<doc id="997798" wikidata="Q1138759" url="?curid=997798" title="Federal Triangle">
<text>Federal Triangle is a triangular area in Washington, D.C., formed by 15th Street NW, Constitution Avenue NW, Pennsylvania Avenue NW, and E Street NW. Federal Triangle is occupied by 10 large city and federal office buildings, all of which are part of the Pennsylvania Avenue National Historic Site. Seven of the buildings in Federal Triangle were built by the U.S. federal government in the early and mid-1930s as part of a coordinated construction plan that has been called &quot;one of the greatest building projects ever undertaken&quot; and all seven buildings are now designated as architecturally historic. 

Federal Triangle station is the Washington Metro station serving Federal Triangle and its immediately surrounding areas.

==Name==
The name &quot;Federal Triangle&quot; appears to have been a journalistic invention. The press wrote of a &quot;Pennsylvania Avenue Triangle&quot; as early as November 18, 1926, and use of this name continued as late as June 1929, but by 1927, it was more common for the news media to refer to the area as &quot;the Triangle&quot;. This name was in use by 1928, even by government officials, and still used as of late 1934.

The Associated Press first used the term &quot;Federal Triangle&quot; (with both words capitalized) in 1935. &quot;The New York Times&quot; first used the term in 1936, although the paper&#x27;s capitalization of both words did not become standardized until 1939. Definitions of the area also varied at first. Early news reports believed the eastern apex of Federal Triangle extended as far east and south as the Ulysses S. Grant Memorial in front of the United States Capitol. But almost all reports referred to Pennsylvania Avenue NW and 15th Street NW as the Triangle&#x27;s northern and western boundaries.

==Genesis and design==
===Plan===
The Senate Park Commission, also known as the McMillan Commission, was formed by the United States Congress in 1900 to reconcile competing visions for the development of Washington, D.C., and especially the National Mall and nearby areas. The commission&#x27;s plan for development, the McMillan Plan, proposed to replace the residences and other buildings on Lafayette Square with tall, Neoclassical office buildings with facades of white marble for executive branch offices. Demolition proceeded on some nearby buildings: notably, the Hay-Adams Houses, Corcoran House, and a portion of the Decatur House grounds. But the rapid expansion in the size and number of executive-branch agencies in the 1910s, 1920s, and 1930s made the McMillan Plan&#x27;s development of Lafayette Square impractical, and Congressional and local support for the project waned. 

Over the next few years, the president and Congress established several agencies to supervise the approval, design, and construction of new buildings in the District of Columbia: The Commission of Fine Arts in 1910 to approve designs, the Public Buildings Commission in 1916 to make recommendations about the housing of federal agencies and offices, and the National Capital Parks and Planning Commission in 1924 to oversee planning. In the mid-1910s, Congress appropriated and the government spent $7 million to acquire land on Pennsylvania Avenue NW between 14th and 15th Streets NW and several blocks south. No demolition or construction took place during that period, and the government merely collected rent from the tenants in the area. In 1924, the Public Buildings Commission recommended that a new series of federal office buildings be built near the White House. The plan called for a complex of buildings to be built at Murder Bay, a muddy, flood-prone, malaria-ridden, poverty-stricken region lacking in paved roads, sewer system, and running water and almost exclusively home to numerous brothels and an extensive criminal underclass.

===1926===

Federal Triangle, as the area would be renamed, had its genesis in 1926. An attempt to provide $50 million to fund, among other things, a national archives building and develop federal offices along Pennsylvania Avenue NW was proposed in 1925. The effort saw success in 1926 with the passage by the United States Congress of the Public Buildings Act, which authorized the construction not only of the Federal Triangle complex of buildings but also a new U.S. Supreme Court building opposite the United States Capitol, a major extension of the U.S. Government Printing Office building on North Capitol Street, and significant widening of B Street NW on the north side of the National Mall (eventually renamed Constitution Avenue). However, appropriations were to be made annually, leaving control of the project firmly in Congressional hands. Congress appropriated $50 million, including $10 million annually for five years, for construction of these projects in 1927, with half the funds to be spent solely on Federal Triangle. A second appropriation bill provided $25 million for buying up all additional privately held land in Federal Triangle. On June 5, 1926, the Treasury Department, which had been given authority over the implementation of the building program, announced the Federal Triangle projects (among others) which would move forward and their anticipated cost:
:*A National Archives building, with total cost of land and construction to be $6.9 million, including $1 million appropriated in fiscal 1927.
:*A new Internal Revenue Bureau building, with total cost of land and construction to be $7.95 million, including $1.7 million appropriated in fiscal 1927.
:*A new Department of Commerce building, with total cost of construction to be $10 million, including $600,000 appropriated in fiscal 1927.
Treasury officials said the Archives building was their top priority, followed by the Internal Revenue building, two Department of Agriculture projects, and the Commerce building last. At that time, no provision was made to construct a new building for the Department of Justice and no sites were named for construction of the three announced buildings. Preliminary plans for the Commerce building were presented to the Commission on Fine Arts and Public Building Commission in mid-June. On July 7, the Treasury Department and Commission of Fine Arts announced sites and sizes for the three previously announced structures. The Department of Commerce building would contain 1 million square feet (93,000 square metres) of office space and be sited on the south side of B Street NW (now Constitution Avenue NW) on the National Mall. The Internal Revenue building would contain 650,000 square feet (60,450 square metres) of office space and take up two whole city blocks between 10th and 12th Streets NW and B and C Streets NW (cutting off 11th Street NW). The National Archives would contain 2.3 million square feet (213,900 square metres) of office space, and take up one city block between 12th and 13th Streets NW and B and C Streets NW (cutting off the last block of Ohio Avenue NW). The government owned three of the four plots needed for the Internal Revenue site, but none of the land beneath the proposed Archives building. Purchasing both sites, officials estimated, would cost $700,000 each. Treasury officials also proposed at this time adding a Justice building on Pennsylvania Avenue between 14th and 15th Streets NW, and a Labor building (facing 15th Street) between 14th and 15th Streets NW and D Street NW and Ohio Avenue NW. Preliminary plans for these buildings were expected to be presented in three months.

The purchase of land delayed the construction program considerably over the next several years. Center Market, designed by architect Adolf Cluss and built in 1872, was the largest of the District of Columbia&#x27;s markets, serving tens of thousands of people a day at a time when general stores and greengrocers were uncommon in the city. It was also a hub for transportation in the District of Columbia, as the city&#x27;s trolley lines converged there. At the time it was built, it was the largest food market in the United States—with space for more than a thousand vendors, the city&#x27;s first cold-storage vaults, its own ice storage facility, and its own artesian well. Center Market, however, occupied two blocks between 7th and 9th Streets NW on the north side of B Street NW. As early as August 1926, planners recognized that relocating Center Market and purchasing land from owners eagerly seeking inflated prices from the federal government would delay the Federal Triangle project significantly. Early negotiations with private landowners in the area collapsed early on when owners demanded exorbitant prices for their properties, and the city and federal government began condemnation proceedings in late August 1926 against owners on B Street NW between 10th and 13th Streets. Federal legislation authorizing expanded, faster condemnation powers for the Federal Triangle areas was sought in November 1926, and passed a month later. Condemnation (under the old eminent domain law) of the final block necessary for the Internal Revenue building began in January 1927. The Commission of Fine Arts placed a ban on all non-federal construction in the area in February 1927. The relocation of Center Market began in July 1927. The final lot for the Internal Revenue site was not condemned and purchased until October 1927. Negotiations for the privately owned land at the Archives site began in late November 1927. Funds were furnished in February 1928 to buy the Southern Railway building at the southwest corner of 13th Street NW and Pennsvylania Avenue NW, which already housed a number of federal agencies (it was purchased in 1929). After six months, D.C. city officials finally began to consider a new location for Center Market. The new 1926 federal condemnation law was first used in October 1929 to condemn a set of parcels on the south side of D Street NW between 13th and 13½ Streets NW. A second set of parcels (Pennsylvania Avenue NW and B, 12th, and 13th Streets NW) was condemned under the new law in December 1930. The first land for the National Archives (later the Justice Department) building site was not acquired until July 1930 even though the site had been selected for development in November 1926. Center Market was not relocated until early 1931, more than four years after the process began. Additional land for the Justice and Post Office buildings was condemned in March and December 1931. Another major effort had to be made to condemn and remove railroad tracks from Federal Triangle, which had converged on the Center Market site. Although the Treasury Department had ordered the tracks lifted by April 1, 1931, this effort did not begin in earnest until early 1931. Negotiations over the price of the land and equipment broke down in February 1931, and the tracks had still not been removed by January 1932. Delay occurred in obtaining the Post Office land as well. Several parcels of land were not condemned until July 1, 1931—a single day before demolition on adjacent parcels of land began. The land for the Apex Building site was finally obtained through condemnation in July 1931.

The initial Federal Triangle building plan was significantly revised by the Public Buildings Commission in November 1926. President Calvin Coolidge refused in September to permit the Commerce building to be placed on the Mall. A few weeks later, the Commission of Fine Arts decided that the Commerce building should be relocated to 14th and 15th Streets NW, extending from D Street NW to B Street NW (cutting off Ohio Avenue NW and C Street NW). The National Capital Parks and Planning Commission established a committee (composed of William Adams Delano, Milton Bennett Medary, and Frederick Law Olmsted Jr.) to study the street plan in the Federal Triangle area and recommend appropriate closures or alterations (if any). While the Public Buildings Commission studied the Commerce site (and even considered halving the size of the building so that two structures could be built along 15th Street), plans for the Archives building were approved and a contract signed for razing of the Internal Revenue site. After these deliberations, the Public Buildings Commission announced on November 17, 1926, that several new buildings would be added and new sites for proposed buildings announced, including:
:*A new Department of Justice building, to be located between Pennsylvania Avenue NW and D Street NW, and 14th and 15th Streets NW.
:*A new &quot;General Supply&quot; building, to be located between 14th and 13th Streets NW between D and C Streets NW.
:*A new Independent Offices building, to be located between 12th and 13th Streets NW and B and C Streets NW (cutting off the last block of Ohio Avenue NW; this was the original proposed site of the National Archives in June 1926).
:*A new Department of Labor building, to be located between 13th and 14th Streets NW and B and C Streets NW.
:*A new General Accounting Office building, to be located between 9th and 10th Streets NW and B and C Streets NW.
:*Moving the Department of Commerce site from the National Mall to between 14th and 15th Streets NW between C and B Streets NW.
:*Moving the National Archives site northward to between 12th and 13th Streets NW and Pennsylvania Avenue NW and C Streets NW (cutting off D Street NW).
:*Retaining the previously announced site of the Internal Revenue building.
The Public Buildings Commission also announced it would build an 1,800-car parking lot next to the Department of Commerce building, and would proceed with construction of the Commerce and Archives first (as they were the top priority). Three months later, the estimates for construction of the Commerce building was increased to $16 million from $10 million and for the Internal Revenue building to $10.5 million from $2.5 million. Work on the Commerce building site was expected to begin by March 31, 1927. Government officials, other experts, and the press believed that the demolition of the District Building and Old Post Office Pavilion and the closure of many streets in the area would occur.

===1927===

Work on all buildings was postponed in May 1927. On May 6, an &quot;ad hoc&quot; committee composed of Olmsted; Medary; Charles Moore, chair of the Commission on Fine Arts; and Louis E. Simon, Supervising Architect of the U.S. Treasury, recommended relocating the Justice building from 15th Street NW to a lot further east so that traffic congestion at 15th and Pennsylvania might be alleviated. This &quot;ad hoc&quot; committee met again three days later to not only consider the Justice building relocation but also to consider a plan to create a single building ringing Federal Triangle rather than six to eight individual structures. The Public Buildings Commission considered the same plan on May 16. The Commission on Fine Arts approved relocating the Justice building the following day. However, disagreements among the three planning bodies proved so fundamental that a new Board of Architectural Consultants was created on May 19, 1927, to advise the groups on the development of Federal Triangle. The Board consisted of the Supervising Architect of the U.S. Treasury (Louis E. Simon) and six private architects, including Louis Ayres, Edward H. Bennett, Arthur Brown Jr., William Adams Delano, Milton Bennett Medary, and John Russell Pope. 

The Board of Architectural Consultants first met on May 23, at which time it considered a plan to create a single building ringing Federal Triangle rather than six to eight individual structures. As the Board of Architectural Consultants began its deliberations, the Commission on Fine Arts approved a plan to locate the Justice building on the north side of B Street NW between 7th and 9th Streets NW (where Center Market stood). About two weeks later, the Public Buildings Commission approved the single structure plan. This plan envisioned a central plaza (defined by 13th, 14th, B, and D Streets NW) surrounded by a traffic circle, with the buildings lining the exterior of the traffic circle. Few streets would be closed; rather, arches would connect each building to its neighbors (with only 12th Street NW remaining unbridged).

The final design of Federal Triangle began to come together in June 1927. The Board of Architectural Consultants approved the construction of the Commerce and Internal Revenue structures as stand-alone buildings on the sites last proposed in late June. In July, the Board proposed eight buildings, sited as follows:
:*Archives (surrounded by Interstate Commerce on the north, east, and south)
:*Commerce (west side of 15th Street NW between B and D Streets NW)
:*General Accounting (13th, 14th, B, and C Streets NW)
:*Independent Offices (6th, 7th, and B Streets NW and Pennsylvania Avenue NW)
:*Internal Revenue (B, 10th, 12th, and C Streets NW)
:*Interstate Commerce (9th, 10th, and B Streets NW and Pennsylvania Avenue NW)
:*Justice (7th, 9th, and B Streets NW and Pennsylvania Avenue NW)
:*Labor (B, 13th, 14th, and C Streets NW)
The Board did not address the future of the District Building, Old Post Office Pavilion, or Southern Railway Building, but had tentatively agreed to continue with the &quot;Louvre plan&quot; of a ring of buildings joined by arches.

The first design contract for any of the buildings in Federal Triangle was statutorily required by Congress in 1926 as part of the &quot;Public Buildings Act&quot;. A new headquarters for the Department of Commerce had been proposed in 1912 and a contract for the design work awarded to the architectural firm of York and Sawyer. Although this building was never built, Congress honored the contract and named the firm again as the Commerce building&#x27;s designer. By March 1927, government officials had already decided that the Commerce building should be 1,000 feet (305 metres) long—making it the then-largest building in the District of Columbia. The May 1927 work moratorium, however, put these plans on hold. In September 1927, the design of the Internal Revenue building was handed over to Louis Simon at the Treasury Department, and the Commission of Fine Arts met to discuss proposed plans for both the Commerce and Internal Revenue buildings. At the same time, the commission received bids on demolition of existing structures in the Triangle.

After review by the Board of Architectural Consultants, the Public Buildings Commission gave final design approval on November 1, 1927, to the Commerce and Internal Revenue buildings. The previous sizes of both buildings was reaffirmed, as was the &quot;Louvre plan&quot; for a unified ring of buildings surrounding a traffic circle and plaza. The Commission on Fine Arts adopted a requirement that the planned Federal Triangle buildings have a &quot;uniform appearance&quot; and height (six stories), limiting the Board&#x27;s deliberations. Secretary Mellon imposed a requirement that all the buildings be built in the Neoclassical architectural style. By mid-December 1927, the design of the Archives building had been approved, and the Board of Architectural Consultants was meeting again to study once more the general layout of the Federal Triangle.

===1928===
By March 1928, newspapers had reported that the Commerce and Internal Revenue buildings would be constructed first, followed by the Archives, then Justice, and then a newly added Post Office building. Plans continued for the demolition of the District Building and Southern Railway headquarters (although the latter would be the last to be razed, as it would be used as temporary office space for displaced federal workers). Although the Commerce building plans (a building with of office space, the largest office building in the world) had stabilized by March 1928, some designers suggested that both 15th and 14th Streets NW be submerged in tunnels beneath the structure. About the same time, the Internal Revenue building&#x27;s square footage was reduced by almost a quarter to 500,000 square feet (46,500 square metres). In July, Congress appropriated $210,000 for design work for the Independent Offices, Interstate Commerce, Justice, and Labor buildings, and Secretary Mellon altered the work schedule yet again to focus on these structures. The Board of Architectural Consultants met to consider ways in which the construction program might be sped up, and devised plans to have four approved buildings (Commerce, Internal Revenue, Justice and Labor) completed by 1932. By October 1928, the Board of Architectural Consultants had agreed with prior decisions that no office building should be constructed on the National Mall, and that this space should be reserved for museums.

Plans for the eastern apex of Federal Triangle, however, were complicated by an ongoing effort to create a George Washington Memorial. A George Washington Memorial Association was organized in 1898 to establish in the District of Columbia a university bearing Washington&#x27;s name. Efforts to do so were unsuccessful, but in 1904 the Association signed an agreement with D.C.-based Columbian University to change its name to George Washington University and build a large memorial hall on the university&#x27;s campus. Plans for the memorial hall did not move forward, however, so the Association joined with the Smithsonian Institution to build a similar structure on the former site of the Baltimore and Potomac Railroad&#x27;s Pennsylvania Station. A design competition was held in 1914, and architects chosen. The cornerstone was laid in 1921, and some of the foundation and a marble stairway built on a plot of land across B Street NW (where the National Gallery of Art sits today) in 1924. In 1929, even as the Federal Triangle project was moving forward, the George Washington Memorial Association was conducting fund-raising for the construction of the building at the proposed National Archives site. Press reports, however, indicated that the building had already been displaced from the Apex building site. The fund-raising effort eventually failed, and the foundation and stairs were razed in 1937 to make way for the National Gallery of Art.

===1929–31===

Architectural models of the proposed Federal Triangle development were unveiled in late April 1929. Design work on the Independent Offices, Justice, and Labor buildings also began at that time. After these models were unveiled, however, the Board once more made changes to the Federal Triangle construction plan to reflect the March and April changes made by Hoover and Mellon. Now only seven large structures were planned, and assigned to the following board members for design:
:*Apex Building (formerly the Independent Offices building, and now assigned to house the United States Coast Guard) - Bennett
:*Commerce Department building - Ayers (of the firm York and Sawyer)
:*Internal Revenue Service building - Simon
:*Justice Department building - Medary
:*Labor Department/Interstate Commerce Commission (ICC) building, and Departmental Auditorium - Brown
:*National Archives building - Pope
:*Post Office Department building - Delano

Two major changes to the complex came in early 1930. The Board and other planning groups had long agreed to site the Justice Department building on the block bounded by 7th, 9th, and B Streets NW and Pennsylvania Avenue NW. But this plan changed in March 1930. Architect John Russell Pope made a proposal to have the Justice and Archives switch sites so that the Justice building would have more space. Although the change would entail major design alterations in both buildings, Secretary Mellon favored the idea. The Commission on Fine Arts approved the plan, and Mellon met with the Board of Architectural Consultants in late March 1930 to discuss the idea. Although this initial meeting left the issue unresolved, the Board later agreed to Mellon&#x27;s wishes in April and the two buildings switched plots. At the end of April, President Hoover asked Congress to appropriate $10.3 million (the most yet) to build a new Post Office Department building between 12th and 13th Streets NW, from Pennsylvania Avenue NW south to C Street NW.

Parking and traffic issues proved immensely vexing for the planners of Federal Triangle. The original L&#x27;Enfant Plan setting out the streets of Washington, D.C., still existed in the Federal Triangle area. Both C Street NW and D Street NW still ran from 15th Street NW to 15th Street NE. Ohio Avenue NW ran in a northwest–southeast line from the intersection of D and 15th Streets NW to the intersection of B and 12th Streets NW (soon to be renamed as Constitution Avenue NW and 12th Street NW). Louisiana Avenue NW still ran in a southwest–northeast direction from 10th and B Streets NW to 7th and D Streets NW (along what is currently the diagonal portion Indiana Avenue NW). The McMillan Plan was developed before the widespread use of the automobile, and now the Board of Architectural Consultants had to decide how to accommodate the &quot;horseless carriage&quot; while also making Federal Triangle pedestrian-friendly. The Board began studying traffic issues in late 1927. A major study of parking needs and solutions was conducted in 1931, and traffic and parking patterns assessed again after the Department of Commerce building opened in early 1932. To achieve some of the traffic and parking goals, the east–west streets and diagonal avenues were eliminated, leaving only the north–south streets through the area, and 12th and 9th Streets NW were submerged in tunnels beneath the National Mall. In the first major change to the Board&#x27;s &quot;final&quot; plans, the Grand Plaza was abandoned in favor of a parking lot. The Board considered a number of other solutions to the need to accommodate the more than 7,500 cars expected to arrive every day (including an underground bus terminal and underground parking garage under the Grand Plaza), but in the end only approved a small number of underground parking spaces beneath the Apex Building.

===Design influences===

The design of Federal Triangle was significantly influenced by the Louvre-Tuileries Palace complex in France and the concentration of government buildings in Whitehall in the United Kingdom. But planning for the complex was also deeply influenced by the City Beautiful movement and the idea of creating a civic center to achieve efficiency in administration as well as reinforce the public&#x27;s perception of government as authoritative and permanent. For the architectural style of the buildings, the Board relied heavily on the McMillan Plan&#x27;s recommendation of the Neoclassical style. Both the Board and Treasury Secretary Andrew W. Mellon rejected the Modern style then heavily in vogue. Rather than a mass of tall, imposing buildings, two unifying open spaces (intended for ceremonial use, and under discussion by the Board at least by March 1928) would be utilized. The first would be a Circular Plaza (inspired by the Place Vendôme) bisected by 12th Street NW, and which would require the demolition of the Old Post Office Pavilion. The second would be a rectangular Grand Plaza on the east side of 14th Street NW between the proposed Department of Commerce building (west side of 14th Street NW) and the proposed Post Office Department building (east side of 13th Street NW). The construction of the Grand Plaza would have required the demolition of the District Building.

The Board received significant input from the Commission of Fine Arts (which strongly advocated implementation of the McMillan Plan), National Capital Parks and Planning Commission, and the Washington Board of Trade. One guiding principle for the project was that office space for at least 25,000 federal workers must be included. Another was that, although the buildings would be modern steel frame structures, they would each be the same height and faced with limestone. The National Capital Parks and Planning Commission had the least influence over the overall design of the project, primarily because it had only recently been formed.

Although the Board unveiled its proposed design for the project in 1929, the design still lacked a unifying architectural look. Subsequently, John Russell Pope was asked in September 1929 to bring a more uniform style to the buildings. Nonetheless, within this more uniform approach, a variety of styles could be used, and were: Italian Renaissance for the Department of Commerce building, Corinthian for the National Archives building, and Ionic for the Post Office Department. Meanwhile, the Board worked with sculptors, painters, and others to design more than 100 statues, fountains, bronze doors, murals, plaques, and panels (both interior and exterior) throughout the complex. Modern architectural styles were not completely ignored in the design effort, however; most of the doors and grillwork throughout the Federal Triangle complex were Art Deco in style.

==Construction of original seven buildings==
===Beginning: Hoover administration===

The U.S. Treasury Department signed a contract to raze the buildings on the site of the planned Internal Revenue Service building in October 1926. The length of the Commerce building was set at in March 1927, and survey work at the site began on March 31, 1927 (even though final plans for the project were still unclear). Work on all buildings was postponed in May 1927. Work began again in September 1927, with demolition work on the Commerce and Internal Revenue sites. Excavation of both sites began on November 21, 1927. Additional demolition contracts were awarded for both sites in April 1928, and foundation work for the Internal Revenue building began in June 1928. Some 8,000 pilings were driven into the soft ground to support the foundation. Work on Internal Revenue&#x27;s superstructure began on March 8.

The cornerstone of the first building to be constructed, the Internal Revenue building, was laid by Treasury Secretary Andrew W. Mellon on May 25, 1929. While digging its foundation, workers uncovered a dock which was at least 100 years old. Indiana limestone was used for the facing, and Tennessee marble for the columns. The sites of all the Triangle buildings had been established in their revised positions by May 1929, with two exceptions: The positions of the Justice and Archives buildings remained as originally planned (with Justice in the east), and the apex space remained unallotted. President (and former Commerce Secretary) Herbert Hoover laid the cornerstone of the Commerce building on June 10, 1929, using the same trowel President George Washington had used to lay the cornerstone of the U.S. Capitol. The construction contract for the Commerce building (set at $13.567 million) had been signed in March, and the contract for its limestone facade—according to at least one newspaper account, the largest stone contract in world history—was awarded in April. By then, the cost of the Commerce building had risen to $17.5 million. Due to the formerly marshy condition of the soil and several submerged streams nearby, more than 18,000 pilings had to be set to support the Commerce building. Water pressure from the submerged Tiber Creek made it too difficult to drive the piles, so a deep-sea diver descended into the underground Tiber Creek and drilled a hole 20 feet (6.1 metres) deep into the earth. A hose was inserted into the hole, and water pumped from the earth until the water table dropped and the driving of the piles could be accomplished. The October 1929 stock market crash and subsequent Great Depression led newly elected President Herbert Hoover to increase spending on existing public works as a means of stimulating the economy. No funds had been authorized yet for the Archives, Independent Offices, Justice, or Labor buildings, and Hoover secured an additional $2.5 million a year for 10 years from Congress for this purpose. Work on the Justice and Independent Offices/Labor buildings now proceeded.

Treasury officials hoped to have the Post Office building under construction and ground broken for the Justice building by December 1930. But a major design change and funding choices were made in 1930. Pope convinced the Commission on Fine Arts to switch the positions of the Department of Justice and National Archives, giving the Justice building more space. Congress also amended the Public Buildings Act to permit private (not just federally employed) architects to bid on design contracts, and agreed to fund the construction of the Justice, Labor/ICC, National Archives, and Post Office buildings.

1931 saw much of the Federal Triangle project near completion. In March 1931, Congress appropriated $3 million to begin construction of the Apex Building, the last structure to be funded. Demolition began on the site the following November. The Internal Revenue building was completed and occupied in June. It was finished a year ahead of schedule, and contained more than 672,000 square feet (62,500 square meters) of office space (3.4 percent more than originally planned). But work had yet to begin on the Justice, Labor, or Post Office buildings. Work on the ICC building finally began in April 1931 when the two blocks for the site began to be razed, and 13th Street NW was permanently blocked off at that time. The first work on the Post Office site began in July with demolition as well. Demolition of existing structures on the Archives site ended in August 1931, and ground was finally broken on September 5. Meanwhile, razing of the ICC/Labor site was also completed by the first of September, and excavation work began shortly thereafter.

In 1932, the Commerce building opened and construction began on three additional buildings at Federal Triangle. The Department of Commerce building opened on January 4, 1932. The finished building had 1,605,066 square feet (148,271.1 square metres) of office space (more than 60 percent larger than originally planned), and its foundation was more than three feet thick in places in order to withstand the hydraulic pressure put on it by the submerged Tiber Creek. Water from the Tiber was utilized as an air conditioning system, to cool the building. July saw the construction contract for the $7.67 million Justice Department building signed. Although some funds for Federal Triangle projects had not been appropriated yet, work still went ahead using funds from other projects which were behind schedule. On September 26, 1932, the 143rd anniversary of the founding of the U.S. Postal Service, President Hoover laid the cornerstone of the Post Office Department building (although the foundation had already been laid, and the steel superstructure of the building was already three stories high). Once again, Hoover used the trowel which George Washington had used to lay the Capitol&#x27;s cornerstone. Congress had appropriated $10.3 million for the new structure, which was designed to accommodate more than 3,000 workers. Its eight stories would be laid on a granite foundation and the sides clad in limestone. On December 1, 1932, the contract for construction of the limestone National Archives building (whose estimated construction cost was $5.284 million) was awarded to the George A. Fuller Company (which had constructed the New York Times Building and the Flatiron Building). Hoover laid two cornerstones on December 15 for the Labor/ICC building, the third building to begin construction that year. Workers who were Freemasons assisted the President in laying the cornerstones. Hoover personally oversaw the dedication of the cornerstone at the Labor end of the building. His words were broadcast over loudspeaker to the workers at the ICC end of the structure, who placed the ICC cornerstone simultaneously at the President&#x27;s instruction (becoming the first time in Washington history that a single person dedicated two cornerstones at the same time). William Green, President of the American Federation of Labor, attended the laying of the cornerstone for the Labor building. Once more, Hoover used the trowel used by Washington to lay the cornerstone of the Capitol. Two weeks later, on December 30, the concrete foundation of the Archives building was poured.

Two days before George Washington&#x27;s birthday, U.S. President Herbert Hoover laid the cornerstone of the National Archives building on February 20, 1933. The structure&#x27;s cost was set at $8.75 million. Just three days later, he laid the cornerstone of the Department of Justice building with a trowel made from wood and cooper nails from the &quot;USS Constitution&quot;. Chief Justice Charles Evans Hughes, Associate Justice Harlan Fiske Stone, Associate Justice Owen Roberts, Associate Justice James Clark McReynolds, Solicitor General Thomas D. Thacher, and Attorney General William D. Mitchell all attended the ceremony. Five months later, a small fire at the Post Office construction site was extinguished by a security guard before it could do any damage. Late in 1933, the northern addition to the Internal Revenue building (the land had been condemned in December 1930) began to rise.

===Completion: Roosevelt administration===

Only one building remained to be constructed under the new administration of President Franklin D. Roosevelt. By December 1933, the President was preparing his proposal to Congress for full funding of the Apex Building construction project. But the Apex Building itself almost was not built, as Pope and others argued that it tended to hide the planned National Archives building. Still others thought the site should be used for the proposed Jefferson Memorial. Through Roosevelt&#x27;s personal intervention, the building was saved—but nearly all its external ornamentation was stripped, and plans for a terraced fountain nearby eliminated, although a small fountain was built in what eventually became known as Patrick Henry Park. Construction of the building was re-approved on January 18, 1934. The building&#x27;s final cost was estimated at just over $12 million.

In 1934, one building began construction and another finished. The Apex Building site began to be cleared in April. The Post Office building was occupied on May 6, and Postmaster General James Farley dedicated the Post Office Department building on June 11, 1934. Its final cost was $10.83 million, about half a million dollars over budget. Construction in the rest of the Triangle, however, seemed stalled. Although some structures had been razed on the site, no appropriation had been made for the Apex Building. The government had also cleared land northeast of the Internal Revenue building (as planners considered adding yet another building to the Triangle), but Congress was increasingly opposed to demolishing either the Old Post Office or the District Building. City officials considered selling the District Building to the federal government as a means of raising cash to build a new city hall, but federal officials balked at the idea. President Roosevelt dedicated the newly opened Department of Justice building on October 25, 1934. Chief Justice Hughes, all the Associate Justices of the Supreme Court, Attorney General Homer Stille Cummings, and a large number of foreign ambassadors also attended the dedication. The $11 million structure had more than 550,000 square feet (51,200 square meters) of office space. By November 1934, the addition to the Internal Revenue building was nearing completion, and government officials were contemplating the razing of the District Building, Old Post Office Pavilion, and Southern Railway Building.

The Labor/ICC and Archives buildings were opened in 1935. Numerous strikes (see below) had delayed the opening of the building for almost a year. In April 1934, Secretary of Labor Frances Perkins asked for additional (if minor) design changes. Pressing needs for office space meant that a portion of the ICC building was occupied before the structure was finished. Minor alterations were made to the Labor building (such as creating a private rather than shared bathroom for the female Secretary) in January 1935. Secretary of Labor Frances Perkins dedicated the two buildings at a ceremony in the Departmental Auditorium on February 26, 1935, attended by AFL President William Green. The Labor building&#x27;s final cost was $4.5 million and the ICC portion of the structure cost $4.45 million. The two buildings were connected by the 2,000-seat Departmental Auditorium (renamed the Andrew W. Mellon Auditorium in 1987). Meanwhile, construction forged ahead on the Archives building. Already considered too small to hold all the materials in its possession, a proposal had been made to add another story to the building. This proposal was rejected in March 1935. The National Archives building was occupied in November 1935, but had no formal dedication. Although the Archives structure had been one of the top priorities of almost all planners, it was one of the last buildings to be opened. Archives staff began moving into the building in November 1935, and the exhibition rotunda was opened to the public in November 1936. Records were not transferred in large numbers to the building until April 1937.

The Apex Building was the last to be constructed and dedicated. A major impetus for the building&#x27;s construction came in June 1935, when the Federal Trade Commission&#x27;s (FTC) headquarters at C Street NW and 21st Street NW was razed to make way for the Federal Reserve Board Building. The FTC petitioned the Commission on Fine Arts to permit it to occupy the Apex Building. Testing for the foundation began in September 1936, and was completed shortly thereafter. With design work long completed and President Roosevelt expressing his wish that the structure be built, a $3.1 million contract for the building was signed on December 29, 1936. Using the George Washington trowel, President Roosevelt laid the cornerstone for the building on July 12, 1937. The building&#x27;s $3.665 million cost was paid for out of Public Works Administration funds, and officials estimated it would be ready for occupation by January 1, 1938. Demolition of the old foundation for the unbuilt Washington Memorial occurred in July 1937, and much of the Apex Building&#x27;s steel superstructure was rising by then as well. The great depth of the building&#x27;s foundation meant that the crane operator lifting the steel beams into place was out of sight in the basement, and a series of telephone links from observers on the street relayed instructions to him. By December 1937, the building was two months ahead of schedule.

One of the most important aspects of the new building was the group of massive sculptures to be installed on either side of the structure. A jury of four nationally known sculptors (Paul Manship, Adolph Alexander Weinman, Lee Lawrie, and William E. Parsons) selected the artist in January 1938. The winner was Michael Lantz, an award-winning instructor in sculpting then employed by the Works Progress Administration. The Apex Building had no dedication. The commission and staff moved into the 125,000 square foot (11,625 square metres) building on April 21, 1938.

Artwork, exterior details, landscaping, and other finishing touches on the construction of Federal Triangle occupied the period from 1938 to 1947. Landscaping issues of the Grand Plaza and Circular Plaza were considered in January 1934. To protect the Federal Triangle from flooding by the Potomac River (as had happened in 1871), the north and west grounds of the Washington Monument were raised in the summer of 1938 by about six feet (two metres) in order to form a dike against any future floodwaters. The final art installation in the complex was the Oscar Straus Memorial Fountain, designs for which were first considered in December 1933. Plans for the memorial were brought before President Roosevelt for his approval the same month. Discussion continued into 1934. The Federal Triangle project was considered complete with the installation of the Straus Memorial in 1947.

But the Great Plaza was never built. Instead, the area was turned into a parking lot.

==Federal Triangle and the Bonus Army==
In June 1932, thousands of homeless World War I veterans, their families, and their supporters occupied the recently condemned assemblage of buildings at the Federal Triangle site as part of the Bonus March on the capital to win better veterans&#x27; benefits.

On July 28, 1932, President Hoover ordered General Douglas MacArthur to remove the &quot;Bonus Army&quot; from the site. At 4:45 p.m., MacArthur led 1,200 infantry, 1,200 cavalry, and six battle tanks (commanded by Major George S. Patton) to Federal Triangle to remove the Bonus Army. More than 20,000 civil service workers (leaving their offices for the day) watched as the U.S. Army attacked its own veterans. Patton personally led a cavalry charge (with sabers drawn) into the mass of homeless people, and several hundred rounds of vomit gas were launched at the marchers. A Bonus marcher was killed on the site of the Apex Building. The Federal Triangle site was cleared and these members of the Bonus Army marched to Anacostia—where, at 10:14 p.m., MacArthur led a second attack on the 43,000 protesters and burned their camp to the ground.

==Labor issues during 1930s construction==

Labor-management troubles occurred throughout construction of the initial seven buildings in the Federal Triangle complex in the 1920s and 1930s. Much of Washington, D.C.&#x27;s, construction workforce was unionized many years before the project began. All the building contractors employed by the federal government signed three-year contracts with the major labor unions representing their workers in September 1929, in the hope that this would eliminate any disruptions during the building program. But this hope proved false.

The first problem occurred in July 1930, when the lathers union went on strike to win a $2 per day (16.7 percent) pay increase, halting work for a short period of time on the Archives, Interstate Commerce, Justice, Labor, and Post Office sites. A second strike occurred in late summer 1931 over a new federal wage law. The Davis–Bacon Act was passed by Congress and signed into law by President Hoover on March 3, 1931. On August 4, 1931, painters working on the Internal Revenue building went on strike, arguing that out-of-town workers were being imported into the city to work on the building and being paid $5-to-$7 a day rather than the prevailing local wage rate of $11 a day. Both the Treasury and Labor Departments stepped in to arbitrate the strike. The dispute was settled a few days later when the Labor Department found that the contractor had paid the correct wages, and that no workers were being paid overtime.

The construction project&#x27;s labor troubles worsened in 1933. With the Depression deepening, contractors were pressing for a 27.3 percent wage cut with their unions, particularly the carpenters&#x27; union. On January 6, 1933, a fire swept through the upper floors of the unfinished ICC building. The fire was ruled arson and a &quot;disgruntled carpenter&quot; was suspected. Two weeks later, the operating engineers and steamfitters unions engaged in a jurisdictional strike against one another, stopping work at the Post Office construction site, but the AFL intervened and arbitrated a solution to the dispute. The earlier wage dispute, however, had not been resolved, and by February a general strike among all unionized workers at the Federal Triangle complex seemed likely. Employers said they would fire all unionized workers if a strike occurred and replace them with strikebreakers. The two sides agreed to let the Treasury Department arbitrate their dispute, and on February 13 the government ruled in favor of the unions—averting a job action. The employers went to court, and in April 1933 the carpenters union agreed to the 27.3 percent wage cut.

The second major wage dispute of 1933 broke out in May. On May 26, more than 500 members of the plasterers&#x27; union went on strike to prevent a $2 (14.3 percent) pay cut, halting all work on the seven active Federal Triangle constructions sites. The employers and the American Institute of Architects both argued that the higher wage would inhibit economic recovery in the construction industry. To prove their point, the employers locked out the workers; the strike collapsed, and plasterers went back to work on July 22.

August 1933 saw the eruption of a series of labor-management disputes and inter-union squabbles that put construction of the Federal Triangle complex on hold for several months. The first event was when the Journeyman Stonecutters Association of North America walked out on a jurisdictional strike against the iron workers&#x27; union on August 21, idling 225 men working on the Post Office building. The dispute was over which union would ride with crane operators to coordinate the movement of loads with workers on the ground. The strike lasted at least until September 7, with both sides seeking a decision from the American Federation of Labor. Then on September 1, 75 carpenters walked off the job in a jurisdictional dispute with the iron worker&#x27;s union. This dispute, which occurred at the Labor/ICC building, was over which workers would be permitted to install decorative enclosures around radiators. With work on the Labor/ICC buildings already two months behind schedule due to the earlier labor disputes, the employers threatened to stop all work if the carpenters&#x27; union struck and throw another 1,000 men out of work. The employers shut down on September 15. Twenty security guards were stationed at the Labor/ICC building to prevent vandalism. On September 18, a third jurisdictional strike occurred when the boilermakers&#x27; union walked off the job at the Federal Triangle central heating plant to protest the use of iron workers in the erection of smokestacks for the facility. Construction of the smokestacks continued, but construction of the boilers was halted. A fourth jurisdictional strike erupted on September 20, when 80 members of the bricklayers&#x27; union walked off the job at the heating plant to protest the use of laborers to caulk windows, stone, and roof tiles. Although the bricklayers remained on the job for the moment, government officials feared that sympathy strikes would occur, stopping work at all seven construction sites. The carpenters rejected a call for the government to arbitrate the strike, and the employers asked for Senator Robert F. Wagner (a proponent of organized labor) to help settle the disputes. On September 26, the AFL ruled that the smokestack work properly belonged to the iron workers, and ordered the boilermakers back to work. But the carpenters&#x27; union initiated a new protest, arguing that the installation of pulley linings in elevators belonged to them and not to the elevator constructors&#x27; union. And the Washington Building and Construction Trades Council threatened to call a general strike of all construction workers if the bricklayers were not pulled off the job installing boiler insulation and the asbestos workers&#x27; union allowed to do the job instead. Senator Wagner also said on Sept. 28 that he believed a resolution to the carpenters/iron workers dispute (which had led to the layoff of 1,000 workers at the Labor/ICC building) could be reached. But the boilermakers did not return to work, leaving 450 workers laid off. Meanwhile, government officials said that the caulking, insulation, and pulley work disputes would be resolved soon, and would not in any case cause further disruptions at construction sites. Another major work disruption threatened the Federal Triangle complex when the iron workers&#x27; union demanded that contractors initiate two four-hour shifts per day rather than one eight-hour shift per day in order to spread work among more men. When contractors balked, the union struck at the Post Office and Justice building sites. That strike lasted two days before about half of the employers capitulated. But it continued for the remaining employers at the Justice and Post Office buildings. Finally, on October 11, 1933, frustrated and angry Labor Department officials said that unless the jurisdictional disputes were ended quickly, the government would seek authorization from Congress in January to force the unions back to work and resolve the disputes itself. The threat worked: On October 13, all parties to all jurisdictional disputes agreed to return to work while continuing to seek resolution to their problems via other channels. Federal officials excoriated the carpenters&#x27; union for holding up a $40,000-a-week payroll for four weeks over an $800 job. Eleven days later, the iron workers&#x27; union agreed to return to the eight-hour shift.

The labor peace was short-lived. Four unions refused to do work on the Post Office conveyor belt system in mid-November, and the dispute over elevators spread to the Labor/ICC building in February 1934 (delaying the building&#x27;s opening indefinitely). On February 14, 1934, 225 carpenters engaged in a jurisdictional strike against the cement finishers&#x27; union at the Labor/ICC building over the installation of tile flooring. The dispute was elevated to AFL President William Green, Green awarded the job to the cement finishers on March 17. But just three weeks later, the plasterers&#x27; union led a jurisdictional strike against the stonecutters&#x27; union at the Labor/ICC building because the stonecutters were installing acoustical marble columns. Contractors, angry at the repeated inter-union squabbles, announced they would no longer employ reduced-hour shifts or give pay raises. The carpenters&#x27; union called for a general strike of all unions at the Labor/ICC building on May 25, a strike which spread to the city&#x27;s ice cream plants. That secondary strike ended June 4. But the general construction strike began to spread to other federal projects throughout the city, leading to an increasing number of calls for the strike to be settled by arbitration. As the work stoppage spread, the carpenters&#x27; union&#x27;s contract with the construction companies expired on May 30. The employers declared on June 12 that they would no longer adhere to any closed shop agreements with the carpenters, and instead would impose the open shop and employ any carpenter (union or non-union) in order to finish the work on existing construction projects. The construction unions declared they would pull every worker off every job if non-union construction laborers were hired, and the D.C Metropolitan Police Department made preparations to patrol streets and job sites to prevent any violence from erupting. Non-union workers were hired, and the carpenters&#x27; union went on strike at all job sites throughout the city amidst fears that the carpenters might strike all federal construction projects nationwide. Three union members were injured on June 13 as picketers clashed with security guards hired by the employers. But the strike did not spread to the other unions, and the Washington Building and Construction Trades Council and D.C. Commissioner George E. Allen attempted to mediate an end to the strike. The carpenters rejected the arbitration attempt, and bands of roving picketers moving among construction sites led to traffic tie-ups, frightened citizens, and rumors of violence. The &quot;open shop strike&quot; ended on June 20, 1934, when the carpenters agreed to a new contract providing for a five-day, 40-hour work week and $1.25 an hour in pay. But no agreement was made regarding the open shop. The plasterers&#x27; union ended their strike in June 1934, and went to local district court to resolve the jurisdictional dispute.

The final labor dispute to affect the Federal Triangle complex construction was a jurisdictional strike over the installation of library shelving at the National Archives building in November 1935.

==Federal Triangle&#x27;s first half-century==
The continuing existence of the District Building, Old Post Office Pavilion, and Southern Railway building as well as parking issues became points of contention during Federal Triangle&#x27;s first 50 years. District of Columbia officials said in 1958 that they were willing to have the District Building torn down and Federal Triangle &quot;finished&quot; (if the city was properly compensated), but a lack of federal funds defeated the move. In 1995, the D.C. and federal governments signed an agreement in which the federal government would construct a new top floor and renovate the building (at a cost of $47 million) in return for a 20-year lease on 130,000 square feet (12,090 square metres) of space in the structure. Plans were developed in 1970 to demolish most of the Old Post Office Pavilion (leaving only the bell tower). But opposition to the plan emerged, and the following year plans were made to restore the building instead. In 1973, the General Services Administration (GSA) developed a plan save the Old Post Office Pavilion, and the National Capitol Planning Commission agreed to the project. An $18 million renovation began in 1977. The renovation was completed in 1983 to highly positive reviews. In the late 1980s, plans were laid to double the size of the Old Post Office Pavilion&#x27;s retail space to 75,000 square feet (6,975 square metres) in order to attract more shoppers to the building. Utilizing the provisions of the &quot;Public Buildings Cooperative Use Act of 1976&quot;, the retail space expansion was financed and completed in 1992. Despite the federal government&#x27;s intention to demolish the Southern Railway Building and construct a federal office building on the site to complete the Federal Triangle complex, the building stood until 1971. It was demolished in that year, and turned into a parking lot.

As many critics had anticipated during Federal Triangle&#x27;s construction in the 1930s, parking issues grew much worse due to the development&#x27;s existence. In the late 1950s, a proposal was made to build a commuter and long-distance bus terminal at Federal Triangle as well as a large office building on the space of the parking lot, but the $60 million it would take to build the terminal was never provided. The parking issue became so vexing that the Eisenhower administration ordered its own parking study in 1959. There were several attempts to remove the parking lot in the interior of Federal Triangle and build the long-planned Great Plaza. The first such move came in 1955, when the Commission of Fine Arts asked the federal government to build the plaza, but nothing came of the proposal. A second effort was made in 1972, with the goal of building the Great Plaza in time for the national bicentennial in 1976, but the required $36.7 million in federal funds were not forthcoming. The parking lot was leased to a private company in 1979.

Several other outstanding issues regarding Federal Triangle&#x27;s development were also raised, and occasionally resolved, in the next half-century. The closure and elimination of Ohio and Louisiana Avenues NW led each state&#x27;s representatives to seek to rename other streets in the District of Columbia after those states. Ohio Drive NW came into existence in 1949, after Congress passed legislation authorizing the name change of the drive along the Tidal Basin. Another issue remaining from Federal Triangle&#x27;s development regarded the condemnation of railway tracks in the area. The Mount Vernon, Alexandria and Washington Railway argued that it had not been properly compensated for the loss of its tracks in the area, and in 1943 sought federal relief.

Some improvements were made to Federal Triangle, however. In 1952, the Andrew W. Mellon Memorial Fountain was dedicated within the eastern tip of the Triangle. A new cooling plant was built in 1960. Beginning in 1970, all the buildings were floodlit at night in order to reduce the level of crime in the area.

In 1972, the Federal Triangle Washington Metro station was approved at Federal Triangle, and the station on Metro&#x27;s Blue and Orange lines opened on July 1, 1977. Major heating, cooling, and electrical upgrades were made to the Archives, ICC, and Labor buildings and the Departmental Auditorium in 1984.

After the terrorist bombing of the Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building in Oklahoma City on April 19, 1995 (which killed 168 people), security at Federal Triangle was tightened measurably and many of the pedestrian areas and buildings restricted to federal employees or those with official business. A major renovation for the Labor, ICC, and Post Office buildings was conducted in 1998.

==Ronald Reagan Building construction==
===Context===

Even as parking and traffic issues continued to cause controversy at Federal Triangle in the 1960s and 1970s, efforts were under way to remove the parking lot and &quot;finish&quot; Federal Triangle by building a large office building on the site. The first effort came in 1972, when the Nixon administration proposed building a $126 million office building on the lot in time for the national bicentennial in 1976. But this proposal was never seriously contemplated or funded. One outcome of the Nixon proposal, however, was &quot;the Weese Plan.&quot; The Nixon administration commissioned the architecture planning firm of Harry Weese &amp; Associates to come up with a master plan for the continued development of Federal Triangle. The Master Plan (which became known as &quot;the Weese Plan&quot;) did not only propose a massive new federal office building on the parking lots of the Triangle. It also proposed a new series of pedestrian paths throughout the complex, titled &quot;Federal Walk.&quot; Federal Walk would not only be a network of sidewalks designed to showcase the architecture of Federal Triangle; it also included destinations such as spots for tourists to wait for tours of the interiors of each building, outdoor art, places for rest and contemplation, and even cafes and restaurants. Federal Walk was gradually implemented in piecemeal fashion over the next 15 years, although it still remained incomplete as of 1997. GSA held a competition in 1982 to select a design for a 10-story office building to replace the parking lot, but planning bodies refused to approve the plan.

Plans for construction of an office building on the Federal Triangle parking lot site found support in 1986. The Federal City Council, a private civic organization which had been promoting the construction of a $200 million international trade center in the District of Columbia, advocated construction of its proposed building at Federal Triangle. Reagan administration officials favored the plan, and in October 1986 the proposal received the backing of the General Services Administration. The idea received support from Democrats in Congress as well, especially from Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan, a former Kennedy administration aide who had long championed completion of the Federal Triangle. There was some opposition to the idea from planning officials and others, who were dismayed at the loss of parking in the downtown area and who feared that the trade center&#x27;s proposed 1,300 to 2,600 underground parking slots would not be built due to poor soil conditions. A bill was passed (almost unanimously) by Congress on August 7, 1987, to provide $362 million for the construction of an &quot;International Cultural and Trade Center&quot; on the parking lot at Federal Triangle. The plan was to provide office space for both the Justice and State departments. The legislation also provided that although the U.S. government would finance the building, a private developer would construct it. The federal government would lease space from the private developer for 30 years, after which ownership of the building would revert to the government. The bill also required the building to be financially self-supporting within two years of its completion. The rental prices throughout the lease&#x27;s term would remain stable. It was only the fifth time the government had signed a &quot;lease-to-own&quot; agreement. With 1.4 million square feet (130,200 square metres) of office space and 500,000 square feet (46,500 square metres) of space for trade center activities, the planned trade center would be larger than any other federally owned building except for The Pentagon. The bill also required that the trade center be &quot;designed in harmony with historical and government buildings in the vicinity, ... reflect the symbolic importance and historic character of Pennsylvania Avenue and the Nation&#x27;s Capital, and ... represent the dignity and stability of the Federal Government.&quot; A nine-member panel was established to approve any plans, and included the Secretaries of State, Agriculture, and Commerce; the Mayor of the District of Columbia; and five members of the public. The building was expected to be completed in 1992. President Ronald Reagan signed the &quot;Federal Triangle Development Act&quot; into law on August 22, 1987.

===Design and construction===

Preliminary design specifications required that the final building be no taller than the existing Federal Triangle structures, be constructed of similar materials, emphasize pedestrian traffic, and have a &quot;sympathetic&quot; architectural style. An architectural model by the firms of Notter Finegold &amp; Alexander, Mariani &amp; Associates, and Bryant &amp; Bryant depicted a building with a long, uninterrupted facade along 14th Street NW and two colonnaded hemicycles on the east side (matching the Post Office Department building&#x27;s hemicycle). The preliminary design specs were criticized for not more clearly specifying the architectural style, for bringing another 10,000 new workers to Federal Triangle each day, and for reducing the required number of parking spaces by 30 percent to just 1,300. The five public members of the design committee were named on April 6, 1988, and were former Senator Charles H. Percy, chair; Harry McPherson, president of the Federal City Council; Donald A. Brown, chair of the Federal City Council&#x27;s International Center Task Force; Michael R. Garder, a member of the Pennsylvania Avenue Development Corporation; and Judah C. Sommer, a local attorney. Groundbreaking on the now-$350 million building was scheduled for 1989, and completion in 1993. Disagreements broke out in mid-1988 over which federal agencies should take up residence in the structure, and whether they should be trade- or foreign-policy related. Seven designs were submitted in June 1989, each incorporating a base-middle-crown structure and enclosed in traditional materials (limestone facade, vertical glass windows, terra-cotta roof tiles). Each design incorporated a new home for the Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars (a Smithsonian Institution entity), an outdoor memorial to President Woodrow Wilson, and exhibition and retail space.

Construction began in mid-1989. Contractors estimated the cost of the building at between $550 million and $800 million, far higher than the anticipated $350 million original price tag. The design committee picked the $738.3 million design submitted by Pei Cobb Freed &amp; Partners in October 1989. A consortium led by New York developer William Zeckendorf Jr. was chosen to build and operate the building and lease it to the government. One of the firms which had lost this contract subsequently challenged the bidding process.

===Cancellation, completion, and opening===

Significant cost increases led to the project being mothballed by the George H. W. Bush administration. The General Services Administration refused to sign the draft lease, arguing that the building&#x27;s rental costs were too high and would cost (rather than save) the government $18 million to $24 million a year. Although Pei Cobb Freed agreed to investigate design changes to make the project less costly, at least one member of Congress declared the project dead. In September 1990, the architectural team made changes which cut $82 million from the cost of the building (including the elimination of two theaters, scaling down the reception hall, using plaster rather than stone, substituting aluminum for bronze in the trim, and reducing the size of interior doors), reducing the price tag to $656 million. Delta Partnership, a development consortium led by New York developer William Zeckendorf Jr., was chosen to operate the building and lease it to the government. Another design change came in January 1991, when the number of parking spaces rose by 12.6 percent to 2,500 spaces. But the changes did not resolve the controversies enveloping the project. Design committee member Donald A. Brown quit the committee in late 1991, complaining that the Bush administration was meddling in the project&#x27;s design. Two days later, Eleanor Holmes Norton, D.C.&#x27;s delegate to Congress, repeated these charges. On January 19, 1992, even as the foundation for the trade center was being dug, the GSA said the building would not achieve financial self-sufficiency. A separate report commissioned by the Bush administration reached similar conclusions. On January 25, 1992, the Bush administration cancelled the international trade center construction project. Days later, a United States district court ruled that Delta Partnership had been chosen in violation of federal contracting guidelines, although the court also refused to overturn the award after finding no bias in the award process. Construction experts decried the decision, saying that the building&#x27;s costs could balloon to more than $1.2 billion if construction were resumed at a later time.

The decision to cancel the building was reversed on December 2, 1993, by the Clinton administration. Although the building was originally designed to be a major tourist destination and provide a boost to economic development in the downtown area, the building was repurposed to be a simple office building. Rather than a mix of federal and private renters, federal agencies were now scheduled to occupy 80 percent of the office space. By January 1995, the structure was two years behind schedule. By September 1995, a tentative occupancy date of December 1996 had been set. The building was named for former President Ronald Reagan in October 1995. There were still occasional design glitches. For example, the GSA approved two major sculptures for the Woodrow Wilson Plaza in 1994, abruptly ordered a halt to work on the sculptures in June 1996, and then ordered work to proceed again in July 1996. Construction slipped further, and by January 1997 occupancy was scheduled for the following summer. Construction continued to fall behind schedule, with completion not expected until summer 1998. Nonetheless, federal officials planned to move more than 480 Environmental Protection Agency employees into the building in July 1997. By this time, security concerns had led to several additional design changes (including a reduction in the number of parking spaces to just 1,900), and the cost of the structure had risen to $738 million.

The Ronald Reagan Building opened on May 5, 1998. President Bill Clinton and former First Lady Nancy Reagan dedicated the building. Three large pieces of artwork were included in the building. The first, by sculptor and D.C. native Stephen Robin, is a gigantic rose with stem and a lily, both made out of cast aluminum and lying on stone pedestals. The second, by African American D.C. native Martin Puryear, is a Minimalist tower of brown welded metal titled &quot;Bearing Witness&quot; which stands in Woodrow Wilson Plaza. The third, located inside the building&#x27;s atrium, is a multi-story neon installation by Keith Sonnier titled &quot;Route Zenith.&quot; The structure&#x27;s final cost was $818 million.

==Critical assessment==
&quot;Federal Triangle was the most important government construction project of the 1930s in Washington.&quot; It was the largest construction project in the United States in the 1930s; only the construction of Rockefeller Center in New York City came close. It &quot;remains one of the most important design and construction projects&quot; in American history.

The original seven buildings won critical praise for their beauty from the news media when they first opened. &quot;The Washington Post&quot; said the Internal Revenue building was &quot;a credit to any city&quot; and declared the &quot;marble work to be among the most beautiful in the United States.&quot; At its dedication, &quot;The New York Times&quot; called the Department of Justice building &quot;one of the most beautiful public buildings in the world&quot;. But praise was most heavily lavished on the Commerce building. It was not only the largest office building in the world, but the &quot;greatest of office buildings&quot; and one which represented the aspirations of the nation. It had &quot;dignity without severity&quot;, one report said, and was &quot;a magnificent architectural end&quot;. It had the &quot;world&#x27;s most extensive and impressive applications of bronze&quot;, &quot;embellished with a wealth of detail, delicately modeled, carefully tooled, finely chased and exactingly finished.&quot; Even the interior decorating scheme was highly noted for its &quot;fine architectural effect&quot;.

But younger architects in the 1930s criticized the style and size of the buildings at Federal Triangle for being &quot;elitist, pretentious, and anachronistic&quot;. Architecture critic William Harlan Hale strongly criticized the Neoclassical style for being unimaginative and anti-democratic: &quot;New Deal indeed! What was there new, or modern, or imaginative, or efficient, or economical in trying to give modern Washington the character of Imperial Rome? What was there either aesthetic or intelligent in cloaking the offices of a modern democracy as the temple of a classic tyrant, the gallery of a Renaissance prince, or the palace of a French monarch? ...we have learned quite a lot about the principles of modern architecture, just as we have learned a lot about some other things; and today, after so short a time, it looks pretty much like a relic out of the dim past.&quot; By the 1940s, some critics said the buildings were too reminiscent of Nazi and Soviet architecture.

Initial assessments of the Ronald Reagan Building&#x27;s design were overwhelmingly positive. &quot;Washington Post&quot; critic Benjamin Forgey highly praised the Pei Cobb Freed design when it was first made public. Forgey found the final building even more praiseworthy, finding it full of &quot;character and extraordinary potential,&quot; &quot;brilliant,&quot; &quot;vital,&quot; &quot;welcoming,&quot; &quot;clever&quot; and &quot;dynamic.&quot; Forgey particularly praised the bold stroke of the building&#x27;s diagonal structure (which extends from the rotunda at the north end of Woodrow Wilson Plaza to the juncture of 13th Street NW and Pennsylvania Avenue NW) and the conical atrium on the building&#x27;s east side. Federal employees working in the building gave it &quot;rave reviews&quot; and at its dedication was one of the most sought-after places to work in the city. But six months later, another &quot;Washington Post&quot; reporter declared the Ronald Reagan building &quot;much too large,&quot; &quot;confusing&quot; to get around in, &quot;awkwardly configured,&quot; and with &quot;dismal views&quot;. The facade, the critic felt, was &quot;relentlessly austere&quot; and represented &quot;a lost opportunity to lighten the Federal Triangle&#x27;s imperial, ponderous architectural spirit.&quot;

==Current buildings==

As of 2009, Federal Triangle included two existing buildings and eight buildings built specifically for the development. The structures include:
*Apex Building, which houses the Federal Trade Commission
*William Jefferson Clinton Federal Building, originally the Post Office Department Building but renamed in 1982 for Ariel Rios and renamed again for Bill Clinton in 2013, which houses the Environmental Protection Agency
*Department of Labor/Interstate Commerce Commission building, which now houses the Environmental Protection Agency
*Herbert C. Hoover Building, the headquarters of the U.S. Department of Commerce, the White House Visitor Center, and formerly the National Aquarium
*Internal Revenue Service Building, the headquarters of the Internal Revenue Service
*John A. Wilson Building, houses the offices and chambers of the District Council and the Mayor of Washington, D.C.
*National Archives Building
*Old Post Office, houses the Waldorf Astoria Washington DC hotel
*Robert F. Kennedy Department of Justice Building, the headquarters of the U.S. Department of Justice
*Ronald Reagan Building and International Trade Center, which houses both private-sector and government offices, including headquarters for the U.S. Agency for International Development and U.S. Customs and Border Protection 
These buildings are contributing structures to the Pennsylvania Avenue National Historic Site.

==See also==
* Architecture of Washington, D.C.

==References==
==External links==

* Why is it Named Federal Triangle - Ghosts of DC blog</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1138759" start="0" end="16" title="Federal Triangle" label="Federal Triangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q19821" start="22" end="32" title="Triangle" label="triangular"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="41" end="57" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q2406648" start="85" end="107" title="Constitution Avenue" label="Constitution Avenue NW"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455053" start="109" end="131" title="Pennsylvania Avenue" label="Pennsylvania Avenue NW"/>
<link wikidata="Q7163662" start="255" end="297" title="Pennsylvania Avenue National Historic Site" label="Pennsylvania Avenue National Historic Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q48525" start="360" end="383" title="Federal government of the United States" label="U.S. federal government"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440474" start="615" end="639" title="Federal Triangle station" label="Federal Triangle station"/>
<link wikidata="Q171221" start="647" end="663" title="Washington Metro" label="Washington Metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q40469" start="1175" end="1191" title="Associated Press" label="Associated Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571266" start="1584" end="1609" title="Ulysses S. Grant Memorial" label="Ulysses S. Grant Memorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q54109" start="1626" end="1647" title="United States Capitol" label="United States Capitol"/>
<link wikidata="Q6802368" start="1863" end="1882" title="McMillan Commission" label="McMillan Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="1902" end="1924" title="United States Congress" label="United States Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="1987" end="2003" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q465811" start="2024" end="2037" title="National Mall" label="National Mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q6802368" start="2104" end="2117" title="McMillan Plan" label="McMillan Plan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2177" end="2193" title="President&amp;#x27;s Park#Lafayette Park" label="Lafayette Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q54111" start="2205" end="2217" title="Neoclassical architecture" label="Neoclassical"/>
<link wikidata="Q40861" start="2257" end="2263" title="marble" label="marble"/>
<link wikidata="Q35798" start="2268" end="2284" title="Executive (government)" label="executive branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q11861763" start="2354" end="2370" title="Hay–Adams Hotel" label="Hay-Adams Houses"/>
<link wikidata="Q5248791" start="2409" end="2422" title="Decatur House" label="Decatur House"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986557" start="2858" end="2881" title="United States Commission of Fine Arts" label="Commission of Fine Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q6971257" start="3033" end="3079" title="National Capital Planning Commission" label="National Capital Parks and Planning Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q35525" start="3535" end="3546" title="White House" label="White House"/>
<link wikidata="Q17082159" start="3606" end="3616" title="Murder Bay" label="Murder Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q131295" start="3776" end="3783" title="brothel" label="brothel"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="4135" end="4157" title="United States Congress" label="United States Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257335" start="4165" end="4185" title="Public Buildings Act" label="Public Buildings Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="4290" end="4308" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="U.S. Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q54109" start="4331" end="4352" title="United States Capitol" label="United States Capitol"/>
<link wikidata="Q2928358" start="4379" end="4410" title="United States Government Printing Office" label="U.S. Government Printing Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q7054364" start="4423" end="4443" title="North Capitol Street" label="North Capitol Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q2406648" start="4544" end="4563" title="Constitution Avenue" label="Constitution Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q212468" start="4687" end="4699" title="Appropriation (law)" label="appropriated"/>
<link wikidata="Q973587" start="5364" end="5387" title="Internal Revenue Service" label="Internal Revenue Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q501542" start="5769" end="5794" title="United States Department of Agriculture" label="Department of Agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q23134212" start="7575" end="7588" title="Center Market, Washington, D.C." label="Center Market"/>
<link wikidata="Q42973" start="7602" end="7611" title="architect" label="architect"/>
<link wikidata="Q91864" start="7612" end="7623" title="Adolf Cluss" label="Adolf Cluss"/>
<link wikidata="Q1244860" start="7760" end="7773" title="general store" label="general store"/>
<link wikidata="Q145658" start="7779" end="7790" title="greengrocer" label="greengrocer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3407658" start="7904" end="7911" title="tram" label="trolley"/>
<link wikidata="Q747713" start="8080" end="8092" title="Refrigeration" label="cold-storage"/>
<link wikidata="Q177734" start="8143" end="8151" title="Artesian aquifer" label="artesian"/>
<link wikidata="Q43483" start="8152" end="8156" title="water well" label="well"/>
<link wikidata="Q166332" start="8667" end="8679" title="Eminent domain" label="condemnation"/>
<link wikidata="Q36023" start="11242" end="11257" title="Calvin Coolidge" label="Calvin Coolidge"/>
<link wikidata="Q8004151" start="11644" end="11664" title="William Adams Delano" label="William Adams Delano"/>
<link wikidata="Q6860995" start="11666" end="11687" title="Milton Bennett Medary" label="Milton Bennett Medary"/>
<link wikidata="Q538025" start="11693" end="11718" title="Frederick Law Olmsted Jr." label="Frederick Law Olmsted Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q749118" start="12911" end="12936" title="Government Accountability Office" label="General Accounting Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q5343220" start="15232" end="15249" title="Edward H. Bennett" label="Edward H. Bennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q8004151" start="15269" end="15289" title="William Adams Delano" label="William Adams Delano"/>
<link wikidata="Q6860995" start="15291" end="15312" title="Milton Bennett Medary" label="Milton Bennett Medary"/>
<link wikidata="Q973881" start="15318" end="15335" title="John Russell Pope" label="John Russell Pope"/>
<link wikidata="Q1525" start="15959" end="15973" title="traffic circle" label="traffic circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q12073373" start="17555" end="17570" title="York and Sawyer" label="York and Sawyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q663120" start="19433" end="19449" title="Southern Railway (U.S.)" label="Southern Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q432637" start="21040" end="21060" title="George Washington University" label="Columbian University"/>
<link wikidata="Q131626" start="21271" end="21294" title="Smithsonian Institution" label="Smithsonian Institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2410491" start="21350" end="21380" title="Baltimore and Potomac Railroad" label="Baltimore and Potomac Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q214867" start="21609" end="21632" title="National Gallery of Art" label="National Gallery of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q11224" start="22699" end="22724" title="United States Coast Guard" label="United States Coast Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q12073373" start="22788" end="22803" title="York and Sawyer" label="York and Sawyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6455666" start="24213" end="24231" title="L&amp;#x27;Enfant Plan" label="L&amp;#x27;Enfant Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q19675" start="26067" end="26073" title="Louvre" label="Louvre"/>
<link wikidata="Q234364" start="26074" end="26090" title="Tuileries Palace" label="Tuileries Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="26102" end="26108" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q214820" start="26158" end="26167" title="Whitehall" label="Whitehall"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="26175" end="26189" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755539" start="26254" end="26277" title="City Beautiful movement" label="City Beautiful movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q6583066" start="26305" end="26317" title="civic center" label="civic center"/>
<link wikidata="Q4215834" start="26614" end="26632" title="United States Secretary of the Treasury" label="Treasury Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q446858" start="26633" end="26649" title="Andrew W. Mellon" label="Andrew W. Mellon"/>
<link wikidata="Q245188" start="26663" end="26669" title="Modern architecture" label="Modern"/>
<link wikidata="Q643520" start="26932" end="26945" title="Place Vendôme" label="Place Vendôme"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141542" start="27021" end="27045" title="Old Post Office Pavilion" label="Old Post Office Pavilion"/>
<link wikidata="Q503577" start="27149" end="27171" title="United States Department of Commerce" label="Department of Commerce"/>
<link wikidata="Q668687" start="27228" end="27250" title="United States Postal Service" label="Post Office Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q3180858" start="27369" end="27386" title="John A. Wilson Building" label="District Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q5600816" start="27579" end="27604" title="Greater Washington Board of Trade" label="Washington Board of Trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q23757" start="27851" end="27860" title="limestone" label="limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q236122" start="28359" end="28378" title="Renaissance architecture" label="Italian Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q54124" start="28420" end="28430" title="Corinthian order" label="Corinthian"/>
<link wikidata="Q518155" start="28439" end="28456" title="National Archives and Records Administration" label="National Archives"/>
<link wikidata="Q189548" start="28471" end="28476" title="Ionic order" label="Ionic"/>
<link wikidata="Q173782" start="28877" end="28885" title="Art Deco" label="Art Deco"/>
<link wikidata="Q648666" start="28986" end="29010" title="United States Department of the Treasury" label="U.S. Treasury Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q973587" start="29078" end="29102" title="Internal Revenue Service" label="Internal Revenue Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q6023318" start="30044" end="30061" title="Indiana Limestone" label="Indiana limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7700258" start="30091" end="30107" title="Tennessee marble" label="Tennessee marble"/>
<link wikidata="Q747382" start="30534" end="30540" title="trowel" label="trowel"/>
<link wikidata="Q23" start="30551" end="30568" title="George Washington" label="George Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q30198" start="30969" end="30974" title="marsh" label="marsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374167" start="31053" end="31060" title="deep foundation" label="pilings"/>
<link wikidata="Q111363586" start="31202" end="31216" title="Surface supplied diving" label="deep-sea diver"/>
<link wikidata="Q201684" start="31474" end="31505" title="Wall Street Crash of 1929" label="October 1929 stock market crash"/>
<link wikidata="Q696482" start="31521" end="31537" title="Great Depression in the United States" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q35236" start="31566" end="31580" title="Herbert Hoover" label="Herbert Hoover"/>
<link wikidata="Q7800350" start="34050" end="34061" title="Tiber Creek" label="Tiber Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q5535954" start="35185" end="35209" title="George A. Fuller" label="George A. Fuller Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q7769405" start="35237" end="35260" title="The Times Square Building" label="New York Times Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q220728" start="35269" end="35286" title="Flatiron Building" label="Flatiron Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q41726" start="35430" end="35440" title="Freemasonry" label="Freemasons"/>
<link wikidata="Q3568669" start="35872" end="35885" title="William Green (labor leader)" label="William Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q464242" start="35904" end="35932" title="American Federation of Labor" label="American Federation of Labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q23" start="36200" end="36217" title="George Washington" label="George Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q35236" start="36250" end="36264" title="Herbert Hoover" label="Herbert Hoover"/>
<link wikidata="Q944436" start="36540" end="36556" title="USS Constitution" label="USS Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q11147" start="36564" end="36577" title="Chief Justice of the United States" label="Chief Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q313252" start="36578" end="36598" title="Charles Evans Hughes" label="Charles Evans Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q11144" start="36600" end="36617" title="Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States" label="Associate Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q942386" start="36618" end="36636" title="Harlan F. Stone" label="Harlan Fiske Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q703968" start="36656" end="36668" title="Owen Roberts" label="Owen Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q724204" start="36688" end="36710" title="James Clark McReynolds" label="James Clark McReynolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q2298067" start="36712" end="36729" title="Solicitor General of the United States" label="Solicitor General"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265881" start="36730" end="36747" title="Thomas D. Thacher" label="Thomas D. Thacher"/>
<link wikidata="Q636207" start="36753" end="36769" title="United States Attorney General" label="Attorney General"/>
<link wikidata="Q351955" start="36770" end="36789" title="William D. Mitchell" label="William D. Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="37217" end="37238" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt" label="Franklin D. Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q326183" start="37573" end="37591" title="Jefferson Memorial" label="Jefferson Memorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753094" start="38170" end="38188" title="United States Postmaster General" label="Postmaster General"/>
<link wikidata="Q954859" start="38189" end="38201" title="James Farley" label="James Farley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375718" start="39137" end="39158" title="Homer Stille Cummings" label="Homer Stille Cummings"/>
<link wikidata="Q967750" start="40073" end="40091" title="United States Secretary of Labor" label="Secretary of Labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q254478" start="40092" end="40107" title="Frances Perkins" label="Frances Perkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q4758815" start="40443" end="40470" title="Andrew W. Mellon Auditorium" label="Andrew W. Mellon Auditorium"/>
<link wikidata="Q5332198" start="41428" end="41458" title="Eccles Building" label="Federal Reserve Board Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q3177134" start="41990" end="42017" title="Public Works Administration" label="Public Works Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q3371768" start="42767" end="42779" title="Paul Manship" label="Paul Manship"/>
<link wikidata="Q265044" start="42781" end="42805" title="Adolph Alexander Weinman" label="Adolph Alexander Weinman"/>
<link wikidata="Q71409" start="42807" end="42817" title="Lee Lawrie" label="Lee Lawrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q8008291" start="42823" end="42841" title="William E. Parsons" label="William E. Parsons"/>
<link wikidata="Q6832087" start="42895" end="42908" title="Michael Lantz" label="Michael Lantz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200079" start="42972" end="43001" title="Works Progress Administration" label="Works Progress Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q178114" start="43517" end="43536" title="Washington Monument" label="Washington Monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q105190" start="43621" end="43625" title="dyke (construction)" label="dike"/>
<link wikidata="Q7106264" start="43708" end="43738" title="Oscar Straus Memorial" label="Oscar Straus Memorial Fountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="44197" end="44208" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q2910386" start="44356" end="44367" title="Bonus Army" label="Bonus March"/>
<link wikidata="Q127417" start="44474" end="44491" title="Douglas MacArthur" label="Douglas MacArthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q186492" start="44644" end="44660" title="George S. Patton" label="George S. Patton"/>
<link wikidata="Q233052" start="44958" end="44967" title="adamsite" label="vomit gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="45468" end="45484" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q178790" start="45520" end="45529" title="trade union" label="unionized"/>
<link wikidata="Q187833" start="45895" end="45900" title="lathe" label="lathe"/>
<link wikidata="Q49776" start="45909" end="45923" title="strike action" label="went on strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q5242034" start="46168" end="46183" title="Davis–Bacon Act" label="Davis–Bacon Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q7887550" start="46958" end="46980" title="United Brotherhood of Carpenters and Joiners of America" label="carpenters&amp;#x27; union"/>
<link wikidata="Q327541" start="47091" end="47096" title="arson" label="arson"/>
<link wikidata="Q17016641" start="47173" end="47192" title="International Union of Operating Engineers" label="operating engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7887486" start="47197" end="47209" title="United Association" label="steamfitters"/>
<link wikidata="Q6315225" start="47230" end="47251" title="jurisdictional strike" label="jurisdictional strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340502" start="47652" end="47665" title="strikebreaker" label="strikebreaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q7097821" start="48033" end="48055" title="Operative Plasterers&amp;#x27; and Cement Masons&amp;#x27; International Association" label="plasterers&amp;#x27; union"/>
<link wikidata="Q465197" start="48208" end="48240" title="American Institute of Architects" label="American Institute of Architects"/>
<link wikidata="Q159377" start="48372" end="48382" title="Lockout (industry)" label="locked out"/>
<link wikidata="Q6467331" start="48671" end="48723" title="Laborers&amp;#x27; International Union of North America" label="Journeyman Stonecutters Association of North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q3153228" start="48774" end="48798" title="International Association of Bridge, Structural, Ornamental and Reinforcing Iron Workers" label="iron workers&amp;#x27; union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7887486" start="49799" end="49823" title="United Association" label="boilermakers&amp;#x27; union"/>
<link wikidata="Q6054099" start="50139" end="50162" title="International Union of Bricklayers and Allied Craftworkers" label="bricklayers&amp;#x27; union"/>
<link wikidata="Q6467331" start="50225" end="50233" title="Laborers&amp;#x27; International Union of North America" label="laborers"/>
<link wikidata="Q125107" start="50369" end="50384" title="sympathy strike" label="sympathy strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="50549" end="50556" title="United States Senate" label="Senator"/>
<link wikidata="Q213721" start="50557" end="50573" title="Robert F. Wagner" label="Robert F. Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q6054097" start="50923" end="50956" title="International Union of Elevator Constructors" label="elevator constructors&amp;#x27; union"/>
<link wikidata="Q14692023" start="51166" end="51194" title="International Association of Heat and Frost Insulators and Allied Workers" label="asbestos workers&amp;#x27; union"/>
<link wikidata="Q770135" start="52944" end="52957" title="conveyor belt" label="conveyor belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7097821" start="53200" end="53228" title="Operative Plasterers&amp;#x27; and Cement Masons&amp;#x27; International Association" label="cement finishers&amp;#x27; union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1102436" start="54344" end="54355" title="closed shop" label="closed shop"/>
<link wikidata="Q7096412" start="54417" end="54426" title="open shop" label="open shop"/>
<link wikidata="Q5283439" start="55221" end="55238" title="District of Columbia home rule" label="D.C. Commissioner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501657" start="57036" end="57067" title="General Services Administration" label="General Services Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q9916" start="58393" end="58418" title="Dwight D. Eisenhower" label="Eisenhower administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q956781" start="59446" end="59457" title="Tidal Basin (District of Columbia)" label="Tidal Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4758813" start="59829" end="59863" title="Andrew W. Mellon Memorial Fountain" label="Andrew W. Mellon Memorial Fountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440474" start="60082" end="60098" title="Federal Triangle (Washington Metro)" label="Federal Triangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q171221" start="60099" end="60115" title="Washington Metro" label="Washington Metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q2602185" start="60190" end="60194" title="Blue Line (Washington Metro)" label="Blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q4715683" start="60199" end="60205" title="Orange Line (Washington Metro)" label="Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q217528" start="60388" end="60405" title="Oklahoma City bombing" label="terrorist bombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q597408" start="60413" end="60446" title="Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building" label="Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q34863" start="60450" end="60463" title="Oklahoma City" label="Oklahoma City"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="61107" end="61127" title="Richard M. Nixon" label="Nixon administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q28406785" start="62534" end="62554" title="Federal City Council" label="Federal City Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="62770" end="62791" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Reagan administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="62945" end="62954" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q713505" start="63000" end="63023" title="Daniel Patrick Moynihan" label="Daniel Patrick Moynihan"/>
<link wikidata="Q789915" start="63675" end="63680" title="United States Department of State" label="State"/>
<link wikidata="Q11208" start="64493" end="64505" title="The Pentagon" label="The Pentagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029955" start="64926" end="64937" title="United States Secretary of Agriculture" label="Agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q886797" start="64957" end="64990" title="List of mayors of Washington, D.C." label="Mayor of the District of Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="65085" end="65098" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5450133" start="65505" end="65536" title="Notter Finegold &amp;amp; Alexander" label="Notter Finegold &amp;amp; Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064692" start="66132" end="66148" title="Charles H. Percy" label="Charles H. Percy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3790209" start="66157" end="66172" title="Harry McPherson" label="Harry McPherson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7163662" start="66339" end="66382" title="Pennsylvania Avenue Development Corporation" label="Pennsylvania Avenue Development Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q872975" start="66929" end="66977" title="Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars" label="Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars"/>
<link wikidata="Q131626" start="66981" end="67004" title="Smithsonian Institution" label="Smithsonian Institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q34296" start="67047" end="67061" title="Woodrow Wilson" label="Woodrow Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6623279" start="67350" end="67379" title="Pei Cobb Freed &amp;amp; Partners" label="Pei Cobb Freed &amp;amp; Partners"/>
<link wikidata="Q18563877" start="67436" end="67458" title="William Zeckendorf Jr." label="William Zeckendorf Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q23505" start="67743" end="67760" title="George H. W. Bush" label="George H. W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q461649" start="69012" end="69033" title="Eleanor Holmes Norton" label="Eleanor Holmes Norton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1614849" start="69454" end="69482" title="United States district court" label="United States district court"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124" start="69919" end="69941" title="Bill Clinton" label="Clinton administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q193426" start="71374" end="71386" title="Nancy Reagan" label="Nancy Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="71643" end="71659" title="African American" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q6776418" start="71672" end="71686" title="Martin Puryear" label="Martin Puryear"/>
<link wikidata="Q173436" start="71693" end="71703" title="Minimalism" label="Minimalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q327520" start="71897" end="71910" title="Keith Sonnier" label="Keith Sonnier"/>
<link wikidata="Q47321159" start="72215" end="72249" title="construction of Rockefeller Center" label="construction of Rockefeller Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="72253" end="72266" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q8010882" start="73697" end="73716" title="William Harlan Hale" label="William Harlan Hale"/>
<link wikidata="Q287025" start="74467" end="74471" title="Nazi architecture" label="Nazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q841977" start="74476" end="74482" title="Constructivist architecture" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440464" start="75990" end="76003" title="Federal Trade Commission Building" label="Apex Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q786713" start="76022" end="76046" title="Federal Trade Commission" label="Federal Trade Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q4790448" start="76048" end="76090" title="William Jefferson Clinton Federal Building" label="William Jefferson Clinton Federal Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q4790447" start="76163" end="76173" title="Ariel Rios" label="Ariel Rios"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124" start="76196" end="76208" title="Bill Clinton" label="Bill Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q460173" start="76235" end="76266" title="United States Environmental Protection Agency" label="Environmental Protection Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q5260367" start="76268" end="76287" title="Department of Labor Building" label="Department of Labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647715" start="76288" end="76318" title="Interstate Commerce Commission" label="Interstate Commerce Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q460173" start="76350" end="76381" title="United States Environmental Protection Agency" label="Environmental Protection Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q124895" start="76383" end="76409" title="Herbert C. Hoover Building" label="Herbert C. Hoover Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q503577" start="76435" end="76462" title="United States Department of Commerce" label="U.S. Department of Commerce"/>
<link wikidata="Q7994918" start="76468" end="76494" title="White House Visitor Center" label="White House Visitor Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q6970399" start="76513" end="76530" title="National Aquarium in Washington, D.C." label="National Aquarium"/>
<link wikidata="Q6047714" start="76532" end="76565" title="Internal Revenue Service Building" label="Internal Revenue Service Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q973587" start="76591" end="76615" title="Internal Revenue Service" label="Internal Revenue Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q3180858" start="76617" end="76640" title="John A. Wilson Building" label="John A. Wilson Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q6527389" start="76681" end="76697" title="Council of the District of Columbia" label="District Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q886797" start="76706" end="76731" title="List of mayors of Washington, D.C." label="Mayor of Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q6970416" start="76733" end="76759" title="National Archives Building" label="National Archives Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141542" start="76761" end="76776" title="Old Post Office Pavilion" label="Old Post Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q3239392" start="76789" end="76818" title="Waldorf Astoria Hotels &amp;amp; Resorts" label="Waldorf Astoria Washington DC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7344191" start="76826" end="76874" title="Robert F. Kennedy Department of Justice Building" label="Robert F. Kennedy Department of Justice Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553390" start="76900" end="76926" title="United States Department of Justice" label="U.S. Department of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q983772" start="76928" end="76981" title="Ronald Reagan Building and International Trade Center" label="Ronald Reagan Building and International Trade Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q217072" start="77071" end="77112" title="United States Agency for International Development" label="U.S. Agency for International Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q368804" start="77117" end="77151" title="U.S. Customs and Border Protection" label="U.S. Customs and Border Protection"/>
<link wikidata="Q7163662" start="77204" end="77246" title="Pennsylvania Avenue National Historic Site" label="Pennsylvania Avenue National Historic Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q110128203" start="77264" end="77296" title="Architecture of Washington, D.C." label="Architecture of Washington, D.C."/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="997800" wikidata="Q1437182" url="?curid=997800" title="Forest Glen">
<text>The name Forest Glen may refer to:

;Australia
*Forest Glen, New South Wales, a suburb of Sydney
*Forest Glen, Queensland, a town on the Sunshine Coast

;United States
*Forest Glen, Chicago, Illinois, a neighborhood
**Forest Glen station (Illinois), a Metra station
*Forest Glen, Indiana, an unincorporated community
*Forest Glen, Maryland, a census-designated place near Silver Spring
**Forest Glen station, a Washington Metro station
*Forest Glen Beach, Wisconsin, an unincorporated community
*Forest Glen Park, Maryland, an unincorporated community
**Forest Glen Annex, a U.S. Army installation

;Canada
*Forest Glen, Nova Scotia</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5468871" start="48" end="76" title="Forest Glen, New South Wales" label="Forest Glen, New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q5468872" start="98" end="121" title="Forest Glen, Queensland" label="Forest Glen, Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077156" start="169" end="189" title="Forest Glen, Chicago" label="Forest Glen, Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q5468873" start="218" end="248" title="Forest Glen station (Illinois)" label="Forest Glen station (Illinois)"/>
<link wikidata="Q30625821" start="267" end="287" title="Forest Glen, Indiana" label="Forest Glen, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q754794" start="318" end="339" title="Forest Glen, Maryland" label="Forest Glen, Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5468881" start="388" end="407" title="Forest Glen station" label="Forest Glen station"/>
<link wikidata="Q5602752" start="437" end="465" title="Forest Glen Beach, Wisconsin" label="Forest Glen Beach, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q64785312" start="496" end="522" title="Forest Glen Park, Maryland" label="Forest Glen Park, Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5468876" start="554" end="571" title="Forest Glen Annex" label="Forest Glen Annex"/>
<link wikidata="Q3571882" start="608" end="632" title="Forest Glen, Nova Scotia" label="Forest Glen, Nova Scotia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="997801" wikidata="Q5472189" url="?curid=997801" title="Fort Totten">
<text>Fort Totten may refer to:
* Fort Totten (Queens), a Civil War–era military installation in New York City
* Fort Totten, North Dakota
** Fort Totten State Historic Site, a Dakota frontier-era fort and Native American boarding school
* Fort Totten (Washington, D.C.), a neighborhood in north east Washington, D.C.
** Fort Totten (WMATA station), a Metro station in Washington, D.C.
** Fort Totten Park, a Civil War fort and site of a park in Washington, D.C.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5472190" start="28" end="48" title="Fort Totten (Queens)" label="Fort Totten (Queens)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2757936" start="107" end="132" title="Fort Totten, North Dakota" label="Fort Totten, North Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q5472191" start="136" end="167" title="Fort Totten State Historic Site" label="Fort Totten State Historic Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q4404086" start="234" end="264" title="Fort Totten (Washington, D.C.)" label="Fort Totten (Washington, D.C.)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5472194" start="315" end="342" title="Fort Totten (WMATA station)" label="Fort Totten (WMATA station)"/>
<link wikidata="Q18150335" start="383" end="399" title="Fort Totten Park" label="Fort Totten Park"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="997803" wikidata="Q5504398" url="?curid=997803" title="Friendship Heights">
<text>Friendship Heights is an urban commercial and residential neighborhood in northwest Washington, D.C., and southern Montgomery County, Maryland. Though its borders are not clearly defined, Friendship Heights consists roughly of the neighborhoods and commercial areas around Wisconsin Avenue north of Fessenden Street NW and Tenleytown to Somerset Terrace and Willard Avenue in Maryland, and from River Road in the west to Reno Road and 41st Street in the east. Within Maryland west of Wisconsin Avenue is the Village of Friendship Heights, technically a special taxation district.

The portion in the District of Columbia lies in Ward 3, represented by ANCs 3E03 and 3E04. It is often considered to be part of Chevy Chase, D.C.; 
The most substantial commercial aspects are the shopping plazas near the intersection of Wisconsin and Western Avenues. Found here are many department stores, as well as numerous boutiques, day spas, a multiplex cinema and other services which cater to the residents as well as visitors to the area. The area also features a variety of moderate and discount chains.

The neighborhood also supports a number of offices, including the corporate headquarters of insurance giant GEICO (originally Government Employees Insurance Company) and the Ritz-Carlton hotel chain, and a concentration of broadcast media including the studios of WMAL-FM and WTOP-FM. As a result, heavy traffic is not uncommon.

The Friendship Heights Station on the Red Line of the Washington Metro system serves the area, and the station is also a major connecting depot for area bus services. Streetcar service, which once connected the neighborhood to Georgetown, was abandoned in 1960.

Since the late 1990s, development has accelerated in the neighborhood, notably the construction of Chase Tower on Willard Avenue, a new Chevy Chase Center replacing the older 1980s-era complex of the same name, and new condominiums on the site of the former Washington Women&#x27;s Clinic.

==Retail==
==Education==
District of Columbia Public Schools operates public schools. Friendship Heights is served by Janney Elementary School, Alice Deal Middle School, and Jackson-Reed High School.

The Maryland side of Friendship Heights is served by Somerset Elementary School, Westland Middle School, and Bethesda Chevy Chase High School.

District of Columbia Public Library operates the Tenley-Friendship Library. After seven years in an interim location, the library reopened in 2011 at the corner of Wisconsin Avenue and Albemarle Streets.

==See also==

*List of upscale shopping districts

== External links ==
* Friendship Heights Alliance

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5504398" start="0" end="18" title="Friendship Heights" label="Friendship Heights"/>
<link wikidata="Q123705" start="58" end="70" title="neighborhood" label="neighborhood"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="84" end="100" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q488659" start="115" end="142" title="Montgomery County, Maryland" label="Montgomery County, Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4703783" start="273" end="289" title="Wisconsin Avenue" label="Wisconsin Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q7699929" start="323" end="333" title="Tenleytown" label="Tenleytown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391" start="376" end="384" title="Maryland" label="Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="508" end="537" title="Friendship Village, Maryland#Village of Friendship Heights" label="Village of Friendship Heights"/>
<link wikidata="Q4686858" start="652" end="656" title="Advisory Neighborhood Commission" label="ANCs"/>
<link wikidata="Q4404091" start="709" end="726" title="Chevy Chase (Washington, D.C.)" label="Chevy Chase, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q1498689" start="1204" end="1209" title="GEICO" label="GEICO"/>
<link wikidata="Q782200" start="1270" end="1282" title="Ritz-Carlton" label="Ritz-Carlton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3564709" start="1360" end="1367" title="WMAL-FM" label="WMAL-FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q6464640" start="1372" end="1379" title="WTOP-FM" label="WTOP-FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q5504403" start="1430" end="1456" title="Friendship Heights (Washington Metro)" label="Friendship Heights Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q2193330" start="1464" end="1472" title="Red Line (Washington Metro)" label="Red Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q171221" start="1480" end="1503" title="Washington Metro" label="Washington Metro system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1468648" start="1653" end="1663" title="Georgetown, Washington, D.C." label="Georgetown"/>
<link wikidata="Q3120094" start="2005" end="2040" title="District of Columbia Public Schools" label="District of Columbia Public Schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q8033204" start="2154" end="2178" title="Jackson-Reed High School" label="Jackson-Reed High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5283432" start="2325" end="2360" title="District of Columbia Public Library" label="District of Columbia Public Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q4703783" start="2489" end="2505" title="Wisconsin Avenue" label="Wisconsin Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q6625200" start="2545" end="2579" title="List of upscale shopping districts" label="List of upscale shopping districts"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="997808" wikidata="Q6303071" url="?curid=997808" title="Judiciary Square">
<text>Judiciary Square is a neighborhood in the northwest quadrant of Washington, D.C., the vast majority of which is occupied by various federal and municipal courthouses and office buildings. Judiciary Square is located roughly between Pennsylvania Avenue to the south, H Street to the north, 6th Street to the west, and 3rd Street to the east. The center of the neighborhood is an actual plaza named Judiciary Square. The Square itself is bounded by 4th Street to the east, 5th Street to the west, D Street and Indiana Avenue to the south, and F Street to the north. The neighborhood is served by the Judiciary Square station on the Red Line of the Washington Metro, in addition to Washington Metropolitan Area Transit Authority bus stops.

The Square was included in the 1791 L&#x27;Enfant Plan, which planned the layout of the nation&#x27;s new capital. The plans were slightly altered during the following years. Development in the neighborhood was slow during the first half of the 19th-century. There were only a few shanties and a small hospital utilized by recent immigrants. When construction of the District of Columbia City Hall began in 1820, it led to an increase in development around the Square. Houses and places of worship were built, including the First Unitarian Church (now the All Souls Church, Unitarian). Other denominations soon followed with building impressive structures, such as Trinity Episcopal Church. 

The area became a fashionable place to live, despite many lots on the northern side being undeveloped, and Goose Creek passing through the neighborhood. Prominent residents during the 19th-century include Vice President John C. Calhoun, statesman Daniel Webster, Chief Justice of the U.S. Supreme Court Roger B. Taney, and architect Charles Bulfinch. During the Civil War, the buildings and open lots around the Square were commandeered to treat wounded Union soldiers. At the beginning of the war, the Square&#x27;s hospital was destroyed in a fire, so another hospital opened on the Square. There was also a large brick jail on the Square, that probably hindered development in the vicinity. After President Abraham Lincoln was assassinated, local citizens raised money to install a statue of Lincoln that became the nation&#x27;s first memorial to the slain president.

Alexander &quot;Boss&quot; Shepherd improved many areas of the neighborhood by having the streets graded and paved, sewer lines installed, and adding landscaping, which created a park-like setting in the Square. A massive new building on the north side of the Square, the Pension Building, was completed in 1887. By that time the residents in the neighborhood were mostly lawyers, doctors, professors, and other white-collar professions, due to the proximity of the city hall, hospital, and Columbian College, now known as George Washington University. The installation of streetcars resulted in further development. It was around this time, several older buildings on 4 1/2 Street were demolished and replaced with John Marshall Park. During the 20th-century, the area became less residential, especially after the construction of multiple judicial buildings. Most prominent citizens had already left the area to live in more fashionable neighborhoods. The area became mostly a neighborhood where office and judicial employees worked. With the construction of the Judiciary Square station, there was a sharp increase in commercial development. The largest project, Capitol Crossing, began in the 21st-century. 

There are many public artworks in the neighborhood, in addition to the Lincoln statue. The list includes the Darlington Memorial Fountain, George Gordon Meade Memorial, and &quot;Chief Justice John Marshall&quot;. Most of the neighborhood is listed as contributing properties to the Pennsylvania Avenue National Historic Site, and the Square itself is included in the historic landmark designation for the L&#x27;Enfant Plan. Additional historic buildings besides City Hall and the Pension Building include the Adas Israel Synagogue, the E. Barrett Prettyman United States Courthouse, Germuiller Row, and the Henry Daly Building.

==Location==
The Judiciary Square plaza, which encompasses , is on Squares 487E, 488E, and 489E, and is bounded by 4th Street to the east, 5th Street to the west, D Street and Indiana Avenue to the south, and F Street to the north. The Judiciary Square neighborhood, which encompasses Squares 486, 488, 489, 490, 518, 529, 531, and 533, is roughly bounded by C Street, Constitution Avenue, and Pennsylvania Avenue to the south, 3rd and 4th Street to the east, G Street to the north, and 6th Street to the west. Along the north side of the Square is the Judiciary Square station of the Washington Metro. 

Many of the structures in the Square are judicial buildings, owned by either the federal or local government, as was originally planned in the early history of the neighborhood. The neighborhood includes additional judicial and municipal buildings, commercial buildings, residential properties, and a church. South of the Square is John Marshall Park, which provides nearby workers a place to gather. Two buildings to the west of the park are the Embassy of Canada and the former Newseum, both of which are modern structures.

Additional modern structures in the neighborhood include the Judiciary Square station entrance, the National Law Enforcement Officers Memorial and associated National Law Enforcement Museum, the H. Carl Moultrie Courthouse, Engine Company No. 2, John Marshall Park and its statues, and the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine, although it incorporates the façades of several historic buildings. 

==History==
===18th century===

When the decision was made to create a new capital city after the Revolutionary War, President George Washington selected engineer and architect Pierre Charles L’Enfant to design it. The L&#x27;Enfant Plan was presented in 1791, which included numerous large squares, connected by avenues. In L&#x27;Enfant&#x27;s plan, the area that become Judiciary Square was Reservation 7 on land owned by David Burnes, and one of the largest out of the original 17 parcels included in his plan. It was designed to be three square blocks, in an area that would be home to the United States Supreme Court Building and other judicial buildings. The plan was to create a design that would form a triangle between the United States Capitol, the White House, and the Supreme Court Building. 

After L&#x27;Enfant was fired and replaced with Andrew Ellicott, there were several changes made to the Square&#x27;s plans, including size of the Square, removing building sites, and adding cross-through streets. The neighborhood around the planned Square was on sloping land that gradually reached street level at Pennsylvania Avenue. Goose Creek ran diagonally through the Square in addition to another tributary of the creek entering from the north.

Another plan for the city was completed in 1797 by James R. Dermott. Washington and President John Adams both selected this plan, which was more cohesive and did not include planned buildings, to be the final draft. The map includes the name, Judiciary Square, which does not appear on the L&#x27;Enfant Plan or Ellicott Plan.

===19th century===
Development was slow around the Square. By 1802, there were six shanties occupied by Irish immigrants on the southern edge of the Square. There was also a small hospital around the Square to treat immigrants workers. That building was later converted into a poorhouse. The last building around the square at that time was a barn, which housed prisoners waiting to be transferred to other facilities. In 1802, the U.S. Congress ordered local government official Daniel Brent to construct a jail, later nicknamed the McGurck Jail after a murderer was confined there until his execution, in the center of the Square. George Hadfield designed the $8,000 two-story building.

Robert King produced a fourth version of a city map which showed Judiciary Square as rectangular. The first major building erected in the area was the District of Columbia City Hall, designed by Hadfield, which was constructed from 1820 to the 1840s. Despite the building not being completed, the city government and circuit court for Washington County, D.C., moved into it beginning in 1822. After city hall came into use, there was development in the neighborhood. Architect James Hoban lived in a house on the corner of 5th and D Streets. The city&#x27;s registrar, William Hewitt, built a large home near 6th and D Streets, a few doors down from architect Charles Bulfinch.

The First Unitarian Church, designed by Bulfinch and now known as All Souls Church, Unitarian, was built in 1822 at the corner of 6th and D Streets. Other buildings constructed in the 1820s include a Masonic Temple and First Presbyterian Church, located on 4 1/2th Street, the Wesley Methodist Church, Trinity Episcopal Church, designed by James Renwick Jr., the American Theater, and public baths. The area&#x27;s houses of worship were numerous. In addition to the aforementioned churches, German immigrants built St. Mary Mother of God Church and a synagogue for the Washington Hebrew Congregation. Years later, the Adas Israel Synagogue was built at 6th and G Streets by Eastern European and Russian Jews.

A new jail designed by Robert Mills was built on the northeast corner of the Square in 1839, replacing the one built in 1802. The former jail was renovated into the Washington Infirmary Hospital, operated by Columbian College, now known as George Washington University. A few years later public school Fifth Street Schoolhouse was built near the hospital.. In 1840, the Rittenhouse Academy opened at 3rd Street and Indiana Avenue, which was a sign that area residents could afford tuition.

In the following decades, Judiciary Square had a heavily residential population. By the 1850s-1860s, its proximity to the courthouses attracted lawyers, judges, and clerks to the neighborhood, while its location between the White House and the Capitol made it ideal for government employees. Among its most prominent residents around this time were Chief Justice Roger B. Taney, Senator Thomas Hart Benton, Vice President John C. Calhoun, statesman Daniel Webster, and Mayor Richard Wallach. There were still many empty lots on the north and east sides of the Square during this period, possibly due to the sloping terrain or proximity to the jail.

During the Civil War, the buildings surrounding the Square were commandeered by the federal government and used as medical facilities for wounded Union soldiers. The Washington Infirmary Hospital was also converted into a military hospital. Tragedy struck on November 3, 1861, when a fire broke out inside the hospital, resulting in several deaths. A new hospital, U.S. General Hospital, was constructed in the Square, as was the nearby Providence Hospital, which survived for almost 100 years. One building constructed during the war and faced the Square contained a small library, founded by Elida B. Rumsey, and her fiancé, John A Fowle. Congress allocated money for them to construct a one-story building on the Square to use as a library, which was completed on their wedding day in 1863.

As the war continued in 1865, President Abraham Lincoln was assassinated, shocking the city&#x27;s residents. An association was soon formed to raise money for a monument to the slain president. On the three year anniversary of Lincoln&#x27;s death, the statue of Abraham Lincoln by sculptor Lot Flannery was installed in front of City Hall, becoming the first monument in the nation honoring Lincoln.

In the years following the war, there was a large influx of people moving into the city, but many areas had not yet been graded or plotted. Alexander &quot;Boss&quot; Shepherd was responsible for large-scale improvements to the city. This included modernizing the Judiciary Square neighborhood with public work projects, including paved roads, adding sewer lines, and landscaping public land. Additional improvements included building a small public restroom, adding footpaths, narrowing the roads on the southern end of the Square, and adding a fountain in the Square. The school and old jail were demolished by 1878 and replaced with green space and the Goose Creek was drained. The goal was to make the Square a landscaped area similar to ones designed by Andrew Jackson Downing.

Expansion of City Hall based on the design of Edward Clark began in 1882, the same year the cornerstone was laid for the massive Pension Building (now known as the National Building Museum), designed by Montgomery C. Meigs and located on the northern end of the Square. The building was inspired by the Palazzo Farnese, Palazzo della Cancelleria, and the Santa Maria degli Angeli e dei Martiri. The building encompassed of the Square, and with the largest atrium in Washington, D.C., became the place where many United States presidential inauguration balls took place.

By the end of the 1880s, most lots around the Square were developed, with houses and offices for lawyers, doctors, and professors. Some of the earlier buildings on 4 1/2 Street were demolished to make way for John Marshall Park, which includes the sculpture &quot;Chief Justice John Marshall&quot;. The population of the city nearly quadrupled between 1860 and 1900, and many of the new residents lived in older houses and alley dwellings. The neighborhood, which had been a fashionable area for a few decades, saw wealthier residents move to other areas of the city as more working-class people moved into Judiciary Square. A streetcar line on F Street led to rapid commercial development on the neighborhood&#x27;s west side. The first apartment building constructed in the neighborhood was the Harrison Apartment Building, at the corner of 3rd and G Streets. This led to additional apartment buildings being constructed in the area. By the end of 19th century, many office buildings were constructed in the neighborhood, signaling a transformation of the surrounding area from residential to commercial. 

===20th century===
The city saw additional growth in the population and more apartment buildings were constructed in the Judiciary Square neighborhood. Most of the remaining houses built in the 19th-century were converted into boarding houses. After the city&#x27;s John A. Wilson Building was constructed in 1908, the old City Hall housed the United States District Court for the District of Columbia, and the District of Columbia Court of Appeals moved into a new building on the Square.

The old City Hall was refurbished in the 1910s and the grounds further landscaped. The statue of Lincoln was removed during renovations, but was returned after complaints from citizens. In 1923, the Washington Bar Association installed the Darlington Memorial Fountain in honor of one its members. The bronze fountain with statues, designed by C. Paul Jennewein, was placed on the southwest corner of the Square. The following year the General Jose de San Martin Memorial, by sculptor Augustin-Alexandre Dumont, was installed in the center of the Square, where it remained for several decades. The Albert Pike Memorial, designed by sculptor Gaetano Trentanove, was installed across the street from the Square in 1901.

In the early decades of the 20th-century, the German immigrant population was replaced with Greek, Irish, and Italian immigrants, and the eastern side of Judiciary Square became an enclave of Italians, the equivalent of a Little Italy, though it was never called that. The Italian neighborhood rested on the eastern edge of the square proper, stretching eastward to about 2nd Street. The heart of the community was Holy Rosary Church, a chapel built at 3rd and F Streets.

By the 1920s, buildings along G Street were mostly restaurants and shops that catered to office workers. During the Great Depression, there were often homeless people sleeping in the Square each night. Police officers would wake them up before government and commercial employees arrived for work. The rise of automobile ownership wreaked havoc to the Square. Some of the outer edges were turned into parking spaces, and when those were full, some commuters would park on the Square&#x27;s sidewalks and green space.

As part of the Public Works Administration during the Great Depression, additional court buildings were constructed on the Square: the District of Columbia Recorder of Deeds Building, the Municipal Court Building, and the D.C. Juvenile Court Building. All four buildings are cohesive in design. Additional local and federal buildings constructed around this time include the Henry Daly Building, the E. Barrett Prettyman United States Courthouse, and the large US General Accounting Office Building.

In the 1960s, due to growing traffic issues, there were plans for a Metro transit system to be built in Washington, D.C. Construction of the Washington Metropolitan Area Transit Authority (WMATA) headquarters on the corner of 5th and F Streets was completed in 1974. Groundbreaking for the Judiciary Square station, designed by Harry Weese, took place in 1969. During construction, the General Jose de San Martin Memorial was moved and now stands along Virginia Avenue. The station opened in 1976.

There was a boon in development around the neighborhood after the Metro station was announced. The United States Tax Court Building at 3rd and D Streets was completed in 1974, and the following year, the H. Carl Moultrie Courthouse opened across from the Square&#x27;s southern end. The Judiciary Plaza Office Building, designed by Vlastimil Koubek and across the street from the Square, was completed in 1981. The Canadian embassy, on the southern border of the neighborhood, was built in 1989.

There were plans to demolish the Pension Building, but due to historic preservationists, it was converted into the National Building Museum in the 1980s. In 1989, the Square was chosen to be the site where a memorial to police officers who died in the line of duty would be built. The National Law Enforcement Officers Memorial was completed in 1991 and includes four bronze lion sculptures. During the 1990s, additional office buildings were constructed in the neighborhood, including the FBI District of Columbia Field Office, Koubek&#x27;s One Judiciary Square, and the Judiciary Center. The building boom extended into the next decade.

===21st century===
Construction projects in the 2000s included an $85 million renovation of the old City Hall, which included adding a modern atrium to the rear of the building and installing an underground courtroom. Outside this rear entrance is the National Law Enforcement Museum. Another museum that opened nearby was in the Keck Center, home of the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine, until it closed in 2017. The Newseum opened on Pennsylvania Avenue in 2009, but closed ten years later. It now houses the Paul H. Nitze School of Advanced International Studies.

The District government finalized a deal in 2010 with the Louis Dreyfus Group to construct Capitol Crossing, a mixed-use development in the airspace over the Center Leg Freeway (Interstate 395). The $1.3 billion office, residential, and retail project at the east end of the Judiciary Square neighborhood will also restore the area&#x27;s original L&#x27;Enfant Plan street grid by reconnecting F and G Streets over the freeway. The project awaited final regulatory approval for several years and construction began in 2016. Part of the construction process necessitated moving the Adas Israel Synagogue, which had been moved twice decades earlier for construction projects. The original building and a modern addition are now the Lillian &amp; Albert Small Capital Jewish Museum, which opened in 2023.

==Historic properties==

Judiciary Square itself is listed on the National Register of Historic Places (NRHP) and District of Columbia Inventory of Historic Sites (DCIHS), as a part of the L&#x27;Enfant Plan, which was added to the DCIHS on March 7, 1968, and the NRHP on April 24, 1997. A large portion of the neighborhood also contains contributing properties to the Pennsylvania Avenue National Historic Site, listed on the NRHP on October 15, 1966, and the DCIHS on June 19, 1973.

Additional structures listed on both the NRHP and DCIHS include: the Adas Israel Synagogue, the District of Columbia City Hall, which is also a National Historic Landmark (NHL), the E. Barrett Prettyman United States Courthouse, Germuiller Row, the Harrison Apartment Building, the Henry Daly Building, the Moran Building, the National Building Museum (NHL), the US General Accounting Office Building, the United States Court of Military Appeals Building, and the United States Tax Court Building. The Albert Pike Memorial and George Gordon Meade Memorial are collectively listed with 16 other monuments on the NRHP and DCIHS as Civil War Monuments in Washington, D.C.

==Public art==
There are many public artwork and monuments in the Judiciary Square neighborhood. The oldest one is &quot;Abraham Lincoln&quot; (1868), located in front of the old City Hall. The second oldest is &quot;Chief Justice John Marshall&quot; (1883) by William Wetmore Story, sited in John Marshall Park. The Albert Pike Memorial, which no longer features the statue of Albert Pike, was torn down by protesters after the murder of George Floyd due to Pike being a former general in the Confederate Army. The 1923 Darlington Memorial Fountain, which includes two bronze statutes on top of the fountain, was installed in 1923.

The next oldest public artwork in the neighborhood is the large George Gordon Meade Memorial, designed by Charles Grafly and erected in 1927, which stands in front of the E. Barrett Prettyman United States Courthouse. The statue of William Blackstone, designed by Paul Wayland Bartlett and installed in 1943, is also located in front of the Prettyman Courthouse. &quot;Trylon of Freedom&quot; by C. Paul Jennewein is the third sculpture in front of the Prettyman Courthouse and was installed in 1954.

The abstract sculpture, &quot;She Who Must Be Obeyed&quot;, is in between the Henry Daly Building and Frances Perkins Building. It was created by Tony Smith and installed in 1975. &quot;The Chess Players&quot; is on the east side of John Marshall Park and was installed in 1983. The National Law Enforcement Officers Memorial and its bronze lions were completed in 1991. &quot;Ashes to Answers&quot; is a 2013 statue in front of the Fire Station 2.

==Transportation==
The neighborhood is served by two forms of public transit. Entrances to the Judiciary Square station on the Washington Metro&#x27;s Red Line are on the northern and eastern ends of the Square. The second form is Metrobus with several bus stops in the neighborhood and nearby vicinity, including ones on 6th Street, E Street, H Street, and Pennsylvania Avenue. Other forms of transportation in the neighborhood include Capital Bikeshare stations at 4th and D Streets, and 5th and F Streets. A few blocks east of Judiciary Square is Washington Union Station, where commuters on the MARC Train and Amtrak arrive.

==See also==
* Neighborhoods in Washington, D.C.

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6303071" start="0" end="16" title="Judiciary Square" label="Judiciary Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q383689" start="42" end="51" title="Northwest, Washington, D.C." label="northwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q7268334" start="52" end="60" title="Quadrants of Washington, D.C." label="quadrant"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="64" end="80" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q1455053" start="232" end="251" title="Pennsylvania Avenue" label="Pennsylvania Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q5636309" start="266" end="274" title="H Street (Washington, D.C.)" label="H Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q97159485" start="541" end="549" title="F Street and 7th Street shopping districts" label="F Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q6303076" start="598" end="622" title="Judiciary Square station" label="Judiciary Square station"/>
<link wikidata="Q2193330" start="630" end="638" title="Red Line (Washington Metro)" label="Red Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q171221" start="646" end="662" title="Washington Metro" label="Washington Metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q7972051" start="679" end="725" title="Washington Metropolitan Area Transit Authority" label="Washington Metropolitan Area Transit Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q6455666" start="774" end="792" title="L&amp;#x27;Enfant Plan" label="L&amp;#x27;Enfant Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5283406" start="1105" end="1135" title="District of Columbia City Hall" label="District of Columbia City Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q4729652" start="1294" end="1321" title="All Souls Church, Unitarian (Washington, D.C.)" label="All Souls Church, Unitarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q111953676" start="1403" end="1427" title="Trinity Episcopal Church (Washington, D.C.)" label="Trinity Episcopal Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q7800350" start="1538" end="1549" title="Tiber Creek" label="Goose Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q207191" start="1651" end="1666" title="John C. Calhoun" label="John C. Calhoun"/>
<link wikidata="Q106231" start="1678" end="1692" title="Daniel Webster" label="Daniel Webster"/>
<link wikidata="Q359470" start="1734" end="1748" title="Roger B. Taney" label="Roger B. Taney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063849" start="1764" end="1780" title="Charles Bulfinch" label="Charles Bulfinch"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="1793" end="1802" title="American Civil War" label="Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752901" start="1885" end="1890" title="Union Army" label="Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q91" start="2141" end="2156" title="Abraham Lincoln" label="Abraham Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025404" start="2161" end="2173" title="Assassination of Abraham Lincoln" label="assassinated"/>
<link wikidata="Q16001435" start="2216" end="2233" title="Statue of Abraham Lincoln (District of Columbia City Hall)" label="statue of Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q4719957" start="2304" end="2339" title="Alexander Robey Shepherd" label="Alexander &amp;quot;Boss&amp;quot; Shepherd"/>
<link wikidata="Q624008" start="2576" end="2592" title="National Building Museum" label="Pension Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q432637" start="2795" end="2812" title="Columbian College" label="Columbian College"/>
<link wikidata="Q432637" start="2827" end="2855" title="George Washington University" label="George Washington University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7623083" start="2877" end="2887" title="Streetcars in Washington, D.C." label="streetcars"/>
<link wikidata="Q6246907" start="3020" end="3038" title="John Marshall Park" label="John Marshall Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q28228237" start="3470" end="3486" title="Capitol Crossing" label="Capitol Crossing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5223987" start="3626" end="3654" title="Darlington Memorial Fountain" label="Darlington Memorial Fountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q5539818" start="3656" end="3684" title="George Gordon Meade Memorial" label="George Gordon Meade Memorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q5096773" start="3696" end="3723" title="Chief Justice John Marshall" label="Chief Justice John Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q76321820" start="3769" end="3792" title="Contributing property" label="contributing properties"/>
<link wikidata="Q7163662" start="3800" end="3842" title="Pennsylvania Avenue National Historic Site" label="Pennsylvania Avenue National Historic Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q6548073" start="4028" end="4049" title="Lillian &amp;amp; Albert Small Capital Jewish Museum" label="Adas Israel Synagogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q5321749" start="4055" end="4100" title="E. Barrett Prettyman United States Courthouse" label="E. Barrett Prettyman United States Courthouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q5552261" start="4102" end="4116" title="Germuiller Row" label="Germuiller Row"/>
<link wikidata="Q52308581" start="4126" end="4145" title="Henry Daly Building" label="Henry Daly Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q97159485" start="4357" end="4365" title="F Street and 7th Street shopping districts" label="F Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q2406648" start="4517" end="4536" title="Constitution Avenue" label="Constitution Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455053" start="4542" end="4561" title="Pennsylvania Avenue" label="Pennsylvania Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q6303076" start="4701" end="4725" title="Judiciary Square station" label="Judiciary Square station"/>
<link wikidata="Q171221" start="4733" end="4749" title="Washington Metro" label="Washington Metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q6246907" start="5085" end="5103" title="John Marshall Park" label="John Marshall Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q137245" start="5200" end="5217" title="Embassy of Canada, Washington, D.C." label="Embassy of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519128" start="5233" end="5240" title="Newseum" label="Newseum"/>
<link wikidata="Q6974030" start="5380" end="5422" title="National Law Enforcement Officers Memorial" label="National Law Enforcement Officers Memorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q6974022" start="5438" end="5469" title="National Law Enforcement Museum" label="National Law Enforcement Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5628128" start="5475" end="5502" title="H. Carl Moultrie Courthouse" label="H. Carl Moultrie Courthouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q3233780" start="5570" end="5627" title="National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine" label="National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="5797" end="5814" title="American Revolutionary War" label="Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q23" start="5826" end="5843" title="George Washington" label="George Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q264764" start="5876" end="5899" title="Pierre Charles L’Enfant" label="Pierre Charles L’Enfant"/>
<link wikidata="Q6455666" start="5918" end="5936" title="L&amp;#x27;Enfant Plan" label="L&amp;#x27;Enfant Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1579670" start="6294" end="6330" title="United States Supreme Court Building" label="United States Supreme Court Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q54109" start="6432" end="6453" title="United States Capitol" label="United States Capitol"/>
<link wikidata="Q35525" start="6459" end="6470" title="White House" label="White House"/>
<link wikidata="Q129901" start="6554" end="6569" title="Andrew Ellicott" label="Andrew Ellicott"/>
<link wikidata="Q7800350" start="6843" end="6854" title="Tiber Creek" label="Goose Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q11806" start="7055" end="7065" title="John Adams" label="John Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929784" start="7566" end="7575" title="poorhouse" label="poorhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="7721" end="7734" title="United States Congress" label="U.S. Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q16240815" start="7769" end="7781" title="Daniel Brent" label="Daniel Brent"/>
<link wikidata="Q3760513" start="7922" end="7937" title="George Hadfield (architect)" label="George Hadfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q5283406" start="8130" end="8160" title="District of Columbia City Hall" label="District of Columbia City Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7971751" start="8314" end="8337" title="Washington County, D.C." label="Washington County, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q470765" start="8456" end="8467" title="James Hoban" label="James Hoban"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063849" start="8639" end="8655" title="Charles Bulfinch" label="Charles Bulfinch"/>
<link wikidata="Q4729652" start="8724" end="8751" title="All Souls Church, Unitarian (Washington, D.C.)" label="All Souls Church, Unitarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454583" start="8858" end="8872" title="Masonic Temple" label="Masonic Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q111953676" start="8960" end="8984" title="Trinity Episcopal Church (Washington, D.C.)" label="Trinity Episcopal Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q3161370" start="8998" end="9015" title="James Renwick Jr." label="James Renwick Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q7971902" start="9228" end="9258" title="Washington Hebrew Congregation" label="Washington Hebrew Congregation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6548073" start="9277" end="9298" title="Lillian &amp;amp; Albert Small Capital Jewish Museum" label="Adas Israel Synagogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q956665" start="9392" end="9404" title="Robert Mills (architect)" label="Robert Mills"/>
<link wikidata="Q432637" start="9609" end="9637" title="George Washington University" label="George Washington University"/>
<link wikidata="Q359470" start="10223" end="10237" title="Roger B. Taney" label="Roger B. Taney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317969" start="10247" end="10265" title="Thomas Hart Benton (senator)" label="Thomas Hart Benton"/>
<link wikidata="Q207191" start="10282" end="10297" title="John C. Calhoun" label="John C. Calhoun"/>
<link wikidata="Q106231" start="10309" end="10323" title="Daniel Webster" label="Daniel Webster"/>
<link wikidata="Q7329785" start="10335" end="10350" title="Richard Wallach" label="Richard Wallach"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="10521" end="10530" title="American Civil War" label="Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752901" start="10656" end="10661" title="Union Army" label="Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q30280436" start="10947" end="10966" title="Providence Hospital (Washington, D.C.)" label="Providence Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q91" start="11345" end="11360" title="Abraham Lincoln" label="Abraham Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025404" start="11365" end="11377" title="Assassination of Abraham Lincoln" label="assassinated"/>
<link wikidata="Q16001435" start="11559" end="11584" title="Statue of Abraham Lincoln (District of Columbia City Hall)" label="statue of Abraham Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q19666914" start="11597" end="11609" title="Lot Flannery" label="Lot Flannery"/>
<link wikidata="Q4719957" start="11848" end="11883" title="Alexander Robey Shepherd" label="Alexander &amp;quot;Boss&amp;quot; Shepherd"/>
<link wikidata="Q505402" start="12467" end="12489" title="Andrew Jackson Downing" label="Andrew Jackson Downing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1291898" start="12538" end="12550" title="Edward Clark (architect)" label="Edward Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q624008" start="12656" end="12680" title="National Building Museum" label="National Building Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3322718" start="12695" end="12714" title="Montgomery C. Meigs" label="Montgomery C. Meigs"/>
<link wikidata="Q848386" start="12795" end="12810" title="Palazzo Farnese" label="Palazzo Farnese"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031943" start="12812" end="12837" title="Palazzo della Cancelleria" label="Palazzo della Cancelleria"/>
<link wikidata="Q569253" start="12847" end="12885" title="Santa Maria degli Angeli e dei Martiri" label="Santa Maria degli Angeli e dei Martiri"/>
<link wikidata="Q263233" start="13004" end="13043" title="United States presidential inauguration" label="United States presidential inauguration"/>
<link wikidata="Q6246907" start="13272" end="13290" title="John Marshall Park" label="John Marshall Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5096773" start="13327" end="13354" title="Chief Justice John Marshall" label="Chief Justice John Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7623083" start="13690" end="13699" title="Streetcars in Washington, D.C." label="streetcar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5665498" start="13860" end="13887" title="Harrison Apartment Building" label="Harrison Apartment Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q3180858" start="14438" end="14461" title="John A. Wilson Building" label="John A. Wilson Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889769" start="14516" end="14573" title="United States District Court for the District of Columbia" label="United States District Court for the District of Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5283409" start="14583" end="14620" title="District of Columbia Court of Appeals" label="District of Columbia Court of Appeals"/>
<link wikidata="Q16902319" start="14634" end="14646" title="United States Court of Military Appeals (building)" label="new building"/>
<link wikidata="Q7971684" start="14862" end="14888" title="Washington Bar Association" label="Washington Bar Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q5223987" start="14903" end="14931" title="Darlington Memorial Fountain" label="Darlington Memorial Fountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2938977" start="15007" end="15024" title="C. Paul Jennewein" label="C. Paul Jennewein"/>
<link wikidata="Q5531982" start="15099" end="15134" title="General Jose de San Martin Memorial" label="General Jose de San Martin Memorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q179725" start="15148" end="15173" title="Augustin-Alexandre Dumont" label="Augustin-Alexandre Dumont"/>
<link wikidata="Q4967183" start="15261" end="15281" title="Albert Pike Memorial" label="Albert Pike Memorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q5516710" start="15304" end="15322" title="Gaetano Trentanove" label="Gaetano Trentanove"/>
<link wikidata="Q61729985" start="15604" end="15616" title="Little Italy" label="Little Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q16539852" start="15797" end="15815" title="Holy Rosary Catholic Church (Washington, D.C.)" label="Holy Rosary Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q696482" start="15971" end="15987" title="Great Depression in the United States" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q3177134" start="16388" end="16415" title="Public Works Administration" label="Public Works Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q52308581" start="16748" end="16767" title="Henry Daly Building" label="Henry Daly Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q5321749" start="16773" end="16818" title="E. Barrett Prettyman United States Courthouse" label="E. Barrett Prettyman United States Courthouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q7875886" start="16834" end="16871" title="US General Accounting Office Building" label="US General Accounting Office Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q5503" start="16942" end="16962" title="Rapid transit" label="Metro transit system"/>
<link wikidata="Q7972051" start="17015" end="17061" title="Washington Metropolitan Area Transit Authority" label="Washington Metropolitan Area Transit Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q3783535" start="17202" end="17213" title="Harry Weese" label="Harry Weese"/>
<link wikidata="Q7934117" start="17327" end="17342" title="Virginia Avenue" label="Virginia Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892235" start="17472" end="17504" title="United States Tax Court Building" label="United States Tax Court Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q5628128" start="17577" end="17604" title="H. Carl Moultrie Courthouse" label="H. Carl Moultrie Courthouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q7939037" start="17705" end="17721" title="Vlastimil Koubek" label="Vlastimil Koubek"/>
<link wikidata="Q6974030" start="18155" end="18197" title="National Law Enforcement Officers Memorial" label="National Law Enforcement Officers Memorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q7092763" start="18413" end="18433" title="One Judiciary Square" label="One Judiciary Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352632" start="19047" end="19101" title="Paul H. Nitze School of Advanced International Studies" label="Paul H. Nitze School of Advanced International Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q833111" start="19162" end="19181" title="Louis Dreyfus Group" label="Louis Dreyfus Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q28228237" start="19195" end="19211" title="Capitol Crossing" label="Capitol Crossing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4298922" start="19215" end="19236" title="mixed-use development" label="mixed-use development"/>
<link wikidata="Q272730" start="19244" end="19252" title="airspace" label="airspace"/>
<link wikidata="Q718060" start="19282" end="19296" title="Interstate 395 (District of Columbia – Virginia)" label="Interstate 395"/>
<link wikidata="Q6455666" start="19452" end="19470" title="L&amp;#x27;Enfant Plan" label="L&amp;#x27;Enfant Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6548073" start="19835" end="19883" title="Lillian &amp;amp; Albert Small Capital Jewish Museum" label="Lillian &amp;amp; Albert Small Capital Jewish Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719" start="19974" end="20010" title="National Register of Historic Places" label="National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q73198230" start="20022" end="20070" title="District of Columbia Inventory of Historic Sites" label="District of Columbia Inventory of Historic Sites"/>
<link wikidata="Q6455666" start="20097" end="20115" title="L&amp;#x27;Enfant Plan" label="L&amp;#x27;Enfant Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q76321820" start="20246" end="20269" title="Contributing property" label="contributing properties"/>
<link wikidata="Q7163662" start="20277" end="20319" title="Pennsylvania Avenue National Historic Site" label="Pennsylvania Avenue National Historic Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q6548073" start="20463" end="20484" title="Lillian &amp;amp; Albert Small Capital Jewish Museum" label="Adas Israel Synagogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q5283406" start="20490" end="20520" title="District of Columbia City Hall" label="District of Columbia City Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q624232" start="20538" end="20564" title="National Historic Landmark" label="National Historic Landmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q5321749" start="20576" end="20621" title="E. Barrett Prettyman United States Courthouse" label="E. Barrett Prettyman United States Courthouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q5552261" start="20623" end="20637" title="Germuiller Row" label="Germuiller Row"/>
<link wikidata="Q5665498" start="20643" end="20670" title="Harrison Apartment Building" label="Harrison Apartment Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q52308581" start="20676" end="20695" title="Henry Daly Building" label="Henry Daly Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q6909189" start="20701" end="20715" title="Moran Building" label="Moran Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q624008" start="20721" end="20745" title="National Building Museum" label="National Building Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7875886" start="20757" end="20794" title="US General Accounting Office Building" label="US General Accounting Office Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q16902319" start="20800" end="20848" title="United States Court of Military Appeals (building)" label="United States Court of Military Appeals Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892235" start="20858" end="20890" title="United States Tax Court Building" label="United States Tax Court Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q4967183" start="20896" end="20916" title="Albert Pike Memorial" label="Albert Pike Memorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q5539818" start="20921" end="20949" title="George Gordon Meade Memorial" label="George Gordon Meade Memorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q5124620" start="21023" end="21062" title="Civil War Monuments in Washington, D.C." label="Civil War Monuments in Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q16001435" start="21185" end="21200" title="Statue of Abraham Lincoln (District of Columbia City Hall)" label="Abraham Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q5096773" start="21281" end="21308" title="Chief Justice John Marshall" label="Chief Justice John Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335728" start="21325" end="21346" title="William Wetmore Story" label="William Wetmore Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q4967183" start="21381" end="21401" title="Albert Pike Memorial" label="Albert Pike Memorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q366639" start="21442" end="21453" title="Albert Pike" label="Albert Pike"/>
<link wikidata="Q95965839" start="21472" end="21482" title="George Floyd protests" label="protesters"/>
<link wikidata="Q95579249" start="21493" end="21515" title="murder of George Floyd" label="murder of George Floyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125021" start="21558" end="21574" title="Confederate Army" label="Confederate Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q5223987" start="21585" end="21613" title="Darlington Memorial Fountain" label="Darlington Memorial Fountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q5539818" start="21762" end="21790" title="George Gordon Meade Memorial" label="George Gordon Meade Memorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q5078353" start="21804" end="21818" title="Charles Grafly" label="Charles Grafly"/>
<link wikidata="Q7529500" start="21920" end="21948" title="statue of William Blackstone" label="statue of William Blackstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3398515" start="21962" end="21983" title="Paul Wayland Bartlett" label="Paul Wayland Bartlett"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22067" end="22084" title="Trylon of Freedom" label="Trylon of Freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2938977" start="22094" end="22111" title="C. Paul Jennewein" label="C. Paul Jennewein"/>
<link wikidata="Q7492097" start="22230" end="22252" title="She Who Must Be Obeyed (sculpture)" label="She Who Must Be Obeyed"/>
<link wikidata="Q12058035" start="22302" end="22326" title="Frances Perkins Building" label="Frances Perkins Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q551899" start="22346" end="22356" title="Tony Smith (sculptor)" label="Tony Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q21188881" start="22386" end="22403" title="The Chess Players (sculpture)" label="The Chess Players"/>
<link wikidata="Q6303076" start="22745" end="22769" title="Judiciary Square station" label="Judiciary Square station"/>
<link wikidata="Q171221" start="22777" end="22793" title="Washington Metro" label="Washington Metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q2193330" start="22801" end="22809" title="Red Line (Washington Metro)" label="Red Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q6824810" start="22881" end="22889" title="Metrobus (Washington, D.C.)" label="Metrobus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5636309" start="22994" end="23002" title="H Street (Washington, D.C.)" label="H Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q1034635" start="23087" end="23104" title="Capital Bikeshare" label="Capital Bikeshare"/>
<link wikidata="Q3570" start="23200" end="23224" title="Washington Union Station" label="Washington Union Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q6714458" start="23249" end="23259" title="MARC Train" label="MARC Train"/>
<link wikidata="Q23239" start="23264" end="23270" title="Amtrak" label="Amtrak"/>
<link wikidata="Q12063697" start="23295" end="23328" title="Neighborhoods in Washington, D.C." label="Neighborhoods in Washington, D.C."/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="997809" wikidata="Q1043467" url="?curid=997809" title="Foveaux Strait">
<text>Foveaux Strait ( ; ) is a strait that separates Stewart Island from the South Island of New Zealand. The width of the strait ranges from about 23 to 53 km (14 to 33 mi), and the depth varies between 18 and 46 m (59 and 151 ft). The strait was first charted by an American sealer, Owen Folger Smith. He charted the strait from a whaleboat of the sealing brig &quot;Union&quot; in 1804.

The passage was named Foveaux Strait in March 1809, after Joseph Foveaux, the Lieutenant-Governor of New South Wales in Australia. Ferry services across Foveaux Strait began in 1877 and continue to operate regularly between Bluff Harbour and Oban. The strait has been described as &quot;one of the roughest and most unpredictable stretches of water in the world&quot;. Severe weather and sea conditions in the strait have contributed to multiple shipwrecks and fatalities. One of these losses was the wreck of the SS &quot;Tararua&quot; in 1881—the worst maritime disaster for civilian vessels in New Zealand&#x27;s history, with 131 fatalities. There are currently no formal definitions of the eastern and western boundaries of the strait.

The waters of Foveaux Strait are the main location in New Zealand for dredging for Bluff oysters. There are a large number of small islands in the strait, including Ruapuke Island and the northern Muttonbird Islands. These islands are locations for muttonbirding—the harvest by Rakiura Māori of sooty shearwater (or tītī) chicks. New Zealand fur seals in the region were hunted in major seal hunting operations in the early 1800s until populations were severely depleted, and whaling was a major industry over the 40-year period from 1844 to 1885.

Foveaux Strait is known for its biodiversity, particularly seabirds and marine mammals. The region has significant populations of seven species of globally threatened seabirds, including yellow-eyed penguins. Multiple areas of coastline, islands and open sea within the strait have been recognised as Important Bird and Biodiversity Areas. Some marine mammals are resident in the strait throughout the year, while others, such as baleen whales, pass through in winter and spring on migration. The wider region also has small populations of nationally endangered dolphins, including Hector&#x27;s dolphin. The Catlins Coast Marine Mammal Sanctuary lies mostly within the strait.

== Geography ==

=== Scope ===
Foveaux Strait is a seaway separating Stewart Island (&quot;Rakiura&quot;) from the South Island (&quot;Te Wai Pounamu&quot;) in New Zealand. The width of the strait ranges from about . There is no formal definition of the eastern and western boundaries of the strait — different sources set the eastern boundary of the strait at Waipapa Point, or alternatively further east at Waikawa Harbour. The western boundary has been defined as a line at 167° 43&#x27;E, or further west at Sand Hill Point. Depending on the definition of eastern and western boundaries, the area of the strait is approximately .

=== Physical geography and climate ===

There are a large number of small islands in the strait, including Raratoka Island, Dog Island, the Muttonbird Islands and Ruapuke Island. The Solander Islands lie to the west; they are outside of the area usually defined as Foveaux Strait. Major landforms on the northern coast of the strait include three large bays, Te Waewae Bay, Oreti Beach, Toetoes Bay and Bluff Harbour. 

During the Last Glacial Period when sea levels were at least lower than current levels, the South Island and Stewart Island were connected by a coastal plain. This claim is also supported by the gravel patterns in the strait, which are distinguishable by petrographis analyses of the pebbles, that confirm the existence of dryland. After sea levels began to rise 7,000 years ago, Foveaux Strait was created between the two islands. The sea floor in the strait slopes towards the west, increasing in depth from around . The sea floor is mostly flat with patches of coarse pebble and an upfault of bedrock close to sea level, near Te Waewae Bay. Small amounts of &quot;Stiracolpus symmetricus&quot; shells and fine sands lie nearby, which occur of the mouths of some rivers, salinities in the strait is constantly low, particularly near the river mouths of the southern coastline of the Southland, such as the Waiau River.

The climate of the Foveaux Strait region is severe by New Zealand standards with daily average temperatures of around 14 °C in summer, and 5.3 °C in winter. The annual average rainfall is more than and there are around 100 windy days per year. Gale force winds are common in Foveaux Strait, with a frequency that is second only to Cook Strait.

== Sea conditions ==
The sea conditions and tidal currents in Foveaux Strait are influenced by the sub-tropical convergence zone (STCZ). This is a frontal zone between subantarctic waters to the south, and subtropical waters to the north. The southern boundary of the STCZ lies at around 46 °S, and runs eastwards from Tasmania. It gives rise to the Southland Current that flows from the continental shelf west of Stewart Island, through Foveaux Strait and then north along the coast of the South Island. The Southland Current carries a mixture of sub-tropical water and some sub-antarctic waters from the Australasian region, and it has a major influence on ocean conditions in Foveaux Strait and the south-east coast of the South Island.

Foveaux Strait has been described as &quot;one of the roughest and most unpredictable stretches of water in the world&quot;. Strong westerly winds regularly blow through the strait of up to an hour, frequently creating swells with an average height of over and occasionally over . The tidal stream in the strait can flow at speeds of per second and up to per second during spring tides. In 1850 the survey vessel HMS &quot;Acheron&quot; was caught in a gale in Foveaux Strait that lasted for five days. The vessel took shelter at Ruapuke Island, but Captain John Lort Stokes reported: &quot;All this time the sea resembled a huge boiling cauldron, hissing and roaring, whilst its break over the numerous reefs by which the vessel was encompassed had an appearance awfully impressive when seen in the gloom of approaching night&quot;. Many whaling ships used Port William on the northwest coast of Steward Island as shelter when there was strong westerlies or severe sea conditions in Foveaux Strait.

The French navigator Jules de Blosseville on board a French expeditionary vessel &quot;Coquille&quot;, was the first person to describe the strait in detail. He wrote in 1823: &quot;Whirlpools are frequently to be met with and the position is one of great peril when the direction of the waves is contrary to that of the wind&quot;. Blosseville also compared Foveaux Strait with Bass Strait, writing that currents were &quot;much stronger&quot;, with the most dangerous being between Raratoka Island and the South Island, where &quot;the flow and ebb rush through with a speed of as much as 5–6 miles&quot; (8.0–9.7 km per hour). The combination of wind, tides and seafloor topography in Foveaux Strait can lead to steep waves, dangerous overfalls and tidal rips. Sea conditions are rough when fresh winds blow in the opposite direction to a strong tidal flow. In 2009, following several accident investigations, Maritime New Zealand arranged for warning notes to be added to charts of the area.

== Toponymy ==

The Māori name for the strait is &quot;Te Ara a Kiwa&quot;, meaning the pathway of Kiwa. A less common alternative Māori name for the strait is &quot;Te Ara a Kewa.&quot; There are numerous stories in Māori mythology about the origin of the names. In one account, Kiwa became exhausted from crossing the isthmus which connected Murihiku (Southland) and Rakiura. He asked the whale &quot;Kewa&quot; to chew through the isthmus to create a waterway, so he could travel to &quot;Rakiura&quot; using a waka.

The strait was first charted by an American sealer, Owen Folger Smith. Smith charted the strait from the whaleboat of the sealing brig &quot;Union&quot; (out of New York) in 1804; on his 1806 chart, he named it Smith&#x27;s Strait. Smith&#x27;s chart was given to Governor of New South Wales, Philip Gidley King, who did not make it public, even though he was duty bound to communicate all hydrographic discoveries to the Admiralty. Later in 1806, another American vessel, the &quot;Favorite,&quot; collected large amounts of sealskin from the area before continuing its journey to Sydney through the strait, leading to the passage being referred to as &quot;Favorite&#x27;s Strait&quot; by some early maps and American logbooks.

Captain John Grono named the strait Foveaux Strait in March 1809 after his friend Joseph Foveaux, Lieutenant-Governor of New South Wales. His vessel &quot;Governor Bligh&quot; struck a rock in the strait, but suffered little damage. He described the strait as being about in width, and &quot;with very dangerous navigation from the numerous rocks, shoals and little islands, with which it is crowded&quot;. The sealing brig &quot;Pegasus&quot;, commanded by Eber Bunker, ran aground in the strait in 1809, and in the report on the grounding in &quot;The Sydney Gazette&quot;, the strait was called Foveaux Strait.

In 1824, one Captain Kent of the &quot;Elizabeth Henrietta&quot; attempted to rename the strait to &quot;Tees Strait&quot;, but was unsuccessful. A more recent proposal, in 1968, for the strait to be renamed to &quot;Kupe Strait&quot;, was also unsuccessful.

==History==

=== Māori settlement ===
In Māori oral tradition, their history in the Southland region is traced to the arrival of two chiefs, Rākaihautū and Tamatea. Rākaihautū is a &quot;tīpuna&quot; (ancestor) of the Waitaha people, and was the captain of the &quot;Uruao&quot; waka (canoe). The waka &quot;Tākitimu&quot;, captained by Tamatea, was wrecked near Te Waewae Bay on the shores of what is now called Foveaux Strait. In the traditional account, the Tākitimu Mountains in Southland are the overturned hull of the canoe. The name given to the lower parts of the South Island was &quot;Murihiku&quot;, a name that is loosely translated as &#x27;the tail end&#x27; of the land. 

Murihiku Māori were mostly hunter-gatherers who settled around Foveaux Strait including coastal settlements such as Bluff and Riverton, moving between inland areas and the coast, including the shores and islands of the strait. They established permanent settlements on Ruapuke Island in Foveaux Strait, and on the South Island coastline at Aparima (Riverton), Awarua (Bluff) and Waikawa. The ocean provided food year round, and &quot;tītī&quot; (mutton birds) were taken from islands off Rakiura. Groups would move inland to fish and catch eels in the rivers between late winter and into summer. In the autumn, they hunted birds including weka, kākā, takahē, kererū, and kākāpō. 

Significant Māori settlements existed in the Foveaux Strait area, most notably on Ruapuke Island. It was the location of a major Ngāi Tahu settlement in the nineteenth century and was the home to southern rangatira, Tūhawaiki. He was the first of the southern chiefs to sign the Treaty of Waitangi. Ruapuke was an important site for two of the country&#x27;s earliest industries, the harvesting of harakeke (flax) and fur seal skins.

The pre-colonial population is estimated at 350 Māori on the northern side of the strait, spread between the modern-day settlement of Bluff and Ruapuke Island. Stewart Island had about 85 Māori, primarily occupying Horseshoe Bay and an area referred to as &quot;Te Wehi-a-Te-Wera&quot;, a narrow peninsula of the entrance of Paterson Inlet.

In the early 19th century, Honekai, a Māori chief in the Foveaux Strait region, declared that Ngāi Tahu women and European sealers could stay together in Whenua Hou, west Stewart Island, under his protection, making it one of New Zealand&#x27;s first multiracial communities. The island had previously been known as Kanawera, after a prominent Kāti Māmoe chief.

=== Cook&#x27;s passage around Stewart Island ===

In March 1770, Captain James Cook, a British explorer, circumnavigated the South Island on the HMS &quot;Endeavour&quot; during his first voyage to New Zealand. He passed around the southern tip of Stewart Island during this voyage, and sighted the area of Foveaux Strait, but did not record the presence of a passage. It is also possible that Cook genuinely made an error, as his focus was on finding the southern extent of New Zealand, and conditions were unfavourable for more closely exploring the possible strait.

=== Sealing ===

Māori living around Foveaux Strait hunted seals for food, and used seal skin for clothing and seal teeth for fishing hooks. The first Europeans known to have hunted seals in Southland were the crew of James Cook&#x27;s vessel, the HMS &quot;Resolution&quot;, during her stay in Dusky Sound in 1773. An Australian-based commercial sealing gang was dropped off in Dusky Sound in 1792 to gather seal skins. However, new opportunities for sealing in Bass Strait made New Zealand less attractive, and there was little further seal hunting by Europeans until renewed activity at Dusky Sound in 1803. Between 1805 and 1808, there were large scale seal hunting campaigns in the Antipodes Islands, Bounty Island and the Auckland Islands. From around 1808, sealing took place around Foveaux Strait. In one voyage to the strait from their base at Port Jackson (Sydney) in September 1808, the &quot;Governor Bligh&quot;, captained by John Grono, returned with 10,000 skins. Some sealing gangs spent months or years in the region and there was increased contact and trade between sealers and Māori living in the area. In one incident, a sealing gang was dropped off from the brig &quot;Fox&quot; onto Solander Island. They were left there for over four years until being picked up by the &quot;Perseverance&quot; in 1813. A few sealers took up living with Māori, and some earned high status through marriage to the daughters of chiefs. From around 1810 onwards, the seal colonies around Foveaux Strait were so depleted that large scale commercial sealing was no longer economically viable.

=== Whaling ===
Over the 40 year period 1844–1885, there were at least 187 separate visits by whaling ships to Foveaux Strait, with a peak from 1856–62. An estimated 600 sperm whales were killed. Numerous shore-based whaling stations operated along the coastline of the strait. The western entrance of the Foveaux Strait (near the Solander Islands) was formerly described as &quot;one of the world&#x27;s prime sperm whale fishing ground&quot;.

=== Shipwrecks ===
There is a long history of shipwrecks and vessels capsizing in Foveaux Strait. The worst incident was on 29 April 1881, when the SS &quot;Tararua&quot; struck Otara reef off Waipapa Point. Of the ship&#x27;s 151 passengers, only 20 survived. This incident is the worst maritime disaster for civilian vessels in New Zealand&#x27;s history. The disaster led to the establishment of a lighthouse at Waipapa Point. Serious incidents with multiple fatalities have continued into the 21st century, and the Bluff Coastguard is often called upon to assist vessels in distress in Foveaux Strait.

=== Lighthouses ===

From the early days of European settlement it was clear that a lighthouse was needed in Foveaux Strait. However, there were protracted debates in the 1860s about where one would be located. Captains with local experience were asked for their opinion, and they suggested possible sites on Raratoka Island, Ruapuke Island, Stewart Island, Solander Islands, and Dog Island.
Captain Thomas Robertson visited Dog Island in 1863 and stated that the north-eastern edge of the island was an ideal place for a boat harbour, Robertson spoke with a local Māori chief, Tōpi Pātuki, assured Captain Robertson that there was a good water supply on the island. Later, it was chosen as Southland&#x27;s first site for a lighthouse; the recommendation was made by the Invercargill Harbour Master to James Menzies, the first Superintendent of the Southland Province.

A lighthouse was also constructed on Raratoka Island (also known as Centre Island). In 1853, the island was purchased from Māori. The lighthouse tower was built from kauri timber and is tall and started operations from 1878. The most remote lighthouse in Southland is the Puysegur Point Lighthouse at the northwest point of the entrance to Foveaux Strait, overlooking the Tasman Sea. Operation of the light at Puysegur Point began in 1879. A further lighthouse at Waipapa Point was established in January 1884 after the sinking of SS &quot;Tararua.&quot; It is tall and was built from kauri and tōtara timber.

== Biodiversity ==

=== Seabirds ===
New Zealand has been described as the seabird capital of the world because of the large number of seabird species that breed on its territory, and the high diversity of species, including albatross, penguins, petrels and shags. Foveaux Strait is one of the key locations in New Zealand for seabirds and seabird conservation. A wide array of seabirds have been recorded in the strait, including approximately 54 different species in various families: penguins (4 species), albatrosses and mollymawks (7 species), shearwaters, petrels, and prions (25 species), gannets and shags (6 species), skuas, gulls and terns (12 species). Most notable among the penguins are the strait&#x27;s population of yellow-eyed penguins. 

Multiple areas in the Foveaux Strait region have been recognised as an Important Bird and Biodiversity Area (IBA) by BirdLife International. These IBAs are characterised by a large number of globally threatened seabird species, or by being locations where more than 1% of the global population of a species may be found. 

The Rakiura (offshore) Important Bird Area (IBA) was designated in 2014. It covers an area of of ocean including all of Foveaux Strait, and large areas offshore from Stewart Island. The Rakiura (offshore) IBA recognises that the region has significant populations of seven species of globally threatened birds meeting the IBA criteria: Fiordland penguin, yellow-eyed penguin&quot;,&quot; northern royal albatross&quot;,&quot; Cook&#x27;s petrel&quot;,&quot; mottled petrel&quot;,&quot; sooty shearwater&quot;,&quot; and the endemic Foveaux shag.
Multiple locations on islands in Foveaux Strait or the coastline of the strait have also been recognised as Important Bird Areas (IBAs). These include Bluff Harbour Awarua Bay, Fife Rock, North Coast Rakiura, northern Tītī / Muttonbird Islands, Omaui Island Oreti Estuary, Raratoka Island, and Ruapuke. The Solander Islands to the west of Foveaux Strait are another terrestrial IBA. The &quot;trigger species&quot; for the coastal and island IBA sites include most of the species also listed for the Rakiura (offshore) IBA; the terrestrial IBA sites recognise breeding colonies on land. The species with the largest numbers in the region is the sooty shearwater, with an estimated population of between 100,000 and 500,000 birds on the northern Tītī / Muttonbird Islands alone.

==== Muttonbirding ====

The northern Tītī / Muttonbird Islands in Foveaux Strait are one of the main locations around Stewart Island for the annual cultural harvest of chicks of &quot;tītī&quot; (sooty shearwater) by Rakiura Māori. In 2018, muttonbirders expressed concern about the impact of increasing populations of New Zealand fur seal on the annual harvest.

===Marine mammals===

Approximately 50 species of cetaceans (porpoises, dolphins and whales) and pinnipeds (sea lions and seals) are found in New Zealand waters. Of these, at least 24 species of cetacean, and four species of pinniped have been observed in the Foveaux Strait region. Some are resident throughout the year, while others, such as baleen whales, pass through Foveaux Strait in winter and spring on migration. Species of whale observed in the strait include orca, humpback whales and southern right whales. The strait is a mating area for southern right whales during winter. The wider Southland region also has small populations of nationally endangered dolphins including bottlenose and Hector&#x27;s dolphin. A breeding colony of the endanged New Zealand sea lion has recently established at the southern end of Stewart Island. The New Zealand fur seal is present year-round in significant numbers. On land, sea lions are generally found on sandy beaches, but fur seals are more likely to be found on rocky shorelines.

==== Catlins Coast Marine Mammal Sanctuary ====
Marine mammals in New Zealand waters are protected under the Marine Mammals Protection Act. Additional protection has been provided in some areas with the establishment of marine mammal sanctuaries. One of these is Catlins Coast Marine Mammal Sanctuary established in 2008 that lies mostly within the area of Foveaux Strait. Seismic surveying is strictly limited in this sanctuary, and seabed mining is prohibited. The sanctuary extends from a line north of Ruapuke Island eastwards to the Brothers Point east of Waikawa Harbour.

In 2020, all of Foveaux Strait, and a large area surrounding all of Stewart Island was designated as the &quot;Rakiura Stewart Island and Te Ara a Kiwa IMMA&quot; by the international Marine Mammals Protected Areas Taskforce.

===Insects===
The Foveaux wētā (&quot;Deinacrida carinata)&quot; is a species of giant wētā that is endemic to New Zealand and is currently restricted to a few offshore predator-free islands including Herekopare Island in the Muttonbird Islands group in Foveaux Strait. Another endemic insect in the region is the Foveaux looper moth (&quot;Asaphodes frivola&quot;) which is a critically endangered moth, occurring in a very narrow and specialised habitat at just two small coastal sites near Invercargill, it occurs along a small area of the Southland coast, in fragmented strips of short tussock grassland right next to shell or gravel beaches.

== Fishing and aquaculture ==
=== Commercial fishing ===
The Foveaux Strait region has a nationally significant fishery for Bluff oysters and blue cod. Around half of total New Zealand catch of blue cod comes from Stewart Island or Foveaux Strait. The fish is generally caught in cod pots. The wider Southland region is also a major commercial fishery for crayfish (known elsewhere as rock lobster or spiny lobster) and pāua (known elsewhere as abalone).
=== Bluff oyster fishery ===
Bluff oysters are considered a delicacy in New Zealand, particularly in the southern parts of the country. Oysters found in Foveaux Strait are also found around other parts of New Zealand. However, only in Foveaux Strait are the quantities of Bluff oyster sufficient to sustain a commercial fishery. It is one of the oldest industries in New Zealand. The Bluff oyster fishery is nationally significant and provides socio-economic benefit to neighbouring settlements. The oysters are harvested by a fleet of dredging boats—mostly operating from Bluff Harbour—between March and August each year. Oystering began on Stewart Island in the 1860s, and gradually moved into the strait with the discovery of larger oyster beds there in 1879. The oyster quota was severely reduced in recent years due to the effects of phytoplankton variability on the oyster beds, and the effects of toxic protozoan parasites such as &quot;Bonamia ostreae.&quot; These issues led to a rāhui being placed by local iwi in 2021.

=== Customary fisheries management areas ===
Under the Treaty of Waitangi, &quot;tangata whenua&quot; (people of the land), are guaranteed customary fishing rights. For the Foveaux Strait region, these rights are protected by regulations that provide for areas of traditional fishing grounds to be declared as a &quot;mātaitai&quot; reserve, where tangata whenua are guardians and may issue bylaws, and commercial fishing is not normally permitted. Mātaitai reserves within Foveaux Strait include:

* Kaihuka (inshore waters surrounding Kaihuka Island in the northern Tītī / Muttonbird Islands group)
* Motupōhue (an inshore area around the Bluff peninsula)
* Oreti (an inshore area along Oreti Beach)
* Ōmāui (an inshore area around the Ōmāui headland northwest of Bluff)

* Ōtara (an inshore area north of Waipapa Point)
* Pikomamaku (a section of inshore waters around Pikomamaku (Womens Island), in the northern Tītī / Muttonbird Islands group)
In 2023, &quot;whānau&quot; associated with Ruapuke Island applied for a mātaitai reserve surrounding the island, in response to excessive harvesting by recreational fishers that has caused a decline in the local stocks of finfish and shellfish.

=== Aquaculture ===
A land-based aquaculture facility operates at Ocean Beach near Bluff, on the shores of Foveaux Strait. It has large tanks, and uses water from the strait to raise popular New Zealand species including hāpuku, kingfish, whitebait and pāua. The facility was developed from 2018 using a collection of buildings that were originally a large abattoir and meat processing factory that closed in 1991. In May 2021, a seafood company owned by Ngāi Tahu applied for consents to establish salmon farms in Foveaux Strait. The proposal covered an area of , located off the north–east coast of Stewart Island. The consent application was reviewed by an independent panel under &quot;fast-track&quot; legislation and was declined in August 2023, based on the likely environmental impact.

== Transport ==
=== Ferry services ===

The ferry journey across Foveaux Strait between Bluff Harbour on the South Island and Oban in Stewart Island is about long. The first scheduled service across Foveaux Strait began in 1877 for weekly mail delivery, but soon also carried passengers and general cargo. The Bluff Harbour Board and central government provided subsidised ferry services to Stewart Island for 100 years from 1885 through until 1985, when private operators took over the service. The present high speed catamaran service typically takes one hour. As of 2024, the ferry service is operated by the tourism company RealNZ (formerly Real Journeys).

=== Shipping ===
A wide range of vessels travel through Foveaux Strait, ranging from small fishing vessels through to cruise ships, large cargo ships and tankers. Vessels travelling between international ports may pass through Foveaux Strait based on the rights of innocent passage defined in the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea. Most vessels transiting through the strait pass to the north of Ruapuke Island.

For transport of freight between Bluff and Oban, the ferry service carries light freight, and Rakiura Shipping provides a general freight service.

=== Air services ===

Stewart Island Flights provides air services across Foveaux Strait between Invercargill Airport and Ryan&#x27;s Creek Aerodrome on Stewart Island. Their aircraft also land on the sand at Mason Bay, Doughboy Bay, and West Ruggedy Beach.

In 1950, a licence was granted to Amphibian Airways to operate an air service between Invercargill and Stewart Island. The inaugural flight to Half Moon Bay was made on 20 March 1951, with plans for a weekly service. In March 1979, the island&#x27;s only airstrip was opened at Ryan&#x27;s Creek above Oban. Services from Invercargill were provided using Nomad and Britten-Norman Islander aircraft. In 1998, a Southern Air Cessna ditched into Foveaux Strait on a trip from Stewart Island to Invercargill after losing power to both engines, resulting in five deaths. 

== Swimming ==
Few people have swum across the Foveaux Strait, mostly due to the unpredictable weather conditions and great white sharks residing in the area. The strait crossing distance is roughly . The first known person to swim across the strait was John van Leeuwen, who completed it on 7 February 1963 in a time of 13 hours 40 minutes. The first woman to swim the strait was New Zealander Meda McKenzie who completed the crossing on 20 March 1979.

==Citations==
==References==
* 
*
*
*
* 
*

==External links==

* Foveaux Strait from &quot;An Encyclopaedia of New Zealand&quot;
* Chart NZ69 Stewart Island Rakiura (showing Foveaux Strait) at Land Information New Zealand
* Chart NZ76 Western approaches to Foveaux Strait at Land Information New Zealand
* Chart NZ681 Approaches to Bluff and Riverton-Aparima at Land Information New Zealand</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1043467" start="0" end="14" title="Foveaux Strait" label="Foveaux Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q37901" start="26" end="32" title="strait" label="strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q41684" start="48" end="62" title="Stewart Island" label="Stewart Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q120755" start="72" end="84" title="South Island" label="South Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502014" start="272" end="278" title="Seal hunting" label="sealer"/>
<link wikidata="Q286077" start="328" end="337" title="whaleboat" label="whaleboat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7885339" start="364" end="369" title="Union (1802 ship)" label="Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1707004" start="444" end="458" title="Joseph Foveaux" label="Joseph Foveaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224" start="487" end="502" title="New South Wales" label="New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q152028" start="610" end="623" title="Bluff, New Zealand" label="Bluff Harbour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1718987" start="628" end="632" title="Oban, New Zealand" label="Oban"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="823" end="842" title="Foveaux Strait#Shipwrecks" label="multiple shipwrecks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425816" start="900" end="922" title="SS Tararua" label="SS &amp;quot;Tararua&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q14651290" start="1211" end="1224" title="Dredge oyster" label="Bluff oysters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028948" start="1293" end="1307" title="Ruapuke Island" label="Ruapuke Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436938" start="1325" end="1343" title="Tītī / Muttonbird Islands" label="Muttonbird Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q12353775" start="1377" end="1390" title="muttonbirding" label="muttonbirding"/>
<link wikidata="Q6122670" start="1414" end="1419" title="Māori people" label="Māori"/>
<link wikidata="Q27074603" start="1423" end="1439" title="sooty shearwater" label="sooty shearwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q832379" start="1458" end="1479" title="Arctocephalus forsteri" label="New Zealand fur seals"/>
<link wikidata="Q42767" start="1604" end="1611" title="whaling" label="whaling"/>
<link wikidata="Q55808" start="1736" end="1743" title="seabird" label="seabird"/>
<link wikidata="Q382441" start="1749" end="1762" title="marine mammal" label="marine mammal"/>
<link wikidata="Q206654" start="1864" end="1883" title="yellow-eyed penguin" label="yellow-eyed penguin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139892" start="1978" end="2014" title="Important Bird Area" label="Important Bird and Biodiversity Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q168366" start="2107" end="2119" title="baleen whale" label="baleen whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q7369" start="2239" end="2246" title="dolphin" label="dolphin"/>
<link wikidata="Q300961" start="2259" end="2280" title="Hector&amp;#x27;s dolphin" label="Hector&amp;#x27;s dolphin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1819369" start="2286" end="2299" title="Catlins Coast" label="Catlins Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q41684" start="2425" end="2439" title="Stewart Island" label="Stewart Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q120755" start="2471" end="2483" title="South Island" label="South Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q947685" start="2717" end="2730" title="Waipapa Point" label="Waipapa Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054142" start="3098" end="3113" title="Raratoka Island" label="Raratoka Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234607" start="3115" end="3125" title="Dog Island (New Zealand)" label="Dog Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436938" start="3131" end="3149" title="Tītī / Muttonbird Islands" label="Muttonbird Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028948" start="3154" end="3168" title="Ruapuke Island" label="Ruapuke Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q2298216" start="3174" end="3190" title="Solander Islands" label="Solander Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q2398216" start="3350" end="3363" title="Te Waewae Bay" label="Te Waewae Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2029690" start="3365" end="3376" title="Oreti Beach" label="Oreti Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q2438729" start="3378" end="3389" title="Toetoes Bay" label="Toetoes Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q754949" start="3422" end="3441" title="Last Glacial Period" label="Last Glacial Period"/>
<link wikidata="Q31566" start="3555" end="3568" title="coastal plain" label="coastal plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q133833" start="3606" end="3612" title="gravel" label="gravel"/>
<link wikidata="Q289600" start="3666" end="3678" title="Petrography" label="petrographis"/>
<link wikidata="Q14673" start="3982" end="3988" title="pebble" label="pebble"/>
<link wikidata="Q570309" start="4007" end="4014" title="bedrock" label="bedrock"/>
<link wikidata="Q3171403" start="4078" end="4101" title="Stiracolpus symmetricus" label="Stiracolpus symmetricus"/>
<link wikidata="Q34679" start="4119" end="4128" title="fine sand" label="fine sand"/>
<link wikidata="Q179615" start="4184" end="4194" title="salinities" label="salinities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048696" start="4319" end="4330" title="Waiau River (Southland)" label="Waiau River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2144546" start="4577" end="4581" title="Gale" label="Gale"/>
<link wikidata="Q5023" start="4664" end="4675" title="Cook Strait" label="Cook Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q7632278" start="4825" end="4837" title="Subtropical front" label="frontal zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q5631191" start="5832" end="5855" title="HMS Acheron (1838)" label="HMS &amp;quot;Acheron&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1700884" start="5977" end="5993" title="John Lort Stokes" label="John Lort Stokes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3188976" start="6441" end="6461" title="Jules de Blosseville" label="Jules de Blosseville"/>
<link wikidata="Q171846" start="6799" end="6810" title="Bass Strait" label="Bass Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q18390471" start="7172" end="7181" title="rip tide" label="tidal rip"/>
<link wikidata="Q1899394" start="7333" end="7353" title="Maritime New Zealand" label="Maritime New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q546879" start="7634" end="7649" title="Māori mythology" label="Māori mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q6418838" start="7697" end="7701" title="Kiwa (mythology)" label="Kiwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q864971" start="7771" end="7780" title="Southland Region" label="Southland"/>
<link wikidata="Q41684" start="7786" end="7793" title="Rakiura" label="Rakiura"/>
<link wikidata="Q1865281" start="7808" end="7813" title="whale" label="whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1710791" start="7931" end="7935" title="Waka (canoe)" label="waka"/>
<link wikidata="Q286077" start="8043" end="8052" title="whaleboat" label="whaleboat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7885339" start="8079" end="8084" title="Union (1802 ship)" label="Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q725880" start="8231" end="8249" title="Philip Gidley King" label="Philip Gidley King"/>
<link wikidata="Q302780" start="8464" end="8472" title="sealskin" label="sealskin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6236476" start="8677" end="8687" title="John Grono" label="John Grono"/>
<link wikidata="Q1707004" start="8751" end="8765" title="Joseph Foveaux" label="Joseph Foveaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224" start="8790" end="8805" title="New South Wales" label="New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q28337" start="9017" end="9022" title="shoal" label="shoal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5331764" start="9127" end="9138" title="Eber Bunker" label="Eber Bunker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2041168" start="9219" end="9237" title="The Sydney Gazette" label="The Sydney Gazette"/>
<link wikidata="Q2540772" start="9762" end="9769" title="Waitaha (South Island iwi)" label="Waitaha"/>
<link wikidata="Q7901390" start="9811" end="9816" title="Uruaokapuarangi" label="Uruao"/>
<link wikidata="Q2465240" start="9852" end="9860" title="Tākitimu" label="Tākitimu"/>
<link wikidata="Q31665106" start="10005" end="10023" title="Takitimu Mountains" label="Tākitimu Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q6938701" start="10232" end="10240" title="Murihiku" label="Murihiku"/>
<link wikidata="Q27443" start="10259" end="10275" title="Hunter-gatherer" label="hunter-gatherers"/>
<link wikidata="Q152152" start="10572" end="10579" title="Riverton / Aparima" label="Aparima"/>
<link wikidata="Q152028" start="10592" end="10598" title="Bluff, New Zealand" label="Awarua"/>
<link wikidata="Q7960012" start="10611" end="10618" title="Waikawa, Southland" label="Waikawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q756714" start="10871" end="10875" title="weka" label="weka"/>
<link wikidata="Q626289" start="10877" end="10881" title="kākā" label="kākā"/>
<link wikidata="Q212302" start="10883" end="10889" title="takahē" label="takahē"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145127" start="10891" end="10897" title="kererū" label="kererū"/>
<link wikidata="Q179959" start="10903" end="10909" title="kākāpō" label="kākāpō"/>
<link wikidata="Q7851693" start="11129" end="11138" title="Tūhawaiki" label="Tūhawaiki"/>
<link wikidata="Q472802" start="11192" end="11210" title="Treaty of Waitangi" label="Treaty of Waitangi"/>
<link wikidata="Q607380" start="11311" end="11319" title="harakeke" label="harakeke"/>
<link wikidata="Q2056788" start="11673" end="11687" title="Paterson Inlet" label="Paterson Inlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q371230" start="11784" end="11793" title="Ngāi Tahu" label="Ngāi Tahu"/>
<link wikidata="Q944257" start="11844" end="11854" title="Codfish Island / Whenua Hou" label="Whenua Hou"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163411" start="12034" end="12044" title="Kāti Māmoe" label="Kāti Māmoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7324" start="12127" end="12137" title="James Cook" label="James Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q312224" start="12199" end="12224" title="HMS Endeavour" label="HMS &amp;quot;Endeavour&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3178839" start="12236" end="12263" title="First voyage of James Cook" label="first voyage to New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q832379" start="12683" end="12688" title="Arctocephalus forsteri" label="seals"/>
<link wikidata="Q2881842" start="12842" end="12859" title="Second voyage of James Cook" label="James Cook&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898494" start="12872" end="12898" title="HMS Resolution (1771)" label="HMS &amp;quot;Resolution&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048789" start="12919" end="12930" title="Dusky Sound" label="Dusky Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q171846" start="13087" end="13098" title="Bass Strait" label="Bass Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q503712" start="13311" end="13328" title="Antipodes Islands" label="Antipodes Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q41451" start="13330" end="13343" title="Bounty Islands" label="Bounty Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q326951" start="13352" end="13368" title="Auckland Islands" label="Auckland Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q54504" start="13477" end="13489" title="Port Jackson" label="Port Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q42291506" start="13922" end="13934" title="Perseverance (1801 whaling ship)" label="Perseverance"/>
<link wikidata="Q42767" start="14313" end="14320" title="whaling" label="whaling"/>
<link wikidata="Q2298216" start="14550" end="14565" title="Solander Island" label="Solander Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q81214" start="14630" end="14641" title="sperm whale" label="sperm whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425816" start="14813" end="14835" title="SS Tararua" label="SS &amp;quot;Tararua&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q39715" start="15356" end="15366" title="lighthouse" label="lighthouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q7824848" start="15850" end="15861" title="Pātuki" label="Tōpi Pātuki"/>
<link wikidata="Q31805" start="16044" end="16056" title="Invercargill" label="Invercargill"/>
<link wikidata="Q6128557" start="16075" end="16088" title="James Menzies (New Zealand politician)" label="James Menzies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357079" start="16100" end="16114" title="Superintendent (New Zealand)" label="Superintendent"/>
<link wikidata="Q216113" start="16309" end="16314" title="kauri" label="kauri"/>
<link wikidata="Q2119426" start="16415" end="16440" title="Puysegur Point Lighthouse" label="Puysegur Point Lighthouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q33254" start="16515" end="16525" title="Tasman Sea" label="Tasman Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q7262656" start="16553" end="16567" title="Puysegur Point" label="Puysegur Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q164276" start="16738" end="16744" title="tōtara" label="tōtara"/>
<link wikidata="Q55805" start="16979" end="16988" title="albatross" label="albatross"/>
<link wikidata="Q3901247" start="17012" end="17017" title="Cormorant" label="shags"/>
<link wikidata="Q9147" start="17241" end="17248" title="penguin" label="penguin"/>
<link wikidata="Q614004" start="17279" end="17288" title="mollymawk" label="mollymawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2729486" start="17303" end="17313" title="shearwater" label="shearwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q3092053" start="17316" end="17322" title="petrel" label="petrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q859818" start="17329" end="17334" title="Prion (bird)" label="prion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1651414" start="17350" end="17356" title="gannet" label="gannet"/>
<link wikidata="Q205323" start="17381" end="17385" title="skua" label="skua"/>
<link wikidata="Q2699803" start="17388" end="17392" title="gull" label="gull"/>
<link wikidata="Q33140745" start="17398" end="17402" title="tern" label="tern"/>
<link wikidata="Q206654" start="17486" end="17505" title="yellow-eyed penguin" label="yellow-eyed penguin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139892" start="17581" end="17617" title="Important Bird Area" label="Important Bird and Biodiversity Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q210108" start="17627" end="17649" title="BirdLife International" label="BirdLife International"/>
<link wikidata="Q622637" start="18169" end="18186" title="Fiordland penguin" label="Fiordland penguin"/>
<link wikidata="Q206654" start="18188" end="18207" title="yellow-eyed penguin" label="yellow-eyed penguin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2464919" start="18221" end="18245" title="northern royal albatross" label="northern royal albatross"/>
<link wikidata="Q596787" start="18259" end="18277" title="Cook&amp;#x27;s petrel" label="Cook&amp;#x27;s petrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262679" start="18291" end="18305" title="mottled petrel" label="mottled petrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q27074603" start="18319" end="18335" title="sooty shearwater" label="sooty shearwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q24551139" start="18365" end="18377" title="Foveaux shag" label="Foveaux shag"/>
<link wikidata="Q160" start="19573" end="19581" title="cetacean" label="cetacean"/>
<link wikidata="Q30263" start="19620" end="19628" title="pinniped" label="pinniped"/>
<link wikidata="Q168366" start="19867" end="19879" title="baleen whale" label="baleen whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q26843" start="19993" end="19997" title="orca" label="orca"/>
<link wikidata="Q132905" start="19999" end="20014" title="Humpback whale" label="humpback whales"/>
<link wikidata="Q244410" start="20019" end="20040" title="Southern right whale" label="southern right whales"/>
<link wikidata="Q149069" start="20209" end="20219" title="Bottlenose dolphin" label="bottlenose"/>
<link wikidata="Q300961" start="20224" end="20237" title="Hector&amp;#x27;s dolphin" label="Hector&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q432513" start="20281" end="20301" title="New Zealand sea lion" label="New Zealand sea lion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350647" start="20667" end="20696" title="Marine Mammals Protection Act" label="Marine Mammals Protection Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1819369" start="20821" end="20834" title="Catlins Coast" label="Catlins Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q5252452" start="21402" end="21421" title="Deinacrida carinata" label="Deinacrida carinata"/>
<link wikidata="Q3622155" start="21445" end="21455" title="giant wētā" label="giant wētā"/>
<link wikidata="Q123452" start="21464" end="21471" title="Endemism" label="endemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436938" start="21565" end="21582" title="Herekopare Island" label="Herekopare Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q21244160" start="21705" end="21722" title="Asaphodes frivola" label="Asaphodes frivola"/>
<link wikidata="Q2492416" start="22154" end="22162" title="blue cod" label="blue cod"/>
<link wikidata="Q952443" start="22292" end="22300" title="Fish trap" label="cod pots"/>
<link wikidata="Q916760" start="22368" end="22376" title="Spiny lobster" label="crayfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658241" start="22432" end="22436" title="pāua" label="pāua"/>
<link wikidata="Q4857439" start="22457" end="22464" title="abalone" label="abalone"/>
<link wikidata="Q184755" start="23306" end="23319" title="phytoplankton" label="phytoplankton"/>
<link wikidata="Q101274" start="23377" end="23385" title="protozoa" label="protozoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4941120" start="23411" end="23426" title="Bonamia ostreae" label="Bonamia ostreae"/>
<link wikidata="Q7386798" start="23456" end="23461" title="rāhui" label="rāhui"/>
<link wikidata="Q1676081" start="23484" end="23487" title="iwi" label="iwi"/>
<link wikidata="Q472802" start="23553" end="23571" title="Treaty of Waitangi" label="Treaty of Waitangi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7682824" start="23579" end="23593" title="tangata whenua" label="tangata whenua"/>
<link wikidata="Q2029690" start="24187" end="24198" title="Oreti Beach" label="Oreti Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q7089911" start="24236" end="24241" title="Omaui" label="Ōmāui"/>
<link wikidata="Q2558606" start="24462" end="24468" title="whānau" label="whānau"/>
<link wikidata="Q188989" start="24727" end="24738" title="aquaculture" label="aquaculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q25662385" start="24760" end="24771" title="Ocean Beach, Bluff" label="Ocean Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q4929094" start="24915" end="24921" title="hāpuku" label="hāpuku"/>
<link wikidata="Q2157453" start="24923" end="24931" title="Yellowtail amberjack" label="kingfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q7995732" start="24933" end="24942" title="whitebait" label="whitebait"/>
<link wikidata="Q1718987" start="25615" end="25619" title="Oban, New Zealand" label="Oban"/>
<link wikidata="Q190403" start="26008" end="26017" title="catamaran" label="catamaran"/>
<link wikidata="Q104604622" start="26117" end="26123" title="RealNZ" label="RealNZ"/>
<link wikidata="Q686268" start="26416" end="26432" title="innocent passage" label="innocent passage"/>
<link wikidata="Q216996" start="26448" end="26495" title="United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea" label="United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q752694" start="26823" end="26843" title="Invercargill Airport" label="Invercargill Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q7383795" start="26848" end="26875" title="Ryan&amp;#x27;s Creek Aerodrome" label="Ryan&amp;#x27;s Creek Aerodrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q3406385" start="27128" end="27141" title="Halfmoon Bay (Stewart Island)" label="Half Moon Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q7383795" start="27263" end="27280" title="Ryan&amp;#x27;s Creek Aerodrome" label="Ryan&amp;#x27;s Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q205628" start="27340" end="27345" title="GAF Nomad" label="Nomad"/>
<link wikidata="Q921019" start="27350" end="27373" title="Britten-Norman BN-2 Islander" label="Britten-Norman Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q308889" start="27408" end="27414" title="Cessna" label="Cessna"/>
<link wikidata="Q129026" start="27671" end="27688" title="great white shark" label="great white shark"/>
<link wikidata="Q16195207" start="27948" end="27961" title="Meda McKenzie" label="Meda McKenzie"/>
<link wikidata="Q4749901" start="28100" end="28131" title="An Encyclopaedia of New Zealand" label="An Encyclopaedia of New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1801902" start="28202" end="28230" title="Land Information New Zealand" label="Land Information New Zealand"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="997810" wikidata="Q6455669" url="?curid=997810" title="L'Enfant Plaza">
<text>L&#x27;Enfant Plaza is a complex of four commercial buildings grouped around a large plaza in the Southwest section of Washington, D.C., United States. Immediately below the plaza and the buildings is La Promenade shopping mall. 

The plaza is located south of Independence Avenue SW between 12th and 9th Streets SW (9th Street actually runs underneath the centers of the buildings on the easternmost side of the plaza). It was built perpendicular to L&#x27;Enfant Promenade, a north-south running street and pedestrian esplanade part of which is directly above 10th Street SW. The plaza is named for Pierre (Peter) Charles L&#x27;Enfant, the architect and planner who first designed a street layout for the capital city (see L&#x27;Enfant Plan). It was dedicated in 1968 after completion of the north and south buildings.

==Planning==

L&#x27;Enfant Plaza was part of the Southwest Washington, D.C. urban renewal project, one of the earliest urban renewal projects in the U.S., and the first such in Washington, D.C. The rapid expansion of the population of Washington, D.C., during World War II led to the extensive construction of suburban office buildings and housing tracts. But with federal agencies (which were the area&#x27;s largest employers) restricted to the city center, a movement began after the war to redevelop Washington&#x27;s older, more dilapidated, single-family-dwelling neighborhoods to provide high-density, modern housing for workers. In 1946, the United States Congress passed the District of Columbia Redevelopment Act, which established the District of Columbia Redevelopment Land Agency (RLA) and provided legal authority to clear land and funds to spur redevelopment in the capital. Congress also gave the National Capital Planning Commission (NCPC) the authority to designate which land would be redeveloped, and how. The RLA was not funded, however, until passage of the Housing Act of 1949.

A 1950 study by the NCPC found that the small Southwest quarter of the city suffered from high concentrations of old and poorly maintained buildings, overcrowding, and threats to public health, such as lack of running indoor water, sewage systems, electricity, central heating, and indoor toilets. Competing visions for the redevelopment ranged from renovation to wholesale leveling of neighborhoods, but the latter view prevailed as more likely to qualify for federal funding. Demolition faced almost all structures in Southwest Washington and was to have begun in 1950, but legal challenges led to piecemeal razing of the area until the mid-1950s. Most of the dwellings in Southwest D.C. were Victorian row houses. Poor and middle-class African American and immigrant Central and Eastern European families living in the area were forced out of their homes by use of eminent domain, receiving only a fraction of the value of their homes in compensation. In 1954, Southwest D.C. had about 3,900 buildings housing 4,500 families. About 60 percent of the residents were African American, and the remainder Caucasian. Only 20 percent of the residents owned their own home, and 72 percent of the buildings were rated as substandard. The area which became L&#x27;Enfant Plaza was primarily Victorian townhouses, although a shuttered slaughterhouse also stood in the area.

===New plan===
The RLA was the first to propose a major plaza along 10th Street NW. It commissioned architects Robert Justement and Chloethiel Woodard Smith to devise a master site plan for Southwest D.C. The Justement-Smith plan, released in 1952, called for wholesale clearance of the area. Notably, the Justement-Smith plan also proposed building an esplanade above 10th Street SW (to allow it to pass over the railroad tracks and the then-under construction Southwest-Southeast Freeway) which would connect with Maine Avenue SW. The RLA later said it had studied putting the mall anywhere from 5th Street to 12th Street, but that 10th Street was the only economical location. Parks would border the esplanade east and west, with a goal of providing an unobstructed view of the Smithsonian Institution headquarters and the National Mall. In November 1952, the NCPC released a report largely supporting the Justement-Smith plan (although emphasizing the construction of low-rise townhouses rather than a &quot;forest&quot; of high-rise apartment buildings). The NCPC report also approved of the plan to build an esplanade above 10th Street SW, although it noted that there were significant geographical obstacles to the plan. In 1953, the RLA asked developers to submit plans based on the NCPC&#x27;s November 1952 compromise report.

===Naming===

&quot;L&#x27;Enfant Plaza&quot; was the name proposed by New York City developer William Zeckendorf in February 1954 as the title for a cultural center within a development that would almost completely encompass all of Southwest D.C. (an area designated as &quot;Project C&quot;). As originally laid out, a traffic circle would be built on Independence Avenue SW in front of the Smithsonian Castle. A wide, grass-lined pedestrian mall replaced 10th Street SW. A concert hall, convention center, and opera house would line the pedestrian mall, which would be built over the railroad tracks and Southeast Freeway and connect with the Potomac River waterfront. The plan called for all existing buildings in the 20-acre area to be razed. Zeckendorf and the RLA signed a &quot;memorandum of understanding&quot; locking in most of the major aspects of Zeckendorf&#x27;s plan to allow further site study and architectural design to move forward. By October of that year, Zeckendorf had agreed to add government office buildings to the planned pedestrian mall. The developer said he had already spent $450,000 on studies, and planned to spend another $500,000 in developing a detailed plan. In December, Zeckendorf asked the NCPC and RLA to formally approve his plan for a 10th Street SW mall, and proposed that the federal government build a &quot;12th Street Bridge&quot; over the Potomac River to help reduce traffic flows along his mall—which now incorporated a roadway. In February 1955, however, the NCPC proposed moving the planned &quot;cultural mall&quot; to 9th Street SW and retaining 10th Street as a major thoroughfare for traffic coming off the 14th Street Bridge. John Remon, chair of the RLA and NCPC vice chair, strongly criticized the plan (which also proposed relocating the railroad tracks) as far too costly. D.C. officials then proposed turning 12th Street into a southbound one-way, 9th Street into a northbound one-way, and building a new 14th Street Bridge span to accommodate the traffic flows. In a compromise, Zeckendorf agreed to revisit his plans to see if one or more of the proposed road plans could be accommodated under his proposed site redesign plan. The road and bridge dispute threatened to cause the failure of the entire redevelopment effort.

But in April 1955, the city&#x27;s highway officials proposed a compromise; they agreed to eventually construct a major new bridge at Roaches Run in exchange for NCPC approval of the existing preliminary plans offered by Zeckendorf. Additionally, National Park Service officials agreed to allow a portion of Independence Avenue SW (between the Lincoln Memorial and the Tidal Basin) and Ohio Drive SW to be used for a portion of the proposed Inner Loop Freeway—both long-sought objectives of the NCPC. The NCPC subsequently approved nearly all of Zeckendorf&#x27;s proposal for Project C, including the 10th Street mall.

===1955 cultural mall===
The proposal for a &quot;cultural mall&quot; along 10th Street SW became complicated again in mid-1955. On July 1, President Dwight Eisenhower signed into law legislation creating a District of Columbia Auditorium Commission, whose charge was to formulate plans &quot;for the design, location, financing, and construction in the District of Columbia of a civic auditorium, including an Inaugural Hall of Presidents and a music, fine arts, and mass communications center&quot;. Southwest Washington, and especially Zeckendorf&#x27;s proposed &quot;cultural mall,&quot; became one of the top sites studied by the Auditorium Commission for its planned multi-use performance center. The RLA began looking at the cost-effectiveness of turning the 10th Street site over to the Auditorium Commission for its (rather than private) use in September 1955. A month later, an RLA consultant recommended a &quot;World Center&quot; for L&#x27;Enfant Plaza that would include 4,000-seat opera house, 2,000-seat theatrical stage, large and small concert halls, exhibit areas, meeting rooms, television studios, reception and formal dining halls, and cultural library. After another year of study, however, this plan had been scaled back to just three buildings (a combined auditorium-exhibit hall, combined opera-concert hall, and a theater). But D.C. Auditorium Commission officials now proposed two sites for the cultural center: L&#x27;Enfant Plaza and the Foggy Bottom neighborhood (an area of factories, breweries, gas works, and decrepit housing then also undergoing study for redevelopment).

====Cultural center location====
The Auditorium Commission&#x27;s willingness to consider Foggy Bottom for the cultural center ignited a lengthy battle over the center&#x27;s location. In November, the Auditorium Commission voted in favor of the Foggy Bottom site. But the Federal City Council, a private group of corporations and business leaders, voted for L&#x27;Enfant Plaza. D.C. and RLA officials also favored L&#x27;Enfant Plaza. But the west leg of the proposed Inner Loop (a six-lane, high-speed freeway in downtown D.C. which formed an ellipse centered on the White House) cut through the Foggy Bottom site, and the planned highway would have to be moved west to accommodate it. In late October 1956, the NCPC agreed to consider moving the freeway and the Auditorium Commission agreed to study a number of new sites as well. As the January 31, 1957, deadline for the Auditorium Commission&#x27;s report neared, the Commission proposed three sites for a cultural center: Foggy Bottom (its nominal preference), L&#x27;Enfant Plaza, and a site a block east of L&#x27;Enfant Plaza (the current site of the Robert C. Weaver Federal Building and Constitution Center, a private office building). The proposal to Congress included a 10,000-seat convention hall, music hall-auditorium, theater, and tourist center. The cost was pegged at $36 million ($282.1 million in 2011 dollars). The RLA pressed for the L&#x27;Enfant Plaza site, although it agreed that perhaps the single proposed cultural center might be broken up into several structures. A fourth site in Southwest D.C. (bounded by 7th Street, 9th Street, Maine Avenue and G Street) was proposed in February 1957. The Auditorium Commission also said it would be acceptable to move the cultural center slightly west in Foggy Bottom, so that it sat on the banks of the Potomac River rather than a few blocks inland.

Three months later, in April 1957, House and Senate subcommittees overseeing the District of Columbia voted to approve the Foggy Bottom site as well. The Senate followed suit in May, but the House refused to appropriate money to purchase the land. Eight months later, with the Auditorium Commission defunct, a number of civic leaders and members of Congress proposed that the cultural center be built on a site on the National Mall south of the National Gallery of Art (where the National Air and Space Museum is now). This proposal proved so unwelcome that Congress shifted again and chose the Foggy Bottom site for the cultural center. President Eisenhower signed legislation creating the National Cultural Center (later renamed the John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts) on September 2, 1958.

===Plans move forward===
With the cultural center set for Foggy Bottom, plans began moving ahead again on L&#x27;Enfant Plaza. In November 1958, the RLA and Zeckendorff began negotiating over the price of land and the composition of the buildings to be built at L&#x27;Enfant Plaza. In December 1959, Zeckendorf won approval to build a 1,000-room hotel and five privately owned office buildings on L&#x27;Enfant Plaza. The Redevelopment Land Agency also approved the condemnation and razing of 14 city blocks for construction of the plaza, hotel, and office buildings. Construction was scheduled to begin on January 1, 1961, but was delayed due to unresolved design issues with L&#x27;Enfant Promenade, the short time-frame to prepare detailed construction plans, and because Congress had not granted air rights above 9th Street SW to the developers.

====Delays====

For four years, construction of L&#x27;Enfant Plaza and the hotel were delayed. Zeckendorf agreed to build the promenade, plaza, and all surrounding buildings as a single project in April 1961 and pay $20 per for the land. These pledges led the Redevelopment Land Agency to award the 14-block area to Zeckendorf in October 1961 for $7 million.

Zeckendorf had assigned I. M. Pei, at the time a staff architect in his firm of Webb &amp; Knapp, to provide the overall design of the plaza, promenade, and park (including building siting). In 1955 Pei had started his own firm, which worked primarily on Zeckendorf&#x27;s projects, and Pei&#x27;s associate Araldo Cossutta became the lead architect for the North Building (955 L&#x27;Enfant Plaza SW) and the South Building (950 L&#x27;Enfant Plaza SW). But by 1962 the scale of the project had been revised; the hotel building was unaffected, but the number of office buildings had shrunk from eight to three. Zeckendorf added an underground shopping mall of shops and restaurants to the project in November 1962, and construction on the promenade and plaza was slated to begin in April 1963. But Zeckendorf&#x27;s vast real estate empire began to suffer severe financial difficulties in 1964, and indeed the company went bankrupt in 1965. With Zeckendorf unable to make good on his construction pledges, the Redevelopment Land Agency forced him to withdraw and sell his interest in L&#x27;Enfant Plaza in November 1964.

==Construction==
===Construction starts===
The buyer of Zeckendorf&#x27;s property and leases was the L&#x27;Enfant Plaza Corp. (also known as L&#x27;Enfant Properties, Inc.). L&#x27;Enfant Plaza Corp. was a syndicate led by former United States Air Force Lieutenant General Elwood R. Quesada, and included Chase Manhattan Bank president David Rockefeller, D.C. businessman David A. Garrett, investment banker André Meyer, and the real estate investment firm of Gerry Brothers &amp; Co. Quesada said that if the Redevelopment Land Agency approved the sale, his company would begin immediate construction of the promenade, the parking garage beneath it, and the plaza using the Pei firm&#x27;s 10-year-old plans. The agency gave its approval on January 21, 1965, and the sale was finalized on August 30.

Construction of L&#x27;Enfant Plaza and promenade quickly moved forward. Site preparation began in November 1965. Air rights over 9th Street SW were granted for a rent of $500 per year for 99 years on November 23, 1965. The actual groundbreaking for L&#x27;Enfant Plaza occurred on December 9. The project still encountered delays, however. The federal government, which was building the James V. Forrestal Building at the northern end of L&#x27;Enfant promenade, was a year behind in its construction schedule by June 1967, causing the northern end of the promenade to remain incomplete. Meanwhile, over-optimistic construction schedules and labor shortages had delayed the construction of L&#x27;Enfant Plaza&#x27;s North and South buildings (which were the first structures to be built by L&#x27;Enfant Plaza Corp.) by six months. The $23 million complex neared completion in January 1968, and the office buildings, plaza, and promenade opened to the public and for business in June 1968. The plaza was formally dedicated on Saturday, November 16, 1968.

Construction on the hotel was to have started in the spring of 1970. However, delays meant that work on the , $23 million hotel and office building did not begin until June 1971. The hotel opened with a three-day gala which concluded with its dedication on May 31, 1973.

===Architects===
Vlastimil Koubek was the architect of the West Building (475 L&#x27;Enfant Plaza SW) and East Building (or L&#x27;Enfant Plaza Hotel; 480 L&#x27;Enfant Plaza SW). In February 1969, Koubek, former First Lady Mamie Eisenhower, and developer William Zeckendorf ceremonially broke ground for the West Building, which with of interior office space was the largest private office building at the time in Washington. In June 1972, the United States Postal Service purchased the West Building for its national headquarters.

A third architect, Edwin F. Schnedl, designed the shopping mall and food court areas. Known as &quot;La Promenade&quot;, the shopping mall connects all four buildings and the Metro station together underground.

===Ending at Benjamin Banneker Park===

In 1970, the &quot;Tenth Street Overlook&quot; became the southern terminus of L&#x27;Enfant Promenade. Pei had initially proposed a large pedestrian bridge lined by retail businesses and restaurants extending from the Promenade across the Overlook and Interstate 395 down to Maine Avenue SW and the waterfront. This structure was never built for cost reasons.

The Overlook, which Daniel Urban Kiley designed, contains a low granite wall surrounding a commemorative fountain and minimally landscaped lawns leading down to F and 9th Streets SW. On June 19, 1970, the Redevelopment Land Agency transferred the Overlook to the National Park Service (NPS) for use as a park.&quot; 

On June 30, 1970, the District of Columbia City Council passed by unanimous vote a resolution petitioning the NPS to rename the Tenth Street Overlook as Banneker Park. On November 24, 1971, the NPS responded to the City Council&#x27;s petition by hosting a dedication ceremony that renamed the Overlook to &quot;Benjamin Banneker Park&quot;, even though the area has no specific connection to Benjamin Banneker himself. The park was the first public space in Washington to be dedicated to an African American and is often included in Black History tours.

==Structures==

===Washington Metro and Virginia Railway Express===

The Washington Metro&#x27;s L&#x27;Enfant Plaza station opened on July 1, 1977. The initial entrances were in the courtyard of 400 7th Street SW and at 7th Street SW at Maryland Avenue SW. The entrance inside L&#x27;Enfant Plaza, which connects with the &quot;La Promenade&quot; underground shopping mall, opened in October 1977. In June 1992, Virginia Railway Express opened its new $1.1 million L&#x27;Enfant Station on Virginia Avenue.

L&#x27;Enfant Plaza also has a 1,622-space parking garage underneath the plaza&#x27;s northern section, the second largest in the city.

===Street grid===
L&#x27;Enfant Promenade descends on either side of Banneker Overlook to form Banneker Circle SW. G Street SW runs southeast from the circle to 9th Street SW, although when Washington Nationals baseball games are held at Nationals Park a traffic restriction is put into place restricting traffic to residents. A pedestrian walkway and bridge leads northwest from the park to I-395, which crosses the Washington Channel just west of the park and eventually leads to East Potomac Park.

==Late 20th century==
===Movie theater===
L&#x27;Enfant Plaza originally housed an 822-seat motion picture theater, which suffered financial trouble, until it closed permanently in the 1980s. The space is now used by the National Transportation Safety Board as a conference center.

===Purchase by Eastern Realty===
In 1981, Eastern Realty Investment Corp., the real estate investment arm of the Electric Supply Pension Scheme, a pension plan based in the United Kingdom, purchased L&#x27;Enfant Plaza itself, La Promenade, the North Building, the South Building, and the L&#x27;Enfant Plaza Hotel building.

===Fire===
A serious fire consumed the top four floors of the U.S. Postal Service headquarters on October 15, 1984. More than 200 firefighters needed two hours to put out the fire, one of the largest in D.C. history. It caused an estimated $100 million in damages and injured 25 firefighters. (District of Columbia law required sprinklers in very few buildings.)

===Property taxes===
Property tax issues dogged L&#x27;Enfant Plaza in the late 1980s. In 1981, L&#x27;Enfant Plaza and its constituent buildings and shopping mall was the city&#x27;s most expensive property, valued at $78 million. In 1985, the assessor&#x27;s office in the District of Columbia Department of Finance and Revenue valued the hotel at $83.7 million. Eastern Realty challenged the valuation, and the D.C. property tax Board of Equalization and Review reduced the assessment to $65.1 million. Eastern Realty still felt the valuation was too high, and asked a D.C. Superior Court to lower the structure&#x27;s value to just $44.5 million. The court declined to overturn the equalization board&#x27;s ruling. In 1986, the tax valuation was set at $98.5 million, but after an appeal and the assessment dropped to $62.1 million. The 1987 assessment was $93.2 million, but when the equalization board refused to reduce the assessment Eastern Realty sued.

A private appraiser hired by the owners valued the hotel at $54.6 million in 1986 and $63.4 million in 1987, while the city appraiser claimed $83 million in 1986 and $85 million in 1987, unusually large discrepancies. The differences meant that Eastern Realty owed either $2.3 million or $3.3 million for 1986/1987. In July 1990, the court reduced the 1985 assessment to $44.5 million, the 1986 assessment to $54.6 million, and the 1987 assessment to $63.4 million. Another round of tax battles ensued over the next three years. The city assessed the hotel at $93.2 million in 1988, $97.4 million in 1989, $102.2 million in 1990, and $103.9 million in 1991. A second D.C. Superior Court reduced the assessments to $63.4 million for 1988, $71.1 million for 1989, $61.7 million for 1990, and $63.9 million for 1991. Similar tax battles occurred over much the same period regarding the North Building, with similar results. 

In the midst of its tax battles, Eastern Realty spent $35 million in 1988 to renovate the office buildings and hotel at L&#x27;Enfant Plaza. The upgrades included adding sprinkler systems and smoke detectors through all the structures, upgrading the elevators, and improving the electrical system. The electrical system upgrade caused a major problem for the owners, however. In February 1992, contractors working on the electrical system caused a short beneath the L&#x27;Enfant Plaza Hotel that injured two workers, and forced the hotel and about a third of the mall&#x27;s businesses to close until power was restored (which occurred more than two weeks later).

In early 1996, Eastern Realty sold the South Building to VIB Management Fund, a Dutch real estate investment company, for $52 million. In September 1996, a second Dutch real estate investment firm, Sarakreek Holding N.V. (itself a subsidiary of the Tiger/Westbrook Real Estate Fund of New York City), purchased the plaza, North Building, hotel, and shopping mall for $185 million. That year, sports team owner Abe Pollin briefly considered building an arena (now known as the Capital One Arena) at L&#x27;Enfant Plaza, but built it in Chinatown instead.

===Redevelopment===
In 1998, the Urban Land Institute recommended redeveloping L&#x27;Enfant Promenade to create a more tourist-friendly environment as well as creating a link with the southwest waterfront. Although this concept garnered little attention at the time, it proved to be the genesis of a major plan that emerged around 2010 to radically change the nature and look of L&#x27;Enfant Plaza. A year later, Sarakreek Holdings replaced the Pei-designed fountain with a glass pyramid skylight over the center section of La Promenade.

==21st century==
In 2001, Sarakreek Holdings sought to sell its L&#x27;Enfant Plaza holdings. The same year, VIB Management Fund sold the South Building to Heyman Properties (a local D.C. real estate investment company) for $55 million. On November 3, 2003, JBG Smith, a local real estate investment and development firm, purchased L&#x27;Enfant Plaza, the L&#x27;Enfant Plaza Hotel, and the North and South office buildings from Sarakreek Holding for $200 million. Under the terms of various agreements and contracts of sale, the cost of upkeep for L&#x27;Enfant Plaza&#x27;s automobile access ramps, landscaping, maintenance, stairwells, three-level parking garage, and the roadway around the plaza itself (but not L&#x27;Enfant Promenade) are paid 18.22% by Heyman Properties and 81.78% by JBG.

JBG hired architect César Pelli and the architectural firm of Hickok Warner Cole to draft a 10-year, $200–$300 million master site plan that would renovate all three existing buildings, bring improve street-level retail opportunities, and add one or more residential buildings (similar to the &quot;Banneker Village Center&quot; plan proposed by the city). In May 2004, the National Children&#x27;s Museum proposed building its new museum in the center of L&#x27;Enfant Plaza. But when the pace of redevelopment of L&#x27;Enfant Plaza slowed, the Children&#x27;s Museum decided in November 2004 that it would build elsewhere.

===Banneker Park demolition plans===
Various proposals to redevelop or eliminate Banneker Park in the late 1990s and throughout the 2000s also threatened to radically change the nature of L&#x27;Enfant Promenade. By the early 1990s, the park had suffered from lack of maintenance, deterioration of some of its features, and the fountain had stopped running. In 1996, the nonprofit Washington Interdependence Council won permission from the NPS, which managed the park at the time, to raise $3 million in funds to build a life-size statue of Banneker for the park and to make other improvements (such as bas relief sculptures depicting Banneker&#x27;s achievements on the limestone circle surrounding the overlook). In 1997, the NPS partially restored the park (including restoring signage, getting the fountain running again, and adding a small interpretive exhibit), and D.C. and federal officials sponsored a rededication ceremony there.

The following year, the 105th United States Congress enacted legislation that authorized the Washington Interdependence Council to establish at the Council&#x27;s expense a memorial on federal land in the District that would commemorate Banneker&#x27;s accomplishments. By 1999, however, the proposed memorial had become a $17 million project that would contain a visitors&#x27; center near Independence Avenue at the north end of the Promenade, a clock atop a tall pedestal at the midpoint of the Promenade, a statue of Banneker in the park&#x27;s circle at the south end of the Promenade and a skyway over I-395 that would connect the park to the waterfront. After considering the proposal, the National Capital Memorial Commission rejected the placement of the statue in the park and decided to consult with the District of Columbia government about placing a Banneker memorial at the midpoint of the Promenade.

The legislative authority relative to locating the Memorial on federal land in the District lapsed in 2005. This did not preclude the location of the memorial on lands such as the road right-of-way in L&#x27;Enfant Promenade that are under the jurisdiction of the District of Columbia.

====Skyway idea====
The skyway idea, however, captured the interest of city planners and became part of a plan to build a baseball stadium at the southern end of L&#x27;Enfant Promenade. The Council of the District of Columbia approved a plan in March 2002 to redevelop the southwest waterfront which included construction of a tour bus parking garage beneath Banneker Park and stairs down from Banneker Park to Maine Avenue SW.

The skyway/stairs concept soon became caught up in other plans for Banneker Park. In 2004, the city proposed razing Banneker Park and building a new baseball stadium on the site. The proposal called for covering over a portion of I-395, and creating a skyway or stairs to link the stadium with the waterfront. The city&#x27;s proposal also would have implemented the Urban Land Institute&#x27;s 1998 proposal and created &quot;Banneker Village Center,&quot; a project which would redevelop L&#x27;Enfant Promenade and line it with retail businesses, high-rise residences, and tourist attractions.

However, when the stadium threatened to complicate planning for the Anacostia Waterfront Corporation, city officials withdrew their support so that the waterfront development could proceed. Even though the Banneker site had drawn the most interest from Major League Baseball, the cost of using the Banneker Park site also cost the proposal support. The stadium, named Nationals Park, was later constructed in 2007 in Southeast, Washington, D.C.

====Endangerment====
In 2004, the D.C. Preservation League listed Benjamin Banneker Park as one of the most endangered places in the District because of proposals to redevelop the park&#x27;s area. The League stated that the park, &quot;Designed by renowned landscape architect Dan Kiley ... is culturally significant as the first public space in Washington named for an African American and is usually included in Black History tours&quot;.

In February 2005, Benjamin Banneker Park was considered as a site for the Smithsonian Institution&#x27;s new National Museum of African American History and Culture. However, in January 2006, the Smithsonian chose a site on an empty block of Madison Drive NW between 14th and 15th Streets NW (west of the National Museum of American History).

In 2006, the District government and the Federal Highway Administration issued an environmental assessment for &quot;improvements&quot; to the promenade and park that described some of these redevelopment proposals. In 2011, a proposal surfaced that would erect a structure housing a &quot;National Museum of the American People&quot; at or near the site of the park.

===Southwest Ecodistrict===
Redevelopment of L&#x27;Enfant Plaza into a high-density, environmentally friendly, sustainable-living extension of the National Mall began in 2006. The NCPC, which develops long-term plans for the capital city, has termed this redevelopment the &quot;Southwest Ecodistrict.&quot;

JBG began the redevelopment of L&#x27;Enfant Plaza in 2006 when it secured a $242 million mortgage loan for its renovation projects. That same year, the NCPC and District officials held joint hearings to identify needs and solicit ideas for L&#x27;Enfant Plaza and Promenade. Maintenance of the area had become a major issue, as bricks in the esplanade were broken and much of the landscaping was in poor condition. The hearings identified an immediate need to plant trees along the esplanade, build bike lanes, and install public seating. But the hearings also gave new life to the Urban Land Institute&#x27;s 1998 redevelopment ideas, and formally adopted them as a tentative design plan for L&#x27;Enfant Promenade.

====2009====
In 2009, the NCPC convened a &quot;10th Street Task Force&quot; that would more radically redesign L&#x27;Enfant Promenade. The task force (which was charged with looking at L&#x27;Enfant Plaza, Banneker Park, the Maryland Avenue SW corridor, and nearby federal office buildings as a whole) proposed creating an &quot;eco-district&quot; which would be energy neutral, accommodate multimodal transportation, add residential housing, and create street-level retail aimed at tourists and residents equally. The goal was to produce a formal redevelopment plan by early 2011. The same year, the commission looking into the feasibility of establishing a National Museum of the American Latino tentatively considered Banneker Park as the site of a potential museum, but the site did not make the commission&#x27;s short list of preferred locations. In November 2009, JBG began renovating the eastern portion of La Promenade, and planned to renovate the western section in 2010 and 2011. The $40 million effort, designed by the SmithGroup architectural firm, added large windows overlooking the grassy terrace of the Robert C. Weaver Federal Building to the east and moves most of the fast-food operations into the eastern portion of the mall. The retail shopping area will be expanded to . The plaza glass pyramid (installed in the late 1990s) would be removed, and a greatly expanded atrium and pedestrian entry way installed over the center portion of the mall. The plan is to situate restaurants under this enlarged glass atrium, to provide diners with a more pleasant experience. JBG also said it would renovate the North Building and the L&#x27;Enfant Plaza Hotel, and proposed renovating the South Building (with its owner&#x27;s consent) to fit the new look of the plaza.

Also in 2009, the NCPC released its &quot;Monumental Core Framework Plan&quot;, a comprehensive plan for creating places and spaces around the National Mall to increase the availability of space for new museums and memorials while adding residences and retail features that would make the city a more attractive place to live and work. The plan was adopted by the United States Commission of Fine Arts on March 19, 2009, and approved by the NCPC on April 2, 2009. The &quot;Monumental Core Framework Plan&quot; proposed adding a new visitor&#x27;s center and memorial at Banneker Park, an intermodal transportation hub beneath Banneker Park, demolition of the Forrestal Building and its annex, and construction of apartment and office buildings along L&#x27;Enfant Promenade with retail and dining space at the street level to accommodate tourists and residents alike. The framework plan also proposed covering over I-395 between Banneker Park and L&#x27;Enfant Plaza, covering over the CSX railway tracks (which currently cut L&#x27;Enfant Plaza off from the Forrestal complex of buildings), re-establishing Maryland Avenue SW between 12th and 7th Streets SW (it currently does not exist there, due to the presence of the railroad tracks), and restoring the view of the U.S. Capitol building along Maryland Avenue SW.

However, in September 2009, JBG proposed a much more extensive redevelopment of L&#x27;Enfant Plaza. The firm&#x27;s plans included construction of two 12-story office buildings in the center of the plaza, an extended-stay hotel above 9th Street SW (north of the L&#x27;Enfant Plaza Hotel) and either an office building or a residential building over 9th Street SW (south of the L&#x27;Enfant Plaza Hotel). (One source claimed this would be an apartment building.) Heyman Properties, owner of the South Building, sued shortly thereafter to stop all renovations and the proposed buildings, saying the construction projects would harm the value of its property. Nonetheless, JBG started renovating the eastern part of La Promenade in late 2009, planned to renovate the western section and install the enlarged atrium beginning in late 2010. JBG presented its master plan to the NCPC in early 2010. In November 2010, JBG released an artist&#x27;s conception of its proposed plaza building, a two-tower, Gehry-like structure with wavy glass walls.

====2011====

In August 2011, Heyman Properties put the South Building up for sale. Three months later, JBG began the second phase of its La Promenade renovation. The $27 million, 20-month project covered of space.

JBG also announced in late 2011 that it planned a radical redevelopment of L&#x27;Enfant Plaza. First, the company said it had hired SmithGroup JJR to design a three-story glass atrium to replace the low glass pyramid in the center of the plaza. The atrium would have an elevator and stairs to permit pedestrian access from the plaza. Second, a 234-room Homewood Suites by Hilton would be constructed on the outdoor eating plaza at the corner of 9th Street SW and D Street SW. Also designed by SmithGroup, the proposed design hotel featured ground-level retail and access to the Metro as well as glass curtain walls to alleviate the blocky look of the existing nearby structures. Ground-breaking on the hotel was expected in mid-2012. Third, the company proposed a office building for the small space bordered by 9th Street SW, Frontage Road SW, the L&#x27;Enfant Plaza Hotel, and the HUD building. Designed by ZGF Architects LLP, the proposed office building featured a flat façade with windows set in deep, angled, grid-like frames similar to the existing L&#x27;Enfant Plaza buildings. A fourth proposed element was a new U-shaped, office building to surround the new atrium. This design replaced the curving, cone-like structure previously proposed in 2010. Designed by Richard Rogers, the Modernist glass building would front on 10th Street SW. JBG said it hoped to include the Heyman Properties&#x27; South Building in its plans, but Heyman continued to press its 2010 lawsuit against JBG. Bringing the suit one step closer to resolution, a local court ordered both sides into mediation in February 2012.

====2012====
In May 2012, a session at a national convention of the American Institute of Architects held in Washington examined the history of area&#x27;s planning and the concepts and design strategies for the Southwest Ecodistrict. The session noted that the plans for the Ecodistrict were consistent with President Barack Obama&#x27;s 2009 Executive Order 13514 entitled &quot;Federal Leadership in Environmental, Energy, and Economic Performance&quot;.

====2013====
The NCPC released the draft Southwest Ecodistrict Plan on July 12, 2012. After holding a public meeting on July 19, 2012, and a 60-day public comment period, the NCPC accepted the Plan on January 10, 2013. The accepted Plan recommended the redesign of Benjamin Banneker Park and adjacent areas to accommodate one or more new memorials, museums and/or landscaping.

The proposed construction at L&#x27;Enfant Plaza by JBG did not begin in mid-2012 as scheduled. In August, the company said it was offering investors an equity stake in its existing buildings. JBG also said that the U-shaped office building would now be , and the hotel would have 370 rooms. The Plaza&#x27;s glass pyramid was demolished in May 2013 when construction began.

====2014====

In September 2014, the NCPC accepted an addendum to the SW Ecodistrict Plan. Among other things, the addendum stated: &quot;A modern, terraced landscape at Banneker Park is envisioned to enhance the park and to provide a gateway to the National Mall.&quot;

====2017–2018====
In April 2017, the NCPC approved plans for a staircase and ramp that would connect Benjamin Banneker Park with Washington&#x27;s Southwest Waterfront and that would add lighting and trees to the area. The NCPC and the NPS intended the project to be an interim improvement that could be in place for ten years while the area awaited redevelopment. Funding for the $4 million project included money that Hoffman-Madison Waterfront provided, as well as a $2 million grant from the District of Columbia&#x27;s Office of the Deputy Mayor for Planning and Economic Development. Construction began on the project in September 2017 and was completed during the spring of 2018. 

In 2017, the South Building was foreclosed on after failing to repay a $95 million mortgage from 2007. It was sold in 2018 to Normandy Real Estate Partners in a foreclosure auction for $39.5 million. Citizens Bank provided a $68 million loan on the property in December 2018.

====2019==== 
The International Spy Museum relocated to the Promenade area of the complex and opened its new building.

==Architectural assessment==

L&#x27;Enfant Plaza was considered a masterpiece when it opened in 1968. &quot;The Washington Post&quot; architectural critic Wolf von Eckardt called it &quot;a triumph of good architecture over bad planning.&quot; He believed it would be Washington, D.C.&#x27;s version of Rockefeller Center or the Place Ville-Marie, and predicted people would throng the plaza—which he felt would be the &quot;city&#x27;s major urban attraction.&quot; Von Eckardt piled praise on the plaza itself, calling it &quot;exceptionally attractive&quot; and &quot;modern America&#x27;s most beautiful &#x27;outdoor salon&#x27;&quot;. He also lauded the &quot;marvelous&quot; cruciform-and-globe light fixtures and the huge &quot;dramatic&quot; fountain. Architects Chloethiel Woodard Smith and Louis Justement felt the esplanade and plaza were an &quot;essential ... appropriate entrance to the Southwest.&quot; Five years later, in 1973, von Eckardt continued to sing the plaza&#x27;s praises despite its shortcomings. Although he recognized that the plaza was largely devoid of foot traffic most of the time, he considered it a &quot;superb work of urban design&quot; on par with the great plazas and squares built in Paris under Napoleon III or Lincoln Center for the Performing Arts in New York City.

Such high praise did not last. Even von Eckardt felt the Forrestal building was an &quot;esthetic disaster&quot; (sic) and &quot;silly&quot;—&quot;like an elephant tottering on the legs of a giraffe.&quot; He heartily disliked the design of the plaza itself (&quot;all the charm of an empty freeway&quot;) Banneker Park, with its minimalist fountain, came in for similar criticism. He declared that the city&#x27;s decision to cancel the skywalk to Maine Avenue SW ruined the southern end of the Promenade: &quot;It ends with a whimper.&quot; Two years after L&#x27;Enfant Plaza opened, &quot;Washington Post&quot; architecture critic Eugene L. Meyer called it a &quot;ghost town&quot;, and said it was &quot;not living up to its advance billing.&quot; Araldo Cossutta, who designed the North and South Buildings for I. M. Pei &amp; Associates, declared it a &quot;product of outmoded city planning&quot;. The complex&#x27;s reputation did not improve over the next 30 years. In 2003, &quot;Washington Post&quot; architectural critic Benjamin Forgey was just as critical:

The Pei solution was elegant on paper but, as we know, it did not work very well in practice. The plaza today is lusterless and very nearly lifeless, and the 10th Street connector, renamed the L&#x27;Enfant Promenade, seems just another pretentious, failed dream. ... Much of the fault clearly rests with the plan itself. Life is sucked out of the plaza by an extensive, wrongheaded underground retail mall. The wide, ceremonial roadway is simply too much for too little, like a symphonic fanfare introducing a high school band recital. And there&#x27;s little reward for taking the road—it leads only to a dreary auto turnaround overlooking the (equally dreary) redeveloped Southwest waterfront.

He also noted that Pei himself fiercely fought construction of the Forrestal Building, knowing that it would severely compromise the Promenade&#x27;s view of the National Mall. Art critic Hank Burchard called L&#x27;Enfant Plaza a &quot;pitiful and pitiless &#x27;plaza&#x27; that dishonors the name of L&#x27;Enfant&quot; in 1992. The complex&#x27;s popularity with citizens hadn&#x27;t improved, either. Another &quot;Washington Post&quot; reporter noted in 2005 that L&#x27;Enfant Plaza &quot;shuts down&quot; at night and on weekends, creating an effect described as a &quot;Valley of the Tombs&quot;. In 2010, an article in the &quot;Washington City Paper&quot; said L&#x27;Enfant Plaza &quot;could easily contend for the honor of being modern urban design&#x27;s grandest mistake.&quot; It called the complex an &quot;unmitigated urban planning disaster&quot;, and strongly criticized the Forrestal Building for isolating the promenade from the rest of the city.

==See also==
*International Spy Museum

==Notes==
==References==
* Banks, James G. and Banks, Peter S. &quot;The Unintended Consequences: Family and Community, the Victims of Isolated Poverty.&quot; Lanham, Md.: University Press of America, 2004.
* Committee on the District of Columbia. Subcommittee on Fiscal and Government Affairs. &quot;Amend Redevelopment Act of 1945 and Transfer U.S. Real Property to RLA: Hearings and Markups Before the Subcommittee on Fiscal and Government Affairs and the Committee on the District of Columbia.&quot; U.S. House of Representatives. 95th Congress, Second Session. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1978.
* Goode, James M. &quot;Capital Losses: A Cultural History of Washington&#x27;s Destroyed Buildings.&quot; Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian Institution Press, 1979.
* Gutheim, Frederick A. and Lee, Antoinette J. &quot;Worthy of the Nation: Washington, D.C., From L&#x27;Enfant to the National Capital Planning Commission.&quot; Baltimore, Md.: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2006.
* Kousoulas, Claudia D. and Kousoulas, George A. &quot;Contemporary Architecture of Washington, D.C.&quot; Washington, D.C.: Preservation Press, 1994.
* Moeller, Gerard M. and Weeks, Christopher. &quot;AIA Guide to the Architecture of Washington, D.C.&quot; Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2006.
* Reich, Cary. &quot;Financier: The Biography of André Meyer: A Story of Money, Power, and the Reshaping of American Business.&quot; New York: Wiley, 1997.
* Sandiford, Les. &quot;Washington Burning: How a Frenchman&#x27;s Vision for Our Nation&#x27;s Capital Survived Congress, the Founding Fathers, and the Invading British Army.&quot; New York: Three Rivers Press, 2008.
* Williams, Paul K. &quot;Southwest Washington, D.C.&quot; Charleston, S.C.: Arcadia, 2005.

==External links==
* Official website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6455669" start="0" end="19" title="L&amp;#x27;Enfant Plaza" label="L&amp;#x27;Enfant Plaza"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492347" start="98" end="107" title="Southwest (Washington, D.C.)" label="Southwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="119" end="135" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q31374404" start="214" end="227" title="shopping mall" label="shopping mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2358174" start="261" end="283" title="Independence Avenue (Washington D.C.)" label="Independence Avenue SW"/>
<link wikidata="Q787113" start="520" end="529" title="esplanade" label="esplanade"/>
<link wikidata="Q264764" start="601" end="637" title="Pierre Charles L&amp;#x27;Enfant" label="Pierre (Peter) Charles L&amp;#x27;Enfant"/>
<link wikidata="Q6455666" start="726" end="744" title="L&amp;#x27;Enfant Plan" label="L&amp;#x27;Enfant Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492347" start="874" end="883" title="Southwest (Washington, D.C.)" label="Southwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="884" end="900" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q920600" start="901" end="914" title="urban renewal" label="urban renewal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6971257" start="1738" end="1774" title="National Capital Planning Commission" label="National Capital Planning Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q16985066" start="1905" end="1924" title="Housing Act of 1949" label="Housing Act of 1949"/>
<link wikidata="Q565165" start="2622" end="2631" title="Victorian architecture" label="Victorian"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2632" end="2642" title="Terraced house#United States" label="row houses"/>
<link wikidata="Q166332" start="2795" end="2809" title="eminent domain" label="eminent domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q385557" start="3255" end="3269" title="slaughterhouse" label="slaughterhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q5102893" start="3427" end="3451" title="Chloethiel Woodard Smith" label="Chloethiel Woodard Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q718060" start="3757" end="3784" title="Interstate 395 (District of Columbia-Virginia)" label="Southwest-Southeast Freeway"/>
<link wikidata="Q131626" start="4076" end="4099" title="Smithsonian Institution" label="Smithsonian Institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q465811" start="4121" end="4134" title="National Mall" label="National Mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q903119" start="4727" end="4745" title="William Zeckendorf" label="William Zeckendorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q605937" start="5025" end="5043" title="Smithsonian Institution Building" label="Smithsonian Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4550097" start="6297" end="6315" title="14th Street Bridge (Potomac River)" label="14th Street Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q308439" start="7169" end="7190" title="National Park Service" label="National Park Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q213559" start="7266" end="7282" title="Lincoln Memorial" label="Lincoln Memorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q956781" start="7291" end="7302" title="Tidal Basin (District of Columbia)" label="Tidal Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q15263532" start="7308" end="7321" title="Ohio Drive (Washington, D.C.)" label="Ohio Drive SW"/>
<link wikidata="Q717955" start="7363" end="7381" title="Inner Loop (Washington, D.C.)" label="Inner Loop Freeway"/>
<link wikidata="Q9916" start="7693" end="7710" title="Dwight Eisenhower" label="Dwight Eisenhower"/>
<link wikidata="Q2019662" start="9012" end="9024" title="Foggy Bottom" label="Foggy Bottom"/>
<link wikidata="Q83405" start="9050" end="9059" title="Factory" label="factories"/>
<link wikidata="Q131734" start="9061" end="9070" title="Brewery" label="breweries"/>
<link wikidata="Q842311" start="9072" end="9081" title="Coal gas" label="gas works"/>
<link wikidata="Q28406785" start="9425" end="9445" title="Federal City Council" label="Federal City Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q40112" start="9698" end="9705" title="ellipse" label="ellipse"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164089" start="10302" end="10321" title="Nassif Building" label="Constitution Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="11061" end="11066" title="United States House of Representatives" label="House"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="11071" end="11077" title="United States Senate" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q214867" start="11471" end="11494" title="National Gallery of Art" label="National Gallery of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q752669" start="11506" end="11535" title="National Air and Space Museum" label="National Air and Space Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q166332" start="12299" end="12311" title="Eminent domain" label="condemnation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698374" start="12633" end="12643" title="air rights" label="air rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q46868" start="13069" end="13078" title="I. M. Pei" label="I. M. Pei"/>
<link wikidata="Q17612211" start="13353" end="13368" title="Araldo Cossutta" label="Araldo Cossutta"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223" start="14401" end="14424" title="United States Air Force" label="United States Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q2046665" start="14425" end="14443" title="Lieutenant general (United States)" label="Lieutenant General"/>
<link wikidata="Q5368348" start="14444" end="14461" title="Elwood Richard Quesada" label="Elwood R. Quesada"/>
<link wikidata="Q524629" start="14476" end="14496" title="Chase (bank)" label="Chase Manhattan Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q11239" start="14507" end="14524" title="David Rockefeller" label="David Rockefeller"/>
<link wikidata="Q319845" start="14561" end="14578" title="Investment banking" label="investment banker"/>
<link wikidata="Q372777" start="14579" end="14590" title="André Meyer" label="André Meyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6144552" start="15361" end="15388" title="James V. Forrestal Building" label="James V. Forrestal Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q7939037" start="16320" end="16336" title="Vlastimil Koubek" label="Vlastimil Koubek"/>
<link wikidata="Q6455670" start="16427" end="16452" title="L&amp;#x27;Enfant Plaza Hotel" label="L&amp;#x27;Enfant Plaza Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7166256" start="16516" end="16526" title="First Lady of the United States" label="First Lady"/>
<link wikidata="Q233686" start="16527" end="16543" title="Mamie Eisenhower" label="Mamie Eisenhower"/>
<link wikidata="Q668687" start="16748" end="16776" title="United States Postal Service" label="United States Postal Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q718060" start="17342" end="17356" title="Interstate 395 (Virginia–District of Columbia)" label="Interstate 395"/>
<link wikidata="Q355946" start="17471" end="17489" title="Dan Kiley" label="Daniel Urban Kiley"/>
<link wikidata="Q308439" start="17714" end="17735" title="National Park Service" label="National Park Service"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17791" end="17824" title="District of Columbia home rule#History of self-government" label="District of Columbia City Council"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18081" end="18103" title="Commemorations of Benjamin Banneker#Benjamin Banneker Park and Memorial, Washington, D.C." label="Benjamin Banneker Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q557600" start="18162" end="18179" title="Benjamin Banneker" label="Benjamin Banneker"/>
<link wikidata="Q171221" start="18398" end="18414" title="Washington Metro" label="Washington Metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q170781" start="18738" end="18762" title="Virginia Railway Express" label="Virginia Railway Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q170799" start="18791" end="18812" title="L&amp;#x27;Enfant (VRE station)" label="L&amp;#x27;Enfant Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q4888241" start="19066" end="19084" title="Banneker Circle" label="Banneker Circle SW"/>
<link wikidata="Q825838" start="19161" end="19181" title="Washington Nationals" label="Washington Nationals"/>
<link wikidata="Q517545" start="19209" end="19223" title="Nationals Park" label="Nationals Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q718060" start="19363" end="19368" title="Interstate 395 (District of Columbia-Virginia)" label="I-395"/>
<link wikidata="Q2901340" start="19388" end="19406" title="Washington Channel" label="Washington Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785894" start="19453" end="19470" title="East Potomac Park" label="East Potomac Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053145" start="19694" end="19730" title="National Transportation Safety Board" label="National Transportation Safety Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="19929" end="19943" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2821460" start="23409" end="23419" title="Abe Pollin" label="Abe Pollin"/>
<link wikidata="Q223240" start="23475" end="23492" title="Capital One Arena" label="Capital One Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q4404065" start="23534" end="23543" title="Chinatown (Washington, D.C.)" label="Chinatown"/>
<link wikidata="Q3552188" start="23587" end="23607" title="Urban Land Institute" label="Urban Land Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q17109683" start="24353" end="24362" title="JBG Smith" label="JBG Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q13218805" start="24747" end="24761" title="parking garage" label="parking garage"/>
<link wikidata="Q309483" start="24914" end="24925" title="César Pelli" label="César Pelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q6583130" start="25268" end="25299" title="National Children&amp;#x27;s Museum" label="National Children&amp;#x27;s Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q245117" start="26124" end="26134" title="bas relief" label="bas relief"/>
<link wikidata="Q3596884" start="26486" end="26514" title="105th United States Congress" label="105th United States Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361100" start="27058" end="27064" title="skyway" label="skyway"/>
<link wikidata="Q17082533" start="27159" end="27195" title="National Capital Memorial Commission" label="National Capital Memorial Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q6527389" start="27856" end="27891" title="Council of the District of Columbia" label="Council of the District of Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4750716" start="28761" end="28793" title="Anacostia Waterfront Corporation" label="Anacostia Waterfront Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="28946" end="28967" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q517545" start="29061" end="29075" title="Nationals Park" label="Nationals Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492300" start="29110" end="29137" title="Southeast, Washington, D.C." label="Southeast, Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q355946" start="29417" end="29426" title="Dan Kiley" label="Dan Kiley"/>
<link wikidata="Q131626" start="29656" end="29679" title="Smithsonian Institution" label="Smithsonian Institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q3073495" start="29691" end="29746" title="National Museum of African American History and Culture" label="National Museum of African American History and Culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q148584" start="29887" end="29922" title="National Museum of American History" label="National Museum of American History"/>
<link wikidata="Q800112" start="29967" end="29997" title="Federal Highway Administration" label="Federal Highway Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q320389" start="30008" end="30032" title="environmental assessment" label="environmental assessment"/>
<link wikidata="Q6974513" start="30216" end="30254" title="National Museum of the American People" label="National Museum of the American People"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210094" start="30695" end="30708" title="mortgage loan" label="mortgage loan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5377178" start="31690" end="31704" title="Energy neutral design" label="energy neutral"/>
<link wikidata="Q493641" start="31718" end="31738" title="multimodal transport" label="multimodal transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q109131168" start="31986" end="32024" title="National Museum of the American Latino" label="National Museum of the American Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q7544941" start="32358" end="32368" title="SmithGroup" label="SmithGroup"/>
<link wikidata="Q7342666" start="32447" end="32480" title="Robert C. Weaver Federal Building" label="Robert C. Weaver Federal Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986557" start="33475" end="33512" title="United States Commission of Fine Arts" label="United States Commission of Fine Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q617839" start="34640" end="34659" title="Apartment hotel" label="extended-stay hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q180374" start="35431" end="35436" title="Frank Gehry" label="Gehry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7544941" start="35825" end="35839" title="SmithGroup" label="SmithGroup JJR"/>
<link wikidata="Q5890701" start="36046" end="36071" title="Homewood Suites by Hilton" label="Homewood Suites by Hilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q8063092" start="36603" end="36621" title="ZGF Architects LLP" label="ZGF Architects LLP"/>
<link wikidata="Q237412" start="36966" end="36980" title="Richard Rogers" label="Richard Rogers"/>
<link wikidata="Q245188" start="36986" end="36995" title="Modern architecture" label="Modernist"/>
<link wikidata="Q223871" start="37275" end="37284" title="mediation" label="mediation"/>
<link wikidata="Q465197" start="37372" end="37404" title="American Institute of Architects" label="American Institute of Architects"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="37613" end="37622" title="President of the United States" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="37623" end="37635" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419898" start="37648" end="37669" title="Executive Order 13514" label="Executive Order 13514"/>
<link wikidata="Q827451" start="38294" end="38306" title="Equity (finance)" label="equity stake"/>
<link wikidata="Q7571378" start="38936" end="38956" title="Southwest Waterfront" label="Southwest Waterfront"/>
<link wikidata="Q5190572" start="39285" end="39377" title="Mayor of the District of Columbia" label="District of Columbia&amp;#x27;s Office of the Deputy Mayor for Planning and Economic Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q5122694" start="39678" end="39691" title="Citizens Financial Group" label="Citizens Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q2668693" start="39773" end="39797" title="International Spy Museum" label="International Spy Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="39984" end="40003" title="The Washington Post" label="The Washington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q11277" start="40179" end="40197" title="Rockefeller Center" label="Rockefeller Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344856" start="40205" end="40222" title="Place Ville-Marie" label="Place Ville-Marie"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="41103" end="41108" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q7721" start="41115" end="41127" title="Napoleon III" label="Napoleon III"/>
<link wikidata="Q581044" start="41131" end="41169" title="Lincoln Center for the Performing Arts" label="Lincoln Center for the Performing Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q17612211" start="41942" end="41957" title="Araldo Cossutta" label="Araldo Cossutta"/>
<link wikidata="Q7971727" start="43599" end="43620" title="Washington City Paper" label="Washington City Paper"/>
<link wikidata="Q2668693" start="43944" end="43968" title="International Spy Museum" label="International Spy Museum"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="997813" wikidata="Q6484926" url="?curid=997813" title="Landover">
<text>Landover can refer to:

*Landover, Maryland, United States
*Landover Hills, Maryland, United States
**Landover (Washington Metro), transit station there
*Magic Kingdom of Landover, the fictional setting by Terry Brooks
*Landover Baptist Church, fictional church
*The World Professional Figure Skating Championships, colloquially referred to as &quot;Landover&quot;, where they were held annually from 1973 to 1997</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1811669" start="25" end="43" title="Landover, Maryland" label="Landover, Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q754689" start="60" end="84" title="Landover Hills, Maryland" label="Landover Hills, Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6484930" start="102" end="129" title="Landover (Washington Metro)" label="Landover (Washington Metro)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141213" start="154" end="179" title="Magic Kingdom of Landover" label="Magic Kingdom of Landover"/>
<link wikidata="Q6484933" start="220" end="243" title="Landover Baptist Church" label="Landover Baptist Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q6148624" start="267" end="314" title="World Professional Figure Skating Championships" label="World Professional Figure Skating Championships"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="997814" wikidata="Q1915635" url="?curid=997814" title="McPherson Square">
<text>McPherson Square is a public square in downtown Washington, D.C. It is bound by K Street Northwest to the north, Vermont Avenue NW on the East, I Street NW on the south, and 15th Street NW on the West; it is one block northeast of Lafayette Park. It is the sister square of Farragut Square two blocks west. It is served by the McPherson Square station of the Washington Metro.

==Statue==
The Society of the Army of the Tennessee presented an equestrian statue of McPherson, which was erected at McPherson Square and dedicated on October 18, 1876. The sculpture portrays McPherson surveying a battlefield. It was made by Louis Rebisso out of a captured cannon and rests on a granite pedestal.

==History==
McPherson Square was part of Pierre L&#x27;Enfant&#x27;s plan of 1791 for the city. The park-like area is named after James B. McPherson, a major general who fought in the Union Army during the American Civil War before he was killed at the Battle of Atlanta. 

On October 1, 2011, Occupy D.C. encamped in McPherson Square. On February 4, 2012, United States Park Police officers, citing no-camping statutes, evicted the occupiers.

For many years, McPherson Square endured a substantial homeless camp. In February 2023, the D.C. government and federal government acted to remove all homeless people from the square, despite grassroots opposition. The government argued that the encampments were dangerous, citing an increase in violent incidents, drug use, and criminal activity. Activists countered by arguing that the government was not giving the homeless population a good alternative, and were leaving them with little support while closing down several of their encampments across the city.

== Scene ==
The square is frequented by area workers, street vendors, and restaurant-goers during the day, and homeless people at night. Due to its proximity to the White House, it is the site of political rallies and falls on the path of various protest marches. Adjacent buildings include the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs, the Lafayette Building housing the Export-Import Bank, the 15th Street financial district, as well as numerous hotels.
==References==
==External links==

* Cartwright, Catherine. &quot;Where in the District: McPherson Square,&quot; &quot;The Hoya&quot;, September 26, 2003.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1915635" start="0" end="16" title="McPherson Square" label="McPherson Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q174782" start="22" end="35" title="city square" label="public square"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="48" end="64" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q6342989" start="80" end="88" title="K Street (Washington, D.C.)" label="K Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q916958" start="231" end="245" title="President&amp;#x27;s Park" label="Lafayette Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1923093" start="274" end="289" title="Farragut Square" label="Farragut Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q278435" start="327" end="351" title="McPherson Square (Washington Metro)" label="McPherson Square station"/>
<link wikidata="Q171221" start="359" end="375" title="Washington Metro" label="Washington Metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q689952" start="408" end="429" title="Army of the Tennessee" label="Army of the Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q659396" start="443" end="460" title="equestrian statue" label="equestrian statue"/>
<link wikidata="Q6688039" start="621" end="634" title="Louis Rebisso" label="Louis Rebisso"/>
<link wikidata="Q81103" start="653" end="659" title="cannon" label="cannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q41177" start="675" end="682" title="granite" label="granite"/>
<link wikidata="Q12014132" start="683" end="691" title="pedestal" label="pedestal"/>
<link wikidata="Q264764" start="735" end="755" title="Pierre L&amp;#x27;Enfant" label="Pierre L&amp;#x27;Enfant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354905" start="824" end="842" title="James B. McPherson" label="James B. McPherson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3280545" start="846" end="859" title="Major general (United States)" label="major general"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752901" start="878" end="888" title="Union Army" label="Union Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="900" end="918" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2374330" start="947" end="964" title="Battle of Atlanta" label="Battle of Atlanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q7075846" start="988" end="999" title="Occupy D.C." label="Occupy D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q2005254" start="1051" end="1076" title="United States Park Police" label="United States Park Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q35525" start="1870" end="1881" title="White House" label="White House"/>
<link wikidata="Q592576" start="2000" end="2035" title="United States Department of Veterans Affairs" label="U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q6471363" start="2041" end="2059" title="Lafayette Building (Washington, D.C.)" label="Lafayette Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384697" start="2072" end="2090" title="Export-Import Bank of the United States" label="Export-Import Bank"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="997819" wikidata="Q3337335" url="?curid=997819" title="Navy Yard">
<text>Navy Yard may refer to:

* Boston Navy Yard, Massachusetts
* Brooklyn Navy Yard, the New York Naval Shipyard
* Cavite Navy Yard, located in Manila Bay, the Philippines
* Charleston Navy Yard, South Carolina
* Mare Island Naval Shipyard, California
* Norfolk Naval Shipyard, Virginia
* Philadelphia Naval Shipyard, Pennsylvania
* Portsmouth Naval Shipyard, Maine
* Puget Sound Naval Shipyard, Washington state
* San Francisco Naval Shipyard, California
* Washington Navy Yard, Washington, D.C.
** Navy Yard–Ballpark station, a Metro station in Washington, D.C.
** Navy Yard, Washington, D.C., the neighborhood around the Washington Navy Yard and served by the Metro station of the same name</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q894573" start="27" end="43" title="Boston Navy Yard" label="Boston Navy Yard"/>
<link wikidata="Q524435" start="61" end="79" title="Brooklyn Navy Yard" label="Brooklyn Navy Yard"/>
<link wikidata="Q6981757" start="111" end="127" title="Cavite Navy Yard" label="Cavite Navy Yard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066677" start="170" end="190" title="Charleston Navy Yard" label="Charleston Navy Yard"/>
<link wikidata="Q657784" start="209" end="235" title="Mare Island Naval Shipyard" label="Mare Island Naval Shipyard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999049" start="250" end="272" title="Norfolk Naval Shipyard" label="Norfolk Naval Shipyard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548690" start="285" end="312" title="Philadelphia Naval Shipyard" label="Philadelphia Naval Shipyard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778836" start="329" end="354" title="Portsmouth Naval Shipyard" label="Portsmouth Naval Shipyard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297188" start="364" end="390" title="Puget Sound Naval Shipyard" label="Puget Sound Naval Shipyard"/>
<link wikidata="Q4049033" start="411" end="439" title="San Francisco Naval Shipyard" label="San Francisco Naval Shipyard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637241" start="454" end="474" title="Washington Navy Yard" label="Washington Navy Yard"/>
<link wikidata="Q5548352" start="496" end="522" title="Navy Yard–Ballpark station" label="Navy Yard–Ballpark station"/>
<link wikidata="Q3298487" start="563" end="590" title="Navy Yard, Washington, D.C." label="Navy Yard, Washington, D.C."/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="997820" wikidata="Q42757946" url="?curid=997820" title="Naylor Road">
<text>Naylor Road may refer to:

==Transportation==
* Maryland Route 637, also known as Naylor Road, a state highway in Hillcrest Heights, Maryland
* Naylor Road Line, a former MetroBus route
* Naylor Road station, a Metro station in Hillcrest Heights, Maryland

==Other uses==
* Doundou Chefou, Nigerian militant, codenamed &quot;Naylor Road&quot; by the United States</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q42757946" start="0" end="11" title="Naylor Road" label="Naylor Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q2480111" start="48" end="66" title="Maryland Route 637" label="Maryland Route 637"/>
<link wikidata="Q7163661" start="144" end="160" title="Naylor Road Line" label="Naylor Road Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q6983167" start="188" end="207" title="Naylor Road station" label="Naylor Road station"/>
<link wikidata="Q43252444" start="274" end="288" title="Doundou Chefou" label="Doundou Chefou"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="997826" wikidata="Q408526" url="?curid=997826" title="Shady Grove">
<text>Shady Grove may refer to:

==Places in the United States==
*Shady Grove, Arkansas (disambiguation), several places
*Shady Grove, Illinois
*Shady Grove, Iowa
*Shady Grove, Kentucky
*Shady Grove, Maryland
**Shady Grove station
*Shady Grove, Missouri (disambiguation), several places
*Shady Grove, Oklahoma (disambiguation), several places
*Shady Grove, Pennsylvania
*Shady Grove, Tennessee (disambiguation), several places
*Shady Grove, Texas (disambiguation), several places
*Shady Grove, Virginia
*Shady Grove (Gladys, Virginia), a historic house

==Music==
*&quot;Shady Grove&quot; (song), an Appalachian folk song
*&quot;Shady Grove&quot; (Quicksilver Messenger Service album), 1969
*&quot;Shady Grove&quot; (Jerry Garcia and David Grisman album), 1996
*&quot;Shady Grove&quot;, an album by the Figgs, 2019

==See also==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q408526" start="0" end="11" title="Shady Grove" label="Shady Grove"/>
<link wikidata="Q7460894" start="60" end="98" title="Shady Grove, Arkansas (disambiguation)" label="Shady Grove, Arkansas (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7460902" start="116" end="137" title="Shady Grove, Illinois" label="Shady Grove, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q7460904" start="139" end="156" title="Shady Grove, Iowa" label="Shady Grove, Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7460908" start="158" end="179" title="Shady Grove, Kentucky" label="Shady Grove, Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q7460912" start="181" end="202" title="Shady Grove, Maryland" label="Shady Grove, Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3234043" start="205" end="224" title="Shady Grove station" label="Shady Grove station"/>
<link wikidata="Q124806422" start="226" end="264" title="Shady Grove, Missouri (disambiguation)" label="Shady Grove, Missouri (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7460927" start="282" end="320" title="Shady Grove, Oklahoma (disambiguation)" label="Shady Grove, Oklahoma (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q30682752" start="338" end="363" title="Shady Grove, Pennsylvania" label="Shady Grove, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q16883062" start="365" end="404" title="Shady Grove, Tennessee (disambiguation)" label="Shady Grove, Tennessee (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q20818609" start="422" end="457" title="Shady Grove, Texas (disambiguation)" label="Shady Grove, Texas (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7460920" start="475" end="496" title="Shady Grove, Virginia" label="Shady Grove, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q14713195" start="498" end="528" title="Shady Grove (Gladys, Virginia)" label="Shady Grove (Gladys, Virginia)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7460925" start="559" end="589" title="Shady Grove (song)" label="&amp;quot;Shady Grove&amp;quot; (song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3481188" start="617" end="678" title="Shady Grove (Quicksilver Messenger Service album)" label="&amp;quot;Shady Grove&amp;quot; (Quicksilver Messenger Service album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7460923" start="686" end="748" title="Shady Grove (Jerry Garcia and David Grisman album)" label="&amp;quot;Shady Grove&amp;quot; (Jerry Garcia and David Grisman album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7733788" start="793" end="802" title="the Figgs" label="the Figgs"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="997832" wikidata="Q7858354" url="?curid=997832" title="Twinbrook">
<text>Twinbrook or Twin Brooks may refer to:

*Twinbrook, Belfast, a district on the outskirts of West Belfast
*Twinbrook (WMATA station), a Washington Metro station in Montgomery County, Maryland
*Twinbrook (Rockville, Maryland), a subdivision of Rockville, Maryland
*Twinbrook, a fictional town in &quot;The Sims 3: Ambitions&quot;
*Twin Brooks, Edmonton, a neighborhood of Edmonton
*Twin Brooks, South Dakota, a town in South Dakota</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7209277" start="41" end="59" title="Twinbrook, Belfast" label="Twinbrook, Belfast"/>
<link wikidata="Q2917662" start="106" end="131" title="Twinbrook (WMATA station)" label="Twinbrook (WMATA station)"/>
<link wikidata="Q14692441" start="192" end="223" title="Twinbrook (Rockville, Maryland)" label="Twinbrook (Rockville, Maryland)"/>
<link wikidata="" start="263" end="272" title="The Sims 3: Ambitions#Twinbrook" label="Twinbrook"/>
<link wikidata="Q7858096" start="329" end="350" title="Twin Brooks, Edmonton" label="Twin Brooks, Edmonton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2619293" start="380" end="405" title="Twin Brooks, South Dakota" label="Twin Brooks, South Dakota"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="997843" wikidata="Q7994699" url="?curid=997843" title="White Flint">
<text>White Flint may refer to:
*North Bethesda station, a Washington Metro station in Montgomery County, Maryland, formerly named White Flint station
*White Flint Mall, a former shopping mall in Montgomery County, Maryland
*An urbanized neighborhood in North Bethesda surrounding the Washington Metro station formerly named White Flint</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q279084" start="27" end="49" title="North Bethesda station" label="North Bethesda station"/>
<link wikidata="Q7994701" start="146" end="162" title="White Flint Mall" label="White Flint Mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q602896" start="248" end="262" title="North Bethesda, MD" label="North Bethesda"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="997845" wikidata="Q5132200" url="?curid=997845" title="Cleveland Park">
<text>Cleveland Park is a residential neighborhood in the Northwest quadrant of Washington, D.C.
It is located at and bounded approximately by Rock Creek Park to the east, Wisconsin and Idaho Avenues to the west, Klingle and Woodley Roads to the south, and Rodman and Tilden Streets to the north. Its main commercial corridor lies along Connecticut Avenue NW, where the eponymous Cleveland Park station of the Washington Metro&#x27;s Red Line can be found; another commercial corridor lies along Wisconsin Avenue. The neighborhood is known for its many late 19th century homes and the historic Art Deco Uptown Theater. It is also home to the William L. Slayton House and the Park and Shop, built in 1930 and one of the earliest strip malls.

It is named after Grover Cleveland, who owned property in the area.

==History==
The first known settler was General Uriah Forrest, an aide-de-camp of George Washington who built an estate called Rosedale (now at 3501 Newark Street) in 1793, when he began serving as a Congressman from Maryland. Later, it housed Youth For Understanding, an international student exchange organization. In 2002, the Rosedale grounds were placed in a public conservancy, and the farmhouse, said to be the oldest house in Washington, returned to residential use. Other estates followed. Gardiner Greene Hubbard, first president of the National Geographic Society, built the colonial Georgian revival Twin Oaks on 50 acres (200,000 m²) in 1888. It was used as a summer home by the Hubbard family, including Alexander Graham Bell, and is today home of the diplomatic mission of the Republic of China on Taiwan. Tregaron, present-day home of the Washington International School, is a Georgian house built in 1912.

The neighborhood acquired its name after 1886, when President Grover Cleveland purchased a stone farmhouse opposite Rosedale and remodeled it into a Queen Anne style summer estate called Oak View or Oak Hill (by other accounts, Red Top). When Cleveland lost his bid for re-election in 1888, the property was sold. The Oak View subdivision was platted in 1890. The Cleveland Heights subdivision was platted around the same time, and the Cleveland Park subdivision soon thereafter. Red Top in the meantime was inhabited by Washington architect Robert I. Fleming and later by his widow, and eventually demolished in 1927 to be replaced on the same site by the neo-Georgian mansion that still stands at 3536 Newark Street NW.

Early large-scale development was spurred by the neighborhood&#x27;s upland topography, which provided a breezy relief from the hot, fetid air in the lowlands that were then the built-up area of Washington, D.C. Most of the houses built during this period show their intended use as summer houses in the era before air conditioning, having such architectural features as wide porches, large windows, and long, overhanging eaves.

While the first subdivisions were made in response to the extension of the Georgetown and Tennallytown electric streetcar line along Wisconsin Avenue, the success of the neighborhood was the result of the Rock Creek Railway, built on Connecticut Avenue in 1892. Once Cleveland Park was connected to downtown Washington, the neighborhood&#x27;s second phase of development, as a &quot;streetcar suburb&quot;, began. The Cleveland Park Company oversaw construction on numerous plots starting in 1894. Most houses were designed by individual architects and builders, including Waddy B. Wood and Paul J. Pelz, resulting in an eclectic mix of the popular architectural styles of the time, notably the Queen Anne style (including the Shingle style), Georgian Revival, and the Mission Revival. In later years, simpler schools of design such as the Prairie style and Tudor Revival came to dominate.
Development proceeded in fits and starts, punctuated by such events as the bankruptcy of the Cleveland Park Company in 1905 and the Great Depression in the 1930s. As a result, houses of very different sizes, natures, and styles can often be seen next to one another. In the later 20th century, Winthrop Faulkner and I. M. Pei designed houses in the neighborhood as well.

The Park and Shop (1930) was one of the first two strip malls or neighborhood shopping centers in the U.S. It was anchored by Piggly Wiggly and built in an L shape with dedicated parking space for shoppers in the front, a novelty at the time. The center still exists, anchored by a Target store.

==Civic Groups==
The Cleveland Park Citizens Association (CPCA) was established in 1911 by residents of the Cleveland Park area. The Association was incorporated in 1964 as the &quot;Connecticut Avenue Citizens Association.&quot; The name was changed in 1966 to the current name, Cleveland Park Citizens Association. Over the years, it has raised money for the construction of the local library branch, the Cleveland Park Neighborhood Library. It is a member of the Federation of Citizens Associations of the District of Columbia.

The Cleveland Park Historical Society, founded 1985, strives to document and preserve the history and architecture of the neighborhood, and especially the historic district, which was designated in 1987. The Society sponsors an annual house tour in the neighborhood.

The Cleveland Park Club was founded in 1922 to &quot;promote social intercourse, recreation and sports, literature and the arts, and for mutual improvement&quot; of the neighborhood in the days before television and widespread broadcasting and movies. The next year, the Club purchased a 1900 house to use as its base. Events included such entertainment as plays, songfests, and dances. With the construction of a swimming pool, the Club became more centered on recreational swimming, although other activities, including annual potluck suppers on Memorial Day and Labor Day, a day camp, and other occasional social and educational events continue.

==Education==
District of Columbia Public Schools operates several public schools that serve children residing in Cleveland Park. Some of the zoned schools reside in nearby neighborhoods. Zoned schools include:
* Elementary schools: Phoebe Hearst Elementary and John Eaton Elementary School
* Alice Deal Middle School and Hardy Middle School
* Jackson-Reed High School

The Washington International School operates an upper-school campus (located on the Tregaron Estate) in the neighborhood, located off of Macomb Street between Connecticut Avenue and 34th Street. The National Child Research Center operates a nursery school in the neighborhood; National Cathedral School, St. Albans School, Beauvoir School, and Sidwell Friends School are located at the edge of the customary boundary of Cleveland Park.

The District of Columbia Public Library system operates the Cleveland Park Neighborhood Library, which was completely rebuilt between 2016 and 2018. The library building reopened June 16, 2018.

==Gallery==
==Notable residents==
* Robert A. Altman, chairman of ZeniMax Media
* David Brooks, columnist for &quot;The New York Times&quot;
* Warren Clark Jr. (1936–2018), ambassador from the United States to São Tomé and Príncipe and Gabon
* Grover Cleveland (1837–1908), 22nd and 24th president of the United States
* Joe Englert (1961–2020), restaurateur
* Al Hunt, columnist for Bloomberg View, and Judy Woodruff, television news anchor and journalist
* Jim Lehrer, journalist and novelist
* Ana Montes, Defense Intelligence Agency employee who spied for Cuba
* Marjorie Townsend (1930–2015), NASA engineer
* David Ignatius, journalist and author
* Julian Steward, anthropologist.

==References==
==External links==

* Cleveland Park Citizens Association
* Cleveland Park Historical Society
* Cleveland Park Club
* Cleveland Park Congregational United Church of Christ
* National Register of Historic Places: Cleveland Park Historic District
* Cleveland Park Email List
* &quot;The Washington Post&quot;&#x27;s Neighborhood Profile: Cleveland Park Profile</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5132200" start="0" end="14" title="Cleveland Park" label="Cleveland Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q123705" start="32" end="44" title="neighborhood" label="neighborhood"/>
<link wikidata="Q383689" start="52" end="61" title="Washington, D.C. (northwest)" label="Northwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="74" end="90" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q2172035" start="137" end="152" title="Rock Creek Park" label="Rock Creek Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q4703783" start="166" end="175" title="Wisconsin Avenue" label="Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6421040" start="207" end="214" title="Klingle Road" label="Klingle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1841410" start="331" end="349" title="Connecticut Avenue" label="Connecticut Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q2548809" start="374" end="396" title="Cleveland Park (Washington Metro)" label="Cleveland Park station"/>
<link wikidata="Q171221" start="404" end="420" title="Washington Metro" label="Washington Metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q2193330" start="428" end="436" title="Red Line (Washington Metro)" label="Red Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q4703783" start="490" end="506" title="Wisconsin Avenue" label="Wisconsin Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q173782" start="588" end="596" title="Art Deco" label="Art Deco"/>
<link wikidata="Q16902385" start="597" end="611" title="Uptown Theater (Washington, D.C.)" label="Uptown Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q8014211" start="636" end="660" title="William L. Slayton House" label="William L. Slayton House"/>
<link wikidata="Q7624088" start="722" end="732" title="strip mall" label="strip mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q35171" start="754" end="770" title="Grover Cleveland" label="Grover Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q868551" start="853" end="866" title="Uriah Forrest" label="Uriah Forrest"/>
<link wikidata="Q23" start="887" end="904" title="George Washington" label="George Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q7368159" start="932" end="940" title="Rosedale (Washington, D.C.)" label="Rosedale"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="1005" end="1016" title="United States House of Representatives" label="Congressman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391" start="1022" end="1030" title="Maryland" label="Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q776673" start="1049" end="1072" title="Youth For Understanding" label="Youth For Understanding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494134" start="1304" end="1327" title="Gardiner Greene Hubbard" label="Gardiner Greene Hubbard"/>
<link wikidata="Q167186" start="1352" end="1379" title="National Geographic Society" label="National Geographic Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125300" start="1400" end="1408" title="Georgian architecture" label="Georgian"/>
<link wikidata="Q34286" start="1523" end="1544" title="Alexander Graham Bell" label="Alexander Graham Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="1597" end="1614" title="Republic of China" label="Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q7971982" start="1660" end="1691" title="Washington International School" label="Washington International School"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="1781" end="1790" title="President of the United States" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q35171" start="1791" end="1807" title="Grover Cleveland" label="Grover Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270218" start="1878" end="1894" title="Queen Anne style architecture in the United States" label="Queen Anne style"/>
<link wikidata="Q699168" start="1991" end="2018" title="1888 United States presidential election" label="bid for re-election in 1888"/>
<link wikidata="Q173725" start="2767" end="2783" title="air conditioning" label="air conditioning"/>
<link wikidata="Q7623083" start="2985" end="3003" title="Washington streetcars" label="electric streetcar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7354376" start="3087" end="3105" title="Rock Creek Railway" label="Rock Creek Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7623078" start="3266" end="3282" title="streetcar suburb" label="streetcar suburb"/>
<link wikidata="Q7959007" start="3456" end="3469" title="Waddy B. Wood" label="Waddy B. Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q7151504" start="3474" end="3486" title="Paul J. Pelz" label="Paul J. Pelz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270218" start="3578" end="3594" title="Queen Anne style architecture in the United States" label="Queen Anne style"/>
<link wikidata="Q5673292" start="3610" end="3623" title="Shingle style" label="Shingle style"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125300" start="3626" end="3642" title="Georgian Revival" label="Georgian Revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q2700522" start="3652" end="3667" title="Mission Revival" label="Mission Revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q616358" start="3723" end="3736" title="Prairie style" label="Prairie style"/>
<link wikidata="Q7851317" start="3741" end="3754" title="Tudor Revival architecture" label="Tudor Revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q152074" start="3848" end="3858" title="bankruptcy" label="bankruptcy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="3905" end="3921" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4067" end="4084" title="Winthrop Faulkner" label="Winthrop Faulkner"/>
<link wikidata="Q46868" start="4089" end="4098" title="I. M. Pei" label="I. M. Pei"/>
<link wikidata="Q7624088" start="4195" end="4205" title="strip mall" label="strip mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q97355077" start="4210" end="4238" title="neighborhood shopping center" label="neighborhood shopping center"/>
<link wikidata="Q3388303" start="4271" end="4284" title="Piggly Wiggly" label="Piggly Wiggly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046951" start="4427" end="4433" title="Target Stores" label="Target"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440777" start="4908" end="4971" title="Federation of Citizens Associations of the District of Columbia" label="Federation of Citizens Associations of the District of Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q371781" start="5790" end="5802" title="Memorial Day" label="Memorial Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q848352" start="5807" end="5816" title="Labor Day" label="Labor Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q3120094" start="5906" end="5941" title="District of Columbia Public Schools" label="District of Columbia Public Schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q58768619" start="6154" end="6182" title="John Eaton Elementary School" label="John Eaton Elementary School"/>
<link wikidata="Q8033204" start="6236" end="6260" title="Jackson-Reed High School" label="Jackson-Reed High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7971982" start="6266" end="6297" title="Washington International School" label="Washington International School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7721760" start="6346" end="6361" title="Tregaron Estate" label="Tregaron Estate"/>
<link wikidata="Q6971287" start="6539" end="6564" title="National Cathedral School" label="National Cathedral School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7586750" start="6566" end="6583" title="St. Albans School (Washington, D.C.)" label="St. Albans School"/>
<link wikidata="Q60739863" start="6585" end="6600" title="Beauvoir School" label="Beauvoir School"/>
<link wikidata="Q3439758" start="6606" end="6628" title="Sidwell Friends School" label="Sidwell Friends School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5283432" start="6703" end="6738" title="District of Columbia Public Library" label="District of Columbia Public Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q65071671" start="6759" end="6794" title="Cleveland Park Neighborhood Library" label="Cleveland Park Neighborhood Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q7341187" start="6930" end="6946" title="Robert A. Altman" label="Robert A. Altman"/>
<link wikidata="Q189557" start="6960" end="6973" title="ZeniMax Media" label="ZeniMax Media"/>
<link wikidata="Q938475" start="6976" end="6988" title="David Brooks (journalist)" label="David Brooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086863" start="6990" end="6999" title="columnist" label="columnist"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="7010" end="7028" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q74724327" start="7037" end="7053" title="Warren Clark Jr." label="Warren Clark Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q1039" start="7104" end="7125" title="São Tomé and Príncipe" label="São Tomé and Príncipe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000" start="7130" end="7135" title="Gabon" label="Gabon"/>
<link wikidata="Q35171" start="7138" end="7154" title="Grover Cleveland" label="Grover Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="7182" end="7212" title="president of the United States" label="president of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q6209701" start="7215" end="7226" title="Joe Englert" label="Joe Englert"/>
<link wikidata="Q3427922" start="7240" end="7252" title="restaurateur" label="restaurateur"/>
<link wikidata="Q4704066" start="7255" end="7262" title="Al Hunt" label="Al Hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086863" start="7264" end="7273" title="columnist" label="columnist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6304655" start="7298" end="7311" title="Judy Woodruff" label="Judy Woodruff"/>
<link wikidata="Q270389" start="7324" end="7335" title="news anchor" label="news anchor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930187" start="7340" end="7350" title="journalist" label="journalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q931148" start="7353" end="7363" title="Jim Lehrer" label="Jim Lehrer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4302094" start="7391" end="7401" title="Ana Montes" label="Ana Montes"/>
<link wikidata="Q612276" start="7403" end="7430" title="Defense Intelligence Agency" label="Defense Intelligence Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q19921855" start="7461" end="7478" title="Marjorie Townsend" label="Marjorie Townsend"/>
<link wikidata="Q1174815" start="7508" end="7522" title="David Ignatius" label="David Ignatius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343537" start="7548" end="7562" title="Julian Steward" label="Julian Steward"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719" start="7770" end="7806" title="National Register of Historic Places" label="National Register of Historic Places"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="997846" wikidata="Q5246798" url="?curid=997846" title="Deanwood">
<text>Deanwood is a neighborhood in Northeast Washington, D.C., bounded by Eastern Avenue to the northeast, Kenilworth Avenue to the northwest, Division Avenue to the southeast, and Nannie Helen Burroughs Avenue to the south.

One of Northeast&#x27;s oldest neighborhoods, Deanwood&#x27;s relatively low-density, small wood-frame and brick homes, and dense tree cover give it a small-town character that is unique in the District of Columbia. Much of its housing stock dates from the early 20th century. Several well-known African-American architects, including William Sidney Pittman and Howard D. Woodson, and many skilled local craftsmen designed and built many of its homes. The neighborhood was once home to Nannie Helen Burroughs, an early civil rights leader and the founder of the National Training School for Women and Girls, an independent boarding school for African-American girls founded in 1909 and located on 50th Street, NE. Marvin Gaye (1939–1984) was also born and raised in this neighborhood. From 1921 to 1940, Deanwood was also home to Suburban Gardens (50th and Hayes NE), a black-owned amusement park that served thousands of African-American residents during a time of racial segregation.

It is served by the Deanwood Metro station on the Orange Line.

The neighborhood is featured prominently in crime author Jim Beane&#x27;s short story &quot;Jeanette.&quot;

==Schools==
* Integrated Design Electronics Academy
* The Monroe School
* Houston Elementary School
* Aiton Elementary School
* The Fishing School
* H.D. Woodson Senior High School

==Churches==
* Beulah Baptist Church, of Deanwood Heights, DC

==Libraries==
* Deanwood Neighborhood Library

==Public transportation==
Metro stations
* Deanwood
* Benning Road
* Minnesota Avenue

Major bus routes
* X-2 Minnesota Avenue to Lafayette Square
* X-9 Express Capitol Heights to Metro Center
* W-4 Deanwood to Anacostia

==External links==
* Three Things About Deanwood

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5246798" start="0" end="8" title="Deanwood" label="Deanwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q2402523" start="30" end="39" title="Northeast (Washington, D.C.)" label="Northeast"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="40" end="56" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q5330001" start="69" end="83" title="Eastern Avenue (Washington, D.C.)" label="Eastern Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018430" start="556" end="578" title="William Sidney Pittman" label="William Sidney Pittman"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="583" end="600" title="Howard D. Woodson" label="Howard D. Woodson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6963837" start="707" end="729" title="Nannie Helen Burroughs" label="Nannie Helen Burroughs"/>
<link wikidata="Q191600" start="740" end="752" title="civil rights" label="civil rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q6963838" start="783" end="827" title="National Training School for Women and Girls" label="National Training School for Women and Girls"/>
<link wikidata="Q189758" start="935" end="946" title="Marvin Gaye" label="Marvin Gaye"/>
<link wikidata="Q7632335" start="1051" end="1067" title="Suburban Gardens" label="Suburban Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q194195" start="1103" end="1117" title="amusement park" label="amusement park"/>
<link wikidata="Q59816" start="1187" end="1205" title="racial segregation" label="racial segregation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5246799" start="1228" end="1250" title="Deanwood (Washington Metro)" label="Deanwood Metro station"/>
<link wikidata="Q4715683" start="1258" end="1269" title="Orange Line (Washington Metro)" label="Orange Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q28230513" start="1530" end="1561" title="H.D. Woodson Senior High School" label="H.D. Woodson Senior High School"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="997847" wikidata="Q509385" url="?curid=997847" title="Phyllis Kirk">
<text>Phyllis Kirk (born Phyllis Kirkgaard or Kirkegaard; September 18, 1927 October 19, 2006) was an American actress.

==Early life==
Kirk was born in Syracuse, New York, although some sources state her birthplace as Plainfield, New Jersey. She contracted polio as a child, which resulted in health problems for the rest of her life. Kirk grew up in Elizabeth, New Jersey and graduated from Battin High School in 1945.

==Career==
As a teenager, Kirk moved to New York City to study acting and shortened her last name from Kirkegaard to Kirk. She began her career on Broadway before embarking on a television and film career. Among 1949 stage appearances were &quot;My Name is Aquilon&quot; in New York and the road company of &quot;Present Laughter&quot; before beginning her long-term contract with Samuel Goldwyn in Hollywood that summer.

Kirk is best known for her many roles throughout the 1950s. In &quot;Two Weeks With Love&quot;, she sang and danced with Jane Powell, Richardo Montalban and Debbie Reynolds (1950). She appeared with Vincent Price in the 3D horror film &quot;House of Wax&quot; (1953), the first major 3D movie. She co-starred as Frank Sinatra&#x27;s love interest in the western he produced, &quot;Johnny Concho&quot; (1956). She replaced Gloria Vanderbilt in the role a week before filming began.

Her most notable television role was opposite Peter Lawford in &quot;The Thin Man&quot; (19571959), wherein they played Nick and Nora Charles. A newspaper columnist described what distinguished Kirk&#x27;s role in the program: &quot;[I]t&#x27;s her brains that keep her flying high on &#x27;The Thin Man&#x27; series.&quot; She also received an Emmy nomination as Best Actress in a Leading Role (Continuing Character) in a Dramatic Series in 1959.

She also appeared with Jerry Lewis in his 1957 film &quot;The Sad Sack&quot; and the 1956 film &quot;Back from Eternity&quot;. Kirk was a regular on &quot;The Red Buttons Show&quot; and appeared as a guest on some television programs, including an episode of &quot;The Twilight Zone&quot; (&quot;A World of His Own&quot;). As her acting career slowed down, Kirk began serving as an activist for various social causes. She vocally opposed death row inmate Caryl Chessman&#x27;s death sentence and visited Chessman in prison until his execution in 1960. After the Watts Riots in 1965, she funded preschool programs for underprivileged families in South Los Angeles.

She granted interviews and wrote for the American Civil Liberties Union newspaper. Kirk made her last onscreen appearance in a 1970 episode of &quot;The F.B.I.&quot; before leaving show business altogether to enter public relations. She worked as a publicist for CBS News, and retired in 1992.

==Personal life==
Kirk&#x27;s marriage to television producer and screenwriter Warren Bush was announced in the press in early 1967, and lasted until his death in 1991 at the age of 65. A Democrat, she attended the 1960 Democratic National Convention in Los Angeles, California.

On October 19, 2006, Kirk died of a cerebral aneurysm at age 79 in Woodland Hills, California. She was buried with her husband Warren Bush at Arlington National Cemetery in Virginia.

==Filmography==

===Film===

===Television===
==Award nominations==
==References==
==External links==
*
*Phyllis Kirk Obituary at Legacy
*Freedom From Fear at This I Believe
*Heroine in the &quot;House&quot; on The Astounding B Monster
*Phyllis Kirk at Glamour Girls of the Silver Screen</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q509385" start="0" end="12" title="Phyllis Kirk" label="Phyllis Kirk"/>
<link wikidata="Q509385" start="19" end="50" title="Phyllis Kirk" label="Phyllis Kirkgaard or Kirkegaard"/>
<link wikidata="Q128069" start="147" end="165" title="Syracuse, New York" label="Syracuse, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q544890" start="213" end="235" title="Plainfield, New Jersey" label="Plainfield, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q12195" start="252" end="257" title="polio" label="polio"/>
<link wikidata="Q138311" start="346" end="367" title="Elizabeth, New Jersey" label="Elizabeth, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q19689023" start="387" end="405" title="Battin High School" label="Battin High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q235065" start="563" end="571" title="Broadway theatre" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3716037" start="908" end="927" title="Two Weeks with Love" label="Two Weeks With Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q260099" start="960" end="971" title="Jane Powell" label="Jane Powell"/>
<link wikidata="Q333595" start="973" end="991" title="Ricardo Montalbán" label="Richardo Montalban"/>
<link wikidata="Q263696" start="996" end="1011" title="Debbie Reynolds" label="Debbie Reynolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q219640" start="1038" end="1051" title="Vincent Price" label="Vincent Price"/>
<link wikidata="Q229390" start="1059" end="1061" title="3-D film" label="3D"/>
<link wikidata="Q667733" start="1080" end="1092" title="House of Wax (1953 film)" label="House of Wax"/>
<link wikidata="Q40912" start="1151" end="1164" title="Frank Sinatra" label="Frank Sinatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2441978" start="1220" end="1233" title="Johnny Concho" label="Johnny Concho"/>
<link wikidata="Q264730" start="1261" end="1278" title="Gloria Vanderbilt" label="Gloria Vanderbilt"/>
<link wikidata="Q345517" start="1367" end="1380" title="Peter Lawford" label="Peter Lawford"/>
<link wikidata="Q428479" start="1390" end="1402" title="The Thin Man (TV series)" label="The Thin Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q6041980" start="1441" end="1462" title="Nick and Nora Charles" label="Nick and Nora Charles"/>
<link wikidata="Q123737" start="1666" end="1670" title="Emmy" label="Emmy"/>
<link wikidata="Q294927" start="1793" end="1804" title="Jerry Lewis" label="Jerry Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196446" start="1828" end="1840" title="The Sad Sack" label="The Sad Sack"/>
<link wikidata="Q498384" start="1871" end="1889" title="Back from Eternity" label="Back from Eternity"/>
<link wikidata="Q313198" start="1929" end="1940" title="Red Buttons" label="Red Buttons"/>
<link wikidata="Q742103" start="2035" end="2052" title="The Twilight Zone (1959 TV series)" label="The Twilight Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q4660820" start="2066" end="2084" title="A World of His Own" label="A World of His Own"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083686" start="2208" end="2217" title="death row" label="death row"/>
<link wikidata="Q725908" start="2225" end="2239" title="Caryl Chessman" label="Caryl Chessman"/>
<link wikidata="Q377682" start="2332" end="2343" title="Watts Riots" label="Watts Riots"/>
<link wikidata="Q587064" start="2415" end="2432" title="South Los Angeles" label="South Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q21637" start="2476" end="2506" title="American Civil Liberties Union" label="American Civil Liberties Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234407" start="2584" end="2594" title="The F.B.I. (TV series)" label="The F.B.I."/>
<link wikidata="Q133080" start="2650" end="2666" title="public relations" label="public relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q861764" start="2698" end="2706" title="CBS News" label="CBS News"/>
<link wikidata="Q578109" start="2772" end="2791" title="television producer" label="television producer"/>
<link wikidata="Q28389" start="2796" end="2808" title="screenwriter" label="screenwriter"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="2918" end="2926" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="2984" end="3007" title="Los Angeles, California" label="Los Angeles, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198391" start="3046" end="3063" title="Intracranial aneurysm" label="cerebral aneurysm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337818" start="3077" end="3103" title="Woodland Hills, Los Angeles, California" label="Woodland Hills, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q216344" start="3152" end="3179" title="Arlington National Cemetery" label="Arlington National Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="3183" end="3191" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6517194" start="3324" end="3330" title="Legacy.com" label="Legacy"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="997871" wikidata="Q1630774" url="?curid=997871" title="Ligne">
<text>The ligne ( ), or line or Paris line, is a historic unit of length used in France and elsewhere prior to the adoption of the metric system in the late 18th century, and used in various sciences after that time. The &quot;loi du 19 frimaire an VIII&quot; (Law of 10 December 1799) states that one metre is equal to exactly 443.296 French lines.

It is vestigially retained today by French and Swiss watchmakers to measure the size of watch casings, in button making and in ribbon manufacture.

==Current use==

===Watchmaking===

There are 12 &quot;lignes&quot; to one French inch (&quot;pouce&quot;). The standardized conversion for a ligne is 2.2558291 mm (1 mm = 0.443296 &quot;ligne&quot;), and it is abbreviated with the letter L or represented by the triple prime, . One ligne is the equivalent of 0.0888 international inch.

This is comparable in size to the British measurement called &quot;line&quot; (one-twelfth of an English inch), used prior to 1824. (The French inch at that time was slightly larger than the English one, but the system of 12 inches to a foot and 12 lines to an inch was the same in both cases.)

===Hatmaking===
&quot;Ligne&quot; is used in measuring the width of ribbons in men&#x27;s hat bands, at 11.26 per international inch.

==Button making==
The button trade uses the term &quot;ligne&quot; (sometimes &quot;line&quot;), but with a substantially different definition: .

== See also ==
* 

==Notes==
== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1630774" start="18" end="22" title="Ligne" label="line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630774" start="26" end="36" title="Ligne" label="Paris line"/>
<link wikidata="Q232405" start="125" end="138" title="metric system" label="metric system"/>
<link wikidata="Q627214" start="351" end="360" title="vestigial" label="vestigial"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="381" end="387" title="France" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="392" end="397" title="Switzerland" label="Swiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q178794" start="398" end="403" title="wristwatch" label="watch"/>
<link wikidata="Q17027947" start="568" end="599" title="Units of measurement in France before the French Revolution" label="French inch (&amp;quot;pouce&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q174789" start="654" end="656" title="millimetre" label="mm"/>
<link wikidata="Q914681" start="763" end="768" title="Prime (symbol)" label="prime"/>
<link wikidata="Q218593" start="824" end="828" title="inch" label="inch"/>
<link wikidata="Q649848" start="898" end="902" title="line (length)" label="line"/>
<link wikidata="Q16782623" start="928" end="935" title="English units" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q160464" start="1284" end="1290" title="button" label="button"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="997875" wikidata="Q1384874" url="?curid=997875" title="Minneapolis City Hall">
<text>Minneapolis City Hall and Hennepin County Courthouse (also known as the Municipal Building), designed by Long and Kees in 1888, is the main building used by the city government of Minneapolis, as well as by Hennepin County, in the U.S. state of Minnesota. The structure has served as mainly local government offices since it was built, and today the building is 60 percent occupied by the city and 40 percent occupied by the County. The building is jointly owned by the city and county and managed by the Municipal Building Commission. The Commission consists of the chair of the County Board, the mayor of the City of Minneapolis, a member of the County Board and a member of the Minneapolis City Council. The County Board chair serves as the president of the Commission and the mayor serves as the vice president. The building bears a striking resemblance to the city hall buildings in Cincinnati and Toronto. The City Hall and Courthouse was added to the National Register of Historic Places in 1974.

==Architecture==

The building replaced an earlier City Hall that existed from 1873 until 1912 near the old intersection between Hennepin Avenue and Nicollet Avenue. That structure eventually was razed to make way for Gateway Park, which continues to occupy part of the old City Hall site. The building also replaced an earlier courthouse and also the earlier Hennepin County Jail, which was located where U.S. Bank Stadium currently stands.

Before the construction of the original City Hall in 1873, city government officials worked out of rented space in the Pence Opera House building, located at Hennepin Avenue and 2nd Street.
The building, located at 350 South Fifth Street, is an example of Richardsonian Romanesque architecture. The design is based upon Henry Hobson Richardson&#x27;s Allegheny County Courthouse in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. Washington School, the first schoolhouse in Minneapolis west of the Mississippi River, was demolished to make way for the new building. Groundbreaking took place in 1889, and the cornerstone was laid (a story off the ground) in 1891. Construction did not officially end until 1906, although the structural exterior was essentially complete by the end of 1895. The county began moving in to its side (4th Ave.) in November 1895, while the city (3rd Ave.) side was not occupied until December 1902. Cost was about $3,554,000, which works out to 28¢ per cubic foot ($10/m3).When constructed, the building claimed to have the world&#x27;s largest four-faced chiming clock. At 24 feet, 6 inches (just under meters), the faces are 18 inches (45.7 cm) wider than those of the Great Clock in London (which houses the famous hour bell Big Ben). The tower housing the clock reaches 345 feet (105 m) in height, and was the tallest structure in the city until the 1920s when the Foshay Tower was built. A 15-bell chime in the tower is played regularly, with noontime concerts provided to the public on holidays and on Fridays and certain Sundays during the warm months. The chime was originally 10 bells, and it was first played on March 10, 1896.

The building is built of rose granite quarried in Ortonville, with many stones greater than 20 tonnes in weight. The granite was originally only going to be used for the foundation of the building, with brick used for the upper portion. However, the public appreciated the appearance of the foundation so much that they lobbied for the entire building to be made of granite. This may be a reason for the significant cost overruns — it was originally expected to cost only $1.15 million.

Unlike most buildings in downtown Minneapolis, there are no &quot;skyways&quot; connecting the city hall to the rest of the city. Since exterior alterations are not allowed for buildings on the National Register of Historic Places, tunnels were constructed instead. Public pedestrian tunnels connect the building to the Hennepin County Government Center under 5th Street, and to the U.S. Courthouse under 4th Street. There are also restricted tunnels for use by the sheriff connecting under 4th Avenue to the Hennepin County Jail and to the Government Center. The METRO Blue and Green light rail lines have a stop on the south side of the building: the Government Plaza station.

== Interior ==
Inside, on the 4th Street side, there is a large five-story rotunda including a large sculpture, &quot;Father of Waters,&quot; by American sculptor Larkin Goldsmith Mead who lived in Florence, Italy at the time. According to legend, rubbing his big toe brings good luck. It was placed inside the building in 1906.

Originally, the building had a red terracotta roof, but it began leaking so a copper roof was installed. At 180,000 pounds (81.6 t), it was said to be the largest in the country. The copper has since acquired its characteristic green patina.
Over the years, some of the larger spaces in the building were subdivided to make more office space. In the 1940s and 1950s, the city built a mezzanine floor over its side of the 3rd floor, and the county built an annex building on its side of the courtyard. In 1981, a committee plan recommended converting some of the spaces back to their original design and that other spaces be converted to a more open design with offices fronting onto the courtyard instead of the current corridors. The plan also called for the annex building in the courtyard to be demolished, the courtyard domed, and the Father of Waters sculpture moved in there. Many of these aspects of the plan were rejected, although restoration of certain historic spaces has been completed.

==See also==
*Minneapolis City Council
*List of tallest buildings in Minnesota
*List of tallest buildings in Minneapolis

==References==
*Steve Ristuben and William Scott (1981). HABS/HAER MN-30 documentation. National Park Service/Library of Congress. Retrieved September 19, 2004.
*More images. Public images on Flickr

==External links==
*
*Tower Bell Foundation non-profit group that produces concerts on the chime</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1384874" start="0" end="52" title="Minneapolis City Hall" label="Minneapolis City Hall and Hennepin County Courthouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384874" start="72" end="90" title="Minneapolis City Hall" label="Municipal Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q6673437" start="105" end="118" title="Long and Kees" label="Long and Kees"/>
<link wikidata="Q36091" start="180" end="191" title="Minneapolis" label="Minneapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q486229" start="207" end="222" title="Hennepin County, Minnesota" label="Hennepin County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527" start="245" end="254" title="Minnesota" label="Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q6867972" start="681" end="705" title="Minneapolis City Council" label="Minneapolis City Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q5120236" start="888" end="898" title="Cincinnati City Hall" label="Cincinnati"/>
<link wikidata="Q439501" start="903" end="910" title="Old City Hall (Toronto)" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719" start="958" end="994" title="National Register of Historic Places" label="National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q5714809" start="1134" end="1149" title="Hennepin Avenue" label="Hennepin Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q7030303" start="1154" end="1169" title="Nicollet Avenue" label="Nicollet Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q7929512" start="1411" end="1428" title="U.S. Bank Stadium" label="U.S. Bank Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q7162302" start="1567" end="1584" title="Pence Opera House" label="Pence Opera House"/>
<link wikidata="Q3501297" start="1704" end="1728" title="Richardsonian Romanesque" label="Richardsonian Romanesque"/>
<link wikidata="Q723234" start="1768" end="1791" title="Henry Hobson Richardson" label="Henry Hobson Richardson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4731291" start="1799" end="1826" title="Allegheny County Courthouse" label="Allegheny County Courthouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342" start="1830" end="1854" title="Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania" label="Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1480017" start="2510" end="2523" title="striking clock" label="chiming clock"/>
<link wikidata="Q41225" start="2625" end="2636" title="Great Clock of Westminster" label="Great Clock"/>
<link wikidata="Q41225" start="2682" end="2689" title="Clock Tower, Palace of Westminster" label="Big Ben"/>
<link wikidata="Q3748980" start="2823" end="2835" title="Foshay Tower" label="Foshay Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q101401" start="2852" end="2856" title="bell (instrument)" label="bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5099323" start="2857" end="2862" title="chime (bell instrument)" label="chime"/>
<link wikidata="Q41177" start="3123" end="3130" title="granite" label="granite"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031037" start="3143" end="3153" title="Ortonville, Minnesota" label="Ortonville"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719" start="3775" end="3811" title="National Register of Historic Places" label="National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q44377" start="3813" end="3819" title="tunnel" label="tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5714825" start="3901" end="3934" title="Hennepin County Government Center" label="Hennepin County Government Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q6715488" start="4145" end="4150" title="METRO (Minnesota)" label="METRO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617191" start="4151" end="4155" title="Blue Line (Minnesota)" label="Blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q5060656" start="4160" end="4165" title="Green Line (Minnesota)" label="Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268865" start="4166" end="4176" title="light rail" label="light rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589035" start="4234" end="4258" title="Government Plaza (Metro Transit station)" label="Government Plaza station"/>
<link wikidata="Q623525" start="4336" end="4343" title="rotunda (architecture)" label="rotunda"/>
<link wikidata="Q515535" start="4424" end="4445" title="Larkin Goldsmith Mead" label="Larkin Goldsmith Mead"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044" start="4459" end="4474" title="Florence, Italy" label="Florence, Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q60424" start="4626" end="4636" title="terra cotta" label="terracotta"/>
<link wikidata="Q428352" start="4825" end="4831" title="patina" label="patina"/>
<link wikidata="Q6867972" start="5605" end="5629" title="Minneapolis City Council" label="Minneapolis City Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q6642282" start="5631" end="5669" title="List of tallest buildings in Minnesota" label="List of tallest buildings in Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q4808261" start="5671" end="5711" title="List of tallest buildings in Minneapolis" label="List of tallest buildings in Minneapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q103204" start="5905" end="5911" title="Flickr" label="Flickr"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="997878" wikidata="Q2993943" url="?curid=997878" title="Executive Council of Quebec">
<text>The Executive Council of Quebec (, ) is the cabinet of the Government of Quebec. It comprises ministers of the provincial Crown, who are selected by the premier of Quebec and appointed by the lieutenant governor.

== Composition ==
Typically made up of members of the National Assembly of Quebec, the provincial Executive Council is similar in structure and role to the federal Cabinet of Canada. The lieutenant governor, as representative of the Crown in Right of Quebec, heads the council, and is referred to as the &quot;Governor-in-Council&quot;. Other members of the cabinet are selected by the premier, and appointed by the lieutenant governor. Most members are the head of a ministry, but this is not always the case.

==Membership==

The current cabinet has been in place since October 18, 2018, after the 2018 election elected the Coalition Avenir Québec under François Legault.


==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2993943" start="4" end="31" title="Executive Council of Quebec" label="Executive Council of Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q640506" start="44" end="51" title="Cabinet (government)" label="cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112634" start="59" end="79" title="Government of Quebec" label="Government of Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q3315109" start="94" end="127" title="Minister of the Crown" label="ministers of the provincial Crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q2911019" start="153" end="170" title="premier of Quebec" label="premier of Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q3238289" start="192" end="211" title="Lieutenant Governor of Quebec" label="lieutenant governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1492249" start="268" end="295" title="National Assembly of Quebec" label="National Assembly of Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q2458227" start="378" end="395" title="Cabinet of Canada" label="Cabinet of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q6898071" start="447" end="471" title="Monarchy in Quebec" label="Crown in Right of Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q3271068" start="518" end="549" title="Queen-in-Council" label="&amp;quot;Governor-in-Council&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q192350" start="682" end="690" title="Ministry (government department)" label="ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q17001196" start="814" end="827" title="2018 Quebec general election" label="2018 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q2348226" start="840" end="863" title="Coalition Avenir Québec" label="Coalition Avenir Québec"/>
<link wikidata="Q3085147" start="870" end="886" title="François Legault" label="François Legault"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="997887" wikidata="Q272235" url="?curid=997887" title="Coat of arms of Zimbabwe">
<text>The coat of arms of Zimbabwe was adopted on 21 September 1981, one year and five months after the national flag was adopted. Previously the coat of arms of Zimbabwe was identical to the former coat of arms of Rhodesia.

==Official description==
Zimbabwe law describes the coat of arms as follows:

ARMS: Vert, a representation of a portion of the Great Zimbabwe proper; on a chief argent seven palets wavy azure. Behind the shield are placed in saltire an agricultural hoe, blade pointed to dexter, and an A.K. automatic rifle in bend sinister, foresight uppermost, all proper.

CREST: On a wreath or and vert a mullet gules debruised by a representation of the Great Zimbabwe Bird or.

SUPPORTERS: On either side a kudu proper upon an earthen mount adorned with stalks of wheat, a cotton boll and a head of maize, all proper.

MOTTO: Unity—Freedom—Work

==Meanings==
The official symbolism of the Zimbabwean coat of arms is as follows:

*Kudus: the unity of purpose of Zimbabwe&#x27;s various ethnic groups
*Earth mound: the plants from which food and clothing is obtained
*Motto: the need to maintain the desire for national unity and the will to work for the preservation of freedom
*Green shield: the fertility of the country&#x27;s soil and water. Blue and white wavy lines symbolise prosperity-bringing water
*Great Zimbabwe: the historical heritage of Zimbabwe
*Hoe and Rifle: the transition from war to peace
*Wreath of gold and green: the mining and agricultural enterprise which &quot;protects our national economy&quot;
*Star: ancient symbol of hope for the future. Tinctured red to &quot;remind us of the suffering of all our people and the need to avoid any recurrence of that suffering&quot;
*Great Zimbabwe Bird: distinctive national emblem

==History==
===Coat of arms of the Kingdom of Mutapa (1569–1760)===
In 1569, Sebastian of Portugal made a grant of arms to the Mwenemutapa. These were blazoned: Gules between two arrows Argent an African hoe barwise bladed Or handled Argent — The shield surmounted by a Crown Oriental. This was probably the first grant of arms to a native of southern Africa; however it is unlikely that these arms were ever actually used by the Mwenemutapa.


===Coat of arms of Rhodesia (1924–1981)===
The coat of arms of Rhodesia was used from 1924–1981, for the self-governing British colony of Southern Rhodesia in 1923–1964 and 1979–1980, known simply as Rhodesia from 1964–1979, Zimbabwe–Rhodesia in 1979, and Zimbabwe from 1980.

Official authorisation by Royal Warrant for the coat of arms was granted on 11 August 1924.

The shield features a red lion passant and two thistles, taken from the family arms of Cecil Rhodes, after whom the colony was named, and the Latin motto &quot;Sit Nomine Digna&quot; (May She Be Worthy of the Name) is a reference to Rhodes. The pick, in gold on a green field, represents mining, the economic mainstay of the colony. Also featured above the shield is the soapstone statuette of the Zimbabwe Bird found in the ruins of Great Zimbabwe.

The shield of the arms was used on the flag of the colony by being placed in the fly of a British Blue Ensign, in the tradition of most other British colonies. This design changed in 1964 when the field of the flag was changed to light blue. In November 1968, the full coat of arms was placed in the centre of a new Rhodesian flag which was a green, white, green triband. After Rhodesia was declared a republic in 1970, the arms also featured on the President&#x27;s flag.

The arms remained unchanged following the renaming of the country as Zimbabwe Rhodesia in 1979, and were initially used by the government of Zimbabwe from 18 April 1980 to 21 September 1981, following which the present coat of arms of Zimbabwe were introduced.

==See also==
* List of Rhodesian flags

== References ==
==External links==
* Zimbabwe / Rhodesia at De Rode Leeuw</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q272235" start="4" end="28" title="Coat of arms of Zimbabwe" label="coat of arms of Zimbabwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q159986" start="98" end="111" title="Flag of Zimbabwe" label="national flag"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="193" end="217" title="#Coat of arms of Rhodesia (1924–1981)" label="coat of arms of Rhodesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q209217" start="347" end="361" title="Great Zimbabwe" label="Great Zimbabwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6026802" start="506" end="526" title="Kalashnikov rifle" label="A.K. automatic rifle"/>
<link wikidata="Q722475" start="662" end="681" title="Zimbabwe Bird" label="Great Zimbabwe Bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q2355706" start="716" end="720" title="kudu" label="kudu"/>
<link wikidata="Q272899" start="1834" end="1855" title="Sebastian of Portugal" label="Sebastian of Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q671174" start="1863" end="1876" title="grant of arms" label="grant of arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q854468" start="1884" end="1895" title="Kingdom of Mutapa" label="Mwenemutapa"/>
<link wikidata="Q671174" start="2071" end="2084" title="grant of arms" label="grant of arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q27394" start="2100" end="2115" title="southern Africa" label="southern Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351282" start="2322" end="2336" title="British colony" label="British colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q750583" start="2340" end="2357" title="Southern Rhodesia" label="Southern Rhodesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q217169" start="2402" end="2410" title="Rhodesia" label="Rhodesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q890120" start="2427" end="2444" title="Zimbabwe–Rhodesia" label="Zimbabwe–Rhodesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q954" start="2458" end="2466" title="Zimbabwe" label="Zimbabwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477326" start="2505" end="2518" title="Royal warrant (document)" label="Royal Warrant"/>
<link wikidata="Q19825" start="2659" end="2671" title="Cecil Rhodes" label="Cecil Rhodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="2714" end="2719" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q232254" start="2817" end="2821" title="pickaxe" label="pick"/>
<link wikidata="Q722475" start="2970" end="2983" title="Zimbabwe Bird" label="Zimbabwe Bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q209217" start="3006" end="3020" title="Great Zimbabwe" label="Great Zimbabwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q26213871" start="3058" end="3080" title="Flag of Southern Rhodesia" label="the flag of the colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="3113" end="3120" title="United Kingdom" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q885701" start="3121" end="3132" title="Blue Ensign" label="Blue Ensign"/>
<link wikidata="Q14659" start="3292" end="3304" title="coat of arms" label="coat of arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q3039133" start="3339" end="3353" title="Flag of Rhodesia" label="Rhodesian flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270" start="3425" end="3433" title="republic" label="republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q584901" start="3473" end="3482" title="President of Rhodesia" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q890120" start="3566" end="3583" title="Zimbabwe Rhodesia" label="Zimbabwe Rhodesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q954" start="3638" end="3646" title="Zimbabwe" label="Zimbabwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7029473" start="3774" end="3797" title="List of Rhodesian flags" label="List of Rhodesian flags"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="997893" wikidata="Q7653883" url="?curid=997893" title="Swarm (simulation)">
<text>Swarm is an open-source agent-based modeling simulation package, useful for simulating the interaction of agents (social or biological) and their emergent collective behavior. Swarm was initially developed at the Santa Fe Institute in the mid-1990s, and since 1999 has been maintained by the non-profit Swarm Development Group. Also known as the Swarm Simulation System, it is available for free and use, covered by the GNU General Public License.

Early development work on Swarm was completed by Chris Langton (SFI), Roger Burkhart (John Deere), Nelson Minar (SFI), Manor Askenazi (SFI), Glen Ropella (SFI), Marcus Daniels (SFI), and Alex Lancaster (SFI). Since that time, many hundreds of people around the world have contributed to the continued open source development of the suite of Swarm ABM tools.

== Applications ==

=== Scientific applications===
Agent-based modeling seeks to replicate these complexities and adaptations in computational environments where these interactive emergent behaviors can be analyzed multi-dimensionally. By defining and assigning agencies reflective of prescribed behaviors, known or estimated, to active software agents in a computer simulation, scientists can approximate experimental results not possible in natural temporal frameworks.

Swarm and other agent-based modeling platforms afford scientists the opportunity to conduct and visualize experiments in these synthetic macro and microenvironments for testing scientific theories, natural data sets, and other analyses while free of pressing constraints like time, volume, hazards, or many other parameters.

=== Commercial applications ===
Agent-based models have been used since the mid-1990s to solve a variety of business and technology problems. Examples of applications include:
* supply chain optimization and logistics;
* modeling of consumer behavior, including word of mouth and social network effects;
* distributed computing;
* workforce management;
* traffic management; and
* portfolio management.
In these and other applications, the system of interest is simulated by capturing the behavior of individual agents and their interconnections. Agent-based modeling tools can be used to test how changes in individual behaviors will affect the overall, emergent system behavior.

==See also==
*Agent-based social simulation
*Repast
*NetLogo
*Sugarscape
*GAMA

== References ==
==External links==
*Swarm Homepage</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7653883" start="0" end="5" title="Swarm (simulation)" label="Swarm"/>
<link wikidata="Q392811" start="24" end="41" title="agent-based model" label="agent-based model"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142726" start="106" end="111" title="Intelligent agent" label="agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q215772" start="146" end="154" title="emergence" label="emergent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196057" start="213" end="231" title="Santa Fe Institute" label="Santa Fe Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q7653885" start="303" end="326" title="Swarm Development Group" label="Swarm Development Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603" start="420" end="446" title="GNU General Public License" label="GNU General Public License"/>
<link wikidata="Q9187279" start="498" end="511" title="Chris Langton" label="Chris Langton"/>
<link wikidata="Q215772" start="988" end="1005" title="emergent behavior" label="emergent behavior"/>
<link wikidata="Q925667" start="1166" end="1185" title="computer simulation" label="computer simulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2737866" start="1377" end="1386" title="Scientific visualization" label="visualize"/>
<link wikidata="Q7644532" start="1785" end="1810" title="supply chain optimization" label="supply chain optimization"/>
<link wikidata="Q177777" start="1815" end="1824" title="logistics" label="logistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q301468" start="1840" end="1857" title="consumer behavior" label="consumer behavior"/>
<link wikidata="Q15737157" start="1869" end="1882" title="word of mouth" label="word of mouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2715623" start="1887" end="1901" title="social network" label="social network"/>
<link wikidata="Q180634" start="1913" end="1934" title="distributed computing" label="distributed computing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2072185" start="1938" end="1958" title="workforce management" label="workforce management"/>
<link wikidata="Q2516403" start="1962" end="1980" title="traffic management" label="traffic management"/>
<link wikidata="Q14864997" start="1988" end="2008" title="Investment management" label="portfolio management"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692055" start="2303" end="2332" title="Agent-based social simulation" label="Agent-based social simulation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2334" end="2340" title="Repast (Modeling toolkit)" label="Repast"/>
<link wikidata="Q672307" start="2342" end="2349" title="NetLogo" label="NetLogo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7635046" start="2351" end="2361" title="Sugarscape" label="Sugarscape"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="997902" wikidata="Q5688264" url="?curid=997902" title="Hazen Street (album)">
<text>Hazen Street is the eponymous debut by the band of the same name. Borne out of an original collaboration between Morse and Kennedy and named for the address of the N.Y.C. prison in which ex-Madball vocalist Cricien did a stint, the band mixed hard-hitting contemporary hardcore with metal, rap-rock, and pop overtones. Hazen Street signed with Benji and Joel Madden&#x27;s Epic-distributed DC Flag imprint in 2003 and set to work on their debut with producer Howard Benson. Guitarist Chad Gilbert of New Found Glory also performed on the record, but commitments to NFG kept him from touring in support with Hazen Street. The self-titled effort was then issued in July 2004.

==Track listing==
All songs by Hazen Street and Chad Gilbert.
==Members==
* Toby Morse – vocals
* Freddy Cricien – vocals
* Hoya – bass
* Mackie Jason – drums
* David Kennedy – guitar
* Chad Gilbert – additional performance and songwriting
* Benji Madden – background vocals on &quot;Are You Ready?&quot; and &quot;All That&quot;
* Joel Madden – background vocals on &quot;Are You Ready?&quot; and &quot;All That&quot;

==In other media==
* &quot;Are You Ready&quot; was the official theme song of WWE Survivor Series 2006
* &quot;Back Home&quot; was featured on NBA 2K5
* &quot;Fool The World&quot; was featured in NHL 2005 and in Madden NFL 2005

==&quot;Billboard&quot; chart positions==
*Top Heatseekers, #30
*Billboard 200,#198

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5688264" start="0" end="12" title="Hazen Street (album)" label="Hazen Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q5688262" start="43" end="65" title="Hazen Street" label="band of the same name."/>
<link wikidata="Q792976" start="344" end="349" title="Benji Madden" label="Benji"/>
<link wikidata="Q756563" start="354" end="365" title="Joel Madden" label="Joel Madden"/>
<link wikidata="Q5688262" start="706" end="718" title="Hazen Street" label="Hazen Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630791" start="723" end="735" title="Chad Gilbert" label="Chad Gilbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q39052154" start="751" end="761" title="Toby Morse" label="Toby Morse"/>
<link wikidata="Q27939" start="764" end="770" title="singing" label="vocals"/>
<link wikidata="Q5496851" start="773" end="787" title="Freddy Cricien" label="Freddy Cricien"/>
<link wikidata="Q46185" start="806" end="810" title="bass guitar" label="bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q11404" start="828" end="832" title="drum" label="drum"/>
<link wikidata="Q6607" start="852" end="858" title="guitar" label="guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630791" start="861" end="873" title="Chad Gilbert" label="Chad Gilbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q792976" start="917" end="929" title="Benji Madden" label="Benji Madden"/>
<link wikidata="Q756563" start="1007" end="1018" title="Joel Madden" label="Joel Madden"/>
<link wikidata="Q80528" start="1173" end="1197" title="Survivor Series (2006)" label="WWE Survivor Series 2006"/>
<link wikidata="Q2073648" start="1238" end="1245" title="NBA 2K5" label="NBA 2K5"/>
<link wikidata="Q3334418" start="1291" end="1299" title="NHL 2005" label="NHL 2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q3275505" start="1307" end="1322" title="Madden NFL 2005" label="Madden NFL 2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q2303631" start="1367" end="1382" title="Top Heatseekers" label="Top Heatseekers"/>
<link wikidata="Q188819" start="1389" end="1402" title="Billboard 200" label="Billboard 200"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="997918" wikidata="Q752362" url="?curid=997918" title="Ransom (1996 film)">
<text>Ransom is a 1996 American action thriller film directed by Ron Howard from a screenplay by Richard Price and Alexander Ignon. The film stars Mel Gibson, Rene Russo, Gary Sinise, Delroy Lindo, Lili Taylor, Brawley Nolte, Liev Schreiber, Donnie Wahlberg and Evan Handler. Gibson was nominated for a Golden Globe Award for Best Actor – Motion Picture Drama. The film was the 5th highest-grossing film of 1996 in the United States. The original story came from a 1954 episode of &quot;The United States Steel Hour&quot; titled &quot;Fearful Decision&quot;. In 1956, it was adapted by Cyril Hume and Richard Maibaum into the feature film, &quot;Ransom!&quot;, starring Glenn Ford, Donna Reed, and Leslie Nielsen.

==Plot==

While millionaire airline magnate Tom Mullen and his wife Kate attend a science fair, their son Sean is kidnapped, having left their sight unexpectedly. Sean is taken to an apartment by Maris Conner, a caterer working for the Mullens; brothers Clark and Cubby Barnes; and tech expert Miles Roberts. Jimmy Shaker, an NYPD detective who is Maris&#x27; boyfriend, is later revealed to be the mastermind behind the kidnapping. The kidnappers send Tom and Kate an e-mail with a video of Sean demanding $2 million. Despite the kidnappers&#x27; instructions not to contact authorities, Tom calls the FBI, who operate from his New York City penthouse under Special Agent Lonnie Hawkins. In private, Tom voices his belief that union machinist Jackie Brown, who is in prison following one of Tom&#x27;s business scandals, may be behind it. They visit Brown in prison, but he angrily denies any involvement before attacking Tom.

Tom agrees to the FBI&#x27;s plan for delivering the ransom. Receiving a phone call from Shaker, who electronically disguises his voice, Tom follows his instructions. He meets Cubby in a New Jersey quarry but refuses to hand over the money when Cubby fails to give him Shaker&#x27;s promised directions to Sean. During an ensuing fight, the FBI intervenes and shoots Cubby, who dies before revealing Sean&#x27;s location. Tom realizes the kidnappers have no intention of returning Sean alive upon receiving the ransom. Shaker arranges another drop-off, but although Tom initially agrees to take the money alone, he instead appears on television and offers the ransom as a bounty on the kidnappers, dead or alive, only promising to withdraw the bounty and drop all charges if the kidnappers return Sean alive and unharmed, making it clear he will not pay the ransom.

Despite Kate and Hawkins&#x27; pleas, Tom sticks to his plan, believing it is the best chance for Sean&#x27;s return. Shaker lures Kate to a meeting where he assaults her and presents Sean&#x27;s blood-stained T-shirt as a warning to pay the ransom, but Tom responds by doubling the bounty to $4 million. Shaker calls Tom and gives him one final warning to pay, but Tom still refuses, and Shaker fires a gunshot after Tom hears Sean scream for help, leading Tom and Kate to believe Sean is dead. Clark and Miles attempt to abandon the plan and flee, but Shaker requests backup, kills both Clark and Miles, and makes it look like Miles shot first. When Maris shoots Shaker in the arm from behind, he kills her as well. The NYPD arrives to find Shaker with a badly beaten Sean, whom they believe Shaker rescued. Hawkins informs Tom and Kate, and they are reunited with Sean while Shaker is hospitalized.

Shaker arrives at Tom&#x27;s penthouse to claim the reward; he intends to immediately leave the country before his connection to Maris is discovered. However, Sean recognizes Shaker&#x27;s voice and expressions as the kidnapper and Tom notices. With his cover blown, Shaker plans to kill everyone in the apartment, but Tom persuades Shaker to accompany him to the bank to get the money and leave peacefully. Shaker attempts to force Tom to wire the money from the house via phone, but Tom stands his ground and warns him that whether he receives his money or not, Shaker will be exposed and hunted citywide. Shaker reluctantly agrees to go to the bank, threatening to rekidnap and murder Sean should Tom attempt a double cross. On the way, Tom discreetly alerts Hawkins, and the police and FBI converge on Tom and Shaker outside the bank.

As soon as Tom and Shaker exit the bank, two police officers attempt to detain Shaker, but Shaker shoots them. Tom knocks Shaker to the ground and the two struggle. Tom hurls Shaker through the window of a lamp store. Tom picks up Shaker&#x27;s dropped gun and points it at him. Hawkins and other police officers demand that Tom drop the gun and walk away. In desperation, Shaker draws another gun but is shot dead by Tom and Hawkins. As Tom drops the gun, police rush in to arrest him, but Hawkins orders them to stand down. Tom is allowed to leave the scene with Kate.

==Cast==
* Mel Gibson as Tom Mullen
* Rene Russo as Kate Mullen
* Brawley Nolte as Sean Mullen
* Gary Sinise as NYPD Detective Jimmy Shaker
* Delroy Lindo as FBI Special Agent Lonnie Hawkins
* Lili Taylor as Maris Conner
* Liev Schreiber as Clark Barnes
* Donnie Wahlberg as &quot;Cubby&quot; Barnes
* Evan Handler as Miles Roberts
* Paul Guilfoyle as FBI Director Stan Wallace
* José Zúñiga as David Torres
* Dan Hedaya as Jackie Brown
* John Ortiz as Roberto
* David Vadim as an NYPD Officer

==Reception==
 Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of &quot;A−&quot; on an A+ to F scale.

Critic Roger Ebert gave the film three stars out of four and wrote, &quot;Gibson gives an interesting performance, showing a man trying to think his way out of a crisis, and Sinise makes a good foil: Here are two smart men playing a game with deadly stakes.&quot;

==Awards and nominations==
1997 ASCAP Film and Television Music Awards
* Won – Top Box Office Film
1997 Academy of Science Fiction, Fantasy &amp; Horror Films (Saturn Awards)
* Nominated – Best Action/Adventure/Thriller Film
1997 Golden Globe Awards
* Nominated – Best Actor - Motion Picture Drama – Mel Gibson
1997 Image Awards
* Nominated – Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Motion Picture – Delroy Lindo
1997 Young Artist Awards
* Nominated - Best Performance in a Feature Film – Supporting Young Actor – Brawley Nolte

==References==
==External links==
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q188473" start="26" end="46" title="action thriller film" label="action thriller film"/>
<link wikidata="Q103646" start="59" end="69" title="Ron Howard" label="Ron Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374243" start="91" end="104" title="Richard Price (writer)" label="Richard Price"/>
<link wikidata="Q42229" start="141" end="151" title="Mel Gibson" label="Mel Gibson"/>
<link wikidata="Q229612" start="153" end="163" title="Rene Russo" label="Rene Russo"/>
<link wikidata="Q180272" start="165" end="176" title="Gary Sinise" label="Gary Sinise"/>
<link wikidata="Q362559" start="178" end="190" title="Delroy Lindo" label="Delroy Lindo"/>
<link wikidata="Q233502" start="192" end="203" title="Lili Taylor" label="Lili Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q298368" start="220" end="234" title="Liev Schreiber" label="Liev Schreiber"/>
<link wikidata="Q313470" start="236" end="251" title="Donnie Wahlberg" label="Donnie Wahlberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q562251" start="256" end="268" title="Evan Handler" label="Evan Handler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011547" start="297" end="315" title="Golden Globe Award" label="Golden Globe Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q593098" start="320" end="353" title="Golden Globe Award for Best Actor - Motion Picture Drama" label="Best Actor – Motion Picture Drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930063" start="481" end="509" title="The United States Steel Hour" label="The United States Steel Hour"/>
<link wikidata="Q48817342" start="529" end="545" title="Fearful Decision" label="Fearful Decision"/>
<link wikidata="Q3009018" start="580" end="590" title="Cyril Hume" label="Cyril Hume"/>
<link wikidata="Q934444" start="595" end="610" title="Richard Maibaum" label="Richard Maibaum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471327" start="640" end="647" title="Ransom!" label="Ransom!"/>
<link wikidata="Q212048" start="664" end="674" title="Glenn Ford" label="Glenn Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q224021" start="676" end="686" title="Donna Reed" label="Donna Reed"/>
<link wikidata="Q82786" start="692" end="706" title="Leslie Nielsen" label="Leslie Nielsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q318296" start="823" end="832" title="kidnapping" label="kidnapped"/>
<link wikidata="Q328473" start="1035" end="1039" title="NYPD" label="NYPD"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="1312" end="1315" title="FBI" label="FBI"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="1338" end="1351" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414572" start="1691" end="1697" title="ransom" label="ransom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="1825" end="1835" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q4372150" start="2310" end="2316" title="bounty (reward)" label="bounty"/>
<link wikidata="Q334501" start="3848" end="3852" title="wire transfer" label="wire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166722" start="4122" end="4134" title="double cross (betrayal)" label="double cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q42229" start="4831" end="4841" title="Mel Gibson" label="Mel Gibson"/>
<link wikidata="Q229612" start="4858" end="4868" title="Rene Russo" label="Rene Russo"/>
<link wikidata="Q180272" start="4917" end="4928" title="Gary Sinise" label="Gary Sinise"/>
<link wikidata="Q362559" start="4962" end="4974" title="Delroy Lindo" label="Delroy Lindo"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="4978" end="4981" title="Federal Bureau of Investigation" label="FBI"/>
<link wikidata="Q233502" start="5013" end="5024" title="Lili Taylor" label="Lili Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q298368" start="5043" end="5057" title="Liev Schreiber" label="Liev Schreiber"/>
<link wikidata="Q313470" start="5076" end="5091" title="Donnie Wahlberg" label="Donnie Wahlberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q562251" start="5122" end="5134" title="Evan Handler" label="Evan Handler"/>
<link wikidata="Q464744" start="5154" end="5168" title="Paul Guilfoyle" label="Paul Guilfoyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="5172" end="5175" title="Federal Bureau of Investigation" label="FBI"/>
<link wikidata="Q966151" start="5200" end="5211" title="José Zúñiga (actor)" label="José Zúñiga"/>
<link wikidata="Q724804" start="5230" end="5240" title="Dan Hedaya" label="Dan Hedaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q210094" start="5259" end="5269" title="John Ortiz" label="John Ortiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2967204" start="5283" end="5294" title="David Vadim" label="David Vadim"/>
<link wikidata="Q328473" start="5301" end="5305" title="New York City Police Department" label="NYPD"/>
<link wikidata="Q2972775" start="5350" end="5361" title="CinemaScore" label="CinemaScore"/>
<link wikidata="Q212173" start="5440" end="5451" title="Roger Ebert" label="Roger Ebert"/>
<link wikidata="Q373087" start="5730" end="5735" title="ASCAP" label="ASCAP"/>
<link wikidata="Q105447" start="5858" end="5870" title="Saturn Award" label="Saturn Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q115737" start="5887" end="5922" title="Saturn Award for Best Action/Adventure/Thriller Film" label="Best Action/Adventure/Thriller Film"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011547" start="5928" end="5946" title="Golden Globe Award" label="Golden Globe Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q593098" start="5962" end="5995" title="Golden Globe Award for Best Actor - Motion Picture Drama" label="Best Actor - Motion Picture Drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q42229" start="5998" end="6008" title="Mel Gibson" label="Mel Gibson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153257" start="6014" end="6026" title="NAACP Image Award" label="Image Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1590605" start="6041" end="6089" title="NAACP Image Award for Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Motion Picture" label="Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Motion Picture"/>
<link wikidata="Q362559" start="6092" end="6104" title="Delroy Lindo" label="Delroy Lindo"/>
<link wikidata="Q494588" start="6110" end="6129" title="Young Artist Awards" label="Young Artist Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q188018" start="6206" end="6219" title="Brawley Nolte" label="Brawley Nolte"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="997920" wikidata="Q580542" url="?curid=997920" title="Vought F7U Cutlass">
<text>The Vought F7U Cutlass is a United States Navy carrier-based jet fighter and fighter-bomber designed and produced by the aircraft manufacturer Chance Vought. It was the first tailless production fighter in the United States as well as the Navy&#x27;s first jet equipped with swept wings and the first to be designed with afterburners.

The Cutlass was developed from the mid 1940s to early 1950s as Vought&#x27;s entry in a United States Navy competition. Their design team, which was influenced by design information obtained from Nazi Germany, opted for a tailless configuration paired with low aspect ratio swept wings, which was regarded as a radical departure from traditional aircraft design for the era. Vought&#x27;s submission was favoured by Navy officials and was declared the winner in 1946. On 29 September 1948, the prototype performed its maiden flight; all three prototypes would be lost during the flight test program. It was initially powered by a pair of Westinghouse J34 turbojet engines which were relatively underpowered, contributing to its accident-prone nature; its unreliable hydraulic flight control system was also a source of difficulties.

The first production model of the Cutlass, &quot;F7U-1&quot;, entered service during July 1951. It was promptly followed by &quot;F7U-2&quot; and &quot;F7U-3&quot;, improved models that were equipped with more powerful engines amongst other refinements. However, the Cutlass continued to suffer from frequent technical and handling problems throughout the aircraft&#x27;s short service career. Accidents involving the type were responsible for the deaths of four test pilots and 21 other U.S. Navy pilots. Over one quarter of all Cutlasses built were destroyed in accidents; this high rate of accidents led to the type being withdrawn during the late 1950s despite having been in service for less than ten years.

==Development==
===Background===
The Cutlass was developed in response to a competition organised by the United States Navy for a new carrier-capable day fighter that was launched on 1 June 1945. Specific requirements of the competition included the ability to fly at speeds of up to and altitudes of up to . Vought decided to respond with a relatively radical design for the era.

Vought&#x27;s design team opted for an unconventional tailless configuration; this decision was heavily influenced by aerodynamic data obtained for various wartime projects undertaken by the German Arado and Messerschmitt companies that had been obtained at the close of World War II through German scientists who worked on the projects, though Vought designers denied any link to the German research at the time. Specifically, former Messerschmitt AG senior designer Woldemar Voigt, who supervised the development of numerous experimental jet fighters in Nazi Germany, contributed to its design with his experience in the development of the Messerschmitt P.1110 and P.1112 projects. The F7U was the last aircraft designed by Rex Beisel, who was responsible for the first fighter ever designed specifically for the U.S. Navy, the Curtiss TS-1 of 1922.

Vought&#x27;s design was given the company type number &quot;V-346&quot; and later received the official designation of &quot;F7U&quot; when the aircraft was announced to be the winner of the competition. Reviewing official found the design, despite its unconventional nature, to pose an acceptable level of risk, less so than some of the competing submissions. During June 1946, an initial order for three &quot;XF7U-1&quot; prototypes, each powered by a pair of Westinghouse J34 turbojet engines, was issued to the company. Construction took place at Vought&#x27;s plant in Stratford, Connecticut.

=== Flight testing ===
On 29 September 1948, the first prototype performed its maiden flight from Naval Air Station Patuxent River in Maryland, piloted by Vought&#x27;s chief test pilot, J. Robert Baker. Several issues were encountered during this initial flight. Shortly thereafter, the Navy announced that the aircraft would be named &quot;Cutlass&quot;. During subsequent flight testing, one of the prototypes attained a maximum speed of 625 mph (1,058 km/h).

During September 1949, Vought received a contract to modify the design and to produce 88 &quot;F7U-2&quot; Cutlasses for the Navy. In May 1950, the Navy opted to halt &quot;F7U-1&quot; production at 14 aircraft in favor of the updated model. None of the 14 F7U-1s built between 1950 and 1952 were approved for use in squadron service. On 7 July 1950, Vought test pilot Paul Thayer ejected from his burning prototype in front of an airshow crowd. Around this time, Vought repeatedly noted its dissatisfaction with the Westinghouse J34 engine to the Navy, alleging that the powerplant was responsible for delivery delays and an inability to perform certain flight tests.

Funding for the Cutlass was briefly cut before being reinstated during 1950. The extent of the aircraft&#x27;s development difficulties were such that, according to aviation author Tommy Thomason, there were serious considerations towards cancelling the Cutlass entirely during the latter half of 1951, however, severe difficulties with the Westinghouse J40 that powered many of its potential competing aircraft and thus the Navy had no solid alternative to readily take its place. The introduction of more powerful steam catapults during 1952 also aided the programme considerably.

On 20 December 1951, the improved F7U-3 took off for its maiden flight; this model was a reconfiguration of the aircraft towards a more general purpose fighter configuration. Specific changes included the use of more powerful Westinghouse J46 engines, a stronger airframe that was enlarged by one-third, as well as better maintenance access via additional panels. Test pilot (and later, astronaut) Wally Schirra wrote in his autobiography that he considered the F7U-3 to be accident prone and a &quot;widow maker&quot;. Several positive observations were also recorded by test pilots, such as it being a stable weapons platform, relatively maneuverable, fun to fly, and fairly sturdy with the strengthened airframe. Furthermore, test pilots gave particular praise for its high roll rate of 570 degrees/s, which was three times faster than most production jets at the time. Some pilots have suggested that inexperience with swept wing aircraft, as well as other innovative features of the aircraft, likely contributed to the poor accident record.

Early on, it was discovered that the Cutlass would gyrate after experiencing a stall. During one test flight, Lt. Morrey Loso&#x27;s Cutlass exhibited such behavior, tumbling towards the ground following a stall. Upon letting go of the control stick to reach with both hands for the ejection handle, Loso&#x27;s Cutlass promptly self-corrected. It was determined that normal recovery procedures did not apply to the Cutlass, a conclusion that was later confirmed via wind tunnel testing.

==Design==
The Vought F7U Cutlass was a carrier-based jet fighter and fighter-bomber. It featured broad chord, low aspect ratio swept wings, with twin wing-mounted tail fins either side of a short fuselage. There were no flaps. The cockpit, which was pressurized, was situated well forward to provide good visibility for the pilot during aircraft carrier approaches. The pilot was provisioned with an ejector seat. Common nicknames for the F7U amongst naval aviators included the &quot;Gutless Cutlass&quot;, the &quot;Ensign Eliminator&quot; and, in kinder moments, the &quot;Praying Mantis&quot;.

Both pitch and roll control was provided by elevons, though Vought referred to these surfaces as &quot;ailevators&quot; at the time. Slats were fitted to the entire span of the leading edge. The aircraft was provisioned with all-hydraulic flight controls; these provided artificial feedback so the pilot could feel aerodynamic forces acting on the aircraft. The hydraulic system operated at 3000 psi, twice that of other Navy aircraft; however, the system proved to be not ready for front-line service and experienced a high level of unreliability. Allegedly, this was at least partially due to many components having been intended for lower pressure hydraulic systems, resulting in a high rate of failure and thus exacerbating overall unreliability.

During flight testing, aviator John Glenn and various test pilots found the muzzle blast from the 20mm cannons caused the engines to flame out, however this was solved when the US Navy approached weapons expert George M. Chinn who designed a flame-out eliminator, a similar device to the Cutts compensator used on the Thompson submachine gun to divert the muzzle blast that solved the problem.

The very long nose landing gear strut required for high angle of attack takeoffs lifted the pilot 14 feet into the air and was fully steerable. The high position of the nose relative to the flight deck posed visibility difficulties for the pilot. Furthermore, the high stresses of barrier engagements, and side-loads imposed during early deployment carrier landings caused failure of the retract cylinder&#x27;s internal down-locks, causing nose gear failure and resultant spinal injuries to the pilot. To help mitigate the loading forces exerted upon the nose landing gear actuator and mounting structure, Vought&#x27;s design engineers added small turbines, powered by bleed air from the engines, to pre-spin on the nosegear tires to 90 mph prior to landing. Furthermore, an automatic fuel transfer system maintained the aircraft&#x27;s center of gravity.

The initial models of the Cutlass were powered by a pair of Westinghouse J34 turbojet engines; these were widely considered to be underpowered and several pilots disparagingly claimed that they &quot;put out less heat than Westinghouse&#x27;s toasters.&quot; The J34 produced considerably less power than had been originally projected by Westinghouse, yet it was the only engine that could fit the airframe of the Cutlass without extensive reworking. Later production aircraft were provisioned with the more powerful Westinghouse J46 engine. The F7U-3M model was the first aircraft in US Navy service to be capable of firing the AAM-N-2 Sparrow I air-to-air missile. While it had been intended to equip the Cutlass with radar, such apparatus would be excluded due to weight constraints.

==Operational history==
Production orders were placed for the &quot;F7U-1&quot; under a specification that remained relatively close to that of the prototypes, and further developed &quot;F7U-2&quot; and &quot;F7U-3&quot; versions with more powerful engines. Because of development problems with the powerplant, however, the F7U-2 would never be built, while the F7U-3 would incorporate many refinements that came out of flight tests of the -1. The first 16 F7U-3s were powered by non-afterburning Allison J35-A-29 engines. The -3, with its Westinghouse J46-WE-8B turbojets, would eventually become the definitive production version, a total of 288 aircraft equipping 13 U.S. Navy squadrons. Further development of the type came to an end shortly after flight testing of the more capable Vought F8U Crusader commenced.

The F7U&#x27;s performance suffered due to a lack of sufficient engine thrust; consequently, its carrier landing and take-off performance was notoriously poor. The J35 was known to flame out in rain, a very serious fault. The first fleet squadron to receive F7Us was Fighter Squadron 81 (VF-81) in April 1954. Few squadrons made deployments with the type, and most &quot;beached&quot; them ashore during part of the cruise owing to operating difficulties. Those units known to have taken the type to sea were:

* VF-124, , August 1955 – March 1956. After pilot George Millard was killed in a Cutlass landing accident, the captain ordered every Cutlass off the ship and the squadron spent its Pacific cruise at the Atsugi naval air station in Japan
* VA-66, , November 1955 – August 1956; after a pilot was injured after a nose gear collapse, the captain summoned the squadron leader, confined both he and all his pilots to quarters, and ordered the squadron ashore at Naval Air Station Port Lyautey.
* VA-86, , January–March 1956 shakedown cruise
* VA-83, , March–September 1956
* VA-116, USS &quot;Hancock&quot;, April–September 1957
* VA-151, , May–December 1956
* VA-212, , August 1956 – February 1957
* Air Test and Evaluation Squadron 4 (VX-4), and USS &quot;Lexington&quot;

During 1957, Chance Vought analyzed the accident record and found that, with 78 accidents and a quarter of the airframes lost while accumulating 55,000 flight hours, the Cutlass had the highest accident rate of all Navy swept-wing fighters. Furthermore, according to Thomason, accidents involving the Cutlass were typically more severe than with other aircraft. The aircraft&#x27;s poor safety record caused Vice Admiral Harold M. &quot;Beauty&quot; Martin, air commander of the United States Pacific Fleet, to replace the Cutlass with the Grumman F9F-8 Cougars; the decision was somewhat abrupt, with new aircraft continuing to be delivered for a time after this. Nevertheless, the outstanding order for 250 Cutlass A2U-1, a ground-attack variant, was soon cancelled. During the late 1950s, the Navy donated many of the now-surplus aircraft to various municipalities and schools to promote aviation.

===Blue Angels===
The Navy Flight Demonstration Squadron, the Blue Angels, flew two F7U-1 Cutlasses (BuNos 124426 &amp; 124427) as a side demonstration during their 1953 show season in an effort to promote the new aircraft, but did not use them as part of their regular formation demonstration. Both the pilots and ground crews found the aircraft generally unsatisfactory, and it was apparent that the type was still experiencing multiple teething troubles. However, there were political pressures to adopt the Cutlass, both from several senior officers and from senators. Among the failures were landing gear failures, hydraulic failures, engine fires while in the air and, on one occasion, a landing gear door fell on a spectator grandstand but, through sheer luck, did not injure anyone. Following these incidents, the two Cutlasses were deemed unsuitable for demonstration flying and were flown to Naval Air Station Memphis, Tennessee, where they were abandoned to become aircraft maintenance instructional airframes for the Naval Technical Training Center. The Blue Angels would opt to use the Grumman F9F Panther in place of the Cutlass.

==Variants==
;XF7U-1
:Three prototypes ordered on 25 June 1946 (BuNos 122472, 122473 &amp; 122474). First flight, 29 September 1948; all three aircraft were destroyed in crashes.
;F7U-1
:The initial production version, 14 built. Powered by two J34-WE-32 engines.
;F7U-2
:Proposed version, planned to be powered by two Westinghouse J34-WE-42 engines with afterburner, but the order for 88 aircraft was cancelled.
;XF7U-3
:Designation given to one aircraft built as the prototype for the F7U-3, BuNo 128451. First flight: 20 December 1951.
;F7U-3
:The definitive production version, 180 built. Powered by two Westinghouse J46-WE-8B turbojets. The first sixteen aircraft, including the prototype, were powered by interim J35-A-29 non-afterburning engines.

;F7U-3P
:Photo-reconnaissance version, 12 built. With a longer nose and equipped with photo flash cartridges, none of these aircraft saw operational service, being used only for research and evaluation purposes.
;F7U-3M
:This missile capable version was armed with four AAM-N-2 Sparrow I air-to-air beam-riding missiles. 98 built of which 48 F7U-3 airframes under construction were upgraded to F7U-3M standard. An order for 202 additional aircraft was cancelled.
;A2U-1
:Designation given to a cancelled order of 250 aircraft to be used in the ground attack role.
;V-362
:Interceptor proposal as a rival to the F-3 Demon with XJ-40 Westinghouse Jet Engines.
;V-366H
:The Vought V-366H was a modernization project for the Vought F7U-3. The main design objectives were to reduce the overall dimensions of the aircraft while increasing the payload. Due to the unusual layout, both goals were achieved. With a slight increase in the wingspan, the length of the fuselage was significantly reduced, and the fuel reserves increased. Also installed is a launcher for unguided air-to-air missiles Mighty Mouse as on the F-89 Scorpion, while maintaining the cannon armament. Work on the V-366H was stopped due to the recognition of the F7U design as a whole outdated and the imminent need to create supersonic carrier-based fighters.
;V-373
:Proposal for a supersonic capable variant powered by a Pratt &amp; Whitney J57.
;V-389
:Proposal for an improved performance attack aircraft based upon the A2U-1 Cutlass. The proposal featured a single Pratt and Whitney J57-P-4.

==Operators==
;
* United States Navy
** VC-3
** VX-3
** VX-4
** VX-5
** VA-12
** VA-34
** VF-81/VA-66
** VF-83/VA-83
** VA-86
** VA-116
** VF-122
** VF-124
** VA-126
** VF-151/VA-151
** VF-212/VA-212

==Accidents and incidents==

* 26 July 1954: Pilot Lt Floyd Nugent ejected from a Cutlass armed with 2.75 inch rockets. The Cutlass continued to fly on and proceeded to circle the North Island of San Diego with its Hotel Del Coronado for 30 minutes, before it finally crashed close to shore.
* 11 December 1954: During an air demonstration at the christening of aircraft carrier , pilot Lt J. W. Hood was killed when his F7U-3 had a malfunction with the wing locking mechanism and the aircraft crashed into the sea.
* 30 May 1955: Pilot Lt Cmdr Payton O. Harwell&#x27;s Cutlass suffered an engine fire upon takeoff on his first flight in the aircraft. Harwell ejected and was rescued by a helicopter 15 minutes later.
* Pilot Tom Quillin&#x27;s Cutlass took off as part of a flight of four Cutlasses. Quillin&#x27;s aircraft had an electrical failure which forced him to abort his training mission and return to base.
* 14 July 1955: Pilot Jay T. Alkire was killed in a ramp strike on USS &quot;Hancock&quot;.
* 4 November 1955: Pilot Lt George Millard was killed when his Cutlass went into the cable barrier at the end of the flight deck landing area of . The nosegear malfunctioned and drove a strut into the cockpit which triggered the ejection seat and dislodged the canopy. Millard was launched forward and hit the tail of a parked A-1 Skyraider and later died of his injuries.

==Aircraft on display==

Seven F7U-3 Cutlass aircraft are known to have survived:
* 128451 – Phoenix, Arizona. Prototype F7U-3, fuselage only. Originally slated as a parts source for 129565, it has been transferred to Al Casby as a possible parts source for his Cutlass 129622. Prior to its storage at NAS North Island - San Diego, California it was formerly located at the New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology in Socorro, New Mexico.
* 129554 – Falcon Field (Arizona). Ex VA-212. Purchased by Len Berryman from Geiger Field, Spokane, Washington in May 1958 and displayed outside the Berryman War Memorial Park in Bridgeport, Washington from 1958 until 1992. In June 1992 it was sold to Tom Cathcart of Ephrata, Washington. Sold in September 2014, and currently at Falcon Field, Arizona, for further restoration to airworthy condition by F7U historian Al Casby.
* 129565 – USS Midway Museum in San Diego, California. Ex VA-212.
* 129622 – Phoenix, Arizona. Ex VA-34 / VA-12 aircraft that was flown to Naval Air Reserve Training Unit (NARTU) Glenview, NAS Glenview, Illinois, where it was sporadically flown by Naval Air Reserve pilots and used for instruction of enlisted Naval Reserve aircraft maintenance personnel; ownership was then transferred to the Northbrook East Civic Association and the aircraft was moved to the Oaklane Elementary School for playground use in late November 1958. It was subsequently removed and dissected to be sold for its engines. Forward fuselage was part of Earl Reinert&#x27;s collection in Mundelein, Illinois, while the rest of the aircraft went to J-46 dragster builder Fred Sibley in Elkhart, Indiana. Its components are currently reunited in the collection of F7U historian Al Casby.
* 129642 – Wings of Freedom Aviation Museum in Horsham, Pennsylvania. Ex VA-12 aircraft flown to NAS Willow Grove in May 1957 to take part in an air show. Upon arrival the aircraft was stricken from active duty. It was transferred to the Naval Reserve for use as a ground training aircraft, and eventually placed as a gate guard in front of the base on US Route 611. The airframe has only 326.3 hours total flight time. Currently undergoing cosmetic refurbishment for a return to display status.
* 129655 – National Naval Aviation Museum at NAS Pensacola, Florida. Ex VA-212. Cosmetically restored but incorrectly marked as an F7U-3M, this aircraft is a F7U-3. Formerly displayed at Griffith Park, California.
* 129685 – Under restoration for display at the MAPS Air Museum, Green, Ohio. The aircraft was in the collection of the late Walter Soplata in Newbury, Ohio.

==Specifications (F7U-3M)==

==See also==

==References==
===Citations===
===Bibliography===
* 
* 
* 
* 

==Further reading==
* 

==External links==

* Vought Aircraft Industries, F-7U Photo Gallery</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q580542" start="4" end="22" title="Vought F7U Cutlass" label="Vought F7U Cutlass"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="28" end="46" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q17205" start="47" end="54" title="aircraft carrier" label="carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q127771" start="61" end="72" title="fighter aircraft" label="jet fighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q385642" start="77" end="91" title="fighter-bomber" label="fighter-bomber"/>
<link wikidata="Q644459" start="143" end="156" title="Vought" label="Chance Vought"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326722" start="175" end="183" title="tailless aircraft" label="tailless"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929294" start="275" end="285" title="swept wing" label="swept wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q29426" start="321" end="332" title="afterburner" label="afterburner"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="532" end="544" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q3420076" start="597" end="609" title="aspect ratio" label="aspect ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362364" start="854" end="867" title="maiden flight" label="maiden flight"/>
<link wikidata="Q611039" start="974" end="990" title="Westinghouse J34" label="Westinghouse J34"/>
<link wikidata="Q723916" start="991" end="999" title="turbojet" label="turbojet"/>
<link wikidata="Q177784" start="1102" end="1111" title="hydraulic" label="hydraulic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="1989" end="2007" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326722" start="2320" end="2328" title="tailless aircraft" label="tailless"/>
<link wikidata="Q624899" start="2464" end="2469" title="Arado Flugzeugwerke" label="Arado"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="2537" end="2549" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q154470" start="2701" end="2717" title="Messerschmitt" label="Messerschmitt AG"/>
<link wikidata="Q15854965" start="2734" end="2748" title="Woldemar Voigt (engineer)" label="Woldemar Voigt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="2822" end="2834" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1728276" start="2908" end="2928" title="Messerschmitt P.1110" label="Messerschmitt P.1110"/>
<link wikidata="Q389874" start="2933" end="2939" title="Messerschmitt P.1112" label="P.1112"/>
<link wikidata="Q4081238" start="2992" end="3002" title="Rex Beisel" label="Rex Beisel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3942422" start="3096" end="3108" title="Naval Aircraft Factory TS" label="Curtiss TS-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q611039" start="3583" end="3599" title="Westinghouse J34" label="Westinghouse J34"/>
<link wikidata="Q723916" start="3600" end="3608" title="turbojet" label="turbojet"/>
<link wikidata="Q755140" start="3695" end="3717" title="Stratford, Connecticut" label="Stratford, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362364" start="3799" end="3812" title="maiden flight" label="maiden flight"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972204" start="3818" end="3850" title="Naval Air Station Patuxent River" label="Naval Air Station Patuxent River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391" start="3854" end="3862" title="Maryland" label="Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q505865" start="5195" end="5211" title="Westinghouse J40" label="Westinghouse J40"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5370" end="5384" title="Aircraft catapult#Steam catapult" label="steam catapult"/>
<link wikidata="Q4019192" start="5664" end="5680" title="Westinghouse J46" label="Westinghouse J46"/>
<link wikidata="Q11631" start="5825" end="5834" title="astronaut" label="astronaut"/>
<link wikidata="Q110450" start="5836" end="5849" title="Wally Schirra" label="Wally Schirra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164257" start="6215" end="6224" title="roll rate" label="roll rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q193010" start="6952" end="6963" title="wind tunnel" label="wind tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q17205" start="7014" end="7021" title="aircraft carrier" label="carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q127771" start="7028" end="7039" title="fighter aircraft" label="jet fighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q385642" start="7044" end="7058" title="fighter-bomber" label="fighter-bomber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384332" start="7078" end="7083" title="Chord (aircraft)" label="chord"/>
<link wikidata="Q3420076" start="7089" end="7101" title="aspect ratio" label="aspect ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929294" start="7102" end="7112" title="swept wing" label="swept wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110579" start="7171" end="7179" title="fuselage" label="fuselage"/>
<link wikidata="Q18407944" start="7195" end="7200" title="flap (aeronautics)" label="flaps"/>
<link wikidata="Q194156" start="7206" end="7213" title="cockpit" label="cockpit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2389519" start="7225" end="7236" title="Cabin pressurization" label="pressurized"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095549" start="7299" end="7304" title="Aviator" label="pilot"/>
<link wikidata="Q458475" start="7329" end="7339" title="Final approach (aviation)" label="approaches"/>
<link wikidata="Q623544" start="7375" end="7387" title="ejector seat" label="ejector seat"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7579" end="7584" title="Aircraft principal axes#Transverse axis (pitch)" label="pitch"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7589" end="7593" title="Aircraft principal axes#Longitudinal axis (roll)" label="roll"/>
<link wikidata="Q139188" start="7618" end="7624" title="elevon" label="elevon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2534008" start="7707" end="7712" title="Leading edge slats" label="Slats"/>
<link wikidata="Q245097" start="7739" end="7743" title="wingspan" label="span"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754137" start="7751" end="7763" title="leading edge" label="leading edge"/>
<link wikidata="Q177784" start="7803" end="7812" title="hydraulic" label="hydraulic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7845" end="7864" title="Aircraft flight control system#Artificial feel devices" label="artificial feedback"/>
<link wikidata="Q182642" start="8357" end="8367" title="John Glenn" label="John Glenn"/>
<link wikidata="Q451996" start="8459" end="8468" title="Flameout" label="flame out"/>
<link wikidata="Q51232149" start="8537" end="8552" title="George M. Chinn" label="George M. Chinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q840773" start="8614" end="8631" title="Cutts compensator" label="Cutts compensator"/>
<link wikidata="Q269593" start="8644" end="8667" title="Thompson submachine gun" label="Thompson submachine gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q263421" start="8740" end="8752" title="landing gear" label="landing gear"/>
<link wikidata="Q370906" start="8777" end="8792" title="angle of attack" label="angle of attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q854248" start="8793" end="8800" title="takeoff" label="takeoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q482853" start="9194" end="9200" title="Vertebral column" label="spinal"/>
<link wikidata="Q147357" start="9392" end="9401" title="bleed air" label="bleed air"/>
<link wikidata="Q833237" start="9560" end="9577" title="Center of gravity of an aircraft" label="center of gravity"/>
<link wikidata="Q611039" start="9640" end="9656" title="Westinghouse J34" label="Westinghouse J34"/>
<link wikidata="Q723916" start="9657" end="9665" title="turbojet" label="turbojet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4019192" start="10097" end="10113" title="Westinghouse J46" label="Westinghouse J46"/>
<link wikidata="Q293810" start="10209" end="10226" title="AIM-7 Sparrow" label="AAM-N-2 Sparrow I"/>
<link wikidata="Q243249" start="10227" end="10245" title="air-to-air missile" label="air-to-air missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q47528" start="10300" end="10305" title="radar" label="radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q478153" start="10866" end="10877" title="Allison J35" label="Allison J35"/>
<link wikidata="Q502126" start="11156" end="11175" title="Vought F8U Crusader" label="Vought F8U Crusader"/>
<link wikidata="Q533668" start="11259" end="11265" title="thrust" label="thrust"/>
<link wikidata="Q16984505" start="11455" end="11482" title="Second VA-66 (U.S. Navy)" label="Fighter Squadron 81 (VF-81)"/>
<link wikidata="Q23198698" start="11701" end="11707" title="VF-124 (1950-8)" label="VF-124"/>
<link wikidata="Q3016710" start="11902" end="11935" title="Naval Air Facility Atsugi" label="Atsugi naval air station in Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16984505" start="11938" end="11943" title="Second VA-66 (U.S. Navy)" label="VA-66"/>
<link wikidata="Q6981719" start="12156" end="12186" title="Naval Air Station Port Lyautey" label="Naval Air Station Port Lyautey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7906851" start="12190" end="12195" title="VFA-86" label="VA-86"/>
<link wikidata="Q2505906" start="12237" end="12242" title="VFA-83" label="VA-83"/>
<link wikidata="Q16986071" start="12269" end="12275" title="VA-144 (U.S. Navy)" label="VA-116"/>
<link wikidata="Q16986177" start="12325" end="12331" title="VA-23 (U.S. Navy)" label="VA-151"/>
<link wikidata="Q16986148" start="12355" end="12361" title="VA-212 (U.S. Navy)" label="VA-212"/>
<link wikidata="Q10853197" start="12395" end="12436" title="VX-4" label="Air Test and Evaluation Squadron 4 (VX-4)"/>
<link wikidata="Q494920" start="12948" end="12975" title="United States Pacific Fleet" label="United States Pacific Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q401053" start="13009" end="13030" title="Grumman F-9 Cougar" label="Grumman F9F-8 Cougars"/>
<link wikidata="Q885618" start="13433" end="13444" title="Blue Angels" label="Blue Angels"/>
<link wikidata="Q2570643" start="13934" end="13941" title="senator" label="senator"/>
<link wikidata="Q6981955" start="14273" end="14298" title="Naval Air Station Memphis" label="Naval Air Station Memphis"/>
<link wikidata="Q390816" start="14470" end="14489" title="Grumman F9F Panther" label="Grumman F9F Panther"/>
<link wikidata="Q611039" start="14834" end="14856" title="Westinghouse J34" label="Westinghouse J34-WE-42"/>
<link wikidata="Q29426" start="14870" end="14881" title="afterburner" label="afterburner"/>
<link wikidata="Q4019192" start="15123" end="15145" title="Westinghouse J46" label="Westinghouse J46-WE-8B"/>
<link wikidata="Q293810" start="15540" end="15557" title="AIM-7 Sparrow" label="AAM-N-2 Sparrow I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050818" start="15814" end="15827" title="ground attack" label="ground attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q505865" start="15896" end="15914" title="Westinghouse J40" label="XJ-40 Westinghouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969611" start="16657" end="16680" title="Pratt &amp;amp; Whitney J57" label="Pratt &amp;amp; Whitney J57"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969611" start="16804" end="16829" title="Pratt &amp;amp; Whitney J57" label="Pratt and Whitney J57-P-4"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="16850" end="16868" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7906856" start="16872" end="16876" title="VC-3 (military)" label="VC-3"/>
<link wikidata="Q25004927" start="16880" end="16884" title="VX-3" label="VX-3"/>
<link wikidata="Q10853197" start="16888" end="16892" title="VX-4" label="VX-4"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16896" end="16900" title="VX-5" label="VX-5"/>
<link wikidata="Q7906419" start="16904" end="16909" title="VA-12" label="VA-12"/>
<link wikidata="Q7906854" start="16913" end="16918" title="Attack Squadron 34 (U.S. Navy)" label="VA-34"/>
<link wikidata="Q16984505" start="16922" end="16933" title="Second VA-66 (U.S. Navy)" label="VF-81/VA-66"/>
<link wikidata="Q2505906" start="16937" end="16948" title="Attack Squadron 83 (U.S. Navy)" label="VF-83/VA-83"/>
<link wikidata="Q7906851" start="16952" end="16957" title="Attack Squadron 86 (U.S. Navy)" label="VA-86"/>
<link wikidata="Q16986071" start="16961" end="16967" title="VA-144 (U.S. Navy)" label="VA-116"/>
<link wikidata="Q23198693" start="16971" end="16977" title="VF-122" label="VF-122"/>
<link wikidata="Q23198698" start="16981" end="16987" title="VF-124 (1950-8)" label="VF-124"/>
<link wikidata="Q25110499" start="16991" end="16997" title="VF-126" label="VA-126"/>
<link wikidata="Q7906834" start="17001" end="17014" title="VFA-151" label="VF-151/VA-151"/>
<link wikidata="Q16986148" start="17018" end="17031" title="VA-212 (U.S. Navy)" label="VF-212/VA-212"/>
<link wikidata="Q1800390" start="17213" end="17238" title="Naval Air Station North Island" label="North Island of San Diego"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631096" start="17248" end="17266" title="Hotel Del Coronado" label="Hotel Del Coronado"/>
<link wikidata="Q7289989" start="18003" end="18014" title="ramp strike" label="ramp strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q16556" start="18510" end="18526" title="Phoenix, Arizona" label="Phoenix, Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q1800390" start="18719" end="18735" title="NAS North Island" label="NAS North Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q16552" start="18738" end="18759" title="San Diego, California" label="San Diego, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052208" start="18791" end="18836" title="New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology" label="New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q503818" start="18840" end="18859" title="Socorro, New Mexico" label="Socorro, New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q5431746" start="18872" end="18894" title="Falcon Field (Arizona)" label="Falcon Field (Arizona)"/>
<link wikidata="Q917528" start="18938" end="18950" title="Geiger Field" label="Geiger Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q187805" start="18952" end="18959" title="Spokane" label="Spokane"/>
<link wikidata="Q2266356" start="19040" end="19062" title="Bridgeport, Washington" label="Bridgeport, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q3329805" start="19299" end="19316" title="USS Midway Museum" label="USS Midway Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q16552" start="19320" end="19341" title="San Diego, California" label="San Diego, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q16556" start="19365" end="19381" title="Phoenix, Arizona" label="Phoenix, Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q3015150" start="19477" end="19489" title="NAS Glenview" label="NAS Glenview"/>
<link wikidata="Q8025296" start="20160" end="20192" title="Wings of Freedom Aviation Museum" label="Wings of Freedom Aviation Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q10751864" start="20196" end="20217" title="Horsham, Pennsylvania" label="Horsham, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q3014726" start="20246" end="20262" title="NAS Willow Grove" label="NAS Willow Grove"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368608" start="20656" end="20686" title="National Naval Aviation Museum" label="National Naval Aviation Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q321162" start="20690" end="20703" title="NAS Pensacola" label="NAS Pensacola"/>
<link wikidata="Q812" start="20705" end="20712" title="Florida" label="Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="20847" end="20857" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q14716650" start="20907" end="20922" title="MAPS Air Museum" label="MAPS Air Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2652788" start="20924" end="20935" title="Green, Ohio" label="Green, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q22695651" start="21002" end="21015" title="Newbury, Ohio" label="Newbury, Ohio"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="997921" wikidata="Q706495" url="?curid=997921" title="Luis de Milán">
<text>Luis de Milán (also known as Lluís del Milà or Luys Milán) (c. 1500 – c. 1561) was a Spanish Renaissance composer, vihuelist, and writer on music. He was the first composer in history to publish music for the vihuela de mano, an instrument employed primarily in the Iberian peninsula and some of the Italian states during the 15th and 16th centuries, and he was also one of the first musicians to specify verbal tempo indications in his music.

He probably lived all his life in Valencia, though details are sketchy at best. He seems to have been employed by the ducal court until around 1538. In 1535 he published his first book, a parlor game with music called &quot;El juego de mandar&quot;. The next year he issued what would be his most important book.

== &quot;El Maestro&quot; (1536) ==
Milán’s &quot;Libro de música de vihuela de mano intitulado El Maestro&quot; was printed in December 1536 and dedicated to King John III of Portugal. The dedication, and the inclusion of six villancicos in Portuguese, suggests that Milán traveled to that country and spent time there.

&quot;El Maestro&quot; is the first collection of vihuela music, and was in part intended for students of the instrument, with scores presented in grades from simple to complex so that vihuelists could proceed from elementary to harder pieces. The set is divided into two books, one for the vihuela alone and the other for voice and vihuela. (A breakdown of its 72 works is at Spanish Wikipedia.) There are forty &quot;fantasías&quot;, six &quot;pavanas&quot;, and four &quot;tientos&quot; in the instrumental volume. For voice, there are twelve &quot;villancicos&quot;, four &quot;romances&quot;, and six &quot;sonetos&quot; (sonnets). All of these are to Castilian texts, except for the sonetos, which are in Italian, and half of the &quot;villancicos&quot; are in Portuguese, as noted above.

Much of the collection requires considerable virtuosity. Still, not all the ornamentation is provided in detail. The style of the compositions varies from simple homophony to polyphony and virtuoso passage-work; unusual chromaticism also occurs, including strange double-inflections which were quite rare in music from other parts of Europe at the time. It appears that the book was prepared with great care; alternative passages are given for players who wish to avoid more virtuosic parts, sections of pieces are indicated as optional, and descriptive tempo indications are provided, for example, &quot;ni muy apriessa ni muy a espacio sino con un compás bien mesurado&quot; (&quot;neither too quickly nor too slowly, but with a moderate measure&quot;).

== Late works ==
Milán’s last publication, &quot;El cortesano&quot; (1561), modeled on &quot;Il Cortegiano&quot; by Baldassare Castiglione, gives a vivid and entertaining picture of life in the Valencian ducal court. While it contains no music, it is a valuable account by a professional musician at the time.

== Legacy ==
The music of Luis de Milán is popular with performers on the present-day classical guitar because it can be adapted very easily to their instrument.

==Bibliography==
*Articles &quot;Vihuela&quot; and &quot;Luis de Milán,&quot; in &quot;The New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians&quot;, ed. Stanley Sadie. 20 vol. London, Macmillan Publishers Ltd., 1980. 
* Ruggero Chiesa: &quot;Luys Milán: El Maestro&quot;, Zerboni, Milano 1974 (commentary and transcription for guitar)
* Luis Gásser: &quot;Luis Milán on Sixteenth-Century Performance Practice&quot;, Indiana University Press, Bloomington &amp; Indianapolis 1996
* John Griffiths: &quot;Luys Milán&quot;, The New Grove, New York 2001
* Ralf Jarchow: &quot;Luys Milán – El Maestro, Vol. 1–3&quot;, Jarchow, Glinde 1995 (commentary and transcription for guitar; German and English translation of Milán)
* Gustave Reese: &quot;Music in the Renaissance&quot;. New York, W.W. Norton &amp; Co., 1954. 
* John M. Ward: &quot;The Vihuela de Mano and its Music (1536-1576)&quot;, New York 1953 (Dissertation)

==Recordings==

* Luis de Milán interpreted by Jordi Savall, 
* Listen online (Magnatune) to &quot;El Maestro&quot; performed by Edward Martin or by Jacob Heringman and Catherine King.
*2005 – &quot;Dulcis Melancholia. Biographie musicale de Marguerite d’Autriche.&quot; Capilla Flamenca. MEW 0525. Contains a recording of Pavane 4 and Pavane 5 (La bella franceschina) by Luis Milan.

==External links==

===Sheetmusic===
*&quot;Libro de musica de vihuela de mano, intitulado El Maestro&quot; &quot;(click &quot;View options&quot; JPG icon)&quot; - Biblioteca Nacional de España info</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q706495" start="0" end="13" title="Luis de Milán" label="Luis de Milán"/>
<link wikidata="Q706495" start="29" end="43" title="Luis de Milán" label="Lluís del Milà"/>
<link wikidata="Q706495" start="47" end="57" title="Luis de Milán" label="Luys Milán"/>
<link wikidata="Q201405" start="93" end="104" title="Renaissance music" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q751884" start="115" end="124" title="vihuela" label="vihuelist"/>
<link wikidata="Q751884" start="209" end="216" title="vihuela" label="vihuela"/>
<link wikidata="Q189214" start="412" end="417" title="tempo" label="tempo"/>
<link wikidata="Q8818" start="479" end="487" title="Valencia (city in Spain)" label="Valencia"/>
<link wikidata="Q216789" start="918" end="943" title="King John III of Portugal" label="King John III of Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1232283" start="986" end="996" title="villancico" label="villancico"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146" start="1001" end="1011" title="Portuguese language" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1426" end="1451" title=":es:El Maestro#Las obras" label="breakdown of its 72 works"/>
<link wikidata="Q836571" start="1494" end="1515" title="fantasia (music)" label="&amp;quot;fantasías&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q180853" start="1521" end="1540" title="pavane" label="&amp;quot;pavanas&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517519" start="2727" end="2740" title="Il Cortegiano" label="Il Cortegiano"/>
<link wikidata="Q211133" start="2750" end="2772" title="Baldassare Castiglione" label="Baldassare Castiglione"/>
<link wikidata="Q157100" start="4259" end="4280" title="Margaret of Habsburg" label="Marguerite d’Autriche"/>
<link wikidata="Q1835779" start="4288" end="4304" title="Capilla Flamenca" label="Capilla Flamenca"/>
<link wikidata="Q180853" start="4340" end="4346" title="Pavane" label="Pavane"/>
<link wikidata="Q180853" start="4353" end="4359" title="Pavane" label="Pavane"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="997924" wikidata="Q962710" url="?curid=997924" title="Leon Pinsker">
<text>Leon Pinsker or Judah Leib Pinsker (; ; – ) was a physician and Zionist activist.

Earlier in life he had originally supported the cultural assimilation of Jews in the Russian Empire. He was born in the town of Tomaszów Lubelski in the southeastern border region of the Kingdom of Poland, and educated in Odessa, where he studied law but was unable to practice because of restrictions on occupations available to Jews.

Pinsker was a supporter of equal rights under the law for Jews, but his optimism was curtailed after the Odessa Pogroms. In response to the pogroms of 1871 and 1881, Pinsker founded the Zionist organization Hibbat Zion in 1881.

Political disagreements between religious and secular factions of the Odessa Committee, and Ottoman restriction on Jewish emigration, prevented Pinsker from resettling, and he died in Odessa in 1891. His remains were brought to Jerusalem in 1934.

==Biography==
Leon (Yehudah Leib) Pinsker inherited a strong sense of Jewish identity from his father, Simchah Pinsker, a Hebrew language writer, scholar and teacher. Leon attended his father&#x27;s private school in Odessa and was one of the first Jews to attend Odessa University, where he studied law. Later he realized that, being a Jew, he had no chance of becoming a lawyer due to strict quotas on Jewish professionals and chose the career of a physician.

==Jewish and Zionist activism==

Pinsker believed that the Jewish problem could be resolved if the Jews attained equal rights. In his early years, Pinsker favored the assimilation path and was one of the founders of a Russian language Jewish weekly (see also: Haskala).

The Odessa pogrom of 1871 moved Pinsker to become an active public figure. In 1881, a bigger wave of anti-Jewish hostilities, many state-sponsored, swept southern Russia and continued until 1884. Then Pinsker&#x27;s views changed radically, and he no longer believed that mere humanism and Enlightenment would defeat antisemitism. In 1884, he organized an international conference of Hibbat Zion in Katowice (Upper Silesia, then part of the Kingdom of Prussia).

As a professional physician, Pinsker preferred the medical term &quot;Judeophobia&quot; to the recently introduced &quot;antisemitism&quot;. Pinsker knew that a combination of mutually exclusive assertions is a characteristic of a psychological disorder and was convinced that pathological, irrational phobia may explain this millennia-old hatred, wherein: 
... to the living, the Jew is a corpse, to the native a foreigner, to the homesteader a vagrant, to the proprietary a beggar, to the poor an exploiter and a millionaire, to the patriot a man without a country, for all a hated rival.

His visit to Western Europe led to his famous pamphlet &quot;Auto-Emancipation&quot;, subtitled &quot;Mahnruf a seine Stammgenossen, von einem russischen Juden&quot; (&quot;Warning to His Fellow People, from a Russian Jew&quot;), which he published anonymously in German on 1 January 1882, and in which he urged the Jewish people to strive for independence and national consciousness.

In his 1882 pamphlet &quot;Auto-Emancipation&quot;, Pinsker argued against Palestine as the destination for a Jewish commonwealth:We must not attach ourselves to the place where our political life was once violently interrupted and destroyed. The goal of our present endeavors must be not the &#x27;Holy Land&#x27;, but a land of our own. We need nothing but a large piece of land for our poor brothers; a piece of land which shall remain our property, from which no foreign master can expel us. Thither we shall take with us the most sacred possessions which we have saved from the shipwreck of our former father-land, the God-idea and the Bible. It is only these which have made our old father-land the Holy Land, and not Jerusalem or the Jordan. Perhaps the Holy Land will again become ours. If so, all the better, but first of all, we must determine—and this is the crucial point—what country is accessible to us, and at the same time adapted to offer the Jews of all lands who must leave their homes a secure and unquestioned refuge, capable of being made productive.

Despite being urged several times to amend his essay to say that Palestine was the only acceptable Jewish refuge, Pinkser refused, even writing in his will that he had not retracted his opinion. Before his death, he reportedly said &quot;Since the Holy Land cannot be a &#x27;physical center&#x27; except for very few of our Jewish brethren, it would be far better for us to divide the work of national revival into two, with Palestine as our national (spiritual) center and Argentina as our cultural (physical) center.&quot; Nevertheless, Pinsker became one of the founders and a chairman of the Hovevei Zion movement. As part of the movement, he focused on supporting settlements that already existed and helping them to achieve self-sufficiency before organizing any further migration and the establishment of new settlements. Younger activists, such as Menachem Mendel Ussishkin, actively opposed this approach, urging an acceleration of the pace of settlement. 

==Zionist agricultural settlement==
In 1890, the Russian authorities approved the establishment of the Society for the Support of Jewish Farmers and Artisans in Syria and Palestine, dedicated to the practical aspects of establishing Jewish agricultural colonies there. Pinsker headed this charity organization, known as the Odessa Committee. Disagreements between various Jewish religious and secular factions, an internal movement crisis and the ban by the Ottoman Empire on Jewish immigration in the 1890s caused Pinsker to doubt whether Eretz Israel would ever become the solution.

==Death and legacy==
Pinsker died in Odessa in 1891. His remains were brought to Jerusalem in 1934 and reburied in Nicanor&#x27;s Cave next to Mount Scopus. Moshav Nahalat Yehuda, now a neighborhood in Rishon LeZion, is named after him, as well as a street in Tel Aviv and several other locales in Israel.

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==

* Resources and articles by Pinsker WZO</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q962710" start="0" end="12" title="Leon Pinsker" label="Leon Pinsker"/>
<link wikidata="Q962710" start="16" end="34" title="Leon Pinsker" label="Judah Leib Pinsker"/>
<link wikidata="Q39631" start="50" end="59" title="physician" label="physician"/>
<link wikidata="Q42388" start="64" end="71" title="Zionist" label="Zionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="168" end="182" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q911009" start="211" end="228" title="Tomaszów Lubelski" label="Tomaszów Lubelski"/>
<link wikidata="Q577867" start="270" end="287" title="Kingdom of Poland" label="Kingdom of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1874" start="305" end="311" title="Odessa" label="Odessa"/>
<link wikidata="Q552243" start="525" end="539" title="Odessa pogroms" label="Odessa Pogroms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071744" start="627" end="638" title="Hovevei Zion" label="Hibbat Zion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1529159" start="719" end="735" title="Odessa Committee" label="Odessa Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="741" end="748" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218" start="877" end="886" title="Jerusalem" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="967" end="973" title="Jewish" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q2287040" start="1000" end="1015" title="Simchah Pinsker" label="Simchah Pinsker"/>
<link wikidata="Q9288" start="1019" end="1034" title="Hebrew language" label="Hebrew language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1874" start="1114" end="1120" title="Odessa" label="Odessa"/>
<link wikidata="Q85300" start="1161" end="1178" title="Odessa University" label="Odessa University"/>
<link wikidata="Q193579" start="1527" end="1539" title="Cultural assimilation" label="assimilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737" start="1578" end="1594" title="Russian language" label="Russian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q472670" start="1620" end="1627" title="Haskala" label="Haskala"/>
<link wikidata="Q552243" start="1635" end="1648" title="Odessa pogroms" label="Odessa pogrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q46158" start="1908" end="1916" title="humanism" label="humanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q12539" start="1921" end="1934" title="Age of Enlightenment" label="Enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="Q22649" start="1948" end="1960" title="antisemitism" label="antisemitism"/>
<link wikidata="Q12407161" start="1987" end="2011" title="Katowice Conference" label="international conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071744" start="2015" end="2026" title="Hovevei Zion" label="Hibbat Zion"/>
<link wikidata="Q588" start="2030" end="2038" title="Katowice" label="Katowice"/>
<link wikidata="Q81011" start="2040" end="2053" title="Upper Silesia" label="Upper Silesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q27306" start="2072" end="2090" title="Kingdom of Prussia" label="Kingdom of Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q22649" start="2164" end="2175" title="Antisemitism" label="Judeophobia"/>
<link wikidata="Q22649" start="2215" end="2227" title="antisemitism" label="antisemitism"/>
<link wikidata="Q175854" start="2396" end="2402" title="phobia" label="phobia"/>
<link wikidata="Q786440" start="2747" end="2764" title="Auto-Emancipation" label="Auto-Emancipation"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="2950" end="2956" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071744" start="4743" end="4755" title="Hovevei Zion" label="Hovevei Zion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1529159" start="5438" end="5454" title="Odessa Committee" label="Odessa Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="5572" end="5586" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218" start="5781" end="5790" title="Jerusalem" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q491928" start="5815" end="5834" title="Cave of Nicanor" label="Nicanor&amp;#x27;s Cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q312818" start="5843" end="5855" title="Mount Scopus" label="Mount Scopus"/>
<link wikidata="Q917146" start="5857" end="5863" title="Moshav" label="Moshav"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5864" end="5878" title="Nahalat Yehuda" label="Nahalat Yehuda"/>
<link wikidata="Q201051" start="5902" end="5915" title="Rishon LeZion" label="Rishon LeZion"/>
<link wikidata="Q33935" start="5960" end="5968" title="Tel Aviv" label="Tel Aviv"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="997928" wikidata="Q7016575" url="?curid=997928" title="Newar (disambiguation)">
<text>Newar may refer to:

* Newar people, of Kathmandu, Nepal
** Newar language, their Sino-Tibetan language
*** Newar script
** Newar cuisine

==See also==
*Niwar (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7016575" start="0" end="5" title="Newar (disambiguation)" label="Newar"/>
<link wikidata="Q524007" start="23" end="35" title="Newar people" label="Newar people"/>
<link wikidata="Q33979" start="60" end="74" title="Newar language" label="Newar language"/>
<link wikidata="Q768023" start="108" end="120" title="Newar script" label="Newar script"/>
<link wikidata="Q7016539" start="124" end="137" title="Newar cuisine" label="Newar cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q116213645" start="153" end="175" title="Niwar (disambiguation)" label="Niwar (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="997931" wikidata="Q440220" url="?curid=997931" title="BIP">
<text>Bip or BiP or BIP may refer to:

== Software ==

* BiP – Messaging, Voice and Video Calling: a smartphone application
== Entertainment ==
* Bip (channel), a comedy channel
* Bip the clown, a famous character of mime Marcel Marceau
* &quot;Bachelor in Paradise&quot; (American TV series)

== Organizations ==
* BIP Brewery, (Serbian: &quot;&quot;), a brewery in Belgrade, Serbia
* BIP Investment Partners, an investment company
* Botswana Independence Party, a political party in Botswana
* British International Pictures, a British film production, distribution and exhibition company

== People ==
* Bip Apollo, a formerly anonymous painter and sculptor
* Ethel &quot;Bip&quot; Pares (1904–1977), Art Deco illustrator, designed over 600 book covers, created iconic posters for London Transport
* Bip Roberts (born 1963), American Major League Baseball player
* Boom Bip (born 1974), American record producer and musician
* Bipasha Basu (born 1979), Indian actress, sometimes abbreviated simply as &quot;Bip&quot;

== Technology ==
* bip! (Red Metropolitana de Movilidad), a contactless smartcard fare system used in Transantiago and Metro de Santiago, in Santiago de Chile
* Basic Imaging Profile, a Bluetooth profile for sending images between devices
* Bearer Independent Protocol
* Binary integer programming, a special case of integer programming
* Bit interface parity, parity protection on computer interfaces
* BiP chemical formula for bismuth phosphide
* Bitcoin Improvement Proposal (BIP)

== Transport ==
* Bishopstone railway station, a railway station in Sussex, England

== Other uses ==
* Binding immunoglobulin protein (BiP), a molecular ER chaperone that regulates protein folding
* &quot;Biuletyn Informacji Publicznej&quot; (Bulletin of Public Information), a government-sponsored public information system in Poland
* &quot;Bishopstone, East Sussex&quot; (also known as Bip), a village in East Sussex located near Seaford.

==See also==
* Basis point (bp), pronounced as &quot;bip&quot;
* Bips (disambiguation)
* BP (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q440220" start="0" end="3" title="BIP" label="Bip"/>
<link wikidata="Q440220" start="7" end="10" title="BIP" label="BiP"/>
<link wikidata="Q440220" start="14" end="17" title="BIP" label="BIP"/>
<link wikidata="Q29364771" start="51" end="54" title="BiP (software)" label="BiP"/>
<link wikidata="Q4915398" start="140" end="153" title="Bip (Israeli TV channel)" label="Bip (channel)"/>
<link wikidata="Q157191" start="174" end="187" title="Marcel Marceau" label="Bip the clown"/>
<link wikidata="Q17514443" start="233" end="286" title="Bachelor in Paradise (American TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Bachelor in Paradise&amp;quot; (American TV series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2877087" start="310" end="321" title="BIP Brewery" label="BIP Brewery"/>
<link wikidata="Q2566057" start="380" end="403" title="BIP Investment Partners" label="BIP Investment Partners"/>
<link wikidata="Q390056" start="429" end="456" title="Botswana Independence Party" label="Botswana Independence Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q200976" start="490" end="520" title="Associated British Picture Corporation" label="British International Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q28442838" start="601" end="611" title="Bip Apollo" label="Bip Apollo"/>
<link wikidata="Q62520536" start="657" end="684" title="Bip Pares" label="Ethel &amp;quot;Bip&amp;quot; Pares"/>
<link wikidata="Q173782" start="698" end="706" title="Art Deco" label="Art Deco"/>
<link wikidata="Q644687" start="707" end="718" title="illustrator" label="illustrator"/>
<link wikidata="Q16934097" start="778" end="794" title="London Transport (brand)" label="London Transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q4915396" start="797" end="808" title="Bip Roberts" label="Bip Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q545689" start="862" end="870" title="Boom Bip" label="Boom Bip"/>
<link wikidata="Q158214" start="924" end="936" title="Bipasha Basu" label="Bipasha Basu"/>
<link wikidata="Q954223" start="1034" end="1038" title="bip!" label="bip!"/>
<link wikidata="Q954223" start="1040" end="1070" title="Red Metropolitana de Movilidad" label="Red Metropolitana de Movilidad"/>
<link wikidata="Q131691021" start="1176" end="1197" title="Basic Imaging Profile" label="Basic Imaging Profile"/>
<link wikidata="Q813024" start="1256" end="1283" title="Bearer Independent Protocol" label="Bearer Independent Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q202843" start="1286" end="1312" title="Binary integer programming" label="Binary integer programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q625502" start="1354" end="1374" title="Bit interface parity" label="Bit interface parity"/>
<link wikidata="Q28790590" start="1444" end="1461" title="bismuth phosphide" label="bismuth phosphide"/>
<link wikidata="Q131723" start="1464" end="1471" title="Bitcoin" label="Bitcoin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2330749" start="1518" end="1545" title="Bishopstone railway station" label="Bishopstone railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q18027351" start="1604" end="1634" title="Binding immunoglobulin protein" label="Binding immunoglobulin protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q9173850" start="1706" end="1736" title="Biuletyn Informacji Publicznej" label="Biuletyn Informacji Publicznej"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918102" start="1844" end="1868" title="Bishopstone, East Sussex" label="Bishopstone, East Sussex"/>
<link wikidata="Q23293" start="1909" end="1920" title="East Sussex" label="East Sussex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640242" start="1934" end="1941" title="Seaford, East Sussex" label="Seaford"/>
<link wikidata="Q750178" start="1959" end="1970" title="Basis point" label="Basis point"/>
<link wikidata="Q4915504" start="2009" end="2030" title="Bips (disambiguation)" label="Bips (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q218681" start="2033" end="2052" title="BP (disambiguation)" label="BP (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="997939" wikidata="Q257630" url="?curid=997939" title="Kindergarten Cop">
<text>Kindergarten Cop is a 1990 American action comedy film directed by Ivan Reitman and distributed by Universal Pictures. Arnold Schwarzenegger stars as John Kimble, a tough police detective working undercover as a kindergarten teacher to locate the wife and child of drug dealer Cullen Crisp (Richard Tyson), who are living under assumed identities. Pamela Reed, Penelope Ann Miller, and Linda Hunt co-star. The original music score was composed by Randy Edelman.

The film was released in North America on December 21, 1990, and grossed $202 million worldwide. Critical reception was mixed, though Schwarzenegger earned praise for his comedic abilities and willingness to subvert the action-hero image that had defined his career.

==Plot==
After years of pursuing Cullen Crisp, an infamous drug lord, LAPD detective John Kimble arrests Crisp for murder, when a call woman named Cindy witnesses Crisp gun down an informant in the back of a shopping mall after getting information regarding the whereabouts of his former wife, Rachel, who he claims stole $3 million from him, before fleeing with his son Cullen Crisp Jr, and obtaining new identities for them.

Partnered with fellow detective Phoebe O&#x27;Hara, Kimble is sent to Astoria, Oregon to identify Rachel and offer her immunity in exchange for testifying against Crisp in court. O&#x27;Hara is tasked with finding Rachel via her son by posing as a newly hired substitute teacher in kindergarten class at Astoria Elementary School. Both of them get to know each other – Kimble is divorced and has a son named Alex who is 13 years old, whom he has not spoken to in years after his ex-wife remarried; and O&#x27;Hara is dating a chef – and become friends. However, she is incapacitated by severe stomach flu, so Kimble is forced to step in as the teacher.

The school principal, Miss Schlowski, initially suspects Kimble&#x27;s ineptitude. Though initially overwhelmed, Kimble adapts to his new status quickly, despite lacking any formal teaching experience. Through the use of his pet ferret as a class mascot, positive reinforcement for good behavior, and his police training as a model for structure in class, he becomes a much admired and cherished figure to the students. O&#x27;Hara recovers, and poses as Kimble&#x27;s sister from Austria to assist him in the investigation.

Kimble begins to enjoy his undercover role. At one point, he deals with a case of child abuse by assaulting, threatening, and pressing charges against the abusive father of one of his students (Zach), winning over Schlowski. She assures him that despite his unorthodox methods, she is impressed with Kimble&#x27;s performance and thus does not fire him. Kimble also becomes fond of Joyce, a fellow teacher whose son Dominic is one of his students. Dominic admires Kimble and sees him as a fatherly figure, as his mother is estranged from her husband and will not speak of him, telling Dominic that he lives in France and that she left him after seeing his true colors, refusing to elaborate.

Through their conversations, Kimble deduces that Joyce is actually Rachel and that Dominic is Cullen Jr. Back in California, the case holding Crisp in jail is closed after Cindy dies from using tainted cocaine provided by Crisp&#x27;s mother and partner-in-crime, Eleanor. With no witness, Crisp is subsequently released and travels to Astoria with Eleanor to search for his son. When Kimble learns this news, he confronts Rachel about her identity, saying he can protect her if she cooperates. She is outraged that he misled her, but she reveals that Crisp lied about the stolen money; in order to convince drug dealers to hunt them down.

Crisp arrives at the school and starts a fire in the library as a distraction to kidnap his son, then uses the boy as a hostage when Kimble arrives, intending on capturing him. Just as Crisp declares his intentions and prepares to shoot Kimble; Kimble&#x27;s ferret (which was hiding in Dominic&#x27;s sweater) bites Crisp in the neck, allowing Dominic to escape. In pain, Crisp shoots at Kimble, hitting him in the leg, to which Kimble shoots Crisp three times in the chest, killing him. Outside, Eleanor strikes O&#x27;Hara with her car and runs inside. She shoots Kimble in the shoulder and demands he tell her where her grandson is, but at the last second, O&#x27;Hara appears and knocks Eleanor unconscious with a baseball bat. Eleanor is then arrested, and the unconscious Kimble is hospitalized alongside O&#x27;Hara, both of them going on to make a full recovery.

O&#x27;Hara returns to the LAPD, while Kimble decides to resign and stays in Astoria to become a full-time kindergarten teacher at the school. Joyce joins him and they share a kiss while everyone cheers.

==Cast==

==Production==
===Casting===
Bill Murray and Patrick Swayze were initially approached to play the role of Kimble. Danny DeVito was also considered for the role, but Ivan Reitman nixed the idea as he felt DeVito&#x27;s height would make him seem less believable as Kimble. Ultimately, Devito&#x27;s former costar from &quot;Twins&quot;, Arnold Schwarzenegger, was chosen for the part.

Director Reitman and casting director Michael Chinich auditioned more than 2,000 children for the roles of the students. Elijah Wood unsuccessfully auditioned for a role.

===Filming===
Exterior scenes at Astoria Elementary School were filmed at John Jacob Astor Elementary School, located at 3550 Franklin Avenue in Astoria, Oregon.

Universal Studios hired local artists Judith Niland and Carl Lyle Jenkins to paint murals on the walls at Astoria, and provided new playground equipment, a fenced playground, and a new lawn and hedges around the school. Most of the filming was completed after school was out in June 1990, allowing many of the students and faculty to be extras in the film. Students&#x27; artwork was also used. While on location, Schwarzenegger insisted a private studio for daily workouts and weightlifting be assembled for his use.

Other locations used in or near Astoria include the Bayview Motel, Commercial Street in downtown Astoria, and exteriors outside the Seafare Restaurant on Industry Street. The school picnic was filmed at Ecola State Park near Cannon Beach, Oregon, south of Astoria. Scenes at Joyce and Dominic&#x27;s house were filmed at a private residence located at 414 Exchange Street and highway scenes were filmed on U.S. 26 east of Seaside, Oregon, from Astoria.

Interior school scenes were shot at Universal Studios in Hollywood. The film&#x27;s opening scene was filmed at the Westfield MainPlace in Santa Ana, California, and South Coast Plaza in Costa Mesa, California.

==Music==
 


==Reception==

===Box office===
&quot;Kindergarten Cop&quot; was the second-highest grossing film, behind &quot;Home Alone&quot;, during the week of January 8, 1991. It grossed $91.4 million in North America and $101.5 million internationally. It was released in the United Kingdom on February 1, 1991, and topped the country&#x27;s box office that weekend.

===Critical response===
On Rotten Tomatoes, &quot;Kindergarten Cop&quot; has a rating of 54% based on 39 reviews and an average rating of 5.60/10. The site&#x27;s consensus reads, &quot;Arnold Schwarzenegger substitutes his action brio with some refreshingly adept comedic timing, but &quot;Kindergarten Cop&quot; is too grim for children and too cloying for adults.&quot; On Metacritic, it has a score of 61 out of 100 based on 15 critics, indicating &quot;generally favorable reviews&quot;. Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave it an average grade of &quot;A−&quot; on an A+ to F scale. Reviewer Caryn James of &quot;The New York Times&quot; said, &quot;Like &quot;Twins&quot;, which was also directed by Ivan Reitman, nothing in the film is as funny as the idea of it.&quot;

In Kim Newman&#x27;s review for &quot;Empire&quot;, he wrote, &quot;with a heart of purest mush, the film still manages to be generally entertaining&quot; and gave it 3 stars out of 5. An &quot;Entertainment Weekly&quot; review at the time of release notes that: &quot;the movie never quite gels and it is not going to generate quite the mega hit business their producers are counting on&quot;, giving it a &quot;C&quot; grade.

Roger Ebert said the film: &quot;is made up of two parts that shouldn&#x27;t fit, but somehow they do, making a slick entertainment out of the improbable, the impossible and Arnold Schwarzenegger&quot; and awarded it three stars.

On April Fool&#x27;s Day 2012, as a prank, the film was announced to be selected for a release on DVD and Blu-ray Disc as part of the Criterion Collection, a video distribution company dedicated to the release of &quot;important classic and contemporary films&quot;. It was said to be selected as important in part because of its genre revisionist use of both the policier and family comedy genres in the same film. It was released on Blu-ray, though not by Criterion, on July 1, 2014.

===Legacy===
For the video game &quot;Silent Hill&quot;, parts of Astoria Elementary School from the film were used as reference for the location Midwich Elementary School. Several of Schwarzenegger&#x27;s memorable lines from the film were used in sound boards for prank phone calls that became popular in the early 2000s. During an April 2021 interview on &quot;Jimmy Kimmel Live!&quot;, Schwarzenegger stated that the idea behind the making of &quot;Superhero Kindergarten&quot; came from his desire &quot;to do a sequel to &quot;Kindergarten Cop&quot;&quot;.

A 1996 Filipino action comedy movie &quot;Ang Titser Kong Pogi&quot; (lit. &quot;My Handsome Teacher&quot;) is a remake of &quot;Kindergarten Cop&quot;, starring Bong Revilla in a title role.

==Sequel==

A standalone sequel starring Dolph Lundgren, &quot;Kindergarten Cop 2&quot;, was released direct to DVD in May 2016.

==See also==

* Arnold Schwarzenegger filmography
* List of American films of 1990
* &quot;Olympian Anthony Adam&quot;, an Indian film with a similar plot

==References==
==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2678111" start="36" end="54" title="action comedy film" label="action comedy film"/>
<link wikidata="Q380272" start="67" end="79" title="Ivan Reitman" label="Ivan Reitman"/>
<link wikidata="Q168383" start="99" end="117" title="Universal Pictures" label="Universal Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q2685" start="119" end="140" title="Arnold Schwarzenegger" label="Arnold Schwarzenegger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189410" start="291" end="304" title="Richard Tyson" label="Richard Tyson"/>
<link wikidata="Q271763" start="348" end="359" title="Pamela Reed" label="Pamela Reed"/>
<link wikidata="Q235002" start="361" end="380" title="Penelope Ann Miller" label="Penelope Ann Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q232874" start="386" end="396" title="Linda Hunt" label="Linda Hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q954231" start="447" end="460" title="Randy Edelman" label="Randy Edelman"/>
<link wikidata="Q844924" start="790" end="799" title="Illegal drug trade" label="drug lord"/>
<link wikidata="Q214126" start="801" end="805" title="Los Angeles Police Department" label="LAPD"/>
<link wikidata="Q490724" start="1229" end="1244" title="Astoria, Oregon" label="Astoria, Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6005469" start="1278" end="1286" title="Immunity from prosecution (international law)" label="immunity"/>
<link wikidata="Q156103" start="1752" end="1763" title="stomach flu" label="stomach flu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2015382" start="1884" end="1894" title="Competence (human resources)" label="ineptitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q178973" start="2042" end="2048" title="ferret" label="ferret"/>
<link wikidata="Q29250" start="4790" end="4801" title="Bill Murray" label="Bill Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q49004" start="4806" end="4820" title="Patrick Swayze" label="Patrick Swayze"/>
<link wikidata="Q26806" start="4875" end="4887" title="Danny DeVito" label="Danny DeVito"/>
<link wikidata="Q785157" start="5084" end="5089" title="Twins (1988 movie)" label="Twins"/>
<link wikidata="Q483771" start="5267" end="5278" title="Elijah Wood" label="Elijah Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q490724" start="5463" end="5478" title="Astoria, Oregon" label="Astoria, Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q168383" start="5481" end="5498" title="Universal Pictures" label="Universal Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q37935480" start="6203" end="6219" title="Ecola State Park" label="Ecola State Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q988747" start="6225" end="6245" title="Cannon Beach, Oregon" label="Cannon Beach, Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q408902" start="6406" end="6413" title="U.S. 26" label="U.S. 26"/>
<link wikidata="Q2624434" start="6422" end="6437" title="Seaside, Oregon" label="Seaside, Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q168383" start="6490" end="6507" title="Universal Pictures" label="Universal Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988712" start="6570" end="6589" title="Westfield MainPlace" label="Westfield MainPlace"/>
<link wikidata="Q49244" start="6593" end="6614" title="Santa Ana, California" label="Santa Ana, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027465" start="6620" end="6637" title="South Coast Plaza" label="South Coast Plaza"/>
<link wikidata="Q499196" start="6641" end="6663" title="Costa Mesa, California" label="Costa Mesa, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q105031" start="6792" end="6802" title="Home Alone (film)" label="Home Alone"/>
<link wikidata="Q105584" start="7066" end="7081" title="Rotten Tomatoes" label="Rotten Tomatoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q150248" start="7415" end="7425" title="Metacritic" label="Metacritic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2972775" start="7552" end="7563" title="CinemaScore" label="CinemaScore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046243" start="7637" end="7648" title="Caryn James" label="Caryn James"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="7658" end="7676" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q785157" start="7706" end="7711" title="Twins (1988 film)" label="Twins"/>
<link wikidata="Q717204" start="7821" end="7831" title="Kim Newman" label="Kim Newman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122760" start="7856" end="7862" title="Empire (magazine)" label="Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q275033" start="8012" end="8032" title="Entertainment Weekly" label="Entertainment Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q212173" start="8247" end="8258" title="Roger Ebert" label="Roger Ebert"/>
<link wikidata="Q80949" start="8481" end="8502" title="April Fool&amp;#x27;s Day" label="April Fool&amp;#x27;s Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294" start="8576" end="8579" title="DVD" label="DVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q47770" start="8584" end="8596" title="Blu-ray Disc" label="Blu-ray Disc"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204187" start="8612" end="8632" title="The Criterion Collection" label="Criterion Collection"/>
<link wikidata="Q2321734" start="8842" end="8850" title="police procedural" label="policier"/>
<link wikidata="Q753164" start="9003" end="9014" title="Silent Hill (video game)" label="Silent Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394256" start="9231" end="9248" title="Prank call" label="prank phone calls"/>
<link wikidata="Q1315167" start="9329" end="9347" title="Jimmy Kimmel Live!" label="Jimmy Kimmel Live!"/>
<link wikidata="Q106726824" start="9418" end="9440" title="Superhero Kindergarten" label="Superhero Kindergarten"/>
<link wikidata="Q919045" start="9691" end="9703" title="Bong Revilla" label="Bong Revilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q181678" start="9763" end="9777" title="Dolph Lundgren" label="Dolph Lundgren"/>
<link wikidata="Q777740" start="9868" end="9901" title="Arnold Schwarzenegger filmography" label="Arnold Schwarzenegger filmography"/>
<link wikidata="Q6561553" start="9904" end="9934" title="List of American films of 1990" label="List of American films of 1990"/>
<link wikidata="Q7089205" start="9943" end="9964" title="Olympian Anthony Adam" label="Olympian Anthony Adam"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="997944" wikidata="Q5419826" url="?curid=997944" title="Executive Council of Saskatchewan">
<text>The [[Executive Council (Commonwealth countries)|Executive Council]] of [[Saskatchewan]] (informally and more commonly, the Cabinet of Saskatchewan) is the cabinet of that Canadian province.

Typically made up of members of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan (MLAs), the Cabinet is similar in structure and role to the Cabinet of Canada, although it is smaller in size. As federal and provincial responsibilities differ, there are a number of different portfolios between the federal and provincial governments.

The Lieutenant-Governor of Saskatchewan, as representative of the King in Right of Saskatchewan, formally heads the council. The lieutenant-governor does not normally attend its meetings and in practice the Premier of Saskatchewan is its most powerful member, although its documents are often referred to as being issued by the Governor-in-Council. Other members of the Cabinet, the ministers, are selected by the Premier of Saskatchewan and appointed by the Lieutenant-Governor. Most cabinet ministers are the heads of ministries, but this is not always the case.

As at the federal level, the most important Cabinet post after that of the Premier is Minister of Finance. The next most powerful position is, arguably, Minister of Health, since the Ministry has a vast budget and is of central political import. Other powerful portfolios include Justice, Education, and Energy and Resources. The government at times establishes and disbands particular ministries.

==Current Cabinet==
The current ministry has been in place since 2007, when the Saskatchewan Party won the general election of that year under the leadership of Brad Wall. The government was returned to office after the elections of 2011 and 2016. On February 2, 2018, Scott Moe succeeded Wall as Premier, and a new cabinet was formed. Moe&#x27;s government was returned to office after the elections of 2020 and 2024. The current cabinet was established on November 7, 2024, after the 2024 general election.

Members are listed in order of precedence.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5419826" start="4" end="88" title="Executive Council of Saskatchewan" label="[[Executive Council (Commonwealth countries)|Executive Council]] of [[Saskatchewan]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419826" start="124" end="147" title="Executive Council of Saskatchewan" label="Cabinet of Saskatchewan"/>
<link wikidata="Q640506" start="156" end="163" title="Cabinet (government)" label="cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2879" start="172" end="189" title="Provinces and territories of Canada" label="Canadian province"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537375" start="228" end="264" title="Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan" label="Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2458227" start="325" end="342" title="Cabinet of Canada" label="Cabinet of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q824823" start="523" end="558" title="Lieutenant-Governors of Saskatchewan" label="Lieutenant-Governor of Saskatchewan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6898070" start="585" end="614" title="Monarchy in Saskatchewan" label="King in Right of Saskatchewan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6578215" start="726" end="749" title="Premier of Saskatchewan" label="Premier of Saskatchewan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3271068" start="847" end="866" title="King-in-Council" label="Governor-in-Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q83307" start="902" end="911" title="Minister (government)" label="ministers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6578215" start="933" end="956" title="Premier of Saskatchewan" label="Premier of Saskatchewan"/>
<link wikidata="Q192350" start="1039" end="1049" title="Ministry (government department)" label="ministries"/>
<link wikidata="Q2225652" start="1564" end="1582" title="Saskatchewan Party" label="Saskatchewan Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q926085" start="1591" end="1607" title="2007 Saskatchewan general election" label="general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q437816" start="1645" end="1654" title="Brad Wall" label="Brad Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q597071" start="1717" end="1721" title="2011 Saskatchewan general election" label="2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q4632827" start="1726" end="1730" title="2016 Saskatchewan general election" label="2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q7436891" start="1753" end="1762" title="Scott Moe" label="Scott Moe"/>
<link wikidata="Q29561228" start="1888" end="1892" title="2020 Saskatchewan general election" label="2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q104875005" start="1897" end="1901" title="2024 Saskatchewan general election" label="2024"/>
<link wikidata="Q7100637" start="2016" end="2035" title="Order of precedence in Saskatchewan" label="order of precedence"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="997953" wikidata="Q350680" url="?curid=997953" title="Robert Ryan">
<text>Robert Bushnell Ryan (November 11, 1909 – July 11, 1973) was an American actor and activist. Known for his portrayals of hardened cops and ruthless villains, Ryan performed for over three decades. He was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor for his role in the film noir drama &quot;Crossfire&quot; (1947).

==Early life==
Ryan was born in Chicago, the first child of Mabel Arbutus (née Bushnell), a secretary, and Timothy Aloysius Ryan, who was from a wealthy family who owned a real estate firm. He was of Irish (his paternal grandparents were from Thurles) and English descent. Ryan was raised Catholic and educated at Loyola Academy.

He graduated from Dartmouth College in 1932, where he held the school&#x27;s heavyweight boxing title for all four years of his attendance, along with lettering in football and track. After graduation, Ryan found employment as a stoker on a ship that traveled to Africa, a WPA worker, a ranch hand in Montana, and other odd jobs.

He returned home in 1936 when his father died, and after a brief stint modeling clothes for a department store, he decided to become an actor.

==Career==
===Early appearances===
In 1937 Ryan joined a little theater group in Chicago. The following year he enrolled in the Max Reinhardt Workshop in Hollywood. His role in the 1939 play &quot;Too Many Husbands&quot; brought an offer from Paramount. Although he had done a screen test for them in 1938 and been turned down as &quot;not the right type&quot;, the studio offered him a $75 a week contract.

===Paramount===
In November 1939, Paramount signed Ryan to a six-month contract and announced he would play the lead in &quot;Golden Gloves&quot; (1940)&quot;,&quot; citing his boxing experience at Dartmouth. However, after a screen test with &quot;Gloves&quot; director Edward Dmytryk, the lead went to Richard Denning and Ryan was cast in a minor, but important role as a boxing &quot;ringer&quot;. He had his first credited role, while making a lasting association with the director in which they would make several films together.

In the same year, Ryan had small parts in &quot;The Ghost Breakers&quot; (1940) and &quot;Queen of the Mob&quot; (1940) as well as small roles in &quot;North West Mounted Police&quot; (1941) and &quot;Texas Rangers Ride Again&quot; (1941). Then Paramount dropped him.

He went to Broadway, where he was cast in a production of Clifford Odets&#x27; &quot;Clash by Night&quot; (1941–42), directed by Lee Strasberg and produced by Billy Rose starring Tallulah Bankhead and Lee J. Cobb. It had a run of 49 performances, but was high-profile and led to him being signed to a long-term contract by RKO.

===RKO===
Ryan appeared in &quot;Bombardier&quot; (1943), starring Pat O&#x27;Brien, and was fourth-billed in the Fred Astaire musical &quot;The Sky&#x27;s the Limit&quot; (1943), playing a friend of Astaire. Both films were popular.

He was fourth-billed in &quot;Behind the Rising Sun&quot; (1943), directed by Edward Dmytryk, which was a huge box-office success then third-billed in &quot;The Iron Major&quot; (1943), with O&#x27;Brien, and &quot;Gangway for Tomorrow&quot; (1943).

RKO promoted him to star status in &quot;Tender Comrade&quot; (1943), where he was Ginger Rogers&#x27; leading man, directed for the third time by Dmytryk. It was a big hit. Also popular was &quot;Marine Raiders&quot; (1944), in which Ryan co-starred again alongside O&#x27;Brien.

===World War II===
Ryan enlisted in the United States Marine Corps and served as a drill instructor from January 1944 to November 1945 at Camp Pendleton, in Southern California. There he befriended a fellow Marine, the writer and future film director Richard Brooks. He also took up painting.

===Return to acting===
When Ryan was discharged from the Marine Corps, he returned to RKO. They immediately cast Ryan in the Randolph Scott western, &quot;Trail Street&quot; (1947), which was very popular. However, his next film made with Joan Bennett, &quot;The Woman on the Beach&quot; (1947) directed by Jean Renoir, lost money.

Ryan&#x27;s breakthrough role was as an anti-Semitic killer in the Dmytryk-directed film noir &quot;Crossfire&quot; (1947), co-starring Robert Young, Robert Mitchum, and Gloria Grahame. The film was based on Richard Brooks&#x27;s novel &quot;The Brick Foxhole,&quot; which reflected the tensions of barracks life during the war—something familiar to both Brooks and Ryan from their Pendleton experience. &quot;Crossfire&quot; was highly successful at the box office and received several Academy Award nominations including a Best Supporting Actor for Ryan&#x27;s performance.

Ryan co-starred with Merle Oberon in &quot;Berlin Express&quot; (1948) for director Jacques Tourneur; it was the first movie made in Germany after the end of the second world war. He was reunited with Scott in &quot;Return of the Bad Men&quot; (1948), and with O&#x27;Brien in &quot;The Boy with Green Hair&quot; (1948). The latter film was directed by Joseph Losey and produced by Dore Schary, who was head of production at RKO.

MGM borrowed him to make &quot;Act of Violence&quot; (1948) for Fred Zinnemann. He stayed at that studio to make &quot;Caught&quot; (1949) for Max Ophuls with James Mason.

Back at RKO, Ryan had one of his best roles in &quot;The Set-Up&quot; (1949), directed by Robert Wise, as an over-the-hill boxer who is brutally punished for refusing to take a dive. &quot;The Set-Up&quot; was a favorite of Ryan&#x27;s. He was top billed in &quot;The Woman on Pier 13&quot; (1949), an anti-communist melodrama directed by Robert Stevenson, that was made at the prompting of RKO&#x27;s new owner, Howard Hughes.

Ryan next appeared in several film noirs: &quot;The Secret Fury&quot; (1950) with Claudette Colbert directed by Mel Ferrer, and &quot;Born to Be Bad&quot; (1950) directed by Nicholas Ray. In 1950, the studio bought &quot;The Miami Story&quot; as a vehicle for him.

He then made the Western &quot;Best of the Badmen&quot; (1951), and costarred with John Wayne in &quot;Flying Leathernecks&quot; (1951), a World War II film directed by Ray. It was announced he was working on an original film story called &quot;The Alpine Slide&quot; about avalanches, but no film resulted.
In 1951, Ryan was reunited with &quot;Crossfire&quot; costar Robert Mitchum in &quot;The Racket&quot;, directed by John Cromwell; that same year, Ray again directed him in a film noir, &quot;On Dangerous Ground&quot;, with Ida Lupino. Ryan then made the film adaptation of &quot;Clash by Night&quot; (1952) with Barbara Stanwyck and Marilyn Monroe under Fritz Lang&#x27;s direction. According to film critic David Thomson, &quot;at RKO Ryan created the character of a modern neurotic such as the American screen had not dreamed of before.&quot;

His last film at RKO for a number of years was &quot;Beware, My Lovely&quot; (1952) with Lupino, made for her production company.

===Post-RKO===

Ryan went to MGM where he played a villain in Anthony Mann&#x27;s western &quot;The Naked Spur&quot; (1953), starring James Stewart. The picture was very popular.

He appeared in &quot;City Beneath the Sea&quot; (1953) for Budd Boetticher at Universal, &quot;Inferno&quot; (1953) at Fox, and &quot;Alaska Seas&quot; (1954) at Paramount.

He was the leading man for Shirley Booth in &quot;About Mrs. Leslie&quot; (1954) and Greer Garson in &quot;Her Twelve Men &quot; (1954). The latter was made at MGM, now being run by Dore Schary, RKO&#x27;s previous studio head, who cast Ryan as the head villain in &quot;Bad Day at Black Rock&quot; (1954).

He appeared in an off-Broadway production of &quot;Coriolanus&quot; (1954) directed by John Houseman.

Ryan returned to RKO for &quot;Escape to Burma&quot; (1955) with Stanwyck. More widely seen was Sam Fuller&#x27;s &quot;House of Bamboo&quot; (1955) and Raoul Walsh&#x27;s &quot;The Tall Men&quot; (1955), both at Fox. By now his fee was reported as $150,000 per film.

He starred in &quot;The Proud Ones&quot; (1956) at Fox, &quot;Back from Eternity&quot; (1956) at RKO, directed by John Farrow. He appeared in &quot;Men in War&quot; (1957) for Anthony Mann, made at Mann&#x27;s company Security Pictures.

===Television===
Ryan made his television debut in 1955 as Abraham Lincoln in the &quot;Screen Director&#x27;s Playhouse&quot; adaptation of Christopher Morley&#x27;s story &quot;Lincoln&#x27;s Doctor&#x27;s Dog.&quot; As he explained to reporters, despite financial considerations, Ryan preferred to steer clear of any commitment to a TV series:
The only money in TV is in the series, and I want to stay out of those. Sure, I might make a million or so in a series, but I&#x27;d wind up being &#x27;Sidewinder Sam&#x27; for the rest of my life.

Ryan remained true to these convictions, appearing in many television series, but always as a guest star. He was in &quot;Screen Directors Playhouse&quot;, &quot;Mr. Adams and Eve&quot;, &quot;Goodyear Theatre&quot;, &quot;Alcoa Theatre&quot;, &quot;Playhouse 90&quot; (playing The Great Gatsby), and &quot;Zane Grey Theater&quot;.

He continued to star in features, however, including &quot;God&#x27;s Little Acre&quot; (1958) for Mann and Security Pictures, &quot;Lonelyhearts&quot; (1959) written and produced by Schary, &quot;Day of the Outlaw&quot; (1959) for Security Pictures, and &quot;Odds Against Tomorrow&quot; (1959) for Wise.

===1960s===
In the summer of 1960 Ryan starred opposite Katharine Hepburn at the American Shakespeare Theatre in Stratford, Connecticut, playing Antony to Hepburn&#x27;s Cleopatra.

Ryan remained in high demand throughout the 1960s: he appeared in &quot;Ice Palace&quot; (1960) with Richard Burton; a TV version of &quot;The Snows of Kilimanjaro&quot; directed by John Frankenheimer; &quot;The Canadians&quot; (1961) for Burt Kennedy; played John the Baptist in MGM&#x27;s Technicolor epic &quot;King of Kings&quot; (1961) for Nicholas Ray; was the villainous Claggart in Peter Ustinov&#x27;s adaptation of &quot;Billy Budd&quot; (1962) for which he was nominated for a BAFTA.

He also appeared in the all-star war film &quot;The Longest Day&quot; (1962), playing James M. Gavin.

Ryan returned to Broadway in the musical &quot;Mr. President&quot; (1962–63) by Lindsay and Crouse with music by Irving Berlin and directed by Joshua Logan; it ran for 263 performances.

Ryan continued to appear in TV shows such as &quot;Kraft Suspense Theatre,&quot; &quot;Breaking Point&quot;, &quot;The Eleventh Hour&quot;, &quot;Wagon Train&quot;, &quot;The Reporter&quot; and &quot;Bob Hope Presents the Chrysler Theatre&quot;. Ryan&#x27;s only partial concession to featuring in an entire television series was his role as Narrator in CBS&#x27;s 26-episode acclaimed documentary homage to &quot;World War One&quot;, released in prime-time during the 1964–65 season.

Ryan was considered for a role in Gene Roddenberry&#x27;s &quot;Star Trek.&quot; Norman Spinrad had written the script of the 1967 episode &quot;The Doomsday Machine&quot; with Ryan in mind to play Commodore Matt Decker, but Ryan had prior commitments. That role went to William Windom.

===Europe===
Ryan could be seen in &quot;The Crooked Road&quot; (1965) and &quot;The Secret Agents&quot; (1965), then the all-star &quot;Battle of the Bulge&quot; (1965) for Phil Yordan and &quot;The Professionals&quot; (1966) for Brooks.

Ryan supported Sid Caesar in &quot;The Busy Body&quot; (1967) and had a key supporting part in &quot;The Dirty Dozen&quot; (1967) for Robert Aldrich and &quot;Hour of the Gun&quot; (1967), playing Ike Clanton for John Sturges.

Ryan played Othello (1967) in a regional production at Nottingham, England.

Ryan went to Europe for &quot;A Minute to Pray, A Second to Die&quot; (1968) and &quot;Anzio&quot; (1969) for Dmytryk. Ryan had the lead in &quot;Captain Nemo and the Underwater City&quot; (1969).

Along with William Holden and Ernest Borgnine, Ryan was goaded by Sam Peckinpah during the making of &quot;The Wild Bunch&quot; (1969). After production in Mexico moved from Parras to Torreón, his request to take a few days off to campaign for Eugene McCarthy during the 1968 Democratic Party presidential primaries was denied by Peckinpah. In his biography &quot;Golden Boy: The Untold Story of William Holden&quot;, Bob Thomas wrote, &quot;For ten days, Ryan reported to the set in makeup and costume. He never played a scene. Finally he grabbed Peckinpah by the shirtfront and growled, &#x27;I&#x27;ll do anything you ask me to do in front of the camera, because I&#x27;m a professional. But you open your mouth to me off the set, and I&#x27;ll knock your teeth in.

Ryan returned to the stage in a revival of &quot;The Front Page&quot;. It was one of the earlier productions developed by the Plumstead Playhouse (later the Plumstead Theatre Company), a Long Island-based repertory company founded by Ryan, Martha Scott and Henry Fonda; the following winter, a film of the production (produced jointly by MPC and Plumstead) was broadcast nationally over the upstart Hughes TV Network.

In 1970 Ryan, a heavy smoker, discovered he had inoperable cancer of the lymph glands. He decided to keep working, and said, &quot;I&#x27;ve had a good shot at life.&quot;

===Final films===

Ryan supported Burt Lancaster in &quot;Lawman&quot; (1971) and John Phillip Law in &quot;The Love Machine&quot; (1971). He appeared in &quot;And Hope to Die&quot; (1971) with Jean-Louis Trintignant for René Clément.

In April 1971, Ryan returned to the stage to play James Tyrone in Arvin Brown&#x27;s critically acclaimed Off-Broadway production of &quot;Long Day&#x27;s Journey into Night&quot;.

He originally refused the lead in &quot;Lolly-Madonna XXX&quot; (1973) with Rod Steiger because he wanted to take his wife to Europe, but she died of cancer in May 1972, and he ended up playing the part. &quot;Something very big is missing and I don&#x27;t know what to put in its place,&quot; he said.

Ryan&#x27;s final roles included: &quot;The Man Without a Country&quot; (1973), a TV movie for Delbert Mann; &quot;The Outfit&quot; (1973) with Robert Duvall; &quot;Executive Action&quot; (1973) with Lancaster, from a script by Dalton Trumbo; and a version of &quot;The Iceman Cometh&quot; (1973) with Lee Marvin and director Frankenheimer. Ryan, who died before the latter&#x27;s premiere, won the Kansas City Film Critics Circle Award for Best Supporting Actor, the National Board of Review Award for Best Actor (in a tie with Al Pacino, for &quot;Serpico&quot;), and a special award from the National Society of Film Critics. &quot;The Iceman Cometh&quot; and &quot;Executive Action&quot; both were released in November 1973, after Ryan&#x27;s death.

Ryan had signed to appear in a stage musical version of &quot;Shenandoah&quot; when he died.

==Politics==
Though Ryan served in the military, he came to share the pacifist views of his wife Jessica, who was a Quaker.

In the late 1940s, as the House Committee on Un-American Activities (HUAC) intensified its anti-Communist attacks on Hollywood, he joined the short-lived Committee for the First Amendment. Throughout the 1950s, he donated money and services to civic and religious organizations such as the American Civil Liberties Union, American Friends Service Committee, and United World Federalists. In September 1959, he and Steve Allen became founding co-chairs of The Committee for a SANE Nuclear Policy&#x27;s Hollywood chapter.

By the mid-1960s, Ryan&#x27;s political activities included efforts to fight racial discrimination. He served in the cultural division of the Committee to Defend Martin Luther King Jr., and helped organize the short-lived Artists Help All Blacks, with Bill Cosby, Robert Culp, Sidney Poitier, and several other actors.

Ryan often spoke about the dichotomy of his personal beliefs and his acting roles. At a screening of &quot;Odds Against Tomorrow&quot;, he appeared before the press to discuss &quot;the problems of an actor like me playing the kind of character that in real life he finds totally despicable.&quot; Ryan&#x27;s roles as cynical, prejudiced, violent characters, often ran counter to the causes he embraced. He was a pacifist who starred in war movies, westerns, and violent thrillers. He was an opponent of McCarthyism, but appeared in the anti-communist propaganda film &quot;I Married a Communist&quot;, playing a nefarious communist agent. In socially progressive films such as &quot;Crossfire&quot;, &quot;Bad Day at Black Rock&quot;, &quot;Odds Against Tomorrow&quot; and &quot;Executive Action&quot;, he played bigoted villains or conspirators.

==Personal life==
On March 11, 1939, he married Jessica Cadwalader. They had three children: Timothy (b. 1946); Cheyney (b. 1948), a research fellow at Oxford University and a professor of philosophy and law at the University of Oregon; and Lisa (b. 1951). They lived in the Dakota at 72nd and Central Park West in Manhattan and eventually sub-let and later sold the apartment to John Lennon and Yoko Ono.

In the fall of 1951, the progressive Oakwood School was opened in Jessica and Robert Ryan&#x27;s backyard in Los Angeles; founded by a small group of parents, created and based on their educational and child-rearing views. Three years later, the parents, including the Ryans, Sidney Harmon, Elizabeth Schappert, Wendy and Ross Cabeen, and Charles and Emilie Haas, bought and built the elementary school campus on Moorpark Street in Los Angeles&#x27;s San Fernando Valley.

Robert and Jessica remained married until her death from cancer in 1972. He died from lung cancer in New York City the following year at the age of 63.

&quot;I&#x27;ve been lucky as hell with my career and my family,&quot; he said shortly before he died.

==Appraisal==

According to one profile of him written after his death:
Born to play beautifully tortured, angry souls... Ryan was a familiar movie face for more than two decades in Hollywood&#x27;s classical years, his studio ups and downs, independent detours and outlier adventures paralleling the arc of American cinema as it went from a national pastime to near collapse. A little prettier and he might have been one of the golden boys of the golden age. But there could be something a touch menacing about his face (something open and sweet too), which bunched as tight as a fist, and his towering height (he stood 6 foot 4) at times loomed like a threat. The rage boiled up in him so quickly. It made him seem dangerous. He was known for his villains, and it was the complexity of these characters, their emotional and psychological kinks, that elevated even his lesser roles. He never achieved the supernova stardom of a Gable or Bogart, and these days Ryan&#x27;s glower may be more familiar than his name. Yet he was the type of next-level star and B-movie stalwart that helped make old Hollywood great.

== Filmography ==
==References==
==Further reading==
*Othman, Frederick C. &quot;Hollywood Reporter&quot;. &quot;The Middlesboro Daily News&quot;. August 23, 1943.
*UP. &quot;Robert Ryan Isn&#x27;t Sure He Can Afford Stardom&quot;. &quot;The Milwaukee Journal&quot;. November 19, 1947.
*AP. &quot;Robert Ryan: A Friend of the Underdog&quot;. &quot;The Pittsburgh Post-Gazette&quot;. September 14, 1948.
*&quot;Robert Ryan&#x27;s Advice to Would-Be Actors&quot;. &quot;The Deseret News&quot;. November 30, 1951.
*Finnigan, Joseph. &quot;Actor Robert Ryan Set to Find His Relatives&quot;. &quot;The Palm Beach Post&quot;. July 4, 1961.
*Pack, Harvey. &quot;Bob Ryan Shines on TV and Stage&quot;. &quot;The Toledo Blade&quot;. June 23, 1969.
*Otterburn-Hall, William. &quot;Robert Ryan Recalls First Trip to Durango&quot;. &quot;The Saskatoon Star-Phoenix&quot;. June 6, 1970.
*Thomas, Bob. &quot;Robert Ryan Fights Back After Tragic Two Years&quot;. &quot;The Milwaukee Journal&quot;. August 25, 1972.
*Jones, J.R. &quot;The Actor&#x27;s Letter: A Reminiscence by Film Noir Icon Robert Ryan&quot;. &quot;The Chicago Reader&quot;. October 29, 2009.
*Dargis, Manohla. &quot;Robert Ryan&#x27;s Quiet Furies&quot;. &quot;The New York Times&quot;. August 5, 2011.
*Kennedy, Harold J. &quot;No Pickle, No Performance. An Irreverent Theatrical Excursion from Tallulah to Travolta&quot;. New York, Doubleday &amp; Co., 1978. pp. 124–148

== External links ==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q350680" start="0" end="20" title="Robert Ryan" label="Robert Bushnell Ryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q106291" start="222" end="261" title="Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor" label="Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor"/>
<link wikidata="Q185867" start="282" end="291" title="film noir" label="film noir"/>
<link wikidata="Q632718" start="304" end="313" title="Crossfire (film)" label="Crossfire"/>
<link wikidata="Q383188" start="572" end="579" title="Thurles" label="Thurles"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="618" end="626" title="Catholic" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6694532" start="643" end="657" title="Loyola Academy" label="Loyola Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q49116" start="678" end="695" title="Dartmouth College" label="Dartmouth College"/>
<link wikidata="Q281678" start="737" end="755" title="heavyweight boxing" label="heavyweight boxing"/>
<link wikidata="Q6533680" start="811" end="820" title="Letterman (sports)" label="lettering"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109032" start="824" end="832" title="college football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q3312129" start="837" end="842" title="track and field" label="track"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200079" start="933" end="936" title="Works Progress Administration" label="WPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q78639" start="1263" end="1276" title="Max Reinhardt" label="Max Reinhardt"/>
<link wikidata="Q159846" start="1578" end="1587" title="Paramount Pictures" label="Paramount"/>
<link wikidata="Q2057539" start="1670" end="1683" title="Golden Gloves (1940 film)" label="Golden Gloves"/>
<link wikidata="Q72229" start="1815" end="1829" title="Edward Dmytryk" label="Edward Dmytryk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379341" start="1848" end="1863" title="Richard Denning" label="Richard Denning"/>
<link wikidata="Q2088441" start="2128" end="2146" title="The Ghost Breakers" label="The Ghost Breakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270656" start="2170" end="2186" title="Queen of the Mob" label="Queen of the Mob"/>
<link wikidata="Q963688" start="2232" end="2257" title="North West Mounted Police (film)" label="North West Mounted Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q19881241" start="2281" end="2305" title="Texas Rangers Ride Again" label="Texas Rangers Ride Again"/>
<link wikidata="Q734944" start="2407" end="2421" title="Clifford Odets" label="Clifford Odets"/>
<link wikidata="Q16385300" start="2434" end="2448" title="Clash by Night (play)" label="Clash by Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q297945" start="2478" end="2491" title="Lee Strasberg" label="Lee Strasberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q448948" start="2508" end="2518" title="Billy Rose" label="Billy Rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q255815" start="2528" end="2545" title="Tallulah Bankhead" label="Tallulah Bankhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q348351" start="2550" end="2561" title="Lee J. Cobb" label="Lee J. Cobb"/>
<link wikidata="Q267282" start="2672" end="2675" title="RKO Pictures" label="RKO"/>
<link wikidata="Q4121019" start="2711" end="2721" title="Bombardier (film)" label="Bombardier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790788" start="2745" end="2761" title="Pat O&amp;#x27;Brien (actor)" label="Pat O&amp;#x27;Brien"/>
<link wikidata="Q7764665" start="2819" end="2843" title="The Sky&amp;#x27;s the Limit (1943 film)" label="The Sky&amp;#x27;s the Limit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2601541" start="2943" end="2964" title="Behind the Rising Sun (film)" label="Behind the Rising Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q18389882" start="3070" end="3084" title="The Iron Major" label="The Iron Major"/>
<link wikidata="Q5521278" start="3128" end="3148" title="Gangway for Tomorrow" label="Gangway for Tomorrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1848202" start="3205" end="3219" title="Tender Comrade" label="Tender Comrade"/>
<link wikidata="Q95089" start="3247" end="3260" title="Ginger Rogers" label="Ginger Rogers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6764205" start="3361" end="3375" title="Marine Raiders (film)" label="Marine Raiders"/>
<link wikidata="Q11218" start="3486" end="3512" title="United States Marine Corps" label="United States Marine Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q5307556" start="3529" end="3545" title="drill instructor" label="drill instructor"/>
<link wikidata="Q195334" start="3584" end="3598" title="Camp Pendleton" label="Camp Pendleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q844837" start="3603" end="3622" title="Southern California" label="Southern California"/>
<link wikidata="Q434342" start="3697" end="3711" title="Richard Brooks" label="Richard Brooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q295984" start="3865" end="3879" title="Randolph Scott" label="Randolph Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q7832736" start="3895" end="3907" title="Trail Street" label="Trail Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q1762509" start="3999" end="4021" title="The Woman on the Beach" label="The Woman on the Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q50713" start="4047" end="4058" title="Jean Renoir" label="Jean Renoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q22649" start="4113" end="4125" title="anti-Semitic" label="anti-Semitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q632718" start="4173" end="4182" title="Crossfire (film)" label="Crossfire"/>
<link wikidata="Q16472" start="4223" end="4237" title="Robert Mitchum" label="Robert Mitchum"/>
<link wikidata="Q59314" start="4243" end="4257" title="Gloria Grahame" label="Gloria Grahame"/>
<link wikidata="Q106291" start="4598" end="4619" title="Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor" label="Best Supporting Actor"/>
<link wikidata="Q230958" start="4671" end="4683" title="Merle Oberon" label="Merle Oberon"/>
<link wikidata="Q821062" start="4693" end="4707" title="Berlin Express" label="Berlin Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q55393" start="4734" end="4750" title="Jacques Tourneur" label="Jacques Tourneur"/>
<link wikidata="Q3066743" start="4866" end="4887" title="Return of the Bad Men" label="Return of the Bad Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q2396738" start="4933" end="4956" title="The Boy with Green Hair" label="The Boy with Green Hair"/>
<link wikidata="Q269357" start="5003" end="5015" title="Joseph Losey" label="Joseph Losey"/>
<link wikidata="Q457497" start="5032" end="5043" title="Dore Schary" label="Dore Schary"/>
<link wikidata="Q421750" start="5112" end="5127" title="Act of Violence (film)" label="Act of Violence"/>
<link wikidata="Q55420" start="5145" end="5159" title="Fred Zinnemann" label="Fred Zinnemann"/>
<link wikidata="Q2162940" start="5200" end="5206" title="Caught (1949 film)" label="Caught"/>
<link wikidata="Q55410" start="5224" end="5234" title="Max Ophuls" label="Max Ophuls"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570221" start="5307" end="5317" title="The Set-Up (1949 film)" label="The Set-Up"/>
<link wikidata="Q59821" start="5344" end="5355" title="Robert Wise" label="Robert Wise"/>
<link wikidata="Q3835818" start="5518" end="5538" title="The Woman on Pier 13" label="The Woman on Pier 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q725060" start="5593" end="5609" title="Robert Stevenson (director)" label="Robert Stevenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q189081" start="5667" end="5680" title="Howard Hughes" label="Howard Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7763007" start="5731" end="5746" title="The Secret Fury" label="The Secret Fury"/>
<link wikidata="Q203819" start="5765" end="5782" title="Claudette Colbert" label="Claudette Colbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q333475" start="5795" end="5805" title="Mel Ferrer" label="Mel Ferrer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2336835" start="5817" end="5831" title="Born to Be Bad (1950 film)" label="Born to Be Bad"/>
<link wikidata="Q240677" start="5857" end="5869" title="Nicholas Ray" label="Nicholas Ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q10729295" start="5980" end="5998" title="Best of the Badmen" label="Best of the Badmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q40531" start="6032" end="6042" title="John Wayne" label="John Wayne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2303335" start="6052" end="6071" title="Flying Leathernecks" label="Flying Leathernecks"/>
<link wikidata="Q16472" start="6318" end="6332" title="Robert Mitchum" label="Robert Mitchum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3283636" start="6342" end="6352" title="The Racket (1951 film)" label="The Racket"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348309" start="6372" end="6385" title="John Cromwell (director)" label="John Cromwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1634259" start="6448" end="6467" title="On Dangerous Ground" label="On Dangerous Ground"/>
<link wikidata="Q148669" start="6480" end="6490" title="Ida Lupino" label="Ida Lupino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1766802" start="6536" end="6550" title="Clash by Night" label="Clash by Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q94002" start="6569" end="6585" title="Barbara Stanwyck" label="Barbara Stanwyck"/>
<link wikidata="Q4616" start="6590" end="6604" title="Marilyn Monroe" label="Marilyn Monroe"/>
<link wikidata="Q19504" start="6611" end="6621" title="Fritz Lang" label="Fritz Lang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1176847" start="6665" end="6678" title="David Thomson (film critic)" label="David Thomson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060292" start="6856" end="6873" title="Beware, My Lovely" label="Beware, My Lovely"/>
<link wikidata="Q269975" start="6996" end="7008" title="Anthony Mann" label="Anthony Mann"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275343" start="7030" end="7044" title="The Naked Spur" label="The Naked Spur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216441" start="7135" end="7155" title="City Beneath the Sea (1953 film)" label="City Beneath the Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q51466" start="7173" end="7188" title="Budd Boetticher" label="Budd Boetticher"/>
<link wikidata="Q168383" start="7192" end="7201" title="Universal Pictures" label="Universal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6029509" start="7209" end="7216" title="Inferno (1953 film)" label="Inferno"/>
<link wikidata="Q4708599" start="7248" end="7259" title="Alaska Seas" label="Alaska Seas"/>
<link wikidata="Q253308" start="7315" end="7328" title="Shirley Booth" label="Shirley Booth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3605112" start="7338" end="7355" title="About Mrs. Leslie" label="About Mrs. Leslie"/>
<link wikidata="Q182486" start="7373" end="7385" title="Greer Garson" label="Greer Garson"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7395" end="7410" title="Her Twelve Men " label="Her Twelve Men "/>
<link wikidata="Q457497" start="7470" end="7481" title="Dore Schary" label="Dore Schary"/>
<link wikidata="Q963045" start="7559" end="7580" title="Bad Day at Black Rock" label="Bad Day at Black Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q463126" start="7647" end="7657" title="Coriolanus" label="Coriolanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q315734" start="7683" end="7696" title="John Houseman" label="John Houseman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235186" start="7730" end="7745" title="Escape to Burma" label="Escape to Burma"/>
<link wikidata="Q262479" start="7795" end="7805" title="Sam Fuller" label="Sam Fuller"/>
<link wikidata="Q2602267" start="7819" end="7834" title="House of Bamboo" label="House of Bamboo"/>
<link wikidata="Q72756" start="7852" end="7863" title="Raoul Walsh" label="Raoul Walsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2405331" start="7877" end="7889" title="The Tall Men (film)" label="The Tall Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q3227157" start="7988" end="8002" title="The Proud Ones" label="The Proud Ones"/>
<link wikidata="Q498384" start="8030" end="8048" title="Back from Eternity" label="Back from Eternity"/>
<link wikidata="Q547495" start="8082" end="8093" title="John Farrow" label="John Farrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2998526" start="8116" end="8126" title="Men in War" label="Men in War"/>
<link wikidata="Q91" start="8265" end="8280" title="Abraham Lincoln" label="Abraham Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q3221319" start="8294" end="8326" title="Screen Director&amp;#x27;s Playhouse" label="Screen Director&amp;#x27;s Playhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q931105" start="8347" end="8365" title="Christopher Morley" label="Christopher Morley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3221319" start="8875" end="8901" title="Screen Directors Playhouse" label="Screen Directors Playhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q3866759" start="8915" end="8932" title="Mr. Adams and Eve" label="Mr. Adams and Eve"/>
<link wikidata="Q3110741" start="8946" end="8962" title="Goodyear Theatre" label="Goodyear Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3609026" start="8976" end="8989" title="Alcoa Theatre" label="Alcoa Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248532" start="9003" end="9015" title="Playhouse 90" label="Playhouse 90"/>
<link wikidata="Q214371" start="9031" end="9047" title="The Great Gatsby" label="The Great Gatsby"/>
<link wikidata="Q130301699" start="9060" end="9077" title="Zane Grey Theater" label="Zane Grey Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q5575719" start="9145" end="9167" title="God&amp;#x27;s Little Acre (film)" label="God&amp;#x27;s Little Acre"/>
<link wikidata="Q494331" start="9219" end="9231" title="Lonelyhearts (film)" label="Lonelyhearts"/>
<link wikidata="Q3207329" start="9283" end="9300" title="Day of the Outlaw" label="Day of the Outlaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q2855809" start="9347" end="9368" title="Odds Against Tomorrow" label="Odds Against Tomorrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q56016" start="9449" end="9466" title="Katharine Hepburn" label="Katharine Hepburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q4744973" start="9474" end="9502" title="American Shakespeare Theatre" label="American Shakespeare Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3230887" start="9647" end="9657" title="Ice Palace (film)" label="Ice Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q15587387" start="9714" end="9738" title="The Snows of Kilimanjaro (short story)" label="The Snows of Kilimanjaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q262820" start="9757" end="9775" title="John Frankenheimer" label="John Frankenheimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1219189" start="9783" end="9796" title="The Canadians (1961 film)" label="The Canadians"/>
<link wikidata="Q786712" start="9814" end="9826" title="Burt Kennedy" label="Burt Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q40662" start="9835" end="9851" title="John the Baptist" label="John the Baptist"/>
<link wikidata="Q179200" start="9855" end="9858" title="MGM" label="MGM"/>
<link wikidata="Q762927" start="9889" end="9902" title="King of Kings (1961 film)" label="King of Kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q55796" start="9965" end="9978" title="Peter Ustinov" label="Peter Ustinov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121916" start="10006" end="10016" title="Billy Budd (film)" label="Billy Budd"/>
<link wikidata="Q468484" start="10119" end="10134" title="The Longest Day (film)" label="The Longest Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q355040" start="10157" end="10171" title="James M. Gavin" label="James M. Gavin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6929117" start="10221" end="10234" title="Mr. President (musical)" label="Mr. President"/>
<link wikidata="Q6552847" start="10254" end="10272" title="Lindsay and Crouse" label="Lindsay and Crouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q128746" start="10287" end="10300" title="Irving Berlin" label="Irving Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q505141" start="10317" end="10329" title="Joshua Logan" label="Joshua Logan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3128559" start="10412" end="10434" title="Kraft Suspense Theatre" label="Kraft Suspense Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q4959571" start="10448" end="10462" title="Breaking Point (1963 TV series)" label="Breaking Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q4004618" start="10476" end="10493" title="The Eleventh Hour (1962 TV series)" label="The Eleventh Hour"/>
<link wikidata="Q772909" start="10507" end="10518" title="Wagon Train" label="Wagon Train"/>
<link wikidata="Q3795515" start="10532" end="10544" title="The Reporter (TV series)" label="The Reporter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1565710" start="10561" end="10599" title="Bob Hope Presents the Chrysler Theatre" label="Bob Hope Presents the Chrysler Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q8036467" start="10775" end="10788" title="World War One (TV series)" label="World War One"/>
<link wikidata="Q191716" start="10881" end="10897" title="Gene Roddenberry" label="Gene Roddenberry"/>
<link wikidata="" start="10911" end="10920" title="Star Trek: The Original Series" label="Star Trek"/>
<link wikidata="Q455951" start="10928" end="10942" title="Norman Spinrad" label="Norman Spinrad"/>
<link wikidata="" start="10992" end="11012" title="The Doomsday Machine (Star Trek: The Original Series)" label="The Doomsday Machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q561666" start="11118" end="11132" title="William Windom (actor)" label="William Windom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7728154" start="11176" end="11192" title="The Crooked Road" label="The Crooked Road"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11216" end="11233" title="The Secret Agents" label="The Secret Agents"/>
<link wikidata="Q700682" start="11272" end="11291" title="Battle of the Bulge (1965 film)" label="Battle of the Bulge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218318" start="11331" end="11348" title="The Professionals (1966 film)" label="The Professionals"/>
<link wikidata="Q555226" start="11390" end="11400" title="Sid Caesar" label="Sid Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7720761" start="11410" end="11423" title="The Busy Body (film)" label="The Busy Body"/>
<link wikidata="Q470735" start="11476" end="11491" title="The Dirty Dozen" label="The Dirty Dozen"/>
<link wikidata="Q95133" start="11509" end="11523" title="Robert Aldrich" label="Robert Aldrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q389773" start="11534" end="11549" title="Hour of the Gun" label="Hour of the Gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987645" start="11572" end="11583" title="Ike Clanton" label="Ike Clanton"/>
<link wikidata="Q361670" start="11588" end="11600" title="John Sturges" label="John Sturges"/>
<link wikidata="Q990564" start="11710" end="11743" title="A Minute to Pray, a Second to Die (film)" label="A Minute to Pray, A Second to Die"/>
<link wikidata="Q600205" start="11767" end="11772" title="Anzio (film)" label="Anzio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1879050" start="11826" end="11862" title="Captain Nemo and the Underwater City" label="Captain Nemo and the Underwater City"/>
<link wikidata="Q95002" start="11889" end="11903" title="William Holden" label="William Holden"/>
<link wikidata="Q102551" start="11908" end="11923" title="Ernest Borgnine" label="Ernest Borgnine"/>
<link wikidata="Q51461" start="11944" end="11957" title="Sam Peckinpah" label="Sam Peckinpah"/>
<link wikidata="Q994481" start="11985" end="11999" title="The Wild Bunch" label="The Wild Bunch"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="12034" end="12040" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1861513" start="12052" end="12058" title="Parras" label="Parras"/>
<link wikidata="Q386991" start="12062" end="12069" title="Torreón" label="Torreón"/>
<link wikidata="Q17085530" start="12122" end="12137" title="Eugene McCarthy 1968 presidential campaign" label="Eugene McCarthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5255743" start="12149" end="12193" title="1968 Democratic Party presidential primaries" label="1968 Democratic Party presidential primaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q2907850" start="12296" end="12306" title="Bob Thomas (reporter)" label="Bob Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3770524" start="12697" end="12711" title="The Front Page" label="The Front Page"/>
<link wikidata="Q236394" start="12888" end="12900" title="Martha Scott" label="Martha Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q19155" start="12905" end="12916" title="Henry Fonda" label="Henry Fonda"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741127" start="12986" end="12989" title="Metromedia Producers Corporation" label="MPC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5933449" start="13047" end="13064" title="Hughes Television Network" label="Hughes TV Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q160528" start="13274" end="13288" title="Burt Lancaster" label="Burt Lancaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q685625" start="13298" end="13304" title="Lawman (film)" label="Lawman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339933" start="13322" end="13338" title="John Phillip Law" label="John Phillip Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q7748941" start="13348" end="13364" title="The Love Machine (film)" label="The Love Machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3010141" start="13400" end="13415" title="And Hope to Die" label="And Hope to Die"/>
<link wikidata="Q106204" start="13434" end="13456" title="Jean-Louis Trintignant" label="Jean-Louis Trintignant"/>
<link wikidata="Q313190" start="13461" end="13473" title="René Clément" label="René Clément"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13526" end="13538" title="Long Day&amp;#x27;s Journey into Night#Characters" label="James Tyrone"/>
<link wikidata="Q4802463" start="13542" end="13553" title="Arvin Brown" label="Arvin Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058828" start="13582" end="13594" title="Off-Broadway" label="Off-Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q618430" start="13615" end="13649" title="Long Day&amp;#x27;s Journey into Night" label="Long Day&amp;#x27;s Journey into Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q6668974" start="13698" end="13715" title="Lolly-Madonna XXX" label="Lolly-Madonna XXX"/>
<link wikidata="Q273215" start="13734" end="13745" title="Rod Steiger" label="Rod Steiger"/>
<link wikidata="Q28170427" start="14002" end="14027" title="The Man Without a Country (TV movie)" label="The Man Without a Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q270038" start="14057" end="14069" title="Delbert Mann" label="Delbert Mann"/>
<link wikidata="Q3066226" start="14077" end="14087" title="The Outfit (1973 film)" label="The Outfit"/>
<link wikidata="Q171736" start="14106" end="14119" title="Robert Duvall" label="Robert Duvall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2990575" start="14127" end="14143" title="Executive Action (film)" label="Executive Action"/>
<link wikidata="Q3987649" start="14228" end="14245" title="The Iceman Cometh (1973 film)" label="The Iceman Cometh"/>
<link wikidata="Q76895" start="14264" end="14274" title="Lee Marvin" label="Lee Marvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q41163" start="14491" end="14500" title="Al Pacino" label="Al Pacino"/>
<link wikidata="Q657079" start="14512" end="14519" title="Serpico" label="Serpico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206671" start="14557" end="14589" title="National Society of Film Critics" label="National Society of Film Critics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2990575" start="14631" end="14647" title="Executive Action (film)" label="Executive Action"/>
<link wikidata="Q7494157" start="14754" end="14795" title="Shenandoah (musical)" label="musical version of &amp;quot;Shenandoah&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q58848" start="14881" end="14889" title="pacifist" label="pacifist"/>
<link wikidata="Q170208" start="14927" end="14933" title="Quaker" label="Quaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q945795" start="14962" end="15003" title="House Committee on Un-American Activities" label="House Committee on Un-American Activities"/>
<link wikidata="Q2271359" start="15090" end="15123" title="Committee for the First Amendment" label="Committee for the First Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q21637" start="15226" end="15256" title="American Civil Liberties Union" label="American Civil Liberties Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q464677" start="15258" end="15292" title="American Friends Service Committee" label="American Friends Service Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q5122756" start="15298" end="15322" title="United World Federalists" label="United World Federalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q553276" start="15350" end="15361" title="Steve Allen" label="Steve Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7157308" start="15391" end="15430" title="Peace Action" label="The Committee for a SANE Nuclear Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8027" start="15620" end="15642" title="Martin Luther King Jr." label="Martin Luther King Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q213512" start="15710" end="15720" title="Bill Cosby" label="Bill Cosby"/>
<link wikidata="Q369949" start="15722" end="15733" title="Robert Culp" label="Robert Culp"/>
<link wikidata="Q104049" start="15735" end="15749" title="Sidney Poitier" label="Sidney Poitier"/>
<link wikidata="Q2855809" start="15885" end="15906" title="Odds Against Tomorrow" label="Odds Against Tomorrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q207066" start="16283" end="16294" title="McCarthyism" label="McCarthyism"/>
<link wikidata="Q182121" start="16316" end="16330" title="Anti-communism" label="anti-communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3835818" start="16353" end="16374" title="I Married a Communist (film)" label="I Married a Communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="16402" end="16411" title="communist" label="communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q632718" start="16463" end="16472" title="Crossfire (film)" label="Crossfire"/>
<link wikidata="Q963045" start="16486" end="16507" title="Bad Day at Black Rock" label="Bad Day at Black Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q2855809" start="16521" end="16542" title="Odds Against Tomorrow" label="Odds Against Tomorrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2990575" start="16559" end="16575" title="Executive Action (film)" label="Executive Action"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="16780" end="16797" title="University of Oxford" label="Oxford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q121594" start="16804" end="16813" title="professor" label="professor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4932206" start="16817" end="16835" title="Philosophy of law" label="philosophy and law"/>
<link wikidata="Q766145" start="16843" end="16863" title="University of Oregon" label="University of Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q829806" start="16899" end="16909" title="the Dakota" label="the Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q109951" start="16922" end="16939" title="Central Park West" label="Central Park West"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203" start="17008" end="17019" title="John Lennon" label="John Lennon"/>
<link wikidata="Q117012" start="17024" end="17032" title="Yoko Ono" label="Yoko Ono"/>
<link wikidata="Q7074328" start="17072" end="17086" title="Oakwood School (Los Angeles)" label="Oakwood School"/>
<link wikidata="Q4420074" start="17311" end="17324" title="Sidney Harmon" label="Sidney Harmon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19045" end="19047" title="United Press International#History" label="UP"/>
<link wikidata="Q40469" start="19167" end="19169" title="Associated Press" label="AP"/>
<link wikidata="Q2907850" start="19755" end="19766" title="Bob Thomas (reporter)" label="Thomas, Bob"/>
<link wikidata="Q441327" start="20027" end="20042" title="Manohla Dargis" label="Dargis, Manohla"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="997955" wikidata="Q1072661" url="?curid=997955" title="Look Who's Talking Too">
<text>Look Who&#x27;s Talking Too is a 1990 American romantic comedy film, a sequel to &quot;Look Who&#x27;s Talking&quot;, and the second installment in the franchise. The film was directed by Amy Heckerling from a script she co-authored with Neal Israel. The film stars the original cast members John Travolta and Kirstie Alley as James and Mollie Ubriacco, the parents of Mikey (voiced by Bruce Willis), a toddler coping with the newest addition to the family, baby Julie (voiced by Roseanne Barr).

In addition to this, he is having trouble using a potty, and the unorthodox advice he gets from his playmate, Eddie (voiced by Damon Wayans), doesn&#x27;t make his problem any better.

==Plot==
Several months after getting married, Mollie and James welcome their child, Mikey&#x27;s half-sister Julie into the family. While at first, Mikey is excited to be a big brother, he begins to resent his sister shortly after she is born when the reality does not match what he dreamed being a big brother would be like. He finds Julie annoying and resents sharing both toys and his parents attention; being constantly mean to her as a result. In turn, Julie is not impressed by Mikey, who struggles with potty training, having several accidents despite encouragement from his friends and family. James is provided a job as a full time pilot thanks to Mollie&#x27;s parents and the longer work hours strain the couple&#x27;s relationship. The couple also have parenting disputes with James believing Mollie to be overprotective and too high strung. Mollie&#x27;s lazy younger brother Stuart comes to live with them temporarily, and James is upset that Mollie does not even consult him about it. James is further frustrated when Stuart pulls an (unloaded) gun on him thinking he&#x27;s an intruder. He wants Stuart out immediately and Mollie insists on talking to him first seeing nothing wrong with him having a gun or leaving messes everywhere. James finally reaches his breaking point and storms out of the apartment. Mikey thinks Julie is responsible for the situation and takes his vengeance out on Julie&#x27;s stuffed bird Herbie. Meanwhile, after her apartment is robbed, Mollie&#x27;s friend Rona comes to stay with them, and she begins to date Stuart.

During one of James&#x27; visits, he takes Mikey and Julie to the movies. Mikey finally realizes he was too hard on his sister and she wasn&#x27;t to blame for their dad leaving. Later, when Julie decides she doesn&#x27;t need Mikey and wants to strike out on her own, she is inspired to walk unsupported. Mollie sees this and showers Julie with affection for her accomplishment, but the happiness is short lived, as James is not there to share the moment. James returns home to talk to Mollie and Mikey accomplishes going to the bathroom on his own, which is a celebration both of them share with him. James is due to go flying despite a massive storm building in the area, Mollie gets worried and leaves Mikey and Julie in Stuart&#x27;s care. While she is gone, a robber sneaks into the apartment and Stuart scares him out with his gun. Forgetting that Mikey and Julie are in the apartment, Stuart gives chase leaving them home alone. He is also left the stove on and a towel on the stove causing a fire to spread through the apartment. Thinking quickly Mikey pushes Julie in her bouncer out of harm&#x27;s way. He promises to take care of her when she tells him she is afraid of the &quot;hot stuff&quot; which he tells her not to touch.

Meanwhile, James and Mollie make up in the plane when the flight is canceled. James asks Mollie if she&#x27;s happy about being right; she tells him that she loves him and no longer cares about who&#x27;s right. They return home to see the fire through the kitchen window. Momentarily panicked they are relieved as Mikey exits the elevator with Julie in tow. James runs to the apartment and puts out the fire before any major damage is caused. Mollie admits that leaving the kids with Stuart was a bad idea which James is pleased to hear.

Later, at a family barbecue Julie and Mikey have a conversation on how strange adults they are. Julie is grateful to Mikey for saving them from the fire and he sees how much they are needed in each others lives. He tells Julie that it is them against the grown ups and that he loves her. She agrees saying &quot;big ones don&#x27;t make any sense&quot; and the two walk off together hand in hand.

==Cast==
* John Travolta as James Ubriacco/voice of James&#x27; sperm cells (&quot;uncredited&quot;)
* Kirstie Alley as Mollie Ubriacco (nee Jensen)/voice of Mollie&#x27;s egg (&quot;uncredited&quot;)
* Lorne Sussman as Mikey Ubriacco
* Megan Milner as Julie Ubriacco (age 1 year)
** Georgia Keithley as Julie (age 4 months)
** Nikki Graham as Julie (fetus–newborn) 
* Danny Pringle as Eddie
* Elias Koteas as Stuart Jensen
* Twink Caplan as Rona
* Olympia Dukakis as Rosie Jensen
* Lesley Ewen as Debbie
* Gilbert Gottfried as Joey, the baby gym instructor
* Don S. Davis as Dr. Fleischer

Voices
* Bruce Willis as Mikey Ubriacco
* Roseanne Barr as Julie Ubriacco
* Damon Wayans as Eddie
* Mel Brooks as Mr. Toilet Man

==Production==
An extended and re-arranged version of the famous Tri-Star Pictures theme music, originally composed by Dave Grusin and composed and arranged by David Kitay, was played during the scene when Julie practices walking. A variation with the standard version of the fanfare, which was credited at the end, exists at the beginning of the logo when Bruce Willis (voice of Mikey) was doing a Mister Ed imitation.

==Casting==
The bum teaser at the end of the first film portrayed an uncredited Joan Rivers, providing the voice of Julie. Due to scheduling conflicts, she declined the role.

An early trailer featured Richard Pryor as the voice of Eddie.

Also appearing are Olympia Dukakis, Elias Koteas, and Gilbert Gottfried. Further vocal talents include Damon Wayans in a supporting role as the voice of Eddie. Mel Brooks makes a cameo appearance as the voice of Mr. Toilet Man. Director Amy Heckerling&#x27;s father, Lou, has a small speaking part as Mollie&#x27;s father. The film was followed by another sequel, &quot;Look Who&#x27;s Talking Now!&quot;, in 1993.

==Alternative versions==
When the film aired on Freeform (formerly known as ABC Family), many of its deleted scenes such as Mollie threatening Mikey with corporal punishment if he walks off with Julie&#x27;s carriage again were shown (Kirstie Alley reportedly hated it as she was an advocate against corporal punishment). One notable addition is a running gag where Mollie chats with her friends and folks and it ignites a daydream of James cheating on her. There is even one sequence where she imagines him as John Lennon and herself as Yoko Ono parodying their activism. Only one remnant of this gag remains in the theatrical and home media cut.

In one version, James and Stuart have a conversation after he arrives in the apartment.

==Reception==
Unlike its predecessor, it received mostly negative reviews. Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of &quot;B&quot; on an A+ to F scale. The film was released in the United Kingdom on March 22, 1991, and reached number 2 in the country&#x27;s box office that weekend.

Catherine Dunphy of &quot;The Toronto Star&quot; called it &quot;a movie filled with the kind of thigh-slapping potty jokes only those still not trained could love&quot;, while noting that the character of Mikey was &quot;old enough by any pediatric standards to speak for himself by now&quot;. Bill Brownstein of the Montreal &quot;Gazette&quot; called it an &quot;embarrassingly dreadful&quot;. Greg Potter of the &quot;Vancouver Sun&quot; wrote that &quot;if not for the sweet, cherubic countenances of the wee tikes innocently gagaing amid the unscrupulous exploitation and bald-faced money-grubbing of &quot;Look Who&#x27;s Talking Too&quot;, this 81-minute testimony to the despicably twisted motives of Hollywood sequel mongers would be even more insufferable&quot;.

David Armstrong of the &quot;San Francisco Examiner&quot; called the film &quot;utterly undistinguished product—witless, vulgar, filled with potty jokes and gags about genitalia, stuffed with can&#x27;t-miss-&#x27;em-product plugs, weighted down with a gratuitous chase-and-fight scene, loaded with old pop songs to underscore what the characters—and thus the audience—are supposed to be feeling&quot;. Gene Siskel of the &quot;Chicago Tribune&quot; called it a &quot;toilet-humored sequel that loses the romance and Innocence that made the original film such a pleasant surprise. John Travolta and Kirstie Alley return with a new baby girl with the voice of Roseanne Barr, who has been given absolutely nothing funny to say. The few infrequent bits of humor come from the laidback voice of Bruce Willis as toddler Mikey. Travolta dances like Elvis in one scene, but director Amy Heckerling manages to louse that up by shooting him too often from the waist up&quot;. Steve Murray, in the &quot;Atlanta Journal-Constitution&quot;, wrote that &quot;the good news is, &quot;Look Who&#x27;s Talking Too&quot; is less than 90 minutes long. The bad news? It feels so much longer. [...] Designed to make money, &quot;Look Who&#x27;s Talking Too&quot; will probably succeed on that level, though it fails on all others&quot;. Martin F. Kohn of the &quot;Detroit Free Press&quot; wrote that &quot;the script, by director Amy Heckerling and Neal Israel, provides a dime&#x27;s worth of characterization and a nickel&#x27;s worth of plot. The story line is so flimsy that the film deteriorates into a series of music videos [that] are downright delightful compared to some of the minor characters, particularly the kids&#x27; mooching, trigger-happy Uncle Stuart and the proprietor of the baby gym, played by one Gilbert Gottfried (picture Richard Simmons with Martha Raye&#x27;s mouth) whose performance makes Pee-wee Herman look like Sir Laurence Olivier. Incidentally, the voice of the talking toilet is Mel Brooks. Now there&#x27;s an idea for a sitcom&quot;. David Lyman of &quot;The Cincinnati Post&quot; gave a negative review and called it &quot;humorless&quot;, &quot;dismally dull&quot; and &quot;totally devoid of cleverness&quot;. Ryan Murphy of &quot;The Miami Herald&quot; gave the film only one star, and stated that &quot;director Amy Heckerling has whipped up a banal entirely soulless cinematic concoction whose main ingredients are vulgar bathroom humor (there are at least two dozen references to poo-poo and pee-pee) and bothersome Mr. Ed baby tricks in which the mouths of poor toddlers and infants are manipulated to produce overdone talking effects&quot;. 
It grossed $47,789,074 at the box office in the United States and Canada, and $73.1 million internationally, for a worldwide total of $120.9 million.

It was also nominated for two Razzie Awards, including Worst Supporting Actor for Gilbert Gottfried and Worst Supporting Actress for Roseanne Barr, and a Stinkers Bad Movie Award for Worst Picture.

==Sequel==

The film was followed by a sequel titled, &quot;Look Who&#x27;s Talking Now!&quot; in 1993. Once again co-starring John Travolta and Kirstie Alley, alongside David Gallagher and Tabitha Lupien as Mikey and Julie respectively, the film centers around the introduction of two pet dogs to the family. The two animals, an Irish-wire fox terrier mutt and a white coat poodle who compete for the family&#x27;s affection, were voiced by Danny DeVito and Diane Keaton, respectively.

==References==
==External links==
* Look Who&#x27;s Talking Too AllMovie
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q860626" start="47" end="62" title="romantic comedy" label="romantic comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q261636" start="71" end="77" title="sequel" label="sequel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324330" start="87" end="110" title="Look Who&amp;#x27;s Talking" label="Look Who&amp;#x27;s Talking"/>
<link wikidata="Q124693143" start="152" end="161" title="Look Who&amp;#x27;s Talking (franchise)" label="franchise"/>
<link wikidata="Q442273" start="188" end="202" title="Amy Heckerling" label="Amy Heckerling"/>
<link wikidata="Q3337574" start="238" end="249" title="Neal Israel" label="Neal Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q80938" start="292" end="305" title="John Travolta" label="John Travolta"/>
<link wikidata="Q151935" start="310" end="323" title="Kirstie Alley" label="Kirstie Alley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2680" start="386" end="398" title="Bruce Willis" label="Bruce Willis"/>
<link wikidata="Q232301" start="480" end="493" title="Roseanne Barr" label="Roseanne Barr"/>
<link wikidata="Q382420" start="624" end="636" title="Damon Wayans" label="Damon Wayans"/>
<link wikidata="Q80938" start="4441" end="4454" title="John Travolta" label="John Travolta"/>
<link wikidata="Q74560" start="4494" end="4505" title="Spermatozoon" label="sperm cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q151935" start="4533" end="4546" title="Kirstie Alley" label="Kirstie Alley"/>
<link wikidata="Q9631" start="4602" end="4605" title="ovary" label="egg"/>
<link wikidata="Q26513" start="4781" end="4786" title="fetus" label="fetus"/>
<link wikidata="Q379808" start="4824" end="4836" title="Elias Koteas" label="Elias Koteas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7858375" start="4856" end="4868" title="Twink Caplan" label="Twink Caplan"/>
<link wikidata="Q230188" start="4879" end="4894" title="Olympia Dukakis" label="Olympia Dukakis"/>
<link wikidata="Q221464" start="4937" end="4954" title="Gilbert Gottfried" label="Gilbert Gottfried"/>
<link wikidata="Q313814" start="4990" end="5002" title="Don S. Davis" label="Don S. Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2680" start="5030" end="5042" title="Bruce Willis" label="Bruce Willis"/>
<link wikidata="Q232301" start="5063" end="5076" title="Roseanne Barr" label="Roseanne Barr"/>
<link wikidata="Q382420" start="5097" end="5109" title="Damon Wayans" label="Damon Wayans"/>
<link wikidata="Q104266" start="5121" end="5131" title="Mel Brooks" label="Mel Brooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q651454" start="5216" end="5233" title="Tri-Star Pictures" label="Tri-Star Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q502923" start="5270" end="5281" title="Dave Grusin" label="Dave Grusin"/>
<link wikidata="Q604152" start="5311" end="5322" title="David Kitay" label="David Kitay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2680" start="5508" end="5520" title="Bruce Willis" label="Bruce Willis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185758" start="5550" end="5559" title="Mister Ed" label="Mister Ed"/>
<link wikidata="Q240933" start="5652" end="5663" title="Joan Rivers" label="Joan Rivers"/>
<link wikidata="Q294912" start="5774" end="5787" title="Richard Pryor" label="Richard Pryor"/>
<link wikidata="Q230188" start="5831" end="5846" title="Olympia Dukakis" label="Olympia Dukakis"/>
<link wikidata="Q379808" start="5848" end="5860" title="Elias Koteas" label="Elias Koteas"/>
<link wikidata="Q221464" start="5866" end="5883" title="Gilbert Gottfried" label="Gilbert Gottfried"/>
<link wikidata="Q22920017" start="5893" end="5906" title="voice actor" label="vocal talents"/>
<link wikidata="Q382420" start="5915" end="5927" title="Damon Wayans" label="Damon Wayans"/>
<link wikidata="Q104266" start="5972" end="5982" title="Mel Brooks" label="Mel Brooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1577763" start="6182" end="6210" title="Look Who&amp;#x27;s Talking Now!" label="Look Who&amp;#x27;s Talking Now!"/>
<link wikidata="Q287149" start="6276" end="6284" title="Freeform (TV channel)" label="Freeform"/>
<link wikidata="Q5253643" start="6329" end="6342" title="deleted scene" label="deleted scene"/>
<link wikidata="Q151935" start="6463" end="6476" title="Kirstie Alley" label="Kirstie Alley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203" start="6739" end="6750" title="John Lennon" label="John Lennon"/>
<link wikidata="Q117012" start="6766" end="6774" title="Yoko Ono" label="Yoko Ono"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324330" start="6991" end="7002" title="Look Who&amp;#x27;s Talking" label="predecessor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2972775" start="7061" end="7072" title="CinemaScore" label="CinemaScore"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="7171" end="7185" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067299" start="7300" end="7316" title="The Toronto Star" label="The Toronto Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q1549535" start="7607" end="7614" title="Montreal Gazette" label="Gazette"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004274" start="7696" end="7709" title="Vancouver Sun" label="Vancouver Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164240" start="8078" end="8100" title="San Francisco Examiner" label="San Francisco Examiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q969105" start="8452" end="8463" title="Gene Siskel" label="Gene Siskel"/>
<link wikidata="Q47596" start="8477" end="8492" title="Chicago Tribune" label="Chicago Tribune"/>
<link wikidata="Q303" start="8892" end="8897" title="Elvis Presley" label="Elvis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3092348" start="9043" end="9071" title="Atlanta Journal-Constitution" label="Atlanta Journal-Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q601669" start="9395" end="9413" title="Detroit Free Press" label="Detroit Free Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q498019" start="9878" end="9893" title="Richard Simmons" label="Richard Simmons"/>
<link wikidata="Q435236" start="9899" end="9910" title="Martha Raye" label="Martha Raye"/>
<link wikidata="Q3374172" start="9949" end="9963" title="Pee-wee Herman" label="Pee-wee Herman"/>
<link wikidata="Q55245" start="9974" end="9994" title="Laurence Olivier" label="Sir Laurence Olivier"/>
<link wikidata="Q7723045" start="10123" end="10142" title="The Cincinnati Post" label="The Cincinnati Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q1706651" start="10302" end="10318" title="The Miami Herald" label="The Miami Herald"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185758" start="10591" end="10597" title="Mister Ed" label="Mr. Ed"/>
<link wikidata="Q40237" start="10900" end="10913" title="Razzie Awards" label="Razzie Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q221464" start="10952" end="10969" title="Gilbert Gottfried" label="Gilbert Gottfried"/>
<link wikidata="Q232301" start="11003" end="11016" title="Roseanne Barr" label="Roseanne Barr"/>
<link wikidata="Q7617446" start="11024" end="11048" title="Stinkers Bad Movie Award" label="Stinkers Bad Movie Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1577763" start="11129" end="11157" title="Look Who&amp;#x27;s Talking Now" label="Look Who&amp;#x27;s Talking Now!"/>
<link wikidata="Q80938" start="11196" end="11209" title="John Travolta" label="John Travolta"/>
<link wikidata="Q151935" start="11214" end="11227" title="Kirstie Alley" label="Kirstie Alley"/>
<link wikidata="Q365484" start="11239" end="11254" title="David Gallagher" label="David Gallagher"/>
<link wikidata="Q575256" start="11259" end="11273" title="Tabitha Lupien" label="Tabitha Lupien"/>
<link wikidata="Q39201" start="11355" end="11358" title="pet" label="pet"/>
<link wikidata="Q144" start="11359" end="11362" title="dog" label="dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q38644" start="11399" end="11404" title="Irish Terrier" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q39491" start="11405" end="11421" title="Wire Fox Terrier" label="wire fox terrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q38945" start="11422" end="11426" title="Mongrel" label="mutt"/>
<link wikidata="Q38904" start="11433" end="11450" title="Poodle" label="white coat poodle"/>
<link wikidata="Q26806" start="11511" end="11523" title="Danny DeVito" label="Danny DeVito"/>
<link wikidata="Q102642" start="11528" end="11540" title="Diane Keaton" label="Diane Keaton"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="997959" wikidata="Q5917490" url="?curid=997959" title="How Can You Be in Two Places at Once When You're Not Anywhere at All">
<text>How Can You Be in Two Places at Once When You&#x27;re Not Anywhere at All is the second comedy album recorded by the Firesign Theatre. It was originally released in July 1969 by Columbia Records.

==Track listing==
===Side one===
This side of the vinyl LP was not divided into separate tracks, but the liner notes list the following titles and tracks:
#&quot;How Can You Be in Two Places at Once When You&#x27;re Not Anywhere at All&quot; – 28:27:
##&quot;Drink to Me Only with Thine Fox&quot; (Mr. Catherwood and Ensemble) [CD retitle: &quot;The Ralph Spoilsport Mantrum&quot;] – 4:21
##&quot;The Policemen&#x27;s Brawl&quot; (Officers Bradshaw and Henderson) [CD retitle: &quot;Zeno&#x27;s Evil&quot;] – 4:34
##&quot;Yankee Doodle Came to Terms&quot; (All Fecal People&#x27;s Chorus) [CD retitle: &quot;The Land of the Pharaohs&quot;] – 2:47
##&quot;Über Dubbing Over Alice&quot; (&#x27;Arry &#x27;N&#x27; Friends) [CD Track retitle: &quot;VACANCY-NO VACANCY&quot;] – 1:34
##&quot;You Ain&#x27;t Got No Friends on the Left&quot; (Babe and the Unknown Soldiers) [CD retitle: &quot;The Lonesome American Choo-Choo Don&#x27; Wan&#x27; Stop Here Any Mo] – 7:34
##&quot;&quot;We&#x27;re Bringing the War Back Home!&quot; From Babes in Khaki&quot; (Lilly Lamont*) (*Miss Lamont Courtesy of Paranoid Pictures) – 7:31 [split into 2 tracks on the CD, track titles below]:
###&quot;Babes in Khaki&quot; – 3:53
###&quot;TV or Not TV&quot; – 3:38

===Side two===
#The Further Adventures of Nick Danger – 28:11
:&quot;From the Archives of the Original Firesign Theatre Radio Hour. As First Broadcast December 6, 1941. Rebroadcast Courtesy of Loostners Bros. Soap Co.&quot;

==Synopsis==
The album consists of two 28-minute pieces, each taking up one side of the original vinyl release.

=== &quot;How Can You Be in Two Places at Once When You&#x27;re Not Anywhere at All&quot; ===
This opens with a late-night TV commercial by car salesman Ralph Spoilsport (Philip Proctor), a spoof of Southern California Ford dealer Ralph Williams. As he extols the virtues of a featured new car, the main character Babe (Peter Bergman), runs across traffic onto the lot and interrupts Ralph&#x27;s spiel with an immediate desire to buy the car in question. Ralph enthusiastically invites Babe to take a look inside his &quot;beautiful new home&quot;. The impossibly luxurious car contains a &quot;home entertainment system&quot;, with AM and FM radio and television. Spoilsport turns on each component in turn, creating a cacophonous din.

Babe buys the car and, as he drives it, the text of road signs and billboards along the road is spoken as he passes them. He decides to take the Antelope Freeway, and the distance signs to it progress per Zeno&#x27;s paradox (one mile, 1/2 mile, 1/4 mile, etc.) The infinite series is broken only when he decides to try the &quot;all-weather climate control&quot;, and selects &quot;tropical paradise&quot; from a list of options. At the push of a button, this transforms the interior of his car into a tropical rainforest, complete with sounds of exotic birds, thunder, and rainfall.

A troupe of wise-cracking explorers emerge from the trees, including someone who sounds like W. C. Fields, on a half-hearted expedition. Babe tries to escape the interlopers by changing the climate control to &quot;Land of the Pharaohs&quot; and is transported to ancient Egypt, but to no avail; the explorers have come with him. Increasingly annoyed, he complains that the sun is setting and it will be night soon. They reply he&#x27;s confused, the horizon is moving up; so they stand him on his head to convince him that it is morning. Babe loses his balance and falls to the ground, causing one to remark, &quot;He&#x27;s no fun! He fell right over!&quot;. A loud rumbling is heard, and the group realizes that a pyramid is opening.

The pyramid is actually a motel, with a vacancy. Babe enters the lobby and encounters a pair of partiers. They gradually morph into panoply of characters who launch a satirical celebration of America which parodies Norman Corwin&#x27;s 1941 patriotic radio pageant &quot;We Hold These Truths&quot;. This includes sardonic references to slavery and the conquest of the American Indians. At one point, each member of the group rhythmically repeats the names of the candidates in the 1968 presidential election mimicking a steam locomotive: &quot;&quot;Rock&quot;efeller, &quot;Nix&quot;on, &quot;Hum&quot;phrey, and &quot;Ken&quot;nedy.&quot;

Eventually, Babe is drafted into the army, and the play morphs again into the closing scene of a World War II musical film &quot;Babes In Khaki&quot;, starring Lillie Lamont (Proctor). The movie is broadcast on television, and after it ends, channel surfing reveals snippets of random commercials and program segments. At one point we hear a crime drama, with tough guys saying they hate cops. One named Nick declares he&#x27;s &quot;gonna get even with every rotten cop in this city&quot;, by turning in his badge and burning his uniform.

Finally, Spoilsport returns as &quot;Ralph Icebag&quot;, selling marijuana instead of cars. His spiel morphs into a close paraphrase of Molly Bloom&#x27;s Soliloquy which closes James Joyce&#x27;s novel &quot;Ulysses&quot;.

=== &quot;The Further Adventures of Nick Danger&quot; ===
This is presented as an episode (titled &quot;Cut &#x27;Em Off at the Past&quot;) of a fictional 1940s radio drama, &quot;Nick Danger, Third Eye&quot;, broadcast on December 7, 1941. Nick Danger (Phil Austin) is a &#x27;40s-style hardboiled private investigator in the Raymond Chandler mold. In live performances and photographs, he wears the stereotypical fedora and trench coat. He has the obligatory nemesis on the police force, Lieutenant Bradshaw (Bergman), who questions Danger&#x27;s every move. His &quot;mark&quot; is Rocky Rococo (Proctor), a Peter Lorre parody. True to the clichés of the genre, there is a suspicious butler, Catherwood (David Ossman), and a &quot;femme fatale&quot;: Danger&#x27;s old college flame Betty Jo Bialosky (Proctor, or Bergman in scenes with Rocky Rococo), with aliases Melanie Haber, Audrey Farber, and Susan Underhill, whom &quot;everyone knew as Nancy&quot; (parodying a line from the Beatles&#x27; song &quot;Rocky Raccoon&quot;).

This sketch is not as surreal or Kafkaesque as most other Firesign Theatre material, though it is intermixed and loaded with references to the Beatles, the &quot;I Ching&quot;, and other counterculture topics. The basic plot involves the attempt by Rococo to sell Danger a stolen ring, that belonged to Nancy; Danger is thus drawn into a trap and framed when Nancy and Catherwood kill Rococo because he found out about time travel experiments by Catherwood, leading Danger to a violent confrontation with all of them and forcing a confession from Catherwood at gunpoint. It also parodies characteristics of old-time radio drama production, e.g. referring to a fireplace fire as &quot;the cellophane&quot; and &quot;coming in out of the cornstarch&quot; (used to create the sound effects); actors reading the wrong lines, or dropping their scripts; actors stepping out of character to read commercials; and referring to the use of voice fade-outs and organ cues to signal transitions between flashbacks.

At one point, Nancy faints and falls over, causing Danger to say, &quot;She&#x27;s no fun, she fell right over.&quot; He remembers he (Austin) said this same line on side 1 of the record, and asks, &quot;Where am I? I&#x27;d better check.&quot; The side 1 track is then heard playing backwards, and Danger says, &quot;It&#x27;s OK, they&#x27;re speaking Chinese&quot; and continues with the play.

The climax is reached as Catherwood&#x27;s return from a flashback is bungled, resulting in the duplication of every character except Lieutenant Bradshaw. Just as Danger is about to try something daring to solve this problem and extricate himself from his trap, the action is abruptly interrupted by a special news bulletin, in which President Franklin Delano Roosevelt (Bergman) wearily tells the American people of the attack on Pearl Harbor. He declares our &quot;rendezvous with destiny&quot; demands the United States &quot;unconditionally surrender&quot; to the Empire of Japan. The bulletin ends, but it is too late to find out what Danger did; Bradshaw is congratulating him for solving the case.

The closing organ theme chord segues into Austin laughing and singing &quot;ta-da!&quot;, and the Firesign Theatre talk to the producer, announcing their intent to &quot;go back to the other side of the record&quot;. The producer then announces, &quot;Scene 3, take 600&quot;.

==Issues and reissues==
This album was originally released on both LP and 8-track tape, and was later released on cassette.

*LP – Columbia CS-9884
*8 Track – Columbia 18C-09884
*Cassette – PCT-09884

It has been reissued on CD at least 5 times:

*In 1988 by Mobile Fidelity – MFCD-834
*In 1995 by Sony/Legacy – CK-9884
*In 2001 by Sony/Legacy – CK-85774

==Artwork==
The front cover of the album features photographs of Groucho Marx and John Lennon framed by faux Cyrillic lettering, &quot;ДLL НДІL МДЯЖ LЄИИФИ&quot;, parodying Marxism–Leninism. Because of this, the album is sometimes erroneously referred to as &quot;All Hail Мarx and Lennon&quot;.

The back cover is an overhead shot of the four members looking up at the camera, with Proctor standing on Austin&#x27;s foot.

Inside the gatefold of the album there are eight posed photos representing various scenes from &quot;The Further Adventures of Nick Danger.&quot;

==In popular culture==
There are several bars in the United States named &quot;Nick Danger&#x27;s&quot;. There is a clothing line called &quot;Nick Danger&quot;, as well as a garage band, a porn star, a site about board games (now defunct), and a radio DJ all using the name. &quot;Rocky Rococo&quot; is the name of a pizza-and-pasta restaurant chain based in Wisconsin, and there is a &quot;Betty Jo Byoloski&#x27;s&quot; (sic) bar and grill in downtown Winona, Minnesota.

The line &quot;He&#x27;s no fun, he fell right over&quot; is used as a quip in the &quot;Mystery Science Theater 3000&quot; episode &quot;Hercules Unchained&quot; for the film &quot;Hercules Unchained&quot;.

==References==

==External links==
* Official Firesign Theatre web site
* Firezine fan site, FAQ</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q40831" start="88" end="94" title="comedy" label="comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3520884" start="113" end="133" title="the Firesign Theatre" label="the Firesign Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q183387" start="178" end="194" title="Columbia Records" label="Columbia Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q482994" start="253" end="255" title="album" label="LP"/>
<link wikidata="Q2263757" start="302" end="313" title="liner notes" label="liner notes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3379068" start="1947" end="1961" title="Philip Proctor" label="Philip Proctor"/>
<link wikidata="Q844837" start="1975" end="1994" title="Southern California" label="Southern California"/>
<link wikidata="Q44294" start="1995" end="1999" title="Ford Motor Company" label="Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q7172792" start="2096" end="2109" title="Peter Bergman (comedian)" label="Peter Bergman"/>
<link wikidata="Q460854" start="2660" end="2676" title="Antelope Valley Freeway" label="Antelope Freeway"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2720" end="2739" title="Zeno&amp;#x27;s paradox#Dichotomy paradox" label="Zeno&amp;#x27;s paradox"/>
<link wikidata="Q360053" start="2857" end="2872" title="automobile air conditioning" label="climate control"/>
<link wikidata="Q199403" start="3018" end="3037" title="tropical rainforest" label="tropical rainforest"/>
<link wikidata="Q352971" start="3194" end="3206" title="W. C. Fields" label="W. C. Fields"/>
<link wikidata="Q11768" start="3365" end="3378" title="ancient Egypt" label="ancient Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q12516" start="3818" end="3825" title="pyramid" label="pyramid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251336" start="4054" end="4067" title="Norman Corwin" label="Norman Corwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7977617" start="4110" end="4130" title="We Hold These Truths" label="We Hold These Truths"/>
<link wikidata="Q8463" start="4175" end="4182" title="slavery" label="slavery"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="4207" end="4223" title="Indigenous peoples of the Americas" label="American Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q693742" start="4320" end="4346" title="U.S. presidential election, 1968" label="1968 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q171043" start="4359" end="4375" title="steam locomotive" label="steam locomotive"/>
<link wikidata="Q11237" start="4383" end="4406" title="Nelson Rockefeller" label="&amp;quot;Rock&amp;quot;efeller"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="4408" end="4425" title="Richard Nixon" label="&amp;quot;Nix&amp;quot;on"/>
<link wikidata="Q209989" start="4427" end="4447" title="Hubert Humphrey" label="&amp;quot;Hum&amp;quot;phrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q25310" start="4453" end="4472" title="Robert F. Kennedy" label="&amp;quot;Ken&amp;quot;nedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5162775" start="4501" end="4508" title="conscription in the United States" label="drafted"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="4578" end="4590" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q842256" start="4591" end="4603" title="musical film" label="musical film"/>
<link wikidata="Q289" start="4692" end="4702" title="television" label="television"/>
<link wikidata="Q147497" start="4723" end="4738" title="channel surfing" label="channel surfing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2845" start="5087" end="5096" title="marijuana" label="marijuana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296791" start="5158" end="5186" title="Molly Bloom&amp;#x27;s Soliloquy" label="Molly Bloom&amp;#x27;s Soliloquy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6882" start="5200" end="5211" title="James Joyce" label="James Joyce"/>
<link wikidata="Q6511" start="5231" end="5238" title="Ulysses (novel)" label="Ulysses"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635894" start="5408" end="5419" title="radio drama" label="radio drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q7181664" start="5501" end="5512" title="Phil Austin" label="Phil Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328330" start="5535" end="5545" title="hardboiled" label="hardboiled"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058617" start="5546" end="5566" title="private investigator" label="private investigator"/>
<link wikidata="Q180377" start="5574" end="5590" title="Raymond Chandler" label="Raymond Chandler"/>
<link wikidata="Q638335" start="5662" end="5668" title="fedora" label="fedora"/>
<link wikidata="Q654290" start="5673" end="5684" title="trench coat" label="trench coat"/>
<link wikidata="Q78505" start="5858" end="5869" title="Peter Lorre" label="Peter Lorre"/>
<link wikidata="Q156351" start="5890" end="5896" title="cliché" label="cliché"/>
<link wikidata="Q3703282" start="5954" end="5966" title="David Ossman" label="David Ossman"/>
<link wikidata="Q222573" start="5981" end="5993" title="femme fatale" label="femme fatale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="6229" end="6240" title="the Beatles" label="the Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q39427" start="6303" end="6310" title="surrealism" label="surreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q905" start="6314" end="6319" title="Kafka" label="Kafka"/>
<link wikidata="Q181937" start="6443" end="6450" title="I Ching" label="I Ching"/>
<link wikidata="Q188976" start="6468" end="6482" title="counterculture" label="counterculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q182154" start="6700" end="6711" title="time travel" label="time travel"/>
<link wikidata="Q193841" start="6969" end="6979" title="cellophane" label="cellophane"/>
<link wikidata="Q768807" start="7054" end="7066" title="sound effect" label="sound effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q848346" start="7217" end="7226" title="fade (audio engineering)" label="fade-outs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1742272" start="7231" end="7236" title="theatre organ" label="organ"/>
<link wikidata="Q473432" start="7272" end="7281" title="flashback (narrative)" label="flashback"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="8027" end="8052" title="Franklin Delano Roosevelt" label="Franklin Delano Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q52418" start="8104" end="8126" title="attack on Pearl Harbor" label="attack on Pearl Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q188712" start="8251" end="8266" title="Empire of Japan" label="Empire of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q270171" start="8741" end="8753" title="8-track tape" label="8-track tape"/>
<link wikidata="Q3859724" start="8926" end="8941" title="Mobile Fidelity Sound Lab" label="Mobile Fidelity"/>
<link wikidata="Q85847268" start="8965" end="8969" title="Sony Records" label="Sony"/>
<link wikidata="Q85847268" start="8999" end="9003" title="Sony Records" label="Sony"/>
<link wikidata="Q103846" start="9088" end="9100" title="Groucho Marx" label="Groucho Marx"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203" start="9105" end="9116" title="John Lennon" label="John Lennon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064170" start="9127" end="9140" title="faux Cyrillic" label="faux Cyrillic"/>
<link wikidata="Q211930" start="9196" end="9212" title="Marxism–Leninism" label="Marxism–Leninism"/>
<link wikidata="Q488111" start="9784" end="9793" title="Pornographic film actor" label="porn star"/>
<link wikidata="Q130857" start="9847" end="9849" title="DJ" label="DJ"/>
<link wikidata="Q7356002" start="9928" end="9944" title="Rocky Rococo (pizza chain)" label="restaurant chain"/>
<link wikidata="Q773527" start="10049" end="10066" title="Winona, Minnesota" label="Winona, Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1894972" start="10158" end="10186" title="Mystery Science Theater 3000" label="Mystery Science Theater 3000"/>
<link wikidata="Q655943" start="10251" end="10269" title="Hercules Unchained" label="Hercules Unchained"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="997963" wikidata="Q524007" url="?curid=997963" title="Newar people">
<text>Newar (; , endonym: Newa; , Pracalit script: ), or Nepami, are primarily inhabitants in Kathmandu Valley of Nepal and its surrounding areas, and the creators of its historic heritage and civilisation. Newars are a distinct linguistic and cultural group, primarily Indo-Aryan and Tibeto-Burman ethnicities, who share a common language, Nepal Bhasa, and predominantly practice Newar Hinduism and Newar Buddhism.
Newars have developed a division of labour and a sophisticated urban civilisation not seen elsewhere in the Himalayan foothills. Newars have continued their age-old traditions and practices and pride themselves as the true custodians of the religion, culture and civilisation of Nepal. Newars are known for their contributions to culture, art and literature, trade, agriculture and cuisine. Today, they consistently rank as the most economically and socially advanced community in Nepal, according to the annual Human Development Index published by UNDP. Newars are ranked the 8th largest ethnic group in Nepal according to the 2021 Nepal census numbering 1,341,363 people constituting 4.6% of the total population.

The Kathmandu Valley and surrounding territories constituted the former Newar kingdom of the Nepal Mandala. Unlike other common-origin ethnic or caste groups in Nepal, the Newars are regarded as an example of a nation community with a relict identity, derived from an ethnically diverse, previously existing polity. The Newar community within it consists of various strands of ethnic, racial, caste and religious heterogeneity, as they are the descendants of the diverse group of people that have lived in Nepal Mandala since prehistoric times. Indo-Aryan tribes like Maithils of Madhesh Province, the Licchavis, Kosala, and Mallas (N) from respective Indian Mahajanapada (i.e. Licchavis of Vajji, Kosala, and Malla (I)) that arrived at different periods eventually merged with the local native population by marriage as well as adopting their language and customs. These tribes however retained their Vedic culture and brought with them their Sanskritic languages, social structure, Hindu religion and culture, which were assimilated with local cultures and gave rise to the current Newar civilisation. Newar rule in Nepal Mandala ended with its conquest by the Gorkha Kingdom in 1768.

==Origin, Etymology==

The terms &quot;Nepāl&quot;, &quot;Newār&quot;, &quot;Newāl&quot; and &quot;Nepār&quot; are phonetically different forms of the same word, and instances of the various forms appear in texts in different times in history. Nepal is the literary (Sanskrit) form and Newar is the colloquial (Prakrit) form. A Sanskrit inscription dated to 512 in Tistung, a valley to the west of Kathmandu, contains the phrase &quot;greetings to the Nepals&quot; indicating that the term &quot;Nepal&quot; was used to refer to both the country and the people.

The term &quot;Newar&quot; or &quot;Newa:&quot; referring to &quot;inhabitant of Nepal&quot; appeared for the first time in an inscription dated 1654 in Kathmandu. Italian Jesuit priest Ippolito Desideri (1684–1733) who traveled to Nepal in 1721 has written that the natives of Nepal are called Newars. It has been suggested that &quot;Nepal&quot; may be a sanskritization of &quot;Newar&quot;, or &quot;Newar&quot; may be a later form of &quot;Nepal&quot;. According to another explanation, the words &quot;Newar&quot; and &quot;Newari&quot; are colloquial forms arising from the mutation of P to W, and L to R. There are regarded as the Adivasi of Kathmandu Valley.

As a result of the phonological process of dropping the last consonant and lengthening the vowel, &quot;Newā&quot; for Newār or Newāl, and &quot;Nepā&quot; for Nepāl are used in ordinary speech.

==History==

For over two millennia, the Newa civilization in Central Nepal preserved a microcosm of classical North Indian culture in which Brahmanic and Buddhist elements enjoyed equal status. Snellgrove and Richardson (1968) speak of &#x27;the direct heritage of pre-Islamic India&#x27;. The Malla dynasty was noted for their patronisation of the Maithili language (the language of the Mithila region) which was afforded equal status to that of Sanskrit in the Malla court. Maithil Brahmin priests were invited to Kathmandu and many Maithil families settled in Kathmandu during Malla rule. The influx of people from both the north (Tibet) and south (Tirhut) increased not only Nepal&#x27;s genetic and racial diversity but also greatly moulded the dominant culture and tradition of the Newars.

The divisions of the Newars had different historical developments. The common identity of the Newar was formed in the Kathmandu Valley. Until the conquest of the valley by the Gorkha Kingdom in 1769, all the people who had inhabited the valley at any point in time were either Newar or progenitors of Newar. So, the history of Newar correlates to the history of the Kathmandu Valley (or Nepala Mandala) prior to the establishment of the modern state of Nepal.

The earliest known history of Newar and the Kathmandu Valley blends with mythology recorded in historical chronicles. One such text, which recounts the creation of the valley, is the &quot;Swayambhu Purana&quot;. According to this Buddhist scripture, the Kathmandu Valley was a giant lake until the Bodhisattva Manjusri, with the aid of a holy sword, cut a gap in the surrounding hills and let the water out. This legend is supported by geological evidence of an ancient lakebed, and it provides an explanation for the high fertility of the Kathmandu Valley soil.

According to the &quot;Swayambhu inscription&quot;, Manjusri then established a city called Manjupattan (Sanskrit &quot;Land Established by Manjusri&quot;), now called Manjipā, and made Dharmākara its king. A shrine dedicated to Manjusri is still present in Majipā.
No historical documents have been found after this era until the advent of the Gopal era. A genealogy of kings is recorded in a chronicle called &quot;Gopalarajavamsavali&quot;. According to this manuscript, the Gopal kings were followed by the Mahispals and the Kirats before the Licchavis entered from the south. Some claim Buddha visited Nepal during the reign of Kirat King Jitedasti. 
The Newars reign over the valley and their sovereignty and influence over neighboring territories ended with the conquest of the Kathmandu Valley in 1769 by the Gorkhali Shah dynasty founded by Prithvi Narayan Shah.

Prior to the Gorkha conquest, which began with the Battle of Kirtipur in 1767, the borders of Nepal Mandala extended to Tibet in the north, the nation of the Kirata in the east, the kingdom of Makwanpur in the south and the Trishuli River in the west which separated it from the kingdom of Gorkha.

===Economic History===

Trade, industry and agriculture have been the mainstay of the economy of the Newars. They are made up of social groups associated with hereditary professions that provide ritual and economic services. Merchants, craftsmen, artists, potters, weavers, dyers, farmers and other castes all played their part in creating a flourishing economic system. Elaborate cultural traditions which required the use of varied objects and services also fueled the economy. Towns and villages in the Kathmandu Valley specialized in producing particular products, and rich agriculture produced a surplus for export.

For centuries, Newar merchants have handled trade between Tibet and India as well as exporting locally manufactured products to Tibet. Rice was another major export. Porters and pack mules transported merchandise over mountain tracks that formed the old trade routes. Since the 18th century, Newars have spread out across Nepal and established trading towns dotting the mid hills. They are known as jewelry makers and shopkeepers. Today, they are engaged in modern industry, business and service sectors.

==Castes and Communities==

Newars forms an ethnolinguistic community distinct from all the other ethnic groups of Nepal. Newars are divided into various endogamous clans or groups on the basis of their ancient hereditary occupations, deriving its roots in the classic late-Vedic Varna model. Although first introduced in the time of the Licchavis, the present Newar caste system assumed its present shape during the medieval Malla period.

*Artisan castes: &quot;Ritually pure&quot; occupational castes (Sat-Shudra): Balami (field workers and farmers), Bha/Karanjit (death ritual specialists), Chipā/Ranjitkar (dyers), Duhim/Putwar/Dali (carriers), Gathu/Mālākār/Mali (gardeners), Khusa/Tandukar (palanquin bearers/farmers), Pahari (farmers from Valley outskirts), Kau/Nakarmī (blacksmiths), Nau/Napit (barbers), Puñ/Chitrakar (painters), Sayami/Mānandhar (oilpressers and engineer), etc. 

*Jyapu: Traditionally farmers; majority of Newar population inside Kathmandu Valley. Includes Maharjan and (Farmers and Landowners). Also includes Suwāl, Basukala, etc. (Bhaktapur Hindu Jyapus), Kumhā/Prajapati (potterers and clay workers), Awalé (brickmakers), Sāpu (descendants of Gopāl dynasty), etc.
*Shakya: Descendants of Lord Buddha&#x27;s Shakya clan, Buddhist temple priests and also traditionally goldsmiths. They are also one of the few castes that can audition for being Kumari, a form of Taleju Goddess.
*Brahmin: The two main groups are: Kanyakubja Brahmin or Rajopadhyaya (Dyabhāju Brāhman) who are purohits for Hindu Newars and temple priests of important national shrines like Changu Narayan Temple, Taleju Bhawani, Kumbheshwar Temple, among others, and Maithil Brahmin (Jhā Bajé) who are mostly temple priests of smaller Hindu shrines and are lower in numbers than Rajopadhyayas. 
*Chyamé/Chamaha: Traditionally fishermen, sweepers, and toilet cleaners. A Scheduled Caste.
*Dhobi: Traditionally washermen. A Scheduled Caste.
*Dyahla/Podé: Traditionally temple cleaners, fishermen, sweepers. A Scheduled Caste.
*Gubhāju/Bajracharya: Buddhist purohits and temple priests of Kathmandu&#x27;s various Buddhist shrines. They can be auditioned as Kumari, a form of Taleju Goddess
*Jogi/Kapali (Newar caste): A caste associated as being descendants of the Kanphata Yogi sect. Also traditionally tailors, musicians (plays Mwaali baja). Previously, a Scheduled Caste.
*Chathariya Srēṣṭha: Kshatriya aristocratic bloc which includes Malla descendants, their numerous Hindu courtier clans Pradhan and Pradhananga (chief ministers and army chiefs), Amātya (ministers), Maskey (courtiers), Hada, Mathema, etc. and Kshatriya-status specialists like Joshi (astrologers), Vaidya (Ayurvedic practitioners), Rajbhandārī (royal treasurers), Rajvanshi (landed gentry) Karmāchārya (Tantric priests), Kayastha (scribes), among others. 
*Kulu/Dom: Traditionally leather workers. A Scheduled Caste.
*Nayé/Khadgi/Shahi: Traditionally traders of vegetables, meat and musicians. A Scheduled Caste, but the discrimination is slowly ending.
*Panchthariya Srēṣṭha: Chief Hindu trader and administrative class including Shrestha (administrators and traders).
*Rajkarnikar or Halwai: Traditional confectioners and sweetmakers. Kathmandu Halwais are Buddhist, whereas Lalitpur Halwais are Hindu.
*Shilpakar: Wood carvers. 
*Tamrakar: Trader and merchant group from Lalitpur; traditionally involved as coppersmiths.
*Urāya/Udās: Chief Buddhist trader, merchant and artisan group including Tuladhar and Bania (merchants), Kansakar (bronzesmiths), Sthapit, Kasthakar (architects/carpenters), and many more.

==Culture==
===Language===

Nepal Bhasa, also known as Newar, belongs to the Tibeto-Burman branch of the Sino-Tibetan language family and is predominantly spoken by Newars in Nepal&#x27;s Katmandu Valley. Newars are bound together by a common language and culture. Their common language is Nepal Bhasa or the linguistic progenitor of that language. Nepal Bhasa is the term recognised by the government.

Nepal Bhasa already existed as a spoken language during the Licchavi period and is believed to have developed from the language spoken in Nepal during the Kirati period. Inscriptions in Nepal Bhasa emerged from the 12th century, the palm-leaf manuscript from Uku Bahah being the first example. Nepal Bhasa developed from the 14th to the late 18th centuries as the court and state language. It was used universally in stone and copper inscriptions, sacred manuscripts, official documents, journals, title deeds, correspondence and creative writing.

In 2011, there were approximately 846,000 native speakers of Nepal Bhasa. Many Newar communities within Nepal also speak their own dialects of Nepal Bhasa, such as the Dolakha Newar Language.

=== Literature ===
Newar Bhasa is one of the five languages in the Sino-Tibetan family with an ancient literary tradition. Literature in Newar Bhasa began as translation and commentary in prose in the 14th century AD. The earliest known document in Newar Bhasa is called &quot;The Palmleaf from Uku Bahal&quot; which dates from 1114 AD during the Thakuri period.

Classical Newar Bhasa literature is represented by all the three major forms—prose, poetry, and drama. Most of the writings consist of prose including chronicles, popular stories and scientific manuals. Poetry consists of love songs, ballads, work songs, and religious poetry. The earliest poems date from the 1570s. Epic poetry describing historical events and tragedies are very popular. The ballads Sitala Maju, about the expulsion of children from Kathmandu, Silu, about an ill-fated pilgrimage to Gosaikunda, and Ji Waya La Lachhi Maduni, about a luckless Tibet trader, are sung as seasonal songs.

The dramas are based on stories from the epics, and almost all of them were written during the 17th and 18th centuries. Nepal Bhasa literature flourished for five centuries until 1850. Since then, it suffered a period of decline due to political oppression. The period 1909–1941 is known as the Nepal Bhasa renaissance period when writers defied official censure and braved imprisonment to create literary works. Modern Nepal Bhasa literature began in the 1940s with the emergence of new genres like short stories, poems, essays, novels and plays.

===Scripts===

Nepal Bhasa script is a group of scripts that developed from the Brahmi script and are used primarily to write Nepal Bhasa. Among the different scripts, Ranjana Lipi is the most common. Nepal script is also known as Nepal Lipi and Nepal Akhala.

Nepal Bhasa scripts appeared in the 10th century. For a thousand years, it was used on stone and copper plate inscriptions, coins (Nepalese mohar), palm-leaf documents and Hindu and Buddhist manuscripts. Devanagari began to be used to write Nepal Bhasa in the beginning of the 20th century, and Nepal script has limited usage today.

===Politics===
===Newa Autonomous State===
Newa Autonomous State is a proposed federal state of Nepal which establishes the historical native homeland of Newa people as a federal state. The historical territories of Newars is called Nepal Mandala. The Newa Autonomous State mandates to reconstruct the district division and create an autonomous Newa province. It includes historically Newa residing settlements and Newa dominant zones of Kathmandu, Bhaktapur, Lalitpur, Newa towns of Dolakha, Newa settlements of Nuwakot, Newa settlements of Makwanpur, Newa settlements of Ramechhap, Newa settlements of Sindupalchok, Newa settlements of Kavre West.

=== Dance ===


====Masked dance====
The Newar dance consists of sacred masked dance, religious dance without the use of masks known as Dyah Pyakhan, dance performed as part of a ritual and meditation practice known as Chachaa Pyakhan () (&quot;Charya Nritya&quot; in Sanskrit) and folk dance. There are also masked dance dramas known as Daboo Pyakhan which enact religious stories to the accompaniment of music.

==== Dhime dance ====
The dance done in the tune of Dhime are Dhime dance.

=== Music ===

Traditional Newa music consists of sacred music, devotional songs, seasonal songs, ballads and folk songs. One of the most well-known seasonal songs is Sitala Maju. The ballad describes the expulsion of children from Kathmandu in the early 19th century. Another seasonal song Silu is about a pilgrimage to Gosaikunda that went wrong. Ji Waya La Lachhi Maduni is a tragedy song about a newly married couple. The ballad Rajamati about unlucky lovers is widely popular. In 1908, maestro Seturam Shrestha made the first recording of the song on gramophone disc in Kolkata.

Common percussion instruments consist of the dhimay, khin, naykhin and dhaa. Wind instruments include the bansuri (flute), payntah (long trumpet) and mwahali (short trumpet), chhusya, bhusya, taa (cymbals), and gongs are other popular instruments. String instruments are very rare. Newa people call their music Dhime Baja.

The musical style and musical instruments are still in use today. Musical bands accompany religious processions in which an idol of a deity is placed in a chariot or portable shrine and taken around the city. Devotional songs are known as bhajan may be sung daily in community houses. Hymn societies like Gyanmala Bhajan Khala hold regular recitals. Dapa songs are sung during hymn singing seasons at Temple squares and sacred courtyards.

Gunla Bajan musical bands parade through the streets during Gunla, the 10th month of the Nepal Sambat calendar which is a holy month for Newar Buddhists. Musical performances start with an overture which is a salutation to the gods.

Seasonal songs and ballads are associated with particular seasons and festivals. Music is also played during wedding processions, life-cycle ceremonies and funeral processions.

====Popular traditional songs====

* Ghātu (summer music, this seasonal melody is played during Pahan Charhe festival)
* Ji Wayā Lā Lachhi Maduni (the tragedy of a merchant)
* Mohani (festive joy, this seasonal tune is played during Mohani festival) 
* Rājamati (about young lovers)
* Silu (about a couple who get separated during a pilgrimage, this seasonal music is played during the monsoon)
* Sitālā Māju (lament for children expelled from the Kathmandu Valley)
* Swey Dhaka Swaigu Makhu (a song about love)
* Holi ya Mela (About the&quot;holi&quot;.)
* Wala Wala Pulu Kishi (Sung in &quot;Indra jatra&quot;)
* Yo Sing Tyo
* Yomari Maku
* Dhanga maru ni bhamcha (song to complain about the laziness of daughter-in-law by man&#x27;s father.)
* Sirsaya Hegu

===Religious music===

* Gunlā Bājan
* Malshree dhun
* Dapha Bhajan
* Mye kasa

=== Art ===


The Newars are the creators of most examples of art and architecture in Nepal. Traditional Newar art is basically religious art. Newar devotional paubha painting, sculpture and metal craftsmanship are world-renowned for their exquisite beauty. The earliest dated paubha discovered so far is Vasudhara Mandala which was painted in 1365 AD (Nepal Sambat 485). The murals on the walls of two 15th-century monasteries in the former kingdom of Mustang in the Nepal Himalaya provide illustrations of Newar works outside the Kathmandu Valley. Stone sculpture, wood carving, repoussé art and metal statues of Buddhist and Hindu deities made by the lost-wax casting process are specimens of Newar artistry. The Peacock Window of Bhaktapur and Desay Madu Jhya of Kathmandu are known for their wood carving.

Building elements like the carved Newar window, roof struts on temples and the tympanum of temples and shrine houses exhibit traditional creativity. From as early as the seventh century, visitors have noted the skill of Newar artists and craftsmen who left their influence on the art of Tibet and China. Newars introduced the lost-wax technique into Bhutan and they were commissioned to paint murals on the walls of monasteries there. Sandpainting of mandala made during festivals and death rituals is another specialty of Newar art.

Besides exhibiting a high level of skill in the traditional religious art, Newar artists have been at the forefront of introducing Western art styles in Nepal. Raj Man Singh Chitrakar (1797–1865) is credited with starting watercolor painting in the country. Bhaju Man Chitrakar (1817–1874), Tej Bahadur Chitrakar (1898–1971) and Chandra Man Singh Maskey were other pioneer artists who introduced modern style paintings incorporating concepts of lighting and perspective.

===Traditional painting===

* Paubhā
* Thanka

=== Architecture ===

There are seven UNESCO World Heritage Sites and 2,500 temples and shrines in the Kathmandu Valley that illustrate the skill and aesthetic sense of Newar artisans. Fine brickwork and woodcarving are the marks of Newar architecture. Residential houses, monastic courtyards known as baha and bahi, rest houses, temples, stupas, priest houses and palaces are the various architectural structures found in the valley. Most of the chief monuments are located in the Durbar Squares of Kathmandu, Lalitpur and Bhaktapur, the old royal palace complexes built between the 12th and 18th centuries.

Newa architecture consists of the pagoda, stupa, shikhara, chaitya and other styles. The valley&#x27;s trademark is the multiple-roofed pagoda which may have originated in this area and spread to India, China, Indochina and Japan. The most famous artisan who influenced stylistic developments in China and Tibet was Arniko, a Newar youth who traveled to the court of Kublai Khan in the 13th century AD. He is known for building the white stupa at the Miaoying Temple in Beijing.

=== Settlements ===
Durbar squares, temple squares, sacred courtyards, stupas, open-air shrines, dance platforms, sunken water fountains, public rest houses, bazaars, multistoried houses with elaborately carved windows and compact streets are the characteristics of traditional planning. Besides the historical cities of Kathmandu, Lalitpur, Bhaktapur, Madhyapur Thimi, Chovar, Bungamati, Thankot and Kirtipur, small towns with a similar artistic heritage (like Panga in Kirtipur municipality) dot the Kathmandu Valley where almost half of the Newar population lives.

Outside the valley, historical Newar settlements include Nuwakot, Nala, Banepa, Dhulikhel, Panauti, Dolakha, Chitlang and Bhimphedi. The Newars of Kathmandu founded Pokhara in 1752 at the invitation of the rulers of Kaski. Over the last two centuries, Newars have fanned out of the Kathmandu Valley and established trade centers and settled in various parts of Nepal. Bandipur, Baglung, Silgadhi and Tansen in west Nepal and Chainpur and Bhojpur in east Nepal contain large Newar populations.

Outside Nepal, many Newars have settled in Darjeeling and Kalimpong in West Bengal, Assam, Manipur and Sikkim, India. 
In Sikkim, many Newars became Taksaris helping the former kingdom in establishing coinage system. Later they were made &quot;Thikadars&quot; or Sikkimese feudal lords with judicial and administrative powers within their respective estates.

Newars have also settled in Bhutan. Colonies of expatriate Newar merchants and artisans existed in Lhasa, Shigatse and Gyantse in Tibet till the mid-1960s when the traditional trade came to an end after the Sino-Indian War. In recent times, Newars have moved to different parts of Asia, Europe and America.

===Festivals===

Newar religious culture is rich in ceremony and is marked by frequent festivals throughout the year. Many festivals are tied to Hindu and Buddhist holidays and the harvest cycle. Street celebrations include pageants, jatras or processions in which a car or portable shrine is paraded through the streets and sacred masked dances. Other festivals are marked by family feasts and worship. The celebrations are held according to the lunar calendar, so the dates are changeable.

Mohani (Dasain) is one of the greatest annual celebrations which is observed for several days with feasts, religious services, and processions. During Swanti (Tihar), Newars celebrate New Year&#x27;s Day of Nepal Sambat by doing Mha Puja, a ritual in which our own body is worshipped, which is believed to purifies and strengthens one spiritually for the coming year. Similarly, Bhai Tika is also done during Swanti. It is a ritual observed to worship and respect a woman&#x27;s brothers, with or without blood relation. Another major festival is Sā Pāru when people who have lost a family member in the past year dress up as cows and saints, and parade through town, following a specific route. In some cases, a real cow may also be a part of the parade. People give such participants money, food and other gifts as a donation. Usually, children are the participants of the parade.

In Kathmandu, the biggest street festival is Yenya (Indra Jatra) when three cars bearing the living goddess Kumari and two other child gods are pulled through the streets and masked dance performances are held. The two godchildren are Ganesh and Bhairav. Another major celebration is Pahan Charhe when portable shrines bearing images of mother goddesses are paraded through Kathmandu. During the festival of Jana Baha Dyah Jatra, a temple car with an image of Karunamaya is drawn through central Kathmandu for three days. A similar procession is held in Lalitpur known as Bunga Dyah Jatra which continues for a month and climaxes with Bhoto Jatra, the display of the sacred vest. The biggest outdoor celebration in Bhaktapur is Biska Jatra (Bisket Jatra) which is marked by chariot processions and lasts for nine days. Sithi Nakha is another big festival when worship is offered and natural water sources are cleaned. In addition, all Newar towns and villages have their particular festival which is celebrated by holding a chariot or palanquin procession.

Paanch Chare is one of the many occasions or festivals celebrated by the Newa community, natives from Kathmandu Valley, Nepal.
This is celebrated on the Chaturdasi (Pisach Chaturdashi) day according to new lunar calendar on the month of Chaitra.

And also the longest jatra of Nepal Rato Machindra Nath Janka is celebrated by Newars mostly on Patan. This Jatra is one month long and contains various celebrations.

===Clothing===
Western wear is the norm as in urban areas in the rest of the country. Traditionally men wear tapuli (cap), long shirt (tapālan) and trousers (suruwā), also called Daura-Suruwal. Woman wear cheeparsi (sari) and gaa (long length shawl) while younger girls wear ankle-length gowns (bhāntānlan). Ritual dresses consist of pleated gowns, coats and a variety of headresses. Jyapu women have a distinctive sari called Hāku Patāsi which is a black sari with distinctive red border. Jyapu men also have a distinctive version of the tapālan suruwā. Similarly, a shawl (gā) is worn by men and women. Traditionally, Newar women wear a shoe made out of red cloth, Kapa lakaan. It is decorated with glitters and colorful beads (potya). One of the major parts of Newar dress ups is bracelets (chūra) and mala (necklaces).

===Cuisine===

Meals can be classified into three main categories: the daily meal, the afternoon snack and festival food. The daily meal consists of boiled rice, lentil soup, vegetable curry, relish and Meat are served. The snack generally consists of beaten rice, roasted and curried soybeans, curried potato and roasted meat mixed with spices.

Food is also an important part of the ritual and religious life of the Newars, and the dishes served during festivals and feasts have symbolic significance. Different sets of ritual dishes are placed in a circle around the staple Bawji (rice flakes or Flattened) to represent and honour different sets of deities depending on the festival or life-cycle ceremony.

Kwāti (क्वाति soup of different beans), kachilā (कचिला spiced minced meat), chhoyalā (छोयला water buffalo meat marinated in spices and grilled over the flames of dried wheat stalks), pukālā (पुकाला fried meat), wo (वः lentil cake), paun kwā (पाउँक्वा sour soup), swan pukā (स्वँपुका stuffed lungs), syen (स्येँ fried liver), mye (म्ये boiled and fried tongue), sapu mhichā (सःपू म्हिचा leaf tripe stuffed with bone marrow), sanyā khunā (सन्या खुना jellied fish soup) and takhā (तःखा jellied meat) are some of the popular festival foods. Dessert consists of dhau (धौ yogurt), sisābusā (सिसाबुसा fruits) and mari (मरि sweets). Thwon (थ्वँ rice beer) and aylā (अयला local alcohol) are the common alcoholic liquors that Newars make at home.

Traditionally, at meals, festivals and gatherings, Newars sit on long mats in rows. Typically, the sitting arrangement is hierarchical with the eldest sitting at the top and the youngest at the end. Newar cuisine makes use of mustard oil and a host of spices such as cumin, sesame seeds, turmeric, garlic, ginger, mint, bay leaves, cloves, cinnamon, pepper, chilli and mustard seeds. Food is served in laptya (लप्त्य plates made of special leaves, held together by sticks). Similarly, any soups are served in botā (बोटा bowls made of leaves). Liquors are served in Salinchā (सलिंचाः bowls made of clay) and Kholchā (खोल्चाः small metal bowls).

Newar people are much innovative in terms of cuisine. They have a tradition to prepare various foods according to the festivals. Some of the popular cuisines that are prepared with the festivals are:
===Life-cycle ceremonies===

Elaborate ceremonies chronicle the life cycle of a Newar from birth till death. Newars consider life-cycle rituals as a preparation for death and the life after it. Hindus and Buddhists alike perform the &quot;Sorha Sanskaar Karma&quot; or the 16 sacred rites of passage, unavoidable in a Hindu person&#x27;s life. The 16 rites have been shortened to 10 and called &quot;10 Karma Sanskar&quot; (). These include important events of a person&#x27;s life like &quot;Jatakarma&quot; () (Childbirth), &quot;Namakaran&quot; () (Naming the child), &quot;Annapraasan&quot; () (First rice feeding ceremony), &quot;Chudakarma&quot; or &quot;Kaeta Puja&quot; (first hair shaving and loin cloth ceremony), &quot;Vivaaha&quot; () (Wedding), among others.

* Chudakarma ceremony and &quot;(Bare Chuyegu/Acharyabhisheka &quot;or&quot; Bratabandha/Upanayana)&quot;

Once such important rite of passage ceremony among the male Newars is performing the loin-cloth and head-shaving ceremony called Chudākarma () followed by the Bratabandha or Kaeta Puja () which is traditionally performed for boys aged five to thirteen according to the religious affiliation Newars identify with.

In this ceremony, Buddhist Newars – Gubhāju-Baré (Bajracharya-Shakya), Urāy, Jyapu and few artisan castes like Chitrakār – perform their Pravrajyā () ceremony by mimicking Gautama Buddha&#x27;s ascetic and medicant lifestyle and the steps to attain monkhood and &quot;nirvana&quot; where the boy stays in a Buddhist monastery, Vihara, for three days, living the life of a monk and abandoning all material pleasures. On the fourth day, he disrobes and returns to his family and henceforth becomes a householder Buddhist for the rest of his life. The Buddhist priestly clan Gubhāju-Baré (Bajracharya and Shakya) go through an additional initiation ceremony called &quot;Bare Chuyegu&quot; (becoming a &quot;Baré&quot;) while Bajracharya boys are further required to go through &quot;Acharyabhisheka&quot; () which is a Tantric initiation rite that qualifies a Bajracharya to perform as a purohita.

Hindu Newars perform the male initiation ceremony called Kaeta Puja as a ritual observance of the &quot;brahmachārya&quot; – the first stage in the traditional four stages of life. During the ritual, the young boy renounces family and lineage for the celibate religious life. His head is fully shaved except a tuft in the top, he must don yellow/orange robes of the mendicant, he must beg rice from his relatives and prepare to wander out into the world. Having this symbolically fulfilled the ascetic ideal, he can be called back by his family to assume the life of a householder and his eventual duty as a husband and a father. Twice-born (Brahmin and Kshatriya) Newars – Rajopādhyāyas and Chatharīyas – additionally perform the Upanayana initiation where the boy receives his sacred thread () and the secret Vedic mantras – RV.3.62.10 (Gāyatrī mantra) for Brahmins and RV.1.35.2 (Shiva mantra) for Chatharīyas. The boy is then fully inducted into his caste status as a Dvija with the obligation to observe henceforth all commensal rules and other caste obligations().

*Macha Janku
This is the rice feeding ceremony, &quot;Annapraasan&quot; (). It is performed at the age of six or eight months for boys and at the age of five or seven months for girls.

*Ihi ceremony
For a female child, Ihi (Ehee)() short for &quot;Ihipaa&quot; (Eheepā)() (Marriage) is performed between the ages of five and nine. It is a ceremony in which pre-adolescent girls are &quot;married&quot; to the bael fruit (wood apple), which is a symbol of the god Shiva. It is believed that if the girl&#x27;s husband dies later in her life, she is not considered a widow because she is married to Shiva, and so already has a husband that is believed to be still alive.

*Bahra
Girls have yet another ceremonial ritual called &quot;Bahra Chuyegu&quot;() when a girl approaches puberty. This is done in her odd number year like 7,9 or 11 before menstruation. She is kept in a room for 12 days hidden and is ceremonially married to the sun god Surya.

*Jankwa

Jankwa or Janku is an old-age ceremony which is conducted when a person reaches the age of 77 years, seven months, seven days, seven hours, seven minutes, seven-quarter. Three further Janku ceremonies are performed at similar auspicious milestones at age 83, 88 and 99. The first Janwa is called &quot;Bhimratharohan&quot;, the second &quot;Chandraratharohan&quot;, the third &quot;Devaratharohan&quot;, and the fourth &quot;Divyaratharohan&quot;. After the second Jankwa, the person is accorded deified status.

* Vivaaha (Wedding)

The next ceremony common to both men and women is marriage. The Newar custom, similar to that of Hindus, is that the bride almost always leaves home at marriage and moves into her husband&#x27;s home and adopts her husband&#x27;s family name as her own. Cross-cousin and parallel-cousin marriage is forbidden. Marriage is usually arranged by parents who use a gobetween(lamee). Marriage by elopement is popular in some peripheral villages.

* The Sagan ceremony where auspicious food items are presented is an important part of life-cycle rituals.
* All Newars, except the Laakumi and Jogi caste, cremate their dead. The Jogis bury their dead. As part of the funeral, offerings are made to the spirit of the deceased, the crow and the dog. The crow and the dog represent ancestors and the god of death. Subsequently, offerings and rituals are conducted four, seven, eight, 13 and 45 days following death and monthly for a year and then annually.
* Buddhist Newars also make a mandala (sand painting) depicting the Buddha on the third day after death which is preserved for four days.

===Newa Games===
The games which had been played by prasanga people from their ancient time can be classified as Newa games.

Kana kana picha (Blindfold game), Piyah (a game played with stone by pushing stone within the marks drawn in the ground), Gatti ( another game played with stone by hand), pasa are some games played by Newar people since ancient time.

The Kirantas settled in different places of Nepal, especially in the eastern Himalayas in the seventh century B.C. They were brave. They attacked Kathmandu during the reign of King Bhuwan Singh and defeated him. They founded the Kiranti rule in the Kathmandu Valley. Yalambar was the first Kiranti King. The seventh Kiranti King, Jitedasit and the fourteenth King, Sthunko were very famous. During the rule of Jitedasti, Gautam Buddha Visited Nepal. During the rule of Sthunko, Indian Emperor Ashok visited Kathmandu.

About 32 kings of Kirant dynasty continued their rule in the valley. During that period, Nepal made great progress. Trade and industry developed. Wool, wood and herbs were sent from Nepal to other countries. Nepali blandets were very famous in pataliputra (patina). Kautily, an Indian economist, has written this. The laws were very strict. There were justice courts in the country. The kirantas worshipped kiranteshwar Mahadev, serpents and trees. They made stupas and chaityas. They had their own culture. They made several settlements like matatirtha, Shankhmul, Thankot, Khopung, Kurpasi, Sanga, Tenkhu etc. these settlements still exist with a little change in their names.

Lichchhavi kings, After the downfall of the Kiranti rule, Som dynasty came into power. Only five kings of this dynasty ruled over Nepal. Bhaskerverma was the last king. After that, Lichchhavi rule began in Nepal. The Lichchhavis had come to Nepal from India.

== Religion ==

According to the 2011 Nepal Census, 87.38% of the Newars were Hindu and 10.74% were Buddhist. A minority are Christian.

Out of the three main cities of the Kathmandu Valley which are historically Newar, the city of Patan is the most Buddhist containing the four stupas built by Indian emperor Ashoka. Bhaktapur is primarily Hindu, while Kathmandu is a mix of both. Generally, both Hindu and Buddhist deities are worshiped and festivals are celebrated by both religious groups. However, for ritual activities, Hindu and Buddhist Newars have their own priests (Rajopadhyaya Brahmins for Hindus and Vajracharyas for Buddhists) and varying amounts of cultural differences.
Religiously, the majority of Newars can be classified as both Hindu and Buddhist. The major cults are Vajrayana Buddhism and Tantric Hinduism. The former is referred to as Buddhamarga, the latter as Sivamarga. Both creeds have been established since antiquity in the valley. Both Buddhamargi and Sivamargi Newars are Tantricists, Within the Newar community, many different esoteric Tantric followers of Buddhist, Shaiva, and Vaishnava denominations are practiced. In this regard, followers of the Mother Goddesses and their consorts, the Bhairavas, are particularly important.
The most important shrines in the Valley are Swayambhu Maha Chaitya or Swayambhunath (Buddhist) and Pashupatinath (Hindu). Different castes worship different deities at different occasions, and more or less intensively. Only the higher echelons in the caste system claim to be exclusively Buddhist or Hindu. The Vajracharyas, Buddhist priests, will adamantly maintain that they are Buddhists, and so will the Bare (Shakya). Kathmandu Uray (Tuladhars, tc.) as well as the Sayamis (Manandhars) will also strongly maintain their Buddhist heritage. On the other hand, the Dyabhāju Brāhman, the Jha Brāhman, and the dominant Shresthas will maintain that they are Hindus. Further down in the caste hierarchy no distinction is made between Buddhists and Hindus, although preponderance towards Hinduism and worship of Hindu gods is much more prevalent among these castes. Hindu and Buddhist alike always worship Ganesh first in every ritual, and every locality has its local Ganesh shrine (Ganesh Than).

Although Newar Buddhism (Vajrayana) had been traditionally practiced in the Kathmandu Valley, Theravada Buddhism made a comeback in Nepal in the 1920s and now is a common form of Buddhism among Buddhamargi Newars.

From the 17th century onwards, Catholic Christian missionaries of the Jesuit and Capuchin religious orders &quot;established hospices at Kathmandu, Patan and Bhatgoan, the capitals of the three Malla Kings of Nepal who had permitted them to preach Christianity.&quot; An indigenous Newar Christian community thus became established. When the Mallas were overthrown by the Gurkhas, the Newar Christians took refuge in India, settling first in the city of Bettiah and then later moving eleven kilometres north to Chuhari.

== Notable Newar people ==
*Sankhadhar Sakhwa (879 AD) philanthropist, related to Nepal Sambat
*Jogbir Sthapit (1838–1926), Architect and designer of Narayanhiti Royal Palace
Swayambhunath and Kindo Baha
*Bhaju Ratna Kansakar (1882–1956), Prominent trader and philanthropist
*Pushpa Sundar Tuladhar (1885–1935), Prominent merchant and philanthropist 
*Yogbir Singh Kansakar (1885–1942), Poet and one of the Four Pillars of Nepal Bhasa
*Nhuchhe Ratna Tuladhar (1888–1950), Democracy activist and martyr
*Dhammalok Mahasthavir (1890–1966), who worked to revive Nepali Theravada Buddhism in the 1930s and 1940s
*Shukra Raj Shastri (1894–1941), Freedom fighter and martyr
*Dharmachari Guruma (1898–1978), Founder of the first nunnery in Nepal 
*Pragyananda Mahasthavir (1900–1993), First Patriarch of Theravada Order in Nepal
*Mandas Tuladhar (1900–1975), Pioneer publisher and renowned for ancient hymns collection
*Ashapatti Tamrakar (1904–1942), Pioneer optician and herbalist
*Kashiraj Pradhan (1905–1990), Pro-democracy leader in erstwhile Kingdom of Sikkim
*Triratna Man Tuladhar (1905–1986), President of the Nepalese Chamber of Commerce
*Chittadhar Hridaya (1906–1982), Prominent poet, aka Kavi Keshari or Chittadhar Tuladhar
*Vidyabati Kansakar (1906–1976), Pioneer nurse and was awarded Order of Gorkha Dakshina Bahu
*Dharma Bhakta Mathema (1908–1941), Freedom fighter and martyr
*Moti Laxmi Upasika (1909–1997), poet and first short story writer
*Daya Bir Singh Kansakar (1911–2001), Social worker and founder of Paropakar Organization
*Bhakta Bir Singh Tuladhar (1912–1989), Merchant and sponsor of Samyak festival in 1952
*Siddhicharan Shrestha (1912–1992), Poet, aka Yug Kavi
*Aniruddha Mahathera (1915–2003), Patriarch of Theravada Order (1998–2003)
*Dharma Ratna Yami (1915–1975), Freedom fighter and social reformer
*Siddartha Gautam Shakya (563 BCE-483 BCE), Buddha 
*Ganesh Man Singh (1915–1997) Freedom fighter and leader
*Prem Bahadur Kansakar (1918–1991), Writer and founder of Asa Archives
*Kul Ratna Tuladhar (1918–1984), First chief engineer of Nepal&#x27;s Public Works Department
*Lupau Ratna Tuladhar (1918-1993), Pioneer of Nepalese public transport and writer
*Gangalal Shrestha (1919–1941), Freedom fighter and martyr
*Purna Kaji Tamrakar (1920–2009), Trader and author
*Karuna Ratna Tuladhar (1920–2008), Pioneer of Nepalese public transport and proprietor of Nepal Transport Service
*Satya Mohan Joshi (1920–2022), Scholar of history and culture
*Pushpa Ratna Sagar (1922–2011), Merchant, grammarian, lexicographer and pioneer pressman
*Pratek Man Tuladhar (1924–1991), Trader and philatelist
*Pushpa Lal Shrestha (1924–1978), Founder of Communist Party of Nepal
*Sahana Pradhan (1927–2014), Leader of CPN-ML, Ex. Deputy PM
*Tara Devi Tuladhar (1931–2012), Dedicated social worker and first female blood donor
*Hari Prasad Pradhan Former Chief Justice of Nepal
*Narayan Gopal (1939–1990), Singer, aka Swar Samrat
*Padma Ratna Tuladhar (1940–2018), Politician and human rights activist
*Marich Man Singh Shrestha (1942–2013) Former Prime Minister
* Tara Bir Singh Tuladhar (b. 1943), artist and music composer
*Prem Man Chitrakar (1944–2020), Artist and poet
*Tara Devi (1945–2006), Singer, aka Swar Samragi
*Baikuntha Manandhar (b. 1951), Fastest Runner who competed at four consecutive Olympic Games, from 1976 to 1988.
*Nirgun Sthapit (1968-1990), Democracy fighter, Martyr during 1990 People&#x27;s Movement
*Sujan Chitrakar (b. 1974), Academic Program Coordinator, Assistant Professor in Kathmandu University
*Phatteman Rajbhandari, Singer
*Nahakul Pradhan, the pro-democracy leader in the erstwhile kingdom of Sikkim
*Prem Dhoj Pradhan (1938–2021), singer
*Ganga Prasad Pradhan, main translator of the Nepali Bible
*Madan Krishna Shrestha (b.1950), Actor
*Shiv Shrestha, Actor
*Kumar Pradhan, Historian
*Shree Krishna Shrestha, (19 April 1967 – 10 August 2014), Actor
*Durga Lal Shrestha, (b. July 1935), The People&#x27;s Poet of Nepal Bhasa and Nepali.
*Poornima Shrestha, (b. 6 September 1960), Bollywood film playback singer
*Narayan Man Bijukchhe, (b. 9 March 1939), writer, Member of the Legislature-Parliament of Nepal
*Binod Pradhan, Cinematographer
*Adrian Pradhan, Vocalist and Drummer 1974 AD
*Namrata Shrestha, famous Nepali actress
*Ashishma Nakarmi, famous Nepali actress
*Karna Shakya, environmentalist, conservationist, hotel entrepreneur, writer, and philanthropist
*Aashirman DS Joshi, Actor
*Ayushman Joshi, Actor
*Sanju Pradhan, Football Player
*Jharana Bajracharya - Miss Nepal 1997
*Usha Khadgi - Miss Nepal 2000
*Payal Shakya - Miss Nepal 2004
*Sahana Bajracharya - Miss Nepal Earth 2010
*Malina Joshi - Miss Nepal World 2011
*Sarina Maskey - Miss Nepal International 2011
*Shristi Shrestha - Miss Nepal World 2012 &amp; Miss World 2012 - Top 20 finalist
*Ishani Shrestha - Miss Nepal World 2013 &amp; Miss World 2013 - Beauty With A Purpose | Top 10 finalist 
*Prinsha Shrestha - Miss Nepal Earth 2014
*Sonie Rajbhandari - Miss Nepal International 2014
*Evana Manandhar - Miss Nepal 2015
*Asmi Shrestha - Miss Nepal 2016
*Ronali Amatya - Miss Nepal International 2018
*Anushka Shrestha - Miss Nepal World 2019 &amp; Miss World 2019- Beauty With A Purpose | Miss Multimedia | Top 12 finalist 
*Priyanka Rani Joshi - Miss Nepal 2022
*Srichchha Pradhan - Miss Nepal 2023
*Nitesh R Pradhan – Journalist &amp; singer 
*Ashish Pradhan – Football player
* Gautama V. Vajracharya - Sanskrit scholar and art historian
* Asmi Shrestha

==Gallery==
==See also==
* Lhasa Newar (trans-Himalayan traders)
* Newa Rastriya Mukti Morcha, Nepal
*Yalamber (Kirat King who went to Mahabharat)
*Yela (Lalitpur)
*Khopa (Bhaktapur)
*Ye (Kathmandu)
*Kippu, Kipoo (Kirtipur)
*Taksari Newars

== References ==
==Further reading==
* Bista, Dor Bahadur (2004). &quot;People of Nepal.&quot; Kathmandu: Ratna Pustak Bhandar.
* Encyclopædia Britannica (2011). &quot;Newar&quot;.
* Kayastha, Chhatra Bahadur (2003). &quot;Nepal Sanskriti: Samanyajnan&quot;. Nepal Sanskriti. .
* Toffin, Gérard, &quot;Newar Society&quot;, Kathmandu, Socia Science Baha/Himal Books, 2009.
* Scofield, John. &quot;Kathmandu&#x27;s Remarkable Newars&quot;, in &quot;National Geographic&quot;, February 1979.
* Vajracharya, Gautama V. &quot;Elements of Newar Buddhist Art:Circle of Bliss&quot; – a review article.

==External links==
*A Window to Newar Culture (archived)
* (archived)
*Art of Newar Buddhism (archived)
*Rashtriya Janajati Bikas Samiti (archived)
*An authentic source of information on Madhyapur Thimi, a rich Newar town
*Importance Of Wine In Newar Culture
*Journal of Newar Studies
*Newa Bigyan Journal of Newar Studies (archived)
*Newah Organization of America
*Newah Site Pasa Puchah Guthi, United Kingdom
*Amar Chitrakar (archived)
*Chitrakars
*Newars, new and old French scholar Gérard Toffin&#x27;s work on Newars
*Newar Society: City, Village and Periphery. By Gérard Toffin&#x27;s book review</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q524007" start="0" end="5" title="Newar people" label="Newar"/>
<link wikidata="Q22920493" start="11" end="18" title="endonym" label="endonym"/>
<link wikidata="Q524007" start="20" end="24" title="Newar people" label="Newa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7237292" start="28" end="43" title="Pracalit script" label="Pracalit script"/>
<link wikidata="Q524007" start="51" end="57" title="Newar people" label="Nepami"/>
<link wikidata="Q970717" start="88" end="104" title="Kathmandu Valley" label="Kathmandu Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1267849" start="264" end="274" title="Indo-Aryan peoples" label="Indo-Aryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q107334943" start="279" end="292" title="Tibeto-Burman migration to Indian subcontinent" label="Tibeto-Burman"/>
<link wikidata="Q33979" start="335" end="346" title="Newar language" label="Nepal Bhasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q17012490" start="375" end="389" title="Newar Hinduism" label="Newar Hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3655926" start="394" end="408" title="Newar Buddhism" label="Newar Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451" start="518" end="527" title="Himalayas" label="Himalayan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7016544" start="749" end="752" title="Newa art" label="art"/>
<link wikidata="Q12436076" start="757" end="767" title="Newari literature" label="literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q6538513" start="769" end="774" title="Lhasa Newar" label="trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q4694063" start="776" end="787" title="Agriculture in Nepal" label="agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q7016539" start="792" end="799" title="Newa cuisine" label="cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q38994" start="922" end="945" title="Human Development Index" label="Human Development Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q161718" start="959" end="963" title="UNDP" label="UNDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q105657245" start="1038" end="1055" title="2021 Nepal census" label="2021 Nepal census"/>
<link wikidata="Q574098" start="1220" end="1233" title="Nepal Mandala" label="Nepal Mandala"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404323" start="1262" end="1268" title="ethnic group" label="ethnic"/>
<link wikidata="Q484416" start="1272" end="1277" title="caste" label="caste"/>
<link wikidata="Q6266" start="1338" end="1344" title="nation" label="nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q239829" start="1362" end="1368" title="relict" label="relict"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063239" start="1435" end="1441" title="polity" label="polity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1267849" start="1672" end="1682" title="Indo-Aryan peoples" label="Indo-Aryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6737114" start="1695" end="1703" title="Maithils" label="Maithils"/>
<link wikidata="Q25104009" start="1707" end="1723" title="Madhesh Province" label="Madhesh Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q3242360" start="1729" end="1738" title="Licchavi (kingdom)" label="Licchavis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053762" start="1740" end="1746" title="Kosala Kingdom" label="Kosala"/>
<link wikidata="Q2366229" start="1752" end="1762" title="Malla (Nepal)" label="Mallas (N)"/>
<link wikidata="Q846025" start="1786" end="1798" title="Mahajanapada" label="Mahajanapada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376731" start="1805" end="1814" title="Licchavi (tribe)" label="Licchavis"/>
<link wikidata="Q605199" start="1818" end="1823" title="Vajjika League" label="Vajji"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053762" start="1825" end="1831" title="Kosala Kingdom" label="Kosala"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376303" start="1837" end="1846" title="Malla (tribe)" label="Malla (I)"/>
<link wikidata="Q215262" start="2029" end="2034" title="Vedic period" label="Vedic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11059" start="2071" end="2079" title="Sanskrit" label="Sanskrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7303998" start="2093" end="2109" title="Varna (Hinduism)" label="social structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q10090" start="2111" end="2116" title="Hindu" label="Hindu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3332217" start="2290" end="2304" title="Gorkha Kingdom" label="Gorkha Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q11059" start="2582" end="2590" title="Sanskrit" label="Sanskrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q192170" start="2626" end="2633" title="Prakrit" label="Prakrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="3050" end="3056" title="Jesuit" label="Jesuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338303" start="3064" end="3081" title="Ippolito Desideri" label="Ippolito Desideri"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296474" start="3235" end="3250" title="sanskritization" label="sanskritization"/>
<link wikidata="Q28579" start="3805" end="3818" title="Central Nepal" label="Central Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2366229" start="4038" end="4051" title="Malla (Nepal)" label="Malla dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q36109" start="4093" end="4110" title="Maithili language" label="Maithili language"/>
<link wikidata="Q2891737" start="4132" end="4139" title="Mithila (region)" label="Mithila"/>
<link wikidata="Q11059" start="4191" end="4199" title="Sanskrit" label="Sanskrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q6737115" start="4220" end="4235" title="Maithil Brahmin" label="Maithil Brahmin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6737114" start="4279" end="4286" title="Maithil" label="Maithil"/>
<link wikidata="Q17252" start="4378" end="4383" title="Tibet" label="Tibet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2891737" start="4396" end="4402" title="Tirhut" label="Tirhut"/>
<link wikidata="Q3332217" start="4717" end="4731" title="Gorkha Kingdom" label="Gorkha Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7654077" start="5191" end="5207" title="Swayambhu Purana" label="Swayambhu Purana"/>
<link wikidata="Q178149" start="5301" end="5312" title="Bodhisattva" label="Bodhisattva"/>
<link wikidata="Q471696" start="5313" end="5321" title="Manjusri" label="Manjusri"/>
<link wikidata="Q25068" start="6096" end="6101" title="Kirat" label="Kirat"/>
<link wikidata="Q3242360" start="6114" end="6122" title="Licchavi (kingdom)" label="Licchavi"/>
<link wikidata="Q9441" start="6159" end="6165" title="Buddha" label="Buddha"/>
<link wikidata="Q3332217" start="6384" end="6397" title="Gorkha Kingdom" label="Gorkhali Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q574450" start="6417" end="6437" title="Prithvi Narayan Shah" label="Prithvi Narayan Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q4871446" start="6491" end="6509" title="Battle of Kirtipur" label="Battle of Kirtipur"/>
<link wikidata="Q17252" start="6560" end="6565" title="Tibet" label="Tibet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3630429" start="6598" end="6604" title="Kirata" label="Kirata"/>
<link wikidata="Q4463211" start="6664" end="6678" title="Trishuli River" label="Trishuli River"/>
<link wikidata="Q17252" start="7419" end="7424" title="Tibet" label="Tibet"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="7429" end="7434" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q215262" start="8141" end="8146" title="Vedic period" label="Vedic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7303998" start="8147" end="8152" title="Varna (Hinduism)" label="Varna"/>
<link wikidata="Q3242360" start="8205" end="8214" title="Licchavi (kingdom)" label="Licchavis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2366229" start="8293" end="8298" title="Malla (Nepal)" label="Malla"/>
<link wikidata="Q905360" start="8376" end="8382" title="Shudra" label="Shudra"/>
<link wikidata="Q83281" start="8468" end="8477" title="Ranjitkar" label="Ranjitkar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6743325" start="8531" end="8535" title="Mali caste" label="Mali"/>
<link wikidata="Q5102312" start="8685" end="8694" title="Chitrakar" label="Chitrakar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6733422" start="8760" end="8765" title="Maharjan" label="Jyapu"/>
<link wikidata="Q970717" start="8826" end="8842" title="Kathmandu Valley" label="Kathmandu Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q843138" start="8929" end="8938" title="Bhaktapur" label="Bhaktapur"/>
<link wikidata="Q21872034" start="8954" end="8959" title="Kumhar" label="Kumhā"/>
<link wikidata="Q2017194" start="8960" end="8969" title="Prajapati" label="Prajapati"/>
<link wikidata="Q1648546" start="9042" end="9055" title="History of Nepal" label="Gopāl dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062748" start="9106" end="9112" title="Shakya" label="Shakya"/>
<link wikidata="Q3655926" start="9119" end="9127" title="Newar Buddhism" label="Buddhist"/>
<link wikidata="Q47140" start="9277" end="9284" title="Brahmin" label="Brahmin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6365797" start="9311" end="9329" title="Kanyakubja Brahmin" label="Kanyakubja Brahmin"/>
<link wikidata="Q19683064" start="9333" end="9345" title="Rajopadhyaya" label="Rajopadhyaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q7261365" start="9373" end="9380" title="purohit" label="purohit"/>
<link wikidata="Q17012490" start="9386" end="9398" title="Newa Hinduism" label="Hindu Newars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062150" start="9453" end="9474" title="Changu Narayan Temple" label="Changu Narayan Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q83776242" start="9476" end="9490" title="Taleju Temple, Kathmandu" label="Taleju Bhawani"/>
<link wikidata="Q18344056" start="9492" end="9510" title="Kumbheshwar Temple" label="Kumbheshwar Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q6737115" start="9530" end="9545" title="Maithil Brahmin" label="Maithil Brahmin"/>
<link wikidata="Q10090" start="9598" end="9603" title="Hindu" label="Hindu"/>
<link wikidata="Q11555014" start="9733" end="9748" title="Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes" label="Scheduled Caste"/>
<link wikidata="Q11555014" start="9785" end="9800" title="Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes" label="Scheduled Caste"/>
<link wikidata="Q11555014" start="9870" end="9885" title="Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes" label="Scheduled Caste"/>
<link wikidata="Q7908941" start="9896" end="9907" title="Bajracharya" label="Bajracharya"/>
<link wikidata="Q3655926" start="9909" end="9917" title="Newar Buddhism" label="Buddhist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7261365" start="9918" end="9925" title="purohit" label="purohit"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="9974" end="9982" title="Buddhist" label="Buddhist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6366414" start="10057" end="10077" title="Kapali (Newar caste)" label="Kapali (Newar caste)"/>
<link wikidata="Q454062" start="10126" end="10139" title="Dashanami Sampradaya" label="Kanphata Yogi"/>
<link wikidata="Q11555014" start="10219" end="10234" title="Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes" label="Scheduled Caste"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10237" end="10255" title="Shresthas#Sr.C4.93.E1.B9.A3.E1.B9.ADha sub-caste groups" label="Chathariya Srēṣṭha"/>
<link wikidata="Q242360" start="10257" end="10266" title="Kshatriya" label="Kshatriya"/>
<link wikidata="Q2366229" start="10300" end="10305" title="Malla (Nepal)" label="Malla"/>
<link wikidata="Q10090" start="10334" end="10339" title="Hindu" label="Hindu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3909806" start="10355" end="10362" title="Pradhan" label="Pradhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q37133261" start="10414" end="10420" title="Amatya" label="Amātya"/>
<link wikidata="Q21811387" start="10434" end="10440" title="Maskey" label="Maskey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5653506" start="10454" end="10458" title="Hada Chauhan" label="Hada"/>
<link wikidata="Q4160502" start="10512" end="10517" title="Joshi" label="Joshi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7908704" start="10533" end="10539" title="Vaidya" label="Vaidya"/>
<link wikidata="Q11317295" start="10567" end="10578" title="Rajbhandari" label="Rajbhandārī"/>
<link wikidata="Q51135791" start="10599" end="10608" title="Rajbanshi people" label="Rajvanshi"/>
<link wikidata="Q181510" start="10638" end="10645" title="Tantra" label="Tantric"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243684" start="10656" end="10664" title="Kayastha" label="Kayastha"/>
<link wikidata="Q11555014" start="10735" end="10750" title="Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes" label="Scheduled Caste"/>
<link wikidata="Q11555014" start="10831" end="10846" title="Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes" label="Scheduled Caste"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10890" end="10910" title="Shresthas#Sr.C4.93.E1.B9.A3.E1.B9.ADha sub-caste groups" label="Panchthariya Srēṣṭha"/>
<link wikidata="Q10090" start="10918" end="10923" title="Hindu" label="Hindu"/>
<link wikidata="Q12944265" start="10966" end="10974" title="Shrestha" label="Shrestha"/>
<link wikidata="Q7286263" start="11006" end="11017" title="Rajkarnikar" label="Rajkarnikar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5643781" start="11021" end="11027" title="Halwai" label="Halwai"/>
<link wikidata="Q3655926" start="11094" end="11102" title="Newar Buddhism" label="Buddhist"/>
<link wikidata="Q10090" start="11133" end="11138" title="Hindu" label="Hindu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7681833" start="11168" end="11176" title="Tamrakar" label="Tamrakar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7899807" start="11260" end="11270" title="Uray (caste group)" label="Urāya/Udās"/>
<link wikidata="Q3655926" start="11278" end="11286" title="Newar Buddhism" label="Buddhist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7851905" start="11332" end="11340" title="Tuladhar" label="Tuladhar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4855738" start="11345" end="11350" title="Bania (Newar caste)" label="Bania"/>
<link wikidata="Q6364500" start="11364" end="11372" title="Kansakar" label="Kansakar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7616087" start="11389" end="11396" title="Sthapit" label="Sthapit"/>
<link wikidata="Q33979" start="11477" end="11488" title="Nepal Bhasa" label="Nepal Bhasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q34064" start="11526" end="11539" title="Tibeto-Burman" label="Tibeto-Burman"/>
<link wikidata="Q45961" start="11554" end="11566" title="Sino-Tibetan" label="Sino-Tibetan"/>
<link wikidata="Q970717" start="11637" end="11652" title="Katmandu Valley" label="Katmandu Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q33979" start="11739" end="11750" title="Nepal Bhasa" label="Nepal Bhasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3242360" start="11913" end="11921" title="Licchavi (kingdom)" label="Licchavi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6414862" start="12008" end="12014" title="Kirata Kingdom" label="Kirati"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641020" start="12086" end="12106" title="palm-leaf manuscript" label="palm-leaf manuscript"/>
<link wikidata="Q5288841" start="12570" end="12592" title="Dolakha Newar Language" label="Dolakha Newar Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q7531617" start="13361" end="13372" title="Sitala Maju (song)" label="Sitala Maju"/>
<link wikidata="Q7515621" start="13422" end="13426" title="Silu (song)" label="Silu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2565308" start="13461" end="13471" title="Gosaikunda" label="Gosaikunda"/>
<link wikidata="Q6191343" start="13477" end="13501" title="Ji Waya La Lachhi Maduni (song)" label="Ji Waya La Lachhi Maduni"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13858" end="13881" title="Nepal Bhasa renaissance#Impact" label="Nepal Bhasa renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q185083" start="14192" end="14205" title="Brahmi script" label="Brahmi script"/>
<link wikidata="Q33979" start="14238" end="14249" title="Nepal Bhasa" label="Nepal Bhasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6994502" start="14504" end="14518" title="Nepalese mohar" label="Nepalese mohar"/>
<link wikidata="Q10090" start="14545" end="14550" title="Hindu" label="Hindu"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="14555" end="14563" title="Buddhist" label="Buddhist"/>
<link wikidata="Q38592" start="14577" end="14587" title="Devanagari" label="Devanagari"/>
<link wikidata="Q33979" start="14861" end="14865" title="Newa" label="Newa"/>
<link wikidata="Q574098" start="14940" end="14953" title="Nepal Mandala" label="Nepal Mandala"/>
<link wikidata="Q3037" start="15145" end="15154" title="Kathmandu" label="Kathmandu"/>
<link wikidata="Q843138" start="15156" end="15165" title="Bhaktapur" label="Bhaktapur"/>
<link wikidata="Q6647" start="15167" end="15175" title="Lalitpur, Nepal" label="Lalitpur"/>
<link wikidata="Q5288840" start="15191" end="15198" title="Dolakha Town, Nepal" label="Dolakha"/>
<link wikidata="Q28430" start="15220" end="15227" title="Nuwakot District" label="Nuwakot"/>
<link wikidata="Q28174" start="15249" end="15258" title="Makwanpur" label="Makwanpur"/>
<link wikidata="Q2224286" start="15280" end="15289" title="Ramechhap" label="Ramechhap"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15311" end="15323" title="Sindupalchok" label="Sindupalchok"/>
<link wikidata="Q28569" start="15345" end="15350" title="Kavre" label="Kavre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7531617" start="16015" end="16026" title="Sitala Maju (song)" label="Sitala Maju"/>
<link wikidata="Q7515621" start="16139" end="16143" title="Silu (song)" label="Silu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2565308" start="16169" end="16179" title="Gosaikunda" label="Gosaikunda"/>
<link wikidata="Q6191343" start="16197" end="16221" title="Ji Waya La Lachhi Maduni (song)" label="Ji Waya La Lachhi Maduni"/>
<link wikidata="Q7285695" start="16281" end="16289" title="Rajamati (song)" label="Rajamati"/>
<link wikidata="Q7456979" start="16347" end="16363" title="Seturam Shrestha" label="Seturam Shrestha"/>
<link wikidata="Q16629185" start="16404" end="16414" title="gramophone record" label="gramophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2759641" start="16744" end="16754" title="Dhima" label="Dhime Baja"/>
<link wikidata="Q854775" start="16996" end="17002" title="bhajan" label="bhajan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5624005" start="17062" end="17083" title="Gyanmala Bhajan Khala" label="Gyanmala Bhajan Khala"/>
<link wikidata="Q5618849" start="17197" end="17208" title="Gunla Bajan" label="Gunla Bajan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268741" start="17286" end="17298" title="Nepal Sambat" label="Nepal Sambat"/>
<link wikidata="Q17013393" start="17705" end="17717" title="Pahan Charhe" label="Pahan Charhe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6191343" start="17730" end="17754" title="Ji Waya La Lachhi Maduni (song)" label="Ji Wayā Lā Lachhi Maduni"/>
<link wikidata="Q17011351" start="17842" end="17848" title="Mohani" label="Mohani"/>
<link wikidata="Q7285695" start="17862" end="17870" title="Rajamati (song)" label="Rājamati"/>
<link wikidata="Q7515621" start="17894" end="17898" title="Silu (song)" label="Silu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7531617" start="18006" end="18017" title="Sitala Maju (song)" label="Sitālā Māju"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18077" end="18100" title="Swey Dhaka Swaigu Makhu" label="Swey Dhaka Swaigu Makhu"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18123" end="18135" title="Holi ya Mela" label="Holi ya Mela"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18167" end="18187" title="Wala Wala Pulu Kishi" label="Wala Wala Pulu Kishi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18224" end="18235" title="Yo Sing Tyo" label="Yo Sing Tyo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18238" end="18249" title="Yomari Maku" label="Yomari Maku"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18252" end="18274" title="Dhanga maru ni bhamcha" label="Dhanga maru ni bhamcha"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18356" end="18368" title="Sirsaya Hegu" label="Sirsaya Hegu"/>
<link wikidata="Q5618849" start="18395" end="18406" title="Gunla Bajan" label="Gunlā Bājan"/>
<link wikidata="Q60785794" start="18409" end="18422" title="Malshree dhun" label="Malshree dhun"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18425" end="18437" title="Dapha Bhajan" label="Dapha Bhajan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18440" end="18448" title="Mye kasa" label="Mye kasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7148832" start="18610" end="18616" title="paubha" label="paubha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268741" start="18803" end="18815" title="Nepal Sambat" label="Nepal Sambat"/>
<link wikidata="Q28307" start="18903" end="18910" title="Upper Mustang" label="Mustang"/>
<link wikidata="Q656884" start="19031" end="19039" title="repoussé" label="repoussé"/>
<link wikidata="Q765814" start="19104" end="19120" title="lost-wax casting" label="lost-wax casting"/>
<link wikidata="Q5263645" start="19198" end="19213" title="Desay Madu Jhya (window)" label="Desay Madu Jhya"/>
<link wikidata="Q7016571" start="19296" end="19308" title="Newar window" label="Newar window"/>
<link wikidata="Q223209" start="19341" end="19349" title="tympanum (architecture)" label="tympanum"/>
<link wikidata="Q917" start="19612" end="19618" title="Bhutan" label="Bhutan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439311" start="19697" end="19709" title="Sandpainting" label="Sandpainting"/>
<link wikidata="Q191431" start="19713" end="19720" title="mandala" label="mandala"/>
<link wikidata="Q16065867" start="19957" end="19980" title="Raj Man Singh Chitrakar" label="Raj Man Singh Chitrakar"/>
<link wikidata="Q50030" start="20019" end="20038" title="watercolor painting" label="watercolor painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q16010977" start="20126" end="20150" title="Chandra Man Singh Maskey" label="Chandra Man Singh Maskey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7148832" start="20299" end="20305" title="Paubha" label="Paubhā"/>
<link wikidata="Q916651" start="20308" end="20314" title="Thanka" label="Thanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="20354" end="20360" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="20361" end="20381" title="World Heritage Sites" label="World Heritage Sites"/>
<link wikidata="Q906881" start="20798" end="20811" title="Durbar Square" label="Durbar Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q6122177" start="20816" end="20825" title="Kathmandu Durbar Square" label="Kathmandu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7144236" start="20827" end="20835" title="Patan Durbar Square" label="Lalitpur"/>
<link wikidata="Q4900869" start="20840" end="20849" title="Bhaktapur Durbar Square" label="Bhaktapur"/>
<link wikidata="Q199451" start="20960" end="20966" title="pagoda" label="pagoda"/>
<link wikidata="Q180987" start="20968" end="20973" title="stupa" label="stupa"/>
<link wikidata="Q569867" start="20975" end="20983" title="Sikhara" label="shikhara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059208" start="20985" end="20992" title="chaitya" label="chaitya"/>
<link wikidata="Q626019" start="21242" end="21248" title="Arniko" label="Arniko"/>
<link wikidata="Q7523" start="21293" end="21304" title="Kublai Khan" label="Kublai Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2298526" start="21377" end="21392" title="Miaoying Temple" label="Miaoying Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q956" start="21396" end="21403" title="Beijing" label="Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3037" start="21727" end="21736" title="Kathmandu" label="Kathmandu"/>
<link wikidata="Q6647" start="21738" end="21746" title="Patan, Nepal" label="Lalitpur"/>
<link wikidata="Q843138" start="21748" end="21757" title="Bhaktapur" label="Bhaktapur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1457909" start="21759" end="21774" title="Madhyapur Thimi" label="Madhyapur Thimi"/>
<link wikidata="Q693679" start="21776" end="21782" title="Chovar" label="Chovar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2608296" start="21784" end="21793" title="Bungamati" label="Bungamati"/>
<link wikidata="Q3427840" start="21795" end="21802" title="Thankot" label="Thankot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517030" start="21807" end="21815" title="Kirtipur" label="Kirtipur"/>
<link wikidata="Q18392311" start="21868" end="21898" title="Panga, Kirtipur" label="Panga in Kirtipur municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q3429855" start="22032" end="22039" title="Nuwakot, Bagmati" label="Nuwakot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2588460" start="22041" end="22045" title="Nala" label="Nala"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760422" start="22047" end="22053" title="Banepa" label="Banepa"/>
<link wikidata="Q576437" start="22055" end="22064" title="Dhulikhel" label="Dhulikhel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2049147" start="22066" end="22073" title="Panauti" label="Panauti"/>
<link wikidata="Q3412027" start="22084" end="22092" title="Chitlang" label="Chitlang"/>
<link wikidata="Q6640" start="22140" end="22147" title="Pokhara" label="Pokhara"/>
<link wikidata="Q806327" start="22343" end="22351" title="Bandipur" label="Bandipur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1659597" start="22353" end="22360" title="Baglung" label="Baglung"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22362" end="22370" title="Silgadhi" label="Silgadhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1499762" start="22375" end="22381" title="Tansen, Nepal" label="Tansen"/>
<link wikidata="Q169997" start="22512" end="22522" title="Darjeeling" label="Darjeeling"/>
<link wikidata="Q500877" start="22527" end="22536" title="Kalimpong" label="Kalimpong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164" start="22553" end="22558" title="Assam" label="Assam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193" start="22560" end="22567" title="Manipur" label="Manipur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1505" start="22572" end="22578" title="Sikkim" label="Sikkim"/>
<link wikidata="Q110933428" start="22618" end="22626" title="Taksaris of Sikkim" label="Taksaris"/>
<link wikidata="Q111181030" start="22713" end="22722" title="Kazis and Thikadars of Sikkim" label="Thikadars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026100" start="22928" end="22933" title="Lhasa" label="Lhasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211183" start="22935" end="22943" title="Shigatse" label="Shigatse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999606" start="22948" end="22955" title="Gyantse" label="Gyantse"/>
<link wikidata="Q208694" start="23036" end="23051" title="Sino-Indian War" label="Sino-Indian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q132241" start="23224" end="23232" title="festival" label="festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q10090" start="23282" end="23287" title="Hindu" label="Hindu"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="23292" end="23300" title="Buddhist" label="Buddhist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6164660" start="23371" end="23376" title="Jatra (Nepal)" label="jatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q17011351" start="23630" end="23636" title="Mohani" label="Mohani"/>
<link wikidata="Q10379695" start="23638" end="23644" title="Dasain" label="Dasain"/>
<link wikidata="Q17022491" start="23781" end="23787" title="Swanti (festival)" label="Swanti"/>
<link wikidata="Q15128500" start="23789" end="23794" title="Tihar (festival)" label="Tihar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268741" start="23837" end="23849" title="Nepal Sambat" label="Nepal Sambat"/>
<link wikidata="Q6826848" start="23859" end="23867" title="Mha Puja" label="Mha Puja"/>
<link wikidata="Q40887536" start="24177" end="24184" title="Sā Pāru" label="Sā Pāru"/>
<link wikidata="Q301339" start="24559" end="24564" title="Yenya" label="Yenya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064555" start="24622" end="24628" title="Kumari (children)" label="Kumari"/>
<link wikidata="Q17013393" start="24798" end="24810" title="Pahan Charhe" label="Pahan Charhe"/>
<link wikidata="Q16889005" start="24922" end="24942" title="Jana Baha Dyah Jatra" label="Jana Baha Dyah Jatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q20704257" start="25255" end="25267" title="Bisket Jatra" label="Bisket Jatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3634111" start="26166" end="26179" title="Daura-Suruwal" label="Daura-Suruwal"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26414" end="26425" title="Newar traditional clothing#Hāku patāsi" label="Hāku Patāsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2724236" start="27388" end="27393" title="Flattened rice" label="Bawji"/>
<link wikidata="Q18127051" start="27522" end="27527" title="Kwati (soup)" label="Kwāti"/>
<link wikidata="Q5104057" start="27598" end="27606" title="choila" label="chhoyalā"/>
<link wikidata="Q18389634" start="27705" end="27711" title="Pukala" label="pukālā"/>
<link wikidata="Q18386746" start="27785" end="27794" title="Swan Puka" label="swan pukā"/>
<link wikidata="Q18355137" start="27883" end="27894" title="Sapu Mhicha" label="sapu mhichā"/>
<link wikidata="Q7799531" start="28147" end="28152" title="Thwon" label="Thwon"/>
<link wikidata="Q273761" start="29880" end="29899" title="Tonsure" label="Chudakarma ceremony"/>
<link wikidata="Q2722622" start="29967" end="29976" title="Upanayana" label="Upanayana"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="30317" end="30325" title="Buddhist" label="Buddhist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7908941" start="30349" end="30360" title="Bajracharya" label="Bajracharya"/>
<link wikidata="Q7899807" start="30370" end="30374" title="Uray (caste group)" label="Urāy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5216189" start="30376" end="30381" title="Jyapu" label="Jyapu"/>
<link wikidata="Q5102312" start="30410" end="30419" title="Chitrakar" label="Chitrakār"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074258" start="30436" end="30445" title="Pabbajja" label="Pravrajyā"/>
<link wikidata="Q9441" start="30471" end="30485" title="Shakyamuni" label="Gautama Buddha"/>
<link wikidata="Q42927" start="30567" end="30574" title="nirvana" label="nirvana"/>
<link wikidata="Q844619" start="30626" end="30632" title="Vihara" label="Vihara"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="30848" end="30856" title="Buddhist" label="Buddhist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7261365" start="31185" end="31193" title="purohita" label="purohita"/>
<link wikidata="Q17012490" start="31196" end="31208" title="Newa Hinduism" label="Hindu Newars"/>
<link wikidata="Q897318" start="31300" end="31312" title="Brahmacharya" label="brahmachārya"/>
<link wikidata="Q47140" start="31838" end="31845" title="Brahmin" label="Brahmin"/>
<link wikidata="Q242360" start="31850" end="31859" title="Kshatriya" label="Kshatriya"/>
<link wikidata="Q19683064" start="31870" end="31883" title="Rajopadhyaya" label="Rajopādhyāyas"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31888" end="31899" title="Shresthas#Srēṣṭha sub-caste groups" label="Chatharīyas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2722622" start="31927" end="31936" title="Upanayana" label="Upanayana"/>
<link wikidata="Q39950" start="32007" end="32012" title="Vedas" label="Vedic"/>
<link wikidata="Q727413" start="32023" end="32025" title="Rigveda" label="RV"/>
<link wikidata="Q728880" start="32035" end="32049" title="Gayatri Mantra" label="Gāyatrī mantra"/>
<link wikidata="Q727413" start="32068" end="32070" title="Rigveda" label="RV"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495898" start="32168" end="32173" title="Dvija" label="Dvija"/>
<link wikidata="Q5994682" start="32455" end="32467" title="Ihi" label="Ihi ceremony"/>
<link wikidata="Q5994682" start="32488" end="32491" title="Ihi" label="Ihi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32517" end="32523" title="Ihipaa" label="Ihipaa"/>
<link wikidata="Q234126" start="32678" end="32682" title="Aegle marmelos" label="bael"/>
<link wikidata="Q11380" start="32732" end="32737" title="Vishnu" label="Shiva"/>
<link wikidata="Q204418" start="33210" end="33215" title="Surya" label="Surya"/>
<link wikidata="Q6154984" start="33219" end="33225" title="Jankwa" label="Jankwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q17016503" start="34208" end="34222" title="Sagan (ceremony)" label="Sagan ceremony"/>
<link wikidata="Q6366414" start="34346" end="34350" title="Kapali (Newar caste)" label="Jogi"/>
<link wikidata="Q191431" start="34737" end="34744" title="mandala" label="mandala"/>
<link wikidata="Q6647" start="36898" end="36903" title="Patan, Lalitpur" label="Patan"/>
<link wikidata="Q8589" start="36976" end="36982" title="Ashoka" label="Ashoka"/>
<link wikidata="Q843138" start="36984" end="36993" title="Bhaktapur" label="Bhaktapur"/>
<link wikidata="Q3037" start="37020" end="37029" title="Kathmandu" label="Kathmandu"/>
<link wikidata="Q172175" start="37454" end="37472" title="Vajrayana Buddhism" label="Vajrayana Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q181510" start="37477" end="37484" title="Tantra" label="Tantric"/>
<link wikidata="Q234953" start="37551" end="37560" title="Shivaite" label="Sivamarga"/>
<link wikidata="Q854730" start="37890" end="37898" title="Bhairava" label="Bhairava"/>
<link wikidata="Q12946982" start="38000" end="38013" title="Swayambhunath" label="Swayambhunath"/>
<link wikidata="Q380384" start="38029" end="38042" title="Pashupatinath Temple" label="Pashupatinath"/>
<link wikidata="Q7908941" start="38241" end="38252" title="Vajracharya" label="Vajracharya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062748" start="38338" end="38351" title="Shakya" label="Bare (Shakya)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7899807" start="38363" end="38384" title="Uray (caste group)" label="Uray (Tuladhars, tc.)"/>
<link wikidata="Q19683064" start="38497" end="38513" title="Rajopadhyaya" label="Dyabhāju Brāhman"/>
<link wikidata="Q16850200" start="38519" end="38530" title="Jha (surname)" label="Jha Brāhman"/>
<link wikidata="Q18358237" start="38549" end="38558" title="Shresthas" label="Shresthas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1579" start="38833" end="38839" title="Ganesha" label="Ganesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q132265" start="39020" end="39038" title="Theravada Buddhism" label="Theravada Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="39211" end="39217" title="Jesuit" label="Jesuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q124862" start="39222" end="39230" title="Order of Friars Minor Capuchin" label="Capuchin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2366229" start="39483" end="39489" title="Malla (Kathmandu Valley)" label="Mallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="39558" end="39563" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q759222" start="39595" end="39602" title="Bettiah" label="Bettiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q17017330" start="39690" end="39707" title="Sankhadhar Sakhwa" label="Sankhadhar Sakhwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q15647950" start="39758" end="39772" title="Jogbir Sthapit" label="Jogbir Sthapit"/>
<link wikidata="Q12946982" start="39837" end="39850" title="Swayambhunath" label="Swayambhunath"/>
<link wikidata="Q16989081" start="39855" end="39865" title="Kindo Baha" label="Kindo Baha"/>
<link wikidata="Q15998831" start="39867" end="39887" title="Bhaju Ratna Kansakar" label="Bhaju Ratna Kansakar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7261838" start="39938" end="39960" title="Pushpa Sundar Tuladhar" label="Pushpa Sundar Tuladhar"/>
<link wikidata="Q12448507" start="40014" end="40035" title="Yogbir Singh Kansakar" label="Yogbir Singh Kansakar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5475426" start="40069" end="40096" title="Four Pillars of Nepal Bhasa" label="Four Pillars of Nepal Bhasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q15998027" start="40098" end="40120" title="Nhuchhe Ratna Tuladhar" label="Nhuchhe Ratna Tuladhar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5268844" start="40165" end="40186" title="Dhammalok Mahasthavir" label="Dhammalok Mahasthavir"/>
<link wikidata="Q7504850" start="40271" end="40289" title="Shukraraj Shastri" label="Shukra Raj Shastri"/>
<link wikidata="Q5269267" start="40331" end="40349" title="Dharmachari Guruma" label="Dharmachari Guruma"/>
<link wikidata="Q7237703" start="40403" end="40426" title="Pragyananda Mahasthavir" label="Pragyananda Mahasthavir"/>
<link wikidata="Q6747873" start="40485" end="40500" title="Mandas Tuladhar" label="Mandas Tuladhar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4804574" start="40575" end="40593" title="Ashapatti Tamrakar" label="Ashapatti Tamrakar"/>
<link wikidata="Q91159790" start="40639" end="40655" title="Kashiraj Pradhan" label="Kashiraj Pradhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1505" start="40714" end="40720" title="Sikkim" label="Sikkim"/>
<link wikidata="Q7843924" start="40722" end="40743" title="Triratna Man Tuladhar" label="Triratna Man Tuladhar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134508" start="40804" end="40822" title="Chittadhar Hridaya" label="Chittadhar Hridaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q15647960" start="40893" end="40911" title="Vidyabati Kansakar" label="Vidyabati Kansakar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3885232" start="40955" end="40984" title="Order of Gorkha Dakshina Bahu" label="Order of Gorkha Dakshina Bahu"/>
<link wikidata="Q5269218" start="40986" end="41007" title="Dharma Bhakta Mathema" label="Dharma Bhakta Mathema"/>
<link wikidata="Q16013979" start="41049" end="41067" title="Moti Laxmi Upasika" label="Moti Laxmi Upasika"/>
<link wikidata="Q5242999" start="41116" end="41139" title="Daya Bir Singh Kansakar" label="Daya Bir Singh Kansakar"/>
<link wikidata="Q16012348" start="41206" end="41231" title="Bhakta Bir Singh Tuladhar" label="Bhakta Bir Singh Tuladhar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7413171" start="41269" end="41275" title="Samyak" label="Samyak"/>
<link wikidata="Q7508170" start="41294" end="41315" title="Siddhicharan Shrestha" label="Siddhicharan Shrestha"/>
<link wikidata="Q4765265" start="41349" end="41368" title="Aniruddha Mahathera" label="Aniruddha Mahathera"/>
<link wikidata="Q13182433" start="41424" end="41441" title="Dharma Ratna Yami" label="Dharma Ratna Yami"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="41492" end="41515" title="Siddartha Gautam Shakya" label="Siddartha Gautam Shakya"/>
<link wikidata="Q3429358" start="41544" end="41560" title="Ganesh Man Singh" label="Ganesh Man Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q7240120" start="41601" end="41622" title="Prem Bahadur Kansakar" label="Prem Bahadur Kansakar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6442674" start="41672" end="41690" title="Kul Ratna Tuladhar" label="Kul Ratna Tuladhar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6704669" start="41766" end="41786" title="Lupau Ratna Tuladhar" label="Lupau Ratna Tuladhar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5521047" start="41849" end="41866" title="Gangalal Shrestha" label="Gangalal Shrestha"/>
<link wikidata="Q7261331" start="41908" end="41927" title="Purna Kaji Tamrakar" label="Purna Kaji Tamrakar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6373665" start="41960" end="41981" title="Karuna Ratna Tuladhar" label="Karuna Ratna Tuladhar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6994429" start="42050" end="42073" title="Nepal Transport Service" label="Nepal Transport Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q13198490" start="42075" end="42092" title="Satya Mohan Joshi" label="Satya Mohan Joshi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7261837" start="42138" end="42156" title="Pushpa Ratna Sagar" label="Pushpa Ratna Sagar"/>
<link wikidata="Q17404096" start="42228" end="42247" title="Pratek Man Tuladhar" label="Pratek Man Tuladhar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2280667" start="42285" end="42304" title="Pushpa Lal Shrestha" label="Pushpa Lal Shrestha"/>
<link wikidata="Q577100" start="42355" end="42369" title="Sahana Pradhan" label="Sahana Pradhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7685055" start="42416" end="42434" title="Tara Devi Tuladhar" label="Tara Devi Tuladhar"/>
<link wikidata="Q68403564" start="42502" end="42521" title="Hari Prasad Pradhan" label="Hari Prasad Pradhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q425728" start="42553" end="42566" title="Narayan Gopal" label="Narayan Gopal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7123838" start="42605" end="42625" title="Padma Ratna Tuladhar" label="Padma Ratna Tuladhar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1113976" start="42677" end="42702" title="Marich Man Singh Shrestha" label="Marich Man Singh Shrestha"/>
<link wikidata="Q7685032" start="42739" end="42762" title="Tara Bir Singh Tuladhar" label="Tara Bir Singh Tuladhar"/>
<link wikidata="Q101208557" start="42801" end="42819" title="Prem Man Chitrakar" label="Prem Man Chitrakar"/>
<link wikidata="Q422799" start="42850" end="42859" title="Tara Devi (singer)" label="Tara Devi"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859867" start="42899" end="42918" title="Baikuntha Manandhar" label="Baikuntha Manandhar"/>
<link wikidata="Q16012524" start="43013" end="43027" title="Nirgun Sthapit" label="Nirgun Sthapit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783955" start="43074" end="43101" title="1990 People&amp;#x27;s Movement" label="1990 People&amp;#x27;s Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q19661392" start="43103" end="43118" title="Sujan Chitrakar" label="Sujan Chitrakar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6376965" start="43183" end="43203" title="Kathmandu University" label="Kathmandu University"/>
<link wikidata="Q16019188" start="43205" end="43226" title="Phatteman Rajbhandari" label="Phatteman Rajbhandari"/>
<link wikidata="Q91336278" start="43236" end="43251" title="Nahakul Pradhan" label="Nahakul Pradhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q422801" start="43314" end="43331" title="Prem Dhoj Pradhan" label="Prem Dhoj Pradhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5520995" start="43353" end="43373" title="Ganga Prasad Pradhan" label="Ganga Prasad Pradhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6726403" start="43412" end="43434" title="Madan Krishna Shrestha" label="Madan Krishna Shrestha"/>
<link wikidata="Q7499220" start="43452" end="43465" title="Shiva Shrestha (actor)" label="Shiv Shrestha"/>
<link wikidata="Q18750435" start="43474" end="43487" title="Kumar Pradhan" label="Kumar Pradhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q13186419" start="43500" end="43522" title="Shree Krishna Shrestha" label="Shree Krishna Shrestha"/>
<link wikidata="Q5316380" start="43565" end="43583" title="Durga Lal Shrestha" label="Durga Lal Shrestha"/>
<link wikidata="Q7648978" start="43652" end="43669" title="Sushma Shrestha" label="Poornima Shrestha"/>
<link wikidata="Q4591915" start="43726" end="43747" title="Narayan Man Bijukchhe" label="Narayan Man Bijukchhe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4914479" start="43823" end="43836" title="Binod Pradhan" label="Binod Pradhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16734689" start="43855" end="43869" title="Adrian Pradhan" label="Adrian Pradhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4575973" start="43892" end="43899" title="1974 AD" label="1974 AD"/>
<link wikidata="Q6962061" start="43901" end="43917" title="Namrata Shrestha" label="Namrata Shrestha"/>
<link wikidata="Q21139334" start="43942" end="43958" title="Ashishma Nakarmi" label="Ashishma Nakarmi"/>
<link wikidata="Q17018840" start="43983" end="43995" title="Karna Shakya" label="Karna Shakya"/>
<link wikidata="Q64009126" start="44080" end="44098" title="Aashirman DS Joshi" label="Aashirman DS Joshi"/>
<link wikidata="Q26919929" start="44107" end="44121" title="Ayushman Joshi" label="Ayushman Joshi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7418591" start="44130" end="44143" title="Sanju Pradhan" label="Sanju Pradhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6190919" start="44162" end="44181" title="Jharana Bajracharya" label="Jharana Bajracharya"/>
<link wikidata="Q12938564" start="44184" end="44199" title="Miss Nepal" label="Miss Nepal 1997"/>
<link wikidata="Q28023367" start="44201" end="44212" title="Usha Khadgi" label="Usha Khadgi"/>
<link wikidata="Q12938564" start="44215" end="44230" title="Miss Nepal" label="Miss Nepal 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q7156652" start="44232" end="44244" title="Payal Shakya" label="Payal Shakya"/>
<link wikidata="Q6877142" start="44247" end="44262" title="Miss Nepal 2004" label="Miss Nepal 2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q7399456" start="44264" end="44282" title="Sahana Bajracharya" label="Sahana Bajracharya"/>
<link wikidata="Q6743714" start="44308" end="44320" title="Malina Joshi" label="Malina Joshi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6877151" start="44323" end="44344" title="Miss Nepal 2011" label="Miss Nepal World 2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q7424091" start="44346" end="44359" title="Sarina Maskey" label="Sarina Maskey"/>
<link wikidata="Q6877151" start="44362" end="44391" title="Miss Nepal 2011" label="Miss Nepal International 2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q11174900" start="44393" end="44409" title="Shristi Shrestha" label="Shristi Shrestha"/>
<link wikidata="Q6877165" start="44412" end="44433" title="Miss Nepal World 2012" label="Miss Nepal World 2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q2352891" start="44440" end="44455" title="Miss World 2012" label="Miss World 2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q15713539" start="44475" end="44490" title="Ishani Shrestha" label="Ishani Shrestha"/>
<link wikidata="Q6877155" start="44493" end="44514" title="Miss Nepal World 2013" label="Miss Nepal World 2013"/>
<link wikidata="Q1177857" start="44521" end="44536" title="Miss World 2013" label="Miss World 2013"/>
<link wikidata="Q10541213" start="44539" end="44560" title="Beauty With A Purpose" label="Beauty With A Purpose"/>
<link wikidata="Q19661026" start="44581" end="44597" title="Prinsha Shrestha" label="Prinsha Shrestha"/>
<link wikidata="Q17008997" start="44600" end="44621" title="Miss Nepal 2014" label="Miss Nepal Earth 2014"/>
<link wikidata="Q23883481" start="44623" end="44640" title="Sonie Rajbhandari" label="Sonie Rajbhandari"/>
<link wikidata="Q17008997" start="44643" end="44672" title="Miss Nepal 2014" label="Miss Nepal International 2014"/>
<link wikidata="Q19816997" start="44674" end="44689" title="Evana Manandhar" label="Evana Manandhar"/>
<link wikidata="Q19817024" start="44692" end="44707" title="Miss Nepal 2015" label="Miss Nepal 2015"/>
<link wikidata="Q23765629" start="44709" end="44722" title="Asmi Shrestha" label="Asmi Shrestha"/>
<link wikidata="Q24907162" start="44725" end="44740" title="Miss Nepal 2016" label="Miss Nepal 2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q51757185" start="44742" end="44755" title="Ronali Amatya" label="Ronali Amatya"/>
<link wikidata="Q48862584" start="44758" end="44787" title="Miss Nepal 2018" label="Miss Nepal International 2018"/>
<link wikidata="Q63668022" start="44789" end="44805" title="Anushka Shrestha" label="Anushka Shrestha"/>
<link wikidata="Q60787416" start="44808" end="44829" title="Miss Nepal 2019" label="Miss Nepal World 2019"/>
<link wikidata="Q60795304" start="44836" end="44851" title="Miss World 2019" label="Miss World 2019"/>
<link wikidata="Q10541213" start="44853" end="44874" title="Beauty With A Purpose" label="Beauty With A Purpose"/>
<link wikidata="Q60795304" start="44877" end="44892" title="Miss World 2019" label="Miss Multimedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q112912920" start="44913" end="44932" title="Priyanka Rani Joshi" label="Priyanka Rani Joshi"/>
<link wikidata="Q111948430" start="44935" end="44950" title="Miss Nepal 2022" label="Miss Nepal 2022"/>
<link wikidata="Q116939021" start="44952" end="44969" title="Srichchha Pradhan" label="Srichchha Pradhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q97446954" start="44989" end="45005" title="Nitesh R Pradhan" label="Nitesh R Pradhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q61015431" start="45034" end="45048" title="Ashish Pradhan" label="Ashish Pradhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16105506" start="45069" end="45091" title="Gautama V. Vajracharya" label="Gautama V. Vajracharya"/>
<link wikidata="Q23765629" start="45131" end="45144" title="Asmi Shrestha" label="Asmi Shrestha"/>
<link wikidata="Q6538513" start="45173" end="45210" title="Lhasa Newar (trans-Himalayan traders)" label="Lhasa Newar (trans-Himalayan traders)"/>
<link wikidata="Q12063958" start="45213" end="45246" title="Newa Rastriya Mukti Morcha, Nepal" label="Newa Rastriya Mukti Morcha, Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q19682829" start="45248" end="45256" title="Yalambar" label="Yalamber"/>
<link wikidata="Q6647" start="45294" end="45298" title="Lalitpur, Nepal" label="Yela"/>
<link wikidata="Q843138" start="45311" end="45316" title="Bhaktapur" label="Khopa"/>
<link wikidata="Q970717" start="45330" end="45332" title="Kathmandu Valley" label="Ye"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517030" start="45346" end="45369" title="Kirtipur" label="Kippu, Kipoo (Kirtipur)"/>
<link wikidata="Q110933428" start="45371" end="45385" title="Taksaris of Sikkim" label="Taksari Newars"/>
<link wikidata="Q455" start="45517" end="45540" title="Encyclopædia Britannica" label="Encyclopædia Britannica"/>
<link wikidata="Q5973845" start="45834" end="45853" title="National Geographic (magazine)" label="National Geographic"/>
<link wikidata="Q16105506" start="45878" end="45901" title="Gautama V. Vajracharya" label="Vajracharya, Gautama V."/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="997969" wikidata="Q9545439" url="?curid=997969" title="Paper lantern">
<text>A paper lantern is a lantern made of thin, brightly colored paper. Paper lanterns come in various shapes and sizes, as well as various methods of construction. In their simplest form, they are simply a paper bag with a candle placed inside, although more complicated lanterns consist of a collapsible bamboo or metal frame of hoops covered with tough paper.

==Origin==
Paper lanterns are likely derived from earlier lanterns that used other types of translucent material like silk, horn, or animal skin. The material covering was used to prevent the flame in the lantern from being extinguished by wind, while still retaining its use as a light source. Papermaking technology originated from China from at least AD 105 during the Eastern Han dynasty, but it is unknown exactly when paper became used for lanterns. Poems about paper lanterns start to appear in Chinese history at around the 6th century. Paper lanterns were common by the Tang dynasty (AD 690–705), and it was during this period that the first annual lantern festival was established. From China, it was spread to neighboring cultures in East Asia, Southeast Asia, and South Asia.

==Types==
There are three general types of paper lanterns, they are:
*Hanging lantern - the basic type of paper lantern used for illumination. They are meant to be carried, hung, or mounted on stands.
*Sky lantern - a small hot air balloon made of paper, with an opening at the bottom where a small fire is suspended. Also known as &quot;flying lanterns&quot;, &quot;sky candles&quot; or &quot;fire balloons.&quot;
*Water lantern - paper lanterns that float on the surface of water.

==By region==
In addition to everyday usage as a light source in the past, paper lanterns are commonly associated with festivals in East Asian, Southeast Asian, and South Asian cultures.

===East Asia===
====China &amp; Taiwan====

Paper lanterns are called &quot;Dēnglóng&quot; () in China.
====Japan====

In Japan the traditional styles include &quot;bonbori&quot; and &quot;chōchin&quot; and there is a special style of lettering called &quot;chōchin moji&quot; used to write on them.
===Southeast Asia===

====Philippines====

In the Philippines, a traditional paper lantern is the parol, which is regarded an iconic symbol of Filipino Christmas. Traditionally constructed using bamboo and Japanese paper, modern parols have been made using other materials such as plastic, metal, and capiz shells. Its most-common form is a five-pointed star, although it can come in various shapes and sizes.

Dating back to the Spanish colonial period of the Philippines, parols are a traditional part of the Panunulúyan pageant in the nine-day Christmas Novena procession leading up to the Simbang Gabi (midnight mass). It was initially rectangular or oblong in shape but eventually came to be made in various shapes. It became standardized to a five-pointed star (symbolizing the Star of Bethlehem) during the American colonial period.

====Thailand====

During the Yi Peng festival of Thailand, some people also decorate their houses, gardens, and temples with &quot;khom fai&quot; (), intricately shaped paper lanterns which take on different forms. &quot;Khom thue&quot; () are lanterns which are carried around hanging from a stick, &quot;khom khwaen&quot; () are the hanging lanterns, and &quot;khom pariwat&quot; (), which are placed at temples and which revolve due to the heat of the candle inside. The most elaborate &quot;Yi Peng&quot; celebrations can be seen in Chiang Mai, the ancient capital of the former Lanna kingdom, where now both &quot;Loi Krathong&quot; and &quot;Yi Peng&quot; are celebrated at the same time resulting in lights floating on the waters, lights hanging from trees/buildings or standing on walls, and lights floating in the sky. The tradition of &quot;Yi Peng&quot; was also adopted by certain parts of Laos during the 16th century.

Thousands of sky lanterns called &quot;khom loi&quot; () are also released annually during the Yi Peng festival. However, this is a relatively new addition to the festival, only dating back to the first decade of the 21st century as part of tourism development.

====Vietnam====
Two traditional festivals in Vietnam have prominent roles for lanterns: 
#Vu Lan on the 15th day of the seventh lunar month. Buddhist temples traditionally would host the release of floating water lanterns down river courses on small paper crafts with sticks of incense and written prayers.

#Tết Trung Thu, (Mid-Autumn festival) also known as the Children&#x27;s Festival (Tết Nhi Đồng) on the 15th day of the eighth lunar month. Children would parade in the streets with lit lanterns (&quot;rước đèn&quot;) with accompanying music and songs after sunset. The lanterns in this case are whimsical with a multitude of shapes and themes like fish, star... The lanterns are typically in transparent colored papers.
In addition to the above two festivals, paper lanterns are also hung by Vietnamese people on the occasion of the Tết Nguyên Đán to look forward to a good new year.

Paper lanterns are also used to attract visitors, for example, Hoian city, a famous tourist destination of Vietnam, often hangs paper lanterns throughout the year to attract tourists.
====Malaysia &amp; Singapore====
Paper lanterns are used especially in Chinatown areas in countries having notable Chinese ethnicity heritage.
===South Asia===
====Sri Lanka====

Colorful paper lanterns called &quot;vesak kuudu&quot; are hung outside houses during the Buddhist festival of Vesak.
===Americas===
====United States====

Placing candles or tea lights in a succession of small paper bags (known as luminarias or farolitos) is a common Christmas tradition in New Mexico. The tradition originated from the parol paper lanterns of the Philippines brought over to the Americas during the colonial period.

==In photography==
High-wattage paper lanterns are commonly used in lighting for motion picture productions. Commonly referred to as &quot;China balls&quot;, they provide soft, edgeless light to a scene.

==See also==
* Color in Chinese culture
* Kamifūsen
* Lantern
* Luminaria
* Sky lantern
* Types of Indian lamps
* Water lantern

==References==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q9545439" start="2" end="15" title="Paper lantern" label="paper lantern"/>
<link wikidata="Q862454" start="21" end="28" title="lantern" label="lantern"/>
<link wikidata="Q379754" start="202" end="211" title="paper bag" label="paper bag"/>
<link wikidata="Q12888135" start="219" end="225" title="candle" label="candle"/>
<link wikidata="Q862454" start="267" end="274" title="lantern" label="lantern"/>
<link wikidata="Q670887" start="301" end="307" title="bamboo" label="bamboo"/>
<link wikidata="Q11472" start="351" end="356" title="paper" label="paper"/>
<link wikidata="Q37681" start="477" end="481" title="silk" label="silk"/>
<link wikidata="Q65284752" start="483" end="487" title="Horn (anatomy)" label="horn"/>
<link wikidata="Q11472" start="654" end="676" title="Paper" label="Papermaking technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209" start="731" end="750" title="Eastern Han dynasty" label="Eastern Han dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q9683" start="938" end="950" title="Tang dynasty" label="Tang dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q27231" start="1104" end="1113" title="East Asia" label="East Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="1115" end="1129" title="Southeast Asia" label="Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q771405" start="1135" end="1145" title="South Asia" label="South Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q696134" start="1350" end="1361" title="Sky lantern" label="Sky lantern"/>
<link wikidata="Q391339" start="1564" end="1577" title="Water lantern" label="Water lantern"/>
<link wikidata="Q132241" start="1751" end="1759" title="festival" label="festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q27231" start="1764" end="1773" title="East Asia" label="East Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="1776" end="1790" title="Southeast Asia" label="Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q771405" start="1797" end="1807" title="South Asia" label="South Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077506" start="1948" end="1970" title="Traditional lighting equipment of Japan" label="the traditional styles"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077506" start="1985" end="1992" title="bonbori" label="bonbori"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133518" start="2078" end="2090" title="edomoji" label="chōchin moji"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="2170" end="2181" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q3546945" start="2218" end="2223" title="parol" label="parol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253235" start="2263" end="2281" title="Christmas in the Philippines" label="Filipino Christmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q670887" start="2315" end="2321" title="bamboo" label="bamboo"/>
<link wikidata="Q846299" start="2326" end="2340" title="Japanese paper" label="Japanese paper"/>
<link wikidata="Q11474" start="2401" end="2408" title="plastic" label="plastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11426" start="2410" end="2415" title="metal" label="metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3024105" start="2421" end="2432" title="capiz shell" label="capiz shell"/>
<link wikidata="Q182186" start="2461" end="2478" title="Pentagram" label="five-pointed star"/>
<link wikidata="Q3199818" start="2550" end="2592" title="History of the Philippines (1565–1898)" label="Spanish colonial period of the Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253235" start="2631" end="2642" title="Panunulúyan" label="Panunulúyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122496" start="2677" end="2683" title="Novena" label="Novena"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025481" start="2713" end="2725" title="Simbang Gabi" label="Simbang Gabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q211221" start="2904" end="2921" title="Star of Bethlehem" label="Star of Bethlehem"/>
<link wikidata="Q16056052" start="2934" end="2958" title="History of the Philippines (1898–1946)" label="American colonial period"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425496" start="2990" end="2997" title="Yi Peng" label="Yi Peng"/>
<link wikidata="Q52028" start="3498" end="3508" title="Chiang Mai" label="Chiang Mai"/>
<link wikidata="Q819" start="3863" end="3867" title="Laos" label="Laos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425496" start="3989" end="3996" title="Yi Peng" label="Yi Peng"/>
<link wikidata="Q881" start="4202" end="4209" title="Vietnam" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4247" end="4253" title="Vu Lan" label="Vu Lan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5393308" start="4298" end="4313" title="Buddhist temple" label="Buddhist temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q391339" start="4364" end="4377" title="water lantern" label="water lantern"/>
<link wikidata="Q273131" start="4435" end="4442" title="incense" label="incense"/>
<link wikidata="Q112075710" start="4466" end="4479" title="Tết Trung Thu" label="Tết Trung Thu"/>
<link wikidata="Q912988" start="4998" end="5012" title="Tết Nguyên Đán" label="Tết Nguyên Đán"/>
<link wikidata="Q36160" start="5113" end="5118" title="Hoian" label="Hoian"/>
<link wikidata="Q779191" start="5349" end="5375" title="Overseas Chinese" label="Chinese ethnicity heritage"/>
<link wikidata="Q215700" start="5524" end="5529" title="Vesak" label="Vesak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1927865" start="5588" end="5597" title="tea light" label="tea light"/>
<link wikidata="Q17051001" start="5645" end="5655" title="farolito" label="luminarias"/>
<link wikidata="Q19809" start="5682" end="5691" title="Christmas" label="Christmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522" start="5705" end="5715" title="New Mexico" label="New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q3546945" start="5751" end="5756" title="parol" label="parol"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="5779" end="5790" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q2776556" start="6069" end="6093" title="Color in Chinese culture" label="Color in Chinese culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q73807776" start="6096" end="6105" title="Kamifūsen" label="Kamifūsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q862454" start="6108" end="6115" title="Lantern" label="Lantern"/>
<link wikidata="Q17051001" start="6118" end="6127" title="Luminaria" label="Luminaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q696134" start="6130" end="6141" title="Sky lantern" label="Sky lantern"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6144" end="6165" title="Oil lamp#Hinduism" label="Types of Indian lamps"/>
<link wikidata="Q391339" start="6168" end="6181" title="Water lantern" label="Water lantern"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="997978" wikidata="Q4744893" url="?curid=997978" title="American Samoan">
<text>American Samoan may refer to:
* Something of, or related to American Samoa
* A person from American Samoa, or of American Samoan descent. For information about the American Samoan people, see Demographics of American Samoa, Samoans, and Culture of Samoa. For specific American Samoans, see List of people from American Samoa.
* Note that there is no language called &quot;American Samoan&quot;. Languages spoken in American Samoa include American English and the Samoan language.

== See also ==
* Samoan Americans</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4744893" start="0" end="15" title="American Samoan" label="American Samoan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16641" start="60" end="74" title="American Samoa" label="American Samoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5251985" start="192" end="222" title="Demographics of American Samoa" label="Demographics of American Samoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135531" start="224" end="231" title="Samoans" label="Samoans"/>
<link wikidata="Q5193630" start="237" end="253" title="Culture of Samoa" label="Culture of Samoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q19901526" start="290" end="324" title="List of people from American Samoa" label="List of people from American Samoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7976" start="438" end="454" title="American English" label="American English"/>
<link wikidata="Q34011" start="463" end="478" title="Samoan language" label="Samoan language"/>
<link wikidata="Q7409937" start="498" end="514" title="Samoan Americans" label="Samoan Americans"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="997979" wikidata="Q4754573" url="?curid=997979" title="Andorran">
<text>Andorran may refer to:
* Something of, or related to Andorra, the European microstate
** A person from Andorra or of Andorran descent; see List of Andorrans
** Andorran cuisine
* A resident of Andorra, Teruel, Spain

== See also ==
* Andorian, a fictional extraterrestrial race in the &quot;Star Trek&quot; franchise</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4754573" start="0" end="8" title="Andorran" label="Andorran"/>
<link wikidata="Q228" start="53" end="60" title="Andorra" label="Andorra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3250576" start="139" end="156" title="List of Andorrans" label="List of Andorrans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1735570" start="160" end="176" title="Andorran cuisine" label="Andorran cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q492533" start="193" end="208" title="Andorra, Teruel" label="Andorra, Teruel"/>
<link wikidata="Q838239" start="234" end="242" title="Andorian" label="Andorian"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="997981" wikidata="Q4763759" url="?curid=997981" title="Angolan">
<text>Angolan may refer to:

*Something of, from, or related to Angola
*Angolan people; see Demographics of Angola
*Angolan culture
*Angolar Creole
*Something of, from, or related to the historical Bantu Kingdom of Ndongo
*A resident of:
**Angola, New York
**Angola, Kansas

==See also==
*List of Angolans
*Languages of Angola
*Angola (disambiguation)
*&quot;Angolanidade&quot; (&quot;Angolan-ness&quot;)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4763759" start="0" end="7" title="Angolan" label="Angolan"/>
<link wikidata="Q916" start="58" end="64" title="Angola" label="Angola"/>
<link wikidata="Q2402452" start="86" end="108" title="Demographics of Angola" label="Demographics of Angola"/>
<link wikidata="Q3007243" start="110" end="125" title="Angolan culture" label="Angolan culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q34994" start="127" end="141" title="Angolar Creole" label="Angolar Creole"/>
<link wikidata="Q1796232" start="198" end="215" title="Kingdom of Ndongo" label="Kingdom of Ndongo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1843821" start="234" end="250" title="Angola, New York" label="Angola, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q4763731" start="253" end="267" title="Angola, Kansas" label="Angola, Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5977316" start="283" end="299" title="List of Angolans" label="List of Angolans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455024" start="301" end="320" title="Languages of Angola" label="Languages of Angola"/>
<link wikidata="Q249515" start="322" end="345" title="Angola (disambiguation)" label="Angola (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4763792" start="353" end="365" title="Angolanidade" label="Angolanidade"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="997983" wikidata="Q4763991" url="?curid=997983" title="Anguillian">
<text>Anguillian may refer to:

* Something of, from, or related to Anguilla, a British overseas territory in the Caribbean
** Demographics of Anguilla
** Culture of Anguilla
* Anguillian Creole, the language spoken in Anguilla
* Anguillian cuisine

== See also ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4763991" start="0" end="10" title="Anguillian" label="Anguillian"/>
<link wikidata="Q25228" start="62" end="70" title="Anguilla" label="Anguilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q3043561" start="121" end="145" title="Demographics of Anguilla" label="Demographics of Anguilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q25228" start="149" end="168" title="Culture of Anguilla" label="Culture of Anguilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q4763995" start="171" end="188" title="Anguillian Creole" label="Anguillian Creole"/>
<link wikidata="Q4763992" start="224" end="242" title="Anguillian cuisine" label="Anguillian cuisine"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="997984" wikidata="Q4774845" url="?curid=997984" title="Antiguan">
<text>Antiguan may refer to:
* Antigua, the main island of Antigua and Barbuda
* Antigua and Barbuda, a sovereign state in the West Indies
* A person from Antigua
** List of Antiguans and Barbudans

== See also ==
* Antigua (disambiguation)
* Barbudan (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4774845" start="0" end="8" title="Antiguan" label="Antiguan"/>
<link wikidata="Q316390" start="25" end="32" title="Antigua" label="Antigua"/>
<link wikidata="Q781" start="75" end="94" title="Antigua and Barbuda" label="Antigua and Barbuda"/>
<link wikidata="Q2997133" start="137" end="156" title="Demographics of Antigua and Barbuda" label="person from Antigua"/>
<link wikidata="Q6561778" start="160" end="191" title="List of Antiguans and Barbudans" label="List of Antiguans and Barbudans"/>
<link wikidata="Q229003" start="210" end="234" title="Antigua (disambiguation)" label="Antigua (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4859769" start="237" end="262" title="Barbudan (disambiguation)" label="Barbudan (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="997986" wikidata="Q22281759" url="?curid=997986" title="Entner–Doudoroff pathway">
<text>The Entner–Doudoroff pathway (ED Pathway) is a metabolic pathway that is most notable in Gram-negative bacteria, certain Gram-positive bacteria and archaea. Glucose is the substrate in the ED pathway and through a series of enzyme assisted chemical reactions it is catabolized into pyruvate. Entner and Doudoroff (1952) and MacGee and Doudoroff (1954) first reported the ED pathway in the bacterium &quot;Pseudomonas saccharophila&quot;. While originally thought to be just an alternative to glycolysis (EMP) and the pentose phosphate pathway (PPP), some studies now suggest that the original role of the EMP may have originally been about anabolism and repurposed over time to catabolism, meaning the ED pathway may be the older pathway. Recent studies have also shown the prevalence of the ED pathway may be more widespread than first predicted with evidence supporting the presence of the pathway in cyanobacteria, ferns, algae, mosses, and plants. Specifically, there is direct evidence that &quot;Hordeum vulgare&quot; uses the Entner–Doudoroff pathway.

Distinct features of the Entner–Doudoroff pathway are that it:

* Uses the unique enzymes 6-phosphogluconate dehydratase and 2-keto-deoxy-6-phosphogluconate (KDPG) aldolase and other common metabolic enzymes to other metabolic pathways to catabolize glucose to pyruvate.
* In the process of breaking down glucose, a net yield of 1 ATP is formed per every one glucose molecule processed, as well as 1 NADH and 1 NADPH. In comparison, glycolysis has a net yield of 2 ATP molecules and 2 NADH molecules per every one glucose molecule metabolized. This difference in energy production may be offset by the difference in protein amount needed per pathway. 

== Archaeal variations ==
Archaea have variants of the Entner-Doudoroff Pathway. These variants are called the semiphosphorylative ED (spED) and the nonphosphorylative ED (npED):

* spED is found in halophilic euryachaea and &quot;Clostridium&quot; species.
* In spED, the difference is where phosphorylation occurs. In the standard ED, phosphorylation occurs at the first step from glucose to G-6-P. In spED, the glucose is first oxidized to gluconate via a glucose dehydrogenase. Next, gluconate dehydratase converts gluconate into 2-keto-3-deoxy-gluconate (KDG). The next step is where phosphorylation occurs as KDG kinase converts KDG into KDPG. KDPG is then cleaved into glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate (GAP) and pyruvate via KDPG aldolase and follows the same EMP pathway as the standard ED. This pathway produces the same amount of ATP as the standard ED.
* npED is found in thermoacidophilic &quot;Sulfolobus&quot;, Euryarchaeota &quot;Tp. acidophilum&quot;, and &quot;Picrophilus&quot; species.
* In npED, there is no phosphorylation at all. The pathway is the same as spED but instead of phosphorylation occurring at KDG, KDG is instead cleaved GA and pyruvate via KDG aldolase. From here, GA is oxidized via GA dehydrogenase into glycerate. The glycerate is phosphorylated by glycerate kinase into 2PG. 2PG then follows the same pathway as ED and is converted into pyruvate via ENO and PK. In this pathway though, there is no ATP produced.

Some archaea such as &quot;Crenacraeota Sul&quot;. &quot;solfacaricus&quot; and &quot;Tpt. tenax&quot; have what is called branched ED. In branched ED, the organism have both spED and npED that are both operative and work in parallel.

==Organisms that use the Entner–Doudoroff pathway==
There are several bacteria that use the Entner–Doudoroff pathway for metabolism of glucose and are unable to catabolize via glycolysis (e.g., therefore lacking essential glycolytic enzymes such as phosphofructokinase as seen in Pseudomonas). Genera in which the pathway is prominent include Gram-negative, as listed below, Gram-positive bacteria such as Enterococcus faecalis, as well as several in the Archaea, the second distinct branch of the prokaryotes (and the &quot;third domain of life&quot;, after the prokaryotic Eubacteria and the eukaryotes). Due to the low energy yield of the ED pathway, anaerobic bacteria seem to mainly use glycolysis while aerobic and facultative anaerobes are more likely to have the ED pathway. This is thought to be due to the fact that aerobic and facultative anaerobes have other non-glycolytic pathways for creating ATP such as oxidative phosphorylation. Thus, the ED pathway is favored due to the lesser amounts of proteins required. While anaerobic bacteria must rely on the glycolysis pathway to create a greater percentage of their required ATP thus its 2 ATP production is more favored over the ED pathway&#x27;s 1 ATP production.

Examples of bacteria using the pathway are:
* &quot;Pseudomonas&quot;, a genus of Gram-negative bacteria
* &quot;Azotobacter&quot;, a genus of Gram-negative bacteria
* &quot;Rhizobium&quot;, a plant root-associated and plant differentiation-active genus of Gram-negative bacteria
* &quot;Agrobacterium&quot;, a plant pathogen (oncogenic) genus of Gram-negative bacteria, also of biotechnologic use
* &quot;Escherichia coli&quot;, a Gram-negative bacterium
* &quot;Enterococcus faecalis&quot;, a Gram-positive bacterium
* &quot;Zymomonas mobilis&quot;, a Gram-negative facultative anaerobe
* &quot;Xanthomonas campestris&quot;, a Gram-negative bacterium which uses this pathway as main pathway for providing energy.

To date there is evidence of Eukaryotes using the pathway, suggesting it may be more widespread than previously thought: 
*&quot;Hordeum vulgare&quot;, barley uses the Entner–Duodoroff pathway.
*&quot;Phaeodactylum tricornutum&quot; diatom model species presents functional phosphogluconate dehydratase and dehoxyphosphogluconate aldolase genes in its genome 

The Entner–Doudoroff pathway is present in many species of Archaea (caveat, see following), whose metabolisms &quot;resemble... in [their] complexity those of Bacteria and lower Eukarya&quot;, and often include both this pathway and the Embden-Meyerhof-Parnas pathway of glycolysis, except most often as unique, modified variants.

== Catalyzing enzymes ==

=== Conversion of glucose to glucose-6-phosphate ===
The first step in ED is phosphorylation of glucose by a family of enzymes called hexokinases to form glucose 6-phosphate (G6P). This reaction consumes ATP, but it acts to keep the glucose concentration low, promoting continuous transport of glucose into the cell through the plasma membrane transporters. In addition, it blocks the glucose from leaking out – the cell lacks transporters for G6P, and free diffusion out of the cell is prevented due to the charged nature of G6P. Glucose may alternatively be formed from the phosphorolysis or hydrolysis of intracellular starch or glycogen.

In animals, an isozyme of hexokinase called glucokinase is also used in the liver, which has a much lower affinity for glucose (Km in the vicinity of normal glycemia), and differs in regulatory properties. The different substrate affinity and alternate regulation of this enzyme are a reflection of the role of the liver in maintaining blood sugar levels.

&quot;Cofactors:&quot; Mg2+

=== Conversion of glucose-6-phosphate to 6-phosphogluconolactone ===
The G6P is then converted to 6-phosphogluconolactone in the presence of enzyme glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (an oxido-reductase) with the presence of co-enzyme nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADP+). which will be reduced to nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate hydrogen along with a free hydrogen atom H+.

=== Conversion of 6-phosphogluconolactone to 6-phosphogluconic acid ===
The 6PGL is converted into 6-phosphogluconic acid in the presence of enzyme hydrolase.

=== Conversion of 6-phosphogluconic acid to 2-keto-3-deoxy-6-phosphogluconate ===
The 6-phosphogluconic acid is converted to 2-keto-3-deoxy-6-phosphogluconate (KDPG) in the presence of enzyme 6-phosphogluconate dehydratase; in the process, a water molecule is released to the surroundings.

=== Conversion of 2-keto-3-deoxy-6-phosphogluconate to pyruvate and glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate ===
The KDPG is then converted into pyruvate and glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate in the presence of enzyme KDPG aldolase. For the pyruvate, the ED pathway ends here, and the pyruvate then goes into further metabolic pathways (TCA cycle, ETC cycle, etc).

The other product (glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate) is further converted by entering into the glycolysis pathway, via which it, too, gets converted into pyruvate for further metabolism.

=== Conversion of glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate to 1,3-bisphosphoglycerate ===
The G3P is converted to 1,3-bisphosphoglycerate in the presence of enzyme glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (an oxido-reductase).

The aldehyde groups of the triose sugars are oxidised, and inorganic phosphate is added to them, forming 1,3-bisphosphoglycerate.

The hydrogen is used to reduce two molecules of NAD+, a hydrogen carrier, to give NADH + H+ for each triose.

Hydrogen atom balance and charge balance are both maintained because the phosphate (Pi) group actually exists in the form of a hydrogen phosphate anion (HPO42−), which dissociates to contribute the extra H+ ion and gives a net charge of -3 on both sides.

=== Conversion of 1,3-bisphosphoglycerate to 3-phosphoglycerate ===
This step is the enzymatic transfer of a phosphate group from 1,3-bisphosphoglycerate to ADP by phosphoglycerate kinase, forming ATP and 3-phosphoglycerate.

=== Conversion of 3-phosphoglycerate to 2-phosphoglycerate ===
Phosphoglycerate mutase isomerises 3-phosphoglycerate into 2-phosphoglycerate.

=== Conversion of 2-phosphoglycerate to phosphoenolpyruvate ===
Enolase next converts 2-phosphoglycerate to phosphoenolpyruvate. This reaction is an elimination reaction involving an E1cB mechanism.

&quot;Cofactors:&quot; 2 Mg2+: one &quot;conformational&quot; ion to coordinate with the carboxylate group of the substrate, and one &quot;catalytic&quot; ion that participates in the dehydration

=== Conversion of phosphoenol pyruvate to pyruvate ===
A final substrate-level phosphorylation now forms a molecule of pyruvate and a molecule of ATP by means of the enzyme pyruvate kinase. This serves as an additional regulatory step, similar to the phosphoglycerate kinase step.

&quot;Cofactors:&quot; Mg2+

==References==
==Further reading==
* Bräsen C.; D. Esser; B. Rauch &amp; B. Siebers (2014) &quot;Carbohydrate metabolism in Archaea: current insights into unusual enzymes and pathways and their regulation,&quot; &quot;Microbiol. Mol. Biol. Rev.&quot; 78(1; March), pp. 89–175, DOI 10.1128/MMBR.00041-13, see or , accessed 3 August 2015.
* Ahmed, H.; B. Tjaden; R. Hensel &amp; B. Siebers (2004) &quot;Embden–Meyerhof–Parnas and Entner–Doudoroff pathways in Thermoproteus tenax: metabolic parallelism or specific adaptation?,&quot; &quot;Biochem. Soc. Trans.&quot; 32(2; April 1), pp. 303–304, DOI 10.1042/bst0320303, see , accessed 3 August 2015.
* Conway T. (1992) &quot;The Entner-Doudoroff pathway: history, physiology and molecular biology,&quot; &quot;FEMS Microbiol. Rev.,&quot; 9(1; September), pp. 1–27, see , accessed 3 August 2015.
* Snyder, L., Peters, J. E., Henkin, T. M., &amp; Champness, W. (2013). Molecular genetics of bacteria. American Society of Microbiology.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q22281759" start="4" end="28" title="Entner–Doudoroff pathway" label="Entner–Doudoroff pathway"/>
<link wikidata="Q68685" start="47" end="64" title="metabolic pathway" label="metabolic pathway"/>
<link wikidata="Q632006" start="89" end="111" title="Gram-negative bacteria" label="Gram-negative bacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q857288" start="121" end="143" title="Gram-positive bacteria" label="Gram-positive bacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q10872" start="148" end="155" title="archaea" label="archaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q37525" start="157" end="164" title="Glucose" label="Glucose"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047" start="224" end="230" title="enzyme" label="enzyme"/>
<link wikidata="Q36534" start="240" end="257" title="chemical reaction" label="chemical reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q213580" start="282" end="290" title="Pyruvic acid" label="pyruvate"/>
<link wikidata="Q15452669" start="303" end="312" title="Michael Doudoroff" label="Doudoroff"/>
<link wikidata="Q9057944" start="405" end="430" title="Pelomonas saccharophila" label="Pseudomonas saccharophila"/>
<link wikidata="Q162643" start="492" end="508" title="glycolysis" label="glycolysis (EMP)"/>
<link wikidata="Q827489" start="517" end="548" title="pentose phosphate pathway" label="pentose phosphate pathway (PPP)"/>
<link wikidata="Q184681" start="640" end="649" title="anabolism" label="anabolism"/>
<link wikidata="Q21130714" start="678" end="688" title="catabolism" label="catabolism"/>
<link wikidata="Q93315" start="903" end="916" title="cyanobacteria" label="cyanobacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q80005" start="918" end="922" title="fern" label="fern"/>
<link wikidata="Q37868" start="925" end="930" title="algae" label="algae"/>
<link wikidata="Q25347" start="932" end="936" title="moss" label="moss"/>
<link wikidata="Q756" start="944" end="949" title="plant" label="plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q11577" start="996" end="1023" title="Barley" label="&amp;quot;Hordeum vulgare&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q12499775" start="1460" end="1464" title="NADH" label="NADH"/>
<link wikidata="Q28747" start="1471" end="1476" title="NADPH" label="NADPH"/>
<link wikidata="Q946633" start="1912" end="1922" title="Halophile" label="halophilic"/>
<link wikidata="Q327663" start="1944" end="1955" title="Clostridium" label="Clostridium"/>
<link wikidata="Q242736" start="2006" end="2021" title="phosphorylation" label="phosphorylation"/>
<link wikidata="Q407569" start="2156" end="2165" title="gluconate" label="gluconate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2345861" start="2590" end="2607" title="Thermoacidophile" label="thermoacidophilic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209791" start="2614" end="2624" title="Sulfolobus" label="Sulfolobus"/>
<link wikidata="Q124372828" start="2632" end="2645" title="Euryarchaeota" label="Euryarchaeota"/>
<link wikidata="Q14324411" start="2652" end="2667" title="Thermoplasma acidophilum" label="Tp. acidophilum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3267581" start="2685" end="2696" title="Picrophilus" label="Picrophilus"/>
<link wikidata="Q427147" start="3645" end="3664" title="phosphofructokinase-1" label="phosphofructokinase"/>
<link wikidata="Q140014" start="3802" end="3823" title="Enterococcus faecalis" label="Enterococcus faecalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q10872" start="3851" end="3858" title="Archaea" label="Archaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q19081" start="3894" end="3904" title="prokaryote" label="prokaryote"/>
<link wikidata="Q189790" start="4050" end="4059" title="Anaerobic organism" label="anaerobic"/>
<link wikidata="Q193124" start="4105" end="4112" title="Aerobic organism" label="aerobic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091848" start="4117" end="4138" title="Facultative anaerobic organism" label="facultative anaerobes"/>
<link wikidata="Q227564" start="4316" end="4341" title="oxidative phosphorylation" label="oxidative phosphorylation"/>
<link wikidata="Q131143" start="4677" end="4688" title="Pseudomonas" label="Pseudomonas"/>
<link wikidata="Q132995" start="4738" end="4749" title="Azotobacter" label="Azotobacter"/>
<link wikidata="Q830142" start="4799" end="4808" title="Rhizobium" label="Rhizobium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2700446" start="4913" end="4926" title="Agrobacterium" label="Agrobacterium"/>
<link wikidata="Q25419" start="5031" end="5047" title="Escherichia coli" label="Escherichia coli"/>
<link wikidata="Q140014" start="5089" end="5110" title="Enterococcus faecalis" label="Enterococcus faecalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q245744" start="5152" end="5169" title="Zymomonas mobilis" label="Zymomonas mobilis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091848" start="5193" end="5213" title="Facultative anaerobic organism" label="facultative anaerobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3753551" start="5222" end="5244" title="Xanthomonas campestris" label="Xanthomonas campestris"/>
<link wikidata="Q11577" start="5470" end="5485" title="Hordeum vulgare" label="Hordeum vulgare"/>
<link wikidata="Q4911639" start="5542" end="5567" title="Phaeodactylum tricornutum" label="Phaeodactylum tricornutum"/>
<link wikidata="Q162643" start="5939" end="5961" title="glycolysis" label="Embden-Meyerhof-Parnas"/>
<link wikidata="Q982914" start="6194" end="6204" title="hexokinase" label="hexokinase"/>
<link wikidata="Q74566546" start="6214" end="6233" title="glucose 6-phosphate" label="glucose 6-phosphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q6583244" start="6636" end="6650" title="phosphorolysis" label="phosphorolysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q103135" start="6654" end="6664" title="hydrolysis" label="hydrolysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q729" start="6706" end="6712" title="animal" label="animal"/>
<link wikidata="Q407801" start="6718" end="6725" title="isozyme" label="isozyme"/>
<link wikidata="Q425185" start="6747" end="6758" title="glucokinase" label="glucokinase"/>
<link wikidata="Q245503" start="7189" end="7210" title="6-Phosphogluconolactone" label="phosphogluconolactone"/>
<link wikidata="Q421793" start="7237" end="7270" title="glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase" label="glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase"/>
<link wikidata="Q407479" start="7272" end="7290" title="Oxidoreductase" label="an oxido-reductase"/>
<link wikidata="Q407280" start="7313" end="7322" title="co-enzyme" label="co-enzyme"/>
<link wikidata="Q12499775" start="7323" end="7366" title="Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide" label="nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q96286" start="7639" end="7648" title="hydrolase" label="hydrolase"/>
<link wikidata="Q162643" start="8376" end="8386" title="glycolysis" label="glycolysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q82682" start="8728" end="8736" title="oxidised" label="oxidised"/>
<link wikidata="Q46220103" start="8742" end="8761" title="inorganic phosphate" label="inorganic phosphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020557" start="8788" end="8811" title="1,3-bisphosphoglycerate" label="1,3-bisphosphoglycerate"/>
<link wikidata="Q12499775" start="8862" end="8866" title="NAD+" label="NAD+"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9051" end="9069" title="Phosphoric acid#Orthophosphoric acid chemistry" label="hydrogen phosphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020557" start="9310" end="9333" title="1,3-bisphosphoglycerate" label="1,3-bisphosphoglycerate"/>
<link wikidata="Q24772193" start="9344" end="9367" title="phosphoglycerate kinase" label="phosphoglycerate kinase"/>
<link wikidata="Q32904835" start="9385" end="9403" title="3-phosphoglycerate" label="3-phosphoglycerate"/>
<link wikidata="Q415490" start="9469" end="9492" title="Phosphoglycerate mutase" label="Phosphoglycerate mutase"/>
<link wikidata="Q32904835" start="9504" end="9522" title="3-phosphoglycerate" label="3-phosphoglycerate"/>
<link wikidata="Q209469" start="9528" end="9546" title="2-phosphoglycerate" label="2-phosphoglycerate"/>
<link wikidata="Q24776639" start="9613" end="9620" title="Enolase" label="Enolase"/>
<link wikidata="Q209469" start="9635" end="9653" title="2-phosphoglycerate" label="2-phosphoglycerate"/>
<link wikidata="Q412139" start="9657" end="9676" title="phosphoenolpyruvate" label="phosphoenolpyruvate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3466680" start="9732" end="9736" title="E1cB-elimination reaction" label="E1cB"/>
<link wikidata="Q910492" start="10009" end="10040" title="substrate-level phosphorylation" label="substrate-level phosphorylation"/>
<link wikidata="Q213580" start="10065" end="10073" title="pyruvate" label="pyruvate"/>
<link wikidata="Q900970" start="10119" end="10134" title="pyruvate kinase" label="pyruvate kinase"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="997987" wikidata="Q4842804" url="?curid=997987" title="Bahraini">
<text>Bahraini may refer to:
* Something of, or related to Bahrain
* A person from Bahrain, or of Bahraini descent; see Baharna or Demographics of Bahrain 
* Bahraini culture
* Bahraini cuisine

== See also ==
* Bahrani Arabic
* List of Bahranis</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4842804" start="0" end="8" title="Bahraini" label="Bahraini"/>
<link wikidata="Q398" start="53" end="60" title="Bahrain" label="Bahrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2879337" start="114" end="121" title="Baharna" label="Baharna"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745892" start="125" end="148" title="Demographics of Bahrain" label="Demographics of Bahrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2366577" start="152" end="168" title="Bahraini culture" label="Bahraini culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q846433" start="171" end="187" title="Bahraini cuisine" label="Bahraini cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q56576" start="206" end="220" title="Bahrani Arabic" label="Bahrani Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6563259" start="223" end="239" title="List of Bahranis" label="List of Bahranis"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="997989" wikidata="Q4858563" url="?curid=997989" title="Barbadian">
<text>Barbadian may refer to:

* anything related to Barbados
* Barbadians, people from Barbados or of Barbadian descent
** Afro-Barbadians
** Barbadian Americans
** Barbadian Brazilians
** Barbadian British
** Barbadian Canadians
** White Barbadian
* Culture of Barbados
* Cuisine of Barbados
* English in Barbados

== See also ==
* List of Barbadians
* Bajan (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4858563" start="0" end="9" title="Barbadian" label="Barbadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q244" start="47" end="55" title="Barbados" label="Barbados"/>
<link wikidata="Q4858580" start="58" end="68" title="Barbadians" label="Barbadians"/>
<link wikidata="Q16821017" start="118" end="133" title="Afro-Barbadians" label="Afro-Barbadians"/>
<link wikidata="Q4858560" start="137" end="156" title="Barbadian Americans" label="Barbadian Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q9648264" start="160" end="180" title="Barbadian Brazilians" label="Barbadian Brazilians"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308238" start="184" end="201" title="Barbadian British" label="Barbadian British"/>
<link wikidata="Q4858564" start="205" end="224" title="Barbadian Canadians" label="Barbadian Canadians"/>
<link wikidata="Q7994454" start="228" end="243" title="White Barbadian" label="White Barbadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3007256" start="246" end="265" title="Culture of Barbados" label="Culture of Barbados"/>
<link wikidata="Q20747587" start="268" end="287" title="Cuisine of Barbados" label="Cuisine of Barbados"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378584" start="290" end="309" title="English in Barbados" label="English in Barbados"/>
<link wikidata="Q6569735" start="328" end="346" title="List of Barbadians" label="List of Barbadians"/>
<link wikidata="Q804093" start="349" end="371" title="Bajan (disambiguation)" label="Bajan (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="997991" wikidata="Q2524014" url="?curid=997991" title="Bajan Creole">
<text>Bajan ( ), or Bajan Creole, is an English-based creole language with West/Central African and British influences spoken on the Caribbean island of Barbados. Bajan is primarily a spoken language, meaning that in general, standard English is used in print, in the media, in the judicial system, in government, and in day-to-day business, while Bajan is reserved for less formal situations, in music, or in social commentary. Ethnologue reports that, as of 2018, 30,000 Barbadians were native English speakers, while 260,000 natively spoke Bajan.

==Languages==
Bajan is the Caribbean creole with grammar that most resembles Standard English. There is academic debate on whether its creole features are due to an earlier pidgin state or to some other reason, such as contact with neighbouring English-based creole languages. 

Due to emigration to the Province of Carolina, Bajan has influenced American English and the Gullah language spoken in the Carolinas. Regionally, Bajan has ties to Belizean and Guyanese Creoles.

Unlike Jamaica, Guyana or Trinidad, Barbados was the destination of few enslaved African-born captives after 1800. Thus, African Barbadians became &quot;Bajanised&quot; relatively soon after British colonization. This tended to make them less resistant to local culture, with its Anglicised language, religion and customs.

Bajan is a primarily spoken language with no standardised written form. Due to the lack of standardisation, spelling may vary widely from person to person. There is much dialectal variation throughout the island. Barbadians practising Rastafari on the island also tend to speak more with a Jamaican accent than full Bajan. Bajan words and sentences presented below are largely spelled as they are pronounced. New terminology, expressions, jargon, and idioms are regularly added to the dialect by social commentary sung during the annual Crop Over festival.

==Features==
As in most English-based Caribbean creoles, the interdentals and (as in &quot;thing&quot;, and &quot;the&quot; respectively) have merged with other consonants (in this case, and , respectively, resulting in &quot;ting&quot; and &quot;de&quot;). Unlike most other Caribbean creoles, Bajan is fully rhotic, and if anything more rhotic than North American Standard English. Bajan also has a strong tendency to realize syllable-final as a glottal stop . Thus the Bajan pronunciation of &quot;start&quot;, , contrasts sharply with the pronunciation of other Caribbean speakers, or or .

===Pronouns===
Pronouns in Bajan Dialect do not diverge too far from Standard English, but there are differences. As with other similar creoles, Bajan does not differentiate subject and object pronouns, nor possessive pronouns, except in the case of the first person singular. Another difference is the word for the plural you, which is &quot;wunna&quot;, similar to the Jamaican word &quot;unnu&quot; / &quot;unna&quot; or Bahamian &quot;yinna&quot; or Gullah Geechee &quot;hunnuh&quot;. Here is a list of pronouns in Bajan Dialect:

The word &quot;yuh&quot; is interchangeably pronounced or .

===Questions===
The structure of questions in Bajan Dialect varies from that of Standard English, as it is generally the same format as regular statements. Questions seeking yes or no answers are usually pronounced as a statement with only a raised intonation to differentiate, usually on the last word. For example, &quot;Wunna win de cricket? &quot; means &quot;Did you (pl.) win the cricket match?&quot;; &quot;das yours?&quot; means &quot;Is that yours?&quot;

On the other hand, questions asking for information, i.e. who, what, when, where, why or how, usually begin with a &#x27;question word/phrase&#x27;, saying what is being asked for, followed by a partial, or incomplete statement. For example, &quot;Wha he wan?&quot; means &quot;What does he want?&quot; or &quot;He wants what?&quot; Some question words, however, do not exist, or are seldom used in Bajan dialect, including &quot;when, where and why&quot;, and are achieved by making questions beginning with &quot;wha&quot; (what). For example, &quot;Wha time you see he?&quot; means &quot;When did you see him?&quot;, and &quot;Wha part de Chefette?&quot; means &quot;Where is the Chefette?&quot; In addition, &quot;why&quot; questions can be achieved by asking &quot;how come&quot;. For example, &quot;&quot;How come you get hay so late?”&quot;

===Tenses===
The tense/aspect system of Bajan is fundamentally unlike that of English. In Bajan, verbs are seldom conjugated, and only have a few forms, lacking forms to express tense or distinguish between singular and plural. In particular, there are no morphological marked past tense forms corresponding to English &quot;-ed&quot;, &quot;-t&quot; or other past tense forms.

Continuous Tenses&lt;br&gt;
:Continuity is shown in Bajan dialect in much the same way as it is in Standard English. In Bajan, the base of the verb is changed by adding &quot;-in&quot;, &quot;ing&quot; or &quot;ine&quot; to the end. For many verbs, this simply results in a contracted form of the Standard English. For example, the base &quot;do&quot;, from &quot;to do&quot;, becomes &quot;doin&quot; in continuous tenses, which is a contracted form of the Standard English &quot;doing&quot;.

Showing Tense&lt;br&gt;
:In Bajan dialect, the tense of a verb is expressed through &#x27;tense indicators&#x27;. These are special verbs which are conjugated for this purpose, and generally derive from the verbs &quot;to be&quot;, &quot;to do&quot; and &quot;to go&quot;.

::The present tense is indicated by the words &quot;is&quot; or &quot;does&quot;, with &quot;is&quot; being considered less proper. For example, 
::::&quot;I does guh church pun a Sunduh/Sundy&quot; → &quot;I go to church on Sundays&quot;
::::&quot;He does eat nuff apples&quot; → &quot;He eats a lot of apples&quot;
::The phrase &quot;I is&quot; or &quot;I does&quot;, is quite commonly shortened to &quot;Ise&quot;. e.g. &quot;Ise guh church pun a Sunduh.&quot;
::The past tense unlike other tenses, is not indicated by a tense indicator, and uses only the base of the verb. For example,
::::&quot;He walk town&quot; → &quot;He walked to town&quot;
::::&quot;Dem eat all de food&quot; → &quot;They ate all of the food&quot;.
::As an exception to the rules, the verb &quot;to go&quot; is conjugated to &quot;went&quot;. For example,
::::&quot;I went to church Sunduh&quot; → &quot;I went to church on Sunday&quot;

::In Bajan dialect, when the past tense structure is made continuous, it instead becomes the present continuous, for example &quot;He watchin de show&quot; means &quot;He is watching the show&quot;, and &quot;She gine eat&quot; means &quot;She is going to eat&quot;. The present and past perfect continuous tenses replaces the past continuous.
::The present perfect tense uses the indicator &quot;duh&quot;. For example,
::::&quot;He duh dun get hey&quot; → &quot;He has already arrived&quot;
::::&quot;Wunna dun guh school&quot; → &quot;You all have gone to school.
::The past perfect or pluperfect tense is indicated by the word &quot;did&quot; or &quot;dih&quot;. For example,
::::&quot;He did wan guh tuh de confrunce&quot; → &quot;He had wanted to go to the conference&quot;.
::The future tense is indicated by the word &quot;gun&quot; or &quot;gon&quot;. For example,
::::&quot;She gine bring wunna de receipt&quot; → &quot;She will bring you all the receipt&quot;

:There are many more nuances to Bajan verbs and tenses in addition. One such nuance is that unlike Standard English, Bajan also tends towards using a zero copula. E.g. &quot;We in de garage&quot; means &quot;We are in the garage&quot;. Moreover, the indicators are also used as copulas, much like &quot;to be&quot; in Standard English. E.g. &quot;She duh in de house&quot; means &quot;She was in the house&quot;.

Negative&lt;br&gt;
:Negatives are achieved by modifying the tense indicator of the sentence to end in &quot;n&quot;, or by adding &quot;ain&quot; before the verb in the past tense, present continuous or in place of the copula, or in front of the indicator in the present perfect tense. Here is a list of indicators and their negative form.

:&quot;I ain&quot; is usually contracted to &quot;Ah&#x27;n&quot;. e.g &quot;Ah&#x27;n see she dis evening&quot; means &quot;I didn&#x27;t see her this evening&quot;.

==Proverbs==
Some of the common Bajan proverbs are listed below.

==African words in Bajan==

Although most words in Bajan dialect are English in origin, many words are borrowed from West African languages. The largest portion contributed to Bajan is from the Igbo language.

; wunna: You all from the Igbo word , which means you (plural).
; obeah: From Igbo , &#x27;doctoring, mysticism, or oracle&#x27;.
; Bim: From Igbo , &#x27;my place, people, kindred&#x27;, common nickname for Barbados
; de, deh: From Igbo , &#x27;present in&#x27;
; eye-water: calque from (eye + water), tears
; duppy: From Twi .
; Cou-cou: Part of the local national dish, but comes from &quot;Fou Fou&quot; in Africa.
; nyam: (Pronounced &quot;ng-yam&quot; or &quot;yamm&quot;) Means to eat ravenously or greedily, as in &quot;Don&#x27;t yamm the food like that boy!&quot; – In Manjaku (language spoken in Guinea-Bissau) and in Pulaar it means &#x27;to chew&#x27; (pronounced &quot;nyam&quot;); it also means &#x27;chew&#x27; in Luo (language spoken in East Africa).
; jook/juk: From the Fula word &#x27;poke, spur&#x27;
; soso: From the Igbo language word &#x27;only&#x27;
; hard-head: From , (head + hard, strength), &#x27;obstinate&#x27;

==See also==
*Queen&#x27;s English
*British English
*English in Barbados
*Gullah language
*English-based creole languages
*List of countries and territories where English is an official language
*Barbadian culture
*Music of Barbados

==References==
==Bibliography==
* Blake, Renee A. 1997. &quot;All o&#x27; we is one? Race, class and language in a Barbados community&quot;. PhD, Stanford University.
* Burrowes, Audrey (in collaboration with Richard Allsopp), 1983. &quot;Barbadian Creole: A note on its social history and structure&quot;. In Lawrence Carrington, Dennis Craig, &amp; Ramon Todd Dandaré, eds, &quot;Studies in Caribbean Language&quot;. St. Augustine, Trinidad: Society for Caribbean Linguistics, 38–45.
* Fields, Linda. 1995. &quot;Early Bajan: Creole or non-Creole?&quot; In Jacques Arends, ed., &quot;The Early Stages of Creolization&quot;. Amsterdam, Philadelphia: Benjamins, 89–112.
* Holm, John A. 1988. &quot;Pidgins and Creoles&quot;, vol. II: Reference Survey. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
* Rickford, John R. 1992. &quot;The Creole residue in Barbados&quot;. In Nick Doane, Joan Hall, &amp; Dick Ringler, eds. &quot;Old English and New: Essays in language and linguistics in honor of Frederic G. Cassidy&quot;. NY: Garland, 183–201.
* Rickford, John R. &amp; Renee Blake. 1990. &quot;Copula contraction and absence in Barbadian Creole English, Samaná English and Vernacular Black English&quot;. In Kira Hall et al., eds. &quot;Proceedings of the 16th Annual Meeting of the Berkeley Linguistics Society&quot;. Berkeley CA: Berkeley Linguistics Society, 257–68.
* Rickford, John R and Jerome S. Handler. 1994. &quot;Textual evidence on the nature of early Barbadian speech, 1676–1835&quot;. &quot;Journal of Pidgin and Creole Languages&quot; 9: 221–55.
* Roberts, Peter A. 1988. &quot;West Indians and their language&quot;. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. (&quot;written by a Bajan&quot;)
* Winford, Donald. 2000. &quot;&#x27;Intermediate&#x27; Creoles and degrees of change in Creole formation: The case of Bajan&quot;. In I. Neumann-Holzschuh and E. W. Schneider, eds, &quot;Degrees of Restructuring in Creole Languages&quot;. Amsterdam, Philadelphia: Benjamins, 215–245.
* &quot;A~Z of Barbados Heritage&quot;, by Sean Carrington, Macmillan Caribbean – Macmillan Publishers Limited Press, 2007, paperback. 
* Notes for: &quot;A Glossary of Words and Phrases of Barbadian Dialect&quot;, by Frank A. Collymore, Second Edition – Advocate Co. Limited Press, 1957, paperback
* &quot;From Bajan To Standard English&quot;, by Jerome Davis, Website of author Jerome Davis, former Barbadian Consul to Canada
*&quot;Barbadian Dialect Poetry&quot;, by Kathleen Catford, Common sense &amp; evidence: The art of Bajan dialect , Nation Newspaper

== Further reading ==
* Caribbean Poetry-Barbados
* African Influences on Barbados, Trevor Marshall 
* http://www.barbadosdialect.page.tl : Introduces the book &quot;From Bajan To Standard English&quot;. Highlights Bajan Dialect. See 50 common Bajan expressions
* Reflections of Barbados (A RADIO PROGRAMME - AUDIO ONLY), The Barbados Government Information Service
* Barbados Dictionary Wiwords.com – a cross-referencing West Indian dictionary.

== External links ==
* Bajan language, SIL.org</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2524014" start="0" end="5" title="Bajan Creole" label="Bajan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2524014" start="14" end="26" title="Bajan Creole" label="Bajan Creole"/>
<link wikidata="Q31989" start="34" end="63" title="English-based creole language" label="English-based creole language"/>
<link wikidata="Q664609" start="127" end="143" title="Caribbean island" label="Caribbean island"/>
<link wikidata="Q244" start="147" end="155" title="Barbados" label="Barbados"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322198" start="178" end="193" title="spoken language" label="spoken language"/>
<link wikidata="Q14437894" start="622" end="638" title="Standard English" label="Standard English"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044394" start="849" end="869" title="Province of Carolina" label="Province of Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q7976" start="892" end="908" title="American English" label="American English"/>
<link wikidata="Q33395" start="917" end="932" title="Gullah language" label="Gullah language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363055" start="988" end="996" title="Belizean Kriol language" label="Belizean"/>
<link wikidata="Q3305477" start="1001" end="1016" title="Guyanese Creole" label="Guyanese Creole"/>
<link wikidata="Q16821017" start="1141" end="1159" title="African Barbadians" label="African Barbadians"/>
<link wikidata="Q5187956" start="1881" end="1890" title="Crop Over" label="Crop Over"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377956" start="1963" end="1974" title="dental fricative" label="interdental"/>
<link wikidata="Q26677" start="2212" end="2218" title="rhotic and non-rhotic accents" label="rhotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7053766" start="2253" end="2284" title="North American Standard English" label="North American Standard English"/>
<link wikidata="Q178034" start="2350" end="2362" title="glottal stop" label="glottal stop"/>
<link wikidata="Q690940" start="3004" end="3012" title="Grammatical person" label="pronouns"/>
<link wikidata="Q5576720" start="3342" end="3352" title="Intonation (linguistics)" label="intonation"/>
<link wikidata="Q368722" start="3616" end="3650" title="Five Ws" label="who, what, when, where, why or how"/>
<link wikidata="Q5089525" start="4200" end="4208" title="Chefette" label="Chefette"/>
<link wikidata="Q3910936" start="5557" end="5574" title="Simple present" label="The present tense"/>
<link wikidata="Q1392475" start="6021" end="6035" title="Simple past" label="The past tense"/>
<link wikidata="Q7240943" start="6564" end="6582" title="present continuous" label="present continuous"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6798" end="6813" title="Uses of English verb forms#Past progressive/continuous" label="past continuous"/>
<link wikidata="Q1240211" start="6817" end="6842" title="Present perfect" label="The present perfect tense"/>
<link wikidata="Q623742" start="7040" end="7076" title="Pluperfect" label="The past perfect or pluperfect tense"/>
<link wikidata="Q501405" start="7254" end="7270" title="Future tense" label="The future tense"/>
<link wikidata="Q17104788" start="7593" end="7604" title="zero copula" label="zero copula"/>
<link wikidata="Q207509" start="7721" end="7728" title="Copula (linguistics)" label="copulas"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7740" end="7757" title="E-Prime#Different functions of &amp;quot;to be&amp;quot;" label="&amp;quot;to be&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q33578" start="8668" end="8672" title="Igbo language" label="Igbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774796" start="8708" end="8713" title="obeah" label="obeah"/>
<link wikidata="Q36850" start="8965" end="8968" title="Twi" label="Twi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5175921" start="8973" end="8980" title="Cou-cou" label="Cou-cou"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391582" start="9000" end="9013" title="national dish" label="national dish"/>
<link wikidata="Q35822" start="9221" end="9228" title="Manjak language" label="Manjaku"/>
<link wikidata="Q1007" start="9249" end="9262" title="Guinea-Bissau" label="Guinea-Bissau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420205" start="9271" end="9277" title="Pulaar" label="Pulaar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437354" start="9372" end="9375" title="Luo languages" label="Luo"/>
<link wikidata="Q27407" start="9396" end="9407" title="East Africa" label="East Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q33454" start="9431" end="9435" title="Fula language" label="Fula"/>
<link wikidata="Q33578" start="9481" end="9494" title="Igbo language" label="Igbo language"/>
<link wikidata="Q7985" start="9599" end="9619" title="Received Pronunciation" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s English"/>
<link wikidata="Q7979" start="9621" end="9636" title="British English" label="British English"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378584" start="9638" end="9657" title="English in Barbados" label="English in Barbados"/>
<link wikidata="Q33395" start="9659" end="9674" title="Gullah language" label="Gullah language"/>
<link wikidata="Q31989" start="9676" end="9706" title="English-based creole languages" label="English-based creole languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190742" start="9708" end="9779" title="List of countries and territories where English is an official language" label="List of countries and territories where English is an official language"/>
<link wikidata="Q3007256" start="9781" end="9798" title="Culture of Barbados" label="Barbadian culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q608901" start="9800" end="9817" title="Music of Barbados" label="Music of Barbados"/>
<link wikidata="Q7313826" start="9853" end="9868" title="Blake, Renee A." label="Blake, Renee A."/>
<link wikidata="Q3180849" start="10491" end="10504" title="Holm, John A." label="Holm, John A."/>
<link wikidata="Q6253992" start="10612" end="10629" title="Rickford, John R." label="Rickford, John R."/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11882" end="11916" title="Macmillan Publishers Limited Press" label="Macmillan Publishers Limited Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q5485907" start="12018" end="12036" title="Frank A. Collymore" label="Frank A. Collymore"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="997992" wikidata="Q4859769" url="?curid=997992" title="Barbudan">
<text>Barbudan may refer to:
* Something of, or related to Barbuda. See also the country, Antigua and Barbuda.
* A person from Barbuda, or of Barbudan descent. For information about the Barbudan people, see Barbudans and the Demographics of Barbuda.
* Barbudan Creole.

== See also ==
* Barbuda (disambiguation)
* Antiguan (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4859769" start="0" end="8" title="Barbudan" label="Barbudan"/>
<link wikidata="Q238752" start="53" end="60" title="Barbuda" label="Barbuda"/>
<link wikidata="Q781" start="84" end="103" title="Antigua and Barbuda" label="Antigua and Barbuda"/>
<link wikidata="Q101083602" start="201" end="210" title="Barbudans" label="Barbudans"/>
<link wikidata="Q107210444" start="219" end="242" title="Demographics of Barbuda" label="Demographics of Barbuda"/>
<link wikidata="Q125578132" start="246" end="261" title="Barbudan Creole" label="Barbudan Creole"/>
<link wikidata="Q20532107" start="281" end="305" title="Barbuda (disambiguation)" label="Barbuda (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4774845" start="308" end="333" title="Antiguan (disambiguation)" label="Antiguan (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="997993" wikidata="Q4882993" url="?curid=997993" title="Belizean">
<text>Belizean may refer to:
* Something of, or related to Belize, a Central American nation
* Belizean people, people originating in Belize whether they live there or in the Belizean diaspora
* Belizean population, see Demographics of Belize
* Belizean cuisine
* Belizean culture, see Culture of Belize
* Belizean society

== See also ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4882993" start="0" end="8" title="Belizean" label="Belizean"/>
<link wikidata="Q242" start="53" end="59" title="Belize" label="Belize"/>
<link wikidata="Q4883023" start="89" end="104" title="Belizean people" label="Belizean people"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044378" start="214" end="236" title="Demographics of Belize" label="Demographics of Belize"/>
<link wikidata="Q3006889" start="239" end="255" title="Belizean cuisine" label="Belizean cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5193533" start="280" end="297" title="Culture of Belize" label="Culture of Belize"/>
<link wikidata="Q4883026" start="300" end="316" title="Belizean society" label="Belizean society"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="997997" wikidata="Q844619" url="?curid=997997" title="Vihāra">
<text>Vihāra generally refers to a Buddhist temple or Buddhist monastery for Buddhist renunciates, mostly in the Indian subcontinent. The concept is ancient and in early Pali texts, it meant any arrangement of space or facilities for dwellings. The term evolved into an architectural concept wherein it refers to living quarters for monks with an open shared space or courtyard, particularly in Buddhism. The term is also found in Jain monastic literature, usually referring to temporary refuge for wandering monks or nuns during the annual Indian monsoons. In modern Jainism, the monks continue to wander from town to town except during the rainy season (chaturmasya), and the term &quot;vihara&quot; refers to their wanderings.

Vihara or vihara hall has a more specific meaning in the architecture of India, especially ancient Indian rock-cut architecture. Here it means a central hall, with small cells connected to it, sometimes with beds carved from the stone. Some have a shrine cell set back at the centre of the back wall, containing a stupa in early examples, or a Buddha statue later. Typical large sites such as the Ajanta Caves, Aurangabad Caves, Karli Caves, and Kanheri Caves contain several viharas. Some included a chaitya or worship hall nearby. The vihara originated as a shelter for monks when it rains.

==Etymology and nomenclature==

The word means a form of rest house, temple or monastery in ascetic traditions of India, particularly for a group of monks. It particularly referred to a hall that was used as a temple or where monks met and some walked about. In the context of the performative arts, the term means the theatre, playhouse, convent or temple compound to meet, perform or relax in. Later it referred to a form of temple or monastery construction in Buddhism and Jainism, wherein the design has a central hall and attached separated shrines for residence either for monks or for deities and sacred figure such as Tirthankaras, Gautama Buddha. The word means a Jain or Buddhist temple or &quot;dwelling, waiting place&quot; in many medieval era inscriptions and texts, from &quot;vi-har&quot; which means &quot;to construct&quot;.

It contrasts with or , which means &quot;forest&quot;. In medieval era, the term meant any monastery, particularly for Buddhist monks. &quot;Matha&quot; is another term for monastery in the Buddhist tradition, today normally used for Hindu establishments.

The eastern Indian state of Bihar derives its name from &quot;vihāra&quot; due to the abundance of Buddhist monasteries in that area. The word has also been borrowed in Malay as &quot;biara&quot;, denoting a monastery or other non-Muslim place of worship. It is called a &quot;wihan&quot; () in Thai, and &quot;vĭhéar&quot; ( ) in Khmer. In Burmese, &quot;wihara&quot; ( ), means &quot;monastery&quot;, but the native Burmese word &quot;kyaung&quot; ( ) is preferred. Monks wandering from place to place preaching and seeking alms often stayed together in the sangha. In the Punjabi language, an open space inside a home is called a .

In Korea, Japan, Vietnam and China, the word for a Buddhist temple or monastery seems to have a different origin. The Japanese word for a Buddhist temple is , it was anciently also written phonetically 天良 &quot;tera&quot;, and it is cognate with the Modern Korean &quot;Chǒl&quot; from Middle Korean &quot;Tiel&quot;, the Jurchen &quot;Taira&quot; and the reconstructed Old Chinese *&quot;dɘiaʁ&quot;, all meaning &quot;Buddhist Monastery&quot;. These words are apparently derived from the Aramaic word for &quot;monastery&quot; &quot;dērā/ dairā/ dēr&quot; (from the root &quot;dwr&quot; &quot;to live together&quot;), rather than from the unrelated Indian word for monastery &quot;vihara&quot;, and may have been transmitted to China by the first Central Asian translators of Buddhist scriptures, such as An Shigao or Lokaksema.

==Origins==
===Viharas as pleasure centers===

During the 3rd-century BCE era of Ashoka, &quot;vihara yatras&quot; were travel stops aimed at enjoyments, pleasures and hobbies such as hunting. These contrasted with &quot;dharma yatras&quot; which related to religious pursuits and pilgrimage. After Ashoka converted to Buddhism, states Lahiri, he started &quot;dharma yatras&quot; around mid 3rd century BCE instead of hedonistic royal &quot;vihara yatras&quot;.

===Viharas as monasteries===
The early history of viharas is unclear. Monasteries in the form of caves are dated to centuries before the start of the common era, for Ajivikas, Buddhists and Jainas. The rock-cut architecture found in cave viharas from the 2nd-century BCE have roots in the Maurya Empire period. In and around the Bihar state of India are a group of residential cave monuments all dated to be from pre-common era, reflecting the Maurya architecture. Some of these have Brahmi script inscription which confirms their antiquity, but the inscriptions were likely added to pre-existing caves. The oldest layer of Buddhist and Jain texts mention legends of the Buddha, the Jain Tirthankaras or sramana monks living in caves. If these records derived from an oral tradition accurately reflect the significance of monks and caves in the times of the Buddha and the Mahavira, then cave residence tradition dates back to at least the 5th century BCE. According to Allchin and Erdosy, the legend of First Buddhist Council is dated to a period just after the death of the Buddha. It mentions monks gathering at a cave near Rajgiri, and this dates it in pre-Mauryan times. However, the square courtyard with cells architecture of &quot;vihara&quot;, state Allchin and Erdosy, is dated to the Mauryan period. The earlier monastic residences of Ajivikas, Buddhists, Hindus, and Jains were likely outside rock cliffs and made of temporary materials and these have not survived.

The earliest known gift of immovable property for monastic purposes ever recorded in an Indian inscription is credited to Emperor Ashoka, and it is a donation to the Ajivikas. According to Johannes Bronkhorst, this created competitive financial pressures on all traditions, including the Hindu Brahmins. This may have led to the development of viharas as shelters for monks, and evolution in the Ashrama concept to &quot;agraharas&quot; or Hindu monasteries. These shelters were normally accompanied by donation of revenue from villages nearby, who would work and support these cave residences with food and services. The Karle inscription dated to the 1st century CE donates a cave and nearby village, states Bronkhorst, &quot;for the support of the ascetics living in the caves at Valuraka [Karle] without any distinction of sect or origin&quot;. Buddhist texts from Bengal, dated to centuries later, use the term &quot;asrama-vihara&quot; or &quot;agrahara-vihara&quot; for their monasteries.
Buddhist viharas or monasteries may be described as a residence for monks, a centre for religious work and meditation and a centre of Buddhist learning. Reference to five kinds of dwellings (Pancha Lenani) namely, &quot;Vihara, Addayoga, Pasada, Hammiya&quot; and &quot;Guha&quot; is found in the Buddhist canonical texts as fit for monks. Of these only the &quot;Vihara&quot; (monastery) and &quot;Guha&quot; (Cave) have survived.

At some stage of Buddhism, like other Indian religious traditions, the wandering monks of the Sangha dedicated to asceticism and the monastic life, wandered from place to place. During the rainy season (cf. vassa) they stayed in temporary shelters. In Buddhist theology relating to rebirth and merit earning, it was considered an act of merit not only to feed a monk but also to shelter him, sumptuous monasteries were created by rich lay devotees.

==Architecture==

The only substantial remains of very early viharas are in the rock-cut complexes, mostly in north India, the Deccan in particular, but this is an accident of survival. Originally structural viharas of stone or brick would probably have been at least as common everywhere, and the norm in the south. By the second century BCE a standard plan for a vihara was established; these form the majority of Buddhist rock-cut &quot;caves&quot;. It consisted of a roughly square rectangular hall, in rock-cut cases, or probably an open court in structural examples, off which there were a number of small cells. Rock-cut cells are often fitted with rock-cut platforms for beds and pillows. The front wall had one or more entrances, and often a verandah. Later the back wall facing the entrance had a fairly small shrine-room, often reached through an ante-chamber. Initially these held stupas, but later a large sculpted Buddha image, sometimes with reliefs on the walls. The verandah might also have sculpture, and in some cases the walls of the main hall. Paintings were perhaps more common, but these rarely survive, except in a few cases such as Caves 2, 10, 11 and 17 at the Ajanta Caves. As later rock-cut viharas are often on up to three storeys, this was also probably the case with the structural ones.

As the vihara acquired a central image, it came to take over the function of the chaitya worship hall, and eventually these ceased to be built. This was despite the rock-cut vihara shrine room usually offering no path for circumambulation or pradakshina, an important ritual practice.

In early medieval era, Viharas became important institutions and a part of Buddhist Universities with thousands of students, such as Nalanda. Life in &quot;Viharas&quot; was codified early on. It is the object of a part of the Pali canon, the Vinaya Pitaka or &quot;basket of monastic discipline&quot;. Shalban Vihara in Bangladesh is an example of a structural monastery with 115 cells, where the lower parts of the brick-built structure have been excavated. Somapura Mahavihara, also in Bangladesh, was a larger vihara, mostly 8th-century, with 177 cells around a huge central temple.
===Variants in rock-cut viharas===
Usually the standard form as described above is followed, but there are some variants. Two vihara halls, Cave 5 at Ellora and Cave 11 at Kanheri, have very low platforms running most of the length of the main hall. These were probably used as some combination of benches or tables for dining, desks for study, and possibly beds. They are often termed &quot;dining-hall&quot; or the &quot;Durbar Hall&quot; at Kanheri, on no good evidence.

Cave 11 at the Bedse Caves is a fairly small 1st-century vihara, with nine cells in the interior and originally four around the entrance, and no shrine room. It is distinguished by elaborate gavaksha and railing relief carving around the cell-doors, but especially by having a rounded roof and apsidal far end, like a chaitya hall.

== History ==

The earliest Buddhist rock-cut cave abodes and sacred places are found in the western Deccan dating back to the 3rd century BCE. These earliest rock-cut caves include the Bhaja Caves, the Karla Caves, and some of the Ajanta Caves.

Vihara with central shrine containing devotional images of the Buddha, dated to about the 2nd century CE are found in the northwestern area of Gandhara, in sites such as Jaulian, Kalawan (in the Taxila area) or Dharmarajika, which states Behrendt, possibly were the prototypes for the 4th century monasteries such as those at Devnimori in Gujarat. This is supported by the discovery of clay and bronze Buddha statues, but it is unclear if the statue is of a later date. According to Behrendt, these &quot;must have been the architectural prototype for the later northern and western Buddhist shrines in the Ajanta Caves, Aurangabad, Ellora, Nalanda, Ratnagiri and other sites&quot;. Behrendt&#x27;s proposal follows the model that states the northwestern influences and Kushana era during the 1st and 2nd century CE triggered the development of Buddhist art and monastery designs. In contrast, Susan Huntington states that this late nineteenth and early twentieth century model is increasingly questioned by the discovery of pre-Kushana era Buddha images outside the northwestern territories. Further, states Huntington, &quot;archaeological, literary, and inscriptional evidence&quot; such as those in Madhya Pradesh cast further doubts. Devotional worship of Buddha is traceable, for example, to Bharhut Buddhist monuments dated between 2nd and 1st century BCE. The Krishna or Kanha Cave (Cave 19) at Nasik has the central hall with connected cells, and it is generally dated to about the 1st century BCE.

The early stone viharas mimicked the timber construction that likely preceded them.

Inscriptional evidence on stone and copper plates indicate that Buddhist viharas were often co-built with Hindu and Jain temples. The Gupta Empire era witnessed the building of numerous viharas, including those at the Ajanta Caves. Some of these viharas and temples though evidenced in texts and inscriptions are no longer physically found, likely destroyed in later centuries by natural causes or due to war.

===Viharas as a source of major Buddhist traditions===

As more people joined Buddhist monastic &quot;sangha&quot;, the senior monks adopted a code of discipline which came to be known in the Pali Canon as the Vinaya texts. These texts are mostly concerned with the rules of the &quot;sangha&quot;. The rules are preceded by stories telling how the Buddha came to lay them down, and followed by explanations and analysis. According to the stories, the rules were devised on an ad hoc basis as the Buddha encountered various behavioral problems or disputes among his followers. Each major early Buddhist tradition had its own variant text of code of discipline for vihara life. Major vihara appointed a &quot;vihara-pala&quot;, the one who managed the vihara, settled disputes, determined sangha&#x27;s consent and rules, and forced those hold-outs to this consensus.

Three early influential monastic fraternities are traceable in Buddhist history. The Mahavihara established by Mahinda was the oldest. Later, in 1st century BCE, King Vattagamani donated the Abhayagiri vihara to his favored monk, which led the Mahavihara fraternity to expel that monk. In 3rd century CE, this repeated when King Mahasena donated the Jetavana vihara to an individual monk, which led to his expulsion. The Mahinda Mahavihara led to the orthodox Theravada tradition. The Abhayagiri vihara monks, rejected and criticized by the orthodox Buddhist monks, were more receptive to heterodox ideas and they nurtured the Mahayana tradition. The Jetavana vihara monks vacillated between the two traditions, blending their ideas.

===Viharas of the Pāla era===

A range of monasteries grew up during the Pāla period in ancient Magadha (modern Bihar) and Bengal. According to Tibetan sources, five great mahaviharas stood out: Vikramashila, the premier university of the era; Nalanda, past its prime but still illustrious, Somapura, Odantapurā, and Jagaddala. According to Sukumar Dutt, the five monasteries formed a network, were supported and supervised by the Pala state. Each of the five had their own seal and operated like a corporation, serving as centers of learning.

Other notable monasteries of the Pala Empire were Traikuta, Devikota (identified with ancient Kotivarsa, &#x27;modern Bangarh&#x27;), and Pandit Vihara. Excavations jointly conducted by the Archaeological Survey of India and University of Burdwan in 1971–1972 to 1974–1975 yielded a Buddhist monastic complex at Monorampur, near Bharatpur via Panagarh Bazar in the Bardhaman district of West Bengal. The date of the monastery may be ascribed to the early medieval period. Recent excavations at Jagjivanpur (Malda district, West Bengal) revealed another Buddhist monastery (&quot;Nandadirghika-Udranga Mahavihara&quot;) of the ninth century.

Nothing of the superstructure has survived. A number of monastic cells facing a rectangular courtyard have been found. A notable feature is the presence of circular corner cells. It is believed that the general layout of the monastic complex at Jagjivanpur is by and large similar to that of Nalanda. Beside these, scattered references to some monasteries are found in epigraphic and other sources. Among them Pullahari (in western Magadha), Halud Vihara (45 km south of Paharpur), Parikramana vihara and Yashovarmapura vihara (in Bihar) deserve mention. Other important structural complexes have been discovered at Mainamati (Comilla district, Bangladesh). Remains of quite a few viharas have been unearthed here and the most elaborate is the Shalban Vihara. The complex consists of a fairly large vihara of the usual plan of four ranges of monastic cells round a central court, with a temple in cruciform plan situated in the centre. According to a legend on a seal (discovered at the site) the founder of the monastery was Bhavadeva, a ruler of the Deva dynasty.

===Southeast Asia===

As Buddhism spread in Southeast Asia, monasteries were built by local kings. The term &quot;vihara&quot; is still sometimes used to refer to the monasteries/temples, also known as &quot;wat&quot;, but in Thailand it also took on a narrower meaning referring to certain buildings in the temple complex. The &quot;wihan&quot; is a building, apart from the main &quot;ubosot&quot; (ordination hall) in which a Buddha image is enshrined. In many temples, the &quot;wihan&quot; serves as a sermon hall or an assembly hall where ceremonies, such as the &quot;kathina&quot;, are held. Many of these Theravada viharas feature a Buddha image that is considered sacred after it is formally consecrated by the monks.

==Image gallery==
== See also ==
* List of Buddhist universities across the world
* Ashram
* Bahal, Nepal
* Brahma-vihara
* Gal Vihara
* Kyaung
* Mahavihara
* Mahiyangana Raja Maha Vihara
* Nava Vihara
* Tissamaharama Raja Maha Vihara
* Vihara Buddhagaya Watugong
* Wat – Buddhist temple in Cambodia, Laos or Thailand.

==Notes==
== References ==
* Harle, J.C., &quot;The Art and Architecture of the Indian Subcontinent&quot;, 2nd edn. 1994, Yale University Press Pelican History of Art, 
* Michell, George, &quot;The Penguin Guide to the Monuments of India, Volume 1: Buddhist, Jain, Hindu&quot;, 1989, Penguin Books, 
* 

==External links==

* Lay Buddhist Practice: The Rains Residence – &quot;A short article on the meaning of Vassa, and its observation by lay Buddhists.&quot;
* Mapping Buddhist Monasteries A project aiming to catalogue, crosscheck, verify and interrelate, tag and georeference, chronoreference and map online (using KML markup &amp; Google Maps technology).</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q844619" start="0" end="6" title="Vihāra" label="Vihāra"/>
<link wikidata="Q5393308" start="29" end="44" title="Buddhist temple" label="Buddhist temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q44613" start="48" end="66" title="Buddhist monastery" label="Buddhist monastery"/>
<link wikidata="Q854997" start="71" end="91" title="bhikkhu" label="Buddhist renunciates"/>
<link wikidata="Q60140" start="107" end="126" title="Indian subcontinent" label="Indian subcontinent"/>
<link wikidata="Q36727" start="164" end="168" title="Pali" label="Pali"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="389" end="397" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="650" end="661" title="Chaturmas#Jainism" label="chaturmasya"/>
<link wikidata="Q61050" start="782" end="803" title="architecture of India" label="architecture of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q388774" start="824" end="852" title="Indian rock-cut architecture" label="Indian rock-cut architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q180987" start="1039" end="1044" title="stupa" label="stupa"/>
<link wikidata="Q184427" start="1122" end="1134" title="Ajanta Caves" label="Ajanta Caves"/>
<link wikidata="Q4362303" start="1136" end="1152" title="Aurangabad Caves" label="Aurangabad Caves"/>
<link wikidata="Q6372431" start="1154" end="1165" title="Karla Caves" label="Karli Caves"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356198" start="1171" end="1184" title="Kanheri Caves" label="Kanheri Caves"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059208" start="1226" end="1233" title="chaitya" label="chaitya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077817" start="1945" end="1956" title="Tirthankara" label="Tirthankara"/>
<link wikidata="Q9441" start="1959" end="1973" title="Gautama Buddha" label="Gautama Buddha"/>
<link wikidata="Q2613100" start="1992" end="1996" title="Jain temple" label="Jain"/>
<link wikidata="Q5393308" start="2000" end="2015" title="Buddhist temple" label="Buddhist temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q2069741" start="2304" end="2309" title="Matha" label="Matha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165" start="2448" end="2453" title="Bihar" label="Bihar"/>
<link wikidata="Q9237" start="2589" end="2594" title="Malay language" label="Malay"/>
<link wikidata="Q9217" start="2715" end="2719" title="Thai language" label="Thai"/>
<link wikidata="Q9205" start="2751" end="2756" title="Khmer language" label="Khmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q9228" start="2761" end="2768" title="Burmese language" label="Burmese"/>
<link wikidata="Q48911265" start="2857" end="2863" title="kyaung" label="kyaung"/>
<link wikidata="Q931406" start="2946" end="2950" title="alms" label="alms"/>
<link wikidata="Q193944" start="2980" end="2986" title="sangha" label="sangha"/>
<link wikidata="Q58635" start="2995" end="3011" title="Punjabi language" label="Punjabi language"/>
<link wikidata="Q18097" start="3059" end="3064" title="Korea" label="Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="3066" end="3071" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q881" start="3073" end="3080" title="Vietnam" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="3085" end="3090" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q5287" start="3174" end="3182" title="Japanese language" label="Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q9176" start="3306" end="3319" title="Modern Korean" label="Modern Korean"/>
<link wikidata="Q715339" start="3342" end="3355" title="Middle Korean" label="Middle Korean"/>
<link wikidata="Q56731" start="3378" end="3385" title="Jurchen language" label="Jurchen"/>
<link wikidata="Q35137" start="3426" end="3437" title="Old Chinese" label="Old Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q28602" start="3546" end="3553" title="Aramaic" label="Aramaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q44613" start="3569" end="3578" title="monastery" label="monastery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1267947" start="3863" end="3872" title="An Shigao" label="An Shigao"/>
<link wikidata="Q370115" start="3876" end="3885" title="Lokaksema (Buddhist monk)" label="Lokaksema"/>
<link wikidata="Q8589" start="3969" end="3975" title="Ashoka" label="Ashoka"/>
<link wikidata="Q412873" start="4518" end="4525" title="Ajivika" label="Ajivika"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="4528" end="4537" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhists"/>
<link wikidata="Q9232" start="4542" end="4548" title="Jainism" label="Jainas"/>
<link wikidata="Q62943" start="4641" end="4654" title="Maurya Empire" label="Maurya Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165" start="4681" end="4686" title="Bihar" label="Bihar"/>
<link wikidata="Q211390" start="5056" end="5063" title="sramana" label="sramana"/>
<link wikidata="Q209815" start="5120" end="5134" title="oral tradition" label="oral tradition"/>
<link wikidata="Q2396418" start="6227" end="6234" title="Ashrama (stage)" label="Ashrama"/>
<link wikidata="Q193944" start="7354" end="7360" title="Sangha (Buddhism)" label="Sangha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151493" start="7467" end="7472" title="vassa" label="vassa"/>
<link wikidata="Q169966" start="7837" end="7843" title="Deccan Plateau" label="Deccan"/>
<link wikidata="Q693922" start="8461" end="8469" title="verandah" label="verandah"/>
<link wikidata="Q180987" start="8603" end="8608" title="stupa" label="stupa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001041" start="8638" end="8650" title="Buddha image" label="Buddha image"/>
<link wikidata="Q245117" start="8667" end="8673" title="relief" label="relief"/>
<link wikidata="Q184427" start="8897" end="8909" title="Ajanta Caves" label="Ajanta Caves"/>
<link wikidata="Q1958141" start="9272" end="9283" title="pradakshina" label="pradakshina"/>
<link wikidata="Q3918" start="9400" end="9412" title="Universities" label="Universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q216243" start="9449" end="9456" title="Nalanda" label="Nalanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q215685" start="9543" end="9553" title="Pali canon" label="Pali canon"/>
<link wikidata="Q848764" start="9559" end="9572" title="Vinaya" label="Vinaya Pitaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q7487152" start="9619" end="9633" title="Shalban Vihara" label="Shalban Vihara"/>
<link wikidata="Q902" start="9637" end="9647" title="Bangladesh" label="Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q305044" start="9776" end="9795" title="Somapura Mahavihara" label="Somapura Mahavihara"/>
<link wikidata="Q189616" start="10053" end="10059" title="Ellora" label="Ellora"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356198" start="10075" end="10082" title="Kanheri" label="Kanheri"/>
<link wikidata="Q127807" start="10326" end="10337" title="Durbar Hall" label="Durbar Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q5071455" start="10569" end="10577" title="gavaksha" label="gavaksha"/>
<link wikidata="Q170463" start="10672" end="10679" title="apse" label="apsidal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059208" start="10696" end="10703" title="chaitya" label="chaitya"/>
<link wikidata="Q854709" start="10897" end="10908" title="Bhaja Caves" label="Bhaja Caves"/>
<link wikidata="Q6372431" start="10914" end="10925" title="Karla Caves" label="Karla Caves"/>
<link wikidata="Q184427" start="10943" end="10955" title="Ajanta Caves" label="Ajanta Caves"/>
<link wikidata="Q213651" start="11101" end="11109" title="Gandhara" label="Gandhara"/>
<link wikidata="Q593411" start="11128" end="11135" title="Jaulian" label="Jaulian"/>
<link wikidata="Q48728025" start="11137" end="11144" title="Kalawan" label="Kalawan"/>
<link wikidata="Q156093" start="11153" end="11159" title="Taxila" label="Taxila"/>
<link wikidata="Q5269314" start="11169" end="11181" title="Dharmarajika" label="Dharmarajika"/>
<link wikidata="Q48727915" start="11284" end="11293" title="Devnimori" label="Devnimori"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061" start="11297" end="11304" title="Gujarat" label="Gujarat"/>
<link wikidata="Q200713" start="11579" end="11589" title="Aurangabad, Maharashtra" label="Aurangabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q189616" start="11591" end="11597" title="Ellora" label="Ellora"/>
<link wikidata="Q216243" start="11599" end="11606" title="Nalanda" label="Nalanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1922257" start="11608" end="11617" title="Ratnagiri" label="Ratnagiri"/>
<link wikidata="Q7130537" start="12326" end="12347" title="Pandavleni Caves" label="Krishna or Kanha Cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q11774" start="12686" end="12698" title="Gupta Empire" label="Gupta Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q215685" start="13155" end="13165" title="Pali Canon" label="Pali Canon"/>
<link wikidata="Q193944" start="13248" end="13254" title="Sangha (Buddhism)" label="sangha"/>
<link wikidata="Q19323827" start="14738" end="14748" title="mahavihara" label="mahavihara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1634624" start="14761" end="14773" title="Vikramashila" label="Vikramashila"/>
<link wikidata="Q216243" start="14810" end="14817" title="Nalanda" label="Nalanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q305044" start="14857" end="14865" title="Somapura Mahavihara" label="Somapura"/>
<link wikidata="Q7077269" start="14867" end="14877" title="Odantapuri" label="Odantapurā"/>
<link wikidata="Q6122067" start="14883" end="14892" title="Jagaddala Mahavihara" label="Jagaddala"/>
<link wikidata="Q668412" start="15144" end="15155" title="Pala Empire" label="Pala Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q25036175" start="15249" end="15262" title="Pandit Vihara" label="Pandit Vihara"/>
<link wikidata="Q709267" start="15476" end="15485" title="Bardhaman" label="Bardhaman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6122662" start="15605" end="15616" title="Jagjivanpur" label="Jagjivanpur"/>
<link wikidata="Q130376740" start="15690" end="15722" title="Nandadirghi Mahavihara" label="Nandadirghika-Udranga Mahavihara"/>
<link wikidata="Q5643687" start="16195" end="16207" title="Halud Vihara" label="Halud Vihara"/>
<link wikidata="Q6736254" start="16369" end="16378" title="Mainamati" label="Mainamati"/>
<link wikidata="Q7487152" start="16497" end="16511" title="Shalban Vihara" label="Shalban Vihara"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16779" end="16788" title="Bhavadeva" label="Bhavadeva"/>
<link wikidata="Q427287" start="17028" end="17031" title="wat" label="wat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897071" start="17207" end="17213" title="ubosot" label="ubosot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1736269" start="17395" end="17402" title="kathina" label="kathina"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17584" end="17630" title="Lumbini Buddhist University#Global" label="List of Buddhist universities across the world"/>
<link wikidata="Q466449" start="17633" end="17639" title="Ashram" label="Ashram"/>
<link wikidata="Q4842302" start="17642" end="17654" title="Bahal, Nepal" label="Bahal, Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q897336" start="17657" end="17670" title="Brahma-vihara" label="Brahma-vihara"/>
<link wikidata="Q5517744" start="17673" end="17683" title="Gal Vihara" label="Gal Vihara"/>
<link wikidata="Q48911265" start="17686" end="17692" title="Kyaung" label="Kyaung"/>
<link wikidata="Q19323827" start="17695" end="17705" title="Mahavihara" label="Mahavihara"/>
<link wikidata="Q19718381" start="17708" end="17736" title="Mahiyangana Raja Maha Vihara" label="Mahiyangana Raja Maha Vihara"/>
<link wikidata="Q6134720" start="17739" end="17750" title="Nava Vihara" label="Nava Vihara"/>
<link wikidata="Q16996741" start="17753" end="17783" title="Tissamaharama Raja Maha Vihara" label="Tissamaharama Raja Maha Vihara"/>
<link wikidata="Q28725182" start="17786" end="17812" title="Vihara Buddhagaya Watugong" label="Vihara Buddhagaya Watugong"/>
<link wikidata="Q427287" start="17815" end="17818" title="Wat" label="Wat"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="998000" wikidata="Q5419815" url="?curid=998000" title="Executive Council of Alberta">
<text>The Executive Council of Alberta (the Cabinet) is a body of ministers of the Crown in right of Alberta, who along with the lieutenant governor, exercises the powers of the Government of Alberta. Ministers are selected by the premier and typically (but not always) sit as a member of the Legislative Assembly (MLA). It is the provincial equivalent to the federal Cabinet of Canada.

==Honorifics==
Executive councillors are styled &quot;the Honourable&quot;. A change was made to the protocol in 2022 and former members who were living on February 6, 2022 (the Platinum Jubilee of Elizabeth II) are now honorary members of the council and are styled &quot;the Honourable&quot; for life (unless removed from membership for an indictable offence). Members and honorary members use the post-nominal letters &quot;ECA&quot;.

==Role==
The executive powers in the province lie with the lieutenant governor and are exercised on the advice of the premier and Executive Council. The lieutenant governor is restricted by custom and constitutional convention. The lieutenant governor performs constitutional, ceremonial and social duties. The lieutenant governor is Salma Lakhani, sworn in on August 26, 2020, and the premier is Danielle Smith, sworn in on October 11, 2022.

==Membership==

The Executive Council is similar in structure and role to the Cabinet of Canada. As federal and provincial responsibilities differ there are a number of different portfolios between the federal and provincial governments.

The lieutenant governor, as representative of the King of Canada, heads the council, and actions of the council are said to be done by the &quot;Governor-in-Council&quot;. Other members of the Cabinet, who advise, or minister to, the vice-regal representative, are selected by the premier and appointed by the lieutenant governor. Most cabinet ministers are the head of a ministry, but this is not always the case. In the construct of constitutional monarchy and responsible government, the ministerial advice tendered is typically binding (although the royal prerogative belongs to the Crown, not to any of the ministers) and ministers account to the Legislative Assembly for their portfolios.

===Current executive council===

The current cabinet has been in place since June 9, 2023.
==Former Cabinets==
*Klein Ministry (1992–2006)
*Stelmach Ministry (2006–2011)
*Redford Ministry (2011–2014)
*Hancock Ministry (2014–2014)
*Prentice Ministry (2014–2015)
*Notley Ministry (2015–2019)
*Kenney Ministry (2019–2022)

==See also==

* List of premiers of Alberta
* List of Alberta general elections
* Politics of Canada
* Council of the Federation
* List of Alberta provincial ministers

==References==
===Notes===
==Further reading==

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5419815" start="4" end="32" title="Executive Council of Alberta" label="Executive Council of Alberta"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419815" start="38" end="45" title="Executive Council of Alberta" label="Cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3315109" start="60" end="82" title="ministers of the Crown" label="ministers of the Crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951" start="95" end="102" title="Alberta" label="Alberta"/>
<link wikidata="Q15176422" start="123" end="142" title="Lieutenant Governor of Alberta" label="lieutenant governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q33121932" start="172" end="193" title="Government of Alberta" label="Government of Alberta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1812866" start="287" end="307" title="Legislative Assembly of Alberta" label="Legislative Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2458227" start="362" end="379" title="Cabinet of Canada" label="Cabinet of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q104533546" start="560" end="592" title="Platinum Jubilee of Elizabeth II" label="Platinum Jubilee of Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2330404" start="782" end="802" title="post-nominal letters" label="post-nominal letters"/>
<link wikidata="Q15176422" start="880" end="899" title="Lieutenant Governor of Alberta" label="lieutenant governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3401750" start="939" end="946" title="premier of Alberta" label="premier"/>
<link wikidata="Q2720142" start="1022" end="1047" title="constitutional convention (political custom)" label="constitutional convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q96758100" start="1155" end="1168" title="Salma Lakhani" label="Salma Lakhani"/>
<link wikidata="Q5219439" start="1218" end="1232" title="Danielle Smith" label="Danielle Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q2458227" start="1343" end="1360" title="Cabinet of Canada" label="Cabinet of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q508840" start="1554" end="1568" title="King of Canada" label="King of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q192350" start="1876" end="1884" title="Ministry (government department)" label="ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q41614" start="1939" end="1962" title="constitutional monarchy" label="constitutional monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665071" start="1967" end="1989" title="responsible government" label="responsible government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1812866" start="2156" end="2176" title="Legislative Assembly of Alberta" label="Legislative Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q6420187" start="2312" end="2326" title="Klein Ministry" label="Klein Ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q17147739" start="2340" end="2357" title="Stelmach Ministry" label="Stelmach Ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q22080948" start="2371" end="2387" title="Redford Ministry" label="Redford Ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q113468773" start="2401" end="2417" title="Hancock Ministry" label="Hancock Ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q20647910" start="2431" end="2448" title="Prentice Ministry" label="Prentice Ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q113450557" start="2462" end="2477" title="Notley Ministry" label="Notley Ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q104868621" start="2491" end="2506" title="Kenney Ministry" label="Kenney Ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1512347" start="2536" end="2563" title="List of premiers of Alberta" label="List of premiers of Alberta"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586928" start="2566" end="2599" title="List of Alberta general elections" label="List of Alberta general elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q276861" start="2602" end="2620" title="Politics of Canada" label="Politics of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2993787" start="2623" end="2648" title="Council of the Federation" label="Council of the Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6560907" start="2651" end="2687" title="List of Alberta provincial ministers" label="List of Alberta provincial ministers"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="998003" wikidata="Q15176422" url="?curid=998003" title="Lieutenant Governor of Alberta">
<text>The lieutenant governor of Alberta () is the representative in Alberta of the monarch. The lieutenant governor is appointed in the same manner as the other provincial viceroys in Canada and is similarly tasked with carrying out most of the monarch&#x27;s constitutional and ceremonial duties.

Salma Lakhani is the current lieutenant governor. On 26 August 2020, she was installed as the 19th lieutenant governor, becoming the first South Asian and Muslim in Canadian history to hold the role.

==Role and presence==

The lieutenant governor is vested with a number of governmental duties and is also expected to undertake various ceremonial roles. The lieutenant governor, who is the Chancellor and a member of the Alberta Order of Excellence, inducts deserving individuals into the order. Upon appointment, the lieutenant governor automatically becomes a Knight or Dame of Justice and the Vice-Prior in Alberta of the Most Venerable Order of the Hospital of Saint John of Jerusalem. The viceroy further presents other provincial honours and decorations, as well as various awards that are named for and presented by the lieutenant governor; these are generally created in partnership with another government or charitable organization and linked specifically to their cause. These honours are presented at official ceremonies, which count amongst hundreds of other engagements the lieutenant governor partakes in each year, either as host or guest of honour; in 2006, the lieutenant governor undertook 328 engagements and 280 in 2007.

At these events, the lieutenant governor&#x27;s presence is marked by the lieutenant governor&#x27;s standard, consisting of a blue field bearing the escutcheon of the Arms of Majesty in Right of Alberta surmounted by a crown and surrounded by ten gold maple leaves, symbolizing the ten provinces of Canada. Within Alberta, the lieutenant governor also follows only the sovereign in the province&#x27;s order of precedence, preceding even other members of the Canadian royal family and the Governor General of Canada.

==History==


The office of lieutenant governor of Alberta came into being in 1905, upon Alberta&#x27;s entry into Canadian Confederation, and evolved from the earlier position of lieutenant governor of the North-West Territories. Since that date, 19 lieutenant governors have served the province, amongst whom were notable firsts, such as Norman Kwong—the first Asian-Canadian lieutenant governor of Alberta—and Helen Hunley—the first female lieutenant governor of the province. The shortest mandate by a lieutenant governor of Alberta was Philip Primrose, from 1 October 1936 to his death on 17 March 1937, while the longest was John C. Bowen, from 23 March 1937 to 1 February 1950. In 1956, following his appointment, Lieutenant Governor John J. Bowlen became the first provincial viceroy in Canada to be granted an audience with the Canadian monarch, starting a tradition that continues today for all of Canada&#x27;s lieutenant governors.

One of the few examples in Canada of a viceroy exercising the royal prerogative against or without ministerial advice came in 1937, when John Bowen reserved royal assent to three bills passed through the legislative assembly; two of the bills would have put the province&#x27;s banks under the control of the provincial government, while a third, the Accurate News and Information Act, would have forced newspapers to print Cabinet rebuttals to stories the ministers objected to. All three bills were later declared unconstitutional by the Supreme Court of Canada and the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council, though, in retaliation for this move by Bowen, his premier, William Aberhart, closed Government House (the viceregal residence), removed the lieutenant governor&#x27;s secretary and support offices, and took away his official car. Nearly seven decades later, Lois Hole, lieutenant governor from 2000 until her death in 2005, publicly stated that she wished to discuss with her premier, Ralph Klein, the proposed Bill 11, which was meant to allow private health care to compete with the public health care system. From this it was suspected that Hole might reserve royal assent to the bill; however, Hole eventually did allow the bill to pass.

==Residence==

The lieutenant governor no longer has a home provided as a residence during his or her term.

From 1913 to 1938, the title holder resided at Government House and from 1966 to 2004 at 58 St. George&#x27;s Crescent in Westmount. The former home is now Alberta Government Conference Centre, and the latter was demolished in 2005.
A residence was built for Lieutenant Governor John J. Bowlen, in which he lived from 1950 to 1959, at 13604 Ravine Drive.

== Federal expenses==
The federal expenses of the lieutenant governor in the exercise of her official duties for fiscal year 2022–23 were:

*Travel and accommodation: $38,437
*Hospitality: $86,796
*Operational and administrative expenses: $2,087
*Total: $127,321

==See also==
* Monarchy in the Canadian provinces
* Government of Alberta

==Bibliography==

==References==
==External links==
* Lieutenant Governor - Legislative Assembly of Alberta
* Lieutenant Governors - Legislative Assembly of Alberta on YouTube
* CBC - Lois Mitchell installed as Alberta&#x27;s Lieutenant Governor</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q15176422" start="4" end="34" title="Lieutenant Governor of Alberta" label="lieutenant governor of Alberta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951" start="63" end="70" title="Alberta" label="Alberta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1970061" start="146" end="185" title="Lieutenant governor (Canada)" label="the other provincial viceroys in Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q96758100" start="294" end="307" title="Salma Lakhani" label="Salma Lakhani"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="557" end="588" title="Lieutenant governor (Canada)#Constitutional" label="a number of governmental duties"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="623" end="647" title="Lieutenant governor (Canada)#Ceremonial" label="various ceremonial roles"/>
<link wikidata="Q952110" start="716" end="743" title="Alberta Order of Excellence" label="Alberta Order of Excellence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1465984" start="920" end="983" title="Venerable Order of Saint John" label="Most Venerable Order of the Hospital of Saint John of Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1020" end="1054" title="Orders, decorations, and medals of the Canadian provinces#Alberta" label="provincial honours and decorations"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1067" end="1141" title="List of Canadian awards#Viceregal awards 2" label="various awards that are named for and presented by the lieutenant governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5322415" start="1608" end="1647" title="Flags of the Lieutenant Governors of Canada" label="the lieutenant governor&amp;#x27;s standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060668" start="1706" end="1741" title="Coat of arms of Alberta" label="Arms of Majesty in Right of Alberta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2879" start="1821" end="1844" title="Provinces and territories of Canada" label="ten provinces of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q7100626" start="1925" end="1960" title="Order of precedence in Alberta" label="province&amp;#x27;s order of precedence"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1998" end="2019" title="Monarchy of Canada#Canada&amp;#x27;s royal family and house" label="Canadian royal family"/>
<link wikidata="Q390776" start="2028" end="2054" title="Governor General of Canada" label="Governor General of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520743" start="2172" end="2194" title="Canadian Confederation" label="Canadian Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1853504" start="2237" end="2286" title="lieutenant governor of the North-West Territories" label="lieutenant governor of the North-West Territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q119775" start="2397" end="2409" title="Norman Kwong" label="Norman Kwong"/>
<link wikidata="Q16152160" start="2420" end="2434" title="Asian-Canadian" label="Asian-Canadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1601844" start="2470" end="2482" title="Helen Hunley" label="Helen Hunley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086387" start="2598" end="2613" title="Philip Primrose" label="Philip Primrose"/>
<link wikidata="Q1699535" start="2688" end="2701" title="John C. Bowen" label="John C. Bowen"/>
<link wikidata="Q212651" start="2798" end="2812" title="John J. Bowlen" label="John J. Bowlen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3042529" start="3064" end="3081" title="royal prerogative" label="royal prerogative"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308979" start="3101" end="3119" title="Advice (constitutional)" label="ministerial advice"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3150" end="3171" title="Disallowance and reservation in Canada#Reservation of provincial legislation" label="reserved royal assent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1812866" start="3206" end="3226" title="Legislative Assembly of Alberta" label="legislative assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q4672915" start="3353" end="3386" title="Accurate News and Information Act" label="Accurate News and Information Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419815" start="3426" end="3433" title="Executive Council of Alberta" label="Cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q196615" start="3542" end="3565" title="Supreme Court of Canada" label="Supreme Court of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1710982" start="3574" end="3613" title="Judicial Committee of the Privy Council" label="Judicial Committee of the Privy Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q3401750" start="3666" end="3673" title="Premier of Alberta" label="premier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1311454" start="3675" end="3691" title="William Aberhart" label="William Aberhart"/>
<link wikidata="Q5588889" start="3700" end="3716" title="Government House (Alberta)" label="Government House"/>
<link wikidata="Q299936" start="3874" end="3883" title="Lois Hole" label="Lois Hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395297" start="4001" end="4012" title="Ralph Klein" label="Ralph Klein"/>
<link wikidata="Q31207" start="4069" end="4080" title="health care" label="health care"/>
<link wikidata="Q3274205" start="4101" end="4119" title="Universal health care" label="public health care"/>
<link wikidata="Q7989316" start="4490" end="4499" title="Westmount, Edmonton" label="Westmount"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4524" end="4560" title="Alberta Government Conference Centre" label="Alberta Government Conference Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q16933856" start="5003" end="5037" title="Monarchy in the Canadian provinces" label="Monarchy in the Canadian provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q33121932" start="5040" end="5061" title="Government of Alberta" label="Government of Alberta"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="998011" wikidata="Q597972" url="?curid=998011" title="The Fire Theft">
<text>The Fire Theft was an American rock band from Seattle, Washington. They were formed in 2001 by vocalist/guitarist Jeremy Enigk, bassist Nate Mendel, and drummer William Goldsmith, all of whom were previously members of Sunny Day Real Estate. Mendel also plays bass for Foo Fighters, and Goldsmith drummed for Foo Fighters between 1995 and 1997. This lineup of The Fire Theft was three-fourths of the original personnel of Sunny Day Real Estate, with guitarist Dan Hoerner not rejoining his former bandmates.

While the band went on a hiatus in 2004, there was never an announcement of an official breakup.

==History==
The Fire Theft released a self-titled album on September 23, 2003, on independent label Rykodisc. Only &quot;Chain&quot; was released as a promotional single. A tour promoting the album followed up. Since then, the band has been in a hiatus.
Concerning future projects, Jeremy Enigk has stated on the official message board that he imagined &quot;The Fire Theft will be back in full swing. We just have to find another record label or start our own&quot;. A DVD with the band performing in Seattle had also been announced, but was never released.
In 2007, Billboard.com reported that the band was in discussions about regrouping. In the same article, Nate Mendel says &quot;We&#x27;re not really quite sure. But we&#x27;re making some plans to play together in one way or another -- hopefully next year&quot;. Jeremy Enigk added on an online interview that the band has been &quot;talking about becoming a recording band: only record and not tour&quot;. Enigk also plans to release the next album on Lewis Hollow Recordings, his own record label.

In December 2008, Enigk offered an update on the proposed live Fire Theft DVD project:
We sent it into a place and had a meeting with some guys about gathering all this material and editing it. I really don&#x27;t know what&#x27;s going on with that. That was about a year ago, and I haven&#x27;t really heard anything about it since. I think the reason why is because they&#x27;re sort of doing it pro bono. Also, there&#x27;s so much material, because it&#x27;s not just a live DVD anymore. The guy Maury (Duchamp), who was filming it unfortunately passed away, but he toured with us for quite a while. And filmed tons of shows, tons of interviews with us, and some backstage stuff. We figured we should probably do something more like he had in mind, more of a bigger documentary of the whole thing. So it ended up becoming a bigger project than we anticipated. And mainly to stick to what Maury wanted, in memory of him. He wanted to do a full-on documentary, but he wanted it to span over a long time.

Following the reunion of Sunny Day Real Estate in 2009 with all four original members, the situation of the band remained uncertain. Enigk admitted at the time, that if Sunny Day Real Estate were to stay together, there would have been little purpose in the Fire Theft regrouping.

==Discography==
===Studio album and EP===
===Single===
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q597972" start="0" end="14" title="The Fire Theft" label="The Fire Theft"/>
<link wikidata="Q11399" start="31" end="35" title="Rock music" label="rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083" start="46" end="65" title="Seattle" label="Seattle, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q2534130" start="114" end="126" title="Jeremy Enigk" label="Jeremy Enigk"/>
<link wikidata="Q345294" start="136" end="147" title="Nate Mendel" label="Nate Mendel"/>
<link wikidata="Q447720" start="161" end="178" title="William Goldsmith" label="William Goldsmith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361543" start="219" end="240" title="Sunny Day Real Estate" label="Sunny Day Real Estate"/>
<link wikidata="Q483718" start="269" end="281" title="Foo Fighters" label="Foo Fighters"/>
<link wikidata="Q3743543" start="460" end="471" title="Dan Hoerner" label="Dan Hoerner"/>
<link wikidata="Q656752" start="707" end="715" title="Rykodisc" label="Rykodisc"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294" start="1077" end="1080" title="DVD" label="DVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083" start="1109" end="1116" title="Seattle" label="Seattle"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="998019" wikidata="Q1243551" url="?curid=998019" title="The Roman Revolution">
<text>The Roman Revolution (1939) is a scholarly study of the final years of the ancient Roman Republic and the creation of the Roman Empire by Caesar Augustus. The book was the work of Sir Ronald Syme (1903–1989), a noted Tacitean scholar, and was published by the Oxford University Press. It was immediately controversial. Its main conclusion was that the structure of the Republic and its Senate were inadequate to the needs of Roman rule, and that Augustus was merely doing what was necessary to restore order in public life.

Syme relies on prosopography, especially the work of German scholars Friedrich Münzer and Matthias Gelzer, to show the extent to which Augustus achieved his unofficial but undisputed power by the development of personal relationships into a &quot;Caesarian&quot; party and used it to defeat and diminish the opposition one by one. The process was slow, with the young Octavian initially just using his position as a relative of Julius Caesar to pursue Caesar&#x27;s assassins, then over a period of years gradually accumulating personal power while nominally restoring the Republic. In addition, the portrait he paints of Augustus as a somewhat sinister autocratic figure has been immensely influential among subsequent generations of classicists.

==Reception==
Maurice Bowra said in 1939 of Syme&#x27;s &quot;The Roman Revolution&quot;: &quot;His work is extraordinarily persuasive and interesting... the best book on Roman history that has appeared for many years&quot;.

Syme&#x27;s conclusion of inevitability is less strongly supported than his elucidation of the takeover process, since at each point we see that Augustus is exercising his free choice, albeit for what he sees as the good of his country. In &quot;The Last Generation of the Roman Republic&quot; (1974), Erich S. Gruen offered an opposing point of view, arguing that the traditional view of the Republic&#x27;s decay is not actually supported by the objective evidence.

==Editions==
&quot;The Roman Revolution&quot; has been reprinted regularly by OUP since its first appearance, most recently in 2002 (). (Corrections to the text were made by the author in 1952 and 1956.) 

A revised German translation was published by Klett-Cotta in 2003 (&quot;Die römische Revolution&quot;). 

The Italian edition was first published by Einaudi in 1962, with an introduction by Arnaldo Momigliano. A new, revised edition was published in 2014, with an introduction by Giusto Traina ().

A Korean translation in two volumes was published by Hangilsa Publishing Co. in 2006 (with the introduction by translators, Seung-il Hur and Duk-su Kim) (『로마혁명사 1』 and『로마혁명사 2』)

A new English edition, with an introduction by G.W. Bowersock, was published by the Folio Society in June, 2009.

A Japanese translation in two volumes was published by Iwanami Shoten in 2013 (with the second edition&#x27;s pagination printed in margin and the original index rendered in Japanese included) (『ローマ革命（上）』 and『ローマ革命（下）』).

==Notes==
==References==
* Arnaldo Momigliano, &quot;Introduction to R. Syme, &quot;The Roman Revolution&quot;&quot;, translated and reprinted in &quot;A. D. Momigliano: Studies on Modern Scholarship&quot; (University of California Press, 1994; )

==External links==
* &quot;The Roman Revolution&quot; (1960 edition) at the Internet Archive</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q17167" start="83" end="97" title="Roman Republic" label="Roman Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="122" end="134" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405" start="138" end="153" title="Caesar Augustus" label="Caesar Augustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q707856" start="184" end="195" title="Ronald Syme" label="Ronald Syme"/>
<link wikidata="Q252786" start="217" end="233" title="Tacitean studies" label="Tacitean scholar"/>
<link wikidata="Q217595" start="260" end="283" title="Oxford University Press" label="Oxford University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q783287" start="540" end="553" title="prosopography" label="prosopography"/>
<link wikidata="Q88964" start="594" end="610" title="Friedrich Münzer" label="Friedrich Münzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1725618" start="615" end="630" title="Matthias Gelzer" label="Matthias Gelzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048" start="953" end="966" title="Julius Caesar" label="Julius Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q443786" start="1288" end="1301" title="Maurice Bowra" label="Maurice Bowra"/>
<link wikidata="Q7745780" start="1746" end="1787" title="The Last Generation of the Roman Republic" label="The Last Generation of the Roman Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q86814" start="1802" end="1816" title="Erich S. Gruen" label="Erich S. Gruen"/>
<link wikidata="Q47495519" start="2325" end="2332" title="Einaudi" label="Einaudi"/>
<link wikidata="Q644418" start="2366" end="2384" title="Arnaldo Momigliano" label="Arnaldo Momigliano"/>
<link wikidata="Q2559324" start="2456" end="2469" title="Giusto Traina" label="Giusto Traina"/>
<link wikidata="Q819878" start="2701" end="2715" title="G.W. Bowersock" label="G.W. Bowersock"/>
<link wikidata="Q8961925" start="2738" end="2751" title="Folio Society" label="Folio Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331427" start="2823" end="2837" title="Iwanami Shoten" label="Iwanami Shoten"/>
<link wikidata="Q644418" start="3017" end="3035" title="Arnaldo Momigliano" label="Arnaldo Momigliano"/>
<link wikidata="Q461" start="3314" end="3330" title="Internet Archive" label="Internet Archive"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="998023" wikidata="Q701318" url="?curid=998023" title="Cao Chun">
<text>Cao Chun (170-210), courtesy name Zihe, was a military officer serving under the warlord Cao Cao during the late Eastern Han dynasty of China. He was a younger second cousin of Cao Cao, and is best known for leading the &quot;Tiger and Leopard Cavalry&quot; (虎豹騎), an elite mounted unit, in several battles against Cao Cao&#x27;s rivals, including Yuan Tan, Tadun and Liu Bei. His elder brother, Cao Ren, also served as a military officer under Cao Cao.

==Life==
Cao Chun and his elder full brother, Cao Ren, were younger second cousins of Cao Cao. Their grandfather Cao Bao (曹襃) and father Cao Chi (曹熾) served in the government of the Eastern Han dynasty. Their father died when Cao Chun was 13 years old, so Cao Chun and Cao Ren lived with another family. They inherited their family fortune when they became older; they were wealthy and had hundreds of servants and retainers. Cao Chun was known for being a strict, rule-abiding and fair leader among his followers. His fellow townsfolk regarded him highly. A well-read man who respected scholars, Cao Chun was also popular among the literati, many of whom flocked to him and became his retainers.

At the age of 17, Cao Chun was called to serve in the Han government as a Gentleman of the Yellow Gate (). Two years later, he followed his second cousin, Cao Cao, to Xiangyi (; present-day Sui County, Henan) to recruit soldiers. Since then, he had fought on Cao Cao&#x27;s side in several battles against rival warlords. He became a Consultant () and Military Adviser to the Minister of Works (參司空軍事) sometime between 196 and 205. In early 205, he led the &quot;Tiger and Leopard Cavalry&quot; (虎豹騎) during the Battle of Nanpi against a rival warlord, Yuan Tan. When his forces suffered heavy casualties, Cao Cao wanted to call for a retreat, but Cao Chun stopped him and said, &quot;We&#x27;ve travelled a long distance to attack the enemy. While we can&#x27;t defeat them at the moment by advancing, we&#x27;ll definitely lose our might if we retreat. Besides, we&#x27;re already deep in enemy territory and we won&#x27;t be able to last long. The enemy has become complacent after their initial victory against us; we&#x27;ve become fearful after our initial defeat by them. We can use our fear to overcome their complacency and defeat them.&quot; Cao Cao agreed and ordered his forces to press on their attack, and eventually defeated Yuan Tan. Cao Chun&#x27;s &quot;Tiger and Leopard Cavalry&quot; killed Yuan Tan and cut off his head during the battle.

In 207, Cao Chun led the &quot;Tiger and Leopard Cavalry&quot; again at the Battle of White Wolf Mountain against the Wuhuan tribes, who were allied with Cao Cao&#x27;s rival Yuan Shang. During the battle, Cao Chun&#x27;s unit captured Tadun, who was later executed by Zhang Liao, a general under Cao Cao. In recognition of Cao Chun&#x27;s contributions in battle, Emperor Xian enfeoffed Cao Chun as the Marquis of Gaoling Village (高陵亭侯) and gave him 300 taxable households to form his marquisate.

In 208, Cao Chun accompanied Cao Cao on the campaign in Jing Province. During the Battle of Changban, Cao Chun led his troops in pursuit of the rival warlord Liu Bei and captured Liu Bei&#x27;s two daughters, along with much of his equipment. They also rounded up some of Liu Bei&#x27;s soldiers who were scattered during the battle and recruited them to join Cao Cao&#x27;s forces. After Cao Cao occupied Jiangling County (江陵縣; present-day Jingzhou, Hubei), Jing Province&#x27;s capital, Cao Chun headed back to Qiao County (譙縣; present-day Bozhou, Anhui). It is not known whether Cao Chun participated in the Battle of Red Cliffs.

Cao Chun died in 210, the 15th year of the Jian&#x27;an era in the reign of Emperor Xian. In late 220, Cao Cao&#x27;s son and heir, Cao Pi, forced Emperor Xian to abdicate in his favour, ended the Eastern Han dynasty, and established the state of Cao Wei. After becoming emperor, Cao Pi awarded Cao Chun the posthumous title &quot;Marquis Wei&quot; (威侯).

The &quot;Tiger and Leopard Cavalry&quot; (虎豹騎) unit that Cao Chun led was an elite mounted unit in Cao Cao&#x27;s forces. Its recruitment process was highly selective – only soldiers who had at least 100 men under them were eligible. Even Cao Cao himself found it difficult to lead such a unit, which was why he chose Cao Chun, who was able to gain the trust and respect of those elite soldiers. After Cao Chun&#x27;s death, when someone asked Cao Cao to select a new candidate to replace Cao Chun, Cao Cao said, &quot;Who is comparable to (Cao) Chun? Am I not the only person capable of leading (this unit)?&quot; He did not choose anyone.

==Descendants==
Cao Chun&#x27;s son, Cao Yan (曹演), served as a military officer in the state of Cao Wei during the Three Kingdoms period and held the position of General Who Leads the Army (領軍將軍). Sometime between 254 and 256, he was enfeoffed as the Marquis of Pingle District (平樂鄉侯). After his death, his son, Cao Liang (曹亮), inherited his marquis title.

==See also==
* Lists of people of the Three Kingdoms

==Notes==
==References==

* Chen, Shou (3rd century). &quot;Records of the Three Kingdoms&quot; (&quot;Sanguozhi&quot;).
* Pei, Songzhi (5th century). &quot;Annotations to Records of the Three Kingdoms&quot; (&quot;Sanguozhi zhu&quot;).</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q701318" start="0" end="8" title="Cao Chun" label="Cao Chun"/>
<link wikidata="Q2075910" start="20" end="33" title="courtesy name" label="courtesy name"/>
<link wikidata="Q701318" start="34" end="38" title="Cao Chun" label="Zihe"/>
<link wikidata="Q204077" start="89" end="96" title="Cao Cao" label="Cao Cao"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209" start="113" end="132" title="Eastern Han dynasty" label="Eastern Han dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="160" end="173" title="Cousin#Second cousins" label="second cousin"/>
<link wikidata="Q145671" start="348" end="356" title="Yuan Tan" label="Yuan Tan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069307" start="358" end="363" title="Tadun" label="Tadun"/>
<link wikidata="Q245315" start="368" end="375" title="Liu Bei" label="Liu Bei"/>
<link wikidata="Q378439" start="396" end="403" title="Cao Ren" label="Cao Ren"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="487" end="499" title="Sibling#Full" label="full brother"/>
<link wikidata="Q378439" start="501" end="508" title="Cao Ren" label="Cao Ren"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="523" end="537" title="Cousin#Second cousins" label="second cousins"/>
<link wikidata="Q204077" start="541" end="548" title="Cao Cao" label="Cao Cao"/>
<link wikidata="Q4216524" start="619" end="629" title="Government of the Han dynasty" label="government"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209" start="637" end="656" title="Eastern Han dynasty" label="Eastern Han dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q11666059" start="870" end="878" title="Retainers in early China (social group)" label="retainer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1293" end="1306" title="Cousin#Second cousins" label="second cousin"/>
<link wikidata="Q204077" start="1308" end="1315" title="Cao Cao" label="Cao Cao"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198848" start="1343" end="1360" title="Sui County, Henan" label="Sui County, Henan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6635700" start="1529" end="1546" title="Sikong (office)" label="Minister of Works"/>
<link wikidata="Q10908767" start="1665" end="1680" title="Battle of Nanpi" label="Battle of Nanpi"/>
<link wikidata="Q145671" start="1706" end="1714" title="Yuan Tan" label="Yuan Tan"/>
<link wikidata="Q848062" start="2590" end="2619" title="Battle of White Wolf Mountain" label="Battle of White Wolf Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269374" start="2632" end="2638" title="Wuhuan" label="Wuhuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276938" start="2689" end="2699" title="Yuan Shang" label="Yuan Shang"/>
<link wikidata="Q197249" start="2783" end="2793" title="Zhang Liao" label="Zhang Liao"/>
<link wikidata="Q7316" start="2879" end="2891" title="Emperor Xian of Han" label="Emperor Xian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207712" start="3069" end="3082" title="Jing Province" label="Jing Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330310" start="3095" end="3113" title="Battle of Changban" label="Battle of Changban"/>
<link wikidata="Q245315" start="3171" end="3178" title="Liu Bei" label="Liu Bei"/>
<link wikidata="Q71247" start="3454" end="3462" title="Jingzhou" label="Jingzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q46862" start="3464" end="3469" title="Hubei" label="Hubei"/>
<link wikidata="Q360769" start="3555" end="3561" title="Bozhou" label="Bozhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q40956" start="3563" end="3568" title="Anhui" label="Anhui"/>
<link wikidata="Q830059" start="3624" end="3644" title="Battle of Red Cliffs" label="Battle of Red Cliffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q313333" start="3779" end="3785" title="Cao Pi" label="Cao Pi"/>
<link wikidata="Q320930" start="3894" end="3901" title="Cao Wei" label="Cao Wei"/>
<link wikidata="Q696100" start="3955" end="3971" title="Posthumous name" label="posthumous title"/>
<link wikidata="Q320930" start="4742" end="4749" title="Cao Wei" label="Cao Wei"/>
<link wikidata="Q185043" start="4761" end="4775" title="Three Kingdoms" label="Three Kingdoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q795730" start="5019" end="5056" title="Lists of people of the Three Kingdoms" label="Lists of people of the Three Kingdoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q468890" start="5086" end="5096" title="Chen Shou" label="Chen, Shou"/>
<link wikidata="Q247318" start="5118" end="5147" title="Records of the Three Kingdoms" label="Records of the Three Kingdoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q710078" start="5181" end="5193" title="Pei Songzhi" label="Pei, Songzhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q10865592" start="5215" end="5259" title="Annotations to Records of the Three Kingdoms" label="Annotations to Records of the Three Kingdoms"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="998025" wikidata="Q24405" url="?curid=998025" title="Brihadratha Maurya">
<text>Brihadratha was the 9th and last Emperor of the Mauryan Dynasty. He ruled from 187 to 185 BCE, when he was overthrown and assassinated by his General, Pushyamitra Shunga, who went on to establish the Shunga Empire. The Mauryan territories, centred on the capital of Pataliputra, had shrunk considerably from the time of Ashoka to when Brihadratha came to the throne.

==Reign==
According to the Puranas, Brihadratha succeeded his father Shatadhanvan to the throne and ruled for three years.

=== Overthrow by Pushyamitra Shunga ===
Brihadratha Maurya the last Mauryan Emperor was killed in 185 BCE and power usurped by his general, Pushyamitra Shunga who then took over the throne and established the Shunga Empire. Bāṇabhaṭṭa&#x27;s &quot;Harshacharita&quot; says that Pushyamitra, while parading the entire Mauryan Army before Brihadratha on the pretext of showing him the strength of the army, crushed his master. Pushyamitra killed the former emperor in front of his military and established himself as the new ruler.

=== Invasion of Demetrius I ===
In 185 BCE just after the assassination of Brihadratha by his army chief Pushyamitra, Greco-Bactrian king Demetrius (Dharmamita) invaded northwestern India (parts of modern-day Afghanistan and Pakistan) and occupied it. The Mauryans had diplomatic alliances with the Greeks, and they may have been considered as allies by the Greco-Bactrians. A key detail is mentioned by Sri Lankan Buddhist monks in the &quot;Paramparapustaka&quot; chronicle, pointing that Brihadratha married Demetrius&#x27; daughter, Berenice (&quot;Suvarnnaksi&quot; in Pali language). The Greco-Bactrians may also have invaded India in order to protect Greek populations in the subcontinent. He established his rule in the Kabul Valley and parts of the Punjab region. Soon, however, they had to leave for Bactria to fight a fierce battle (probably between Eucratides I and Demetrius). 

The hypothesized Yavana invasion of Pataliputra is based in the &quot;Yuga Purana.&quot; The scripture describes the campaign of King Dharmamita:
== See also ==
* Magadha
* Maurya Empire
* Shunga Empire

==References==
===Citations===

===Sources===</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q24405" start="0" end="11" title="Brihadratha Maurya" label="Brihadratha"/>
<link wikidata="Q62943" start="48" end="63" title="Mauryan Empire" label="Mauryan Dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1442545" start="142" end="149" title="Senapati" label="General"/>
<link wikidata="Q119973" start="151" end="169" title="Pushyamitra Shunga" label="Pushyamitra Shunga"/>
<link wikidata="Q651377" start="200" end="213" title="Shunga Empire" label="Shunga Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q389755" start="266" end="277" title="Pataliputra" label="Pataliputra"/>
<link wikidata="Q8589" start="320" end="326" title="Ashoka" label="Ashoka"/>
<link wikidata="Q188602" start="395" end="402" title="Puranas" label="Puranas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1563790" start="437" end="449" title="Shatadhanvan" label="Shatadhanvan"/>
<link wikidata="Q171202" start="716" end="726" title="Bāṇabhaṭṭa" label="Bāṇabhaṭṭa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810426" start="740" end="753" title="Harshacharita" label="Harshacharita"/>
<link wikidata="Q119973" start="1128" end="1139" title="Pushyamitra" label="Pushyamitra"/>
<link wikidata="Q488880" start="1141" end="1155" title="Greco-Bactrian Kingdom" label="Greco-Bactrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q347916" start="1161" end="1170" title="Demetrius I of Bactria" label="Demetrius"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="1232" end="1243" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="1248" end="1256" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q169132" start="1781" end="1794" title="Punjab region" label="Punjab region"/>
<link wikidata="Q381819" start="1884" end="1896" title="Eucratides I" label="Eucratides I"/>
<link wikidata="Q215643" start="1932" end="1938" title="Indo-Greek" label="Yavana"/>
<link wikidata="Q8060332" start="1985" end="1996" title="Yuga Purana" label="Yuga Purana"/>
<link wikidata="Q234009" start="2078" end="2085" title="Magadha (Mahajanapada)" label="Magadha"/>
<link wikidata="Q62943" start="2088" end="2101" title="Maurya Empire" label="Maurya Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q651377" start="2104" end="2117" title="Shunga Empire" label="Shunga Empire"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="998031" wikidata="Q225538" url="?curid=998031" title="Krokus (band)">
<text>Krokus is a Swiss hard rock band formed in 1975. They were popular in North America during the 1980s. The band was founded in Solothurn in 1975 by Chris von Rohr (vocals and multi-instruments) and Tommy Kiefer (guitar), both former members of Kaktus. Former TEA vocalist Marc Storace joined the band as frontman in time for their &quot;Metal Rendez-vous&quot; album in 1980.

== History ==
=== Formation (1975–1981) ===
Krokus was formed in 1975 as a progressive rock act. The group&#x27;s original lead singer, Peter Richard, left before the first album was recorded, leaving lead guitarist Tommy Kiefer to handle lead vocal duties for the band&#x27;s self-titled debut album. Chris von Rohr, originally the drummer, switched to lead vocals for the follow-up record, &quot;To You All&quot;, remaining in this capacity into the late 1970s (along with playing keyboards and percussion).

The new line-up was completed by guitarist Fernando von Arb, bassist Jürg Naegeli, and drummer Freddy Steady, who had released the &quot;Rock Is Here&quot; single as a trio under the name &#x27;Montezuma&#x27; in 1976. With this line-up, Krokus became successful in Switzerland, touring throughout the country and releasing a third album, &quot;Painkiller&quot;, in 1978.

After seeing AC/DC in concert in the late 1970s, they changed their musical direction and adopted a new AC/DC-influenced sound. Von Rohr&#x27;s vocal abilities were limited and the band hired a new lead vocalist, Marc Storace, formerly of TEA and Eazy Money, in 1979, and recorded and released the album &quot;Metal Rendez-vous&quot; in 1980. This was their first hit and brought the band international recognition.

The 1981 follow-up album, &quot;Hardware&quot;, was recorded at Roundhouse Studios in London and featured such songs as &quot;Easy Rocker&quot; and &quot;Rock City&quot;, which became an enduring part of the band&#x27;s live repertoire. Lead guitarist Tommy Kiefer was forced to leave the band because of heroin addiction early in the tour to support &quot;Hardware&quot; and was replaced by newcomer Mandy Meyer (ex-BM Smith). (Kiefer committed suicide on 24 December 1986, aged 34, after failing to conquer his heroin addiction.)

Meyer soon left, replaced by Mark Kohler, and teamed up with bassist Tommy Keiser (not to be confused with Tommy Kiefer) of fellow Swiss rockers Roxane to start his own band. Setting up headquarters in Memphis, Tennessee under the guidance of Krokus manager Butch Stone, the duo would recruit former Target vocalist Jimi Jamison, ex-Black Oak Arkansas guitarist/keyboardist Jack Holder, and drummer Jeff Klaven and issued their sole album, &quot;First Strike&quot;, under the name Cobra in 1983. Klaven and Keiser would both subsequently join Krokus. Meyer went on to join Asia and formed the short-lived Katmandu, although he would return to the Krokus line-up himself some years later. Jamison went on to perform backing vocals on Krokus recordings, in addition to replacing Dave Bickler in the band Survivor and achieving massive success with that group.

=== Rise to popularity and success years (1982–1988) ===
In 1982, with new American management, Krokus recorded &quot;One Vice at a Time&quot;, which features the hits, &quot;Long Stick Goes Boom,&quot; and the Guess Who cover, &quot;American Woman&quot;. By the time this album was recorded, the band had parted ways with Naegeli, at which point multi-instrumentalist von Rohr assumed the additional role of primary bassist. This album was also the first to feature Mark Kohler on guitar. Chris von Rohr described the album at the time as &quot;the album AC/DC never made&quot;, as the influence of the Australian band is difficult to ignore. The comparisons actually cast doubt on the creativity of the band, as many listeners now, in spite of the Swiss band&#x27;s much wider musical spectrum, began to regard Krokus merely as AC/DC imitators. Nevertheless, Krokus became increasingly popular in Europe and began to receive attention and success in the United States.

1983&#x27;s &quot;Headhunter&quot; was the band&#x27;s first album awarded with Gold album status in the United States and hit number 25 in the 1983 &quot;Billboard&quot; 200 album chart. The album was Krokus&#x27; most successful album to date, both commercially and critically. It boasted the hit power ballad &quot;Screaming in the Night&quot;, which saw heavy rotation on MTV and would become one of the band&#x27;s most recognizable songs. Judas Priest&#x27;s Rob Halford contributed backing vocals on the song &quot;Ready to Burn&quot;. Bassist/keyboardist/percussionist Chris von Rohr was fired in late 1983 due to his writing an article published in a main Swiss newspaper exposing the band&#x27;s rock&#x27;n&#x27;roll habits, prior to the band&#x27;s appearance at the RockPop Festival in Dortmund, Germany, with rhythm guitarist Mark Kohler switching over to bass and Patrick Mason, aka Patrick Mahassen, who had also played in the Swiss band Crown, taking over rhythm guitar duties for the remainder of the &quot;Headhunter&quot; tour; however, Mahassen exited the band prior to the recording of the next album, &quot;The Blitz&quot;, another Gold certified album, which the band completed as a four-piece. The tour for this album featured Mark Kohler returning to his main instrument, with Andy Tanas, formerly of Black Oak Arkansas, joining on the bass. These shows also featured Loverboy&#x27;s Doug Johnson on keyboards. Meanwhile, von Rohr would go on to produce the band Headhunter&#x27;s eponymous 1985 album, featuring future Krokus members Peter Tanner and Many Maurer, and release a solo album in 1987, entitled &quot;Hammer &amp; Tongue&quot; (re-issued in 1993 as &quot;The Good, The Bad and The Dog&quot; after the release of von Rohr&#x27;s autobiography, &quot;Hunde wollt ihr ewig rocken&quot;), which featured contributions from his former Krokus bandmates, Marc Storace and Fernando von Arb.

Pushed into a corner by their own management and record company, 1984 saw the band move in a Glam rock direction with &quot;The Blitz&quot;, which featured a cover of Sweet&#x27;s 1973 hit &quot;The Ballroom Blitz&quot;. Though a commercial success, the album was panned critically. The band hit the &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100 with &quot;Midnite Maniac&quot; from that album, becoming the first Swiss act to do so. Capitalizing on the wave of success enjoyed by heavy metal in the mid-1980s, the band then released &quot;Change of Address&quot; in 1986, which featured a cover of the Alice Cooper standard &quot;School&#x27;s Out&quot;. The album production was way too clean and polished for Krokus and it became a commercial failure. As a counterbalance, Krokus soon released a live album entitled &quot;Alive and Screamin&#x27;&quot; while the band transitioned from Arista Records to MCA for the release of their &quot;Heart Attack&quot; album in 1988. &quot;Heart Attack&quot; was a last desperate attempt to keep the band together. It saw the return of bassist/keyboardist/percussionist Chris von Rohr with Dani Crivelli (who had played on von Rohr&#x27;s solo album the previous year) on drums and was similarly written and produced in the band&#x27;s early 80&#x27;s style. However, the Swiss flagship of international heavy rock needed time out. Fernando and Marc had endured 8 years of constant writing, recording and touring with hardly any time off. Coming dangerously close to a burn-out they went on hiatus at the end of 1988. Von Rohr, Kohler and Crivelli tried to continue with Swedish vocalist Björn Lodin (from the bands Baltimoore and Six Feet Under) and lead guitarist Many Maurer, Crivelli&#x27;s former bandmate from Killer. That line-up was short-lived and never recorded any material.

=== Later years (1989–2006) ===
Guitarist Fernando von Arb would remain the sole constant member throughout most of the 1990s as Krokus carried on with ever-changing line-ups. 1990&#x27;s &quot;Stampede&quot; featured von Arb, former Headhunter members Peter Tanner (ex-Bloody Six, Witchcraft) and Many Maurer (ex-Killer), drummer Peter Haas (ex-Calhoun Conquer), and bassist Tony Castell. 1995 saw a brief reunion of the classic &quot;One Vice at a Time&quot; line-up, minus von Rohr, on the &quot;To Rock or Not to Be&quot; album. Welsh vocalist Carl Sentance (ex-Persian Risk, Geezer Butler Band) joined the band for &quot;Round 13&quot;, with Haas returning on drums. In 2003, the band released &quot;Rock the Block&quot; with the new line-up of Marc Storace on vocals, Fernando von Arb on lead guitar, bass and keyboards, Dominique Favez on rhythm and lead guitar, Tony Castell on bass and rhythm guitar, and Patrick Aeby on drums and percussion. In 2004 the same line-up released the live CD &quot;Fire and Gasoline&quot;.

In 2005, longtime guitarist/bassist/keyboardist Fernando von Arb left the band because of continuing wrist problems which required surgery. Mandy Meyer, who had played with the band in the early 1980s, replaced von Arb in the then current line-up. The new formation (Storace, Meyer, Favez, Castell, Stefan Schwarzmann and Dennis Ward) recorded the studio album &quot;Hellraiser&quot; in 2006, which went to gold in Switzerland on the first day of sales. It generally received very good reviews. In an interview in 2008, Marc Storace stated that Krokus was becoming more and more &quot;metal&quot;. Prior to the album&#x27;s release date, the band released the ballad &quot;Angel of My Dreams&quot; as a downloadable MP3.

=== Reunion with &quot;classic lineup&quot; (2007–2011) ===
On 18 November 2007, the lineup featuring Chris von Rohr, Fernando von Arb, Freddy Steady and Marc Storace reunited to play a medley (&quot;Tokyo Nights&quot;, &quot;Bedside Radio&quot; and &quot;Heatstrokes&quot;) during the TV show, &quot;Die grössten Schweizer Hits&quot;, on Swiss television. This led to their reunion concert on 2 August 2008 (with the addition of Mark Kohler). Krokus&#x27;s cover of Sweet&#x27;s &quot;The Ballroom Blitz&quot; also appeared in the 2007 game &quot;Guitar Hero Encore: Rocks the 80s&quot;.

It was announced on 20 April 2008, that the classic lineup of Chris von Rohr, Fernando von Arb, Freddy Steady, Mark Kohler and Marc Storace had reunited, and would be releasing a new studio record in 2010 with a supporting world tour. On 2 August 2008, the band performed live in the Stade de Suisse in Bern. Krokus performed the official anthem of the 2009 Ice Hockey World Championships, hosted by Switzerland. The song was entitled &quot;Live for the Action&quot;.

On 3 March 2010, the album &quot;Hoodoo&quot; including a cover version of Steppenwolf&#x27;s &quot;Born to Be Wild&quot; and ten other songs, was released. It came in a regular and limited edition, the latter containing a DVD featuring concert footage.

In May 2011, drummer/percussionist Fready Steady announced he was leaving the band.

=== Reunion with Mandy Meyer and retirement (2012–2017) ===

In December 2012, it was announced guitarist Mandy Meyer was once again rejoining the band after having filled in for an ailing Fernando von Arb at the Loud Park Festival in Japan in October 2011. Krokus released their seventeenth studio album &quot;Dirty Dynamite&quot; on 22 February 2013.

On 21 April 2013, it was reported that former drummer/percussionist Dani Crivelli, who played on the band&#x27;s 1988 &quot;Heart Attack&quot;, had died. According to the German language Swiss daily &quot;Blick&quot;, Crivelli fell off a bridge to his death in Trimbach, Canton of Solothurn.

Swiss drummer/percussionist Flavio Mezzodi joined Krokus in May 2013 and played on their &quot;Dirty Dynamite Tour&quot;. The band sold out an unprecedented four shows at the Kofmehl (House of Rust) in their hometown of Solothurn. The concerts were recorded for an upcoming live album and the fourth concert was released as &quot;Long Stick Goes Boom: Live from da House of Rust&quot; in 2014.

In April/May 2015, the band returned for some dates in the United States, where they had not performed since 2005. Fernando von Arb was not part of that tour, as he cannot travel for long distances and Krokus performed as a 5-piece band. This was another reason why Mandy Meyer was brought back into the fold in 2013 as second lead guitarist. Mark Kohler also needs to take longer leaves of absence from the band and in his place Dominique Favez will play once more rhythm guitar. Dominique recorded on the 2003 &quot;Rock the Block&quot; album, 2004&#x27;s &quot;Fire and Gasoline&quot; and 2006&#x27;s &quot;Hellraiser&quot; and is no stranger to Krokus fans.

The band&#x27;s 18th studio release, a covers album entitled &quot;Big Rocks&quot;, was issued in January 2017.

=== Retirement from touring and return (2018–present) ===
In September 2018, Krokus announced their retirement and would embark on their farewell tour in 2019.

In June 2019, the band announced a final tour to take place in North America starting in 2020, but the dates were postponed due to the COVID-19 pandemic. In April 2020, the band announced, via their Instagram account, plans to restart their final tour in 2021:
Although the tour did not happen in 2021 either, in April 2022, vocalist Marc Storace still expressed interest in finishing the tour sometime in the future. The band resumed touring in 2024 in anticipation of their 50th anniversary in 2025.

When asked in September 2024 if Krokus was calling it quits, six years after announcing their final tour, Sorace said: &quot;No, no, no, no. Krokus is reborn. We all feel fresh again. We&#x27;ve had a really nice run and the feeling in the band is really harmonious. And I don&#x27;t sense any bad vibes for doing my solo stuff, because they know I did it because I was in a lockdown situation and that&#x27;s how it started and the ball kept on rolling.&quot;

== Origin of band name ==
The band name &quot;Krokus&quot; is German for crocus, a flower common throughout Europe. In 1975, band founder Chris von Rohr observed a field of these flowers while traveling by train. He was returning from L&#x27;Ecole des Chefs located in France after an aborted career in the culinary arts, and it was around this time the idea for the band was formed. The band members stated that it was the perfect name, since it featured &quot;rok&quot; in the middle.

== Band members ==

Current members
*Chris von Rohr – bass, keyboards, percussion, drums, vocals 
*Fernando von Arb – lead and rhythm guitars, keyboards, bass, vocals 
*Marc &quot;The Voice&quot; Storace – lead vocals 
*Armand &quot;Mandy&quot; Meyer – lead and rhythm guitars 
*Mark &quot;Koki&quot; Kohler – rhythm and lead guitars, bass 
*Flavio Mezzodi – drums, percussion 

== Discography ==
=== Studio albums ===
=== Compilation albums ===
*&quot;Early Days &#x27;75–&#x27;78&quot; (1980)
*&quot;Stayed Awake All Night – The Best&quot; (1989)
*&quot;The Dirty Dozen&quot; (1993)
*&quot;Definitive Collection&quot; (2000)
*&quot;The Collection&quot; (2000)
*&quot;Best Of&quot; (2000)
*&quot;Headhunter Blitz&quot; (2002)
*&quot;Long Stick Goes Boom: The Anthology&quot; (2003)

=== Live albums ===
*&quot;Alive and Screamin&#x27;&quot; (1986)
*&quot;Fire and Gasoline: Live!&quot; (2004)
*&quot;Long Stick Goes Boom: Live from da House of Rust&quot; (2014)
*&quot;Adios Amigos: Live @ Wacken&quot; (2021)

=== Singles ===
=== Videos and DVDs ===
*&quot;The Video Blitz&quot; (1985, VHS &amp; LaserDisc)
*&quot;Screaming in the Night&quot; (1986, VHS)
*&quot;Fire and Gasoline&quot; (2004, bonus DVD)
*&quot;As Long as We Live&quot; (2004, DVD)
*&quot;Live at Rocksound Festival, Huttwil 2006 &quot; (2006, DVD)
*&quot;Hoodoo&quot; (2010, DVD)
*&quot;Krokus Live at Baloise Session&quot; (2014, Blu-ray disc)
*&quot;Brooklyn Zoo Club 1982&quot; (2015, DVD)
*&quot;Krokus – The Early Years 1977–1981&quot; (2017, DVD)

== See also ==
*List of glam metal bands and artists

== References ==
== External links ==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q225538" start="0" end="6" title="Krokus (band)" label="Krokus"/>
<link wikidata="Q83270" start="18" end="27" title="hard rock" label="hard rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q68965" start="126" end="135" title="Solothurn" label="Solothurn"/>
<link wikidata="Q678459" start="147" end="161" title="Chris von Rohr" label="Chris von Rohr"/>
<link wikidata="Q7669927" start="258" end="261" title="TEA (band)" label="TEA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1892833" start="271" end="283" title="Marc Storace" label="Marc Storace"/>
<link wikidata="Q2261190" start="336" end="353" title="Metal Rendez-vous" label="Metal Rendez-vous"/>
<link wikidata="Q49451" start="451" end="467" title="progressive rock" label="progressive rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q2521603" start="543" end="554" title="Krokus (album)" label="first album"/>
<link wikidata="Q2261520" start="774" end="784" title="To You All" label="To You All"/>
<link wikidata="Q338437" start="1232" end="1242" title="Painkiller (Krokus album)" label="Painkiller"/>
<link wikidata="Q27593" start="1273" end="1278" title="AC/DC" label="AC/DC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1892833" start="1473" end="1485" title="Marc Storace" label="Marc Storace"/>
<link wikidata="Q7669927" start="1499" end="1502" title="TEA (band)" label="TEA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2261190" start="1570" end="1587" title="Metal Rendez-vous" label="Metal Rendez-vous"/>
<link wikidata="Q2894260" start="1709" end="1717" title="Hardware (Krokus album)" label="Hardware"/>
<link wikidata="Q686308" start="2078" end="2089" title="Mandy Meyer" label="Mandy Meyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q16563" start="2412" end="2430" title="Memphis, Tennessee" label="Memphis, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q3981119" start="2510" end="2516" title="Target (American band)" label="Target"/>
<link wikidata="Q2661614" start="2526" end="2538" title="Jimi Jamison" label="Jimi Jamison"/>
<link wikidata="Q118966" start="2543" end="2561" title="Black Oak Arkansas" label="Black Oak Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q10495738" start="2656" end="2668" title="First Strike (album)" label="First Strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q726891" start="2783" end="2787" title="Asia (band)" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6377697" start="2815" end="2823" title="Katmandu (band)" label="Katmandu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3302332" start="2987" end="2999" title="Dave Bickler" label="Dave Bickler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135315" start="3012" end="3020" title="Survivor (band)" label="Survivor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3882651" start="3187" end="3205" title="One Vice at a Time" label="One Vice at a Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141238" start="3280" end="3289" title="The Guess Who" label="Guess Who"/>
<link wikidata="Q622086" start="3303" end="3317" title="American Woman" label="American Woman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3128987" start="4059" end="4069" title="Headhunter (album)" label="Headhunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q241365" start="4121" end="4131" title="Gold album" label="Gold album"/>
<link wikidata="Q188819" start="4190" end="4215" title="Billboard 200" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077388" start="4340" end="4352" title="power ballad" label="power ballad"/>
<link wikidata="Q43359" start="4417" end="4420" title="MTV" label="MTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q83468" start="4486" end="4498" title="Judas Priest" label="Judas Priest"/>
<link wikidata="Q271576" start="4506" end="4517" title="Rob Halford" label="Rob Halford"/>
<link wikidata="Q516072" start="4820" end="4836" title="Westfalenhallen" label="RockPop Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q1295" start="4840" end="4848" title="Dortmund" label="Dortmund"/>
<link wikidata="Q5436932" start="4939" end="4955" title="Fast Forward (band)" label="Patrick Mahassen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3986021" start="5171" end="5180" title="The Blitz (Krokus album)" label="The Blitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q650374" start="5435" end="5443" title="Loverboy (band)" label="Loverboy"/>
<link wikidata="Q650374" start="5451" end="5463" title="Doug Johnson (Loverboy)" label="Doug Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q76092" start="6057" end="6066" title="Glam rock" label="Glam rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q487919" start="6131" end="6136" title="The Sweet" label="Sweet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4346021" start="6159" end="6177" title="The Ballroom Blitz" label="The Ballroom Blitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q180072" start="6264" end="6293" title="Billboard Hot 100" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q3666210" start="6488" end="6505" title="Change of Address (Krokus album)" label="Change of Address"/>
<link wikidata="Q16821277" start="6551" end="6563" title="Alice Cooper (band)" label="Alice Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1513101" start="6579" end="6596" title="School&amp;#x27;s Out (song)" label="School&amp;#x27;s Out"/>
<link wikidata="Q3611861" start="6773" end="6797" title="Alive and Screamin&amp;#x27;" label="Alive and Screamin&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q664167" start="6837" end="6851" title="Arista Records" label="Arista Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q2338889" start="6855" end="6858" title="MCA Records" label="MCA"/>
<link wikidata="Q3783920" start="6890" end="6902" title="Heart Attack (Krokus album)" label="Heart Attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752070" start="7606" end="7616" title="Baltimoore" label="Baltimoore"/>
<link wikidata="Q735091" start="7621" end="7635" title="Six Feet Under (band)" label="Six Feet Under"/>
<link wikidata="Q1244182" start="7706" end="7712" title="Killer (Swiss band)" label="Killer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3968088" start="7971" end="7979" title="Stampede (Krokus album)" label="Stampede"/>
<link wikidata="Q1244182" start="8091" end="8097" title="Killer (Swiss band)" label="Killer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3882651" start="8213" end="8231" title="One Vice at a Time" label="One Vice at a Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q426991" start="8276" end="8296" title="To Rock or Not to Be" label="To Rock or Not to Be"/>
<link wikidata="Q16318727" start="8325" end="8338" title="Carl Sentance" label="Carl Sentance"/>
<link wikidata="Q3900164" start="8343" end="8355" title="Persian Risk" label="Persian Risk"/>
<link wikidata="Q310752" start="8357" end="8370" title="Geezer Butler" label="Geezer Butler"/>
<link wikidata="Q3941870" start="8403" end="8411" title="Round 13" label="Round 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q3939744" start="8482" end="8496" title="Rock the Block" label="Rock the Block"/>
<link wikidata="Q686308" start="8947" end="8958" title="Mandy Meyer" label="Mandy Meyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q70575" start="9106" end="9124" title="Stefan Schwarzmann" label="Stefan Schwarzmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107046" start="9129" end="9140" title="Dennis Ward (musician)" label="Dennis Ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q593196" start="9174" end="9184" title="Hellraiser (album)" label="Hellraiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q194479" start="10403" end="10418" title="Stade de Suisse" label="Stade de Suisse"/>
<link wikidata="Q3361801" start="10472" end="10507" title="2009 IIHF World Championship" label="2009 Ice Hockey World Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q3786695" start="10621" end="10627" title="Hoodoo (Krokus album)" label="Hoodoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q155171" start="10646" end="10659" title="cover version" label="cover version"/>
<link wikidata="Q465862" start="10663" end="10674" title="Steppenwolf (band)" label="Steppenwolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q893936" start="10688" end="10703" title="Born to Be Wild" label="Born to Be Wild"/>
<link wikidata="Q15273077" start="11239" end="11253" title="Dirty Dynamite" label="Dirty Dynamite"/>
<link wikidata="Q3783920" start="11406" end="11418" title="Heart Attack (Krokus album)" label="Heart Attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q269300" start="11487" end="11492" title="Blick" label="Blick"/>
<link wikidata="Q65037" start="11543" end="11551" title="Trimbach, Switzerland" label="Trimbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q11929" start="11553" end="11572" title="Canton of Solothurn" label="Canton of Solothurn"/>
<link wikidata="" start="11905" end="11953" title="Long Stick Goes Boom: Live from da House of Rust" label="Long Stick Goes Boom: Live from da House of Rust"/>
<link wikidata="Q3939744" start="12488" end="12502" title="Rock the Block" label="Rock the Block"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="13042" end="13059" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q209330" start="13106" end="13115" title="Instagram" label="Instagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q157806" start="13945" end="13951" title="crocus" label="crocus"/>
<link wikidata="Q678459" start="14397" end="14411" title="Chris von Rohr" label="Chris von Rohr"/>
<link wikidata="Q3069559" start="14459" end="14475" title="Fernando von Arb" label="Fernando von Arb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1892833" start="14529" end="14563" title="Marc Storace" label="Marc &amp;quot;The Voice&amp;quot; Storace"/>
<link wikidata="Q686308" start="14580" end="14610" title="Mandy Meyer" label="Armand &amp;quot;Mandy&amp;quot; Meyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3611861" start="15171" end="15195" title="Alive and Screamin&amp;#x27;" label="Alive and Screamin&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="" start="15261" end="15309" title="Long Stick Goes Boom: Live from da House of Rust" label="Long Stick Goes Boom: Live from da House of Rust"/>
<link wikidata="Q273309" start="15458" end="15467" title="LaserDisc" label="LaserDisc"/>
<link wikidata="Q4434105" start="15899" end="15935" title="List of glam metal bands and artists" label="List of glam metal bands and artists"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="998032" wikidata="Q1398255" url="?curid=998032" title="Gay Divorce">
<text>Gay Divorce is a musical with music and lyrics by Cole Porter and book by Dwight Taylor, adapted by Kenneth Webb and Samuel Hoffenstein. It was Fred Astaire&#x27;s last Broadway show and featured the hit song &quot;Night and Day&quot; in which Astaire danced with co-star Claire Luce.

RKO Radio Pictures released a film production of the musical in 1934, starring Astaire and Ginger Rogers, renamed &quot;The Gay Divorcee&quot;.

==Plot==
Guy Holden, an American writer traveling in England, falls madly in love with a woman named Mimi, who disappears after their first encounter. To take his mind off his lost love, his friend Teddy Egbert, a British attorney, takes him to Brighton, where Egbert has arranged for a &quot;paid co-respondent&quot; to assist his client in obtaining a divorce from her boring, aging, geologist husband Robert.

What Holden does not know is that the client is none other than Mimi, who in turn mistakes him — because he is too ashamed of his occupation to say what it is, namely pseudonymously writing cheap &quot;bodice ripper&quot; romance novels — for the paid co-respondent.

At the end, when her husband appears, he is unconvinced by the faked adultery—but is then unwittingly revealed, by the waiter at the resort, to have been genuinely adulterous himself.

==Songs==
;Act I
* After You, Who?
* Why Marry Them? 
* Salt Air
* I Still Love the Red, White and Blue
* After You, Who? (Reprise)
* Where Would You Get Your Coat? ‡‡ - Gertrude (from &quot;Fifty Million Frenchmen&quot;)
* Night and Day
* How&#x27;s Your Romance?

;Act II
* What Will Become of Our England?
* I&#x27;ve Got You on My Mind
* Mr. and Mrs. Fitch
* I Love Only You ‡ - Tonetti
* You&#x27;re in Love

‡new song for the London production, ‡‡for London production

==Background and productions==
Astaire&#x27;s sister Adele retired from show business and married Lord Charles Cavendish after her last show with Fred, &quot;The Band Wagon&quot; (1931). When the producers of &quot;Gay Divorce&quot; asked Fred to star in the show, he deferred an answer until he could spend the summer of 1932 wooing his future wife, Phyllis, in London. He finally agreed, and rehearsals began in September 1932. The show was both Astaire&#x27;s last Broadway musical (after which he moved to Hollywood) and his only stage musical without Adele. Also in the cast were Erik Rhodes and Eric Blore who soon became famous in the early 1930s RKO comedies.

&quot;Gay Divorce&quot; opened in pre-Broadway tryouts at the Wilbur Theatre, Boston on November 7, 1932 and then moved to the Shubert Theatre, New Haven on November 21, 1932. It opened on Broadway at the Ethel Barrymore Theatre on November 29, 1932 and transferred to the Shubert Theatre on January 16, 1933 and closed on July 1, 1933 for a total run of 248 performances. Directed by Howard Lindsay with choreography by Barbara Newberry and Carl Randall, and set design by Jo Mielziner, the cast featured Fred Astaire as Guy Holden, Claire Luce as Mimi, Luella Gear as Hortense, G. P. Huntley Jr as Teddy, Betty Starbuck as Barbara Wray, Erik Rhodes as Tonetti, Eric Blore as Waiter, and Roland Bottomley as Pratt.

The show opened in the West End at the Palace Theatre on November 2, 1933 and ran for 180 performances. It was directed by Felix Edwardes with Astaire, Luce, Rhodes and Blore reprising their roles. They were joined by Olive Blakeney as Gertrude Howard, Claud Allister as Teddy, Joan Gardner as Barbara Wray and Fred Hearne as Octavius Mann.

The Australian tour, presented by J. C. Williamson&#x27;s, commenced in Melbourne at the King&#x27;s Theatre on 23 December 1933. The production starred British actors Madge Aubrey, Billy Milton, and Iris Kirkwhite as Mimi. Kirkwhite&#x27;s understudy Mona Potts opened the show as Mimi with two days notice after Kirkwhite injured her ankle in rehearsal. The production then played the Theatre Royal, Adelaide from 21 April 1934. The Perth season, commencing May 5, 1934, J. C. Williamson’s presented three musical comedies, &quot;The Girl Friend&quot;, &quot;Gay Divorce&quot; (commencing May 12) and &quot;Our Miss Gibbs&quot; (commencing May 19) as well as a one night only performance of &quot;Gay Divorce&quot; at Kalgoorlie Town Hall on 29 May 1934. The final two stops of the tour included His Majesty&#x27;s Theatre, Brisbane, opening 9 June 1934 and concluding at the Theatre Royal, Sydney opening 28 July 1934.

The book is dated, and professional modern productions are rare. Goodspeed Opera House staged the show in 1983 and an adapted version was seen off-Broadway in New York in 1987. The 1987 Off-Broadway production was mounted for the opening of Martin R. Kaufman Theatre in Hell&#x27;s Kitchen, Manhattan. The production starred Oliver Woodall as Guy Holden, Debra Dickinson as Mimi, Diane Findlay as Hortense, and Joaquin Romaguera as Teddy. Romaguera was nominated for the Drama Desk Award for Outstanding Featured Actor in a Musical for his portrayal. A concert version was presented at Carnegie Hall (Weill Recital Hall) in New York City in June 1993 and featured Robert Westenberg as Guy, Rebecca Luker as Mimi, Judy Kaye as Hortense, and Kurt Ollmann as Tonetti. A &quot;Musicals Tonight!&quot; (New York City) concert production ran in March 2004.

In 2000, Lost Musicals, aka The Lost Musicals Charitable Trust, presented at London&#x27;s Palace Theatre &quot;Gay Divorce&quot; with the BBC. Ian Marshall Fisher directed, Kevin Amos Music, Director. The cast included Janie Dee, Thelma Ruby, Tim Flavin and Julie Wilson appearing along with the BBC orchestra. This was the second and only appearance of this show and playing in the same theatre where the original London production played. The regional company 42nd Street Moon produced the piece in San Francisco, California from April 12 - May 6, 2007.

==References==
==External links==
*&#x27;Gay Divorce at sondheimguide.com</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2743" start="17" end="24" title="musical theatre" label="musical"/>
<link wikidata="Q215120" start="50" end="61" title="Cole Porter" label="Cole Porter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3195203" start="100" end="112" title="Kenneth Webb (director)" label="Kenneth Webb"/>
<link wikidata="Q506161" start="117" end="135" title="Samuel Hoffenstein" label="Samuel Hoffenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q100937" start="144" end="156" title="Fred Astaire" label="Fred Astaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q235065" start="169" end="177" title="Broadway theatre" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1477068" start="215" end="228" title="Night and Day (song)" label="Night and Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q2975083" start="272" end="283" title="Claire Luce" label="Claire Luce"/>
<link wikidata="Q267282" start="286" end="304" title="RKO Radio Pictures" label="RKO Radio Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q842256" start="316" end="320" title="musical film" label="film"/>
<link wikidata="Q95089" start="377" end="390" title="Ginger Rogers" label="Ginger Rogers"/>
<link wikidata="Q947098" start="406" end="422" title="The Gay Divorcee" label="The Gay Divorcee"/>
<link wikidata="Q131491" start="676" end="684" title="Brighton" label="Brighton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5137506" start="729" end="742" title="co-respondent" label="co-respondent"/>
<link wikidata="Q858330" start="1046" end="1059" title="bodice ripper" label="bodice ripper"/>
<link wikidata="Q4690590" start="1316" end="1331" title="After You, Who?" label="After You, Who?"/>
<link wikidata="Q1477068" start="1521" end="1534" title="Night and Day (song)" label="Night and Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q354381" start="1826" end="1831" title="Adele Astaire" label="Adele"/>
<link wikidata="Q6679036" start="1871" end="1893" title="Lord Charles Arthur Francis Cavendish" label="Lord Charles Cavendish"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519868" start="1931" end="1945" title="The Band Wagon (musical)" label="The Band Wagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q34006" start="2283" end="2292" title="Hollywood, Los Angeles" label="Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q766697" start="2358" end="2369" title="Erik Rhodes (actor, born 1906)" label="Erik Rhodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q959404" start="2374" end="2384" title="Eric Blore" label="Eric Blore"/>
<link wikidata="Q8000245" start="2504" end="2518" title="Wilbur Theatre" label="Wilbur Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="2520" end="2526" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q7504545" start="2569" end="2584" title="Shubert Theatre (New Haven)" label="Shubert Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q5403074" start="2647" end="2670" title="Ethel Barrymore Theatre" label="Ethel Barrymore Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1797756" start="2715" end="2730" title="Shubert Theatre (Broadway)" label="Shubert Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374517" start="2827" end="2841" title="Howard Lindsay" label="Howard Lindsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q106357075" start="2863" end="2879" title="Barbara Newberry" label="Barbara Newberry"/>
<link wikidata="Q980785" start="2916" end="2928" title="Jo Mielziner" label="Jo Mielziner"/>
<link wikidata="Q100937" start="2948" end="2960" title="Fred Astaire" label="Fred Astaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2975083" start="2976" end="2987" title="Claire Luce" label="Claire Luce"/>
<link wikidata="Q110973815" start="3022" end="3038" title="G. P. Huntley Jr" label="G. P. Huntley Jr"/>
<link wikidata="Q766697" start="3081" end="3092" title="Erik Rhodes (actor, born 1906)" label="Erik Rhodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q959404" start="3105" end="3115" title="Eric Blore" label="Eric Blore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359589" start="3182" end="3190" title="West End theatre" label="West End"/>
<link wikidata="Q4592132" start="3198" end="3212" title="Palace Theatre, London" label="Palace Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2976624" start="3412" end="3426" title="Claud Allister" label="Claud Allister"/>
<link wikidata="Q15442956" start="3437" end="3449" title="Joan Gardner (British actress)" label="Joan Gardner"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3535" end="3558" title="J. C. Williamson&amp;#x27;s" label="J. C. Williamson&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q48804727" start="3590" end="3609" title="King&amp;#x27;s Theatre, Melbourne" label="King&amp;#x27;s Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q4913038" start="3683" end="3695" title="Billy Milton" label="Billy Milton"/>
<link wikidata="Q30673852" start="3888" end="3911" title="Theatre Royal, Adelaide" label="Theatre Royal, Adelaide"/>
<link wikidata="Q3987236" start="4033" end="4048" title="The Girl Friend" label="The Girl Friend"/>
<link wikidata="Q7111092" start="4110" end="4124" title="Our Miss Gibbs" label="Our Miss Gibbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q329503" start="4221" end="4231" title="Kalgoorlie" label="Kalgoorlie"/>
<link wikidata="Q56604672" start="4299" end="4335" title="His Majesty&amp;#x27;s Theatre, Brisbane" label="His Majesty&amp;#x27;s Theatre, Brisbane"/>
<link wikidata="Q7777440" start="4379" end="4400" title="Theatre Royal, Sydney" label="Theatre Royal, Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q5583618" start="4489" end="4510" title="Goodspeed Opera House" label="Goodspeed Opera House"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058828" start="4567" end="4579" title="off-Broadway" label="off-Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q106238446" start="4665" end="4690" title="Martin R. Kaufman Theatre" label="Martin R. Kaufman Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q840133" start="4694" end="4724" title="Hell&amp;#x27;s Kitchen, Manhattan" label="Hell&amp;#x27;s Kitchen, Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q27553655" start="4835" end="4852" title="Joaquin Romaguera" label="Joaquin Romaguera"/>
<link wikidata="Q5305711" start="4895" end="4955" title="Drama Desk Award for Outstanding Featured Actor in a Musical" label="Drama Desk Award for Outstanding Featured Actor in a Musical"/>
<link wikidata="Q200959" start="5010" end="5023" title="Carnegie Hall" label="Carnegie Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7350980" start="5088" end="5105" title="Robert Westenberg" label="Robert Westenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q7301818" start="5114" end="5127" title="Rebecca Luker" label="Rebecca Luker"/>
<link wikidata="Q6304496" start="5137" end="5146" title="Judy Kaye" label="Judy Kaye"/>
<link wikidata="Q29963212" start="5164" end="5176" title="Kurt Ollmann" label="Kurt Ollmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q17150574" start="5285" end="5298" title="Lost Musicals" label="Lost Musicals"/>
<link wikidata="Q4637825" start="5739" end="5755" title="42nd Street Moon" label="42nd Street Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="5778" end="5791" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="998033" wikidata="Q562596" url="?curid=998033" title="David Alan Grier">
<text>David Alan Grier (born June 30, 1956) is an American actor and comedian. Known for his roles on stage and screen, Grier gained popularity playing multiple roles in the American sketch comedy television series &quot;In Living Color&quot; (1990–1994) and Reverend Leon Lonnie Love on the Fox comedy series &quot;Martin&quot; (1993–1997). In 2004, Grier was ranked no. 94 on Comedy Central&#x27;s 100 Greatest Stand-Ups.

Grier made his feature film debut in the Robert Altman directed drama &quot;Streamers&quot; (1983) for which he won the Volpi Cup for Best Actor at the Venice Film Festival. Grier then took roles in films such as &quot;A Soldier&#x27;s Story&quot; (1984), &quot;Boomerang&quot; (1992), &quot;Jumanji&quot; (1995), &quot;Baadasssss!&quot; (2003), &quot;Bewitched&quot; (2005), &quot;They Cloned Tyrone&quot; (2023), &quot;The Color Purple&quot; (2023), and &quot;The American Society of Magical Negroes&quot; (2024).

On stage, Grier won the Tony Award for Best Featured Actor in a Play for his role in the Broadway revival of &quot;A Soldier&#x27;s Play&quot; (2021). He was Tony-nominated for his roles as Jackie Robinson in &quot;The First&quot; (1983), Henry Brown in &quot;Race&quot; (2009) and Sporting Life in &quot;Porgy and Bess&quot; (2012). Other Broadway roles include in &quot;Dreamgirls&quot; (1981), and &quot;A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to the Forum&quot; (1996).

He has worked extensively in television playing roles such as Bernard on &quot;Damon&quot; (1998), Jerome Dagget on &quot;DAG&quot; (2000–2001), David Bellows on &quot;Life with Bonnie&quot; (2002–2004), Joe Carmichael on &quot;The Carmichael Show&quot; (2015–2017), the Lion in &quot;The Wiz Live!&quot; (2015), and Hal on &quot;A Series of Unfortunate Events&quot; (2018). He also created and executive-produced the American satirical show &quot;Chocolate News&quot; (2008) for Comedy Central.

== Early life and education ==
Grier was born in Detroit, Michigan, one of three children, to Aretas Ruth (née Blaney), a school teacher, and William Henry Grier, a psychiatrist and writer, who co-wrote the book &quot;Black Rage&quot;.

He graduated from Detroit&#x27;s Cass Technical High School, received a B.A. in radio, television and film from the University of Michigan in 1978, and an M.F.A. from the Yale School of Drama, in 1981. Visiting lecturer Rachel Roberts took notice of his performance one evening in a piece entitled &quot;The Place of the Spirit Dance.&quot;

==Career==
=== 1981–1989: Broadway debut and early roles ===
After graduating from Yale, Grier landed the role of Jackie Robinson in the short-lived Broadway musical &quot;The First&quot;, directed by Martin Charnin and written by Joel Siegel. Grier was nominated for a Tony Award for Best Featured Actor in a Musical and won the Theatre World Award for &quot;The First&quot;. He got his start on the National Public Radio radio drama adaptation of &quot;Star Wars: The Empire Strikes Back&quot; in 1981. He was the voice of a nameless X-wing fighter pilot during the Battle of Yavin.

Grier later starred as James &quot;Thunder&quot; Early in the hit Broadway musical &quot;Dreamgirls&quot;. Grier made his film debut in 1983 in &quot;Streamers&quot;, directed by Robert Altman. He won the Golden Lion for Best Actor at the Venice Film Festival for the film. He appeared in the Negro Ensemble Company production &quot;A Soldier&#x27;s Play&quot; and reprised his role in the film version &quot;A Soldier&#x27;s Story&quot;. Grier appeared as a geology professor at Hillman College in the show &quot;A Different World&quot;.

===1990–1999: Career breakthrough ===
Although primarily known for his dramatic work, Grier began to shift towards comedy, making appearances in the cult films &quot;Amazon Women on the Moon&quot; and &quot;I&#x27;m Gonna Git You Sucka&quot;, whose director Keenen Ivory Wayans cast Grier in his new variety show &quot;In Living Color&quot;. It became a ratings hit and won an Emmy for Outstanding Variety Series. Grier became a popular cast member through his characters, which ranged from hyperactive children to crotchety old men. Some of his more well-known characters were flamboyant and effeminate Antoine Merriweather in the &quot;Men on...&quot; sketch series, blues musician Calhoun Tubbs (based on Shakey Jake, a busker who often performed near the Michigan campus) megaphone-blaring shop teacher Al MacAfee, the elderly Mr. Brooks, and Tiny, a prison inmate obsessed with female &quot;breastesses&quot;. He also provided impersonations of Joe Jackson and Ike Turner.

After his success on &quot;In Living Color&quot;, Grier began appearing in film comedies such as &quot;Boomerang&quot;, as Eddie Murphy&#x27;s shy friend Gerard in 1992; &quot;Blankman&quot;, with Damon Wayans, in 1994; &quot;In the Army Now&quot;, as Fred Ostroff with Pauly Shore and Andy Dick, also in 1994; and as Carl Bentley, a factory employee turned police officer whose car is crushed and eaten by a giant pod in &quot;Jumanji&quot; in 1995. He played Rev. Leon Lonnie Love on the TV series &quot;Martin&quot;. Grier appeared with Tom Arnold in the 1997 comedy &quot;McHale&#x27;s Navy&quot; as Ensign Charles Parker. Grier returned to Broadway to perform in the musical &quot;A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to the Forum&quot; in 1997.

In 1998 Grier hosted the game show &quot;Random Acts of Comedy&quot; on Fox Family, what is now Freeform. The show lasted one season. That same year he co-starred with Jon Stewart in &quot;Elmopalooza&quot;, as the director of Stewart&#x27;s production crew, who he often chastises at Elmo and Telly after realizing what happened to the rest of the cast. In 1999, he made a guest appearance as himself in the &quot;Aw, Here it Goes to Hollywood&quot; episode of Nickelodeon&#x27;s sitcom &quot;Kenan &amp; Kel&quot;. After the cancellation of &quot;In Living Color&quot;, Grier starred in the short-lived sitcoms &quot;The Preston Episodes&quot;, &quot;Damon&quot; (with &quot;In Living Color&quot; co-star Damon Wayans).

=== 2000–2019: Continued work ===
Grier is a comedian and hosted the Comedy Central series &quot;Premium Blend&quot; in 2001. He made an appearance on the &quot;Dave, Shelley, and Chainsaw (DSC) Show&quot; (San Diego Jack 100.7 FM) on October 5, 2012, before doing performances at The Madhouse Comedy Club. In the interview, he debunked internet reports that he was involved in a musical based on the life of Louis Farrakhan. He took a leading role in &quot;DAG&quot; and had a cameo in the Robert De Niro and Edward Burns film &quot;15 Minutes&quot; (2001) as a Central Park mugger. In a departure from the comedic roles he played on &quot;In Living Color&quot;, he portrayed an abusive father in Rusty Cundieff&#x27;s anthology film &quot;Tales from the Hood&quot;. In 2002, Grier joined the cast of the improv-based ABC sitcom and Bonnie Hunt vehicle &quot;Life with Bonnie&quot; which ran for two seasons. During this time, he continued to appear in comedy films but also returned to drama in the films &quot;Baadasssss!&quot; (2003) and &quot;The Woodsman&quot; (2004). He starred in his own Comedy Central stand-up special &quot;The Book of David: The Cult Figure&#x27;s Manifesto&quot;. He is also a frequent guest on the Comedy Central show &quot;Crank Yankers&quot;.

Grier was the host of the NBC show &quot;Thank God You&#x27;re Here&quot;. He starred in &quot;Gym Teacher: The Movie&quot; (2008) playing the villain, Shelly Bragg. He appeared as Uncle Henry in the ABC 2005 television film &quot;The Muppets&#x27; Wizard of Oz&quot;. Grier guest starred in Season 6 of Fox&#x27;s &quot;Bones&quot;. He played Professor Bunsen Jude, the Science Dude, the host of a children&#x27;s television program. This character was inspired by Bill Nye &quot;the Science Guy&quot;. In May 2013, Grier appeared in &quot;Tyler Perry Presents Peeples&quot;, playing the role of Virgil Peeples, alongside Kerry Washington and Craig Robinson. Also in 2013, Grier appeared in &quot;The Watsons Go To Birmingham&quot;, a Hallmark Channel adaptation of Christopher Paul Curtis&#x27; 1995 Newbery Honor-winning novel, &quot;The Watsons Go to Birmingham – 1963&quot;. He appeared on the CBS TV-adaptation of &quot;Bad Teacher&quot;, playing the role of principal Carl Gaines.

In 2008, Grier starred in the Comedy Central series &quot;Chocolate News&quot; which had satirical sketches about current events and news stories. It lasted for one season of ten episodes. Grier appeared as Jimmy Dale in the series &quot;Queen Sugar&quot; appearing in Season 3 and played the role of Mr. Packard in the Paramount Pictures film &quot;Clifford the Big Red Dog&quot;. He returned to Broadway for the premiere of &quot;Race&quot;, written and directed by David Mamet, opposite James Spader, Kerry Washington, and Richard Thomas, which opened at the Ethel Barrymore Theatre on December 6, 2009. Grier received his second Tony nomination for the role. He also appeared in the revival production of &quot;The Wiz&quot; at the La Jolla Playhouse directed by Des McAnuff.

His first book &quot;Barack Like Me: The Chocolate-Covered Truth&quot; was published by Simon &amp; Schuster in 2009. The book recounts Grier&#x27;s own life story, and was written with Alan Eisenstock. Grier appeared on Broadway as Sportin&#x27; Life in the Gershwins&#x27; &quot;Porgy and Bess&quot;, which opened at the Richard Rodgers Theatre on January 12, 2012, alongside Norm Lewis and Audra McDonald. He was nominated for the Tony Award for Best Performance by a Featured Actor in a Musical for this role. In addition to his Tony Award nomination, Grier received a 2013 Grammy nomination for Best Musical Theater Album for his performance on the cast recording of the play. He played the Cowardly Lion in NBC&#x27;s live performance of &quot;The Wiz&quot;, which aired on December 3, 2015.

He appeared in an episode of &quot;Clean House&quot; along with his brother and his brother&#x27;s family. Grier invited the show to help his brother due to his severe problems with clutter, and the family received a home makeover. He hosted the game show &quot;Snap Decision&quot;, which debuted August 7, 2017, on the Game Show Network and many Sinclair TV stations.

=== 2020–present ===
He was a contestant on the eighth season of &quot;Dancing with the Stars&quot;, partnered with Kym Johnson. By the fourth week of the competition, Grier announced that he had lost 26 pounds. He was eliminated in the fifth week. In January 2020, Grier returned to the stage for the Broadway production of &quot;A Soldier&#x27;s Play&quot;, this time playing Tech Sergeant Vernon C. Waters, the role originated by Adolph Caesar in the off-Broadway production. For this role, he won the Tony Award for Best Featured Actor in a Play.

In April 2022, it was announced that Grier would join the cast of the 2023 musical remake, &quot;The Color Purple&quot;. He plays Pastor Avery, the father of Shug Avery, a role also in the 1985 film of the same name. In 2022, he starred in &quot;The Patient&quot; on Hulu with Steve Carell. He was the announcer for the 96th Academy Awards, held on March 10, 2024. That same year he starred in the satirical film &quot;The American Society of Magical Negroes&quot; which received negative reviews. 
Of the film Grier said, &quot;Some members of the white community will see it and say, ‘We’re tired of hearing about race.’ Well we’re tired of talking about it. We’re tired! We’re tied, too. We all want to get past this, but you can only get past it by going through it.&quot;

==Personal life==
Grier was married to Maritza Rivera and divorced in 1997. In July 2007, he married Christine Y. Kim, an associate curator of the Los Angeles County Museum of Art. She gave birth to their daughter, Luisa Danbi Grier-Kim on January 10, 2008, at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, in Los Angeles. On July 9, 2009, Kim filed for divorce, citing irreconcilable differences.

When Grier was young, his family marched with Martin Luther King Jr. in a March on Poverty in Detroit, where King gave an early version of the &quot;I Have A Dream&quot; speech.

He is a fan of motorcycles, and owns the rare Yamaha YZF-R1 Limited Edition. On the August 10, 2009, episode of The Adam Carolla Show, Grier agreed to auction it to aid Bryan Bishop&#x27;s Tumor Fund, but subsequently walked out of the studio. He is an avid cook and began food blogging during the run of the play &quot;Race,&quot; where James Spader helped to critique the food Grier made.

==Acting credits==

===Film===
===Television===
===Radio===
===Theater===
==Awards and nominations==
==References==
==External links==
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q562596" start="0" end="16" title="David Alan Grier" label="David Alan Grier"/>
<link wikidata="Q2438494" start="215" end="230" title="In Living Color" label="In Living Color"/>
<link wikidata="Q166419" start="286" end="289" title="Fox Broadcasting Company" label="Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q3295320" start="304" end="322" title="Martin (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Martin&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q131439" start="372" end="386" title="Comedy Central" label="Comedy Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q55163" start="460" end="473" title="Robert Altman" label="Robert Altman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090685" start="495" end="504" title="Streamers (film)" label="Streamers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2089923" start="539" end="563" title="Volpi Cup for Best Actor" label="Volpi Cup for Best Actor"/>
<link wikidata="Q49024" start="571" end="591" title="Venice Film Festival" label="Venice Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q1624196" start="638" end="660" title="A Soldier&amp;#x27;s Story" label="A Soldier&amp;#x27;s Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q642511" start="681" end="690" title="Boomerang (1992 film)" label="Boomerang"/>
<link wikidata="Q222939" start="711" end="718" title="Jumanji" label="Jumanji"/>
<link wikidata="Q2383324" start="739" end="750" title="Baadasssss!" label="Baadasssss!"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356410" start="771" end="780" title="Bewitched (2005 film)" label="Bewitched"/>
<link wikidata="Q104902025" start="801" end="819" title="They Cloned Tyrone" label="They Cloned Tyrone"/>
<link wikidata="Q111270010" start="840" end="856" title="The Color Purple (2023 film)" label="The Color Purple"/>
<link wikidata="Q123690415" start="881" end="920" title="The American Society of Magical Negroes" label="The American Society of Magical Negroes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474410" start="960" end="1004" title="Tony Award for Best Featured Actor in a Play" label="Tony Award for Best Featured Actor in a Play"/>
<link wikidata="Q235065" start="1025" end="1033" title="Broadway (theatre)" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q4659645" start="1051" end="1072" title="A Soldier&amp;#x27;s Play" label="A Soldier&amp;#x27;s Play"/>
<link wikidata="Q221048" start="1126" end="1141" title="Jackie Robinson" label="Jackie Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7734063" start="1151" end="1160" title="The First (musical)" label="The First"/>
<link wikidata="Q7278881" start="1190" end="1206" title="Race (play)" label="&amp;quot;Race&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q740920" start="1241" end="1255" title="Porgy and Bess" label="Porgy and Bess"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140966" start="1308" end="1318" title="Dreamgirls" label="Dreamgirls"/>
<link wikidata="Q862709" start="1343" end="1389" title="A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to the Forum" label="A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to the Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5212796" start="1484" end="1489" title="Damon (TV series)" label="Damon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5204233" start="1527" end="1530" title="DAG (American TV series)" label="DAG"/>
<link wikidata="Q2056549" start="1573" end="1589" title="Life with Bonnie" label="Life with Bonnie"/>
<link wikidata="Q20203359" start="1633" end="1652" title="The Carmichael Show" label="The Carmichael Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q21664889" start="1690" end="1703" title="The Wiz Live!" label="The Wiz Live!"/>
<link wikidata="Q25340369" start="1735" end="1765" title="A Series of Unfortunate Events (TV series)" label="A Series of Unfortunate Events"/>
<link wikidata="Q5103629" start="1853" end="1867" title="Chocolate News" label="Chocolate News"/>
<link wikidata="Q131439" start="1885" end="1899" title="Comedy Central" label="Comedy Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q12439" start="1951" end="1968" title="Detroit, Michigan" label="Detroit, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q42677187" start="2044" end="2063" title="William H. Grier" label="William Henry Grier"/>
<link wikidata="Q4921523" start="2120" end="2130" title="Black Rage (book)" label="Black Rage"/>
<link wikidata="Q5049183" start="2172" end="2198" title="Cass Technical High School" label="Cass Technical High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765120" start="2211" end="2215" title="Bachelor of Arts" label="B.A."/>
<link wikidata="Q230492" start="2255" end="2277" title="University of Michigan" label="University of Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4175466" start="2294" end="2300" title="Master of Fine Arts" label="M.F.A."/>
<link wikidata="Q8047423" start="2310" end="2330" title="Yale School of Drama" label="Yale School of Drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q254828" start="2359" end="2373" title="Rachel Roberts (actress)" label="Rachel Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q221048" start="2595" end="2610" title="Jackie Robinson" label="Jackie Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q235065" start="2630" end="2638" title="Broadway theatre" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7734063" start="2653" end="2662" title="The First (musical)" label="The First"/>
<link wikidata="Q3295377" start="2682" end="2696" title="Martin Charnin" label="Martin Charnin"/>
<link wikidata="Q693718" start="2712" end="2723" title="Joel Siegel" label="Joel Siegel"/>
<link wikidata="Q191874" start="2751" end="2761" title="Tony Award" label="Tony Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131356" start="2811" end="2830" title="Theatre World Award" label="Theatre World Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q671510" start="2882" end="2903" title="National Public Radio" label="National Public Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7601116" start="2936" end="2970" title="Star Wars (radio series)" label="Star Wars: The Empire Strikes Back"/>
<link wikidata="Q842127" start="3017" end="3023" title="X-wing" label="X-wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2264746" start="3049" end="3064" title="Battle of Yavin" label="Battle of Yavin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140966" start="3156" end="3166" title="Dreamgirls" label="Dreamgirls"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090685" start="3217" end="3226" title="Streamers (film)" label="Streamers"/>
<link wikidata="Q55163" start="3246" end="3259" title="Robert Altman" label="Robert Altman"/>
<link wikidata="Q209459" start="3272" end="3283" title="Golden Lion" label="Golden Lion"/>
<link wikidata="Q49024" start="3306" end="3326" title="Venice Film Festival" label="Venice Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q17082843" start="3360" end="3382" title="Negro Ensemble Company" label="Negro Ensemble Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q4659645" start="3400" end="3421" title="A Soldier&amp;#x27;s Play" label="A Soldier&amp;#x27;s Play"/>
<link wikidata="Q1624196" start="3476" end="3498" title="A Soldier&amp;#x27;s Story" label="A Soldier&amp;#x27;s Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109026" start="3581" end="3598" title="A Different World (TV series)" label="A Different World"/>
<link wikidata="Q219557" start="3756" end="3766" title="cult films" label="cult films"/>
<link wikidata="Q456467" start="3773" end="3797" title="Amazon Women on the Moon" label="Amazon Women on the Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1521693" start="3814" end="3842" title="I&amp;#x27;m Gonna Git You Sucka" label="I&amp;#x27;m Gonna Git You Sucka"/>
<link wikidata="Q323201" start="3865" end="3884" title="Keenen Ivory Wayans" label="Keenen Ivory Wayans"/>
<link wikidata="Q2438494" start="3926" end="3941" title="In Living Color" label="In Living Color"/>
<link wikidata="Q123737" start="3984" end="3988" title="Emmy" label="Emmy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6816307" start="4245" end="4254" title="Men on..." label="Men on..."/>
<link wikidata="Q16017802" start="4315" end="4326" title="Shakey Jake" label="Shakey Jake"/>
<link wikidata="Q361297" start="4557" end="4568" title="Joe Jackson (manager)" label="Joe Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q208871" start="4573" end="4583" title="Ike Turner" label="Ike Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q642511" start="4689" end="4698" title="Boomerang (1992 film)" label="Boomerang"/>
<link wikidata="Q43874" start="4709" end="4721" title="Eddie Murphy" label="Eddie Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q881653" start="4762" end="4770" title="Blankman" label="Blankman"/>
<link wikidata="Q382420" start="4783" end="4795" title="Damon Wayans" label="Damon Wayans"/>
<link wikidata="Q3053490" start="4812" end="4827" title="In the Army Now (film)" label="In the Army Now"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384822" start="4856" end="4867" title="Pauly Shore" label="Pauly Shore"/>
<link wikidata="Q367094" start="4872" end="4881" title="Andy Dick" label="Andy Dick"/>
<link wikidata="Q222939" start="5014" end="5021" title="Jumanji" label="Jumanji"/>
<link wikidata="Q3295320" start="5092" end="5098" title="Martin (TV series)" label="Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q353755" start="5126" end="5136" title="Tom Arnold (actor)" label="Tom Arnold"/>
<link wikidata="Q603318" start="5162" end="5180" title="McHale&amp;#x27;s Navy (1997 film)" label="McHale&amp;#x27;s Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q862709" start="5272" end="5318" title="A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to the Forum" label="A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to the Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7291912" start="5376" end="5397" title="Random Acts of Comedy" label="Random Acts of Comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q287149" start="5431" end="5439" title="Freeform (TV channel)" label="Freeform"/>
<link wikidata="Q211987" start="5503" end="5514" title="Jon Stewart" label="Jon Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q5366869" start="5524" end="5535" title="Elmopalooza" label="Elmopalooza"/>
<link wikidata="Q154958" start="5797" end="5808" title="Nickelodeon" label="Nickelodeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065187" start="5829" end="5844" title="Kenan &amp;amp; Kel" label="Kenan &amp;amp; Kel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7758103" start="5954" end="5974" title="The Preston Episodes" label="The Preston Episodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5212796" start="5988" end="5993" title="Damon (TV series)" label="Damon"/>
<link wikidata="Q382420" start="6042" end="6054" title="Damon Wayans" label="Damon Wayans"/>
<link wikidata="Q131439" start="6127" end="6141" title="Comedy Central" label="Comedy Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q7240459" start="6155" end="6168" title="Premium Blend" label="Premium Blend"/>
<link wikidata="Q49075" start="6467" end="6482" title="Louis Farrakhan" label="Louis Farrakhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5204233" start="6516" end="6519" title="DAG (U.S. TV series)" label="DAG"/>
<link wikidata="Q36949" start="6549" end="6563" title="Robert De Niro" label="Robert De Niro"/>
<link wikidata="Q314485" start="6568" end="6580" title="Edward Burns" label="Edward Burns"/>
<link wikidata="Q180395" start="6592" end="6602" title="15 Minutes" label="15 Minutes"/>
<link wikidata="Q160409" start="6621" end="6633" title="Central Park" label="Central Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q3942954" start="6756" end="6770" title="Rusty Cundieff" label="Rusty Cundieff"/>
<link wikidata="Q3980396" start="6799" end="6818" title="Tales from the Hood" label="Tales from the Hood"/>
<link wikidata="Q169889" start="6877" end="6880" title="American Broadcasting Company" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q272952" start="6892" end="6903" title="Bonnie Hunt" label="Bonnie Hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2056549" start="6918" end="6934" title="Life with Bonnie" label="Life with Bonnie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2383324" start="7071" end="7082" title="Baadasssss!" label="Baadasssss!"/>
<link wikidata="Q120105" start="7106" end="7118" title="The Woodsman (2004 film)" label="The Woodsman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138905" start="7313" end="7326" title="Crank Yankers" label="Crank Yankers"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="7361" end="7364" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q16953451" start="7376" end="7402" title="Thank God You&amp;#x27;re Here (U.S. TV series)" label="Thank God You&amp;#x27;re Here"/>
<link wikidata="" start="7430" end="7452" title="Gym Teacher: The Movie" label="Gym Teacher: The Movie"/>
<link wikidata="Q4024504" start="7516" end="7527" title="Uncle Henry (The Oz Books)" label="Uncle Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q169889" start="7535" end="7538" title="American Broadcasting Company" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1953440" start="7566" end="7596" title="The Muppets&amp;#x27; Wizard of Oz" label="The Muppets&amp;#x27; Wizard of Oz"/>
<link wikidata="Q536256" start="7627" end="7635" title="Bones (season 6)" label="Season 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q207803" start="7656" end="7661" title="Bones (TV series)" label="Bones"/>
<link wikidata="Q2619019" start="7801" end="7809" title="Bill Nye" label="Bill Nye"/>
<link wikidata="Q7860123" start="7876" end="7904" title="Tyler Perry Presents Peeples" label="Tyler Perry Presents Peeples"/>
<link wikidata="Q232104" start="7958" end="7974" title="Kerry Washington" label="Kerry Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q926912" start="7979" end="7993" title="Craig Robinson (actor)" label="Craig Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q641746" start="8071" end="8087" title="Hallmark Channel" label="Hallmark Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113035" start="8102" end="8125" title="Christopher Paul Curtis" label="Christopher Paul Curtis"/>
<link wikidata="Q622813" start="8137" end="8150" title="Newbery Medal" label="Newbery Honor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7773757" start="8172" end="8207" title="The Watsons Go to Birmingham – 1963" label="The Watsons Go to Birmingham – 1963"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="8234" end="8237" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q16524263" start="8261" end="8272" title="Bad Teacher (TV series)" label="Bad Teacher"/>
<link wikidata="Q5103629" start="8382" end="8396" title="Chocolate News" label="Chocolate News"/>
<link wikidata="Q19017197" start="8562" end="8573" title="Queen Sugar" label="Queen Sugar"/>
<link wikidata="Q159846" start="8644" end="8662" title="Paramount Pictures" label="Paramount Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q65931068" start="8674" end="8698" title="Clifford the Big Red Dog (film)" label="Clifford the Big Red Dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q235065" start="8721" end="8729" title="Broadway theater" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7278881" start="8756" end="8760" title="Race (Mamet play)" label="Race"/>
<link wikidata="Q269927" start="8792" end="8803" title="David Mamet" label="David Mamet"/>
<link wikidata="Q296928" start="8814" end="8826" title="James Spader" label="James Spader"/>
<link wikidata="Q232104" start="8828" end="8844" title="Kerry Washington" label="Kerry Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q492238" start="8850" end="8864" title="Richard Thomas (actor)" label="Richard Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5403074" start="8886" end="8909" title="Ethel Barrymore Theatre" label="Ethel Barrymore Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q191874" start="8957" end="8961" title="Tony Award" label="Tony"/>
<link wikidata="Q2855727" start="9039" end="9046" title="The Wiz" label="The Wiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q6463246" start="9060" end="9078" title="La Jolla Playhouse" label="La Jolla Playhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q3705901" start="9091" end="9102" title="Des McAnuff" label="Des McAnuff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756332" start="9193" end="9213" title="Simon &amp;amp; Schuster" label="Simon &amp;amp; Schuster"/>
<link wikidata="Q740920" start="9386" end="9400" title="Porgy and Bess" label="Porgy and Bess"/>
<link wikidata="Q7328714" start="9428" end="9451" title="Richard Rodgers Theatre" label="Richard Rodgers Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7051523" start="9483" end="9493" title="Norm Lewis" label="Norm Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q267676" start="9498" end="9512" title="Audra McDonald" label="Audra McDonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="9683" end="9689" title="Grammy" label="Grammy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2542307" start="9801" end="9814" title="Cowardly Lion" label="Cowardly Lion"/>
<link wikidata="Q21664889" start="9818" end="9845" title="The Wiz Live!" label="NBC&amp;#x27;s live performance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2855727" start="9855" end="9862" title="The Wiz" label="The Wiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1099388" start="9939" end="9950" title="Clean House" label="Clean House"/>
<link wikidata="Q33101572" start="10166" end="10179" title="Snap Decision" label="Snap Decision"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243012" start="10224" end="10241" title="Game Show Network" label="Game Show Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q5215619" start="10322" end="10335" title="Dancing with the Stars (American season 8)" label="eighth season"/>
<link wikidata="Q499092" start="10345" end="10367" title="Dancing with the Stars" label="Dancing with the Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q6451730" start="10390" end="10401" title="Kym Johnson" label="Kym Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4659645" start="10605" end="10626" title="A Soldier&amp;#x27;s Play" label="A Soldier&amp;#x27;s Play"/>
<link wikidata="Q365292" start="10707" end="10720" title="Adolph Caesar" label="Adolph Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474410" start="10779" end="10823" title="Tony Award for Best Featured Actor in a Play" label="Tony Award for Best Featured Actor in a Play"/>
<link wikidata="Q111270010" start="10917" end="10945" title="The Color Purple (2023 film)" label="&amp;quot;The Color Purple&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q223299" start="11020" end="11041" title="The Color Purple (1985 film)" label="film of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q112980305" start="11072" end="11083" title="The Patient" label="The Patient"/>
<link wikidata="Q216221" start="11103" end="11115" title="Steve Carell" label="Steve Carell"/>
<link wikidata="Q85314819" start="11146" end="11165" title="96th Academy Awards" label="96th Academy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q123690415" start="11245" end="11284" title="The American Society of Magical Negroes" label="The American Society of Magical Negroes"/>
<link wikidata="Q22278603" start="11705" end="11721" title="Christine Y. Kim" label="Christine Y. Kim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641836" start="11751" end="11783" title="Los Angeles County Museum of Art" label="Los Angeles County Museum of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052562" start="11865" end="11892" title="Cedars-Sinai Medical Center" label="Cedars-Sinai Medical Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q8027" start="12032" end="12054" title="Martin Luther King Jr." label="Martin Luther King Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q7228810" start="12060" end="12076" title="March on Poverty" label="March on Poverty"/>
<link wikidata="Q192341" start="12135" end="12149" title="I Have A Dream" label="I Have A Dream"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12211" end="12240" title="Yamaha YZF-R1#2006" label="Yamaha YZF-R1 Limited Edition"/>
<link wikidata="Q7278881" start="12485" end="12489" title="Race (play)" label="Race"/>
<link wikidata="Q296928" start="12503" end="12515" title="James Spader" label="James Spader"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="998034" wikidata="Q540061" url="?curid=998034" title="Razz (poker)">
<text>Razz is a form of stud poker that is normally played for ace-to-five low (lowball poker). It is one of the oldest forms of poker, and has been played since the start of the 20th century. It emerged around the time people started using the 52-card deck instead of 20 for poker.

The object of Razz is to make the lowest possible five-card hand from the seven cards you are dealt. In Razz, straights and flushes do not count against the player for low, and the ace always plays low. Thus, the best possible Razz hand is 5-4-3-2-A, or 5 high, also known as &quot;the wheel&quot; or &quot;the bicycle&quot;. Deuce-to-seven Razz is also sometimes played (the best possible hand is 2-3-4-5-7). Razz is featured in the mixed game rotation H.O.R.S.E. as the &quot;R&quot; in the game&#x27;s name.

==Play==

Razz is similar to seven-card stud, except the lowest hand wins. Seven cards are dealt to each player, but only the five best cards (generally the five lowest unpaired cards) are used in forming a complete hand.

Razz is usually played with a maximum of eight players, with limit betting, meaning that there is a fixed amount that can be bet per player per round. Each player antes and is dealt two cards face down (the hole cards), and one card face up (the &quot;door card&quot;). The highest door card showing has to &quot;bring it in&quot; – put in the mandatory first bet, which is usually one third to one half of the regular bet. The player responsible for the bring-in can instead opt to &quot;complete the bet&quot;, i.e. make a whole regular bet. If they opt to make a normal bring-in, the remaining players can either call the bet or &quot;complete&quot;, by raising to a regular bet. From that point the betting continues in regular bet increments.

In a case where two people have a door card of the same rank, the bring in is determined by suit. Spades (♠) is the highest possible suit, followed by hearts (♥), diamonds (♦), and clubs (♣). The is the worst possible door card in Razz, and a guaranteed bring-in. Play continues clockwise from the bring in, as in normal Stud poker. After the first round of betting, each player still in the hand receives another card face up. Betting begins with the lowest hand showing. Play continues like this until the fifth card, at which point the betting increments double. The seventh card is dealt face down, and action would begin with the same player who opened betting on the 6th card. In hand-dealt games, after each hand the deal rotates to the left, as with most forms of poker; although the dealer doesn&#x27;t play a strategic role as in blind games.

===Shortage of cards===
It is possible for the dealer to run out of cards before the end of the hand if there are eight players still in the hand when the seventh cards are to be dealt. 

This is because Razz uses a standard 52 card deck, whereas seven cards for eight players would require 56 cards, meaning the hand would be four cards short.

To solve this problem, the dealer deals one final card face up in the center of the table (in lieu of a seventh card to the players): this card is a community card that all eight players may use as the seventh card in their own hands. This is the only situation where a community card is used in Razz.

==World Series of Poker==

Razz has been an event at the World Series of Poker since 1971, when Jimmy Casella won the first ever WSOP Razz event for a grand prize of $10,000. Razz is the most popular form of lowball poker but in the overall popularity stakes sits firmly behind Texas hold &#x27;em and Omaha hold &#x27;em. In 2004, the WSOP Razz event was televised by ESPN; the tournament was won by professional poker player and multiple bracelet winner T. J. Cloutier. After the event Razz grew massively in popularity and most of the major online poker rooms added Razz to their spread of games. Full Tilt Poker was the first online site to offer Razz games but soon after the televised tournament, Poker.com, Absolute Poker and finally in 2006 PokerStars added Razz to their selection of games. Since 1971, Razz has been featured in every World Series of Poker apart from the 1972 series.

==London lowball==
London lowball is a game played almost exclusively in Europe. It is almost identical to Razz in play with the following exceptions: straights and flushes count against a player for low, so the best possible hand is 6-4-3-2-A, and its canonical version is played at pot limit. Some variations of the game are played at no limit, but the name &quot;London lowball&quot; is typically reserved for the pot-limit version.

==Strategy==
Normally the best starting hand in Razz is A-2-3. A general strategy in a full-ring game is to only play unpaired cards none of them higher than 8s.

Players want to avoid making pairs and should evaluate other door cards in relation to the strength of their hand. A player&#x27;s hand is much stronger if there are cards of the same denomination already showing (less chance of pairing up on a draw) and weaker if there are &quot;make&quot; cards (cards that would allow them to make their hand) visible. For instance, Jane holds 3-4-5 and sees four &quot;dead&quot; door cards of 3-4-4-5 behind her. This is a strong hand, as the likelihood of pairing her hole cards is now greatly diminished. Another example: A-6-7 is a much stronger hand when other players are showing Aces, 6s and 7s than when these players are showing the make cards 2s, 3s, 4s and 5s.

Another key strategy in Razz is stealing the antes and bring-in bets. If a player is to the right of the bring-in bettor, and everyone else folds, a raise with a lower exposed card is normally the correct play. For example, if Mary has a 9 showing, and John, the bring-in bettor, has a K showing, Mary should normally raise if everyone else folds.

==See also==
* Lowball (poker)

==Notes==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q540061" start="0" end="4" title="Razz (poker)" label="Razz"/>
<link wikidata="Q953223" start="18" end="28" title="stud poker" label="stud poker"/>
<link wikidata="Q4356784" start="57" end="72" title="ace-to-five low" label="ace-to-five low"/>
<link wikidata="Q80131" start="123" end="128" title="poker" label="poker"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="388" end="396" title="Hand rankings#Straight" label="straight"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="402" end="409" title="Hand rankings#Flush" label="flushes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="604" end="618" title="Lowball (poker)#Deuce-to-seven" label="Deuce-to-seven"/>
<link wikidata="Q1562524" start="732" end="742" title="HORSE (poker)" label="H.O.R.S.E."/>
<link wikidata="Q264099" start="819" end="834" title="seven-card stud" label="seven-card stud"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1074" end="1087" title="Betting in poker#Limits" label="limit betting"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1220" end="1230" title="Glossary of poker terms#hole cards" label="hole cards"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1320" end="1343" title="Betting in poker#Bring-in" label="&amp;quot;bring it in&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q884110" start="2602" end="2607" title="blind (poker)" label="blind"/>
<link wikidata="Q819961" start="3322" end="3343" title="World Series of Poker" label="World Series of Poker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1663237" start="3350" end="3354" title="1971 World Series of Poker" label="1971"/>
<link wikidata="Q1867853" start="3361" end="3374" title="Jimmy Casella" label="Jimmy Casella"/>
<link wikidata="Q214536" start="3543" end="3562" title="Texas hold &amp;#x27;em" label="Texas hold &amp;#x27;em"/>
<link wikidata="Q649282" start="3567" end="3586" title="Omaha hold &amp;#x27;em" label="Omaha hold &amp;#x27;em"/>
<link wikidata="Q1306573" start="3591" end="3595" title="2004 World Series of Poker" label="2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q217776" start="3634" end="3638" title="ESPN" label="ESPN"/>
<link wikidata="Q290112" start="3721" end="3735" title="T. J. Cloutier" label="T. J. Cloutier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050367" start="3809" end="3821" title="online poker" label="online poker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473712" start="3865" end="3880" title="Full Tilt Poker" label="Full Tilt Poker"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3968" end="3977" title="Poker.com" label="Poker.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477568" start="3979" end="3993" title="Absolute Poker" label="Absolute Poker"/>
<link wikidata="Q941317" start="4014" end="4024" title="PokerStars" label="PokerStars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1298881" start="4146" end="4157" title="1972 World Series of Poker" label="1972 series"/>
<link wikidata="Q3053778" start="4444" end="4453" title="pot limit" label="pot limit"/>
<link wikidata="Q4356784" start="5835" end="5850" title="Lowball (poker)" label="Lowball (poker)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="998037" wikidata="Q4379756" url="?curid=998037" title="Stockpile stewardship">
<text>Stockpile stewardship refers to the United States program of reliability testing, viability, and the maintenance of its nuclear weapons without the use of nuclear testing.

Because no new nuclear weapons have been developed by the United States since 1992, even its youngest weapons are at least years old (as of 2025). Aging weapons can fail or act unpredictably in a number of ways: the high explosives that compress their fissile material can chemically degrade, their electronic components can suffer from decay, their radioactive plutonium/uranium cores are potentially unreliable, and the isotopes used by thermonuclear weapons may be chemically unstable as well.

Since the United States has also not tested nuclear weapons since 1992, this leaves the task of its stockpile maintenance resting on the use of simulations (using non-nuclear explosives tests and supercomputers, among other methods) and applications of scientific knowledge about physics and chemistry to the specific problems of weapons aging (the latter method is what is meant when various agencies refer to their work as &quot;science-based&quot;). It also involves the manufacture of additional plutonium &quot;pits&quot; to replace ones of unknown quality, and finding other methods to increase the lifespan of existing warheads and maintain a credible nuclear deterrent.

Most work for stockpile stewardship is undertaken at United States Department of Energy national laboratories, mostly at Los Alamos National Laboratory (LANL), Sandia National Laboratories (SNL), Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory (LLNL), the Nevada Test Site (NTS), and the Department of Energy&#x27;s other productions facilities, which employ around 27,500 personnel and cost billions of dollars per year to operate.

==Stockpile Stewardship and Management Program==
The Science-based Stockpile Stewardship is a program managed and oversee by the United States&#x27;s Department of Energy (DoE) to ensure that the nuclear weapons capabilities of the United States are not eroded as the nuclear weapons age. It costs more than $4 billion annually to test the components of the nuclear weapons and build advanced science facilities, such as the National Ignition Facility (NIF) at the Livermore (California) and the Z-Pulsed Power Facility at the Sandia (New Mexico). Such facilities have been deemed necessary under the program since President Bill Clinton signed the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty (CTBT) in 1996, but the United States Senate never ratified the CTBT. 

Later, President Barack Obama initiated a wide range and a broad effort to modernize the United States nuclear weapons program, which the Congressional Budget Office estimates will require approximately $494 billion to complete.

===Facilities===
The stockpile stewardship program is supported by the following experimental facilities:

*Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory in California
**National Ignition Facility
**Contained Firing Facility
** High Explosive Application Facility, 
*Nevada Test Site in Nevada
**Joint Actinide Shock Physics Experimental Research Facility (JASPER)
**Principal Underground Laboratory for Subcritical Experimentation Facility (PULSE)
**Big Explosives Experimental Facility (BEEF) 
*Los Alamos National Laboratory in New Mexico
**Dual-Axis Radiographic Hydrodynamic Test Facility (DARHT)
**Los Alamos Neutron Science Center (LANSCE) 
**Proton Radiography Facility 
*Sandia National Laboratories in New Mexico 
** Z-Pulsed Power Facility
** Explosives Components Facility
** Ion Beam Laboratory 

The data produced by the experiments carried out in these facilities is used in combination with the Advanced Simulation and Computing Program.

==See also==
*Enduring Stockpile

==References==
==External links==
* 
* The Stockpile Stewardship and Management Program (DOE document, May 1995)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4379756" start="0" end="21" title="Stockpile stewardship" label="Stockpile stewardship"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="36" end="49" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q12802" start="120" end="134" title="nuclear weapon" label="nuclear weapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q210112" start="155" end="170" title="nuclear testing" label="nuclear testing"/>
<link wikidata="Q483674" start="425" end="432" title="fissile" label="fissile"/>
<link wikidata="Q11448" start="523" end="534" title="radioactive" label="radioactive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1102" start="535" end="544" title="plutonium" label="plutonium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1098" start="545" end="552" title="uranium" label="uranium"/>
<link wikidata="Q13082" start="612" end="625" title="thermonuclear" label="thermonuclear"/>
<link wikidata="Q121117" start="867" end="880" title="supercomputer" label="supercomputer"/>
<link wikidata="Q413" start="951" end="958" title="physics" label="physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2329" start="963" end="972" title="chemistry" label="chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7198547" start="1187" end="1191" title="plutonium pit" label="pits"/>
<link wikidata="Q1949683" start="1330" end="1347" title="Nuclear deterrence" label="nuclear deterrent"/>
<link wikidata="Q2624320" start="1403" end="1459" title="United States Department of Energy national laboratories" label="United States Department of Energy national laboratories"/>
<link wikidata="Q379848" start="1471" end="1501" title="Los Alamos National Laboratory" label="Los Alamos National Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1736748" start="1510" end="1538" title="Sandia National Laboratories" label="Sandia National Laboratories"/>
<link wikidata="Q519826" start="1546" end="1584" title="Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory" label="Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344605" start="1597" end="1613" title="Nevada Test Site" label="Nevada Test Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q217810" start="1629" end="1649" title="United States Department of Energy" label="Department of Energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="1904" end="1917" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q217810" start="1925" end="1945" title="United States Department of Energy" label="Department of Energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="2007" end="2020" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q12802" start="2043" end="2058" title="nuclear weapons" label="nuclear weapons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431014" start="2200" end="2226" title="National Ignition Facility" label="National Ignition Facility"/>
<link wikidata="Q519826" start="2240" end="2249" title="Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory" label="Livermore"/>
<link wikidata="Q135771" start="2271" end="2294" title="Z Pulsed Power Facility" label="Z-Pulsed Power Facility"/>
<link wikidata="Q1736748" start="2302" end="2308" title="Sandia National Laboratories" label="Sandia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124" start="2400" end="2412" title="Bill Clinton" label="Bill Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q521306" start="2424" end="2453" title="Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty" label="Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2813247" start="2464" end="2468" title="1996 in the United States" label="1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="2478" end="2498" title="United States Senate" label="United States Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="2543" end="2555" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q519826" start="2864" end="2902" title="Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory" label="Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431014" start="2919" end="2945" title="National Ignition Facility" label="National Ignition Facility"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344605" start="3016" end="3032" title="Nevada Test Site" label="Nevada Test Site"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3045" end="3104" title="Area 27 (Nevada National Security Site)#Joint Actinide Shock Physics Experimental Research" label="Joint Actinide Shock Physics Experimental Research Facility"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344605" start="3116" end="3189" title="Area 1 (Nevada National Security Site)" label="Principal Underground Laboratory for Subcritical Experimentation Facility"/>
<link wikidata="Q379848" start="3246" end="3276" title="Los Alamos National Laboratory" label="Los Alamos National Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522" start="3280" end="3290" title="New Mexico" label="New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q3040445" start="3293" end="3342" title="Dual-Axis Radiographic Hydrodynamic Test Facility" label="Dual-Axis Radiographic Hydrodynamic Test Facility"/>
<link wikidata="Q14706052" start="3353" end="3386" title="Los Alamos Neutron Science Center" label="Los Alamos Neutron Science Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1736748" start="3429" end="3457" title="Sandia National Laboratories" label="Sandia National Laboratories"/>
<link wikidata="Q135771" start="3476" end="3499" title="Z Pulsed Power Facility" label="Z-Pulsed Power Facility"/>
<link wikidata="Q379726" start="3660" end="3701" title="Advanced Simulation and Computing Program" label="Advanced Simulation and Computing Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q3499586" start="3718" end="3736" title="Enduring Stockpile" label="Enduring Stockpile"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="998039" wikidata="Q4207583" url="?curid=998039" title="Tadao Chino">
<text>was a Japanese civil servant who served as the President of the Asian Development Bank from January 16, 1999 to February 1, 2005.

On July 17, 2008, Chino, 74, died in Tokyo, Japan, due to liver failure. He is survived by his wife and two daughters.

==References==
==External links==
* ADB News release re: Tadao Chino announces resignation</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q188822" start="64" end="86" title="Asian Development Bank" label="Asian Development Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1490" start="168" end="173" title="Tokyo" label="Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q970208" start="189" end="202" title="liver failure" label="liver failure"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="998040" wikidata="Q441888" url="?curid=998040" title="Eddie Griffin">
<text>Edward Rubin Griffin (born July 15, 1968) is an American stand-up comedian and actor. He is best known for portraying Eddie Sherman in the sitcom &quot;Malcolm &amp; Eddie&quot;, the title character in the 2002 comedy film &quot;Undercover Brother&quot;, and Tiberius Jefferson &quot;T.J.&quot; Hicks in &quot;Deuce Bigalow: Male Gigolo&quot; (1999) and &quot;Deuce Bigalow: European Gigolo&quot; (2005). He also portrayed Lester Matthews in &quot;John Q.&quot; (2002), Orpheus in &quot;Scary Movie 3&quot; (2003), Pope Sweet Jesus in &quot;Norbit&quot; (2007), and voiced Richard Pryor on &quot;Black Dynamite&quot; (2012–2015). Griffin was ranked at number 62 on Comedy Central&#x27;s list of the 100 Greatest Stand-ups of All Time.

==Early life==
Griffin was born in Kansas City, Missouri, and was raised by his single mother, Doris Thomas, a phone company operator. His family were Jehovah&#x27;s Witnesses. In 1984, at 16 years old, he moved to Compton, California, to live with his cousins. He later became a father and enlisted in the U.S. Navy but was discharged within months for using marijuana. After six months in jail on an assault conviction following a fight, he made ends meet dancing and painting houses.

==Career==

At a comedy club open-mic night in 1989, Griffin hopped onstage on a bet and earned a standing ovation with family stories. He talked his way into stand-up gigs around town and in L.A. One popular bit was his gay version of tough-guy comic Andrew Dice Clay, who later hired Griffin to open for him.

Once he achieved a fair amount of success in standup, Griffin became legendary at The Comedy Store for stopping in to do guest sets on open mic nights and staying up on stage long enough to tire the audience out for the hapless budding comic who had to follow him.

Griffin has appeared in films such as &quot;The Meteor Man&quot; (1993), &quot;The Walking Dead&quot; (1995) “David E. Talbert: A Fool &amp; His Money” (1997), &quot;Deuce Bigalow: Male Gigolo&quot; (1999), &quot;Double Take&quot; (2001), &quot;Undercover Brother&quot; (2002), &quot;John Q&quot; (2002), &quot;Scary Movie 3&quot; (2003), &quot;Deuce Bigalow: European Gigolo&quot; (2005), &quot;Norbit&quot; (2007), and &quot;Urban Justice&quot; (2007).

Griffin has appeared on television shows such as &quot;Malcolm &amp; Eddie&quot; (1996–2000) and &quot;Chappelle&#x27;s Show&quot; in the skit &quot;World Series of Dice&quot; as Grits n&#x27; Gravy. Griffin performed on two tracks from Dr. Dre&#x27;s 1999 album, &quot;2001&quot;, and the intro track from The D.O.C.&#x27;s 1996 album &quot;Helter Skelter&quot;. He has also appeared on commercials for Miller Beer&#x27;s Man Laws. 

In 2011, Comedy Central released Griffin&#x27;s stand-up comedy special &quot;You Can Tell &#x27;Em I Said It&quot; on DVD. In December 2019, his stand-up comedy special, &quot;E-Niggma&quot;, was released on Showtime.

==Personal life==
Griffin and his mother got into an argument at his 20th birthday party when she accused him of stealing jewelry from her, which Griffin denied doing. Afterward, Griffin did not see his mother for four years until he moved back to Los Angeles, California, in March 1992, to be closer with his family when his mother was injured in a car accident.

Griffin has been married four times. He married his first wife, Carla in 1984 when he was 16 years old. They divorced in 1997. He married his second wife, Rochelle, in 2002 and divorced in 2009. On September 8, 2011, he married his third wife, Nia Rivers. However, they filed for divorce after one month of marriage, citing irreconcilable differences. They were officially divorced six months later in 2012. He married his fourth wife, Ko Lee Griffin, on July 27, 2017, in Las Vegas, Nevada.

In March 2007, Griffin participated in a charity race at Irwindale Speedway to promote the film &quot;Redline&quot;, using a Ferrari Enzo owned by Daniel Sadek. During a practice run, Griffin accidentally hit the gas pedal instead of the brake and lost control of the Enzo, crashing hard into a concrete barrier. He walked away unscratched, but the $1.5 million supercar was badly damaged. Griffin later criticized reporters who suggested the crash was a publicity stunt.

During the sexual assault allegations on Bill Cosby, Griffin suggested that Cosby was the victim of a conspiracy to destroy his image and claimed, without specification, that several other prominent African-American men had been victims of similar conspiracies. Griffin has also been called out by the Sikh community for referring to an elderly Sikh man as &quot;Osama Bin Laden&quot; in the aftermath of 9/11, not understanding the difference between Sikhs and Muslims and also thinking that stereotyping Muslim Americans for the sake of &quot;comedy&quot; was appropriate given all the hate crimes both the Muslim and Sikh communities endured after 9/11.

In October 2024, Griffin stated that he would likely vote for Donald Trump in the 2024 United States presidential election. He said, referring to Kamala Harris, &quot;Everybody I talk to don&#x27;t like you. Ain&#x27;t nobody gonna vote for you.&quot;

==Filmography==

===Film===
===Television===
===Music video appearances===

===Comedy specials===

===Documentary ===
==Discography==

===Live albums===
===Soundtrack albums===
===Album appearances===
*1996 &quot;Intro&quot; (from The D.O.C. album &quot;Helter Skelter&quot;)
*1998 &quot;DP Gangsta&quot; (from Snoop Dogg &amp; C-Murder album &quot;Da Game Is to Be Sold, Not to Be Told&quot;)
*1999 &quot;Bar One&quot; (with Traci Nelson and Ms. Roq) (from Dr. Dre album &quot;2001&quot;)
*1999 &quot;Ed-ucation&quot; (from Dr. Dre album &quot;2001&quot;)
*2002 &quot;Bitch Ass Niggaz&quot; (from Xzibit album &quot;Man vs. Machine&quot;)
*2003 &quot;I Thought U Knew&quot; (with Crooked I, Eastwood &amp; The Dramatics album &quot;Dysfunktional Family&quot;) (Various artists)
*2003 &quot;Dys-Funk-Tional&quot; (from Spider Loc &amp; Eddie Griffin album &quot;Dysfunktional Family&quot;) (Various artists)
*2008 &quot;Take A Ride Skit&quot; &amp; &quot;Feed The Lions Skit&quot; (from T-Pain album &quot;Thr33 Ringz&quot;)

==Awards==

==References==
==External links==
*
*Eddie Griffin Going For Broke Official Site @ VH1.com</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q441888" start="0" end="20" title="Eddie Griffin" label="Edward Rubin Griffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6742150" start="152" end="171" title="Malcolm &amp;amp; Eddie" label="Malcolm &amp;amp; Eddie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2093198" start="229" end="247" title="Undercover Brother" label="Undercover Brother"/>
<link wikidata="" start="310" end="336" title="Deuce Bigalow: Male Gigolo" label="Deuce Bigalow: Male Gigolo"/>
<link wikidata="" start="360" end="390" title="Deuce Bigalow: European Gigolo" label="Deuce Bigalow: European Gigolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141457" start="448" end="455" title="John Q." label="John Q."/>
<link wikidata="Q635937" start="487" end="500" title="Scary Movie 3" label="Scary Movie 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129534" start="541" end="547" title="Norbit" label="Norbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q294912" start="573" end="586" title="Richard Pryor" label="Richard Pryor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4920709" start="596" end="610" title="Black Dynamite (TV series)" label="Black Dynamite"/>
<link wikidata="Q131439" start="665" end="679" title="Comedy Central" label="Comedy Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q41819" start="771" end="792" title="Kansas City, Missouri" label="Kansas City, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q35269" start="887" end="911" title="Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witnesses" label="Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witnesses"/>
<link wikidata="Q487119" start="951" end="970" title="Compton, California" label="Compton, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="1043" end="1052" title="U.S. Navy" label="U.S. Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q504455" start="1476" end="1492" title="Andrew Dice Clay" label="Andrew Dice Clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q3520350" start="1618" end="1634" title="The Comedy Store" label="The Comedy Store"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540271" start="1846" end="1860" title="The Meteor Man (film)" label="The Meteor Man"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1968" end="1994" title="Deuce Bigalow: Male Gigolo" label="Deuce Bigalow: Male Gigolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q661809" start="2015" end="2026" title="Double Take (2001 film)" label="Double Take"/>
<link wikidata="Q2093198" start="2047" end="2065" title="Undercover Brother" label="Undercover Brother"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141457" start="2086" end="2092" title="John Q" label="John Q"/>
<link wikidata="Q635937" start="2113" end="2126" title="Scary Movie 3" label="Scary Movie 3"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2147" end="2177" title="Deuce Bigalow: European Gigolo" label="Deuce Bigalow: European Gigolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129534" start="2198" end="2204" title="Norbit" label="Norbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1812060" start="2229" end="2242" title="Urban Justice" label="Urban Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q6742150" start="2313" end="2332" title="Malcolm &amp;amp; Eddie" label="Malcolm &amp;amp; Eddie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062804" start="2361" end="2382" title="Chappelle&amp;#x27;s Show" label="Chappelle&amp;#x27;s Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q6078" start="2495" end="2502" title="Dr. Dre" label="Dr. Dre"/>
<link wikidata="Q182280" start="2528" end="2532" title="2001 (Dr. Dre album)" label="2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q502998" start="2565" end="2575" title="The D.O.C." label="The D.O.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q1945223" start="2600" end="2614" title="Helter Skelter (The D.O.C. album)" label="Helter Skelter"/>
<link wikidata="Q658637" start="2662" end="2673" title="Miller Beer" label="Miller Beer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6746210" start="2681" end="2689" title="Man Laws" label="Man Laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q8057117" start="2771" end="2802" title="You Can Tell &amp;#x27;Em I Said It" label="You Can Tell &amp;#x27;Em I Said It"/>
<link wikidata="Q23589" start="2902" end="2910" title="Showtime (TV network)" label="Showtime"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="3161" end="3184" title="Los Angeles, California" label="Los Angeles, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q6073552" start="3602" end="3628" title="irreconcilable differences" label="irreconcilable differences"/>
<link wikidata="Q2447214" start="3828" end="3846" title="Irwindale Speedway" label="Irwindale Speedway"/>
<link wikidata="Q269880" start="3896" end="3908" title="Ferrari Enzo" label="Ferrari Enzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q20917517" start="4255" end="4281" title="Bill Cosby sexual assault cases" label="sexual assault allegations"/>
<link wikidata="Q213512" start="4285" end="4295" title="Bill Cosby" label="Bill Cosby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317" start="4607" end="4622" title="Osama bin Laden" label="Osama Bin Laden"/>
<link wikidata="Q4690764" start="4636" end="4645" title="Aftermath of the September 11 attacks" label="aftermath"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="4649" end="4653" title="September 11 attacks" label="9/11"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="4964" end="4976" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q101110072" start="4984" end="5024" title="2024 United States presidential election" label="2024 United States presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q10853588" start="5048" end="5061" title="Kamala Harris" label="Kamala Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q502998" start="5386" end="5396" title="The D.O.C." label="The D.O.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q1945223" start="5409" end="5423" title="Helter Skelter (The D.O.C. album)" label="Helter Skelter"/>
<link wikidata="Q6096" start="5466" end="5476" title="Snoop Dogg" label="Snoop Dogg"/>
<link wikidata="Q913123" start="5483" end="5491" title="C-Murder" label="C-Murder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156403" start="5504" end="5541" title="Da Game Is to Be Sold, Not to Be Told" label="Da Game Is to Be Sold, Not to Be Told"/>
<link wikidata="Q6078" start="5613" end="5620" title="Dr. Dre" label="Dr. Dre"/>
<link wikidata="Q182280" start="5633" end="5637" title="2001 (Dr. Dre album)" label="2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q6078" start="5680" end="5687" title="Dr. Dre" label="Dr. Dre"/>
<link wikidata="Q189078" start="5753" end="5759" title="Xzibit" label="Xzibit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1855115" start="5772" end="5787" title="Man vs. Machine (album)" label="Man vs. Machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q253695" start="5836" end="5845" title="Crooked I" label="Crooked I"/>
<link wikidata="Q4051054" start="5862" end="5875" title="The Dramatics" label="The Dramatics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5319411" start="5888" end="5908" title="Dysfunktional Family" label="Dysfunktional Family"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359039" start="5974" end="5984" title="Spider Loc" label="Spider Loc"/>
<link wikidata="Q5319411" start="6017" end="6037" title="Dysfunktional Family" label="Dysfunktional Family"/>
<link wikidata="Q221155" start="6142" end="6148" title="T-Pain" label="T-Pain"/>
<link wikidata="Q654987" start="6161" end="6172" title="Thr33 Ringz" label="Thr33 Ringz"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="998049" wikidata="Q5419829" url="?curid=998049" title="Executive Council of Yukon">
<text>The Executive Council of Yukon (), more commonly known as the Cabinet of Yukon (), is the cabinet of the Canadian territory of Yukon. It is chosen by the Premier from the elected members of the governing party in the Yukon Legislative Assembly.

The current Executive Council is made up of members of the Yukon Liberal Party (Current as of January 2023).

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5419829" start="4" end="30" title="Executive Council of Yukon" label="Executive Council of Yukon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419829" start="62" end="78" title="Executive Council of Yukon" label="Cabinet of Yukon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2993928" start="90" end="97" title="Executive Council (Canada)" label="cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2009" start="114" end="132" title="Yukon" label="territory of Yukon"/>
<link wikidata="Q959664" start="154" end="161" title="Premier" label="Premier"/>
<link wikidata="Q908022" start="217" end="243" title="Yukon Legislative Assembly" label="Yukon Legislative Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q3366503" start="305" end="324" title="Yukon Liberal Party" label="Yukon Liberal Party"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="998054" wikidata="Q5419831" url="?curid=998054" title="Executive Council of the Northwest Territories">
<text>The [[Executive Council (Commonwealth countries)|Executive Council]] of the [[Northwest Territories]] or cabinet consists of six Ministers and a Premier elected by the 19 members of the Legislative Assembly.

Ministers at present are as follows (current ):

==References==
==External links==
* Official site</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5419831" start="4" end="101" title="Executive Council of the Northwest Territories" label="[[Executive Council (Commonwealth countries)|Executive Council]] of the [[Northwest Territories]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q640506" start="105" end="112" title="Cabinet (government)" label="cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2867078" start="186" end="206" title="Legislative Assembly of the Northwest Territories" label="Legislative Assembly"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="998058" wikidata="Q968676" url="?curid=998058" title="Battle of Dan-no-ura">
<text>The  was a major sea battle of the Genpei War, occurring at Dan-no-ura, in the Shimonoseki Strait off the southern tip of Honshū. On April 25, 1185 (or March 24, 1185 by the official page of Shimonoseki City), the fleet of the Minamoto clan (Genji), led by general Minamoto no Yoshitsune, defeated the fleet of the Taira clan (Heike). The morning rip tide was an advantage for the Taira, but turned to their disadvantage in the afternoon. The young Emperor Antoku was one of those who died among the Taira nobles.

== History ==
At the time of the battle, the war was not going well for the Taira. They still had the Emperor on their side as well as the Imperial Regalia which symbolized the Emperor&#x27;s authority, but had lost much of their territory since former campaigns. Still, the coming battle would be fought in their home territory with the trained southerners fighting in their home waters. The Taira were weaker (despite having more ships), but they had the advantage over the Minamoto in understanding the tides of that particular area as well as naval combat tactics in general. Another issue for the Taira was that the son of one of their generals, Taguchi Shigeyoshi, had been captured by the Minamoto and was being held hostage. While some of the other Taira generals encouraged their commander to either dismiss or execute Shigeyoshi as a liability, the commander believed in his continued loyalty to the cause after conversing with him. The Taira also brought the young emperor (who was around six years old at the time) and some of his retainers, dressed in their full court garb. Directly having the emperor with the army would inspire the troops and show the legitimacy of their cause, in theory.

The Taira split their fleet into three squadrons, while the Minamoto arrived en masse, their ships abreast, and archers ready. The beginning of the battle consisted mainly of a long-range archery exchange, before the Taira took the initiative, using the tides to help them try to surround the enemy ships. They engaged the Minamoto, and the archery from a distance eventually gave way to hand-to-hand combat with swords and daggers after the crews of the ships boarded each other. However, the tide changed, and the advantage was given back to the Minamoto.

One of the crucial factors that allowed the Minamoto to win the battle was that Taguchi Shigeyoshi did indeed defect. His squadron attacked the Taira from the rear. He also revealed to the Minamoto which ship Emperor Antoku was on. Their archers turned their attention to the helmsmen and rowers of the Emperor&#x27;s ship, as well as the rest of their enemy&#x27;s fleet, sending their ships out of control. Many of the Taira saw the battle turn against them and committed suicide. Among those who perished this way were Antoku and his maternal grandmother, Nun of the Second Rank, Taira no Tokiko the widow of Taira no Kiyomori. The Taira attempted to toss the imperial regalia into the sea to deny them to the Minamoto but only managed to get the Kusanagi sword and Yasakani jewel into the water before the ship holding the regalia was captured. Apocryphally, the woman who attempted to toss the mirror looked into it and died instantly from its spiritual power. The jewel was recovered by divers; many presume the sword to have been lost at this time. A new sword was found eventually. A variety of explanations exist for the sword used afterward: that it was a replica, that it was recovered from the sea anyway, that it was supernaturally delivered or remade, and others; the new sword was enshrined at Atsuta Shrine.

==Aftermath==
This decisive defeat of the Taira forces led to the end of the Taira bid for control of Japan. Minamoto no Yoritomo, the elder half-brother of Minamoto Yoshitsune, became the first &quot;shōgun&quot;, establishing his military government (&quot;bakufu&quot;) in Kamakura. In this battle the Taira lost Taira Tomomori, Taira Noritsune, Taira Norimori, Taira Tsunemori, Taira Sukemori, Taira Arimori and Taira Yukimori, who were killed.

== In culture ==
According to legend, the heike crabs found in the Straits of Shimonoseki are considered by the Japanese to hold the spirits of the Taira warriors.

There is also a famous legend of Yoshitsune&#x27;s &quot;eight boat jump,&quot; a feat described as Yoshitsune leaping across eight consecutive boats to escape Noritsune&#x27;s attempt at dragging him into the sea with him. However, it&#x27;s more likely he only leaped one boat and later descriptions simply exaggerated this.

The battle is featured in Masaki Kobayashi&#x27;s 1964 film Kwaidan, in the films third act, titled &quot;Hoichi the Earless&quot;. 

The battle is the subject of an opera by the Thai-American composer S. P. Somtow. Called &quot;Dan no Ura&quot;, the opera premiered in Bangkok in 2014.

The 2021 animated film Inu-Oh also references the battle in its exposition.

Episodes 10 and 11 of the 2021 Naoko Yamada animated series &quot;The Heike Story&quot; portray this battle.

==See also==
*Shimonoseki
*&quot;The Tale of the Heike&quot;

==References==

* Stephen Turnbull: &quot;Samurai: The World of the Warrior&quot;. Osprey Publishing, 2006, pp. 34–38 ()
* Excerpt from the City of Shimonoseki homepage http://www.city.shimonoseki.yamaguchi.jp/seisaku/kokusai/y_english/history/ cites the Battle of Dan No Ura as occurring on March 24, 1185
* Gaskin, Carol, and Vince Hawkins (1990). &quot;The Ways of the Samurai&quot;. New York: Barnes &amp; Noble Books.
* Dannoura: Historic Japanese Battleground that Marked the Rise of Samurai Supremacy https://www.nippon.com/en/guide-to-japan/gu900210/

== Further reading ==
* Stephen Turnbull: &quot;Fighting Ships of the Far East (2): Japan and Korea AD 612–1639&quot;. Osprey Publishing 2012, pp. 41–42 ()

== External links ==

* Shimonoseki City Information</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q968676" start="4" end="4" title="Battle of Dan-no-ura" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q737542" start="35" end="45" title="Genpei War" label="Genpei War"/>
<link wikidata="Q203308" start="60" end="70" title="Shimonoseki, Yamaguchi" label="Dan-no-ura"/>
<link wikidata="Q494894" start="79" end="97" title="Shimonoseki Strait" label="Shimonoseki Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q13989" start="122" end="128" title="Honshū" label="Honshū"/>
<link wikidata="Q599881" start="227" end="240" title="Minamoto clan" label="Minamoto clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q310445" start="265" end="287" title="Minamoto no Yoshitsune" label="Minamoto no Yoshitsune"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079102" start="315" end="325" title="Taira clan" label="Taira clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q18390471" start="347" end="355" title="rip tide" label="rip tide"/>
<link wikidata="Q316651" start="449" end="463" title="Emperor Antoku" label="Emperor Antoku"/>
<link wikidata="Q327465" start="654" end="670" title="Imperial Regalia of Japan" label="Imperial Regalia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1166" end="1184" title="Taguchi Shigeyoshi" label="Taguchi Shigeyoshi"/>
<link wikidata="Q602507" start="2110" end="2129" title="hand-to-hand combat" label="hand-to-hand combat"/>
<link wikidata="Q648919" start="2183" end="2190" title="Boarding (attack)" label="boarded"/>
<link wikidata="Q3379244" start="2864" end="2879" title="Taira no Tokiko" label="Taira no Tokiko"/>
<link wikidata="Q281833" start="2893" end="2910" title="Taira no Kiyomori" label="Taira no Kiyomori"/>
<link wikidata="Q327465" start="2944" end="2960" title="Imperial Regalia of Japan" label="imperial regalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q14944" start="3031" end="3045" title="Kusanagi" label="Kusanagi sword"/>
<link wikidata="Q334232" start="3050" end="3064" title="Yasakani no Magatama" label="Yasakani jewel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2610017" start="3180" end="3186" title="Yata no Kagami" label="mirror"/>
<link wikidata="Q482065" start="3590" end="3603" title="Atsuta Shrine" label="Atsuta Shrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q242800" start="3715" end="3735" title="Minamoto no Yoritomo" label="Minamoto no Yoritomo"/>
<link wikidata="Q310445" start="3763" end="3782" title="Minamoto Yoshitsune" label="Minamoto Yoshitsune"/>
<link wikidata="Q131767" start="3807" end="3813" title="shōgun" label="shōgun"/>
<link wikidata="Q736839" start="3859" end="3877" title="Kamakura shogunate" label="&amp;quot;bakufu&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q200267" start="3882" end="3890" title="Kamakura, Kanagawa" label="Kamakura"/>
<link wikidata="Q736706" start="3922" end="3936" title="Taira no Tomomori" label="Taira Tomomori"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189315" start="3938" end="3953" title="Taira no Noritsune" label="Taira Noritsune"/>
<link wikidata="Q11060997" start="3955" end="3969" title="Taira no Norimori" label="Taira Norimori"/>
<link wikidata="Q11061237" start="3971" end="3986" title="Taira no Tsunemori" label="Taira Tsunemori"/>
<link wikidata="Q1594629" start="4098" end="4109" title="heikegani" label="heike crabs"/>
<link wikidata="Q494894" start="4123" end="4145" title="Kanmon Straits" label="Straits of Shimonoseki"/>
<link wikidata="Q445807" start="4575" end="4598" title="Masaki Kobayashi" label="Masaki Kobayashi&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q133488" start="4609" end="4616" title="Kwaidan (film)" label="Kwaidan"/>
<link wikidata="Q938710" start="4751" end="4763" title="S. P. Somtow" label="S. P. Somtow"/>
<link wikidata="Q106365617" start="4860" end="4866" title="Inu-Oh" label="Inu-Oh"/>
<link wikidata="Q550018" start="4945" end="4957" title="Naoko Yamada" label="Naoko Yamada"/>
<link wikidata="Q108393516" start="4980" end="4995" title="The Heike Story (anime)" label="The Heike Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q203308" start="5038" end="5049" title="Shimonoseki" label="Shimonoseki"/>
<link wikidata="Q830740" start="5057" end="5078" title="The Tale of the Heike" label="The Tale of the Heike"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="998063" wikidata="Q1053159" url="?curid=998063" title="Celso Amorim">
<text>Celso Luiz Nunes Amorim (born 3 June 1942) is a Brazilian diplomat who served as Minister of Foreign Affairs from 20 July 1993 to 31 December 1994 under President Itamar Franco and again from 1 January 2003 to 31 December 2010 under President Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva. He was Minister of Defence from 5 August 2011 to 31 December 2014 under President Dilma Rousseff.

Before his appointment as Minister of Foreign Affairs by Lula, Amorim served as Brazil&#x27;s ambassador to the United Kingdom. On 7 October 2009, Amorim was named the &quot;world&#x27;s best foreign minister&quot; by &quot;Foreign Policy&quot; magazine blogger David Rothkopf. On 5 January 2023, Amorim was appointed as Chief Advisor for Foreign Policy by Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva.

==Early life and academic career==
Amorim was born in Santos, São Paulo, on June 3, 1942. 

He graduated from the Rio Branco Institute, a graduate school of international relations run by the Ministry of External Relations, in 1965, and obtained a post-graduate degree in International Relations from the Diplomatic Academy of Vienna in 1967.

Amorim was a professor of Portuguese language at the Rio Branco Institute, as well as professor of political science and international relations at the University of Brasília. He is a permanent member of the Foreign Affairs Department of the University of São Paulo Institute of Advanced Studies.

==Governmental career==
Amorim has a long history of government service, beginning in 1987 when he was appointed Secretary for International Affairs for the Ministry of Science and Technology. He served in that position until 1989, when he was selected to be the Director-General for Cultural Affairs in the Ministry of External Relations. Amorim was shifted again in 1990, moving to a new post as Director-General for Economic Affairs. In 1993, he was promoted to the position of Secretary General of the Brazilian foreign-affairs agency.

While serving in the Ministry of External Relations, Amorim spent large amounts of time working as an ambassador to the United Nations. Most notably, he represented Brazil on the Kosovo–Yugoslavia sanctions committee in 1998, and the Security Council panel on Iraq in 1999. Amorim was named as Brazil&#x27;s permanent ambassador to the United Nations and the WTO later that year, and served for two years before becoming ambassador to the United Kingdom in 2001.

He became Foreign Affairs Minister between January 2003 and December 2010. On 22 July 2005, Amorim was the subject that the 27-year old Brazilian electrician Jean Charles de Menezes was shot dead by police onboard a tube in Stockwell tube station, a day after the failed 21 July 2005 London bombings.

===WTO controversy===
On July 19, 2008, Amorim stirred up controversy by comparing the descriptions used by wealthier countries to characterize the agricultural concessions they were offering during the Doha Round of WTO talks to the work of Nazi propagandist Joseph Goebbels. This brought a swift condemnation from the U.S. State Department.

==Later career==
Celso serves on the Commission on Global Security, Justice &amp; Governance, chaired by Madeleine Albright and Ibrahim Gambari. In November 2016, he was appointed by United Nations Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon to the High-Level Panel on Access to Medicines, co-chaired by Ruth Dreifuss, former President of Switzerland, and Festus Mogae, former President of Botswana. 

In addition, Celso holds a number of honorary positions, including the following:
* Unitaid, Chair of the Executive Board (since 2017)
* Center for International Relations and Sustainable Development (CIRSD), Member of the Board of Advisors

In 2019, Amorim joined the inaugural meeting of the Puebla Group in Buenos Aires, a conference of left-leaning political leaders.

==Personal life==
Amorim is married to Ana Maria Amorim and has four children: Vicente, Anita, João, and Pedro.

==References==




|-</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1053159" start="0" end="23" title="Celso Amorim" label="Celso Luiz Nunes Amorim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193807" start="81" end="108" title="Ministry of Foreign Affairs (Brazil)" label="Minister of Foreign Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5176750" start="153" end="162" title="President of Brazil" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q485946" start="163" end="176" title="Itamar Franco" label="Itamar Franco"/>
<link wikidata="Q37181" start="243" end="268" title="Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva" label="Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153972" start="277" end="296" title="Ministry of Defence (Brazil)" label="Minister of Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q40722" start="352" end="366" title="Dilma Rousseff" label="Dilma Rousseff"/>
<link wikidata="Q121998" start="463" end="473" title="ambassador" label="ambassador"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="481" end="495" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063573" start="593" end="607" title="Foreign Policy" label="Foreign Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q37181" start="726" end="751" title="Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva" label="Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva"/>
<link wikidata="Q81882" start="808" end="814" title="Santos (São Paulo)" label="Santos"/>
<link wikidata="Q175" start="816" end="825" title="Sao Paulo (state)" label="São Paulo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135605" start="868" end="888" title="Rio Branco Institute" label="Rio Branco Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q166542" start="911" end="934" title="international relations" label="international relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q876973" start="1059" end="1087" title="Diplomatic Academy of Vienna" label="Diplomatic Academy of Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146" start="1124" end="1143" title="Portuguese language" label="Portuguese language"/>
<link wikidata="Q36442" start="1197" end="1214" title="political science" label="political science"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330634" start="1250" end="1272" title="University of Brasília" label="University of Brasília"/>
<link wikidata="Q835960" start="1340" end="1363" title="University of São Paulo" label="University of São Paulo"/>
<link wikidata="Q121998" start="2039" end="2049" title="ambassador" label="ambassador"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="2057" end="2071" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246" start="2116" end="2122" title="Kosovo" label="Kosovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q36704" start="2123" end="2133" title="Yugoslavia" label="Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2061202" start="2134" end="2143" title="International sanctions" label="sanctions"/>
<link wikidata="Q865588" start="2144" end="2153" title="committee" label="committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q37470" start="2171" end="2187" title="United Nations Security Council" label="Security Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="2197" end="2201" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825" start="2296" end="2299" title="World Trade Organization" label="WTO"/>
<link wikidata="Q559142" start="2559" end="2582" title="Jean Charles de Menezes" label="Jean Charles de Menezes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1549562" start="2625" end="2647" title="Stockwell tube station" label="Stockwell tube station"/>
<link wikidata="Q2870041" start="2672" end="2700" title="21 July 2005 London bombings" label="21 July 2005 London bombings"/>
<link wikidata="Q844845" start="2906" end="2916" title="Doha Development Round" label="Doha Round"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="2945" end="2949" title="Nazi" label="Nazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q41749" start="2963" end="2978" title="Joseph Goebbels" label="Joseph Goebbels"/>
<link wikidata="Q789915" start="3023" end="3044" title="United States Department of State" label="U.S. State Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q174438" start="3152" end="3170" title="Madeleine Albright" label="Madeleine Albright"/>
<link wikidata="Q953167" start="3175" end="3190" title="Ibrahim Gambari" label="Ibrahim Gambari"/>
<link wikidata="Q81066" start="3230" end="3262" title="United Nations Secretary-General" label="United Nations Secretary-General"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253" start="3263" end="3274" title="Ban Ki-moon" label="Ban Ki-moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q123902" start="3337" end="3350" title="Ruth Dreifuss" label="Ruth Dreifuss"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="3372" end="3383" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q193238" start="3389" end="3401" title="Festus Mogae" label="Festus Mogae"/>
<link wikidata="Q963" start="3423" end="3431" title="Botswana" label="Botswana"/>
<link wikidata="Q671399" start="3519" end="3526" title="Unitaid" label="Unitaid"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="998066" wikidata="Q376775" url="?curid=998066" title="Edmund G. Ross">
<text>Edmund Gibson Ross (December 7, 1826May 8, 1907) was an American politician who represented Kansas after the American Civil War and was later governor of the New Mexico Territory. His vote against convicting President Andrew Johnson of &quot;high crimes and misdemeanors&quot; allowed Johnson to stay in office by the margin of one vote. As the seventh of seven Republican U.S. Senators to break with his party, he proved to be the person whose decision would result in conviction or acquittal. When he chose the latter, the vote of 35–19 in favor of Johnson&#x27;s conviction failed to reach the required two-thirds vote. Ross lost his bid for re-election two years later.

==Early life==
Ross was born in Ashland, Ohio, on December 7, 1826, the third of fourteen children born to Sylvester Ross Sr. and Cynthia (Rice) Ross. He was educated locally and at age 11 was apprenticed as a printer at the Huron, Ohio, &quot;Commercial Advertiser&quot;. In 1841 he moved to Sandusky, Ohio, to join the staff of the &quot;Sandusky Mirror&quot;, which was owned by his brother Sylvester. For several years in the late 1840s and early 1850s, Ross was employed as a journeyman printer and typesetter, traveling throughout Ohio and to several nearby states to accept temporary work whenever it was available. A Democrat who opposed slavery, in 1852, he moved to Milwaukee, Wisconsin, where he worked on first the &quot;Milwaukee Free Democrat&quot; and then the &quot;Milwaukee Daily Sentinel&quot;. In 1854, Ross was one of several Milwaukee residents who came to the aid of Joshua Glover, an escaped slave who had been recaptured and was being held at the local jail. The group stormed the jail, freed Glover, and enabled his escape to Canada. At the founding of the Republican Party, Ross&#x27; anti-slavery leanings caused him to join the new organization.

==Early career==
An opponent of slavery, during the 1850s dispute over whether to admit Kansas to the union as a free state or a slave state, Ross moved to Topeka, Kansas, as did several of his family members, who were also opponents of slavery. The dispute sometimes resulted in violence, and Ross joined the antislavery side&#x27;s militia. He became a leader of the free state movement as publisher of the &quot;Topeka Tribune&quot; from 1856 to 1858 and founder of the &quot;Kansas State Record&quot; in 1859. He joined the board of directors of the Atchison, Topeka &amp; Santa Fe Railway and was one of its chief promoters. In 1859, Ross was elected a delegate to the Kansas constitutional convention of 1859 to 1861.

==Military service==
A supporter of the Union during the Civil War, Ross joined the Union Army as a private in 1862. He was commissioned as a captain in command of Company E, 11th Kansas Volunteer Cavalry Regiment. The regiment took part in several battles in the southwestern and western United States, including Second Battle of Lexington, Battle of Little Blue River, Second Battle of Independence, Battle of Byram&#x27;s Ford, Battle of Westport, Battle of Mine Creek, and Battle of Platte Bridge Station/Battle of Red Buttes. He was promoted to major during the war and was mustered out after the surrender of the Confederacy in 1865.

==United States Senator==
After the war, Ross returned to Kansas to continue his newspaper career and was editor of the &quot;Kansas Tribune&quot; from 1865 to 1866. In 1866, the governor of Kansas appointed Ross to the U.S. Senate as a Republican, filling the vacancy caused by the death of James H. Lane. The state legislature subsequently elected him to complete Lane&#x27;s term, and he served from July 19, 1866, to March 3, 1871. He was an unsuccessful candidate for reelection to the term which began on March 4, 1871. During his Senate service, Ross served as chairman of the Committee on Enrolled Bills (Fortieth Congress) and the Committee on Engrossed Bills (Forty-first Congress).

===Andrew Johnson impeachment===
Ross is best known for casting the decisive vote which acquitted Andrew Johnson during his 1868 presidential impeachment trial. Some people have claimed that Ross voted against the conviction due to concerns about his colleague Samuel C. Pomeroy receiving patronage from Benjamin Wade, and as a means to receive patronage favors from Johnson. Others claim Ross cast his vote because he genuinely believed that Johnson had the right to replace Edwin M. Stanton, since he had been appointed during the Lincoln Administration. Still others give voice to the opinion that, though the Kansas Senator did believe Johnson guilty of breaking the Tenure of Office Act, he did not believe that offense worthy of impeachment. Kansas newspapers thought clearly that Ross voted against his radical leanings in supporting Johnson because of the influence of his old Civil War colonel, Thomas Ewing Jr., an ardent Johnson supporter at the time. Later in life, Ewing wrote Ross that he felt Ross was &quot;preeminent for courage&quot; among men—not only for his physical courage in battle but also for opposing Johnson&#x27;s conviction. &quot;In making [that] decision, you knew perfectly well that it could consign you to private life and the vehement denunciation of almost all your party friends.&quot; However, there is significant evidence that suggests Ross was bribed, although a subsequent House of Representatives investigation found no proof.

Edmund G. Ross is one of eight U.S. Senators featured in &quot;Profiles in Courage&quot;, the 1956 Pulitzer Prize-winning history co-written by then-Senator John F. Kennedy in commemoration of past acts of political courage in Congress.

==Later career==
Upon retirement from the Senate, Ross went back into the newspaper business briefly, launching a publication in Coffeyville, Kansas. He left the Republican Party after 1872 and was affiliated with the Democrats. In 1880, he ran unsuccessfully for governor of Kansas. A trip to New Mexico in 1882 had a positive effect on his health and he moved there permanently. He studied law and passed the bar, afterwards practicing in Albuquerque and beginning work on a history of the Johnson impeachment.

From 1885 to 1889, Ross served as governor of New Mexico Territory, appointed by President Grover Cleveland. He served as secretary of the New Mexico Bureau of Immigration from 1894 to 1896. In 1896, he published his book &quot;History of the Impeachment of Andrew Johnson&quot;. Time caused Kansans to look on Ross more favorably with respect to his role in the Johnson impeachment. In 1907, General Hugh Cameron of Lawrence visited Ross in New Mexico and brought testimonials from many citizens of Kansas.

==Death==
Ross died in Albuquerque, New Mexico, on May 8, 1907. He was interred at Fairview Memorial Park Cemetery in Albuquerque.

==Family==
In 1848, Ross married Fannie Lathrop (1827–1899) in Sandusky, Ohio. Their children included Lillian, Arthur, Pitt, Flynt, Edmundie, Kay and Fannie.

==Footnotes==
==Further reading==
* Bumgardner, Edward (1949). &quot;The Life of Edmund G. Ross&quot;. The Fielding-Turner Press, Kansas City, Missouri. 
* Lamar, Howard R. &quot;Edmund G. Ross as Governor of New Mexico Territory.&quot; &quot;New Mexico Historical Review&quot; 36#3 (1961): 177+ 
* Roske, Ralph J. &quot;The Seven Martyrs?.&quot; &quot;American Historical Review&quot; 64#2 (1959): 323–330. in JSTOR
* Ruddy Richard A. (2013). &quot;Edmund G. Ross: Soldier, Senator, Abolitionist&quot; online review

==External links==
 Retrieved on 2009-03-18
* 
*Andrew Johnson: Saved by a Scoundrel</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q376775" start="0" end="18" title="Edmund G. Ross" label="Edmund Gibson Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q1558" start="92" end="98" title="Kansas" label="Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="109" end="127" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q597711" start="158" end="178" title="New Mexico Territory" label="New Mexico Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q8612" start="218" end="232" title="Andrew Johnson" label="Andrew Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q725573" start="707" end="720" title="Ashland, Ohio" label="Ashland, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q507637" start="900" end="911" title="Huron, Ohio" label="Huron, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q608207" start="968" end="982" title="Sandusky, Ohio" label="Sandusky, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q37836" start="1351" end="1371" title="Milwaukee, Wisconsin" label="Milwaukee, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q41057" start="2007" end="2021" title="Topeka, Kansas" label="Topeka, Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q753942" start="2405" end="2444" title="Atchison, Topeka &amp;amp; Santa Fe Railway" label="Atchison, Topeka &amp;amp; Santa Fe Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q214102" start="2616" end="2621" title="Union (American Civil War)" label="Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752901" start="2660" end="2670" title="Union Army" label="Union Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q5036511" start="2718" end="2725" title="Captain (United States O-3)" label="captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q4547962" start="2751" end="2789" title="11th Kansas Volunteer Cavalry Regiment" label="11th Kansas Volunteer Cavalry Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q3808722" start="2890" end="2916" title="Battle of Lexington II" label="Second Battle of Lexington"/>
<link wikidata="Q4871572" start="2918" end="2945" title="Battle of Little Blue River" label="Battle of Little Blue River"/>
<link wikidata="Q3808756" start="2947" end="2976" title="Second Battle of Independence" label="Second Battle of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q4870600" start="2978" end="3005" title="Battle of Byram&amp;#x27;s Ford" label="Battle of Byram&amp;#x27;s Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149869" start="3007" end="3025" title="Battle of Westport" label="Battle of Westport"/>
<link wikidata="Q4871740" start="3027" end="3047" title="Battle of Mine Creek" label="Battle of Mine Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q5470897" start="3053" end="3105" title="Fort Caspar" label="Battle of Platte Bridge Station/Battle of Red Buttes"/>
<link wikidata="Q11707054" start="3126" end="3131" title="Major (United States)" label="major"/>
<link wikidata="Q5934173" start="3509" end="3522" title="James Henry Lane (Union general)" label="James H. Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q8612" start="4009" end="4023" title="Andrew Johnson" label="Andrew Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q109619944" start="4031" end="4070" title="Impeachment trial of Andrew Johnson" label="his 1868 presidential impeachment trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q6053012" start="4172" end="4189" title="Samuel C. Pomeroy" label="Samuel C. Pomeroy"/>
<link wikidata="Q817729" start="4215" end="4228" title="Benjamin Wade" label="Benjamin Wade"/>
<link wikidata="Q448803" start="4387" end="4403" title="Edwin M. Stanton" label="Edwin M. Stanton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1589777" start="4582" end="4602" title="Tenure of Office Act (1867)" label="Tenure of Office Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q2619009" start="4607" end="4657" title="Jury nullification" label="did not believe that offense worthy of impeachment"/>
<link wikidata="Q3525101" start="4815" end="4831" title="Thomas Ewing Jr." label="Thomas Ewing Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q206795" start="5446" end="5465" title="Profiles in Courage" label="Profiles in Courage"/>
<link wikidata="Q46525" start="5482" end="5496" title="Pulitzer Prize" label="Pulitzer Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q9696" start="5540" end="5555" title="John F. Kennedy" label="John F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q996804" start="5750" end="5769" title="Coffeyville, Kansas" label="Coffeyville, Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q597711" start="6181" end="6201" title="New Mexico Territory" label="New Mexico Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q35171" start="6226" end="6242" title="Grover Cleveland" label="Grover Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q34804" start="6667" end="6690" title="Albuquerque, New Mexico" label="Albuquerque, New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q608207" start="6839" end="6853" title="Sandusky, Ohio" label="Sandusky, Ohio"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="998068" wikidata="Q3807789" url="?curid=998068" title="Jeff Nelson (musician)">
<text>Jeff Nelson (born 1962 in South Africa) is an American musician, graphic designer, and record-label owner. He is best known as the drummer for the Washington, D.C. hardcore punk band Minor Threat.

==Biography==

Nelson met Ian MacKaye in high school and the two saw their first punk rock show, The Cramps, together. Soon after, they formed their first band, The Slinkees. After playing one show, a lineup change caused them to rename the band The Teen Idles.

He also co-founded the independent record label Dischord Records along with MacKaye in 1980, whose first record was the Teen Idles. They continue to run Dischord together. The duo also comprised the projects Skewbald/Grand Union and Egg Hunt; both bands recorded only one single.

Nelson also runs the record label Adult Swim Records (distributed by Dischord) and Pedestrian Press, as well as being a political activist. Nelson collects Jeep Wagoneers and resides in Toledo, Ohio. He spearheaded an effort in 2008 to successfully save Toledo&#x27;s Scott High School from demolition.

==Discography==
===Minor Threat===
====Original material====
* &quot;Minor Threat&quot; (EP, 1981)
* &quot;In My Eyes&quot; (EP, 1981)
* &quot;Out of Step&quot; (studio album, 1983)
* &quot;Salad Days&quot; (EP, 1985)

====Compilation albums====
* &quot;Minor Threat&quot; (1984)
* &quot;Complete Discography&quot; (1989)
* &quot;First Demo Tape&quot; (2003)

====Compilation appearances====
* &quot;Flex Your Head&quot; (1982) – &quot;Stand Up&quot;, &quot;12XU&quot;
* &quot;Dischord 1981: The Year in Seven Inches&quot; (1995) contains the first two EPs
* &quot;20 Years of Dischord&quot; (2002) – &quot;Screaming at a Wall&quot;, &quot;Straight Edge&quot; (live), &quot;Understand&quot;, &quot;Asshole Dub&quot;

==References==
==Bibliography==
* 

==External links==
* Dischord Records
* Adult Swim Records</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3807789" start="0" end="11" title="Jeff Nelson (musician)" label="Jeff Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="26" end="38" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="147" end="163" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q81509" start="183" end="195" title="Minor Threat" label="Minor Threat"/>
<link wikidata="Q455545" start="224" end="235" title="Ian MacKaye" label="Ian MacKaye"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361146" start="295" end="305" title="The Cramps" label="The Cramps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416624" start="444" end="458" title="The Teen Idles" label="The Teen Idles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1228431" start="509" end="525" title="Dischord Records" label="Dischord Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q7534811" start="669" end="689" title="Skewbald/Grand Union (band)" label="Skewbald/Grand Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q5347815" start="694" end="702" title="Egg Hunt" label="Egg Hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q15937167" start="898" end="911" title="Jeep Wagoneer" label="Jeep Wagoneer"/>
<link wikidata="Q49239" start="928" end="940" title="Toledo, Ohio" label="Toledo, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7436496" start="1010" end="1027" title="Scott High School (Ohio)" label="Scott High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q82585" start="1115" end="1127" title="Minor Threat (EP)" label="Minor Threat"/>
<link wikidata="Q82585" start="1153" end="1163" title="In My Eyes (EP)" label="In My Eyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040730" start="1189" end="1200" title="Out of Step (album)" label="Out of Step"/>
<link wikidata="Q81532" start="1236" end="1246" title="Salad Days (EP)" label="Salad Days"/>
<link wikidata="Q82585" start="1300" end="1312" title="Minor Threat (album)" label="Minor Threat"/>
<link wikidata="Q81559" start="1334" end="1354" title="Complete Discography" label="Complete Discography"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419327" start="1376" end="1391" title="First Demo Tape" label="First Demo Tape"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428248" start="1446" end="1460" title="Flex Your Head" label="Flex Your Head"/>
<link wikidata="Q3598077" start="1611" end="1631" title="20 Years of Dischord" label="20 Years of Dischord"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="998070" wikidata="Q1062658" url="?curid=998070" title="Node (physics)">
<text>A node is a point along a standing wave where the wave has minimum amplitude. For instance, in a vibrating guitar string, the ends of the string are nodes. By changing the position of the end node through frets, the guitarist changes the effective length of the vibrating string and thereby the note played. The opposite of a node is an anti-node, a point where the amplitude of the standing wave is at maximum. These occur midway between the nodes.

== Explanation ==

Standing waves result when two sinusoidal wave trains of the same frequency are moving in opposite directions in the same space and interfere with each other. They occur when waves are reflected at a boundary, such as sound waves reflected from a wall or electromagnetic waves reflected from the end of a transmission line, and particularly when waves are confined in a resonator at resonance, bouncing back and forth between two boundaries, such as in an organ pipe or guitar string.

In a standing wave the nodes are a series of locations at equally spaced intervals where the wave amplitude (motion) is zero (see animation above). At these points the two waves add with opposite phase and cancel each other out. They occur at intervals of half a wavelength (λ/2). Midway between each pair of nodes are locations where the amplitude is maximum. These are called the antinodes. At these points the two waves add with the same phase and reinforce each other.

In cases where the two opposite wave trains are not the same amplitude, they do not cancel perfectly, so the amplitude of the standing wave at the nodes is not zero but merely a minimum. This occurs when the reflection at the boundary is imperfect. This is indicated by a finite standing wave ratio (SWR), the ratio of the amplitude of the wave at the antinode to the amplitude at the node.

In resonance of a two dimensional surface or membrane, such as a drumhead or vibrating metal plate, the nodes become nodal lines, lines on the surface where the surface is motionless, dividing the surface into separate regions vibrating with opposite phase. These can be made visible by sprinkling sand on the surface, and the intricate patterns of lines resulting are called Chladni figures.

In transmission lines a voltage node is a current antinode, and a voltage antinode is a current node.

Nodes are the points of zero displacement, not the points where two constituent waves intersect.

== Boundary conditions ==
Where the nodes occur in relation to the boundary reflecting the waves depends on the end conditions or boundary conditions. Although there are many types of end conditions, the ends of resonators are usually one of two types that cause total reflection:

*Fixed boundary: Examples of this type of boundary are the attachment point of a guitar string, the closed end of an open pipe like an organ pipe, or a woodwind pipe, the periphery of a drumhead, a transmission line with the end short circuited, or the mirrors at the ends of a laser cavity. In this type, the amplitude of the wave is forced to zero at the boundary, so there is a node at the boundary, and the other nodes occur at multiples of half a wavelength from it:
*Free boundary: Examples of this type are an open-ended organ or woodwind pipe, the ends of the vibrating resonator bars in a xylophone, glockenspiel or tuning fork, the ends of an antenna, or a transmission line with an open end. In this type the derivative (slope) of the wave&#x27;s amplitude (in sound waves the pressure, in electromagnetic waves, the current) is forced to zero at the boundary. So there is an amplitude maximum (antinode) at the boundary, the first node occurs a quarter wavelength from the end, and the other nodes are at half wavelength intervals from there: 

== Examples ==

=== Sound ===
A sound wave consists of alternating cycles of compression and expansion of the wave medium. During compression, the molecules of the medium are forced together, resulting in the increased pressure and density. During expansion the molecules are forced apart, resulting in the decreased pressure and density.

The number of nodes in a specified length is directly proportional to the frequency of the wave.

Occasionally on a guitar, violin, or other stringed instrument, nodes are used to create harmonics. When the finger is placed on top of the string at a certain point, but does not push the string all the way down to the fretboard, a third node is created (in addition to the bridge and nut) and a harmonic is sounded. During normal play when the frets are used, the harmonics are always present, although they are quieter. With the artificial node method, the overtone is louder and the fundamental tone is quieter. If the finger is placed at the midpoint of the string, the first overtone is heard, which is an octave above the fundamental note which would be played, had the harmonic not been sounded. When two additional nodes divide the string into thirds, this creates an octave and a perfect fifth (twelfth). When three additional nodes divide the string into quarters, this creates a double octave. When four additional nodes divide the string into fifths, this creates a double-octave and a major third (17th). The octave, major third and perfect fifth are the three notes present in a major chord.

The characteristic sound that allows the listener to identify a particular instrument is largely due to the relative magnitude of the harmonics created by the instrument.

===Waves in two or three dimensions===
In two dimensional standing waves, nodes are curves (often straight lines or circles when displayed on simple geometries.) For example, sand collects along the nodes of a vibrating Chladni plate to indicate regions where the plate is not moving.

In chemistry, quantum mechanical waves, or &quot;orbitals&quot;, are used to describe the wave-like properties of electrons. Many of these quantum waves have nodes and antinodes as well. The number and position of these nodes and antinodes give rise to many of the properties of an atom or covalent bond. Atomic orbitals are classified according to the number of radial and angular nodes. A radial node for the hydrogen atom is a sphere that occurs where the wavefunction for an atomic orbital is equal to zero, while the angular node is 
a flat plane.

Molecular orbitals are classified according to bonding character. Molecular orbitals with an antinode between nuclei are very stable, and are known as &quot;bonding orbitals&quot; which strengthen the bond. In contrast, molecular orbitals with a node between nuclei will not be stable due to electrostatic repulsion and are known as &quot;anti-bonding orbitals&quot; which weaken the bond. Another such quantum mechanical concept is the particle in a box where the number of nodes of the wavefunction can help determine the quantum energy state—zero nodes corresponds to the ground state, one node corresponds to the 1st excited state, etc. In general, &quot;If one arranges the eigenstates in the order of increasing energies, formula_1, the eigenfunctions likewise fall in the order of increasing number of nodes; the &quot;n&quot;th eigenfunction has &quot;n−1&quot; nodes, between each of which the following eigenfunctions have at least one node&quot;.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1062658" start="2" end="6" title="Node (physics)" label="node"/>
<link wikidata="Q123300" start="26" end="39" title="standing wave" label="standing wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q159190" start="67" end="76" title="amplitude" label="amplitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q6607" start="107" end="113" title="guitar" label="guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q636309" start="205" end="210" title="frets" label="frets"/>
<link wikidata="Q3252739" start="262" end="278" title="vibrating string" label="vibrating string"/>
<link wikidata="Q263478" start="295" end="299" title="Musical note" label="note"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062658" start="337" end="346" title="Node (physics)" label="anti-node"/>
<link wikidata="Q123300" start="470" end="483" title="Standing wave" label="Standing wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q207527" start="501" end="516" title="sinusoidal wave" label="sinusoidal wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q11652" start="536" end="545" title="frequency" label="frequency"/>
<link wikidata="Q136980" start="602" end="611" title="Interference (wave propagation)" label="interfere"/>
<link wikidata="Q11461" start="688" end="698" title="sound wave" label="sound wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q12969754" start="725" end="745" title="electromagnetic wave" label="electromagnetic wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q693004" start="775" end="792" title="transmission line" label="transmission line"/>
<link wikidata="Q349669" start="840" end="849" title="resonator" label="resonator"/>
<link wikidata="Q172858" start="853" end="862" title="resonance" label="resonance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1510738" start="926" end="936" title="organ pipe" label="organ pipe"/>
<link wikidata="Q326426" start="940" end="953" title="guitar string" label="guitar string"/>
<link wikidata="Q159190" start="1054" end="1063" title="amplitude" label="amplitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q185553" start="1152" end="1157" title="phase (waves)" label="phase"/>
<link wikidata="Q41364" start="1219" end="1229" title="wavelength" label="wavelength"/>
<link wikidata="Q188364" start="1709" end="1728" title="standing wave ratio" label="standing wave ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q172858" start="1825" end="1834" title="resonance" label="resonance"/>
<link wikidata="Q123345399" start="1840" end="1855" title="two dimensional" label="two dimensional"/>
<link wikidata="Q2116731" start="1887" end="1895" title="drumhead" label="drumhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q213579" start="2198" end="2212" title="Chladni figure" label="Chladni figure"/>
<link wikidata="Q693004" start="2219" end="2236" title="transmission line" label="transmission line"/>
<link wikidata="Q25428" start="2240" end="2247" title="voltage" label="voltage"/>
<link wikidata="Q11651" start="2258" end="2265" title="Electric current" label="current"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332643" start="2547" end="2566" title="boundary conditions" label="boundary conditions"/>
<link wikidata="Q6607" start="2780" end="2786" title="guitar" label="guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1510738" start="2834" end="2844" title="organ pipe" label="organ pipe"/>
<link wikidata="Q181247" start="2851" end="2859" title="woodwind" label="woodwind"/>
<link wikidata="Q2116731" start="2885" end="2893" title="drumhead" label="drumhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q693004" start="2897" end="2914" title="transmission line" label="transmission line"/>
<link wikidata="Q206907" start="2928" end="2941" title="short circuit" label="short circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q6856168" start="2977" end="2989" title="laser cavity" label="laser cavity"/>
<link wikidata="Q165666" start="3297" end="3306" title="xylophone" label="xylophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q626035" start="3308" end="3320" title="glockenspiel" label="glockenspiel"/>
<link wikidata="Q201898" start="3324" end="3335" title="tuning fork" label="tuning fork"/>
<link wikidata="Q131214" start="3352" end="3359" title="Antenna (radio)" label="antenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q29175" start="3419" end="3429" title="derivative (calculus)" label="derivative"/>
<link wikidata="Q11461" start="3471" end="3481" title="sound wave" label="sound wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q11651" start="3527" end="3534" title="Electric current" label="current"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148098" start="4283" end="4291" title="harmonic" label="harmonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q830869" start="4469" end="4475" title="bridge (instrument)" label="bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186738" start="4480" end="4483" title="nut (instrument)" label="nut"/>
<link wikidata="Q261967" start="4654" end="4662" title="overtone" label="overtone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331774" start="4681" end="4692" title="Fundamental frequency" label="fundamental"/>
<link wikidata="Q213579" start="5694" end="5707" title="Ernst Chladni" label="Chladni plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q944" start="5774" end="5792" title="quantum mechanics" label="quantum mechanical"/>
<link wikidata="Q53860" start="5809" end="5817" title="atomic orbital" label="orbitals"/>
<link wikidata="Q127920" start="6050" end="6063" title="covalent bond" label="covalent bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q2362761" start="6219" end="6231" title="wavefunction" label="wavefunction"/>
<link wikidata="Q725417" start="6314" end="6331" title="Molecular orbital" label="Molecular orbital"/>
<link wikidata="Q944" start="6717" end="6735" title="quantum mechanics" label="quantum mechanical"/>
<link wikidata="Q909221" start="6751" end="6768" title="particle in a box" label="particle in a box"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="998073" wikidata="Q32874" url="?curid=998073" title="United Nations Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean">
<text>The United Nations Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (UNECLAC, ECLAC or CEPAL) is a United Nations regional commission to encourage economic cooperation. ECLAC includes 46 member States (20 in Latin America, 13 in the Caribbean and 13 from outside the region), and 14 associate members which are various non-independent territories, associated island countries and a commonwealth in the Caribbean. ECLAC publishes statistics covering the countries of the region and makes cooperative agreements with nonprofit institutions. The headquarters of ECLAC is in Santiago, Chile.
ECLAC (or UNECLA) was established in 1948 as the UN Economic Commission for Latin America. In 1984, a resolution was passed to include the countries of the Caribbean in the name. It reports to the UN Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC).

==Member States==
The following are all member States of ECLAC:
=== Associate Members ===
The following are all associate members of ECLAC:
==Locations==

* Santiago, Chile (headquarters) 
* Mexico City, Mexico (Central American subregional headquarters)
* Port of Spain, Trinidad and Tobago (Caribbean subregional headquarters)
* Bogotá, Colombia (country office)
* Brasília, Brazil (country office)
* Buenos Aires, Argentina (country office)
* Montevideo, Uruguay (country office)
* Washington, DC, United States of America (liaison office)

==Executive Secretaries==
== In relation to development discourse and dependency theory ==
The formation of the United Nations Economic Commission for Latin America was crucial to the beginning of &quot;Big D development&quot;. Many economic scholars attribute the founding of ECLA and its policy implementation in Latin America for the subsequent debates on structuralism and dependency theory. Although forming in the post-war period, the historic roots of ECLA trace back to political movement made long before the war had begun.

Before World War II, the perception of economic development in Latin America was formulated primarily from colonial ideology. This perception, combined with the Monroe Doctrine that asserted the United States as the only foreign power that could intervene in Latin American affairs, led to substantial resentment in Latin America. In the eyes of those living in the continent, Latin America was considerably economically strong; most had livable wages and industry was relatively dynamic. This concern of a need for economic restructuring was taken up by the League of Nations and manifested in a document drawn up by Stanley Bruce and presented to the League in 1939. This in turn strongly influenced the creation of the United Nations Economic and Social Committee in 1944. Although it was a largely ineffective policy development initially, the formation of ECLA proved to have profound effects in Latin America in following decades. For example, by 1955, Peru was receiving $28.5 million in loans per ECLA request. Most of these loans were utilized as means to finance foreign exchange costs, creating more jobs and heightening export trade. To investigate the extent to which this aid was supporting industrial development plans in Peru, ECLA was sent in to study its economic structure. In order to maintain stronghold over future developmental initiatives, ECLA and its branches continued providing financial support to Peru to assist in the country&#x27;s general development.

The terms of trade at this time, set by the United States, introduced the concept of &quot;unequal exchange&quot; in that the so-called &quot;North&quot; mandated prices that allowed them a greater return on its own resources than that of the &quot;South&#x27;s&quot;. Thus, although the export sector had grown during this time, certain significant economic and social issues continued to threaten this period of so-called stability. Although real income was on the rise, its distribution was still very uneven. Social problems were still overwhelmingly prevalent; large portions of the population were unnourished and without homes, and the education and health system were inept.

==See also==
* Library of the Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean
* United Nations System
* eLAC eLAC2007, eLAC2010 and eLAC2015: Strategies for the Information Society in Latin America and the Caribbean
* Association of Caribbean States
* Community of Latin American and Caribbean States

==Notes==
==References==
==Bibliography==
* Paul Berthoud, A Professional Life Narrative, 2008, worked with CEPAL-ECLAC and offers testimony from the inside of the early years of the organization.

== External links ==

* – UN Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q32874" start="4" end="74" title="United Nations Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean" label="United Nations Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q32874" start="76" end="83" title="United Nations Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean" label="UNECLAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q32874" start="85" end="90" title="United Nations Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean" label="ECLAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="106" end="120" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="121" end="140" title="United Nations Economic and Social Council#Regional commissions" label="regional commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q12585" start="215" end="228" title="Latin America" label="Latin America"/>
<link wikidata="Q664609" start="240" end="249" title="Caribbean" label="Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q2887" start="578" end="586" title="Santiago de Chile" label="Santiago"/>
<link wikidata="Q12585" start="671" end="684" title="Latin America" label="Latin America"/>
<link wikidata="Q664609" start="751" end="760" title="Caribbean" label="Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q170075" start="792" end="822" title="UN Economic and Social Council" label="UN Economic and Social Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q2887" start="991" end="999" title="Santiago de Chile" label="Santiago"/>
<link wikidata="Q298" start="1001" end="1006" title="Chile" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1489" start="1025" end="1036" title="Mexico City" label="Mexico City"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="1038" end="1044" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q27611" start="1046" end="1061" title="Central America" label="Central America"/>
<link wikidata="Q39178" start="1091" end="1104" title="Port of Spain" label="Port of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q754" start="1106" end="1125" title="Trinidad and Tobago" label="Trinidad and Tobago"/>
<link wikidata="Q2841" start="1165" end="1171" title="Bogotá" label="Bogotá"/>
<link wikidata="Q739" start="1173" end="1181" title="Colombia" label="Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2844" start="1201" end="1209" title="Brasília" label="Brasília"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="1211" end="1217" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1486" start="1237" end="1249" title="Buenos Aires" label="Buenos Aires"/>
<link wikidata="Q414" start="1251" end="1260" title="Argentina" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335" start="1280" end="1290" title="Montevideo" label="Montevideo"/>
<link wikidata="Q77" start="1292" end="1299" title="Uruguay" label="Uruguay"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="1319" end="1333" title="Washington, DC" label="Washington, DC"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="1335" end="1359" title="United States" label="United States of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q16909499" start="1737" end="1750" title="Structuralist economics" label="structuralism"/>
<link wikidata="Q923955" start="1755" end="1772" title="dependency theory" label="dependency theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q181026" start="2073" end="2088" title="Monroe Doctrine" label="Monroe Doctrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q38130" start="2471" end="2488" title="League of Nations" label="League of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q23358" start="2530" end="2543" title="Stanley Bruce" label="Stanley Bruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q7884230" start="3489" end="3505" title="unequal exchange" label="unequal exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q98901778" start="4097" end="4167" title="Library of the Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean" label="Library of the Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q854218" start="4170" end="4191" title="United Nations System" label="United Nations System"/>
<link wikidata="Q5323259" start="4194" end="4198" title="ELAC Action Plans" label="eLAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147937" start="4308" end="4339" title="Association of Caribbean States" label="Association of Caribbean States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045401" start="4342" end="4390" title="Community of Latin American and Caribbean States" label="Community of Latin American and Caribbean States"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="998074" wikidata="Q1777473" url="?curid=998074" title="Node (computer science)">
<text>A node is a basic unit of a data structure, such as a linked list or tree data structure. Nodes contain data and also may link to other nodes. Links between nodes are often implemented by pointers.

==Nodes and trees ==

Nodes are often arranged into tree structures. A node represents the information contained in a single data structure. These nodes may contain a value or condition, or possibly serve as another independent data structure. Nodes are represented by a single parent node. The highest point on a tree structure is called a root node, which does not have a parent node, but serves as the parent or &#x27;grandparent&#x27; of all of the nodes below it in the tree. The height of a node is determined by the total number of edges on the path from that node to the furthest leaf node, and the height of the tree is equal to the height of the root node. Node depth is determined by the distance between that particular node and the root node. The root node is said to have a depth of zero. Data can be discovered along these network paths.
An IP address uses this kind of system of nodes to define its location in a network.

===Definitions===
*Child: A child node is a node extending from another node. For example, a computer with internet access could be considered a child node of a node representing the internet. The inverse relationship is that of a parent node. If node &quot;C&quot; is a child of node &quot;A&quot;, then &quot;A&quot; is the parent node of &quot;C&quot;.
*Degree: the degree of a node is the number of children of the node.
*Depth: the depth of node &quot;A&quot; is the length of the path from &quot;A&quot; to the root node. The root node is said to have depth 0.
*Edge: the connection between nodes.
*Forest: a set of trees.
*Height: the height of node &quot;A&quot; is the length of the longest path through children to a leaf node.
*Internal node: a node with at least one child.
*Leaf node: a node with no children.
*Root node: a node distinguished from the rest of the tree nodes. Usually, it is depicted as the highest node of the tree.
*Sibling nodes: these are nodes connected to the same parent node.

==Markup languages==
Another common use of node trees is in web development. In programming, XML is used to communicate information between computer programmers and computers alike. For this reason XML is used to create common communication protocols used in office productivity software, and serves as the base for the development of modern web markup languages like XHTML. Though similar in how it is approached by a programmer, HTML and CSS is typically the language used to develop website text and design. While XML, HTML and XHTML provide the language and expression, the DOM serves as a translator.

=== Node type ===
Different types of nodes in a tree are represented by specific interfaces. In other words, the node type is defined by how it communicates with other nodes. Each node has a node type property, which specifies the type of node, such as sibling or leaf.
For example, if the node type property is the constant properties for a node, this property specifies the type of the node. So if a node type property is the constant node ELEMENT_NODE, one can know that this node object is an object Element. This object uses the Element interface to define all the methods and properties of that particular node.

Different W3C World Wide Web Consortium node types and descriptions:
*Document represents the entire document (the root-node of the DOM tree) 
*DocumentFragment represents a &quot;lightweight&quot; Document object, which can hold a portion of a document
*DocumentType provides an interface to the entities defined for the document
*ProcessingInstruction represents a processing instruction
*EntityReference represents an entity reference
*Element represents an element
*Attr represents an attribute
*Text represents textual content in an element or attribute
*CDATASection represents a CDATA section in a document (text that will NOT be parsed by a parser)
*Comment represents a comment
*Entity represents an entity
*Notation represents a notation declared in the DTD
=== Node object ===
A node object is represented by a single node in a tree. It can be an element node, attribute node, text node, or any type that is described in section &quot;node type&quot;. All objects can inherit properties and methods for dealing with parent and child nodes, but not all of the objects have parent or child nodes. For example, with text nodes that cannot have child nodes, trying to add child nodes results in a DOM error.

Objects in the DOM tree may be addressed and manipulated by using methods on the objects. The public interface of a DOM is specified in its application programming interface (API). The history of the Document Object Model is intertwined with the history of the &quot;browser wars&quot; of the late 1990s between Netscape Navigator and Microsoft Internet Explorer, as well as with that of JavaScript and JScript, the first scripting languages to be widely implemented in the layout engines of web browsers.

==See also==

* Vertex (graph theory)

==References==
==External links==
* Data Trees as a Means of Presenting Complex Data Analysis by Sally Knipe
* STL-like C++ tree class 
* Description of tree data structures from ideainfo.8m.com
* WormWeb.org: Interactive Visualization of the &quot;C. elegans&quot; Cell Tree - Visualize the entire cell lineage tree of the nematode &quot;C. elegans&quot; (javascript)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1777473" start="2" end="6" title="Node (computer science)" label="node"/>
<link wikidata="Q175263" start="28" end="42" title="data structure" label="data structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q7003418" start="54" end="65" title="linked list" label="linked list"/>
<link wikidata="Q223655" start="69" end="73" title="Tree (data structure)" label="tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q42848" start="104" end="108" title="data" label="data"/>
<link wikidata="Q118155" start="188" end="196" title="Pointer (computer programming)" label="pointers"/>
<link wikidata="Q386275" start="2212" end="2227" title="web development" label="web development"/>
<link wikidata="Q2115" start="2245" end="2248" title="XML" label="XML"/>
<link wikidata="Q132364" start="2379" end="2401" title="communication protocol" label="communication protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q7247856" start="2411" end="2439" title="office productivity software" label="office productivity software"/>
<link wikidata="Q37045" start="2498" end="2513" title="markup language" label="markup language"/>
<link wikidata="Q166074" start="2520" end="2525" title="XHTML" label="XHTML"/>
<link wikidata="Q8811" start="2583" end="2587" title="HTML" label="HTML"/>
<link wikidata="Q46441" start="2592" end="2595" title="CSS" label="CSS"/>
<link wikidata="Q2093" start="2730" end="2733" title="Document Object Model" label="DOM"/>
<link wikidata="Q37033" start="3392" end="3417" title="World Wide Web Consortium" label="World Wide Web Consortium"/>
<link wikidata="Q357626" start="3964" end="3969" title="CDATA" label="CDATA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2093" start="4582" end="4585" title="Document Object Model" label="DOM"/>
<link wikidata="Q165194" start="4734" end="4767" title="application programming interface" label="application programming interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q743132" start="4861" end="4873" title="browser wars" label="browser wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q235419" start="4906" end="4924" title="Netscape Navigator" label="Netscape Navigator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1575" start="4929" end="4956" title="Microsoft Internet Explorer" label="Microsoft Internet Explorer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2005" start="4982" end="4992" title="JavaScript" label="JavaScript"/>
<link wikidata="Q553514" start="4997" end="5004" title="JScript" label="JScript"/>
<link wikidata="Q187432" start="5016" end="5034" title="scripting language" label="scripting language"/>
<link wikidata="Q373442" start="5068" end="5081" title="Browser engine" label="layout engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6368" start="5086" end="5097" title="web browser" label="web browser"/>
<link wikidata="Q1304193" start="5117" end="5138" title="Vertex (graph theory)" label="Vertex (graph theory)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="998084" wikidata="Q964876" url="?curid=998084" title="Dōtonbori">
<text>is a district in Osaka, Japan. Known as one of Osaka&#x27;s principal tourist and nightlife areas, the area runs along the Dōtonbori canal from Dōtonboribashi Bridge to Nipponbashi Bridge in the Namba district of the city&#x27;s Chūō ward. Historically a theater district, it is now a popular nightlife and entertainment area characterized by its eccentric atmosphere and large illuminated signboards.

One of the area&#x27;s most prominent features is an illuminated billboard for confectionery company Glico displaying the image of a runner crossing a finishing line, which is often seen as an icon of Osaka within Japan.
==History==
===Origin===
Dōtonbori traces its history back to 1612, when the administrator of local canals, Nariyasu Dōton, began construction of the canal on the southern edge of Osaka. Nariyasu Dōton was joined by Yasui Jihē, Yasui Kuhē, and Hirano Tōjirō. Construction was interrupted: Yasui Jihē died after an illness and Nariyasu Dōton died during the Siege of Osaka in summer 1615, having fought on the losing side of Toyotomi Hideyori. Yasui Kuhē and Hirano Tōjirō continued construction and the canal was completed by September 1615. The new lord of Osaka Castle, Matsudaira Tadaaki, named the canal and avenue beside it Dōtonbori (&quot;bori&quot; from &quot;hori&quot;, meaning &quot;canal&quot;), even though Nariyasu Dōton had been on the losing side during the siege. 

Over time, the story changed to credit the canal to a fictional local entrepreneur, . According to the revised story, Yasui Dōton began expanding the tiny Umezu River at his own expense in 1612, hoping to increase commerce in the region by connecting the two branches of the Yokobori River with a canal running east–west. He also died during the Siege of Osaka and his cousin finished the canal in 1615. The popularity of the revised story resulted in a stone monument erected for Yasui Dōton in 1915 at the north end of Nipponbashi. In the 1965 Dōtonbori Trial (道頓堀裁判) disputing the ownership rights of the canal, it was determined that Yasui Dōton was a fictional character, based on Yasui family records dating back to the 1600s.

The character of Dōtonbori became defined in 1621 when the Tokugawa Shogunate instituted urban planning and designated Dōtonbori as the entertainment district of Osaka. Yasui Kuhē is credited with luring playhouses and performance tents to the district, and the theatre owners rewarded the Yasui family by reserving a box for each performance. By 1662, the avenue boasted six Kabuki theatres and five Bunraku theatres, as well as the unique Takeda Karakuri mechanical puppet theatre. Many restaurants and cafes were built to cater to the flood of tourists and entertainment-seekers pouring nightly into Dōtonbori.
===Modern development===
Over the years, declining interest in traditional forms of entertainment led to the closing of most of Dōtonbori&#x27;s original attractions. With the exception of the , its remaining theatres were all destroyed during World War II.

A redevelopment project was started in the 1960s to improve water quality in the canal. Land on the north and south banks was reclaimed to raise the river walls, and to partially fund the project, half the reclaimed land was sold to the owners of the land next to the canal. The other half was designated as a greenbelt parkway. The Dōtonbori Trial began when the descendants of Yasui Kuhē, one of the two people who had completed the canal in 1615, filed suit against the city and prefectural governments over ownership rights to the land along the canal.

Further development of the land bordering the canal began in 2001, and the between Tazaemonbashi and Ebisubashi was opened to the public in 2004. Prior to that time, development along the canal primarily focused on the streets parallel to it (Dōtonbori Street on the south bank, and Sōemonchō Street on the north bank), and very few storefronts faced the canal itself.

==Attractions==
 is a Japanese word meaning &quot;to ruin oneself [go bankrupt] by extravagant spending on food&quot; or, more pithily, &quot;eat until you drop&quot;. It is part of a larger proverb: , reflecting local priorities (and artistry) in the clothing and food of Kyoto and Osaka, respectively.

The phrase is associated with Dōtonbori, and is often used in tourist guides and advertisements. It can be seen in the names of several locations in Dōtonbori, such as the mascot Kuidaore Taro and the defunct restaurant Cui-daore.

Some foods associated specifically with Osaka and kuidaore include okonomiyaki, takoyaki, and kitsune udon.

=== Restaurants ===
Osaka is a major destination for tourists, both domestic and international. The Dotonbori district is a popular area for visitors to the city and boasts a number of well known restaurants offering a range of traditional and modern Japanese dishes.

====Notable restaurants====
*: There are three Kinryu (Golden Dragon) Ramen restaurants in Dōtonbori, one at each end of the street and one in the middle. The chain, which opened its first location in 1982, is notable for its giant three-dimensional golden dragon billboards, as well as its seating consisting of tatami mats. Unlike many Japanese restaurants, Kinryu Ramen is open 24 hours, and offers a free garlic and kimchi bar.
*Kani Dōraku (かに道楽): A crab restaurant, famous for its moving crab billboard at several locations. There are three restaurants along Dōtonbori Street, south of the canal: the original/main western (Honten) location near Ebisubashi, the Nakamise (middle) one near Tazaemonbashi, and the eastern (Higashimise) one near Nipponbashi. The original location opened in 1962 and the current moving crab sign was installed in 1996. Prior incidents involving the sign include an accident in 1984, when a leg fell off and struck a customer, and 2003, when fans of the local Hanshin Tigers baseball team climbed the sign and removed the eyes.
*: A popular takoyaki stand which started in 1972 on Dōtonbori Street near Tazaemonbashi; it was forced to move in 2010 because the original site was municipal land. One of the primary attractions is the size of the octopus used.
*: A fugu restaurant with a huge blowfish lantern hanging out front. Zubora-ya first opened for business in 1920 at its original and main location in Shinsekai, Naniwa Ward, later opening a second branch on Dōtonbori Street. Both locations temporarily closed on April 8, 2020 for the COVID-19 pandemic; the closure was made permanent on September 15.
*Dōtonbori Ramen Taishokudo: A ramen restaurant formed by eight famous ramen shops from across Japan.
*Hariju (播重): A beef restaurant established in 1924; the present Dōtonbori location opened in 1948. They use only Japanese beef. One of the more famous beef restaurants.
*Imai (今井): An Udon restaurant since 1946; the flagship and original location is sometimes called Dōtonbori Imai Honten (道頓堀 今井 本店). The Imai family ran a teahouse (from the 1780s) and music instrument store (1913–1945) at the site, but the store burned during World War II and was rebuilt as a restaurant.
*, a massive eight-story restaurant with a different Osaka cuisine on each floor, was a self-proclaimed contender for the title of the world&#x27;s largest restaurant. It was founded in 1949 by Rokuro Yamada and the Kuidaore Taro bunraku puppet was unveiled in 1950, with a face modeled from Yamada; the restaurant and puppet were intended to attract families with small children. The building was expanded into a large concrete structure in 1959, but it ceased operations and closed on 8 July 2008. Since then, the building has been remodeled and now houses a variety of shops and restaurants as the Nakaza Cui-daoré Building.
===Landmarks and sights===
*Glico Man: Originally installed in 1935, the sign depicting a giant athlete on a blue track is a symbol of Glico candy. The sign has been altered on several occasions to celebrate events such as the World Cup and to show support for the Osaka baseball team, the Hanshin Tigers. The current version is the sixth, which uses LEDs and was installed in October 2014. The previous five incarnations of the sign used neon lights. In 2020, to celebrate Takuma Sato and his second Indy 500 victory, the sign changed every 15 minutes to an image of Sato performing the &quot;Glico Man Pose.&quot; The sign is just west of Ebisubashi, on the south bank of the canal.
*Kuidaore Taro: In front of the Cui-daore building is a mechanical drum-playing clown, also known as the Kuidaore Ningyo, installed in 1950. Every March the visiting rikishi for the Osaka Grand Sumo tournament used to line up with Kuidaore Taro for photos. Now that the restaurant has closed, Kuidaore Taro has been moved to a new location slightly east of his old haunt.
*Kani Dōraku crab: This six and a half meter crab is on the front of the crab restaurant Kani Dōraku. It is mechanised, being able to move its arms and eyestalks. Built in 1960, this mechanical billboard soon spawned imitations, including a squid that puffs steam and oni (demons) that light up at night.
*Ebisu Tower: the ferris wheel, which reaches a height of , is built into the facade of the Dotonbori Don Quijote store branch and is decorated with an image of the god of fishermen and luck, Ebisu. Cracks were discovered in a rail, forcing it to shut down from June 2008 until it reopened on January 19, 2018 after the store spent  million to repair it. The store is just west of Tazaemonbashi, on the north bank of the canal.
*Gateway signs There are two illuminated signs that form gateways above Dōtonbori Street. The one at the western end of the district is decorated with animated neon lights, just west of the intersection with Midosuji. The other one, at the eastern end, is just west of the intersection with Sakaisuji.
===Bridges===

Motor vehicles cross the canal by way of either Dōtonboribashi (part of Midosuji Avenue) at the west end or Nipponbashi (part of Sakaisuji Avenue) at the east end of the main Dōtonbori district. In between are several footbridges connecting the Namba and Shinsaibashi shopping districts to Dōtonbori, such as Tazaemonbashi and Aiaibashi.

====Ebisubashi====

Ebisubashi is just east of the Glico Man billboard. Originally constructed to provide access to the nearby Ebisu Shrine, the bridge is the location of a legendary curse, considered broken in 2023, on Osaka&#x27;s baseball team, the Hanshin Tigers. More practically, the bridge provides a link between the Shinsaibashi-suji and Ebisubashi-suji shopping districts.

Due to the familiarity of the Glico Man, Ebisubashi makes for a convenient gathering point, hence its nicknames, &quot;nanpa-bashi&quot;, mostly used by foreigners, and &quot;hikkake-bashi&quot; (&quot;the pulling bridge&quot;), mostly used by native Japanese.

==In media==
* The fictional location of Sotenbori, as depicted in SEGA&#x27;s &quot;Yakuza&quot; series of video games, is based on Dōtonbori.
* One of the stages in &quot;SNK vs. Capcom: The Match of the Millennium&quot; takes place in Dōtonbori. It is always the first stage of the arcade mode.
* The Nudist Beach HQ in the anime &quot;Kill la Kill&quot; is located underneath the Dōtonbori canal. The robot suits used by them is also named after it.
* Racing game &quot;Asphalt 9&quot;.
* It is featured in John Wick: Chapter 4
* Most action sequences in the movie take place on and around Ebisu Bridge.

==See also==
*Shinsaibashi
*Sōemonchō
*Amerikamura
*Tourism in Japan

== Notes ==
==References==
*Davisson, Zack, &quot;Osaka InfoGuide&quot;, Japan, Carter Witt Media, 2006 (English language tourist guide. Pg. 20-23 have detailed article on Dōtonbori, including history and culture. The majority of this article comes from this tourist guide.)
*Kinoshita, June, &quot;Gateway to Japan&quot;, USA, Kodansha International, 1998, (pg. 608–609, Short section on areas of interest in Namba district)
*Brand New Osaka (2005) &quot;&quot;History of Dotonbori&quot;.&quot; (Short section on the history of Doton Yasui.)link 
*Japan National Tourist Association &quot;Dotonbori&quot; . (About the culture of Dōtonbori)link
*Seattle Times (30 November 2005) &quot;10 great moments in baseball superstition history&quot;.link (#6 is the Curse of the Colonel)
*AP Worldstream (18 September 2003) &quot;Japanese man drowns during baseball pennant celebrations&quot;.link (News article on the death of Masaya Shitababa)

==External links==

* Dotonbori Street &quot;&quot;Virtual Tourist&quot; 
* Dotonbori Shopkeepers, &quot;This is DOHTONBORI&quot;&quot;
 Mouth of Dōtonbori canal
 Ebisubashi-Minamidume Intersection</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q35765" start="17" end="22" title="Osaka" label="Osaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q49389" start="70" end="77" title="tourist" label="tourist"/>
<link wikidata="Q12284" start="133" end="138" title="canal" label="canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5191476" start="169" end="187" title="Nipponbashi" label="Nipponbashi Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075406" start="195" end="200" title="Namba" label="Namba"/>
<link wikidata="Q876485" start="229" end="238" title="Chūō-ku, Osaka" label="Chūō ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q391534" start="504" end="509" title="Glico" label="Glico"/>
<link wikidata="Q475780" start="981" end="995" title="Siege of Osaka" label="Siege of Osaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q313641" start="1048" end="1065" title="Toyotomi Hideyori" label="Toyotomi Hideyori"/>
<link wikidata="Q321242" start="1182" end="1194" title="Osaka Castle" label="Osaka Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6788072" start="1196" end="1214" title="Matsudaira Tadaaki" label="Matsudaira Tadaaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q5191476" start="1928" end="1939" title="Nipponbashi" label="Nipponbashi"/>
<link wikidata="Q205662" start="2200" end="2218" title="Tokugawa Shogunate" label="Tokugawa Shogunate"/>
<link wikidata="Q69883" start="2230" end="2244" title="urban planning" label="urban planning"/>
<link wikidata="Q199701" start="2517" end="2523" title="Kabuki" label="Kabuki"/>
<link wikidata="Q243170" start="2542" end="2549" title="Bunraku" label="Bunraku"/>
<link wikidata="Q2814395" start="2982" end="2991" title="Bombing of Osaka" label="destroyed"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="2999" end="3011" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1552255" start="3324" end="3333" title="greenbelt" label="greenbelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q11252013" start="3855" end="3864" title="Sōemonchō" label="Sōemonchō"/>
<link wikidata="Q5287" start="3964" end="3977" title="Japanese language" label="Japanese word"/>
<link wikidata="Q35102" start="4133" end="4140" title="proverb" label="proverb"/>
<link wikidata="Q18670161" start="4419" end="4425" title="mascot" label="mascot"/>
<link wikidata="Q701075" start="4546" end="4557" title="okonomiyaki" label="okonomiyaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q905527" start="4559" end="4567" title="takoyaki" label="takoyaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q35765" start="4608" end="4613" title="Osaka" label="Osaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q234646" start="4927" end="4932" title="Ramen" label="Ramen"/>
<link wikidata="Q215605" start="5107" end="5120" title="chinese dragon" label="golden dragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q318763" start="5170" end="5181" title="tatami" label="tatami mats"/>
<link wikidata="Q23400" start="5266" end="5272" title="garlic" label="garlic"/>
<link wikidata="Q141898" start="5277" end="5283" title="kimchi" label="kimchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q11264072" start="5290" end="5301" title="Kani Dōraku" label="Kani Dōraku"/>
<link wikidata="Q40802" start="5312" end="5316" title="crab" label="crab"/>
<link wikidata="Q5191476" start="5606" end="5617" title="Nipponbashi" label="Nipponbashi"/>
<link wikidata="Q127635" start="5852" end="5866" title="Hanshin Tigers" label="Hanshin Tigers"/>
<link wikidata="Q905527" start="5933" end="5941" title="takoyaki" label="takoyaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q134385" start="6155" end="6159" title="fugu" label="fugu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049117" start="6300" end="6309" title="Shinsekai" label="Shinsekai"/>
<link wikidata="Q861618" start="6311" end="6322" title="Naniwa Ward" label="Naniwa Ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="6434" end="6451" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757956" start="6717" end="6730" title="wagyu" label="Japanese beef"/>
<link wikidata="Q471861" start="6788" end="6792" title="Udon" label="Udon"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="7034" end="7046" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q243170" start="7310" end="7317" title="bunraku" label="bunraku"/>
<link wikidata="Q391534" start="7843" end="7854" title="Ezaki Glico" label="Glico candy"/>
<link wikidata="Q19317" start="7935" end="7944" title="FIFA World Cup" label="World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q127635" start="7998" end="8012" title="Hanshin Tigers" label="Hanshin Tigers"/>
<link wikidata="Q171297" start="8182" end="8193" title="Takuma Sato" label="Takuma Sato"/>
<link wikidata="Q7358" start="8473" end="8478" title="clown" label="clown"/>
<link wikidata="Q2727289" start="8559" end="8566" title="rikishi" label="rikishi"/>
<link wikidata="Q835803" start="8575" end="8602" title="Honbasho" label="Osaka Grand Sumo tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q11264072" start="8766" end="8777" title="Kani Dōraku" label="Kani Dōraku"/>
<link wikidata="Q11264072" start="8854" end="8865" title="Kani Dōraku" label="Kani Dōraku"/>
<link wikidata="Q202570" start="9088" end="9100" title="ferris wheel" label="ferris wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185381" start="9172" end="9183" title="Don Quijote (store)" label="Don Quijote"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129330" start="9262" end="9267" title="Ebisu (mythology)" label="Ebisu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192413" start="9887" end="9895" title="Midosuji Line" label="Midosuji"/>
<link wikidata="Q5191476" start="9923" end="9934" title="Den Den Town" label="Nipponbashi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143250" start="9944" end="9953" title="Sakaisuji Line" label="Sakaisuji"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129330" start="10281" end="10293" title="Ebisu (mythology)" label="Ebisu Shrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q40114" start="10337" end="10342" title="Curse of the Colonel" label="curse"/>
<link wikidata="Q122251013" start="10365" end="10369" title="2023_Japan_Series" label="2023"/>
<link wikidata="Q5369" start="10387" end="10395" title="baseball" label="baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q127635" start="10406" end="10420" title="Hanshin Tigers" label="Hanshin Tigers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133483" start="10657" end="10662" title="nanpa" label="nanpa"/>
<link wikidata="Q388239" start="10691" end="10701" title="gaijin" label="foreigners"/>
<link wikidata="Q122741" start="10867" end="10871" title="SEGA" label="SEGA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2594935" start="10879" end="10897" title="Yakuza (series)" label="&amp;quot;Yakuza&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="" start="10973" end="11016" title="SNK vs. Capcom: The Match of the Millennium" label="SNK vs. Capcom: The Match of the Millennium"/>
<link wikidata="Q13637192" start="11139" end="11151" title="Kill la Kill" label="Kill la Kill"/>
<link wikidata="Q51594682" start="11274" end="11283" title="Asphalt Legends Unite" label="Asphalt 9"/>
<link wikidata="" start="11311" end="11331" title="John Wick: Chapter 4" label="John Wick: Chapter 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049109" start="11423" end="11435" title="Shinsaibashi" label="Shinsaibashi"/>
<link wikidata="Q11252013" start="11437" end="11446" title="Sōemonchō" label="Sōemonchō"/>
<link wikidata="Q4745722" start="11448" end="11459" title="Amerikamura" label="Amerikamura"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060220" start="11461" end="11477" title="Tourism in Japan" label="Tourism in Japan"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="998086" wikidata="Q4375980" url="?curid=998086" title="Executive Council of Nunavut">
<text>The [[Executive council (Commonwealth countries)|Executive Council]] of [[Nunavut]] or cabinet includes a Premier and eight Ministers and is elected by the members of the Legislative Assembly from among the Assembly members.

The cabinet members provide the political direction and accountability for each function, while the Deputy Minister of each department is appointed position with responsibility to guide and manage the daily administration of the budgets and programs of government.

As of November 2021, the current ministers are:

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4375980" start="4" end="83" title="Executive Council of Nunavut" label="[[Executive council (Commonwealth countries)|Executive Council]] of [[Nunavut]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q640506" start="87" end="94" title="Cabinet (government)" label="cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2867082" start="171" end="191" title="Legislative Assembly of Nunavut" label="Legislative Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492030" start="326" end="341" title="Deputy minister (Canada)" label="Deputy Minister"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="998087" wikidata="Q459921" url="?curid=998087" title="Ibn Yunus">
<text>Abu al-Hasan &#x27;Ali ibn Abi al-Said &#x27;Abd al-Rahman ibn Ahmad ibn Yunus ibn Abd al-&#x27;Ala al-Sadafi al-Misri (Egyptian Arabic: ابن يونس; c. 950 – 1009) was an important Arab Egyptian astronomer and mathematician, whose works are noted for being ahead of their time, having been based on meticulous calculations and attention to detail. He is one of the famous Muslim astronomers who appeared after Al-Battani and Abu al-Wafa&#x27; al-Buzjani, and he was perhaps the greatest astronomer of his time. Because of his brilliance, the Fatimids gave him generous gifts and established an observatory for him on Mount Mokattam near Fustat. Al-Aziz Billah ordered him to make astronomical tables, which he completed during the reign of Al-Hakim bi-Amr Allah, son of Al-Aziz, and called it al-Zij al-Kabir al-Hakimi.
The crater Ibn Yunus on the Moon is named after him.
==Life==
Information regarding his early life and education is uncertain. He was born in Egypt between 950 and 952 and came from a respected family in Fustat. His father was a historian, biographer, and scholar of hadith who wrote two volumes about the history of Egypt—one about the Egyptians and one based on traveller commentary on Egypt. A prolific writer, ibn Yunus&#x27; father has been described as &quot;Egypt&#x27;s most celebrated early historian and first known compiler of a biographical dictionary devoted exclusively to Egyptians&quot;. His grandfather was also one of the scholars who specialized in astronomy, and Ibn Yunus enjoyed great prestige among the Fatimid caliphs, who encouraged him to pursue his astronomical and mathematical research. They built an observatory for him near Fustat (Cairo), and equipped it with all the necessary machinery and tools. Sarton says of him that he was perhaps the greatest Muslim astronomer. His great-grandfather had been an associate of the noted legal scholar al-Shafi&#x27;i.

Early in the life of ibn Yunus, the Fatimid dynasty came to power and the new city of Cairo was founded. In Cairo, he worked as an astronomer for the Fatimid dynasty for twenty-six years, first for the Caliph Al-Aziz Billah and then for al-Hakim. Ibn Yunus dedicated his most famous astronomical work, &quot;al-Zij al-Kabir al-Hakimi&quot;, to the latter.

As well as for his mathematics, Ibn Yunus was also known as an eccentric and a poet.

==Works==
One of his greatest astronomical works was that he calculated with great accuracy the inclination of the ecliptic circle, after observing the solar and lunar eclipses.

Ibn Yunus excelled in trigonometry, and he was the first to solve some of the trigonometric equations that are used in astronomy, and he conducted valuable research in it that helped advance trigonometry. He was the first to establish a law for spherical trigonometry, and it was of great importance to scholars of astronomy, before the discovery of logarithms, since by means of that law multiplication operations in trigonometry could be converted into addition operations, it facilitated the solution of many long and complex problems.

Ibn Yunus showed great ingenuity in solving many difficult problems in astronomy.

Ibn Yunus observed the eclipse of the sun and moon in Cairo in 978 AD, and his calculation came closest to what was known, until modern observing machines appeared.

===Astrology===

In astrology, noted for making predictions and having written the &quot;Kitab bulugh al-umniyya&quot; (&quot;On the Attainment of Desire&quot;), a work concerning the heliacal risings of Sirius, and on predictions concerning what day of the week the Coptic year will start on.

===Astronomy===

Ibn Yunus&#x27; most famous work in Islamic astronomy, &quot;al-Zij al-Kabir al-Hakimi&quot; (c. 1000), was a handbook of astronomical tables which contained very accurate observations, many of which may have been obtained with very large astronomical instruments. According to N. M. Swerdlow, the &quot;Zij al-Kabir al-Hakimi&quot; is &quot;a work of outstanding originality of which just over half survives&quot;.

Yunus expressed the solutions in his &quot;zij&quot; without mathematical symbols, but Delambre noted in his 1819 translation of the Hakemite tables that two of Ibn Yunus&#x27; methods for determining the time from solar or stellar altitude were equivalent to the trigonometric identity formula_1 identified in Johannes Werner&#x27;s 16th-century manuscript on conic sections. Now recognized as one of Werner&#x27;s formulas, it was essential for the development of prosthaphaeresis and logarithms decades later.

Ibn Yunus described 40 planetary conjunctions and 30 lunar eclipses. For example, he accurately describes the planetary conjunction that occurred in the year 1000 as follows:
:A conjunction of Venus and Mercury in Gemini, observed in the western sky: The two planets were in conjunction after sunset on the night [of Sunday 19 May 1000]. The time was approximately eight equinoctial hours after midday on Sunday. Mercury was north of Venus and their latitude difference was a third of a degree.

Modern knowledge of the positions of the planets confirms that his description and his calculation of the distance being one-third of a degree is exactly correct. Ibn Yunus&#x27;s observations on conjunctions and eclipses were used in Richard Dunthorne and Simon Newcombs&#x27; respective calculations of the secular acceleration of the Moon.

===Pendulum===
Recent encyclopaedias and popular accounts claim that the tenth century astronomer Ibn Yunus used a pendulum for time measurement, despite the fact that it has been known for nearly a hundred years that this is based on nothing more than an error made in 1684 by the Savilian Professor of Astronomy at Oxford Edward Bernard.

== Ibn Yunus&#x27;s philosophy ==

In his scientific studies, he only believed in what his mind was convinced of, and he did not care what people said about him. His philosophy was summarized in three points:

* Adopting the scientific principle based on observation and measurement, and taking the universe and everything in it as a teacher, from which facts are deduced and to which they are returned.
* Strengthening faith by touching the signs of the Creator emanating in the universe.
* Practicing legitimate pleasures. (Ibn Khallikan mentions about one of the astrologers that he once went with him to Mount Mokattam, and he stopped to observe the planet Venus, so he took off his turban and dress and put on a red shirt and a red mask to cover himself with. He took out a stick and struck it with incense in his hands, and his situation was bizarre).

== Narration of Hadith ==
Ibn Yunus narrated hadiths and reports from his father, Abi al-Sa&#x27;id, but the scholars rejected his narration due to his preoccupation with astrology and magic.

== Books ==
Ibn Yunus had many works, and his most important book is &quot;Al-Zij Al-Kabir Al-Hakimi&quot;, which is the book he began writing, by order of the Fatimid Caliph Al-Aziz in the year 380 AH/990 AD, and completed it in 1007 AD during the reign of Caliph Al-Hakim Ould Al-Aziz, and he called it Al-Zij Al-Hakimi, after the caliph.

The word &quot;Zij&quot; is a Persian word (Zik), and its meaning in our modern sense is mathematical astronomical tables. He had another book called &quot;Zij Ibn Yunus&quot;, and the numbers he included in his two &quot;zij&quot; books are correct up to the seventh decimal number, which indicates unparalleled mathematical accuracy in calculations, and many astronomers have been transmitted from him, especially after his &quot;zij&quot; moved to the East, and the Egyptians relied on their calendars on Ibn Yunus’ &quot;zij&quot; for a long period of time.

==References==
==External links==
* (PDF version)
* 
* Ibn Yunus Biography</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q459921" start="0" end="118" title="Ibn Yunus" label="Abu al-Hasan &amp;#x27;Ali ibn Abi al-Said &amp;#x27;Abd al-Rahman ibn Ahmad ibn Yunus ibn Abd al-&amp;#x27;Ala al-Sadafi al-Misri"/>
<link wikidata="Q29919" start="120" end="135" title="Egyptian Arabic" label="Egyptian Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q35323" start="179" end="183" title="Arabs" label="Arab"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061510" start="184" end="192" title="Egyptians" label="Egyptian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1267533" start="208" end="221" title="Islamic mathematics" label="mathematician"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="370" end="376" title="Muslims" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q11079" start="408" end="418" title="Al-Battani" label="Al-Battani"/>
<link wikidata="Q298439" start="423" end="451" title="Abu al-Wafa&amp;#x27; al-Buzjani" label="Abu al-Wafa&amp;#x27; al-Buzjani"/>
<link wikidata="Q160307" start="540" end="548" title="Fatimid Caliphate" label="Fatimids"/>
<link wikidata="Q839456" start="635" end="641" title="Fustat" label="Fustat"/>
<link wikidata="Q286542" start="643" end="657" title="Al-Aziz Billah" label="Al-Aziz Billah"/>
<link wikidata="Q342137" start="738" end="759" title="Al-Hakim bi-Amr Allah" label="Al-Hakim bi-Amr Allah"/>
<link wikidata="Q3791577" start="829" end="838" title="Ibn Yunus (crater)" label="Ibn Yunus"/>
<link wikidata="Q405" start="846" end="850" title="Moon" label="Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="960" end="965" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q839456" start="1022" end="1028" title="Fustat" label="Fustat"/>
<link wikidata="Q234343" start="1085" end="1091" title="hadith" label="hadith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061510" start="1155" end="1164" title="Egyptians" label="Egyptians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316061" start="1749" end="1755" title="George Sarton" label="Sarton"/>
<link wikidata="Q294281" start="1891" end="1906" title="al-Shafi&amp;#x27;i" label="al-Shafi&amp;#x27;i"/>
<link wikidata="Q14932665" start="1945" end="1960" title="Fatimid dynasty" label="Fatimid dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q85" start="1995" end="2000" title="Cairo" label="Cairo"/>
<link wikidata="Q286542" start="2118" end="2132" title="Al-Aziz Billah" label="Al-Aziz Billah"/>
<link wikidata="Q342137" start="2146" end="2154" title="Al-Hakim bi-Amr Allah" label="al-Hakim"/>
<link wikidata="Q34362" start="3340" end="3349" title="astrology" label="astrology"/>
<link wikidata="Q368373" start="3504" end="3519" title="heliacal rising" label="heliacal rising"/>
<link wikidata="Q3409" start="3524" end="3530" title="Sirius" label="Sirius"/>
<link wikidata="Q750430" start="3587" end="3593" title="Coptic calendar" label="Coptic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255366" start="3668" end="3685" title="Islamic astronomy" label="Islamic astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658115" start="3696" end="3699" title="Zij" label="Zij"/>
<link wikidata="Q246517" start="4136" end="4144" title="Jean Baptiste Joseph Delambre" label="Delambre"/>
<link wikidata="Q273008" start="4313" end="4335" title="trigonometric identity" label="trigonometric identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q76161" start="4360" end="4375" title="Johannes Werner" label="Johannes Werner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2257608" start="4515" end="4531" title="prosthaphaeresis" label="prosthaphaeresis"/>
<link wikidata="Q11197" start="4536" end="4546" title="logarithms" label="logarithms"/>
<link wikidata="Q191536" start="4586" end="4608" title="Conjunction (astronomy and astrology)" label="planetary conjunctions"/>
<link wikidata="Q44235" start="4616" end="4629" title="lunar eclipse" label="lunar eclipse"/>
<link wikidata="Q141022" start="5272" end="5279" title="eclipse" label="eclipse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124625" start="5294" end="5311" title="Richard Dunthorne" label="Richard Dunthorne"/>
<link wikidata="Q164401" start="5316" end="5329" title="Simon Newcomb" label="Simon Newcomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q405" start="5396" end="5400" title="Moon" label="Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q20702" start="5518" end="5526" title="pendulum" label="pendulum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5341875" start="5727" end="5741" title="Edward Bernard" label="Edward Bernard"/>
<link wikidata="Q71394" start="6270" end="6283" title="Ibn Khallikan" label="Ibn Khallikan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9168" start="7168" end="7175" title="Persian language" label="Persian"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="998103" wikidata="Q864940" url="?curid=998103" title="Bioequivalence">
<text>Bioequivalence is a term in pharmacokinetics used to assess the expected in vivo biological equivalence of two proprietary preparations of a drug. If two products are said to be bioequivalent it means that they would be expected to be, for all intents and purposes, the same.

One article defined bioequivalence by stating that, &quot;two pharmaceutical products are bioequivalent if they are pharmaceutically equivalent and their bioavailabilities (rate and extent of availability) after administration in the same molar dose are similar to such a degree that their effects, with respect to both efficacy and safety, can be expected to be essentially the same. Pharmaceutical equivalence implies the same amount of the same active substance(s), in the same dosage form, for the same route of administration and meeting the same or comparable standards.&quot;

For The World Health Organization (WHO) &quot;two pharmaceutical products are bioequivalent if they are pharmaceutically equivalent or pharmaceutical alternatives, and their bioavailabilities, in terms of rate (Cmax and tmax) and extent of absorption (area under the curve), after administration of the same molar dose under the same conditions, are similar to such a degree that their effects can be expected to be essentially the same&quot;.

The United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has defined bioequivalence as, &quot;the absence of a significant difference in the rate and extent to which the active ingredient or active moiety in pharmaceutical equivalents or pharmaceutical alternatives becomes available at the site of drug action when administered at the same molar dose under similar conditions in an appropriately designed study.&quot;

== Bioequivalence ==
In determining bioequivalence between two products such as a commercially available Branded product and a potential to-be-marketed Generic product, pharmacokinetic studies are conducted whereby each of the preparations are administered in a cross-over study (sometimes parallel study, when a cross-over study is not feasible) to volunteer subjects, generally healthy individuals but occasionally in patients. Serum/plasma samples are obtained at prescribed times and assayed for parent drug (or occasionally metabolite) concentration. Occasionally, blood concentration levels are neither feasible or possible to compare the two products (e.g. inhaled corticosteroids), then pharmacodynamic endpoints rather than pharmacokinetic endpoints (see below) are used for comparison. For a pharmacokinetic comparison, the plasma concentration data are used to assess key pharmacokinetic parameters such as area under the curve (AUC), peak concentration (&quot;C&quot;max), time to peak concentration (&quot;t&quot;max), and absorption lag time (&quot;t&quot;lag). Testing should be conducted at several different doses, especially when the drug displays non-linear pharmacokinetics.

In addition to data from bioequivalence studies, other data may need to be submitted to meet regulatory requirements for bioequivalence. Such evidence may include:

* analytical method validation
* &quot;in vitro-in vivo&quot; correlation studies (IVIVC)

== Regulatory definition ==

=== The World Health Organization ===

The World Health Organization considers two formulation bioequivalent if the 90% confidence interval for the ratio multisource (generic) product/comparator lie within 80.00–125.00% acceptance range for AUC0–t and Cmax. For high variable finished pharmaceutical products, the applicable acceptance range for Cmax can be expanded (up to 69.84–143.19%).

=== Australia ===

In Australia, the Therapeutics Goods Administration (TGA) considers preparations to be bioequivalent if the 90% confidence intervals (90% CI) of the rate ratios, between the two preparations, of &quot;C&quot;max and AUC lie in the range 0.80–1.25. &quot;T&quot;max should also be similar between the products.

There are tighter requirements for drugs with a narrow therapeutic index and/or saturable metabolism – thus no generic products exist on the Australian market for digoxin or phenytoin for instance.

=== Europe ===

According to regulations applicable in the European Economic Area two medicinal products are bioequivalent if they are pharmaceutically equivalent or pharmaceutical alternatives and if their bioavailabilities after administration in the same molar dose are similar to such a degree that their effects, with respect to both efficacy and safety, will be essentially the same. This is considered demonstrated if the 90% confidence intervals (90% CI) of the ratios for AUC0–t and &quot;C&quot;max between the two preparations lie in the range 80–125%.

=== United States ===

The FDA considers two products bioequivalent if the 90% CI of the relative mean Cmax, AUC(0–t) and AUC(0–∞) of the test (e.g. generic formulation) to reference (e.g. innovator brand formulation) should be within 80% to 125% in the fasting state. Although there are a few exceptions, generally a bioequivalent comparison of Test to Reference formulations also requires administration after an appropriate meal at a specified time before taking the drug, a so-called &quot;fed&quot; or &quot;food-effect&quot; study. A food-effect study requires the same statistical evaluation as the fasting study, described above.

=== China ===

There were no requirements for bioequivalence in generic medications in China until the 2016 &quot;Opinion on Conducting Consistent Evaluation of the Quality and Efficacy of Generic Drugs&quot; (), which established basic rules for future bioequivalence work. Since July 2020, all newly-approved generics must pass bioequivalence checks; previous drugs may apply to be checked. Since 2019, National Centralized Volume-Based Procurement uses &quot;passes generic-consistency evalulation&quot; as one of the bidding criteria.

The Chinese definition of &quot;bioequivalence&quot; entails having the test drug&#x27;s geometric mean Cmax, AUC(0–t), and AUC(0–∞) fall into 80%–125% of the reference drug in both fasting and fed states. The reference drug should be preferably the original brand-name drug, then (if not available) an internationally-recognized generic approved by a developed country, then (if still not available) an internationally-recognized generic approved domestically – this is to avoid deviation from the original drug by serial use of generics as reference. If pharmacokinetic values such as Cmax do not apply to the type of drug (e.g. if the drug is not absorbed orally), comparisons can be made using other means such as dose-response curves.

According to Wei et al. (2022), the Consistency Evaluation Policy increased R&amp;D spending for Chinese pharmaceutical companies, especially among private and high-yielding ones. Liu et al. (2023) argues that the Policy increased the innovation quality of the Chinese pharmaceutical industry.

== Bioequivalence issues ==
While the FDA maintains that approved generic drugs are equivalent to their branded counterparts, bioequivalence problems have been reported by physicians and patients for many drugs. Certain classes of drugs are suspected to be particularly problematic because of their chemistry. Some of these include chiral drugs, poorly absorbed drugs, and cytotoxic drugs. In addition, complex delivery mechanisms can cause bioequivalence variances. Physicians are cautioned to avoid switching patients from branded to generic, or between different generic manufacturers, when prescribing anti-epileptic drugs, warfarin, and levothyroxine.

Major issues were raised in the verification of bioequivalence when multiple generic versions of FDA-approved generic drug were found not to be equivalent in efficacy and side effect profiles. In 2007, two providers of consumer information on nutritional products and supplements, ConsumerLab.com and The People&#x27;s Pharmacy, released the results of comparative tests of different brands of bupropion. The People&#x27;s Pharmacy received multiple reports of increased side effects and decreased efficacy of generic bupropion, which prompted it to ask ConsumerLab.com to test the products in question. The tests showed that some generic versions of Wellbutrin XL 300 mg didn&#x27;t perform the same as the brand-name pill in laboratory tests. The FDA investigated these complaints and concluded that the generic version is equivalent to Wellbutrin XL in regard to bioavailability of bupropion and its main active metabolite hydroxybupropion. The FDA also said that coincidental natural mood variation is the most likely explanation for the apparent worsening of depression after the switch from Wellbutrin XL to Budeprion XL. After several years of denying patient reports, in 2012 the FDA reversed this opinion, announcing that &quot;Budeprion XL 300 mg fails to demonstrate therapeutic equivalence to Wellbutrin XL 300 mg.&quot; The FDA did not test the bioequivalence of any of the other generic versions of Wellbutrin XL 300 mg, but requested that the four manufacturers submit data on this question to the FDA by March 2013. As of October 2013, the FDA has made determinations on the formulations from some manufacturers not being bioequivalent.

In 2004, Ranbaxy was revealed to have been falsifying data regarding the generic drugs they were manufacturing. As a result, 30 products were removed from US markets and Ranbaxy paid $500 million in fines. The FDA investigated many Indian drug manufacturers after this was discovered, and as a result at least 12 companies have been banned from shipping drugs to the US.

In 2017, The European Medicines Agency recommended suspension of a number of nationally approved medicines for which bioequivalence studies were conducted by Micro Therapeutic Research Labs in India, due to inspections identifying misrepresentation of study data and deficiencies in documentation and data handling.

== See also ==
* Generic drug
* Pharmacokinetics
* Clinical trial
* Abbreviated New Drug Application

== References ==
== External links ==

* Hussain AS, et al. The Biopharmaceutics Classification System: Highlights of the FDA&#x27;s Draft Guidance Office of Pharmaceutical Science, Center for Drug Evaluation and Research, Food and Drug Administration.
* Mills D (2005). Regulatory Agencies Do Not Require Clinical Trials To Be Expensive International Biopharmaceutical Association: IBPA Publications.
* FDA CDER Office of Generic Drugs – further U.S. information on bioequivalence testing and generic drugs
*Proposal to waive in vivo bioequivalence requirements for WHO Model List of Essential Medicines immediate-release, solid oral dosage forms. WHO Technical Report Series, No. 937, 2006, Annex 8. 
* Guidance for organizations performing in vivo bioequivalence studies (revision). WHO Technical Report Series 996, 2016, Annex 9.
* General background notes and list of international comparator pharmaceutical products. WHO Technical Report Series 1003, 2017, Annex 5. 
* WHO List of International Comparator products (September 2016)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q864940" start="0" end="14" title="Bioequivalence" label="Bioequivalence"/>
<link wikidata="Q323936" start="28" end="44" title="pharmacokinetics" label="pharmacokinetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q141124" start="73" end="80" title="in vivo" label="in vivo"/>
<link wikidata="Q461809" start="431" end="448" title="bioavailability" label="bioavailabilities"/>
<link wikidata="Q672821" start="516" end="526" title="Molar concentration" label="molar dose"/>
<link wikidata="Q2585693" start="597" end="605" title="efficacy" label="efficacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="865" end="894" title="World Health Organization" label="The World Health Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="1310" end="1323" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q204711" start="1324" end="1352" title="Food and Drug Administration" label="Food and Drug Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q506319" start="1874" end="1889" title="Generic drug" label="Generic product"/>
<link wikidata="Q323936" start="1891" end="1906" title="pharmacokinetic" label="pharmacokinetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1242899" start="1984" end="2000" title="cross-over study" label="cross-over study"/>
<link wikidata="Q110084" start="2152" end="2164" title="Serum (blood)" label="Serum/plasma"/>
<link wikidata="Q407595" start="2251" end="2261" title="metabolite" label="metabolite"/>
<link wikidata="Q210420" start="2394" end="2409" title="corticosteroids" label="corticosteroids"/>
<link wikidata="Q725307" start="2417" end="2432" title="pharmacodynamic" label="pharmacodynamic"/>
<link wikidata="Q573538" start="3011" end="3034" title="Regulation of therapeutic goods" label="regulatory requirements"/>
<link wikidata="Q5975478" start="3166" end="3171" title="IVIVC" label="IVIVC"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="3616" end="3625" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4056087" start="3631" end="3664" title="Therapeutics Goods Administration" label="Therapeutics Goods Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q208498" start="3725" end="3744" title="confidence interval" label="confidence interval"/>
<link wikidata="Q659446" start="3979" end="3996" title="therapeutic index" label="therapeutic index"/>
<link wikidata="Q422222" start="4087" end="4094" title="digoxin" label="digoxin"/>
<link wikidata="Q410400" start="4098" end="4107" title="phenytoin" label="phenytoin"/>
<link wikidata="Q8932" start="4182" end="4204" title="European Economic Area" label="European Economic Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q208498" start="4556" end="4575" title="confidence interval" label="confidence interval"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251001" start="6585" end="6604" title="dose-response curve" label="dose-response curve"/>
<link wikidata="Q107124487" start="7235" end="7247" title="chiral drugs" label="chiral drugs"/>
<link wikidata="Q113368879" start="7531" end="7539" title="warfarin" label="warfarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q773449" start="7545" end="7558" title="levothyroxine" label="levothyroxine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164627" start="7842" end="7857" title="ConsumerLab.com" label="ConsumerLab.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q377214" start="9224" end="9231" title="Ranbaxy" label="Ranbaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q130146" start="9600" end="9625" title="European Medicines Agency" label="European Medicines Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q506319" start="9921" end="9933" title="Generic drug" label="Generic drug"/>
<link wikidata="Q323936" start="9936" end="9952" title="Pharmacokinetics" label="Pharmacokinetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q30612" start="9955" end="9969" title="Clinical trial" label="Clinical trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q4664417" start="9972" end="10004" title="Abbreviated New Drug Application" label="Abbreviated New Drug Application"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="998108" wikidata="Q1376668" url="?curid=998108" title="Vladimir Rushailo">
<text>Vladimir Borisovich Rushailo (; born 28 July 1953) is a Russian politician.

While Rushailo was Moscow City Police General of the Moscow RUOP, he was in open conflict with Georgian mob boss 
Otari Kvantrishvili.

From 1999 to 2001, he was the interior minister of Russia, and secretary of Security Council from 2001 to 2004. As the minister of the interior, he was charged with overseeing the security of sensitive internal sites and materials such as high-value train shipments and nuclear weapons facilities. His tenure coincided with a period of serious concern over the security of Russia&#x27;s nuclear weapons stocks, especially with regard to the 2000 computer bug and its potential effects in the run up to and after the Y2K switch.
From 14 July 2004 to 5 October 2007, he was the executive secretary of the Commonwealth of Independent States.
In 2002, he was injured in a road crash in Kamchatka together with region&#x27;s governor Mikhail Mashkovtsev.

==Honours and awards==
*Hero of the Russian Federation (October 27, 1999)
*Order of Merit for the Fatherland, 3rd class (2003)
*Order of Courage (1998)
*Order of Honour (1998)
*Order of the Badge of Honour (1986)
*Order for Personal Courage (1992)
*Jubilee Medal &quot;300 Years of the Russian Navy&quot; (1996)
*Medal &quot;In Commemoration of the 850th Anniversary of Moscow&quot;
*Medal &quot;In Commemoration of the 300th Anniversary of Saint Petersburg&quot; (2003)
*Order of Holy Prince Daniel of Moscow, 3rd class (Russian Orthodox Church)
==See also==
*List of Heroes of the Russian Federation

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1376668" start="0" end="28" title="Vladimir Rushailo" label="Vladimir Borisovich Rushailo"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="56" end="63" title="Russia" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2895468" start="96" end="114" title="Moscow City Police" label="Moscow City Police"/>
<link wikidata="" start="137" end="141" title=":ru:РУБОП" label="RUOP"/>
<link wikidata="Q4218508" start="191" end="210" title="Otari Kvantrishvili" label="Otari Kvantrishvili"/>
<link wikidata="Q17578116" start="243" end="260" title="interior minister" label="interior minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q38715304" start="276" end="285" title="Secretary of the Security Council of Russia" label="secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q672108" start="289" end="305" title="Security Council of Russia" label="Security Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q7779" start="816" end="850" title="Commonwealth of Independent States" label="Commonwealth of Independent States"/>
<link wikidata="Q993" start="895" end="904" title="Kamchatka" label="Kamchatka"/>
<link wikidata="Q4286239" start="942" end="961" title="Mikhail Mashkovtsev" label="Mikhail Mashkovtsev"/>
<link wikidata="Q654471" start="988" end="1018" title="Hero of the Russian Federation" label="Hero of the Russian Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630643" start="1039" end="1072" title="Order of Merit for the Fatherland" label="Order of Merit for the Fatherland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2525430" start="1092" end="1108" title="Order of Courage (Russia)" label="Order of Courage"/>
<link wikidata="Q2268261" start="1117" end="1132" title="Order of Honour (Russian Federation)" label="Order of Honour"/>
<link wikidata="Q960966" start="1141" end="1169" title="Order of the Badge of Honour" label="Order of the Badge of Honour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1703180" start="1178" end="1204" title="Order for Personal Courage" label="Order for Personal Courage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1992414" start="1213" end="1268" title="Jubilee Medal &amp;quot;300 Years of the Russian Navy&amp;quot;" label="Jubilee Medal &amp;quot;300 Years of the Russian Navy&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1992013" start="1277" end="1346" title="Medal &amp;quot;In Commemoration of the 850th Anniversary of Moscow&amp;quot;" label="Medal &amp;quot;In Commemoration of the 850th Anniversary of Moscow&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1992181" start="1348" end="1427" title="Medal &amp;quot;In Commemoration of the 300th Anniversary of Saint Petersburg&amp;quot;" label="Medal &amp;quot;In Commemoration of the 300th Anniversary of Saint Petersburg&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q4336014" start="1436" end="1473" title="Order of Holy Prince Daniel of Moscow" label="Order of Holy Prince Daniel of Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q6573040" start="1525" end="1565" title="List of Heroes of the Russian Federation" label="List of Heroes of the Russian Federation"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="998111" wikidata="Q893480" url="?curid=998111" title="Bored of Education">
<text>Bored of Education is a 1936 &quot;Our Gang&quot; short comedy film directed by Gordon Douglas. Produced by Hal Roach and released to theaters by Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer, it was the 146th entry in the &quot;Our Gang&quot; series to be released.

==Plot==
It is the first day of school and the kids wait on the school steps with long faces and pouted lips. Worried about the new teacher they&#x27;ll be getting this term, Spanky and Alfalfa come up with a scheme to get themselves excused from school: Spanky has Alfalfa pretend he has a toothache, going as far as to stuff a balloon in his mouth to sell the idea.

Unknown to the kids, however, the new school teacher, Miss Lawrence, has overheard Spanky and Alfalfa&#x27;s scheming and has ordered ice cream as a first-day surprise for the class. She sees right through Alfalfa&#x27;s fibs about being too sick to sing &quot;Good Morning to You&quot; with the rest of the class, and knowingly grants him an excuse to go home (and Spanky an excuse to take him home). The two boys&#x27; triumph backfires when they see the ice cream man as he makes his delivery to the rest of their class. Now needing to find a way to get back into school, Spanky pops the balloon in Alfalfa&#x27;s mouth, and explains to Miss Lawrence, &quot;Funny thing, teacher; he&#x27;s all well now&quot;.

Miss Lawrence agrees to let the boys back in for the ice cream party, but only if Alfalfa will make up for not singing &quot;Good Morning&quot; by rendering another song. However, Alfalfa has accidentally swallowed the stopper from the balloon that constituted his &quot;toothache&quot;, so as he steps in front of the class to sing &#x27;&quot;Believe Me, if All Those Endearing Young Charms&#x27;&quot;, a strange wheeze accompanies every breath he takes between lines. At the conclusion of his song, Spanky and Alfalfa go to get their ice cream only to find that it has melted, but the kind and clever Miss Lawrence hands the boys two fresh ice cream bars.

==Notes==
A remake of &quot;Teacher&#x27;s Pet&quot;, &quot;Bored of Education&quot; was also the first &quot;Our Gang&quot; entry in the series&#x27; revamped one-reel (ten-minute) format, after 14 years of two-reel and three-reel entries. &quot;Bored of Education&quot; won Hal Roach his only Academy Award for &quot;Our Gang&quot;, the 1937 Academy Award for Short Subjects (One-Reel).

&quot;Bored of Education&quot; was also the first &quot;Our Gang&quot; film directed by Gordon Douglas. Douglas, who had served as assistant director on &quot;Our Gang&quot; for some time, made his directorial debut on a 1935 Hal Roach &quot;All Stars&quot; short, &quot;The Infernal Triangle&quot;. Douglas would remain &quot;Our Gang&#x27;s&quot; senior director through 1938. With the series now in one-reel format, Douglas had to modify the looser approaches of his predecessors, Robert F. McGowan and Gus Meins, and turned the &quot;Our Gang&quot; series into slicker, more streamlined shorts based around situation comedy. Ironically, Douglas has a walk-on part in &quot;Teacher&#x27;s Pet&quot; as a caterer)

By 1936, producer Hal Roach, who had built his studio around popular two-reel comedies, had slowly begun phasing out his short subjects production as movie theaters opted for double feature programs instead of the traditional program of selected short subjects and one feature. Roach had successfully moved his biggest stars, Laurel and Hardy, to full-time feature production in 1935. Rather than cancel &quot;Our Gang&quot;, however, Roach continued the series at the behest of his distributor, Louis B. Mayer of MGM. Keeping the series in production, however, required Roach to halve the lengths of the &quot;Our Gang&quot; films from two-reels to one.

Also formally introduced to &quot;Our Gang&quot; in &quot;Bored of Education&quot; was Roach actress Rosina Lawrence as &quot;Our Gang&#x27;s&quot; new schoolteacher &quot;Miss Jones&quot;. Lawrence appeared in five more &quot;Our Gang&quot; shorts during the 1936-37 cycle of shorts.

&quot;Bored of Education&quot; won Roach the Academy Award for Short Subjects (One-Reel), the only &quot;Our Gang&quot; film so honored. In their review for the short in their book &quot;The Little Rascals: The Life and Times of Our Gang&quot;, film historians Leonard Maltin and Richard W. Bann felt that the award seemed to be &quot;a product of whim or timing, rather than strictly a consideration of merit&quot;, noting earlier and later shorts–&quot;Teacher&#x27;s Pet&quot; among them–they felt were overlooked.

&quot;Bored of Education&quot; was preserved by the Academy Film Archive, in conjunction with the UCLA Film and Television Archive, in 2013. In 2022, &quot;Bored of Education&quot; was digitally re-scanned from the original 35mm film master prints using updated transfer technology, and further restored by ClassicFlix, who licensed the entire Hal Roach-era &quot;Our Gang&quot; series for release on Blu-ray.

The short&#x27;s title is a pun on the term &quot;Board of Education&quot;, a government agency in the United States that is responsible for the overall management of its public school system.

==Cast==
===The Gang===
* Darla Hood as Darla
* Eugene Lee as Porky
* George McFarland as Spanky
* Carl Switzer as Alfalfa
* Billie Thomas as Buckwheat
* Pete The Pup as Himself

===Additional cast===
* Rosina Lawrence as Miss Lawrence
* Jack Egan as Ice cream attendant

===Classroom extras===
Patsy Barry, Daniel Boone, John Collum, Joe &quot;Corky&quot; Geil, Barbara Goodrich, Sidney Kibrick, Robert Lentz, Patsy May, Tommy McFarland, Dickie De Nuet, Donald Proffitt, Harold &quot;Slim&quot; Switzer,

==See also==
* &quot;Our Gang&quot; filmography

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1218784" start="35" end="43" title="Our Gang" label="Our Gang"/>
<link wikidata="Q24862" start="50" end="55" title="short subject" label="short"/>
<link wikidata="Q157443" start="56" end="67" title="comedy film" label="comedy film"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479869" start="80" end="94" title="Gordon Douglas (director)" label="Gordon Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q72792" start="108" end="117" title="Hal Roach" label="Hal Roach"/>
<link wikidata="Q179200" start="146" end="165" title="Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer" label="Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="872" end="891" title="Good Morning to You (song)" label="Good Morning to You"/>
<link wikidata="Q4882795" start="1670" end="1717" title="Believe Me, if All Those Endearing Young Charms" label="Believe Me, if All Those Endearing Young Charms"/>
<link wikidata="Q12128822" start="2014" end="2032" title="Teacher&amp;#x27;s Pet (1930 film)" label="Teacher&amp;#x27;s Pet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420806" start="2150" end="2154" title="reel" label="reel"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="2281" end="2294" title="Academy Award" label="Academy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324407" start="2330" end="2373" title="Academy Award for Best Live Action Short Film" label="Academy Award for Short Subjects (One-Reel)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479869" start="2464" end="2478" title="Gordon Douglas (director)" label="Gordon Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3435067" start="2860" end="2877" title="Robert F. McGowan" label="Robert F. McGowan"/>
<link wikidata="Q946909" start="2882" end="2891" title="Gus Meins" label="Gus Meins"/>
<link wikidata="Q170238" start="2987" end="3003" title="situation comedy" label="situation comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251417" start="3268" end="3282" title="double feature" label="double feature"/>
<link wikidata="Q33497" start="3419" end="3435" title="Laurel and Hardy" label="Laurel and Hardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q319682" start="3589" end="3603" title="Louis B. Mayer" label="Louis B. Mayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3442671" start="3850" end="3865" title="Rosina Lawrence" label="Rosina Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324407" start="4080" end="4123" title="Academy Award for Best Live Action Short Film" label="Academy Award for Short Subjects (One-Reel)"/>
<link wikidata="Q731195" start="4296" end="4310" title="Leonard Maltin" label="Leonard Maltin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4671357" start="4606" end="4626" title="Academy Film Archive" label="Academy Film Archive"/>
<link wikidata="Q7864025" start="4652" end="4684" title="UCLA Film and Television Archive" label="UCLA Film and Television Archive"/>
<link wikidata="Q226528" start="4778" end="4787" title="35 mm movie film" label="35mm film"/>
<link wikidata="Q47770" start="4955" end="4962" title="Blu-ray" label="Blu-ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q274081" start="5185" end="5195" title="Darla Hood" label="Darla Hood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373141" start="5207" end="5217" title="Eugene Gordon Lee" label="Eugene Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q204042" start="5229" end="5245" title="George McFarland" label="George McFarland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040783" start="5258" end="5270" title="Carl Switzer" label="Carl Switzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3640017" start="5284" end="5297" title="Billie Thomas" label="Billie Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7172369" start="5313" end="5325" title="Pete The Pup" label="Pete The Pup"/>
<link wikidata="Q3442671" start="5362" end="5377" title="Rosina Lawrence" label="Rosina Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q6226753" start="5481" end="5492" title="John Collum" label="John Collum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7509172" start="5540" end="5554" title="Sidney Kibrick" label="Sidney Kibrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q5662499" start="5631" end="5662" title="Harold &amp;quot;Slim&amp;quot; Switzer" label="Harold &amp;quot;Slim&amp;quot; Switzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3745457" start="5680" end="5712" title="Our Gang filmography" label="&amp;quot;Our Gang&amp;quot; filmography"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="998113" wikidata="Q5955348" url="?curid=998113" title="Jeff Nelson (pitcher)">
<text>Jeffrey Allan Nelson (born November 17, 1966) is an American sports broadcaster and former baseball relief pitcher who played 15 years in Major League Baseball (MLB). He batted and threw right-handed. Nelson had two stints with the New York Yankees, the team with whom he won four World Series championships. Nelson retired from playing in 2007 after signing a minor league contract with the Yankees.

In his MLB career, Nelson pitched in 798 games with a 48–45 win–loss record, and with runners in scoring position and two outs he held batters to a .191 batting average against. In 55 postseason games (third all time), he compiled a 2–3 record with 62 strikeouts and a 2.65 earned run average in innings. Among hitters whom he dominated most were Troy Glaus, who in 14 at-bats was hitless with 11 strikeouts.

Nelson had three stints with the Seattle Mariners (1992–1995, 2001–2003 and again in 2005). He is Seattle&#x27;s all-time record holder for most games pitched (383), and has a 23–20 record with the Mariners. Nelson is currently a television color analyst for the Miami Marlins and New York Yankees.

==Early life and career==
Nelson grew up in Maryland and played baseball and basketball at Catonsville High School.

Drafted by the Los Angeles Dodgers in the 22nd round of the 1984 MLB draft, he signed on June 21, 1984. In 1986, he was selected by the Seattle Mariners in the minor league phase of the Rule 5 draft.

==Major league career==
Nelson made his major league debut with the Mariners on April 16, 1992, against the Chicago White Sox at Comiskey Park. He pitched two scoreless innings of relief.

On July 13, 1995, Nelson entered a game against the Toronto Blue Jays with two runners on base and no outs. Nelson threw one pitch to Sandy Martínez and induced a ground ball triple play. He became the first pitcher in the era for which pitch count data is available to throw only one pitch in an outing and be credited with pitching a full inning.

In December 1995, the Mariners traded Nelson, Tino Martinez, and Jim Mecir to the New York Yankees for Russ Davis and Sterling Hitchcock. With the Yankees, Nelson was a member of the World Series champions in 1996, 1998, 1999, and 2000.

Nelson returned to Seattle as a free agent in . In that season he made the American League All-Star team. Nelson&#x27;s All-Star selection was considered an innovative move by AL manager Joe Torre, as Nelson&#x27;s role of middle relief was traditionally overlooked during All-Star selection.

From 2001 to 2003, he formed the right side of Seattle&#x27;s potent lefty/righty setup squad along with left-handed pitcher Arthur Rhodes. In 2001, he held opposing batters to a .136 batting average and a .199 slugging percentage, and .074/.110 once he had two strikes on them.

On August 6, 2003, the Mariners traded Nelson to the Yankees for Armando Benitez. The Yankees lost to the Florida Marlins in the World Series and once again Nelson left the Yankees.

In , Nelson appeared in 29 games for the Texas Rangers, going 1–2 with a 5.32 ERA. He was on the disabled list twice with an assortment of injuries to his right knee and right elbow.
Before the season, the Seattle Mariners signed Nelson to a minor league contract, his third stint with the club.

In the offseason, Nelson signed a minor-league contract with the St. Louis Cardinals, but was released before the season began. He was then picked up by the White Sox.

===Surgery===
On June 8, 2006, Nelson announced that he would undergo surgery, to relieve a nerve in his right elbow, that was likely to mark the end of Nelson&#x27;s active baseball career. Following the operation on his pitching elbow, on May 10, 2007, there was controversy when he tried to sell bone chips from his elbow, removed in the operation, on eBay who cancelled the auction. Nelson, whose daughters attended The Bear Creek School, were going to give half the proceeds to the school and half to the Curtis Williams Foundation.

Nelson signed a minor league contract with the Yankees in January 2007 so that he could officially retire as a Yankee.

==Pitching==
Nelson was a respected slider specialist, much more effective against right-handed batters than against lefties (who batted 55 points higher, and slugged 106 points higher, against him than did righties). He was also known for his three-quarters sidearm delivery, and threw a cut 90-mile per hour fastball as well. During his Yankees tenure, he was known for faking a throw to third base and then throwing to first base in an attempt to pick off the baserunner. Until the rule was changed in 2013, making a fake throw to third base a balk, this was referred to as &quot;the old Jeff Nelson&quot; by Yankees play-by-play broadcaster Michael Kay.

==Broadcasting==
Nelson has filled in on sports radio KJR-AM in Seattle and also worked as an analyst for MLB.com during the 2010 post-season.

In 2016, Nelson joined Fox Sports&#x27; pre-game broadcast team for Miami Marlins. In 2019, Nelson served as a game analyst for the YES Network, calling occasional games for his former team. On July 12, 2019, Nelson began appearing on the YES Network&#x27;s pregame show. He substituted for Suzyn Waldman on WFAN broadcasts of the final games of the Yankees regular season in October 2022, working with John Sterling.

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5955348" start="0" end="20" title="Jeff Nelson (pitcher)" label="Jeffrey Allan Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5369" start="91" end="99" title="baseball" label="baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198553" start="100" end="114" title="relief pitcher" label="relief pitcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="138" end="159" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q2421902" start="187" end="199" title="right-handed" label="right-handed"/>
<link wikidata="Q213417" start="232" end="248" title="New York Yankees" label="New York Yankees"/>
<link wikidata="Q265538" start="281" end="293" title="World Series" label="World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q4869919" start="555" end="578" title="batting average against" label="batting average against"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154763" start="654" end="663" title="strikeout" label="strikeout"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145091" start="676" end="694" title="earned run average" label="earned run average"/>
<link wikidata="Q8192188" start="698" end="705" title="innings pitched" label="innings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364355" start="749" end="759" title="Troy Glaus" label="Troy Glaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q466586" start="845" end="861" title="Seattle Mariners" label="Seattle Mariners"/>
<link wikidata="Q5520118" start="957" end="970" title="games pitched" label="games pitched"/>
<link wikidata="Q652879" start="1075" end="1088" title="Miami Marlins" label="Miami Marlins"/>
<link wikidata="Q5053845" start="1203" end="1226" title="Catonsville High School" label="Catonsville High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q334634" start="1244" end="1263" title="Los Angeles Dodgers" label="Los Angeles Dodgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4581740" start="1289" end="1303" title="1984 Major League Baseball draft" label="1984 MLB draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q869203" start="1415" end="1427" title="Rule 5 draft" label="Rule 5 draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q335169" start="1538" end="1555" title="Chicago White Sox" label="Chicago White Sox"/>
<link wikidata="Q633613" start="1559" end="1572" title="Guaranteed Rate Field" label="Comiskey Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q650829" start="1671" end="1688" title="Toronto Blue Jays" label="Toronto Blue Jays"/>
<link wikidata="Q7417364" start="1753" end="1767" title="Sandy Martínez" label="Sandy Martínez"/>
<link wikidata="Q963555" start="1794" end="1805" title="triple play" label="triple play"/>
<link wikidata="Q7198850" start="1856" end="1867" title="pitch count" label="pitch count"/>
<link wikidata="Q7808412" start="2015" end="2028" title="Tino Martinez" label="Tino Martinez"/>
<link wikidata="Q6196915" start="2034" end="2043" title="Jim Mecir" label="Jim Mecir"/>
<link wikidata="Q213417" start="2051" end="2067" title="New York Yankees" label="New York Yankees"/>
<link wikidata="Q7381121" start="2072" end="2082" title="Russ Davis" label="Russ Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3498774" start="2087" end="2105" title="Sterling Hitchcock" label="Sterling Hitchcock"/>
<link wikidata="Q265538" start="2152" end="2164" title="World Series" label="World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q969772" start="2239" end="2249" title="free agent" label="free agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069698" start="2282" end="2306" title="Major League Baseball All-Star Game" label="American League All-Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q707804" start="2394" end="2403" title="Joe Torre" label="Joe Torre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2865311" start="2626" end="2639" title="Arthur Rhodes" label="Arthur Rhodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4792737" start="2846" end="2861" title="Armando Benitez" label="Armando Benitez"/>
<link wikidata="Q652879" start="2887" end="2902" title="Florida Marlins" label="Florida Marlins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187392" start="2910" end="2922" title="2003 World Series" label="World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q329816" start="3005" end="3018" title="Texas Rangers (baseball)" label="Texas Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145091" start="3042" end="3045" title="earned run average" label="ERA"/>
<link wikidata="Q84129" start="3206" end="3218" title="minor league baseball" label="minor league"/>
<link wikidata="Q504309" start="3326" end="3345" title="St. Louis Cardinals" label="St. Louis Cardinals"/>
<link wikidata="Q335169" start="3418" end="3427" title="Chicago White Sox" label="White Sox"/>
<link wikidata="Q58024" start="3785" end="3789" title="eBay" label="eBay"/>
<link wikidata="Q7716022" start="3850" end="3871" title="The Bear Creek School" label="The Bear Creek School"/>
<link wikidata="Q608445" start="4125" end="4131" title="Slider (baseball)" label="slider"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140647" start="4399" end="4407" title="fastball" label="fastball"/>
<link wikidata="Q14928311" start="4734" end="4745" title="Michael Kay (sports broadcaster)" label="Michael Kay"/>
<link wikidata="Q6331613" start="4802" end="4808" title="KJR-AM" label="KJR-AM"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083" start="4812" end="4819" title="Seattle" label="Seattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3273050" start="4854" end="4861" title="MLB.com" label="MLB.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q77625" start="4915" end="4925" title="Fox Sports" label="Fox Sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q652879" start="4960" end="4973" title="Miami Marlins" label="Miami Marlins"/>
<link wikidata="Q903249" start="5024" end="5035" title="YES Network" label="YES Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q7651459" start="5183" end="5196" title="Suzyn Waldman" label="Suzyn Waldman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1106511" start="5200" end="5204" title="WFAN (AM)" label="WFAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q6259065" start="5295" end="5308" title="John Sterling (sportscaster)" label="John Sterling"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="998116" wikidata="Q173106" url="?curid=998116" title="Node (networking)">
<text>In telecommunications networks, a node (, ‘knot’) is either a redistribution point or a communication endpoint. 

A physical network node is an electronic device that is attached to a network, and is capable of creating, receiving, or transmitting information over a communication channel. In data communication, a physical network node may either be data communication equipment (such as a modem, hub, bridge or switch) or data terminal equipment (such as a digital telephone handset, a printer or a host computer). 

A passive distribution point such as a distribution frame or patch panel is not a node.

== Computer networks ==
In data communication, a physical network node may either be data communication equipment (DCE) such as a modem, hub, bridge or switch; or data terminal equipment (DTE) such as a digital telephone handset, a printer or a host computer.
If a network is a local area network (LAN) or wide area network (WAN), every LAN or WAN node that participates on the data link layer must have a network address, typically one for each network interface controller it possesses. Examples are computers, a DSL modem with Ethernet interface and wireless access point. Equipment, such as an Ethernet hub or modem with serial interface, that operates only below the data link layer does not require a network address.

If the network in question is the Internet or an intranet, many physical network nodes are host computers, also known as &quot;Internet nodes&quot;, identified by an IP address, and all hosts are physical network nodes. However, some data-link-layer devices such as switches, bridges and wireless access points do not have an IP host address (except sometimes for administrative purposes), and are not considered to be Internet nodes or hosts, but are considered physical network nodes and LAN nodes.

== Telecommunications ==
In the fixed telephone network, a node may be a public or private telephone exchange, a remote concentrator or a computer providing some intelligent network service. In cellular communication, switching points and databases such as the base station controller, home location register, gateway GPRS Support Node (GGSN) and serving GPRS support node (SGSN) are examples of nodes. Cellular network base stations are not considered to be nodes in this context.

In cable television systems (CATV), this term has assumed a broader context and is generally associated with a fiber optic node. This can be defined as those homes or businesses within a specific geographic area that are served from a common fiber optic receiver. A fiber optic node is generally described in terms of the number of &quot;homes passed&quot; that are served by that specific fiber node.

==Distributed systems==
In a distributed system network, the nodes are clients, servers or peers. A peer may sometimes serve as client, sometimes server. In a peer-to-peer or overlay network, nodes that actively route data for the other networked devices as well as themselves are called supernodes.

Distributed systems may sometimes use &quot;virtual nodes&quot; so that the system is not oblivious to the heterogeneity of the nodes. This issue is addressed with special algorithms, like consistent hashing, as it is the case in Amazon&#x27;s Dynamo.

Within a vast computer network, the individual computers on the periphery of the network, those that do not also connect other networks, and those that often connect transiently to one or more clouds are called end nodes. Typically, within the cloud computing construct, the individual user or customer computer that connects into one well-managed cloud is called an end node. Since these computers are a part of the network yet unmanaged by the cloud&#x27;s host, they present significant risks to the entire cloud. This is called the end node problem. There are several means to remedy this problem but all require instilling trust in the end node computer.

==See also ==
*End system
*Middlebox
*Networking hardware
*Terminal (telecommunication)

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1068715" start="3" end="29" title="telecommunications network" label="telecommunications network"/>
<link wikidata="Q173106" start="34" end="38" title="Node (networking)" label="node"/>
<link wikidata="Q5154133" start="88" end="110" title="communication endpoint" label="communication endpoint"/>
<link wikidata="Q733553" start="267" end="288" title="communication channel" label="communication channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142912" start="351" end="379" title="data communication equipment" label="data communication equipment"/>
<link wikidata="Q5607" start="391" end="396" title="modem" label="modem"/>
<link wikidata="Q21073034" start="398" end="401" title="Network hub" label="hub"/>
<link wikidata="Q188635" start="403" end="409" title="Network bridge" label="bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q4503" start="413" end="419" title="Network switch" label="switch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172400" start="424" end="447" title="data terminal equipment" label="data terminal equipment"/>
<link wikidata="Q829281" start="501" end="514" title="host computer" label="host computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045736" start="521" end="528" title="Passivity (engineering)" label="passive"/>
<link wikidata="Q6521653" start="558" end="576" title="distribution frame" label="distribution frame"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570652" start="580" end="591" title="patch panel" label="patch panel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142912" start="693" end="721" title="data communication equipment" label="data communication equipment"/>
<link wikidata="Q5607" start="738" end="743" title="modem" label="modem"/>
<link wikidata="Q21073034" start="745" end="748" title="Network hub" label="hub"/>
<link wikidata="Q188635" start="750" end="756" title="Network bridge" label="bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q4503" start="760" end="766" title="Network switch" label="switch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172400" start="771" end="794" title="data terminal equipment" label="data terminal equipment"/>
<link wikidata="Q829281" start="853" end="866" title="host computer" label="host computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q11381" start="886" end="904" title="local area network" label="local area network"/>
<link wikidata="Q11384" start="914" end="931" title="wide area network" label="wide area network"/>
<link wikidata="Q194134" start="986" end="1001" title="data link layer" label="data link layer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4418000" start="1014" end="1029" title="network address" label="network address"/>
<link wikidata="Q165233" start="1054" end="1082" title="network interface controller" label="network interface controller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155692" start="1123" end="1132" title="DSL modem" label="DSL modem"/>
<link wikidata="Q326717" start="1161" end="1182" title="wireless access point" label="wireless access point"/>
<link wikidata="Q128003" start="1206" end="1218" title="Ethernet hub" label="Ethernet hub"/>
<link wikidata="Q385390" start="1233" end="1249" title="serial interface" label="serial interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q75" start="1367" end="1375" title="Internet" label="Internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q483426" start="1382" end="1390" title="intranet" label="intranet"/>
<link wikidata="Q11135" start="1499" end="1509" title="IP address" label="IP address"/>
<link wikidata="Q256132" start="1926" end="1944" title="telephone exchange" label="telephone exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q7312137" start="1948" end="1967" title="remote concentrator" label="remote concentrator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1665681" start="1997" end="2024" title="intelligent network service" label="intelligent network service"/>
<link wikidata="Q809834" start="2096" end="2119" title="base station controller" label="base station controller"/>
<link wikidata="Q779475" start="2121" end="2143" title="home location register" label="home location register"/>
<link wikidata="Q2642473" start="2145" end="2170" title="gateway GPRS Support Node" label="gateway GPRS Support Node"/>
<link wikidata="Q2642473" start="2182" end="2207" title="serving GPRS support node" label="serving GPRS support node"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379116" start="2255" end="2267" title="base station" label="base station"/>
<link wikidata="Q184452" start="2321" end="2337" title="cable television" label="cable television"/>
<link wikidata="Q1529430" start="2429" end="2440" title="Fiber-optic communication" label="fiber optic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339255" start="2572" end="2580" title="Receiver (information theory)" label="receiver"/>
<link wikidata="Q180634" start="2750" end="2768" title="distributed system" label="distributed system"/>
<link wikidata="Q528166" start="2792" end="2799" title="client (computing)" label="clients"/>
<link wikidata="Q44127" start="2801" end="2808" title="Server (computing)" label="servers"/>
<link wikidata="Q161410" start="2812" end="2817" title="peer (networking)" label="peers"/>
<link wikidata="Q161410" start="2880" end="2892" title="peer-to-peer" label="peer-to-peer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331985" start="2896" end="2911" title="overlay network" label="overlay network"/>
<link wikidata="Q2367955" start="3009" end="3019" title="supernode (networking)" label="supernodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757218" start="3211" end="3229" title="consistent hashing" label="consistent hashing"/>
<link wikidata="Q955854" start="3252" end="3272" title="Dynamo (storage system)" label="Amazon&amp;#x27;s Dynamo"/>
<link wikidata="Q483639" start="3468" end="3474" title="cloud computing" label="clouds"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375822" start="3811" end="3827" title="end node problem" label="end node problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375892" start="3951" end="3961" title="End system" label="End system"/>
<link wikidata="Q6841716" start="3963" end="3972" title="Middlebox" label="Middlebox"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546066" start="3974" end="3993" title="Networking hardware" label="Networking hardware"/>
<link wikidata="Q3518405" start="3995" end="4023" title="Terminal (telecommunication)" label="Terminal (telecommunication)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="998118" wikidata="Q568946" url="?curid=998118" title="Ekiben">
<text>are a specific type of &quot;bento&quot; boxed meals, sold on trains and at train stations in Japan. They come with disposable chopsticks (when necessary) or spoons. &quot;Ekiben&quot; containers can be made from plastic, wood, or ceramic. Many train stations have become famous for their &quot;ekiben&quot; made from local food specialties (&quot;tokusanhin&quot;). 

&quot;Ekiben&quot; were first sold in railway stations in the late 19th century, and developed at a time when meals on train were necessary during a long train journey. The popularity of &quot;ekiben&quot; reached a peak in the 1980s, but declined as air travel became more affordable and trains became faster. However, numerous types of &quot;ekiben&quot; can still be purchased at stands in the station, on the platform, or on the train itself, some of which may be presented in unique containers that can serve as souvenirs or collectables. Despite undergoing a decline in popularity in the 1990s and 2000s, &quot;ekiben&quot; remains popular among travelers, and gained popularity on the Shinkansen ever since the dining car service that replaced it was discontinued when Japan&#x27;s asset price bubble burst in the early 1990s, leading to the Lost Decades.

==History==
The word &quot;ekiben&quot; comes from &quot;&quot;eki&quot;, meaning railway station, and &quot;ben&quot;&quot;, which is short for &quot;bento&quot; (box meal). Before the introduction of rail travel, travellers would prepare their own meal or buy meals kept in wooden &quot;bento&quot; boxes sold in tea houses. During the intermission of kabuki theatre performances, &quot;makunouchi-bento&quot; (&quot;between-acts box lunches&quot;) were also sold. These would evolve into &quot;ekiben&quot; with the coming of railways. The first sale of &quot;ekiben&quot; is generally believed to have been at the Utsunomiya Station in 1885 which opened when the Nihon Tetsudo line linked the station to Ueno Station in Tokyo. In the beginning the &quot;ekiben&quot; offered were simple fare, the &quot;ekiben&quot; offered at Utsunomiya Station were simply &quot;onigiri&quot; (rice balls) wrapped in young bamboo leaves. The idea of selling &quot;ekiben&quot; quickly spread to railway stations around the country, and in 1888, the first standard &quot;ekiben&quot; with rice and a few side dishes were sold at Himeji Station.

At the beginning of the 20th century, many stations began to offer &quot;ekiben&quot; that served meals prepared from local specialties, and &quot;ekiben&quot; then evolved into a form of meal distinct from other &quot;bento&quot; boxes. These may be developed specially and are unique to each region, and often found only at the local railway stations. A well-known example is &quot;ikameshi&quot;, squid stuffed with rice, served at the Mori Station in Hokkaido. It was first produced as an &quot;ekiben&quot; meal but has since become a noted regional dish. In many places, &quot;ekiben&quot; have become souvenirs of local specialty for tourists with unique containers and attractive packaging.
Rail travel in Japan boomed after the Second World War, and with it the popularity of &quot;ekiben&quot;. Sales of &quot;ekiben&quot; was further spurred on in the 1970s by &quot;Ekiben Hitoritabi&quot;, a drama based on a manga about a person who travelled round Japan to taste the &quot;ekiben&quot; in different parts of the country. At its height in the mid 1980s, it was estimated that twelve million boxes were consumed daily. This &quot;Golden Age&quot; of &quot;ekiben&quot;, however, ended in the 1980s when air travel became popular and the introduction of faster trains became more widespread. Prior to the 1980s, air travel was expensive and travelers tended to use trains which were then much slower, therefore &quot;ekiben&quot; were necessary during their long train journeys. Faster trains such as the Shinkansen also eliminated many stops along a railway journey, which contributed to its decline, and some stations no longer offer &quot;ekiben&quot;. From 1987 to 2008, there was a 50% decline in the number of &quot;ekiben&quot; makers. However, the popularity of the &quot;ekiben&quot; increased when the dining car was discontinued in the 1990s, eventually gaining popularity on the Shinkansen aside from remaining popular on the slower but cheaper commuter trains.

&quot;Ekiben&quot; are now also available outside of railway station in department stores and airports. Annual &quot;ekiben&quot; fairs are held at various department stores, the first of which was held in 1966. The largest of these are the ones at the Keio Department Store in Shinjuku Station, Tokyo, and Hanshin Department Store in Osaka. Japanese railfans who have a particular enthusiasm for &quot;ekiben&quot; are known as &quot;ekiben-tetsu&quot;.

==Types==

There many types of different &quot;ekiben&quot; available. The standard &quot;ekiben&quot; available throughout Japan is known as &quot;makunouchi-bento&quot;, which typically features rice, grilled fish, fish cakes, pickles, and other standard elements. There are also regional varieties of &quot;ekiben&quot; that incorporate elements of the local cuisine. For example, &quot;masuzushi&quot; is a variety of &quot;ekiben&quot; from Toyama Prefecture that features trout &quot;oshizushi&quot; (pressed sushi) wrapped in bamboo leaves.

A similar style of meal is also popular in Taiwan, known as Taiwan Railway Bento.

==Gallery==
==See also==
*&quot;Kyaraben&quot;: elaborately arranged &quot;bento&quot;
*&quot;Ikameshi&quot;: a regional dish composed of squid cooked with rice inside
* &quot;Kamameshi&quot;: dish of rice, meat, and vegetables cooked in a pot

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q380532" start="29" end="34" title="bento" label="bento"/>
<link wikidata="Q55488" start="76" end="89" title="train station" label="train station"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="94" end="99" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q81980" start="127" end="137" title="chopsticks" label="chopsticks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2674120" start="318" end="328" title="local food" label="local food"/>
<link wikidata="Q11571036" start="348" end="358" title="tokusanhin" label="tokusanhin"/>
<link wikidata="Q164338" start="672" end="678" title="Shinkansen" label="faster"/>
<link wikidata="Q212469" start="886" end="894" title="souvenir" label="souvenir"/>
<link wikidata="Q164338" start="1061" end="1071" title="Shinkansen" label="Shinkansen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500827" start="1158" end="1176" title="Japanese asset price bubble" label="asset price bubble"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141122" start="1218" end="1230" title="Lost Decades" label="Lost Decades"/>
<link wikidata="Q199701" start="1587" end="1593" title="kabuki" label="kabuki"/>
<link wikidata="Q3275782" start="1622" end="1638" title="Makunouchi" label="makunouchi-bento"/>
<link wikidata="Q801549" start="1851" end="1869" title="Utsunomiya Station" label="Utsunomiya Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q910283" start="1900" end="1913" title="Nippon Railway" label="Nihon Tetsudo"/>
<link wikidata="Q801551" start="1941" end="1953" title="Ueno Station" label="Ueno Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1490" start="1957" end="1962" title="Tokyo" label="Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q13393" start="2101" end="2108" title="onigiri" label="onigiri"/>
<link wikidata="Q119301" start="2350" end="2364" title="Himeji Station" label="Himeji Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q5995340" start="2751" end="2759" title="ikameshi" label="ikameshi"/>
<link wikidata="Q864405" start="2806" end="2818" title="Mori Station (Hokkaido)" label="Mori Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q35581" start="2822" end="2830" title="Hokkaido" label="Hokkaido"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="3104" end="3120" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q11668207" start="3245" end="3262" title="Ekiben Hitoritabi" label="Ekiben Hitoritabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q164338" start="3884" end="3894" title="Shinkansen" label="Shinkansen"/>
<link wikidata="Q164338" start="4270" end="4280" title="Shinkansen" label="Shinkansen"/>
<link wikidata="Q801447" start="4632" end="4648" title="Shinjuku Station" label="Shinjuku Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q5651113" start="4661" end="4685" title="Hanshin Department Store" label="Hanshin Department Store"/>
<link wikidata="Q35765" start="4689" end="4694" title="Osaka" label="Osaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q124881401" start="4696" end="4713" title="Densha Otaku" label="Japanese railfans"/>
<link wikidata="Q3275782" start="4958" end="4974" title="Makunouchi" label="makunouchi-bento"/>
<link wikidata="Q11674345" start="5200" end="5209" title="masuzushi" label="masuzushi"/>
<link wikidata="Q132929" start="5256" end="5273" title="Toyama Prefecture" label="Toyama Prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2258881" start="5288" end="5293" title="trout" label="trout"/>
<link wikidata="Q46383" start="5300" end="5309" title="oshizushi" label="oshizushi"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="5402" end="5408" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q15914808" start="5419" end="5439" title="Taiwan Railway Bento" label="Taiwan Railway Bento"/>
<link wikidata="Q3272930" start="5474" end="5482" title="Kyaraben" label="Kyaraben"/>
<link wikidata="Q5995340" start="5536" end="5544" title="Ikameshi" label="Ikameshi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2718618" start="5618" end="5627" title="Kamameshi" label="Kamameshi"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="998119" wikidata="Q102428795" url="?curid=998119" title="Rice ball">
<text>A rice ball may be any kind of food item made from rice that has been shaped, condensed, or otherwise combined into a ball shape. Rice balls exist in many different cultures in which rice is eaten, and are particularly prevalent in Asia. Rice balls are a convenient and portable food that can be eaten on the go, making them a popular choice for picnics, road trips, and packed lunches. They are also often enjoyed as a snack or side dish with meals.

The rice may be seasoned with a variety of ingredients, such as salt, furikake, or other seasonings, and may also be topped or filled with a variety of foods, such as fish, meat, or vegetables.

==Types of rice balls==
Types of rice ball include:

*Arancini, an Italian fried rice ball coated with breadcrumbs.
*Jumeok-bap, a Korean rice ball from cooked rice formed into oval shapes.
*Omo tuo, a Ghanaian staple food that is more smooth and soft due to its higher volume of water, usually eaten with peanut soup.
*Onigiri (お握り), a Japanese rice ball made from white rice formed into triangular or oval shapes.
*Pinda, rice balls offered to ancestors during Hindu funeral rites and ancestor worship.
*Supplì, an Italian fried rice ball coated with breadcrumbs.
*Tangyuan (汤圆), a Chinese rice ball made from glutinous rice flour.
*Zongzi, a Chinese rice ball with different fillings and wrapped in bamboo or reed leaves.
*Cifantuan, a sticky rice ball filled with Chinese fried dough, pork floss, and pickled vegetable.
*Khao tom, a Thai rice ball made with cooked rice and various fillings, wrapped in banana leaves.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q102428795" start="2" end="11" title="Rice ball" label="rice ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q5090" start="51" end="55" title="rice" label="rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q18545" start="118" end="122" title="ball" label="ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q48" start="232" end="236" title="Asia" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044246" start="522" end="530" title="furikake" label="furikake"/>
<link wikidata="Q268857" start="701" end="709" title="Arancini" label="Arancini"/>
<link wikidata="Q192786" start="714" end="721" title="Italian cuisine" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q300472" start="722" end="727" title="Frying" label="fried"/>
<link wikidata="Q658413" start="750" end="761" title="breadcrumbs" label="breadcrumbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q21060314" start="764" end="774" title="Jumeok-bap" label="Jumeok-bap"/>
<link wikidata="Q647500" start="778" end="784" title="Korean cuisine" label="Korean"/>
<link wikidata="Q18357204" start="838" end="845" title="Omo tuo" label="Omo tuo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072146" start="849" end="857" title="Ghanaian cuisine" label="Ghanaian"/>
<link wikidata="Q736427" start="858" end="869" title="staple food" label="staple food"/>
<link wikidata="Q1907985" start="953" end="964" title="peanut soup" label="peanut soup"/>
<link wikidata="Q13393" start="967" end="974" title="Onigiri" label="Onigiri"/>
<link wikidata="Q234138" start="984" end="992" title="Japanese cuisine" label="Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q3388643" start="1064" end="1069" title="Pinda (riceball)" label="Pinda"/>
<link wikidata="Q10090" start="1110" end="1115" title="Hindu" label="Hindu"/>
<link wikidata="Q201676" start="1116" end="1129" title="funeral rites" label="funeral rites"/>
<link wikidata="Q238199" start="1134" end="1150" title="ancestor worship" label="ancestor worship"/>
<link wikidata="Q250966" start="1153" end="1159" title="Supplì" label="Supplì"/>
<link wikidata="Q192786" start="1164" end="1171" title="Italian cuisine" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q300472" start="1172" end="1177" title="Frying" label="fried"/>
<link wikidata="Q658413" start="1200" end="1211" title="breadcrumbs" label="breadcrumbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q115474" start="1214" end="1222" title="Tangyuan (food)" label="Tangyuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q25380804" start="1259" end="1268" title="glutinous" label="glutinous"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269205" start="1269" end="1279" title="rice flour" label="rice flour"/>
<link wikidata="Q713466" start="1282" end="1288" title="Zongzi" label="Zongzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q670887" start="1349" end="1355" title="bamboo" label="bamboo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2734060" start="1359" end="1363" title="Reed (plant)" label="reed"/>
<link wikidata="Q709812" start="1373" end="1382" title="Cifantuan" label="Cifantuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q17006848" start="1472" end="1480" title="Khao tom" label="Khao tom"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="998121" wikidata="Q2635484" url="?curid=998121" title="Cabal ministry">
<text>The Cabal ministry or the CABAL refers to a group of high councillors of King Charles II of England, Scotland and Ireland from 1668 to .

The term &quot;Cabal&quot; has a double meaning in this context. It refers to the fact that, for perhaps the first time in English history, effective power in a royal council was shared by a group of men, a cabal, rather than dominated by a single &quot;favourite&quot;. The term also serves as the acronym &quot;C-A-B-A-L&quot; for the names of the five Privy Councillors (Clifford, Arlington, Buckingham, Ashley, and Lauderdale) who formed the council&#x27;s Committee for Foreign Affairs.

Through the Foreign Affairs committee and their own offices, the five members were able to direct government policy both at home and abroad. The notion of an organized group in government, as opposed to a single royal favourite holding clear power, was seen by many as a threat to the authority of the throne. Others saw it as subverting the power of the council or of Parliament, whilst Buckingham&#x27;s close relationship with the king made the Cabal unpopular with some reformers. The title &quot;Cabal&quot; resulted from the perception that they had conspired in Clarendon&#x27;s fall and prosecution, and in its increasingly secretive conduct of government, and was helped by the fact that the initial letters of their names could be arranged to form CABAL as an acronym. However, there were sharp ideological divisions among the five, ranging from the Parliamentary idealism of Ashley to the autocratic absolutism of Lauderdale.

== Membership and rise ==

Following the end of Clarendon Ministry in 1667, in a cloud of accusations of incompetence and corruption, the conduct of the government of Charles II fell to a loose coalition of energetic young ministers, the &quot;Cabal&quot;.

The linchpin of the Cabal was probably George Villiers, Duke of Buckingham. Although he only held the household office of Master of the Horse, with responsibility for overseeing the King&#x27;s travel arrangements, Buckingham was a long and close associate of King Charles II, having been practically raised together since they were children, during the close association of their fathers, Charles I and the first Duke of Buckingham, a relationship they consciously compared themselves to in adulthood, and might have replicated had the younger Buckingham possessed the skills of his father. Nonetheless, Buckingham was in constant contact with and a clear favourite of the king, and the centre of the Cabal&#x27;s grip on power. Gilbert Burnet, who knew some of its members personally, said that Buckingham stood somewhat apart from the rest of the Cabal, hating them and being hated in return.

The Lord High Treasurer Wriothesley having died just before Clarendon&#x27;s departure, the Treasury went into commission in 1667, under the nominal chairmanship of George Monck (Duke of Albemarle). But as Monck was practically retired from public life, control of the Treasury commission was taken up by Sir Thomas Clifford (Comptroller and soon Treasurer of the Household) and Anthony Ashley Cooper (Chancellor of the Exchequer). With the assistance of their close associates John Duncombe (Ashley&#x27;s deputy at the Exchequer), Stephen Fox (the Paymaster of the Forces) and notably Sir George Downing, the highly capable secretary to the Treasury commission, Clifford and Ashley overhauled the monarchical finances, placing them in a much more solvent state than before.

Foreign affairs was principally directed by Henry Bennet, Earl of Arlington (Secretary of the South), with occasional assistance from George Villiers, Duke of Buckingham. (Although foreign affairs were notionally in the purview of the Secretary of the North, the Cabal bullied Sir William Morice into selling the seat to Sir John Trevor, and then sidelined the latter.)

John Maitland, Earl of Lauderdale (Secretary of State for Scotland) had already consolidated his position in 1663 by securing the dismissal of his principal rival, John Middleton (Lord High Commissioner to the Parliament of Scotland) and his replacement by the more pliable John Leslie, Earl of Rothes. In 1669, Lauderdale went one step further, and got Leslie dismissed and the Lord High Commissioner position for himself, consolidating his hold and ruling Scotland as a virtual autocrat for the remainder of his career.

Sir Orlando Bridgeman, the Royalist lawyer who had prosecuted the Regicides, and who took over Clarendon&#x27;s duties as Lord Keeper of the Great Seal in 1667, was outside of this inner circle, although cooperative with their goals.

Despite their comparative energy and efficiency, the Cabal were a fractious and unpopular lot. Although perceived as a secretive and unsavoury junta, they rarely formed a united front, and their internal quarrels often spilled over into the public arena. J. P. Kenyon suggests that the King actually encouraged the Cabal members to quarrel, in the belief that this made them easier to control. They in turn never trusted him not to bring them down as he had brought down Clarendon, and as Kenyon remarks, they hardly dared turn their backs on him for fear of sudden dismissal. It was said that the King treated his ministers very much as he did his mistresses: &quot;he used them, but he was not in love with them, and was tied to them no more than they to him, which implies sufficient liberty on either side&quot;. Sir William Coventry, the Secretary to the Admiralty, resigned from office following a duel challenge from the Duke of Buckingham, and re-emerged in the House of Commons at the head of a group of MPs known as the &quot;Country Party&quot;, which loudly opposed the Cabal and its policies. Causing poor relations with members of parliament, Charles II acceded to the Cabal&#x27;s recommendation to prorogue parliament repeatedly, keeping it out of session for as long as he could, and leaving the Cabal to run the country on their own. In financial exigency (a pressing need to levy taxes), following the Great Stop of the Exchequer in 1672 and the outbreak of the Third Anglo-Dutch War, Charles was obliged to re-convene parliament in 1673 and the parliamentarians were bent on revenge.

== Split and fall ==
The Cabal began to split in 1672, particularly over the autocratic nature of the King&#x27;s Royal Declaration of Indulgence, the financing of the Third Anglo-Dutch War, and Britain&#x27;s relationship with France. Personal rivalries and a conflict over foreign policy between Buckingham and Arlington escalated. The Ministry became very unpopular, characterised by arbitrary rule; the public saw them as &quot;untrustworthy, venal and self-seeking, their eyes always on the main chance&quot;. Towards the end of the year, Ashley, now the Earl of Shaftesbury, became Lord Chancellor, leaving Treasury matters to Clifford and the Exchequer to Duncombe. He pressed publicly for greater reform of government, taking the side of the Opposition against his colleagues and the King. Clifford resigned over the in-fighting and retired from public life: as an open Roman Catholic he would, in any case, have been debarred by the Test Act 1673 from holding office in the future. Shaftesbury was replaced by Viscount Osborne, soon to become Earl of Danby, in the summer of 1673, on the recommendation of Buckingham and Clifford. Danby immediately established his authority over the remaining members of the Cabal. Buckingham&#x27;s feud with Arlington saw him leak the details of the Treaty of Dover and fall from favour in 1674. Arlington survived as Southern Secretary until September of that year. Lauderdale retained his position and his relatively power in Scotland, becoming an enemy of Shaftesbury. Shaftesbury began to agitate against Charles and his brother, the Duke of York, later James II; he briefly returned to government in the Privy Council Ministry and took a lead in forming the partisan group that would eventually become known as the Whigs.

The Cabal was later called by Lord Macaulay, British historian and Whig politician, &quot;the first germ of the present system of government by a Cabinet&quot;.

== Ministry ==
These five members made up the &quot;cabal&quot; (Clifford, Arlington, Buckingham, Ashley, Lauderdale), which held most of the power within the government.

The remaining members of the ministry, as would be expected, held less power than the cabal.

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2635484" start="4" end="18" title="Cabal ministry" label="Cabal ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635484" start="26" end="31" title="Cabal ministry" label="CABAL"/>
<link wikidata="Q122553" start="78" end="99" title="Charles II of England" label="Charles II of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q230791" start="101" end="109" title="Kingdom of Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q215530" start="114" end="121" title="Kingdom of Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416414" start="345" end="350" title="cabal" label="cabal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1996375" start="392" end="401" title="favourite" label="favourite"/>
<link wikidata="Q101244" start="437" end="444" title="acronym" label="acronym"/>
<link wikidata="Q6528244" start="493" end="509" title="Privy Councillor" label="Privy Councillor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635484" start="512" end="513" title="Cabal ministry" label="C"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635484" start="522" end="523" title="Cabal ministry" label="A"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635484" start="533" end="534" title="Cabal ministry" label="B"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635484" start="545" end="546" title="Cabal ministry" label="A"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635484" start="557" end="558" title="Cabal ministry" label="L"/>
<link wikidata="Q335173" start="1200" end="1209" title="Edward Hyde, 1st Earl of Clarendon" label="Clarendon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5126875" start="1617" end="1635" title="Clarendon Ministry" label="Clarendon Ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q336101" start="1866" end="1901" title="George Villiers, 2nd Duke of Buckingham" label="George Villiers, Duke of Buckingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q3921039" start="1949" end="1968" title="Master of the Horse" label="Master of the Horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q81506" start="2217" end="2226" title="Charles I of England" label="Charles I"/>
<link wikidata="Q313817" start="2241" end="2259" title="George Villiers, 1st Duke of Buckingham" label="Duke of Buckingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q2250014" start="2557" end="2571" title="Gilbert Burnet" label="Gilbert Burnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q944583" start="2728" end="2747" title="Lord High Treasurer" label="Lord High Treasurer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1986689" start="2748" end="2759" title="Thomas Wriothesley, 4th Earl of Southampton" label="Wriothesley"/>
<link wikidata="Q335106" start="2889" end="2921" title="George Monck, 1st Duke of Albemarle" label="George Monck (Duke of Albemarle)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296770" start="3033" end="3048" title="Thomas Clifford, 1st Baron Clifford of Chudleigh" label="Thomas Clifford"/>
<link wikidata="Q4577691" start="3050" end="3061" title="Comptroller of the Household" label="Comptroller"/>
<link wikidata="Q7836765" start="3071" end="3097" title="Treasurer of the Household" label="Treasurer of the Household"/>
<link wikidata="Q336002" start="3103" end="3124" title="Anthony Ashley Cooper, 1st Earl of Shaftesbury" label="Anthony Ashley Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q531471" start="3126" end="3153" title="Chancellor of the Exchequer" label="Chancellor of the Exchequer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6230391" start="3202" end="3215" title="John Duncombe (Bury St Edmunds MP)" label="John Duncombe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3498549" start="3257" end="3268" title="Stephen Fox" label="Stephen Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q7156775" start="3274" end="3297" title="Paymaster of the Forces" label="Paymaster of the Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335492" start="3315" end="3329" title="Sir George Downing, 1st Baronet" label="George Downing"/>
<link wikidata="Q953718" start="3545" end="3576" title="Henry Bennet, 1st Earl of Arlington" label="Henry Bennet, Earl of Arlington"/>
<link wikidata="Q3954357" start="3578" end="3600" title="Secretary of State for the Southern Department" label="Secretary of the South"/>
<link wikidata="Q3954358" start="3736" end="3758" title="Secretary of State for the Northern Department" label="Secretary of the North"/>
<link wikidata="Q8015817" start="3782" end="3796" title="William Morice (Secretary of State)" label="William Morice"/>
<link wikidata="Q6261237" start="3826" end="3837" title="John Trevor (1626–1672)" label="John Trevor"/>
<link wikidata="Q336697" start="3872" end="3905" title="John Maitland, 1st Duke of Lauderdale" label="John Maitland, Earl of Lauderdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q111784" start="3907" end="3938" title="Secretary of State for Scotland" label="Secretary of State for Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4292811" start="4036" end="4050" title="John Middleton, 1st Earl of Middleton" label="John Middleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6679372" start="4052" end="4104" title="Lord High Commissioner to the Parliament of Scotland" label="Lord High Commissioner to the Parliament of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6244629" start="4146" end="4173" title="John Leslie, 1st Duke of Rothes" label="John Leslie, Earl of Rothes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7528405" start="4399" end="4416" title="Sir Orlando Bridgeman, 1st Baronet, of Great Lever" label="Orlando Bridgeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2284765" start="4422" end="4430" title="Cavalier" label="Royalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475448" start="4461" end="4469" title="Regicide" label="Regicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1869896" start="4517" end="4546" title="Lord Keeper of the Great Seal" label="Lord Keeper of the Great Seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6252792" start="4885" end="4897" title="John Philipps Kenyon" label="J. P. Kenyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007190" start="5451" end="5467" title="William Coventry" label="William Coventry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5914849" start="5600" end="5616" title="House of Commons of England" label="House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q4925340" start="5853" end="5863" title="Cavalier Parliament" label="parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q16933164" start="6051" end="6078" title="Great Stop of the Exchequer" label="Great Stop of the Exchequer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342568" start="6111" end="6132" title="Third Anglo-Dutch War" label="Third Anglo-Dutch War"/>
<link wikidata="Q16932520" start="6349" end="6380" title="Declaration of Indulgence (1672)" label="Royal Declaration of Indulgence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342568" start="6403" end="6424" title="Third Anglo-Dutch War" label="Third Anglo-Dutch War"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="7113" end="7127" title="Roman Catholic" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428908" start="7177" end="7190" title="Test Act 1673" label="Test Act 1673"/>
<link wikidata="Q333662" start="7254" end="7270" title="Thomas Osborne, 1st Duke of Leeds" label="Viscount Osborne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191077" start="7530" end="7545" title="Treaty of Dover" label="Treaty of Dover"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="7708" end="7716" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q126188" start="7814" end="7846" title="James II of England" label="the Duke of York, later James II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7246346" start="7889" end="7911" title="Privy Council Ministry" label="Privy Council Ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q108700" start="8000" end="8005" title="British Whig Party" label="Whigs"/>
<link wikidata="Q315989" start="8038" end="8051" title="Thomas Babington Macaulay" label="Lord Macaulay"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="998127" wikidata="Q887077" url="?curid=998127" title="James E. Ferguson">
<text>James Edward Ferguson Jr. (August 31, 1871 – September 21, 1944), known as Pa Ferguson, was an American Democratic politician and the 26th governor of Texas, in office from 1915 to 1917. He was indicted and impeached during his second term, forced to resign and barred from holding further Texas office.

Unable to run under his own name, Ferguson ran his wife&#x27;s campaign for governor; Miriam A. Ferguson, known as &quot;Ma&quot; Ferguson, was twice elected as governor, serving two non-consecutive terms, from 1925 to 1927 and 1933 to 1935. In 1925, Miriam became the first female governor of Texas after campaigning as a stand-in for her husband, and James E. Ferguson became the first gentleman of Texas for her two terms.

== Early life ==
Ferguson was born to the Reverend James E. Ferguson, and Fannie Ferguson near Salado in south Bell County, Texas. At age 12 he entered Salado College (a preparatory school) but was eventually expelled for disobedience. At 16, he left home and drifted through the states of the American West, working successively in a vineyard, a mine, a barbed wire factory, and at a grain ranch. After he returned to Texas, he studied law in Bell County and was admitted to the bar.

On December 31, 1899, he married Miriam A. Wallace at her family home. They had two daughters: Ouida Wallace Ferguson, and Dorrace Watt Ferguson. In 1903, Ferguson was elected as city attorney in Belton, Texas. In addition, he established Farmers State Bank. In 1906, he sold Farmers bank and established Temple State Bank.

He also became active in the Democratic Party and managed several local political campaigns. He believed that &quot;a Negro has no business whatever taking a part in the political affairs of the Democratic party, the white man&#x27;s party.&quot; A part of his appeal as a candidate for governor was his support for white supremacy in the political process.

== First term as governor ==
In 1914, Ferguson was elected as governor of Texas by running as an anti-prohibitionist Democrat. When the Democratic Party dominated the Texas political landscape, winning the Democratic primary often sealed the election results. Ferguson was the only &quot;wet&quot; candidate in the Democratic primary and garnered all of the anti-prohibitionist votes over a plurality of &quot;dry&quot; candidates. Numerous reforms were implemented during Ferguson&#x27;s first term, such as measures aimed at improving working conditions and a farm tenant law that provided for the rent on Texas farms to be limited to one-fourth of the cotton and one-third of the grain produced. In the Senate, it was accepted by a vote of 23 to 4. Similarly, in the House, it was accepted by 100 votes to 24. According to one study, however, the law &quot;was not rigidly enforced and was declared unconstitutional in 1921.&quot;

Prior to his inauguration, Ferguson conferred with officials at the University of Texas regarding appointments affecting learning and higher education. According to historian Dan Utley, Ferguson planned to use state appointments as part of a spoils system to reward his political supporters. He tapped Reverend Allan Ferguson Cunningham to serve as State Librarian, despite his lack of training or experience in the field. The incumbent State Librarian was Ernest Winkler, who was a professional historian with years of experience as a librarian. The chair of the State Library and Historical Commission, Eugene C. Barker, heard talk about these plans and intervened in support of Winkler. He convened the commission, and the body approved that Barker write a letter to the Governor-elect. The letter claimed that Winkler was the best person for the job. Meanwhile, Winkler fought for his job by enlisting the help of his colleagues. Other high-profile librarians voiced their support of Winkler, as did the son of an ex-governor, and a chapter of the Daughters of the Republic of Texas.

== Second term as governor ==

Further reforms were realized during Ferguson&#x27;s second term, including a law establishing Mothers&#x27; pensions and additional labor legislation. However, his second term would not last long. After being re-elected in 1916, Ferguson vetoed the appropriations for the University of Texas. The veto was retaliation against the university because of its refusal to dismiss certain faculty members whom Ferguson found objectionable, including William Harding Mayes, former Texas lieutenant governor and founder and dean of the University of Texas School of Journalism. He had been an opponent of Ferguson for the Democratic party&#x27;s nomination for governor in 1914.

The accusations against Mayes were that he used his ownership of newspapers, including the &quot;Brownwood Bulletin&quot;, to spread negative information about Ferguson. Another leading Ferguson critic on the UT campus was the historian Eugene C. Barker.

Ferguson&#x27;s attack against Mayes resulted in a drive by the legislature to impeach Ferguson. The chairman of the investigating committee, William H. Bledsoe of Lubbock, called for impeachment. Ferguson was indicted on nine charges in July 1917. The Texas House of Representatives prepared 21 charges against Ferguson, and, in his impeachment trial, the Texas Senate convicted him on 10 of those charges, including misapplication of public funds and receiving $156,000 from an unnamed source.

The Texas Senate, many of whom had served under Mayes and with whom Mayes maintained cordial relationships, removed Ferguson as governor and declared him ineligible to hold office under Texas jurisdiction. Together with Attorney General Ken Paxton, who on the other hand was acquitted by the Texas Senate in September 2023, Ferguson is one of only two statewide officeholders in Texas history to have been impeached, and the only statewide officeholder to be convicted and removed from office.

Despite this, Ferguson ran for governor in the 1918 Democratic primary, but was defeated by his successor and incumbent, William P. Hobby of Houston, previously the lieutenant governor.

== Presidential candidate ==
Ferguson also ran for President of the United States in the 1920 election as the candidate of the American Party. Ferguson was on the ballot only in Texas, where he received 47,968 votes (9.9 percent of the vote in Texas, 0.2 percent of the vote nationwide). Ferguson&#x27;s platform included opposition to the League of Nations, opposition to a national prohibition of alcohol, and a full pardon to Eugene V. Debs. Ferguson sought the support of Warren Harding and the Republican Party to convince its voters to vote for the American Party ticket and unite the anti-Democratic vote in Texas. The 1920 presidential election was won by Republican Party candidate Warren Harding. The Democratic nominee James M. Cox won in Texas, where the White majority voted solidly Democratic. Nationally, Ferguson was also surpassed by three other unsuccessful candidates:
* Eugene Victor Debs of the Socialist Party of America.
* Parley Parker Christensen of the United States Farmer–Labor Party.
* Aaron Sherman Watkins of the United States Prohibition Party.

Though Ferguson was unsuccessful in the presidential election, the American Party did elect four members to the Texas House of Representatives; Walter J. Kveton of Sealy, Otto F. Menking of Fayetteville, Henry Julius Neinast of Burton, and John Henry Wessels of La Grange. On January 28, 1922, Ferguson dissolved the American Party in order to run for the Democratic nomination for U.S. Senate in the 1922 election.

== Senate bid and First Gentleman of Texas ==
Ferguson failed at his bid for the United States Senate in 1922, losing in the Democratic runoff election to Earle Bradford Mayfield.

In 1924, Ferguson entered his wife Miriam, known as &quot;Ma&quot;, in the Democratic gubernatorial primary. She won that and the general election, saying that she intended to rely on her husband for advice. In 1924, unable to run under his own name, Mr. Ferguson, known as &quot;Pa&quot;, ran his wife&#x27;s campaign for the governorship against Judge Felix Robertson, the candidate endorsed by the Ku Klux Klan. The Fergusons beat Robertson and went to the Governor&#x27;s Mansion for a third time. Two years later they lost a reelection bid amid new scandals concerning excessive pardons and political patronage abuses.

Miriam Ferguson served two nonconsecutive two-year terms as governor: January 20, 1925 – January 17, 1927 and January 17, 1933 – January 15, 1935.

&quot;Ma&quot; Ferguson became the second female governor in the United States, after Nellie Tayloe Ross of Wyoming. Both women followed husbands who had served earlier. Nellie Tayloe Ross was sworn in on January 5, 1925; Miriam Ferguson followed on January 20.

==See also==
* Conservative Democrat

==Notes==
==References==
* 

==Further reading==


|-</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q887077" start="0" end="25" title="James E. Ferguson" label="James Edward Ferguson Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q887077" start="75" end="86" title="James E. Ferguson" label="Pa Ferguson"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="104" end="114" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589725" start="139" end="156" title="governor of Texas" label="governor of Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1949797" start="207" end="216" title="Impeachment in the United States" label="impeached"/>
<link wikidata="Q449664" start="391" end="409" title="Miriam A. Ferguson" label="Miriam A. Ferguson"/>
<link wikidata="Q203184" start="687" end="702" title="first gentleman" label="first gentleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="706" end="711" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479634" start="827" end="833" title="Salado, Texas" label="Salado"/>
<link wikidata="Q108428" start="843" end="854" title="Bell County, Texas" label="Bell County"/>
<link wikidata="Q7403401" start="884" end="898" title="Salado College" label="Salado College"/>
<link wikidata="Q12612" start="1026" end="1039" title="American West" label="American West"/>
<link wikidata="Q22715" start="1067" end="1075" title="vineyard" label="vineyard"/>
<link wikidata="Q192065" start="1087" end="1098" title="barbed wire" label="barbed wire"/>
<link wikidata="Q449664" start="1251" end="1268" title="Miriam A. Ferguson" label="Miriam A. Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q744550" start="1414" end="1427" title="Belton, Texas" label="Belton, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="1661" end="1666" title="African-American" label="Negro"/>
<link wikidata="Q49078" start="1760" end="1765" title="White American" label="white"/>
<link wikidata="Q698752" start="1859" end="1874" title="white supremacy" label="white supremacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q119557797" start="1953" end="1981" title="1914 Texas gubernatorial election" label="elected as governor of Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q46388" start="2004" end="2015" title="prohibition" label="prohibition"/>
<link wikidata="Q49213" start="2905" end="2924" title="University of Texas at Austin" label="University of Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q781376" start="3079" end="3092" title="spoils system" label="spoils system"/>
<link wikidata="Q55769465" start="3294" end="3308" title="Ernest Winkler" label="Ernest Winkler"/>
<link wikidata="Q5407093" start="3442" end="3458" title="Eugene C. Barker" label="Eugene C. Barker"/>
<link wikidata="Q4167388" start="3889" end="3923" title="Daughters of the Republic of Texas" label="Daughters of the Republic of Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q109539510" start="4052" end="4074" title="Mothers&amp;#x27; pensions" label="Mothers&amp;#x27; pensions"/>
<link wikidata="Q119557635" start="4167" end="4185" title="1916 Texas gubernatorial election" label="re-elected in 1916"/>
<link wikidata="Q49213" start="4230" end="4249" title="University of Texas at Austin" label="University of Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q8010860" start="4402" end="4423" title="William Harding Mayes" label="William Harding Mayes"/>
<link wikidata="Q639115" start="4432" end="4457" title="Lieutenant Governor of Texas" label="Texas lieutenant governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4976833" start="4727" end="4745" title="Brownwood Bulletin" label="Brownwood Bulletin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5407093" start="4867" end="4883" title="Eugene C. Barker" label="Eugene C. Barker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1949797" start="4965" end="4972" title="impeachment in the United States" label="impeach"/>
<link wikidata="Q20806998" start="5028" end="5046" title="William H. Bledsoe" label="William H. Bledsoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q49273" start="5050" end="5057" title="Lubbock, Texas" label="Lubbock"/>
<link wikidata="Q827550" start="5139" end="5169" title="Texas House of Representatives" label="Texas House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q106677651" start="5220" end="5237" title="impeachment trial" label="impeachment trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q515426" start="5243" end="5255" title="Texas Senate" label="Texas Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q515426" start="5387" end="5399" title="Texas Senate" label="Texas Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q6388290" start="5620" end="5630" title="Ken Paxton" label="Ken Paxton"/>
<link wikidata="Q119557644" start="5925" end="5948" title="1918 Texas gubernatorial election" label="1918 Democratic primary"/>
<link wikidata="Q747128" start="5999" end="6015" title="William P. Hobby" label="William P. Hobby"/>
<link wikidata="Q16555" start="6019" end="6026" title="Houston" label="Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q639115" start="6043" end="6062" title="Lieutenant Governor of Texas" label="lieutenant governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="6116" end="6146" title="President of the United States" label="President of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q699343" start="6154" end="6167" title="U.S. presidential election, 1920" label="1920 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q125216648" start="6192" end="6206" title="American Party (Texas)" label="American Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q399999" start="6440" end="6471" title="Prohibition in the United States" label="national prohibition of alcohol"/>
<link wikidata="Q334993" start="6494" end="6508" title="Eugene V. Debs" label="Eugene V. Debs"/>
<link wikidata="Q35286" start="6541" end="6555" title="Warren Harding" label="Warren Harding"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="6564" end="6580" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q699343" start="6691" end="6717" title="1920 United States presidential election" label="1920 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="6729" end="6745" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q35286" start="6756" end="6770" title="Warren Harding" label="Warren Harding"/>
<link wikidata="Q440117" start="6795" end="6807" title="James M. Cox" label="James M. Cox"/>
<link wikidata="Q42916627" start="6812" end="6820" title="1920 United States presidential election in Texas" label="in Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q334993" start="6955" end="6973" title="Eugene Victor Debs" label="Eugene Victor Debs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353232" start="6981" end="7007" title="Socialist Party of America" label="Socialist Party of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q3893970" start="7011" end="7036" title="Parley P. Christensen" label="Parley Parker Christensen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3066954" start="7058" end="7076" title="Farmer–Labor Party" label="Farmer–Labor Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q4662390" start="7080" end="7101" title="Aaron S. Watkins" label="Aaron Sherman Watkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q515856" start="7109" end="7140" title="United States Prohibition Party" label="United States Prohibition Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q827550" start="7255" end="7285" title="Texas House of Representatives" label="Texas House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q980553" start="7307" end="7312" title="Sealy, Texas" label="Sealy"/>
<link wikidata="Q981727" start="7333" end="7345" title="Fayetteville, Texas" label="Fayetteville"/>
<link wikidata="Q2222379" start="7371" end="7377" title="Burton, Texas" label="Burton"/>
<link wikidata="Q974145" start="7405" end="7414" title="La Grange, Texas" label="La Grange"/>
<link wikidata="Q104842538" start="7544" end="7557" title="1922 United States Senate election in Texas" label="1922 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="7641" end="7661" title="United States Senate" label="United States Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q615255" start="7696" end="7711" title="runoff election" label="runoff election"/>
<link wikidata="Q436952" start="7715" end="7738" title="Earle Bradford Mayfield" label="Earle Bradford Mayfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q449664" start="7776" end="7782" title="Miriam A. Ferguson" label="Miriam"/>
<link wikidata="Q118901903" start="7867" end="7887" title="1924 Texas gubernatorial election" label="the general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q47131" start="8142" end="8154" title="Ku Klux Klan" label="Ku Klux Klan"/>
<link wikidata="Q242714" start="8600" end="8618" title="Nellie Tayloe Ross" label="Nellie Tayloe Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q1214" start="8622" end="8629" title="Wyoming" label="Wyoming"/>
<link wikidata="Q4231238" start="8792" end="8813" title="Conservative Democrat" label="Conservative Democrat"/>
</links>
</doc>
