<doc id="990423" wikidata="Q1048700" url="?curid=990423" title="Sibu">
<text>Sibu is a landlocked city located in the central region of Sarawak, Malaysia. It serves as the capital of Sibu District within Sibu Division and is situated on the island of Borneo. Covering an area of , the city is positioned at the confluence of the Rajang and Igan Rivers, approximately 60 kilometres from the South China Sea and north-east of the state capital, Kuching.

Sibu is characterised by its diverse population, with a significant portion being of Chinese descent, primarily from the Fuzhou region. While other ethnic groups such as Iban, Malay, and Melanau are also present, they are not as prominent in Sibu as in other parts of Sarawak. As of 2010, the city had a population of 162,676 residents.

The city&#x27;s history dates back to its founding in 1862 by James Brooke, who built a fort to protect against attacks by indigenous Dayak people. Subsequently, a small group of Chinese Hokkien settlers established themselves around the fort, engaging in various business activities. In 1901, Wong Nai Siong led a significant migration of 1,118 Fuzhou Chinese from Fujian, China, to Sibu. Over time, infrastructure development took place, including the construction of the first hospital, Sibu bazaars, Methodist schools, and churches.

Sibu faced significant challenges in its history, enduring fires in 1889 and 1928 that destroyed the town. However, it was successfully rebuilt on both occasions. During the Second World War, Sibu fell under Japanese occupation, resulting in a renaming of the city to &quot;Sibu-shu&quot; in August 1942. After the Japanese surrender in 1945, Sarawak became a British Crown Colony. This led to unrest among young Melanau individuals in Sibu who were in favour of independence, culminating in the assassination of Sir Duncan George Stewart, the second British governor of Sarawak, during his visit to Sibu in December 1949. The perpetrator, Rosli Dhoby, was subsequently executed in 1950.

In the post-war period, Sibu and the Rajang basin became a center of communist activities, which continued even after Sarawak gained independence in 1963. The establishment of the Rajang Security Command (RASCOM) aimed to curb communist activities in the area, and the communist insurgency in Sarawak was eventually suppressed in 1973, coming to a complete end in 1990.

Sibu achieved municipality status in 1981 and received a royal visit in September 2001. Additionally, it has served as a gateway to the Sarawak Corridor of Renewable Energy (SCORE) since 2008. The city celebrated the 110th anniversary of the Fuzhou settlement in 2011.

Sibu serves as a prominent hub for tourism in the Upper Rajang River region, renowned for its scenic riverine towns and traditional longhouses inhabited by the Iban and Orang Ulu ethnic groups. Noteworthy landmarks within the city include Wisma Sanyan, recognised as the tallest edifice in Sarawak, and Lanang Bridge, acclaimed as one of the lengthiest river bridges in the state. Sibu also features the largest town square in Malaysia, adjacent to Wisma Sanyan. Of historical significance is the Lau King Howe Hospital Memorial Museum, distinguished as Malaysia&#x27;s inaugural and sole medical-themed museum. Equally prominent is the Sibu Central Market, a sprawling indoor marketplace recognised as the largest of its kind in Sarawak. Tourist attractions in Sibu encompass the Sibu Heritage Centre, Tua Pek Kong Temple, Bawang Assan longhouses, Sibu Old Mosque, Jade Dragon Temple, Bukit Aup Jubilee Park, and Bukit Lima Forest Park. The city also hosts vibrant cultural events such as the Borneo Cultural Festival (BCF) and the Sibu International Dance Festival (SIDF). Economically, Sibu thrives on the timber and shipbuilding industries, which have historically been central to its economic landscape.

==Etymology==
Before 1873, Sibu was known as &quot;Maling&quot;, a name derived from a bend in the Rajang River referred to as &quot;Tanjung Maling&quot;. This bend was located opposite the present-day town of Sibu and near the confluence of the Igan and Rajang rivers. The area was named after this prominent geographical feature.

On 1 June 1873, under the administration of the Brooke family, the third division of Sarawak was established. This division later became known as the Sibu Division. The name &quot;Sibu&quot; itself was derived from the native Pulasan fruit, which was abundant in the region. In the Iban language, this fruit is known as &quot;Buah Sibau&quot;. Consequently, the division was named after the Pulasan fruit, reflecting the rich natural resources and cultural significance of the area.

==History==

===Bruneian Empire===
In the 15th century, a historical event occurred in the region of southern Sarawak, which led to the displacement of immigrant Iban communities towards what is now known as the Sibu region.

During the 17th and 18th centuries, the Rajang basin witnessed a series of tribal conflicts involving the Iban people and the indigenous populations residing in the same geographical area. These conflicts often resulted in skirmishes and confrontations.
At times the Iban groups would establish informal alliances with the Malay communities in the vicinity. These alliances were occasionally utilised for joint actions, such as launching attacks on the Kayan tribes inhabiting the region and conducting raids on passing Chinese and Indonesian vessels that traversed through this particular area.

===Kingdom of Sarawak (Brooke administration)===


James Brooke assumed control of Sarawak, now known as Kuching, in 1841 after acquiring the territory from the Bruneian Empire. In 1853, Sarawak expanded its borders to incorporate the Sibu region, which at the time was a small village characterised by shophouses constructed with atap roofs, wooden walls, and floors.

The earliest inhabitants of Sibu were the Melanau people, followed by the influx of Iban and Malay communities in the 1850s. Rajah Brooke, in 1862, oversaw the construction of Sibu Fort (commonly referred to as Fort Brooke), strategically situated at present-day Channel Road in Sibu. This fort played a pivotal role as an administrative center for the Brooke government in Sibu. However, it was demolished in 1936.

It was customary for the White Rajah to erect such forts to assert territorial claims and provide protection. The existence of Sibu Fort is substantiated by historical accounts which described its location and history:

On 13 May 1870, the fort faced an attack by 3,000 Kanowit Dayaks, led by a Dayak chief named Lintong (Mua-ri). They attempted to breach the fort&#x27;s doors with axes but were eventually repelled by the Brooke administration.

As per records from the Sarawak Gazette on 24 January 1871, Sibu boasted 60 wooden shops. In 1873, the town of Sibu was incorporated into the newly created third division of Sarawak.

The first Chinese settlers arrived in Sibu during the 1860s, with a group of Hokkien people constructing two rows of 40 shophouses around Sibu Fort. These early Chinese settlers were a minority, primarily consisting of Kekhs and Min Nan individuals engaged in commerce. A small number of Chiang Chuan and Amoy people also settled in Sibu for commercial purposes.

By 1893, Munan anak Minggat and his followers arrived in Sibu, establishing a longhouse on Pulau Kerto, an island at the confluence of the Rajang and Igan rivers near Sibu. Munan was a loyal ally to the Brooke government and played a crucial role in suppressing Iban rebellions in the Upper Katibas and Lupar rivers during the 1860s and 1880s. In 1903, Munan became the first Iban to operate a rubber plantation in Kuching and subsequently invested the profits in shop-houses and lands in Sibu.

However, on 10 February 1889, a devastating fire razed the town of Sibu, leading to a setback in its development. The first hospital in Sibu was established by the Brooke government in 1912, a wooden single-storey building featuring an outpatient department and male and female wards.

On 8 March 1928, Sibu faced another significant fire; however, the Tua Pek Kong Temple miraculously survived, earning it local reverence.

===Fuzhounese settlement===

Wong Nai Siong, a Christian scholar originally from Minqing County, Fujian, China, became acquainted with Sarawak and the White Rajahs through his son-in-law, Dr. Lim Boon Keng. Disillusioned by the Qing dynasty&#x27;s heavy-handed response during the Boxer Rebellion, which specifically targeted Chinese Christians for violence, Wong embarked on a quest to find a new settlement overseas, with a focus on Southeast Asia. Prior to arriving in Sarawak, Wong explored other regions in Malaya and Indonesia for potential settlement, albeit without success.

Wong obtained approval from Charles Brooke to search for a new settlement in the Rajang basin. In April 1900, after a 13-day journey up the Rajang River, he decided to establish Sibu as the new settlement for his Fuzhounese clansmen, as the area near the Rajang delta was well-suited for agriculture. An agreement was formalised on 9 July 1900 between Wong Nai Siong and the Brooke government in Kuching, allowing Chinese settlers to inhabit the area.

On 21 January 1901, the first group of 72 settlers arrived in Sibu and settled in the Sungai Merah area, hailing from Fuzhou, Fujian, located about 6 km from the town of Sibu. The second batch of 535 settlers arrived on 16 March 1901, marking what is now known as &quot;New Fuzhou Resettlement Day&quot;. In June 1901, a final group of 511 settlers joined them, bringing the total number of Fuzhounese settlers to 1,118.

Wong Nai Siong was appointed as the &quot;Kang Choo&quot; (港主, &quot;port master&quot;) for the Fuzhounese settlement in Sibu. The settlers cultivated crops such as sweet potatoes, fruits, sugar cane, vegetables, and coarse grains in upland areas and rice in wetlands. Most of these settlers chose to remain in Sibu, considering it their new home. Collaborating with American pastor Reverend James Matthew Hoover, Wong and his associates were actively involved in the establishment of schools and churches in Sibu, including the Methodist church in 1902 and Ying Hua Methodist School at Sungai Merah in 1903.

Between 1903 and 1935, Reverend James Hoover played a pivotal role in constructing 41 churches and 40 schools in Sibu. In the interim, 676 Cantonese individuals arrived in Sibu between 1902 and 1917. However, in 1904, Wong opposed the proposed sale of opium and the construction of a casino in the Sibu area, initiatives put forth by the Brooke government. Subsequently, he faced expulsion by the Sarawak government due to an inability to repay debts. Wong and his family departed from Sibu in July 1904.

Following Wong&#x27;s departure, Reverend James Hoover assumed responsibility for managing the Sibu settlement and introduced the first rubber seedlings to Sibu in 1904. He erected a Methodist church in 1905, later renamed Masland Methodist Church in 1925. Hoover remained in the Rajang basin for an additional 31 years until his demise from malaria in 1935, while the construction of Lau King Howe Hospital was completed in 1936 to cater to the growing population of Sibu. The hospital served the people of Sibu for 58 years until 1994 when a new hospital was built in Sibu.
By 1919, the influence of the Chinese Civil War extended to Sarawak, with the Kuomintang establishing its initial branches in Sibu and Kuching. The then-reigning Rajah, Charles Brooke, opposed such political involvement by the local Chinese population and expelled several local Kuomintang leaders. However, his successor, Charles Vyner Brooke, displayed a more receptive stance toward the activities of the local Chinese, who also engaged in fundraising to support the Kuomintang&#x27;s resistance against Japanese invasion on the Chinese mainland.

Following the conclusion of World War II, local Kuomintang leaders advocated for Sarawak&#x27;s transfer to British control as a Crown Colony. This move encountered opposition from local communist leaders, leading to frequent clashes between the two factions. The Kuomintang branches in Sarawak were ultimately disbanded in 1949 when the party lost the Chinese Civil War to the Communist Party and retreated to Taiwan. Nevertheless, tensions and conflicts between the two groups persisted until 1955, with the colonial British government banning the Kuomintang&#x27;s newspaper in May 1951, and the communist newspaper ceasing publication in 1955 due to financial difficulties.

===Japanese occupation===
During World War II, Japanese forces initiated their invasion of the region by landing in Miri on 16 December 1941. Subsequently, they conquered Kuching on 24 December. On 25 December, Sibu experienced an air raid by nine Japanese warplanes that had flown from Kuching. Concerned about the impending invasion of Sibu, Andrew MacPherson, the Resident of the Third Division, made the decision to evacuate with his officers to the upstream area of the Rajang River. Their plan was to traverse through Batang Ai and navigate through the dense forests to reach Dutch Borneo. Unfortunately, they were apprehended and killed by Japanese forces at Ulu Moyan in Sarawak.

On the evening of 26 December 1941, chaos erupted in Sibu as local residents began looting an unguarded government rice storeroom. This unrest extended beyond mere looting, with villagers residing along the Rajang River also partaking in thefts of daily necessities. The situation rapidly spiraled out of control, resulting in significant damage to the British Sime Darby company, Borneo Company Limited, and Chinese businessmen who became victims of these riots. In an attempt to restore order, Chinese businessmen in the region banded together to form a security alliance.

To address the growing disorder, an advance team from Japan arrived in Sibu on 29 January 1942, after being summoned from Kuching. However, this team eventually fled Sibu and returned to Kuching. Consequently, a power vacuum persisted in the third division until 23 June 1942, when the Japanese headquarters in Kuching appointed Senda Nijiro as the new Resident of the Third Division of Sarawak. Upon assuming office, Senda Nijiro declared that the Imperial Japanese Army would assume complete control over people&#x27;s lives and property in the region. On 8 August 1942, Sibu was officially renamed &quot;Sibu-shu&quot;.

The Japanese authorities began to impose heavy taxes on the Chinese population and initiated a Sook Ching operation to identify suspected anti-Japanese individuals. Some Chinese individuals, under extreme torture, provided false lists of names of supposed anti-Japanese groups. Tragically, these lists led to the wrongful execution of innocent individuals at the Bukit Lima execution ground, while others were incarcerated in a prison in Kapit.

===British Crown Colony===
Following the end of the Japanese occupation of Sarawak in 1945, Charles Vyner Brooke, the last Rajah of Sarawak, made the decision to cede the state to become part of the British crown colony of Sarawak. This proposal faced significant opposition from the local population, leading to the emergence of the anti-cession movement in Sarawak.

One prominent figure in the anti-cession movement was Rosli Dhobi, a Sarawak nationalist hailing from Sibu and a member of the Malay Youth Movement (Gerakan Pemuda Melayu). The primary objective of this movement was to secure Sarawak&#x27;s independence from British colonial rule.

At the young age of 17, Rosli carried out the assassination of Sir Duncan George Stewart, the second governor of colonial Sarawak, on 3 December 1949. This act was a reflection of his strong commitment to the anti-cession cause.

Rosli, along with three of his accomplices, namely Awang Ramli Amit, Bujang Suntong, and Morshidi Sidek, were subsequently tried and sentenced to death by hanging. On 2 March 1950, they were buried at the Kuching Central Prison.

In recognition of their role in the anti-colonial movement against the British, Rosli Dhobi and his associates were later given a full state funeral by the Sarawak state government. Their remains were relocated from the Kuching Central Prison and interred at the Sarawak Heroes Mausoleum near the Sibu Town Mosque on 2 March 1996.

===Communist insurgency===

In the early 1950s, influenced by the establishment of the People&#x27;s Republic of China in 1949, communist members in Sibu began to establish a presence in Sarawak. Huang Sheng Zi from Bintangor became the president of the Borneo Communist Party (BCP), and BCP activities were concentrated in areas such as Sibu, Sarikei, and Bintangor. Huang Zeng Ting, another communist and Huang Sheng Zi&#x27;s brother, played a significant role in the formation of Sarawak&#x27;s first political party, the Sarawak United Peoples&#x27; Party (SUPP), becoming its first executive secretary.

In 1954, the Sarawak Liberation League (SLL) was formed following the consolidation of the BCP with several other communist organisations. The spread of communism in Sibu was facilitated by student movements in schools like Chung Hua Secondary School, Catholic High School, and Wong Nai Siong High School. Communist strongholds in Sibu were notably located at Oya Road and Queensway (now Jalan Tun Abang Haji Openg). The movement also received support from the intelligentsia and workers in Sibu. Dr. Wong Soon Kai, for example, supported the movement by providing free medication. Villagers in Kampung Tanjung Kunyit were among those pressured to supply food and medical provisions to the communists.

In March 1971, the communists initiated an anti-pornography campaign, and in early 1973, they launched another campaign opposing tax increases and price inflation while advocating for higher wages for workers. Communist volunteers distributed pamphlets at various locations, including shophouses, schools, and the wharf terminal. They also engaged in military operations against police stations and naval bases, resorting to extreme measures such as beheading suspected government informants. The town of Sibu experienced on-and-off 24-hour curfews for several months.

On 25 March 1973, the Sarawak government, led by Chief Minister Abdul Rahman Ya&#x27;kub, began cracking down on communist activities in the Rajang basin by establishing the &quot;Rajang Special Security Area&quot;. A day later, the Rajang Security Command (RASCOM) was formed through the cooperation of civil, military, and police command headquarters. By August 1973, several communist members had been captured, and these individuals provided crucial information that further weakened the communist movement.

On 22 September 1973, Abdul Rahman initiated &quot;Operation Judas&quot;, resulting in the capture of 29 people from the town of Sibu, including doctors, lawyers, businessmen, teachers, and one former member of parliament. Following the surrender of a communist movement in Sri Aman on 21 October 1973, communist activities in the Rajang basin began to decline and never fully recovered their previous strength. The communist movement in Sarawak finally came to an end in 1990.

===Recent developments===
On 1 November 1981, the local council which administered the town of Sibu (Sibu Urban District Council) was upgraded to Sibu Municipal Council. The area of administration of Sibu expanded from 50 km2 to 129.5 km2. In 1994, Sibu Airport and Sibu Hospital were constructed. In 2001, Wisma Sanyan construction was completed. Yang di-Pertuan Agong of Malaysia, Sultan Salahuddin Abdul Aziz Shah visited Sibu from 16 to 17 September 2001 to close a month-long Malaysian Independence Day Celebration at Sibu Town Square.

Between 1999 and 2004, Sibu Municipal Council decided to adopt the swan as a symbol of Sibu to inspire the people to work towards the goal of becoming a city in the future. Since then, a Swan statue has been erected near the Sibu wharf terminal and another statue is located in the town centre. Sibu is also nicknamed as &quot;Swan City&quot;. This came from a legend where famine in Sibu ended when a flock of swans flew through the skies of Sibu. There is another story where the Sibu Chinese immigrants regarded Sibu Melanau people as &quot;Go&quot; people because a staple food of Melanau staple food was &quot;Sago&quot;.

In 2006, the Lanang Bridge connecting Sibu to Sarikei was opened. Sibu also functions as the gateway to Sarawak Corridor of Renewable Energy (SCORE). The town of Sibu and its surrounding areas has been the subject of several developmental projects since 2008. In 2011, the 110th anniversary of Fuzhou settlement was celebrated in Sibu. However, Sibu&#x27;s population growth and economic development is relatively slow when compared to Miri and Bintulu.

In September 2023, Sibu had the honour of hosting a two-day visit from the 16th Yang di-Pertuan Agong Al-Sultan Abdullah Ri&#x27;ayatuddin Al-Mustafa Billah Shah and Raja Permaisuri Agong Tunku Azizah Aminah Maimunah Iskandariah as part of their Kembara Kenali Borneo tour. This marked the second royal visit to Sibu.

==Government==

Sibu is represented by two members of parliament (MPs) who oversee the town&#x27;s two parliamentary federal constituencies: Lanang and Sibu. Additionally, the town elects five representatives to the Sarawak State Legislative Assembly, each representing a specific constituency: Bukit Assek, Dudong, Bawang Assan, Pelawan, and Nangka.

===Local authorities===

Sibu&#x27;s local council traces its origins back to 31 January 1925, during the Brooke administration. It was later upgraded to Sibu Urban District Council (SUDC) in 1952. Initially established, it evolved into the Sibu Urban District Council (SUDC) in 1952. After nearly three decades of operation, SUDC underwent further development, culminating in its upgrade to the Sibu Municipal Council (SMC) on 1 November 1981.

SMC assumes authority over the town, overseeing a jurisdiction spanning 129.5 km2, extending from the banks of the Rajang River to the uptown area along Jalan Salim. Initially headquartered within the Sibu Town Hall from 1962 to 2000, SMC later relocated to Wisma Sanyan in 2001. The current chairman of SMC is Clarence Ting Ing Horh.

Beyond the town centre, peripheral areas like Sibu Jaya and the district of Selangau fall under the administration of the Sibu Rural District Council (SRDC), which manages a vast territory covering 6,000 km2. Both SMC and SRDC are headquartered within Wisma Sanyan.

Furthermore, Sibu&#x27;s administrative landscape expanded with the inauguration of the Sibu Islamic Complex in September 2014. This complex serves as the home to various governmental bodies, including the Sibu Resident Office, Sibu District Office, State Treasury Office, Social Welfare Department, and the State Islamic Religious Department (JAIS).

===International relations===

As of 2015, Sibu is twinned to fifteen places in China:
==Geography==
Sibu is located near the Rajang delta at the confluence of Rajang and Igan rivers. Peat swamp forests and alluvial plains are particularly prevalent in the Sibu Division. Sibu is located on a deep peat soil, which has caused problems in infrastructure development because buildings and roads slowly sink into the ground after its completion. The location of Sibu in lowland peat swamps have subjected it to frequent floods, about 1 to 3 times per year. Because of these factors, the Sibu Flood Mitigation project was started to relieve the area from the floods. The highest elevation in Sibu is at Bukit Aup Jubilee Park, measuring 59 m above sea level.

===Climate===
Sibu has a tropical rainforest climate according to the Köppen climate classification. The Sibu town has high temperatures of and low temperatures of . Annual rainfall is approximately , with relative humidity between 80 and 87%. Sibu receives between 4 and 5 hours of sunlight per day with yearly average daily values of global solar radiation of 15.2 MJ/m2. Cloud cover over Sibu reduces during the months of June and July (6.75 Oktas) but increases from November to February (7 Oktas).

==Demographics==

The change in Sibu&#x27;s population since 1947 is shown below:

===Ethnicity===

According to the 2010 Malaysian census, the town of Sibu (excluding suburban area) has total population of 162,676. Chinese (52.1%, 82,019) is the largest ethnic group in the town, followed by indigenous people (35.01%, 56,949), non-Malaysians (1.99%, 3,236), and Indians (0.37%, 598). Among the indigenous tribes, there are Iban (28,777), Malays (24,646), Melanau (16,028), Bidayuh (3,337), and other indigenous tribes (1874). A majority of the non-Malaysians are Indonesian workers employed at plywood and sawmills factories. There are also a number of illegal workers employed by syndicates to tap rubber. A number of foreign Chinese nationals and Indonesians are also working in massage parlours.

===Languages===
Since the majority of the town population is made up of Fuzhounese, Hokkien and Hakka Chinese, Mandarin Chinese being the lingua franca of all three dialect groups and usage of dialects such as the Fuzhou dialect, Hakka and Hokkien are commonly spoken among the Chinese community. The majority of Sibu Chinese are multilingual and are able to communicate in Sarawak Malay, the indigenous native Iban language and English. Indigenous languages such as Sarawak Malay, Melanau, Bidayuh and Iban are also spoken.

===Religion===
Unlike the other towns in Malaysia, the majority of the Chinese population in Sibu are Christians while other Chinese practice Buddhism, Taoism, and Confucianism. Many of the Iban population in Sibu are Christians. Malays and Melanaus are Muslims. Respective religious groups are free to hold their processions in the town. Several notable religious buildings in the town are Sacred Heart Cathedral, Masland Methodist Church, Tua Pek Kong Temple, and An-Nur Mosque. Yu Lung San Tien En Si or Jade Dragon Temple is located at KM26 Sibu-Bintulu Road. The temple combined Buddhism, Taoism and Confucianism under one roof. It is claimed to be the largest temple in Southeast Asia.

==Economy==

In the early days, Fuzhounese settlers in Sibu tried to convert the town into a rice cultivation centre. However, this vision did not materialise because the soil was not suitable for rice cultivation. In August 1909, Charles Brooke agreed to grant land titles to Sibu Chinese farmers and encouraged them to cultivate rubber plantations. The rise of rubber prices from 1909 to 1911 had encouraged another 2,000 Fuzhounese settlers to come to Sibu. The demand for rubber rose again during Korean War between 1950 and 1953 and has benefited Sibu rubber plantations. Local farmers later used the profits from rubber plantations into setting up shops at Sungai Merah and Durin bazaars and involve in more profitable timber industry. During the Sarawak Communist Insurgency in the 1970s, rural farmers had to abandon their rubber plantations because of martial law declared by the state government which forbade them for helping the communists operating in the jungles.

The timber industry in Sibu flourished during the 1940s and 1950s and its economic importance surpassed rubber plantations in the 1960s. Several global timber conglomerates such as the Rimbunan Hijau Group, Ta Ann Holdings Berhad, Sanyan Group, WTK, The Sarawak Company, and Asia Plywood Company set up their headquarters in Sibu. Timber processing and exports become the main economic driving force in Sibu. Development of the timber industry in Sibu has been supported by loans given by the earliest Chinese banks in Sibu such as Wah Tat Bank (1929), Hock Hua Bank (1952), and Kong Ming Bank (1965). Following the introduction of &quot;Banking and Financial Institutions Act of 1989&quot; (BAFIA) by the Malaysian federal government, Kong Ming Bank was acquired by EON Bank in 1992, followed by the merger of Wah Tat Bank with Hong Leong Bank and the merger of Hock Hua Bank with Public Bank Berhad in the year 2000. In 1958, HSBC started its banking operation in Kuching, followed by Sibu in 1959. It was responsible for supporting several timber conglomerates in Sibu such as WTK and Ta Ann Holdings Berhad. In November 2013, HSBC decided to close down all its commercial banking sectors in Sarawak after the bank was alleged for supporting non-sustainable logging operations in Sarawak.

Shipbuilding business in Sibu started in the 1930s to supply wooden boats for river and coastal navigation. It flourished in 1970s and 1980s along with increase in exports of tropical timber from Sarawak. It later shifted its focus into steel boat building. Some of the vessels in demand are tug boats for towing logs, barges for carrying logs, anchor handlers, Offshore Support Vessels (OSV), ferries, and express boats for carrying passengers. Most of the boats built are of small and medium in size. There are a total of 40 shipyards in Sibu. A majority of the workers are welders. In 2003, 17 of the shipyards were relocated to Rantau Panjang Integrated Shipyard Shipbuilding Industrial Zone, Sibu. This included Yong Chin Kui, Far East, and TuongAik. The boats built in Sibu are often exported to neighbouring state of Sabah, Peninsular Malaysia, Singapore, Indonesia and United Arab Emirates. In the year 1991, a total of US$50 million was earned for shipbuilding business in Sibu. In 2011, Sibu ship exports stood at RM 525 million. Sibu is also the only city in Sarawak to possess a vehicle assembly plant. The plant is operated by N.B. Heavy Industries Sdn. Bhd., and it has been assembling Ankai, BeiBen, Golden Dragon, Huanghai Bus and JAC commercial vehicles since 2010. Sibu has two industrial areas: Upper Lanang Industrial estate (Mixed Light Industries) and Rantau Panjang Ship Building Industrial Zone.

There are two river ports at Sibu: Sibu port and Sungai Merah port, located at 113 km and 116 km along from the mouth of the Rajang river, respectively. Sibu port has maximum gross tonnage (GT) of 10,000 tonnes while Sungai Merah port has a maximum GT of 2,500 tonnes. Sibu port is used mainly for handling timber and agricultural products while Sungai Merah port is used for handling fuel oil products. Rajang Port Authority (RPA) is located at Sibu port operation centre.

RPA has earned a total revenue of RM 30.1 million and profit of RM 5 million in the year 2012.

==Transport==

===Land===
Roads in Sibu are under the jurisdiction of Sibu Municipal Council (SMC). Some of the notable roads in Sibu are Brooke Drive, Archer Street, and Wong Nai Siong Street. Kwong Ann roundabout is located near Brooke Drive in town centre while Bukit Lima roundabout is located near Wong King Huo Street in the uptown area. Sibu is also connected to other major towns and cities in Sarawak such as Kuching by Pan Borneo Highway. In early 2011, Sibu-Tanjung Manis Highway was opened. In April 2006, Lanang Bridge connecting Sibu to Sarikei and Bintangor across the Rajang River was opened. Toll-free Durin Bridge was opened in October 2006 connecting Sibu to other places such as Julau. The Durin bridge is located near the satellite township of Sibu Jaya.

====Public transport====

=====Local Bus=====
=====Local Bus or Bus Express remain unclear=====
The town of Sibu has two bus stations. The local bus station is located at the waterfront near the Sibu wharf terminal. The long-distance bus station is located at Pahlawan Street, near the Sungai Antu region. Jaya Li Hua Commercial Centre and Medan Hotel are located next to the long-distance bus station. The local bus station at the waterfront serves the town area, Sibu Airport, Sibu Jaya, Kanowit, and Sarikei. Lanang Bus serves the connection between the local bus station and the long-distance bus station while Panduan Hemat buses serves Sibu Airport and satellite township of Sibu Jaya. On the other hand, the long-distance bus station serves Kuching, Bintulu, and Miri via the Pan Borneo Highway. Some of the buses serving at the long-distance bus station are Biaramas, Suria Bus, and Borneo Highway Express.

Taxis in Sibu operates 24 hours a day. Taxis can be found at the airport, big hotels, taxi stands at the wharf terminal, and at Lintang Street. Taxi services are also offered for travel to nearby regions such as Mukah, Bawang Assan, Sarikei, and Bintangor. Kong Teck car rental is available at the airport.

In May 2017, ride-sharing service company GrabCar was launched in Sibu.

===Water===

Sibu wharf terminal is located at Kho Peng Long Street near the Rajang river waterfront. It provides an alternative means of transport for the people living along the Rajang River. Among the destinations that can be reached by express boats from Sibu includes Belaga, Dalat, Daro, Kapit, Kanowit, Kuching, Sarikei, and Song. Sibu floating market which is made up of several large boats can also be seen from the wharf terminal. The boats are responsible to carry groceries to rural communities living along the river and do not have access to roads. There used to be a Pandaw River Cruise which operated along the Rajang River from Sibu to Pelagus Rapids Resort but its operation was terminated in 2012 due to logistical and operational difficulties.

===Air===

Sibu Airport was built in 1994, located at 25 km from the town of Sibu and 1 km from the satellite township of Sibu Jaya. In 2008, the airport handled 831,772 passengers on 14,672 flights and 735 metric tonnes of cargo. In April 2010, the airport was allocated RM130 million by the Malaysian federal government for the upgrade of the terminal building. The airport terminal building is the second largest in Sarawak after the Kuching International Airport. The airport has a 2.75 km runway and it serves Malaysia Airlines, Air Asia, and MASWings with direct flights to all major towns in Sarawak, such as Miri, Bintulu, Kuching and national destinations such as Kota Kinabalu, Kuala Lumpur, and Johor Bahru. In October 2011, Firefly airline terminated its services in Sarawak while Malindo Air terminated its services to Sibu Airport in June 2014 due to low number of passengers.

==Other utilities==

===Courts of law, legal enforcement, and crime===

The court complex is located at Tun Abang Haji Openg Street, Sibu. It contains the High Court, Sessions Court, and the Magistrate Court. The Sibu town also has a Syariah Court located at Kampung Nyabor Street with jurisdictions in Sibu, Kanowit and Selangau districts. There is one district police headquarters at Tun Abang Haji Openg Street. The Sibu central police station is located at Kampung Nyabor Street. Sungai Merah police station and Lanang police station are also located in Sibu town area. There is also a prison in Sibu.

Tiong King Sing, an MP from Bintulu, has voiced concerns about gangsterism in Sarawak especially the Sibu town back in 2007. As a result, &quot;Operation Cantas Kenyalang&quot; was started in 2008 to clamp down gangsterism in Sarawak. In September 2013, Sibu police chief announced that &quot;Lee Long&quot;, &quot;Sungai Merah&quot;, and &quot;Tua Chak Lee&quot; gangs ceased to exist and Sibu town is free from organised gangsterism. There were 25 gangster groups in Sibu back in 2007; there are 7 groups as of 9 October 2013. In September 2014, Royal Malaysian Police headquarter at Bukit Aman, Kuala Lumpur, stated that 16 local gangster groups are still active in Sarawak especially in Sibu but they do not pose any serious security threats. This raised new concerns that such groups still pose a serious security risk in Sibu town and Sarawak in general.

===Healthcare===

Sibu Hospital is the second largest hospital in Sarawak and the secondary referral hospital for the central region of Sarawak which includes 5 divisions: Sibu, Kapit, Mukah, Sarikei, and Betong. There are 8 district hospitals in these divisions that are referred to Sibu. Sibu Hospital is also a teaching hospital for undergraduates from Universiti Malaysia Sarawak (UNIMAS) and SEGi University. There are also two private medical centres in Sibu: KPJ Sibu Specialist Medical Centre and Rejang Medical Centre.

Lanang and Oya Polyclinics are located in Sibu. There are also five 1Malaysia clinics in Sibu. The Bandong 1Malaysia clinic became the first 1Malaysia Clinic nationwide to offer echocardiography screening.
There are also several pharmacy outlets in Sibu: B Y Chan pharmacy, Central Pharmacy, Lot 9 Pharmacy near by Delta Mall and Cosway Pharmacy.

===Education===

Sibu has about 85 primary schools and 23 secondary schools. The Sibu primary and secondary schools under the National Education System are managed by Sibu District Education Office located at Brooke Drive, Sibu. The oldest school in Sibu is Sacred Heart High School which was formed in 1902 by Rev. Father Hopfgarther. This was followed by Rev James Hoover where he formed Methodist Anglo-Chinese School in 1903. The school later evolved into Methodist primary and secondary schools in 1947. Uk Daik primary school, built in 1926, is one of the oldest Chinese primary schools in Sibu. Built in 1954, St Mary primary school is the oldest English stream school in Sibu Division. Sibu also has five Chinese independent schools. The most notable ones are Catholic High School (1961) and Wong Nai Siong High School (1967). All the Chinese independent schools in Sibu are under the purview of The United Association of Private Chinese Secondary School, Sibu Division. In 2013, Woodlands International School opened in Sibu offering Cambridge International Examinations (CIE) course.

In 1997, United College Sarawak (UCS) was established in Sibu at Teku Street. It was renamed to Kolej Laila Taib (KLT) in 2010. This college offers business, accounting, civil engineering, architecture, Electrical and Electronic Engineering and quantity surveying courses. University College of Technology Sarawak (UCTS), located just opposite the KLT, commenced its maiden intake of new undergraduate students in September 2013. This university is established to provide human capital for the development of Sarawak Corridor of Renewable Energy (SCORE). In 1967, Pilley Memorial Secondary School was established in Sibu. In April 1991, the school was upgraded to Methodist Pilley Institute (MPI) and it started to offer accounting, business management, and computer science courses.

Sarawak Maritime Academy was formed under the Shin Yang Group of Companies. It offers Diploma in Nautical (DNS) and Diploma in Marine Engineering courses. Sacred Heart College started to offer Diploma in Hotel Management courses in 2010. Rimbunan Hijau (RH) Academy was established in 2005 and it started to offer training in automotive, oil palm plantations, hospitality, and business management in 2007. Sibu Nursing College and ITA college offers nursing-related programmes. In 1954, the Methodist Theological School was established in Sibu. It is affiliated with Methodist Church in Malaysia and is accredited by the Association for Theological Education in South East Asia (ATESEA).

Long distance study centres (&quot;Pendidikan Jarak Jauh&quot;, PJJ) in Sibu are opened by Universiti Utara Malaysia (UUM) at Lanang and Universiti Putra Malaysia (UPM) at Sibu Jaya. Universiti Malaysia Sarawak (UNIMAS) opened its Centre for Academic Information Services (CAIS) - Integrated Learning Facilities (ILF) at Sibu for undergraduate medical students undergoing their training at Sibu Hospital. Open University Malaysia (OUM) also opens a Sibu Learning Centre.
SEGi University has established its Clinical Campus in Sibu Hospital in 2014. This campus houses its Faculty of Medicine which offers a 5-year programme leading to a Bachelor of Medicine and Surgery (MBBS). The first 2 years of the programme is conducted at the main SEGi University Campus in Kota Damansara. Located in the Sibu Hospital complex Sibu Clinical Campus offers clinical training for the Third, Fourth and Final Year students.Besides Sibu Hospital clinical training are also conducted at Sarikei Hospital, government clinics and selected private clinics.

===Libraries===

The first public library in Sibu was started as Methodist Missionary Library in the 1950s. It was taken over by Sibu Urban District Council (SUDC) in 1955. It was moved to the present location at Keranji road in 1986 as SMC public library. The library underwent a major upgrade in 2014. Another public library named &quot;Ling Zi Ming Cultural centre&quot; (林子明文化館) was established by the local Chinese community under the Sibu Chinese Chamber of Commerce and Industry (SCCCI, 詩巫中華總商會) in 1980. It houses Chinese books collections. Another library named Sibu Jaya public library is located at the satellite township of Sibu Jaya, 26 km from the town of Sibu.

==Culture and leisure==

===Attractions and recreational spots===

====Cultural====

Since 2005, Borneo Cultural Festival (BCF) is held by Sibu Municipal Council (SMC) in July every year at Sibu Town Square, for a period of 10 days. It is a celebration of traditional music, dances, contests, beauty pageant, food stalls, fun fairs, and product exhibitions. There are 3 separate stages for Iban, Chinese, and Malay performances. It draws around 20,000 people every year. BCF was stopped briefly in 2011 before it was resumed in 2012. Sibu has hosted the National Chinese Cultural Festival (全國華人文化節) twice: in 2001 (18th Festival) and 2009 (26th Festival) which lasted for 3 days. Among the activities organised during this festival were cultural village (a venue designated to showcase cultural heritages from various ethnicity), lantern riddles, cultural dances, Chinese songs, dragon dances, and Chinese calligraphy. Sibu International Dance Festival (SIDF) was started in 2012. It is usually held between June and September every year, which lasted for 5 days. It attracted around 14 to 18 international dance troupes for performances in Sibu. It includes activities such as workshops, conferences, outdoor performances, and a dance concert.

There are 9 Bawang Assan Iban longhouses which are 40 minutes away from the town of Sibu. The longhouses can be dated back from 18th century traditional longhouses to present day modern longhouses. Visitors can enjoy traditional rice wine &quot;tuak&quot; and other delicacies such as &quot;sarang semut&quot;, &quot;kain kebat&quot;, and &quot;pansuh&quot;. These Iban longhouses showcase their lifestyles, customs, traditional dance, and music. Homestays are also available at these longhouses. There are 3 ceramic factories in Sibu. Ceramic designs mainly depicts traditional culture of the natives.

====Historical====
Sibu Heritage Trail was launched in 2012 to include 9 landmarks in Sibu, which are: Sibu Heritage Centre, Sibu Old Mosque (Masjid Al-Qadim, built in 1883), Warriors Memorial Site (present burial site of Rosli Dhobi, near An-Nur Mosque), oldest Muslim cemetery, Lau King Howe Hospital Memorial Museum, Hoover Memorial Square, Tua Pek Kong Temple, and Sibu Central Market. All the 9 landmarks can be reached by 2 kilometres of walking distance from each other. Sibu Heritage Centre is housed in a former Sibu Town Hall. It displays the early beginnings of Sibu, Iban and Malay cultures, with Chinese porcelain and clay vases which can be dated back to the era of Imperial China. Tua Pek Kong Temple is a Buddhist and Taoist Temple which was established in 1870. The 7-storey Guanyin Pagoda (Goddess of Mercy) was built in the 1980s. The Lau King Howe Hospital Memorial Museum is the only medical museum in Malaysia. It displays dental, surgical, and obstetric services offered by the hospital from the 1950s to 1990s. Sungai Merah (Red River) Heritage Walk is the landmark of the earliest settlement of Fuzhounese in Sibu in 1901. There is a walking trail at the Sungai Merah river front leading up to Wong Nai Siong Memorial Garden. James Hoover Memorial Garden is also located near the Sungai Merah Heritage Walk.

====Leisure and conservation areas====
Bukit Aup Jubilee Park was opened in March 1993. It is located 10 km away from the town of Sibu. It has a total undulating land of . The park was the two consecutive winner of National Landscaping Competition Award in 1997 and 1998. The highest peak in the park, Bukit Aup (59 m above sea level) was originally a traditional burial ground for Iban warriors. The burial ground has since been relocated to a nearby village for the development of the park. However, the Iban community still regarded the peak as a sacred place and frequently brought offerings for the benevolent spirit named &quot;Nanga Bari&quot;.

Bukit Lima peat swamp forest reserve, covering , was gazetted as protected area since October 1929. In January 2001, Bukit Lima Forest Park covering was constructed in the peat swamp forest and opened to the public. It has two separate trails of wooden planks of 3.5 km and 2.5 km long respectively. The park also has a 3-storey concrete watchtower for sightseeing. The park is managed by Sarawak Forestry Corporation (SFC).

Sibu has other urban and suburban parks such as Kutien Memorial Garden, Hin Hua Memorial Park, and Permai Lake Garden. The Kutien Memorial Garden located at Lanang Street is managed by Sibu Kutien Association. The Kutien Garden showcase the association&#x27;s history and events. The Hin Hua Memorial Park is established by Sibu Heng Hua community where their earliest arrival in Sibu was in 1911. YMCA Camp Resort is located away from the town. It provides facilities for camping and retreat.

====Sports====
Sibu has three stadiums: Tun Zaidi Stadium, Sibu Indoor Stadium and Sibu Volleyball Indoor Stadium.

Sibu BASE jump is an annual event that is held in September every year since 2009, which lasts for 3 days. Night jumps are also performed if the weather is fair. The BASE jumping usually takes place from the top of Wisma Sanyan which is 126m high and is the tallest building in Sarawak. The number of jumpers has increased from 11 jumpers in 2009 to 45 jumpers in 2014. In 2013, world&#x27;s first tandem BASE jumping from a building (Wisma Sanyan in Sibu) was done by Sean Chuma (world-renowned BASE jumper), carrying Rudy Anoi (chief executive of Sarawak Tourism Board, Sibu branch) with him.

Since 2001, Sarawak Health Marathon is held every year at Bukit Aup Jubilee Park, Sibu. The run can be divided into 6 categories, including 21 km Men&#x27;s and Ladies&#x27; Open, 7km Men&#x27;s Fun Run and Boys&#x27; Junior, 2.5km Girls&#x27; Junior, and 2.5km Ladies Fun Run.

====Other sights====
Sibu Gateway is a landmark at the downtown area which includes an illuminated fountain, a garden, and a Swan statue surrounded by 12 Chinese zodiac signs. Rajang Esplanade is one of the 22 community parks in Sibu, mostly donated by Chinese clan associations. Rajang Esplanade has a walkway along the Rajang riverfront from Sibu wharf terminal to Kingwood Hotel with Hii&#x27;s association playground along the way. It offers a scene of muddy river with timber barges, express boats, and fishing boats commuting on the river. Several mural paintings depicting historical lifestyles and local cuisines are found at various locations in Sibu.

====Other events====
Sibu Bike Week is an event that is held in December every year since 2011. It is a 3-day event aimed to bring all the enthusiasts of motorcyclists, cars, audio systems, BMX, Zumba, and paintball to share their hobbies and experiences. It has attracted about 2,000 bikers around the world. Among the activities held during Sibu Bike Week are Miss Sibu Bike Week Pageant, Tattoo queen and King competition. Borneo Talent Award (BTA) is held every year in Sibu since 2011 at Sibu Civic Centre. It showcases performances of singing, dancing, acrobatics, mimicry, playing musical instruments, magic show, and art performances.

====Shopping====

Sibu features a number of shopping malls: Wisma Sanyan, Medan Mall, Sing Kwong Shopping Complex, Farley Departmental Store, Delta Mall, Star Mega Mall, Everwin, Swan Square, and The Hann&#x27;s Residence.

The Sibu Night Market was established in 1973. It was situated in the town centre. Local traders will usually set up their mobile stalls from 5pm to 10pm every day. The stalls offer household goods, footwear, fashion items, and varieties of food. In August 2012, the market was relocated to Butterfly Garden at Cross Road near the Tua Pek Kong Temple to ease traffic jams.

The Sibu Central Market is the largest indoor market in Malaysia. It is located at Channel Street, opposite the Sibu wharf terminal. The central market has food stalls on top floor with dry and wet market on the ground floor. Among the items on sale in this market are exotic fruits, jungle produce, handicrafts, Bario rice, and poultry. There are 1,100 stalls in the market on weekdays and 400-500 additional stalls on weekends when the indigenous people from the interior brought their jungle produce to the market.

==Cuisine==

Sibu is well-known for its wide variety of ethnic dishes, especially indigenous food from the Dayaks community and also food inspired from Fuzhou community. The &quot;Bandong walk&quot; project was started in 2012 and was scheduled to be completed in 2015. This project is set to make the Bandong area a halal food hub of local delicacies for the locals and the tourists. Common dishes that can be found all over Sibu include:
* Kampua noodle (also known as 干盘面 &#x27;dry plate noodles&#x27;) — a dish introduced by early Chinese migrants from Foochow city (Fuzhou) who settled in Sibu, is a simple and filling noodle dish. It consists of homemade noodles mixed with locally available ingredients like pork lard, shallots, and seasonings. The noodles, made from wheat flour, eggs, salt, and water, are boiled, strained, and then tossed with fragrant pork lard, sauces, and seasonings. Slices of pork are added for flavour, and today, Kampua comes in various versions, including plain, dark, and red, with different sauces for distinct flavour profiles. It is available at almost all coffee shops and food stalls. Halal kampua noodles are available too.
* Dian Mian Hu (also known as Duëng Mian Ngu or Ding Bian Hu 鼎边糊) — a unique noodle soup from Sibu, has roots in the migration of Fuzhou settlers. Its name translates to &quot;wok edge paste&quot; in Chinese, alluding to its distinctive preparation method. The star of the dish is the flat noodles made from a rice flour batter. This batter is poured along the edge of a hot wok, forming thin dough upon contact. Skilled hands scrape this into the soup, creating the distinct noodles. The soup is a masterpiece, usually featuring a blend of pork and cuttlefish stock, enhanced with local ingredients like Sarawakian white pepper. Diners can add extra flavor with a dash of this aromatic pepper. Some variations even offer a curry-based soup, showcasing local influence. Dian Mian Hu is a sought-after delicacy, primarily enjoyed in eateries due to its specialised preparation techniques. It is available at several stalls as a hefty breakfast or a late night supper.
* Kompia (also known as Guang Bing, Kompyang or Gom bian 光饼) — often referred to as &quot;Foochow bagels&quot;, is a delightful bread akin to bagels with its origins in Fuzhou, China. It made its way to Malaysian towns with a thriving Fuzhou Chinese community, becoming a culinary gem. Legend has it that Kompia was invented by Qi Jiguang, who designed it with a hole in the center for easy portability during military campaigns. The dough is prepared from wheat flour, baking soda, yeast, salt, and water, then shaped into balls with a hole in the center. Traditionally baked in clay ovens, modern versions use conventional ovens. Kompia can be enjoyed plain or with sesame seeds, and regional variations abound. In Sibu, it&#x27;s often served with stewed pork mince, but creative adaptations include Kompia with donut icing, rojak sauce, and even as a cheeseburger, showcasing its versatility. Traditional soft kompia dipped in pork mince sauce can be sought from Chung Hua road, the Sunday Market at Pedada road, and Sibu Central Market. There are deep fried variations available throughout the town of Sibu.
* Bian Nyuk (also known as 扁肉) — meaning &#x27;flattened meat&#x27; in the Foochow dialect, is a cherished dish in Sibu, celebrated for its rich Foochow culinary heritage. This delightful wonton-type dish features a thin and translucent skin called yanpi, which is meticulously crafted without the use of alkaline water, giving it a unique ability to melt in your mouth. Unlike traditional wontons, Bian Nyuk boasts thinner skin and a lighter, less greasy texture. It is typically filled with lean and finely minced pork, resulting in a delicate texture and exquisite taste. Often enjoyed alongside another Sibu breakfast staple, Kampua noodles, Bian Nyuk comes in both soup and dry-tossed variations. Served in various flavours, including the classic white and savoury black with dark soy sauce.
* Bazhen Soup (also known as 八珍汤/八珍药 or Bek Ding Yuok or Eight Rarity Soup) — one of the well-known herbal soups in Sibu. Many people love to drink it since young. It is made up of two recipes of soup, Sijunzi Soup (Four Gentlemen Soup) and Siwu Soup (Four Substance Soup). The Codonopsis, Atractylodes, Poria and Licorice in the recipe are the ingredients from Sijunzi Soup. While the Shudi, Baishao, Angelica and Chuanxiong are the ingredients from Siwu Soup. These eight types of Chinese herbs add up to become Bazhen Tang, which traditionally help to nourish qi and blood, strengthen the spleen and stomach, and relieve fatigue. Bazhen Soup should be evenly proportioned with sufficient ingredients to make the taste authentic. When paired with Fuzhou longevity noodles, it turns into a delicious dish. Bazhen soup packed could be purchased easily from traditional Chinese herbal shops in Sibu town like Poh Guan Hong and Chew Hock Choon.
* Sarawak Laksa — a renowned soup noodle dish originating from Sarawak, is celebrated for its distinctive shrimp-based broth and complex laksa spice paste. This paste, comprising various aromatic ingredients, is sautéed to perfection before being combined with chicken and prawn broth and coconut milk. The broth is seasoned with soy sauce, vinegar, or fish sauce for a balanced flavor. Typically served with thin rice vermicelli noodles and a variety of garnishes including spring onions, prawns, chicken, and egg omelette, Sarawak Laksa is enhanced with a side of shrimp paste and chilli sambal belacan. A halved kalamansi lime is also provided to brighten the dish with a citrusy touch. Renowned chef Anthony Bourdain hailed it as the &quot;breakfast of the gods&quot;, making it a must-try for food enthusiasts worldwide.
* Tebaloi (also known as Tabaloi) — is a traditional Melanau snack closely linked to the Sarawak region, particularly the Mukah and Dalat districts. It&#x27;s made from sago flour, desiccated coconut, eggs, and sugar, which are mixed to create a dough. This dough is then flattened on a banana leaf and cooked over a wood fire stove, giving it a unique smoky flavor. Once cooked, the dough is cut into squares, flattened further, and dried to achieve its signature crispiness. Tebaloi comes in various flavours today but maintains its historic ties to the Melanau people&#x27;s culture and traditions. You can find it in Sibu Central Market and enjoy its delightful textures and tastes during tea time.
* Kek Lapis Sarawak — is a popular layered cake in Sarawak, known for its vibrant colours and intricate designs. Originating from Indonesia, it was introduced in the 1970s and 1980s and later adapted by Sarawakians with unique flavours and colours. This cake is made using Western cake-making techniques, with a batter of flour, eggs, milk, butter, and various flavourings and colours baked in thin layers. These layers are carefully assembled and bound with condensed milk or jam. The cake&#x27;s cross-section reveals its kaleidoscopic beauty, showcasing the skill and attention to detail in its creation. Kek Lapis Sarawak is a protected geographical indication of Sarawak since 2010, ensuring its authenticity and quality. Kek Lapis Sarawak can be found easily at Sibu Central Market.
* Manok Pansoh (also known as Manuk Pansuhi) — a cherished dish among the Dayak community in Sarawak, involves cooking marinated chicken inside a bamboo stalk, infusing it with a unique flavor. The chicken is prepared with a mix of aromatic ingredients, including ginger, lemongrass, and more. This marinated chicken is then stuffed into bamboo, sealed with tapioca leaves, and roasted over an open fire, creating a delightful and aromatic dish. Manok Pansoh&#x27;s exact origin remains a mystery, but its ingenuity and simplicity make it a beloved tradition, initially served during the Gawai Dayak festival but now enjoyed widely at various occasions.
* Terung Asam (also known as Terung Dayak) — is a unique and sour-tasting fruit cherished by Sarawak&#x27;s Dayak community. Unlike regular aubergines, it has a round shape, dark green skin turning yellow when ripe, and firm, bright yellow flesh with small seeds in the center. Terung Asam is not only distinct in appearance but also offers impressive nutrition, including vitamin C, calcium, fibre, phosphorus, and potassium. It&#x27;s commonly used in Sarawak-style sour and spicy soups, where it&#x27;s combined with lemongrass, chili, ginger, and various proteins like fish, poultry, or meat. Grilling Terung Asam and making it into a spicy sambal is another popular approach. Some even use it to create unique Terung Asam-flavoured ice cream.
* Empurau — known as the &quot;King of the River&quot;, is Malaysia&#x27;s priciest fish, inhabiting clear, swift rivers with a unique taste influenced by its diet of native fruits. Its slow growth contributes to its high cost, with larger specimens fetching prices up to RM2000 per kg. Typically steamed or eaten raw, it offers a delicate flavor and edible scales that chefs transform into crispy snacks. However, wild Empurau populations are dwindling due to overfishing and habitat loss, prompting conservation efforts.
* Rojak Kassim — Indian-style rojak (also known as pasembur or Mamak Rojak).
* You Zhar Gui (also known as 油炸桧, 油條, Yau Char Kway, or Kueh Cakoi in Malay) — deep fried twin dough batter often dipped in soup or chili sauce. It is often eaten together with porridge or Bak Kut Teh (肉骨茶).

==Notable people==

===Politics===
* Abang Muhammad Salahuddin Abang Barieng, third and sixth Yang di-Pertua Negeri of Sarawak
* Ahmad Zaidi Adruce, fifth Yang di-Pertua Negeri of Sarawak
* Tuanku Bujang Tuanku Othman, second Yang di-Pertua Negeri of Sarawak
* Wong Soon Kai, Deputy Chief Minister of Sarawak
* Datuk Robert Lau Hoi Chew, former member of parliament for Sibu and former Malaysian deputy minister of transport.
* Datuk Tiong Thai King, former member of parliament for Lanang and former chairman of Sibu Municipal Council (SMC).
* Wong Ho Leng, former member of parliament for Sibu, Sarawak State Legislative Member for Bukit Assek and former chairman of Sarawak Democratic Action Party (DAP).
* YB Dato&#x27; Sri Fadillah Yusof, Deputy Prime Minister of Malaysia, and Minister of Plantation and Commodities since 2022. He is currently the member of Parliament for Petra Jaya, Kuching and former Senior Minister of Malaysia (Works).
* YBhg. Dato&#x27; Awang Bemee Awang Ali Basah, former Sarawak State Legislative Member for Nangka, Legal Adviser of Parti Pesaka Bumiputera Bersatu (PBB) Sarawak and Chairman of Kuching Port Authority.
* YBhg. Vincent Goh Chung Siong, former Sarawak State Legislative Member for Pelawan and Chairman of Rajang Port Authority.
* YB Dr. Annuar Rapaee, Assistant Minister for Education, Science and Technology Research &amp; Assistant Minister for Housing and Public Health and Sarawak State Legislative Member for Nangka.

===Business===
* Tan Sri Datuk Sir Tiong Hiew King, Chairman of Rimbunan Hijau Group and elder brother of Datuk Tiong Thai King. He was listed as one of the 10 richest Malaysians and also one of the Malaysians receiving the knighthood from the British Government.
* Datuk Lau Hui Siong, Founder of See Hua Group which publishes See Hua Daily News, The Borneo Post, and Utusan Borneo.
* Hii King Chiong, businessman and philanthropist.
* Mary Lim, businesswoman and educator.

===Others===
* Andrew Cheng, US-based musician. He has also been working on concerts with Hong Kong singers/actors William So, Fred Cheng and Stephanie Ho as well as jazz musician Matt Garrison and Shereen Cheong of the Victory Boyd band.
* Edwin Ong Wee Kee, photographer who became the first Malaysian to win the grand prize of the 8th Hamdan International Photography Award (Hipa) in Dubai, United Arab Emirates (UAE).
* Gloria Ting Mei Ru, Miss Malaysia World 2004.
* Datuk Dr. Matnor Daim, former director of Education, Malaysia and recipient of National Education Leadership 2011 Award in conjunction of National Level Teachers Day 2011 in Kuching.
* Ting Ming Siong, a food stall operator, known as the Guinness World Record Holder for the &quot;Most weddings attended by a best man&quot;. He attended 1,393 weddings from September 1975 to 2 February 2006)
* Ting Ung Kee, a famous traditional Chinese medicine practitioner in Sibu who created the well-known herbal tincture in 1950 known as Ubat Sakit Perut Cap Rusa Sing Kong Chui (鹿标申功水). There is a wall mural in Sibu town, dedicated to his contribution to Sibu.

==See also==
* Diocese of Sibu, a diocese of the Latin Church of the Catholic Church in Malaysia
* Sibu by-election, 2010

==References==
===Notes===
==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1048700" start="0" end="4" title="Sibu" label="Sibu"/>
<link wikidata="Q170462" start="59" end="66" title="Sarawak" label="Sarawak"/>
<link wikidata="Q2707675" start="106" end="119" title="Sibu District" label="Sibu District"/>
<link wikidata="Q1853058" start="127" end="140" title="Sibu Division" label="Sibu Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q36117" start="174" end="180" title="Borneo" label="Borneo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474026" start="252" end="258" title="Rajang River" label="Rajang"/>
<link wikidata="Q5991460" start="263" end="273" title="Igan River" label="Igan River"/>
<link wikidata="Q37660" start="313" end="328" title="South China Sea" label="South China Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q220445" start="366" end="373" title="Kuching" label="Kuching"/>
<link wikidata="Q68481" start="497" end="503" title="Fuzhou" label="Fuzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q973254" start="546" end="550" title="Iban people" label="Iban"/>
<link wikidata="Q142702" start="552" end="557" title="Malays (ethnic group)" label="Malay"/>
<link wikidata="Q4262343" start="563" end="570" title="Melanau people" label="Melanau"/>
<link wikidata="Q441276" start="776" end="788" title="James Brooke" label="James Brooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q847603" start="848" end="860" title="Dayak people" label="Dayak people"/>
<link wikidata="Q2221606" start="1008" end="1022" title="Wong Nai Siong" label="Wong Nai Siong"/>
<link wikidata="Q41705" start="1080" end="1086" title="Fujian province" label="Fujian"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1426" end="1442" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589708" start="1620" end="1632" title="Crown Colony of Sarawak" label="Crown Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q4262343" start="1665" end="1672" title="Melanau people" label="Melanau"/>
<link wikidata="Q5314617" start="1765" end="1790" title="Duncan Stewart (British diplomat)" label="Sir Duncan George Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q7369027" start="1892" end="1903" title="Rosli Dhoby" label="Rosli Dhoby"/>
<link wikidata="Q7423418" start="2448" end="2484" title="Sarawak Corridor of Renewable Energy" label="Sarawak Corridor of Renewable Energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474026" start="2638" end="2650" title="Rajang River" label="Rajang River"/>
<link wikidata="Q504106" start="2714" end="2723" title="longhouse" label="longhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q4206762" start="2751" end="2760" title="Orang Ulu" label="Orang Ulu"/>
<link wikidata="Q8027667" start="2821" end="2833" title="Wisma Sanyan" label="Wisma Sanyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q14629145" start="2885" end="2898" title="Lanang Bridge" label="Lanang Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q28219633" start="3079" end="3117" title="Lau King Howe Hospital Memorial Museum" label="Lau King Howe Hospital Memorial Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2188389" start="3385" end="3404" title="Tua Pek Kong Temple, Sibu" label="Tua Pek Kong Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q65074670" start="3448" end="3466" title="Jade Dragon Temple" label="Jade Dragon Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q24946823" start="3576" end="3600" title="Borneo Cultural Festival" label="Borneo Cultural Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q995609" start="3691" end="3697" title="Wood industry" label="timber"/>
<link wikidata="Q474200" start="3702" end="3714" title="shipbuilding" label="shipbuilding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1658411" start="4173" end="4186" title="Kingdom of Sarawak" label="Brooke family"/>
<link wikidata="Q1853058" start="4275" end="4288" title="Sibu Division" label="Sibu Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q2365257" start="4351" end="4358" title="Pulasan" label="Pulasan"/>
<link wikidata="Q33424" start="4407" end="4420" title="Iban language" label="Iban language"/>
<link wikidata="Q973254" start="4771" end="4787" title="Iban people" label="Iban communities"/>
<link wikidata="Q926384" start="5288" end="5293" title="Kayan people (Borneo)" label="Kayan"/>
<link wikidata="Q441276" start="5483" end="5495" title="James Brooke" label="James Brooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q887803" start="5593" end="5608" title="Bruneian Empire" label="Bruneian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q843726" start="5763" end="5767" title="Nypa fruticans" label="atap"/>
<link wikidata="Q4262343" start="5844" end="5858" title="Melanau people" label="Melanau people"/>
<link wikidata="Q973254" start="5886" end="5890" title="Iban people" label="Iban"/>
<link wikidata="Q142702" start="5895" end="5900" title="ethnic Malays" label="Malay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189867" start="6244" end="6255" title="White Rajah" label="White Rajah"/>
<link wikidata="Q333774" start="6489" end="6496" title="Kanowit" label="Kanowit"/>
<link wikidata="Q847603" start="6497" end="6503" title="Dayak people" label="Dayaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q36495" start="7080" end="7087" title="Min Nan" label="Min Nan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2705752" start="7156" end="7160" title="Amoy dialect" label="Amoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474026" start="7354" end="7360" title="Rajang River" label="Rajang"/>
<link wikidata="Q5991460" start="7365" end="7375" title="Igan River" label="Igan river"/>
<link wikidata="Q2188389" start="8064" end="8083" title="Tua Pek Kong Temple, Sibu" label="Tua Pek Kong Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q2221606" start="8165" end="8179" title="Wong Nai Siong" label="Wong Nai Siong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374756" start="8217" end="8231" title="Minqing County" label="Minqing County"/>
<link wikidata="Q41705" start="8233" end="8239" title="Fujian" label="Fujian"/>
<link wikidata="Q8733" start="8364" end="8376" title="Qing dynasty" label="Qing dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q150229" start="8417" end="8432" title="Boxer Rebellion" label="Boxer Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q908467" start="8462" end="8480" title="Christianity in China" label="Chinese Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="8571" end="8585" title="Southeast Asia" label="Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973345" start="8648" end="8654" title="Peninsular Malaysia" label="Malaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="8659" end="8668" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065104" start="8748" end="8762" title="Charles Brooke, Rajah of Sarawak" label="Charles Brooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q68481" start="9291" end="9297" title="Fuzhou" label="Fuzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q41705" start="9299" end="9305" title="Fujian" label="Fujian"/>
<link wikidata="Q46452" start="10457" end="10462" title="opium" label="opium"/>
<link wikidata="Q179975" start="11317" end="11334" title="Chinese Civil War" label="Chinese Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q31113" start="11365" end="11375" title="Kuomintang" label="Kuomintang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066338" start="11610" end="11630" title="Charles Vyner Brooke" label="Charles Vyner Brooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="11866" end="11878" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q17427" start="12216" end="12231" title="Communist Party of China" label="Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="12249" end="12255" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="12550" end="12562" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q986803" start="12633" end="12637" title="Miri, Malaysia" label="Miri"/>
<link wikidata="Q3795" start="13099" end="13111" title="Dutch Borneo" label="Dutch Borneo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146772" start="13567" end="13577" title="Sime Darby" label="Sime Darby"/>
<link wikidata="Q17020863" start="13587" end="13609" title="Borneo Company Limited" label="Borneo Company Limited"/>
<link wikidata="Q276535" start="14231" end="14253" title="Imperial Japanese Army" label="Imperial Japanese Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q716144" start="14501" end="14511" title="Sook Ching" label="Sook Ching"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066338" start="14944" end="14964" title="Charles Vyner Brooke" label="Charles Vyner Brooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589708" start="15059" end="15082" title="Crown Colony of Sarawak" label="crown colony of Sarawak"/>
<link wikidata="Q4155738" start="15186" end="15218" title="anti-cession movement of Sarawak" label="anti-cession movement in Sarawak"/>
<link wikidata="Q7369027" start="15275" end="15286" title="Rosli Dhobi" label="Rosli Dhobi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5314617" start="15567" end="15592" title="Duncan Stewart (British diplomat)" label="Sir Duncan George Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="16383" end="16414" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q4914529" start="16512" end="16521" title="Bintangor, Sarawak" label="Bintangor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7424083" start="16640" end="16647" title="Sarikei" label="Sarikei"/>
<link wikidata="Q1100205" start="16822" end="16856" title="Sarawak United Peoples&amp;#x27; Party" label="Sarawak United Peoples&amp;#x27; Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q381142" start="17367" end="17381" title="intelligentsia" label="intelligentsia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4665653" start="18243" end="18267" title="Abdul Rahman Ya&amp;#x27;kub" label="Abdul Rahman Ya&amp;#x27;kub"/>
<link wikidata="Q2181742" start="18966" end="18974" title="Simanggang" label="Sri Aman"/>
<link wikidata="Q16919394" start="19317" end="19339" title="Sibu Municipal Council" label="Sibu Municipal Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q3267807" start="19420" end="19432" title="Sibu Airport" label="Sibu Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q7507300" start="19437" end="19450" title="Sibu Hospital" label="Sibu Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q8027667" start="19478" end="19490" title="Wisma Sanyan" label="Wisma Sanyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q174156" start="19519" end="19540" title="Yang di-Pertuan Agong" label="Yang di-Pertuan Agong"/>
<link wikidata="Q654886" start="19554" end="19587" title="Sultan Salahuddin Abdul Aziz Shah" label="Sultan Salahuddin Abdul Aziz Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q25173278" start="19652" end="19690" title="Independence Day (Malaysia)" label="Malaysian Independence Day Celebration"/>
<link wikidata="Q16919394" start="19736" end="19758" title="Sibu Municipal Council" label="Sibu Municipal Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q4262343" start="20233" end="20240" title="Melanau" label="Melanau"/>
<link wikidata="Q218778" start="20328" end="20332" title="Sago" label="Sago"/>
<link wikidata="Q14629145" start="20354" end="20367" title="Lanang Bridge" label="Lanang Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7423418" start="20445" end="20481" title="Sarawak Corridor of Renewable Energy" label="Sarawak Corridor of Renewable Energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q986803" start="20777" end="20781" title="Miri, Malaysia" label="Miri"/>
<link wikidata="Q594209" start="20786" end="20793" title="Bintulu" label="Bintulu"/>
<link wikidata="Q174156" start="20876" end="20897" title="Yang di-Pertuan Agong" label="Yang di-Pertuan Agong"/>
<link wikidata="Q15467111" start="20898" end="20957" title="Abdullah of Pahang" label="Al-Sultan Abdullah Ri&amp;#x27;ayatuddin Al-Mustafa Billah Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136316" start="20962" end="20983" title="Raja Permaisuri Agong" label="Raja Permaisuri Agong"/>
<link wikidata="Q7452369" start="20984" end="21024" title="Tunku Azizah Aminah Maimunah Iskandariah" label="Tunku Azizah Aminah Maimunah Iskandariah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207092" start="21158" end="21179" title="Dewan Rakyat" label="members of parliament"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21218" end="21254" title="List of Malaysian electoral districts#Sarawak" label="parliamentary federal constituencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q25240955" start="21256" end="21262" title="Lanang (federal constituency)" label="Lanang"/>
<link wikidata="Q25240967" start="21267" end="21271" title="Sibu (federal constituency)" label="Sibu"/>
<link wikidata="Q281138" start="21331" end="21365" title="Sarawak State Legislative Assembly" label="Sarawak State Legislative Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q25246244" start="21410" end="21421" title="Bukit Assek (state constituency)" label="Bukit Assek"/>
<link wikidata="Q25246262" start="21423" end="21429" title="Dudong (state constituency)" label="Dudong"/>
<link wikidata="Q25246269" start="21431" end="21443" title="Bawang Assan (state constituency)" label="Bawang Assan"/>
<link wikidata="Q25246266" start="21445" end="21452" title="Pelawan (state constituency)" label="Pelawan"/>
<link wikidata="Q25246268" start="21458" end="21464" title="Nangka (state constituency)" label="Nangka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1658411" start="21573" end="21594" title="Raj of Sarawak" label="Brooke administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q16919394" start="21863" end="21885" title="Sibu Municipal Council" label="Sibu Municipal Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474026" start="22028" end="22040" title="Rajang River" label="Rajang River"/>
<link wikidata="Q8027667" start="22171" end="22183" title="Wisma Sanyan" label="Wisma Sanyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2707675" start="22295" end="22304" title="Sibu Jaya" label="Sibu Jaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q10955509" start="22313" end="22333" title="Selangau District" label="district of Selangau"/>
<link wikidata="Q184711" start="22919" end="22926" title="twin towns and sister cities" label="twinned"/>
<link wikidata="Q2352401" start="23052" end="23070" title="Peat swamp forests" label="Peat swamp forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q656586" start="23075" end="23090" title="alluvial plains" label="alluvial plains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1853058" start="23125" end="23138" title="Sibu Division" label="Sibu Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q849953" start="23261" end="23288" title="subsidence" label="slowly sink into the ground"/>
<link wikidata="Q209531" start="23649" end="23676" title="tropical rainforest climate" label="tropical rainforest climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="23694" end="23723" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen climate classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q674173" start="24069" end="24074" title="Oktas" label="Oktas"/>
<link wikidata="Q973254" start="24553" end="24557" title="Iban people" label="Iban"/>
<link wikidata="Q4262343" start="24585" end="24592" title="Melanau" label="Melanau"/>
<link wikidata="Q476397" start="24603" end="24610" title="Bidayuh" label="Bidayuh"/>
<link wikidata="Q9192" start="25041" end="25057" title="Mandarin Chinese" label="Mandarin Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q35571" start="25144" end="25158" title="Fuzhou dialect" label="Fuzhou dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q33375" start="25160" end="25165" title="Hakka Chinese" label="Hakka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1624231" start="25170" end="25177" title="Hokkien dialect" label="Hokkien"/>
<link wikidata="Q4251702" start="25304" end="25317" title="Sarawak Malay" label="Sarawak Malay"/>
<link wikidata="Q33424" start="25341" end="25354" title="Iban language" label="Iban language"/>
<link wikidata="Q4251702" start="25397" end="25410" title="Sarawak Malay" label="Sarawak Malay"/>
<link wikidata="Q3915822" start="25412" end="25419" title="Melanau language" label="Melanau"/>
<link wikidata="Q2760613" start="25421" end="25428" title="Bidayuh languages" label="Bidayuh"/>
<link wikidata="Q33424" start="25433" end="25437" title="Iban language" label="Iban"/>
<link wikidata="Q7397109" start="25847" end="25869" title="Sacred Heart Cathedral, Sibu" label="Sacred Heart Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q2188389" start="25897" end="25916" title="Tua Pek Kong Temple, Sibu" label="Tua Pek Kong Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q65074670" start="25963" end="25981" title="Jade Dragon Temple" label="Jade Dragon Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="26132" end="26146" title="Southeast Asia" label="Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8663" start="26650" end="26660" title="Korean War" label="Korean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q17017491" start="26902" end="26930" title="Sarawak Communist Insurgency" label="Sarawak Communist Insurgency"/>
<link wikidata="Q2153248" start="27313" end="27333" title="Rimbunan Hijau Group" label="Rimbunan Hijau Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q5323789" start="27895" end="27903" title="EON Bank" label="EON Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q4383943" start="27957" end="27972" title="Hong Leong Bank" label="Hong Leong Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q3046561" start="28010" end="28028" title="Public Bank Berhad" label="Public Bank Berhad"/>
<link wikidata="Q5635866" start="28056" end="28060" title="HSBC Bank Malaysia" label="HSBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q179029" start="29245" end="29250" title="Sabah" label="Sabah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973345" start="29252" end="29271" title="Peninsular Malaysia" label="Peninsular Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q170462" start="29491" end="29498" title="Sarawak" label="Sarawak"/>
<link wikidata="Q82467" start="29621" end="29626" title="Ankai" label="Ankai"/>
<link wikidata="Q4881034" start="29628" end="29634" title="BeiBen Truck" label="BeiBen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4039559" start="29636" end="29649" title="Golden Dragon (company)" label="Golden Dragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5925933" start="29651" end="29663" title="Huanghai Bus" label="Huanghai Bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q545579" start="29668" end="29671" title="JAC Motors" label="JAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2719498" start="30017" end="30030" title="gross tonnage" label="gross tonnage"/>
<link wikidata="Q163712" start="30351" end="30353" title="Malaysian Ringgit" label="RM"/>
<link wikidata="Q16919394" start="30483" end="30505" title="Sibu Municipal Council" label="Sibu Municipal Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q4202293" start="30842" end="30860" title="Pan Borneo Highway" label="Pan Borneo Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7507295" start="30877" end="30903" title="Sibu-Tanjung Manis Highway" label="Sibu-Tanjung Manis Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q14629145" start="30931" end="30944" title="Lanang Bridge" label="Lanang Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7424083" start="30964" end="30971" title="Sarikei" label="Sarikei"/>
<link wikidata="Q4914529" start="30976" end="30985" title="Bintangor, Sarawak" label="Bintangor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474026" start="30997" end="31009" title="Rajang River" label="Rajang River"/>
<link wikidata="Q14629168" start="31032" end="31044" title="Durin Bridge" label="Durin Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q6305615" start="31112" end="31117" title="Julau" label="Julau"/>
<link wikidata="Q3267807" start="31655" end="31667" title="Sibu Airport" label="Sibu Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q333774" start="31680" end="31687" title="Kanowit" label="Kanowit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7424083" start="31693" end="31700" title="Sarikei" label="Sarikei"/>
<link wikidata="Q4202293" start="31973" end="31991" title="Pan Borneo Highway" label="Pan Borneo Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2219702" start="32318" end="32323" title="Mukah" label="Mukah"/>
<link wikidata="Q7424083" start="32339" end="32346" title="Sarikei" label="Sarikei"/>
<link wikidata="Q4914529" start="32352" end="32361" title="Bintangor, Sarawak" label="Bintangor"/>
<link wikidata="Q20873932" start="32456" end="32463" title="Grab (company)" label="GrabCar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2717400" start="32760" end="32766" title="Belaga, Sarawak" label="Belaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q5210227" start="32768" end="32773" title="Dalat, Sarawak" label="Dalat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2239916" start="32775" end="32779" title="Daro" label="Daro"/>
<link wikidata="Q2219731" start="32781" end="32786" title="Kapit" label="Kapit"/>
<link wikidata="Q333774" start="32788" end="32795" title="Kanowit" label="Kanowit"/>
<link wikidata="Q220445" start="32797" end="32804" title="Kuching" label="Kuching"/>
<link wikidata="Q7424083" start="32806" end="32813" title="Sarikei" label="Sarikei"/>
<link wikidata="Q7560959" start="32819" end="32823" title="Song, Sarawak" label="Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q3267807" start="33263" end="33275" title="Sibu Airport" label="Sibu Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q191118" start="33466" end="33472" title="tonnes" label="tonnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1305028" start="33689" end="33718" title="Kuching International Airport" label="Kuching International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q308952" start="33767" end="33784" title="Malaysia Airlines" label="Malaysia Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q406643" start="33786" end="33794" title="Air Asia" label="Air Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q768164" start="33800" end="33808" title="MASWings" label="MASWings"/>
<link wikidata="Q986803" start="33868" end="33872" title="Miri, Malaysia" label="Miri"/>
<link wikidata="Q594209" start="33874" end="33881" title="Bintulu" label="Bintulu"/>
<link wikidata="Q220445" start="33883" end="33890" title="Kuching" label="Kuching"/>
<link wikidata="Q137271" start="33925" end="33938" title="Kota Kinabalu" label="Kota Kinabalu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1865" start="33940" end="33952" title="Kuala Lumpur" label="Kuala Lumpur"/>
<link wikidata="Q231318" start="33958" end="33969" title="Johor Bahru" label="Johor Bahru"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418913" start="33988" end="34003" title="Firefly (airline)" label="Firefly airline"/>
<link wikidata="Q6743729" start="34045" end="34056" title="Malindo Air" label="Malindo Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q5755248" start="34299" end="34309" title="High Courts of Malaysia" label="High Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q7659477" start="34378" end="34391" title="Syariah Court" label="Syariah Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q7808735" start="34751" end="34766" title="Tiong King Sing" label="Tiong King Sing"/>
<link wikidata="Q594209" start="34779" end="34786" title="Bintulu" label="Bintulu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1664804" start="35299" end="35321" title="Royal Malaysian Police" label="Royal Malaysian Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q7507300" start="35631" end="35644" title="Sibu Hospital" label="Sibu Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q170462" start="35679" end="35686" title="Sarawak" label="Sarawak"/>
<link wikidata="Q170462" start="35749" end="35756" title="Sarawak" label="Sarawak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141386" start="35969" end="35996" title="Universiti Malaysia Sarawak" label="Universiti Malaysia Sarawak"/>
<link wikidata="Q4202172" start="36079" end="36082" title="Johor Corporation" label="KPJ"/>
<link wikidata="Q216933" start="36320" end="36336" title="echocardiography" label="echocardiography"/>
<link wikidata="Q7397271" start="36748" end="36772" title="SMK Sacred Heart, Sibu" label="Sacred Heart High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1853058" start="37169" end="37182" title="Sibu Division" label="Sibu Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q5100820" start="37203" end="37230" title="Chinese independent high school" label="Chinese independent schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028304" start="37533" end="37569" title="Cambridge International Examinations" label="Cambridge International Examinations"/>
<link wikidata="Q19600080" start="37858" end="37898" title="University College of Technology Sarawak" label="University College of Technology Sarawak"/>
<link wikidata="Q7423418" start="38094" end="38130" title="Sarawak Corridor of Renewable Energy" label="Sarawak Corridor of Renewable Energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6823845" start="38861" end="38889" title="Methodist Theological School" label="Methodist Theological School"/>
<link wikidata="Q6823755" start="38937" end="38965" title="Methodist Church in Malaysia" label="Methodist Church in Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4809529" start="38991" end="39047" title="Association for Theological Education in South East Asia" label="Association for Theological Education in South East Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1723289" start="39150" end="39175" title="Universiti Utara Malaysia" label="Universiti Utara Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458579" start="39196" end="39221" title="Universiti Putra Malaysia" label="Universiti Putra Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141386" start="39242" end="39269" title="Universiti Malaysia Sarawak" label="Universiti Malaysia Sarawak"/>
<link wikidata="Q7507300" start="39449" end="39462" title="Sibu Hospital" label="Sibu Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390612" start="39464" end="39488" title="Open University Malaysia" label="Open University Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7389672" start="39530" end="39545" title="SEGi University" label="SEGi University"/>
<link wikidata="Q24946823" start="40872" end="40896" title="Borneo Cultural Festival" label="Borneo Cultural Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q16919394" start="40914" end="40936" title="Sibu Municipal Council" label="Sibu Municipal Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q6498317" start="41673" end="41692" title="Chinese calligraphy" label="Chinese calligraphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q28219633" start="42905" end="42943" title="Lau King Howe Hospital Memorial Museum" label="Lau King Howe Hospital Memorial Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2188389" start="43321" end="43340" title="Tua Pek Kong Temple, Sibu" label="Tua Pek Kong Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q715162" start="43417" end="43424" title="Guanyin" label="Guanyin"/>
<link wikidata="Q28219633" start="43479" end="43517" title="Lau King Howe Hospital Memorial Museum" label="Lau King Howe Hospital Memorial Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2221606" start="43844" end="43858" title="Wong Nai Siong" label="Wong Nai Siong"/>
<link wikidata="Q7262283" start="45367" end="45375" title="Putian people" label="Heng Hua"/>
<link wikidata="Q26212262" start="45592" end="45611" title="Sibu Indoor Stadium" label="Sibu Indoor Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q809831" start="45815" end="45827" title="BASE jumping" label="BASE jumping"/>
<link wikidata="Q8027667" start="45864" end="45876" title="Wisma Sanyan" label="Wisma Sanyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1976204" start="46678" end="46692" title="Chinese zodiac" label="Chinese zodiac"/>
<link wikidata="Q219423" start="47078" end="47083" title="mural" label="mural"/>
<link wikidata="Q8027667" start="47890" end="47902" title="Wisma Sanyan" label="Wisma Sanyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q85803187" start="47984" end="47998" title="Star Mega Mall" label="Star Mega Mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q177823" start="49264" end="49269" title="halal" label="halal"/>
<link wikidata="Q855130" start="51116" end="51124" title="Kompyang" label="Kompyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q272502" start="51178" end="51183" title="bagel" label="bagel"/>
<link wikidata="Q553905" start="52381" end="52387" title="wonton" label="wonton"/>
<link wikidata="Q426582" start="54637" end="54653" title="Anthony Bourdain" label="Anthony Bourdain"/>
<link wikidata="Q4262343" start="54812" end="54819" title="Melanau people" label="Melanau"/>
<link wikidata="Q847603" start="56325" end="56330" title="Dayak people" label="Dayak"/>
<link wikidata="Q713879" start="58255" end="58267" title="You char kway" label="You Zhar Gui"/>
<link wikidata="Q5098942" start="58386" end="58397" title="chili sauce" label="chili sauce"/>
<link wikidata="Q4663399" start="58500" end="58539" title="Abang Muhammad Salahuddin" label="Abang Muhammad Salahuddin Abang Barieng"/>
<link wikidata="Q4205657" start="58557" end="58589" title="Yang di-Pertua Negeri of Sarawak" label="Yang di-Pertua Negeri of Sarawak"/>
<link wikidata="Q4695501" start="58592" end="58610" title="Ahmad Zaidi Adruce" label="Ahmad Zaidi Adruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q4205657" start="58618" end="58650" title="Yang di-Pertua Negeri of Sarawak" label="Yang di-Pertua Negeri of Sarawak"/>
<link wikidata="Q7850636" start="58653" end="58680" title="Tuanku Bujang Tuanku Othman" label="Tuanku Bujang Tuanku Othman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4205657" start="58689" end="58721" title="Yang di-Pertua Negeri of Sarawak" label="Yang di-Pertua Negeri of Sarawak"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="58724" end="58737" title="Wong Soon Kai" label="Wong Soon Kai"/>
<link wikidata="Q7346728" start="58780" end="58799" title="Robert Lau Hoi Chew" label="Robert Lau Hoi Chew"/>
<link wikidata="Q7808739" start="58897" end="58912" title="Tiong Thai King" label="Tiong Thai King"/>
<link wikidata="Q16919394" start="58976" end="58998" title="Sibu Municipal Council" label="Sibu Municipal Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q8031990" start="59008" end="59020" title="Wong Ho Leng" label="Wong Ho Leng"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185837" start="59140" end="59163" title="Democratic Action Party (Malaysia)" label="Democratic Action Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q5429257" start="59191" end="59205" title="Fadillah Yusof" label="Fadillah Yusof"/>
<link wikidata="Q5261073" start="59207" end="59240" title="Deputy Prime Minister of Malaysia" label="Deputy Prime Minister of Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q30601432" start="59246" end="59284" title="Ministers of Plantation and Commodities (Malaysia)" label="Minister of Plantation and Commodities"/>
<link wikidata="Q25240932" start="59342" end="59352" title="Petra Jaya (federal constituency)" label="Petra Jaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q95461539" start="59373" end="59408" title="Senior Minister of Malaysia" label="Senior Minister of Malaysia (Works)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4769705" start="59742" end="59759" title="Annuar Rapaee" label="Dr. Annuar Rapaee"/>
<link wikidata="Q532433" start="59949" end="59982" title="Tiong Hiew King" label="Tan Sri Datuk Sir Tiong Hiew King"/>
<link wikidata="Q2153248" start="59996" end="60016" title="Rimbunan Hijau Group" label="Rimbunan Hijau Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q7808739" start="60044" end="60059" title="Tiong Thai King" label="Tiong Thai King"/>
<link wikidata="Q7445496" start="60260" end="60278" title="See Hua Daily News" label="See Hua Daily News"/>
<link wikidata="Q734581" start="60280" end="60295" title="The Borneo Post" label="The Borneo Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q16189302" start="60318" end="60333" title="Hii King Chiong" label="Hii King Chiong"/>
<link wikidata="Q112080376" start="60369" end="60377" title="Mary Lim" label="Mary Lim"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="60437" end="60439" title="United States" label="US"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="60498" end="60507" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q4020157" start="60523" end="60533" title="William So" label="William So"/>
<link wikidata="Q13883824" start="60535" end="60545" title="Fred Cheng" label="Fred Cheng"/>
<link wikidata="Q8260848" start="60550" end="60562" title="Stephanie Ho" label="Stephanie Ho"/>
<link wikidata="Q62102442" start="60649" end="60666" title="Edwin Ong Wee Kee" label="Edwin Ong Wee Kee"/>
<link wikidata="Q16527575" start="60746" end="60784" title="Hamdan International Photography Award" label="Hamdan International Photography Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q612" start="60795" end="60800" title="Dubai" label="Dubai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275631" start="60852" end="60865" title="Miss Malaysia" label="Miss Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="61274" end="61286" title="Ting Ung Kee" label="Ting Ung Kee"/>
<link wikidata="Q876489" start="61548" end="61563" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Sibu" label="Diocese of Sibu"/>
<link wikidata="Q597526" start="61582" end="61594" title="Latin Church" label="Latin Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q7507302" start="61632" end="61654" title="Sibu by-election, 2010" label="Sibu by-election, 2010"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="990431" wikidata="Q5487667" url="?curid=990431" title="Frank Kendon">
<text>Frank Samuel Herbert Kendon (12 September 1893 – 28 December 1959) was an English writer, poet and academic. He was also an illustrator, and journalist. A campaigning pacifist at the beginning of the 2nd World War, he had served in the 1st and termed himself a conscientious objector thereafter.

==Life==
He was the son of Samuel Kendon, a schoolmaster at Bethany School, Goudhurst; the educator Olive Kendon was his sister. He matriculated in 1921 at St John&#x27;s College, Cambridge, where he became a Fellow in 1948.

Kendon was a published poet in the 1920s and later a writer of stories and a novel. From 1935 to 1954 he worked for Cambridge University Press. At the beginning of World War II he was a campaigning pacifist. After the war, he undertook the translations of the Psalms in the New English Bible, but died before he could complete the work. Timothy d&#x27;Arch Smith argued tentatively for Kendon&#x27;s inclusion in the canon of Uranian poets in view of a poem, in &quot;Poems and Sonnets&quot;, singing the praises of naked bathing boys – a Uranian staple.

==Works==

*&quot;Poems by Four Authors&quot; (1923) with J. R. Ackerley, A. Y. Campbell, and Edward Davison
*&quot;Poems and Sonnets&quot; (London, 1924)
*&quot;Mural paintings in English churches during the Middle Ages: an introductory essay on the folk influence in religious art&quot; (Bodley Head 1923)
*&quot;Arguments &amp; Emblems&quot; (1925)
*&quot;A Life and Death of Judas Iscariot&quot; (Bodley Head 1926))
*&quot;The Small Years&quot; (1930) autobiography
*&quot;The Adventure of Poetry&quot; (1932)
*&quot;Tristram&quot; (1934) poem
*&quot;The Cherry Minder&quot; (1935) poems
*&quot;The Flawless Stone&quot; (1942) poem
*&quot;The Time Piece&quot; (1945) poem
*&quot;Each Silver Fly&quot;
*&quot;The Farmers Friend&quot;
*&quot;Cage &amp; Wing&quot; (1947) poem
*&quot;Martin Makesure&quot; (1950) novel
*&quot;Jacob &amp; Thomas: Darkness&quot; (1950)
*&quot;Thirty Six Psalms, an English Version&quot;, Cambridge University Press, 1963

==Family==
Kendon had four children with his wife, Elizabeth Cecilia Phyllis Horne, a school teacher. The children were in order of birth; Alice (nee Kendon, then Stephens then Thomas) a prolific linguist, Adam Kendon, Andrew a talented musician and artist, and Thomas (known as Adrian) who is the last surviving of the Kendon siblings, also a talented musician.

==Notes==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5487667" start="0" end="27" title="Frank Kendon" label="Frank Samuel Herbert Kendon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4897782" start="357" end="382" title="Bethany School, Goudhurst" label="Bethany School, Goudhurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q106483744" start="397" end="409" title="Olive Kendon" label="Olive Kendon"/>
<link wikidata="Q691283" start="453" end="486" title="St John&amp;#x27;s College, Cambridge" label="St John&amp;#x27;s College, Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q912887" start="639" end="665" title="Cambridge University Press" label="Cambridge University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="687" end="699" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q58848" start="721" end="729" title="pacifist" label="pacifist"/>
<link wikidata="Q41064" start="783" end="789" title="Psalms" label="Psalms"/>
<link wikidata="Q7007452" start="797" end="814" title="New English Bible" label="New English Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q66685984" start="860" end="885" title="Timothy D&amp;#x27;Arch Smith" label="Timothy d&amp;#x27;Arch Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q3906995" start="949" end="956" title="Uranians" label="Uranian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658365" start="1137" end="1151" title="J. R. Ackerley" label="J. R. Ackerley"/>
<link wikidata="Q4648545" start="1153" end="1167" title="A. Y. Campbell" label="A. Y. Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5342542" start="1173" end="1187" title="Edward Davison (poet)" label="Edward Davison"/>
<link wikidata="Q4679326" start="2240" end="2251" title="Adam Kendon" label="Adam Kendon"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="990433" wikidata="Q986803" url="?curid=990433" title="Miri">
<text>Miri () is a coastal city in north-eastern Sarawak, Malaysia, located near the border of Brunei, on the island of Borneo. The city covers an area of , located northeast of Kuching and southwest of Kota Kinabalu. Miri is the second largest city in Sarawak, with a population of 356,900 as of 2020. The city is also the capital of Miri District, Miri Division.

Before Miri was founded, Marudi was the administrative centre of the northern region of Sarawak. Miri was founded in 1910 when the first oil well was drilled by Royal Dutch Shell. The discovery of an oil field in Miri has led to rapid development of Miri town. Miri became the administrative centre of the northern region of Sarawak by 1929. During World War II, the Miri oil fields were destroyed by the Brooke government to sabotage Japanese operations in Southeast Asia but to no avail; Miri town was the first landing point of Japanese troops in Borneo. The subsequent Japanese occupation led Miri to become a target of Allied air raids which caused the destruction of oil refinery facilities in Miri. The petroleum industry continued to be a major player in the city&#x27;s economy after the war. Oil exploration has moved offshore since the 1950s, but subsequently new inland oil fields were found in 1989 and 2011. In 1974, the formation of Malaysian oil and gas company Petronas led to co-operation between Petronas and Shell on oil exploration in the Miri region. In 2005, Miri became the 10th city in Malaysia to be granted official city status, the first non-state-capital city to be bestowed such status.

Miri is the main tourist gateway to the world-famous UNESCO World Heritage Site, Gunung Mulu National Park; Loagan Bunut National Park; Lambir Hills National Park; and Niah National Park and Miri-Sibuti Coral Reef National Park. The Gunung Mulu National Park with its Sarawak Chamber, which is the largest known cave chamber in the world by area, remains one of the favourite ecotourism destinations in Miri. Miri is also the birthplace of the Malaysian petroleum industry. Other major industries in the city include timber, oil palm and tourism.

==Etymology==
Miri town is named after a minority ethnic group called &quot;Jati Miriek&quot; or simply &quot;Mirek&quot;, or &quot;Miriek&quot;. This ethnic group are the earliest settlers in the region of Miri Division. Europeans who later came to the region for oil exploration mistakenly pronounced &quot;Miriek&quot; as &quot;Miri&quot;, and this name continues to be used today.

==Prehistory==
The first foragers visited the West Mouth of Niah Cavelocated southwest of Miri city50,000 years ago when Borneo was connected to the mainland of Southeast Asia. The landscape of Niah Cave was drier and more open than it is now. Prehistoric Niah Cave was surrounded by a mosaic of closed forests with bush, parkland, swamps, and rivers. The foragers were able to survive in the rainforests through hunting, fishing, mollusc collection, and plant gathering. The earliest evidence of human population in the area dates back to 40,000 BC in Niah Cave at Paleolithic period. This is evidenced by the discovery of a &quot;Homo sapiens&quot; skull nicknamed &quot;Deep Skull&quot; in a deep trench uncovered by Tom Harrisson in 1958, which is the oldest modern human skull in Southeast Asia. The skull probably belongs to a 16- to 17-year-old adolescent girl. Unfossilised &quot;Manis paleojavanica&quot; (Asian giant pangolin) bone dated back to 30,000 BC was also found in the proximity of the &quot;Deep Skull&quot;, as well as with the Mesolithic and Neolithic burial sites inside the Niah Caves.

==History==

===Brooke administration===

Charles Brooke succeeded James Brooke as the new Rajah of Sarawak in 1868. By 1883, Sultan of Brunei (Sultan Abdul Momin) ceded the Baram region (including Miri) to Charles Brooke. The fourth division of Sarawak was immediately created with the installation of Claude Champion de Crespigny as the first Resident of the Division. The Miri area was still a fishing village at that time. It was a small settlement surrounded by mangrove and Nipah palm jungles consisted of 20 scattered houses, a few wooden shops operated by Chinese traders and a lone Arab trader. A fort was built in Claudetown (present day Marudi, to the east of Miri) in 1883. Claudetown became the administrative centre of the division. Mr Claude&#x27;s administration was helped by two junior officers, 30 rangers, and a few native police. Charles Hose succeeded Mr de Crespigny as the new Resident in 1891 and the fort in Marudi was renamed as &quot;Fort Hose&quot;. To restore peace among various ethnic tribes fighting in the Baram region, Charles Hose decided to organise a peace conference at his fort in April 1899. This peace conference also led to the birth of first Baram Regatta, a long boat race competition among the natives which continued to be held until today.

The local population in Miri has indeed started to extract oil from hand-dug wells for centuries. &quot;Song Huiyao Jigao&quot;, a documentation of the Song dynasty of China, mentions the imports of Borneo camphor and petroleum in the 11th century. In 1882, Mr de Crespigny reported to the Brooke government on 18 hand-dug oil wells in the Miri area. He also recommended that area near Miri River should be thoroughly explored. However, his recommendations were ignored. But when Charles Hose took over the Resident office in 1891, he was interested in Mr de Crespigny&#x27;s idea and began to collaborate with him. Mr de Crespigny began to map oil seeps around the Miri area, however a consultant geologist from England discouraged the oil exploration in Miri due to poor logistical conditions. After his retirement from administrative positions in Sarawak, Charles Hose went back to England. He later went to London to discuss the idea of oil exploration in Miri with the Anglo-Saxon Petroleum Company (later became a part of Royal Dutch Shell Company in 1907). Benjamin, a branch manager from the petroleum company, was interested in this idea. Finally in 1909, Rajah Charles Brooke came to London to sign the first Sarawak Oil Mining Lease. Royal Dutch Shell dispatched a senior geologist named Josef Theodor Erb together with Charles Hose back to Miri. Erb started to map Miri oil fields from August 1909 to July 1910. He also identified a location known as &quot;Miri Hill&quot; (now known as &quot;Canada Hill&quot;, above sea level) is suitable to act as an anticline for oil drilling.
Finally, on 10 August 1910, the first oil drilling operation was started. A rig (nicknamed the &quot;Grand Old Lady&quot;) made up of wooden derricks and cable tool drilling was used in the operation by Royal Dutch Shell. On 22 December 1910, oil was struck after of drilling at the well. Royal Dutch Shell also founded a subsidiary company named Sarawak Oil Field Ltd, which now operated as Sarawak Shell Berhad. Since then, another 624 land wells have been drilled around Miri until 1972 which are collectively known as the &quot;Miri field&quot;. The Miri field is the only onshore field in Sarawak, because oil production has shifted offshore since the late 1950s. The first oil well on Canada Hill (Miri Well No. 1) produced a total of for the next 60 years until its closure on 31 October 1972. The first oil refinery and submarine pipeline was built in Miri in 1914. The oil refinery has since been relocated to Lutong, to the north of Miri, in 1916.

Resident Office moved from Marudi to Miri in 1912. Miri grew as fast as the rate of oil production by the Shell company. In 1920, roads were built in Miri. Bicycles and motorcycles were also bought into the town. By 1921, there were 40 shop houses in Miri, with one English school and one Chinese school. Motor cars were later introduced to the town. In 1924, Pujut Road was built to link Miri with Lutong. By 1925, rotary drilling was introduced. Oil production continued to increase until it reached a peak of per day in 1929. Water supply were improved, jungles were cleared, and more roads were built. Miri became the administrative centre of the entire Baram region in 1929.

===Japanese occupation===


The Brooke government had been actively lobbying for the British government to accept Sarawak as one of its protectorates in an event of a war. By 1888, the British finally agreed to grant the protection to Sarawak. The British dispatched several troops to Sarawak to strengthen its defences in the 1930s. By 1938, under the leadership of Rajah Charles Vyner Brooke, airstrips were constructed in Miri, Kuching, Oya, and Mukah in preparation for an imminent war. However, by 1941, British Royal Navy and Royal Air Force had withdrawn from Sarawak and returned to Singapore. Therefore, the British government advocated a &quot;scorched earth policy&quot; for the Brooke government in the event of a Japanese attack. A Denial Scheme was formulated to destroy oil installations in Miri and Lutong. This was because the coastline measuring from Lutong to Miri was impossible to defend from Japanese landings due to shortage of manpower. By May 1941, 1 Infantry Company from 2/15 Punjab Regiment, 6-inch Hong Kong-Singapore Royal Artillery Battery, and 1 Platoon of Royal Engineers were stationed at Miri to oversee the destruction of the Miri oil fields. In August 1941, an operation was carried out to reduce Miri oil output by 70%.

Soon after the news of Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor, Japanese planes were seen making reconnaissance flights over Miri. The Brooke government decided on a complete destruction of oilfields and airfields in Miri. Shell company officials received orders to carry out the Denial Scheme on 8 December 1941. In the evening on the same day, the task was completed. All producing oil wells were sealed up with vital equipment and machinery dismantled and shipped off to Singapore. Skilled workers and important company papers also went along with the equipment and sent to Singapore. The Punjab Regiment and several officials were sent to guard Kuching. On 16 December 1941, 9 days after the Pearl Harbor bombing, Japanese troops consisting of 10,000 men landed on Tanjung Lobang Beach, Miri without much resistance. However, on 17 December 1941, a Dutch flying boat from Tarakan Island attacked the Japanese destroyer &quot;Shinonome&quot; (under the command of Hiroshi Sasagawa) off Miri. The ship was sunk along with the entire crew of 228. Another flying boat X-33 also damaged a Japanese transport ship. After the fall of Singapore on 15 January 1942, skilled workers that went into hiding with their equipment were sent back to Miri by the Japanese. They were immediately put to work for Japanese oil supply service company named Nen Ryo Hai Kyu. Much of the Japanese oil drilling and refinery equipment was portable. A total of were produced during the Japanese occupation from 1941 to 1945.

During the occupation, Miri and Lutong became a periodic subject of Allied air raids and bombings. Food, clothes, and medicine were scarce. Workers of the Japanese oil supply service were used to reconstruct and maintain Lutong Bridge and Lutong airstrip from Allied bombing damage.

===Recent developments===

Petronas, a Malaysian national oil and gas company, was formed in 1974. As a result, a concession system was changed into production sharing contract system (PSC) between Shell and Petronas. All the foreign oil companies including Shell required to obtain licences from Petronas. The first two PSCs were signed on 30 November 1976. Foreign oil companies are required to keep not more than 41% of the oil produced until their original costs are recovered. After a return of their investments, the oil companies will keep 30% of the revenue after all operating costs and oil royalties are deducted. Petronas also formed a company named Petronas Carigali Sdn Bhd which was directly involved in the exploration, development, and production of oil and gas in the country. Petronas also initiated the Baram Delta Gas Gathering (Bardegg) project which involves the collection and compression of gas from five fields, namely Betty, Bekor, Baram, Baronia, and West Lutong, located offshore from Miri. This is to ensure the minimisation of gas loss during oil production. Petronas and Shell are also involved in educational outreach activities such as awarding scholarships to deserving students. Both companies are also involved in Malaysian first rig-to-reef project, in an effort to preserve bio-marine life in the sea offshore Miri. In this project, an abandoned offshore platform was made to become part of the Siwa reef. Both companies also started to establish Piasau Nature Reserve in 2014.

Miri Municipal Council has adopted the seahorse as the town&#x27;s official symbol. It was proposed by the former Sarawak chief minister Abdul Taib Mahmud and introduced as part of the &quot;I love Miri campaign&quot; in 1994. The seahorse is chosen because of its distinctive figure with gentle and graceful motion. These characteristics describe multiple ethnic and cultural identities of Miri which live in peace and harmony with good values of life. It also denotes the location of Miri town near to the sea and coral reefs and the city status as a resort paradise.

Miri was elevated to city status on 20 May 2005 and became Malaysia&#x27;s tenth city. Miri is also the first town in Malaysia which is not a state capital to be granted city status. Miri City Day is celebrated each year on 20 May since it was declared by the past Chief Minister, Abdul Taib Mahmud. A time capsule containing news article of the day and a souvenir book was buried at Petroleum Science Museum at Canada Hill, Miri. The time capsule will be opened 100 years later on 20 May 2105. An effort has also been made to develop Miri as liveable resort city.

==Governance==
Miri City currently elects one member of parliament from the Miri parliamentary seat (P.219) into the Parliament of Malaysia. The city also elects 3 state assemblymen into the Sarawak State Legislative Assembly, namely Piasau, Pujut, and Senadin.

===Local authority and city definition===
Miri was formerly administered by the Miri Municipal Council for 24 years. It was upgraded to Miri City Council (MCC) on 20 May 2005, with Adam Yii Siew Sang as its current mayor, headquartered at Kinsgway Road, Miri. Area under the jurisdiction of MCC is . Miri lies within the boundary of the Miri District, which consists of Miri City, Sibuti sub-district, and Niah sub-district, with a total population of 290,274 and total area of . Miri Resident Office and Miri District Office are located at Kingsway Road, Miri City.

==Geography==
Miri is situated on the alluvial plain of the Miri River on the western shore of northern Sarawak on the island of Borneo. Because of the prevailing southerly off-shore current, beach drift has built up the Peninsula Road as a barrier beach between the Miri River and the shore causing a &quot;Yazoo effect&quot; where the river runs parallel to the coast before breaking through into the South China Sea. The city is predominately located on the inland (east) side of the Miri River with only a few scattered residential neighbourhoods, a Golf Club and a small airstrip on the Peninsula Road.

===Climate===
Miri has a tropical rainforest climate. There are two monsoon seasons: the southwest monsoon, which is the dry season from April to September, and the northeast monsoon, which is the wet season from October to March. The annual rainfall is around . The air temperature is between to the whole year round. But on rare occasions, the temperature can go down to to especially in the months of November, December and January. The lowest temperature ever recorded was in December 2010 when the mercury dropped down to .

==Demography==
People from Miri are called &quot;Mirians&quot;.

The growth of Miri population is shown below:

===Ethnicity===
According to the 2010 Malaysian census, Miri City has a total population of 234,541. Indigenous people form the largest ethnic group in the city (61.3%, 143,736) which consists of Iban (61,273), Malay (46,723), other indigenous tribes (24,119), Melanau (8,313), and Bidayuh (3,308). This is followed by Chinese (32.1%, 75,329), non-Malaysians (5.7%, 13,362), Indians (0.5%, 1134), and Others (0.4%, 980). The ethnic Malay population here consists mainly of Bruneian, Jati Miriek (early indigenous native inhabitants) and Kedayan peoples. Miri has 19 out of 27 Sarawak ethnic groups, including Orang Ulu tribal groups native to the area such as Berawan, Kiput, Lun Bawang, Kayan, Bakong, Kenyah and Kelabit people. Chinese in Miri mainly consist of the Fuzhounese majority with significant populations of Hakka and Cantonese including a small number of Teochews and Hainanese. A majority of non-Malaysians in Miri are Bajau people from the working at Baram Delta as fishermen. There are also illegal Suluk and Bajau people entering Miri using Pulau Tikus (near Baram Delta) as a transit point.

===Languages===
There is great diversity in terms of languages spoken in Miri, as it is a location where there are migrants from all over Sarawak, some West Malaysians, several foreigners, and several Eurasians. Among the main languages spoken here are Malay: which includes both the local variety of Malay, Sarawakian Malay or Bahasa Sarawak, and Standard Malay; Malaysian Mandarin, and Iban. The pronunciation and accent of spoken Malay differs depending on each individual&#x27;s native language, background and history. English is generally well spoken by the older generation, many of whom received primary and secondary education in the 1960s, which then, was in English: a token of British colonialism; or who have worked in oil &amp; gas related companies that operate in English, where they picked up English, Malay and Iban to varying levels of mastery. This is not the case for many younger Mirians, who generally were and are being educated in either Malay or Mandarin; most are capable of speaking basic English with grammar that is heavily influenced by either Malay or Mandarin. This, is because the English language was reduced to a mere standalone subject after the 1980s. There is currently a minuscule minority of Miri-born Millennials and Generation Z members that speaks English as its first language, with varying levels of proficiency. The indigenous races speak their various languages as well, all of them Austronesian. These include languages such as Berawan, Lakiput (often called Kiput), Bruneian/Kedayan, Miriek, Iban, Bidayuh, Kayan, Kenyah, Lun Bawang and Kelabit. Meanwhile, the Chinese Malaysians speak Malaysian Mandarin, Hakka, Cantonese, Teochew, Hainanese, Hokkien and Foochow, in addition to possibly Henghua, a minority Chinese language in Malaysia. However, many Millennials and Generation Z members in Miri tend to use the lingua francas Malay and Malaysian Mandarin rather than their indigenous languages (such as Kayan and Kelabit) and Chinese dialects (Hokkien and Foochow); with the exception of Iban, which is widely used here; although certain efforts have been made in the past to promote the usage of indigenous languages among the younger generation.

===Religion===
Religions in Miri include Christianity, Islam, Buddhism, Taoism, Hinduism, Sikhism and Baháʼí Faith. Among the Christian churches, there are the Borneo Evangelical Church, Anglicanism, Methodism, Roman Catholics. Respective religious groups are free to hold processions in Miri city. Among notable religious places in Miri are: Tua Pek Kong Temple, Che Sing Khor Moral Uplifting Society, Lian Hua San Ching Tian Temple (莲花山三清殿, Taoist temple), St Joseph Cathedral (Roman Catholic), Hwai En Methodist Church, St Columba church (Anglican), Al-Taqwa Mosque, Al-Jamek Mosque, Sikh Temple, and Kamini Durga Eswari Amman Temple (Hinduism). Sarawak is predominantly Christian, in contrast with most of the Indonesian archipelago This is also owing to the 2 previous Christian Revivals: the Bario Revival and the Ba&#x27; Kelalan Revival that occurred between the 1960s and 1990s.

==Economy==

There are a few industrial areas in Miri, some examples include Kuala Baram Industrial Estate (Mixed, Light, and Medium Industries), Piasau Industrial Estate (Mixed Light Industries), Senadin Industrial Area, Eastwood Industrial Estate and Bekenu Light Industrial Area (food processing).

Miri mainly relies on its oil and gas industry, which contributes significantly to the Gross Domestic Product (GDP) of Sarawak. Sarawak Shell Berhad (upstream business) and Petronas Carigali Sdn Bhd have their offices based in Miri. Other multinational oil and gas companies also set up their offices here, including Nippon Oil, Schlumberger, Baker Hughes, Halliburton, Technip, Ranhill WorleyParsons, and Petra Resources Sdn Bhd. In 1989, Asam Paya Oilfield was discovered in Sarawak inland areas. In 2010, Petronas discovered two oil fields offshore between Bintulu and Miri. In 2011, new underground reserves of oil and gas deposits were discovered by Nippon Oil in an inland region near Miri, Sarawak.

In the 1970 to 1980s, timber exporting industry became one of the major income generators for Miri. Multinational conglomerates based in Miri such as Shin Yang and Samling had their early beginnings in timber industry. Besides, shipbuilding companies such as Sealink Shipyard, Shin Yang Shipping &amp; Shipyard, Berjaya Dockyard, and Sarawak Slipways have their major shipyards set up in Miri - Kuala Baram industrial area along the Baram river.

First large-scale oil palm plantation in Sarawak began in 1968, in which the newly formed Sarawak Oil Palm Berhad (SOPB) planted a total of oil palm plantations near Miri by employing Indonesian workers at these plantations. Since the 1980s, SOPB has a total of of oil palm in Miri and Bintulu Divisions, generating a total revenue of RM 85 million in 2005. SOPB is now majority-owned by Shin Yang Group and Sarawak Land Custody and Development Authority (LCDA) with its headquarters in Miri. By 2014, oil palm plantations between Miri-Bintulu zone constituted 60% of total oil palm estates in Sarawak.
Miri Port Authority (MPA) was established on 1 February 1981 and commenced operation on 1 March 1983. It is located near the mouth of Baram River. The port is able to take in ships measuring up to 1,500 GT (Gross Tonnage), with general cargo area of 50,895 m2 and total developed area of It is mainly used in handling petroleum, timber products, coal, and building materials. A total of 23.94 million metric tonnes of goods was handled by MPA from 2011 to 2013, which earned a total revenue of RM 48.58 million in port dues.

Miri is a shopping destination for visitors coming from the neighbouring country of Brunei because of a discrepancy in currency exchange rate (100 Brunei dollar to around 350 Malaysian ringgit), cheaper items, and a variety of resorts here in Miri for recreational activities. Bintang Plaza and Boulevard Shopping Mall are the two major shopping destinations for Brunei people. As of 2014, Miri visitor movement along Kuala Baram-Kuala Belait checkpoint (Sungai Tujoh, along the Sarawak-Brunei border) reached a total of 2.9 million people in one year. Miri is also an eco-tourism gateway to four national parks and a marine national park. Miri is also a destination for Bruneians to go clubbing on occasion.

The education sector is another income generator for Miri. Curtin University, Malaysia brought in RM 480 million foreign exchange annually from 3,000 foreign students studying at the university.

==Transportation==

===Land===
All the roads in Miri are maintained by Miri City Council (MCC). Miri is accessible by road from Bandar Seri Begawan (Brunei) through the Sungai Tujoh checkpoint which is located 35 km north of Miri. Miri is connected to all major cities and towns in Sarawak including Kota Kinabalu in Sabah through the Pan Borneo Highway. Miri is also connected to Bintulu town through a coastal road and Marudi through a 42 km road. ASEAN Bridge is located along the Miri-Baram Highway and crosses the Baram River, providing direct access to neighbouring country of Brunei, and the towns of Limbang and Lawas in Sarawak.

===Public transportation===

====Local Bus====
====Buses and Taxis====
Miri city has 2 bus stations, namely the local (located at Melayu Road next to Tamu Muhibbah and Wisma Pelita Tunku) and long-distance bus stations (located at Pujut Corner). The city bus station serves the Permyjaya, Tudan, Senadin, Miri Hospital, RTM (Eastern road from Pujut 1 to Pujut 5), Taman Tunku and Sungai Rait + Bakam. Buses to Lambir Hills National Park, rest of division within Sarawak and Pontianak, Indonesia depart from the long-distance bus station.
Local taxi services are also provided in the city with the main taxi stand at China Road in the city centre. Taxis here do not use meters.
There is no direct bus to Miri Airport, most people will prefer to use car or taxi because of short distance between airport and city.

===Air===

Miri Airport (IATA: MYY, ICAO: WBGR) is an important gateway to the northern region of Sarawak. It is located 11 km south of Miri city. It serves as a hub for domestic, international, and rural air services. Miri Airport is the tenth busiest airport in Malaysia and second busiest in Sarawak. It provided services to 2.2 million passengers in 2013. The airport has only one direct international flight to Singapore. It also receives flights from domestic destinations such as Kuala Lumpur, Johor Bahru, Kota Kinabalu, Labuan, Kuching and other major towns in Sarawak. Miri Airport also caters flights to the Sarawak interior such as Bario, Ba&#x27;kelalan, Marudi, Lawas, Limbang, and Mukah through MASwings using DHC-6 Twin Otter aircraft. Currently, there are five airlines serving Miri airport, namely Scoot, Malaysia Airlines, Air Asia, Firefly and MASwings.

===Water===
Kuala Baram Express Boat Jetty is located 45 minutes away from Miri city centre. It was last operated in the year 2014 and was closed due to the presence of a better air and road connectivity to the interior especially Marudi Town and all other major towns in Baram.

==Other utilities==

===Courts of law and legal enforcement===
The current court complex is located at Merdu Road, Miri. It contains the High Court, Sessions Court, and the Magistrate Court. Miri city also has Syariah Subordinate Court which is located at Wisma Pelita Tunku, Miri with area of jurisdiction of Miri District and Marudi District. There is one district police headquarters at Pujut Road, Miri. Miri central police station is located at Raja Road while other police stations are located at Bakam Road, Miri Airport, Kampung Tulang Road, Bekenu, and Niah. There is also a central prison in Miri.

===Healthcare===

The current Miri Hospital started its operation on 6 May 1995, located 2.5 km away from Miri city centre and with an area of 87.11 hectares. The hospital has 339 beds, and it provides tertiary specialist services such as surgery, ophthalmology, obstetrics and gynaecology (ONG), nephrology and radiology. It is also the main referral hospital in the northern region of Sarawak, and construction is currently ongoing to add an additional 328 beds in a new block There are currently 3 government polyclinics in Miri city namely Klinik Kesihatan Jalan Merbau, Klinik Kesihatan Tudan, and the new Klinik Kesihatan Bandaraya Miri. Miri has 4 private hospitals currently, with the newest private medical centres including Borneo Medical Centre Miri and KPJ Miri Specialist Hospital. Miri City Medical Centre is a private hospital that started its operation in 2002 and has 30 beds. It is located at Hokkien Road, Miri. Columbia Asia Medical Centre was formerly known as Selesa Medical Centre. It was acquired in 1998, located 4 km downtown Miri. It serves the communities from Miri, Limbang, Marudi, and Brunei. Shell employees make up the largest customer base for this private hospital.

===Education===
All the primary and secondary schools in Miri (under National Education System) are managed by the Miri District Education Office located at Kipas Road, Miri. Among the Chinese primary schools are SJK (C) Chung Hua Miri, SJK (C) Chung Hua Pujut, and SJK (C) Chung Hua Lutong. SK Agama Miri is an Islamic primary school. There are several national primary schools such as: SK Anchi, SK Senadin, and SK St Columba, along with several other national secondary schools in Miri namely SMK Agama Miri, SMK St. Columba, SM Sains Miri, Kolej Tun Dato Tuanku Haji Bujang, SMK St.Joseph, SMK Lutong, SMK Pujut, SMK Lopeng Tengah, SMK Chung Hua Miri and Sekolah Menengah Teknik Miri. Miri has 2 out of 14 Chinese independent schools in Sarawak. These are Pei Min Middle School (培民中学) and Riam Road Middle School (廉律中学). Tenby International School is the first international school in Miri. In 2019, Tenby International School was renamed Knewton Global Schools under new ownership. Other private schools in Miri such as Sekolah Rendah Sri Mawar and Sekolah Rendah Sri Mulia are providers of primary education.

Curtin University, Malaysia is the first foreign university to establish its campus in Sarawak since 1999. It offers business, accounting, and engineering courses. Institut Pendidikan Guru Malaysia Kampus Miri Sarawak (Teachers Training Institute Malaysia Miri) offers training for teachers placements in primary and secondary schools. I-Systems College offers a nursing programme. Fajar International College (FIC) offers a Diploma in Occupational Safety &amp; Health (DIPOSH), accounting, and business studies courses. IBS College was established in 1998, currently offering finance, business, accounting, and security courses. Maxcel Institute of Management offers Diploma programme for Hotel and Tourism Management.

Cahaya Education and Training Academy (Ceta) offers training courses on oil and gas industries. Institut Latihan Perindustrian Miri (Miri Industry Training Institute) was formed in 2004, currently offering courses such as electrician, product design, and telecommunication. RIAM Institute of Technology Sarawak (RIAMTEC) was established in 1996, offering technical training in the fields of agriculture and mechanics. Institut Kemahiran Belia Negara (National Youth skills Institute) and Pusat Pembangunan Kemahiran Sarawak (Sarawak Skills Development Centre) also offer technical training for students. Kolej Komuniti Miri (Miri Community College) offers short module courses upon request from the public. Open University Malaysia (OUM) also operates a learning centre in Miri.

===Libraries===
Miri City Council Library was established in 1958. Currently, it has branches in Piasau, Lutong, and Taman Tunku. Pustaka Miri is a regional library established by the state-run Sarawak State Library. It is located at Miri City Fan.

==Culture and leisure==
===Attractions and recreational spots===
====Cultural====
Miri May Fest has been held in Miri since 1989. It is a month-long celebration of entertainment programmes, trade fairs, cultural, arts, sports, and social activities organised by various governmental agencies. Miri City Day will also be held during the Miri May Fest. Gong Xi Fa Cai Bazaar is held annually a few weeks before the Chinese New Year eve. There will be stalls opening daily selling food and drinks, clothes, decorative items, potted plants, paintings, and handicrafts. Various entertainment programmes such as lion and dragon dances will be held every evening. Miri International Dance for Humanity is held annually since 2004 by Miri Chapter of Malaysian Red Crescent Society to promote racial and cultural harmony. This event will showcase up to 40 to 50 multicultural dance troupes which attract an audience of around 3,500. No dancing competition will be held during this event. Donation cards will be distributed to raise funds for the Red Crescent Society. 916 Malaysia Day Countdown cum Street Party has been held annually since 2010. It consists of a variety of outdoor sports events, street parties, and entertainment programmes which runs beyond midnight to commemorate the formation of Malaysia on 16 September 1963. Miri International Deep Sea Fishing Tournament is held annually at Luconia Shoals at South China Sea. Participants will depart from the Marina Bay, Miri and head up to the ocean for 3 days. The participant who catches the biggest fish in that category wins. Miri city Christmas Parade is held annually since 2007. Churches in Miri would start the parade at Miri City Fan and cover the main streets in the city centre.

====Historical====
In 2005, a petroleum museum was opened in Miri to preserve the city&#x27;s roots as an oil and gas city. The museum is at the site of &quot;Grand Old Lady&quot;, the first oil well in Malaysia which was opened in 1910. Visitors are able to interact with advanced devices displayed in the museum. Niah Archeology Museum is located near the archaeological site of Niah cave. It exhibits the prehistorical artefacts found in the area. Baram Regional Museum was opened in 1997, housed inside Fort Hose at Marudi. The fort was burnt down in 1994, but it was rebuilt later according to its original design and was converted into a museum. It displays historical and cultural artefacts belonging to various ethnic groups living in the area. The Miri Tua Pek Kong Temple was built in 1913 to give thanks to a monk who was believed to chase away evil spirits. The evil spirits were believed to have caused an unknown epidemic in Miri. It is the only building which survives World War II.

====Leisure and conservation areas====

Miri is surrounded by five national parks, namely: Gunung Mulu National Park, which is a renowned UNESCO World Heritage Site; Niah National Park; Lambir Hills National Park; Loagan Bunut National Park, and Miri-Sibuti Coral Reef National Park. Tanjung Lobang Beach is the oldest recreational park in Miri. There are two wooden piers extending out into the ocean which offer a view of the coastline and the seahorse lighthouse at Marina Bay. Miri Marriott Hotel is located at Tanjung Lobang Beach. Marina Bay also has berthing facilities for yachts. Hawaii Beach is located 15 minutes away from Miri city. Picnic and barbecue facilities are provided here. Lutong Beach is suitable for paragliding and paramotor sports. Luak Esplanade Beach is located 11 km south of the city. It is a common spot for barbecues and picnics. Further down to the south of Luak Esplanade Beach is Bungai Beach, which is located at Bekenu, about 1 hour drive from Miri city. Since 2015, the &quot;Blue Tears&quot; phenomenon caused by Dinoflagellate bioluminescence can be seen at Miri beaches particularly at Tusan beach, which is a half-an-hour drive from the Miri city.

Miri Bulatan Park was opened to the public in 1993. It has a man-made lake, a jogging track, and a traffic garden. Traffic games will held every year at Miri Bulatan Park. Taman Awam Miri (Miri Public Park) is located 3 km away from Miri city centre. It has a children&#x27;s playground, botanical garden, and a jogging trail. Miri City Fan is an urban park complex that has a variety of theme gardens, botanical garden, a swimming pool, a library, and an amphitheatre where concerts are frequently held. Taman Bunga (Flower Garden) is located at Asrama Road. Every plant here has a label which list the name and characteristics of the plant.

====Other attractions====
Miri Crocodile Farm Wildlife Mini Zoo is located near the Baram Delta. It houses 1,000 estuarine crocodiles including Malayan gharial crocodiles. Man-made sanctuary pools are also constructed for the crocodiles. Other animals can also be found here such as cassowary, sun bears, python, monkeys and porcupines. Visitors are allowed to feed the animals with bananas available from the canteen.

====Shopping====
Miri has always been a shopping haven for nearby Bruneians, thanks to the favourable currency exchange rates. There are plenty of shopping malls in Miri and the popular ones include Bintang Megamall, Boulevard Shopping Complex, The Imperial Mall, E-Mart, Miri Plaza (Servay Hypermarket), MYY Mall, Permy Mall, Soon Hup Shopping Complex, Wisma Pelita Tunku, and Permaisuri Imperial City Mall.

Saberkas Weekend Market is located at Sarbekas Commercial Centre. It opens in late evening every Friday, Saturday and Sunday. There are over 170 stalls in the market which sell vegetables, fruits, sea products, drinks, satay, grilled fish, BBQ chicken wings and other products such as local handicrafts, clothes as well as used magazines at reasonable prices. Miri Handicraft Centre is located at Brooke Road, Miri. It features handicrafts and souvenirs of Sarawak such as colourful bags, beadwork, woodcarvings, and textiles made by local indigenous groups, Chinese, and Malay artisans.

===Music===
There are three music festivals in Miri, namely Borneo Jazz Festival, Asia Music Festival (AMF) and Miri Country Music Fest (MCMF). Borneo Jazz Festival was started in 2006. It is a 2-night festival of 4 performances in each night by local and international jazz musicians at Parkcity Everly hotel, Miri. Asia Music Festival is also a 2-day event featuring artists and musicians from Asian countries such as India, Taiwan, Philippines, and Indonesia. It was first held in 2013 at Eastwood Valley Golf and Country Club, about 5 km from the city centre. It attracts about 4,000 music lovers attending the event. Miri Country Music Fest (MCMF) is a one-day event introduced in 2014, held at Parkcity Everly Hotel, Miri. Among the activities that can be found here are music and dance workshop, and night concert featuring country music bands from all over the world. Stalls selling food items, games, and souvenir items are also available.

===Local radio stations===
Several local radio stations have their office in the city, this include Hitz FM Sarawak (105.8), Era FM Sarawak (101.3), MY FM Sarawak (103.2) and Cats FM (93.3).

==Cuisine==

Miri Central Market (also known as Miri Open Air Market) is located at the Miri Old Town centre. It offers a wide choices of local food whose recipes which have been passed on for generations. Local delicacies such as Miri Curry Rice, chicken porridge, open air kolo mee, and Char kway teow can be found here. Exotic dishes of pig&#x27;s stomach cooked with pineapple and pig&#x27;s blood with chives can also be found at the central market. There are also a variety of restaurants in Miri that offer seafood, Western food, Chinese, Japanese, and Muslim food. Authentic cuisine from Kelabit Highlands especially from Bario can also be found here.

==Notable people==
* Paul Phua, businessman, bookmaker, and poker player.
* Zee Avi, international singer and ukulele player.
* Shaun Maloney, Scottish national football player.
* Abdul Taib Mahmud, fourth chief minister of Sarawak.
* Joseph Kalang Tie, Sarawak FA football player.
* George Chan Hong Nam, Sarawak&#x27;s former deputy chief minister.
* Wee Han Wen, first chairman of the Miri City Council.
* Watson Nyambek, Ex-national sprinter.
* Lukanisman Awang Sauni, politician.

==International relations==

Several countries have set up their consulates in Miri, including Netherlands, Romania and the United Kingdom.

===Sister cities===

Miri currently has two sister cities:
* Guangning County, People&#x27;s Republic of China
* Hualien County, Republic of China

==References==
==External links==
* Miri city map</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q986803" start="0" end="4" title="Miri" label="Miri"/>
<link wikidata="Q7448465" start="13" end="25" title="list of cities in Malaysia" label="coastal city"/>
<link wikidata="Q170462" start="43" end="50" title="Sarawak" label="Sarawak"/>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="52" end="60" title="Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q921" start="89" end="95" title="Brunei" label="Brunei"/>
<link wikidata="Q36117" start="114" end="120" title="Borneo" label="Borneo"/>
<link wikidata="Q220445" start="172" end="179" title="Kuching" label="Kuching"/>
<link wikidata="Q137271" start="197" end="210" title="Kota Kinabalu" label="Kota Kinabalu"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="318" end="325" title="List of capitals in Malaysia#District capitals" label="capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q2242840" start="329" end="342" title="Miri District" label="Miri District"/>
<link wikidata="Q2424881" start="344" end="357" title="Miri Division" label="Miri Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q1005701" start="385" end="391" title="Marudi, Sarawak" label="Marudi"/>
<link wikidata="Q170462" start="448" end="455" title="Sarawak" label="Sarawak"/>
<link wikidata="Q154950" start="521" end="538" title="Shell plc" label="Royal Dutch Shell"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="709" end="721" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="818" end="832" title="Southeast Asia" label="Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q36117" start="910" end="916" title="Borneo" label="Borneo"/>
<link wikidata="Q221692" start="1338" end="1346" title="Petronas" label="Petronas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="1631" end="1637" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="1638" end="1657" title="World Heritage Site" label="World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q61535" start="1659" end="1684" title="Gunung Mulu National Park" label="Gunung Mulu National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q6663421" start="1686" end="1712" title="Loagan Bunut National Park" label="Loagan Bunut National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q6481482" start="1714" end="1740" title="Lambir Hills National Park" label="Lambir Hills National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1984562" start="1746" end="1764" title="Niah National Park" label="Niah National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q17053782" start="1769" end="1805" title="Miri-Sibuti Coral Reef National Park" label="Miri-Sibuti Coral Reef National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q61535" start="1811" end="1836" title="Gunung Mulu National Park" label="Gunung Mulu National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q555991" start="1846" end="1861" title="Sarawak Chamber" label="Sarawak Chamber"/>
<link wikidata="Q187449" start="1954" end="1964" title="ecotourism" label="ecotourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q22656" start="2032" end="2041" title="petroleum" label="petroleum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7609983" start="2103" end="2111" title="Elaeis" label="oil palm"/>
<link wikidata="Q49389" start="2116" end="2123" title="tourism" label="tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7361326" start="2202" end="2213" title="Miriek people" label="Jati Miriek"/>
<link wikidata="Q2424881" start="2333" end="2346" title="Miri Division" label="Miri Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q1984562" start="2572" end="2581" title="Niah National Park" label="Niah Cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q36117" start="2633" end="2639" title="Borneo" label="Borneo"/>
<link wikidata="Q43467" start="2661" end="2669" title="Mainland Southeast Asia" label="mainland"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="2673" end="2687" title="Southeast Asia" label="Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q25326" start="2943" end="2950" title="Mollusca" label="mollusc"/>
<link wikidata="Q40203" start="3078" end="3089" title="Paleolithic" label="Paleolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5" start="3144" end="3156" title="Homo sapiens" label="Homo sapiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1245728" start="3232" end="3245" title="Tom Harrisson" label="Tom Harrisson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2191516" start="3439" end="3447" title="pangolin" label="pangolin"/>
<link wikidata="Q44155" start="3561" end="3571" title="Mesolithic" label="Mesolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q36422" start="3576" end="3585" title="Neolithic" label="Neolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065104" start="3665" end="3679" title="Charles Brooke, Rajah of Sarawak" label="Charles Brooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q441276" start="3690" end="3702" title="James Brooke" label="James Brooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q40390" start="3767" end="3785" title="Abdul Momin" label="Sultan Abdul Momin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1005701" start="4271" end="4277" title="Marudi, Sarawak" label="Marudi"/>
<link wikidata="Q352284" start="4474" end="4486" title="Charles Hose" label="Charles Hose"/>
<link wikidata="Q3490339" start="5016" end="5033" title="Song Huiyao Jigao" label="Song Huiyao Jigao"/>
<link wikidata="Q7462" start="5064" end="5076" title="Song dynasty" label="Song dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q181559" start="5118" end="5125" title="camphor" label="camphor"/>
<link wikidata="Q154950" start="5940" end="5957" title="Royal Dutch Shell" label="Royal Dutch Shell"/>
<link wikidata="Q190147" start="6478" end="6487" title="anticline" label="anticline"/>
<link wikidata="Q12696321" start="7425" end="7431" title="Lutong" label="Lutong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066338" start="8519" end="8539" title="Charles Vyner Brooke" label="Charles Vyner Brooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q7116197" start="8586" end="8589" title="Oya, Sarawak" label="Oya"/>
<link wikidata="Q2219702" start="8595" end="8600" title="Mukah" label="Mukah"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="8663" end="8673" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="8678" end="8693" title="Royal Air Force" label="Royal Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q208485" start="8800" end="8814" title="scorched earth" label="scorched earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q4551027" start="9149" end="9164" title="15th Punjab Regiment" label="Punjab Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q52418" start="9437" end="9459" title="attack on Pearl Harbor" label="attack on Pearl Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153376" start="10256" end="10267" title="flying boat" label="flying boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q14501" start="10273" end="10287" title="Tarakan Island" label="Tarakan Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q657208" start="10320" end="10341" title="Japanese destroyer Shinonome (1927)" label="&amp;quot;Shinonome&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q221692" start="11212" end="11220" title="Petronas" label="Petronas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1800455" start="11334" end="11368" title="Production sharing agreement" label="production sharing contract system"/>
<link wikidata="Q7448465" start="13294" end="13305" title="List of cities in Malaysia" label="city status"/>
<link wikidata="Q6608799" start="13415" end="13428" title="List of capitals in Malaysia" label="state capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q6566938" start="13538" end="13552" title="List of Chief Ministers of Sarawak" label="Chief Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q1015710" start="13554" end="13571" title="Abdul Taib Mahmud" label="Abdul Taib Mahmud"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986392" start="13956" end="13978" title="Parliament of Malaysia" label="Parliament of Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q281138" start="14030" end="14064" title="Sarawak State Legislative Assembly" label="Sarawak State Legislative Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q7382247" start="14238" end="14255" title="Miri City Council" label="Miri City Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q2242840" start="14439" end="14452" title="Miri District" label="Miri District"/>
<link wikidata="Q656586" start="14708" end="14722" title="alluvial plain" label="alluvial plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q651903" start="14730" end="14740" title="Miri River" label="Miri River"/>
<link wikidata="Q36117" start="14799" end="14805" title="Borneo" label="Borneo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205140" start="14911" end="14924" title="Barrier island" label="barrier beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q651903" start="14937" end="14947" title="Miri River" label="Miri River"/>
<link wikidata="Q37660" start="15073" end="15088" title="South China Sea" label="South China Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q209531" start="15304" end="15331" title="tropical rainforest climate" label="tropical rainforest climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q42967" start="15368" end="15385" title="southwest monsoon" label="southwest monsoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q42967" start="15444" end="15461" title="northeast monsoon" label="northeast monsoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q973254" start="16117" end="16121" title="Iban people" label="Iban"/>
<link wikidata="Q4262343" start="16182" end="16189" title="Melanau" label="Melanau"/>
<link wikidata="Q476397" start="16203" end="16210" title="Bidayuh" label="Bidayuh"/>
<link wikidata="Q3543292" start="16353" end="16358" title="Malaysian Malays" label="Malay"/>
<link wikidata="Q4978967" start="16394" end="16402" title="Bruneian Malays" label="Bruneian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7361326" start="16404" end="16415" title="Miriek people" label="Jati Miriek"/>
<link wikidata="Q4262236" start="16458" end="16465" title="Kedayan" label="Kedayan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4206762" start="16530" end="16539" title="Orang Ulu" label="Orang Ulu"/>
<link wikidata="Q132573043" start="16590" end="16595" title="Kiput" label="Kiput"/>
<link wikidata="Q60510" start="16597" end="16607" title="Lun Bawang" label="Lun Bawang"/>
<link wikidata="Q926384" start="16609" end="16614" title="Kayan (Borneo)" label="Kayan"/>
<link wikidata="Q180540" start="16624" end="16630" title="Kenyah people" label="Kenyah"/>
<link wikidata="Q475951" start="16635" end="16642" title="Kelabit people" label="Kelabit"/>
<link wikidata="Q6576621" start="16689" end="16699" title="Fuzhou people" label="Fuzhounese"/>
<link wikidata="Q5998962" start="16928" end="16935" title="Illegal immigrants in Malaysia" label="illegal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1655283" start="16936" end="16941" title="Suluk people" label="Suluk"/>
<link wikidata="Q4251702" start="17339" end="17355" title="Sarawak Malay" label="Sarawakian Malay"/>
<link wikidata="Q13646143" start="17395" end="17413" title="Malaysian Mandarin" label="Malaysian Mandarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4891018" start="18508" end="18515" title="Berawan language" label="Berawan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182878" start="18547" end="18563" title="Brunei Malay" label="Bruneian/Kedayan"/>
<link wikidata="Q33424" start="18573" end="18577" title="Iban language" label="Iban"/>
<link wikidata="Q2760613" start="18579" end="18586" title="Bidayuh languages" label="Bidayuh"/>
<link wikidata="Q3217468" start="18588" end="18593" title="Kayan languages" label="Kayan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6736761" start="18595" end="18601" title="Kenyah language" label="Kenyah"/>
<link wikidata="Q13479839" start="18603" end="18613" title="Lun Bawang language" label="Lun Bawang"/>
<link wikidata="Q6385445" start="18618" end="18625" title="Kelabit language" label="Kelabit"/>
<link wikidata="Q13646143" start="18667" end="18685" title="Malaysian Mandarin" label="Malaysian Mandarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q33375" start="18687" end="18692" title="Hakka Chinese" label="Hakka"/>
<link wikidata="Q9186" start="18694" end="18703" title="Cantonese" label="Cantonese"/>
<link wikidata="Q36759" start="18705" end="18712" title="Teochew dialect" label="Teochew"/>
<link wikidata="Q934541" start="18714" end="18723" title="Hainanese" label="Hainanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1624231" start="18725" end="18732" title="Hokkien" label="Hokkien"/>
<link wikidata="Q35571" start="18737" end="18744" title="Fuzhou dialect" label="Foochow"/>
<link wikidata="Q7262283" start="18770" end="18777" title="Henghua" label="Henghua"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="19274" end="19286" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="19288" end="19293" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="19295" end="19303" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9598" start="19305" end="19311" title="Taoism" label="Taoism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="19313" end="19321" title="Hinduism" label="Hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9316" start="19323" end="19330" title="Sikhism" label="Sikhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q22679" start="19335" end="19347" title="Baháʼí Faith" label="Baháʼí Faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q4946078" start="19393" end="19418" title="Borneo Evangelical Church" label="Borneo Evangelical Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423963" start="19420" end="19431" title="Anglicanism" label="Anglicanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q33203" start="19433" end="19442" title="Methodism" label="Methodism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="19444" end="19458" title="Roman Catholic" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q65074742" start="19576" end="19595" title="Tua Pek Kong Temple, Miri" label="Tua Pek Kong Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q61824595" start="19636" end="19666" title="San Ching Tian Temple" label="Lian Hua San Ching Tian Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q170462" start="19882" end="19889" title="Sarawak" label="Sarawak"/>
<link wikidata="Q113276545" start="19947" end="19969" title="Indonesian archipelago" label="Indonesian archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q16146522" start="20007" end="20025" title="Christian revival" label="Christian Revivals"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="20511" end="20533" title="Gross Domestic Product" label="Gross Domestic Product"/>
<link wikidata="Q2542096" start="20574" end="20591" title="Upstream (petroleum industry)" label="upstream business"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640290" start="20741" end="20751" title="Nippon Oil" label="Nippon Oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425316" start="20753" end="20765" title="Schlumberger" label="Schlumberger"/>
<link wikidata="Q804353" start="20767" end="20779" title="Baker Hughes" label="Baker Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q656165" start="20781" end="20792" title="Halliburton" label="Halliburton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1598474" start="20794" end="20801" title="Technip" label="Technip"/>
<link wikidata="Q594209" start="20984" end="20991" title="Bintulu" label="Bintulu"/>
<link wikidata="Q651903" start="22315" end="22326" title="Baram River" label="Baram River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2719498" start="22388" end="22401" title="Gross Tonnage" label="Gross Tonnage"/>
<link wikidata="Q921" start="22791" end="22797" title="Brunei" label="Brunei"/>
<link wikidata="Q206319" start="22854" end="22867" title="Brunei dollar" label="Brunei dollar"/>
<link wikidata="Q163712" start="22882" end="22899" title="Malaysian ringgit" label="Malaysian ringgit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7640187" start="23162" end="23174" title="Sungai Tujoh" label="Sungai Tujoh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5195645" start="23476" end="23503" title="Curtin University, Malaysia" label="Curtin University, Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7382247" start="23684" end="23701" title="Miri City Council" label="Miri City Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q9279" start="23741" end="23760" title="Bandar Seri Begawan" label="Bandar Seri Begawan"/>
<link wikidata="Q921" start="23762" end="23768" title="Brunei" label="Brunei"/>
<link wikidata="Q7640187" start="23782" end="23794" title="Sungai Tujoh" label="Sungai Tujoh"/>
<link wikidata="Q137271" start="23913" end="23926" title="Kota Kinabalu" label="Kota Kinabalu"/>
<link wikidata="Q4202293" start="23948" end="23966" title="Pan Borneo Highway" label="Pan Borneo Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q594209" start="23994" end="24001" title="Bintulu" label="Bintulu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1005701" start="24034" end="24040" title="Marudi, Sarawak" label="Marudi"/>
<link wikidata="Q14629034" start="24063" end="24075" title="ASEAN Bridge" label="ASEAN Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q6873574" start="24097" end="24115" title="Miri-Baram Highway" label="Miri-Baram Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2181642" start="24221" end="24228" title="Limbang" label="Limbang"/>
<link wikidata="Q6503576" start="24233" end="24238" title="Lawas" label="Lawas"/>
<link wikidata="Q25246242" start="24483" end="24488" title="Pujut" label="Pujut"/>
<link wikidata="Q14168" start="24726" end="24746" title="Pontianak, Indonesia" label="Pontianak, Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432050" start="24955" end="24967" title="Miri Airport" label="Miri Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432050" start="25076" end="25088" title="Miri Airport" label="Miri Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="25481" end="25490" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1865" start="25552" end="25564" title="Kuala Lumpur" label="Kuala Lumpur"/>
<link wikidata="Q231318" start="25566" end="25577" title="Johor Bahru" label="Johor Bahru"/>
<link wikidata="Q137271" start="25579" end="25592" title="Kota Kinabalu" label="Kota Kinabalu"/>
<link wikidata="Q214504" start="25594" end="25600" title="Labuan" label="Labuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q220445" start="25602" end="25609" title="Kuching" label="Kuching"/>
<link wikidata="Q2884535" start="25709" end="25714" title="Bario" label="Bario"/>
<link wikidata="Q4837029" start="25716" end="25731" title="Ba&amp;#x27;kelalan" label="Ba&amp;#x27;kelalan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1005701" start="25733" end="25739" title="Marudi, Sarawak" label="Marudi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6503576" start="25741" end="25746" title="Lawas" label="Lawas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2181642" start="25748" end="25755" title="Limbang" label="Limbang"/>
<link wikidata="Q2219702" start="25761" end="25766" title="Mukah" label="Mukah"/>
<link wikidata="Q683041" start="25790" end="25806" title="de Havilland Canada DHC-6 Twin Otter" label="DHC-6 Twin Otter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319404" start="25881" end="25886" title="Scoot" label="Scoot"/>
<link wikidata="Q308952" start="25888" end="25905" title="Malaysia Airlines" label="Malaysia Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q406643" start="25907" end="25915" title="Air Asia" label="Air Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418913" start="25917" end="25924" title="Firefly (airline)" label="Firefly"/>
<link wikidata="Q768164" start="25929" end="25937" title="MASwings" label="MASwings"/>
<link wikidata="Q5755248" start="26357" end="26367" title="High Courts of Malaysia" label="High Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q7659477" start="26430" end="26455" title="Syariah Court" label="Syariah Subordinate Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432050" start="26735" end="26747" title="Miri Airport" label="Miri Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q4881597" start="26770" end="26776" title="Bekenu" label="Bekenu"/>
<link wikidata="Q23926504" start="26859" end="26872" title="Miri Hospital" label="Miri Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q2181642" start="27924" end="27931" title="Limbang" label="Limbang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1005701" start="27933" end="27939" title="Marudi, Sarawak" label="Marudi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28527" end="28541" title="SMK Agama Miri" label="SMK Agama Miri"/>
<link wikidata="Q20465084" start="28543" end="28558" title="SMK St. Columba" label="SMK St. Columba"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28560" end="28573" title="SM Sains Miri" label="SM Sains Miri"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28575" end="28608" title="Kolej Tun Dato Tuanku Haji Bujang" label="Kolej Tun Dato Tuanku Haji Bujang"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28610" end="28623" title="SMK St.Joseph" label="SMK St.Joseph"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28625" end="28635" title="SMK Lutong" label="SMK Lutong"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28637" end="28646" title="SMK Pujut" label="SMK Pujut"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28648" end="28665" title="SMK Lopeng Tengah" label="SMK Lopeng Tengah"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28667" end="28685" title="SMK Chung Hua Miri" label="SMK Chung Hua Miri"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28690" end="28718" title="Sekolah Menengah Teknik Miri" label="Sekolah Menengah Teknik Miri"/>
<link wikidata="Q5100820" start="28741" end="28768" title="Chinese independent high school" label="Chinese independent schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q5195645" start="29147" end="29174" title="Curtin University, Malaysia" label="Curtin University, Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390612" start="30575" end="30599" title="Open University Malaysia" label="Open University Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q27642994" start="30842" end="30863" title="Sarawak State Library" label="Sarawak State Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q6742015" start="31640" end="31670" title="Malaysian Red Crescent Society" label="Malaysian Red Crescent Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115032" start="31961" end="31973" title="Malaysia Day" label="Malaysia Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q890078" start="32289" end="32303" title="Luconia Shoals" label="Luconia Shoals"/>
<link wikidata="Q37660" start="32307" end="32322" title="South China Sea" label="South China Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q27657338" start="32671" end="32687" title="Petroleum Museum (Malaysia)" label="petroleum museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1005701" start="33161" end="33167" title="Marudi, Sarawak" label="Marudi"/>
<link wikidata="Q65074742" start="33398" end="33422" title="Tua Pek Kong Temple, Miri" label="Miri Tua Pek Kong Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q61535" start="33731" end="33756" title="Gunung Mulu National Park" label="Gunung Mulu National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="33778" end="33784" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="33785" end="33804" title="World Heritage Site" label="World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q1984562" start="33806" end="33824" title="Niah National Park" label="Niah National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q6481482" start="33826" end="33852" title="Lambir Hills National Park" label="Lambir Hills National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q6663421" start="33854" end="33880" title="Loagan Bunut National Park" label="Loagan Bunut National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q17053782" start="33886" end="33922" title="Miri-Sibuti Coral Reef National Park" label="Miri-Sibuti Coral Reef National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153558" start="34197" end="34205" title="Berth (moorings)" label="berthing"/>
<link wikidata="Q178380" start="34364" end="34375" title="paragliding" label="paragliding"/>
<link wikidata="Q942549" start="34380" end="34389" title="paramotor" label="paramotor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4881597" start="34589" end="34595" title="Bekenu" label="Bekenu"/>
<link wikidata="Q120490" start="34692" end="34706" title="Dinoflagellate" label="Dinoflagellate"/>
<link wikidata="Q27657618" start="35501" end="35538" title="Miri Crocodile Farm cum Mini Zoo" label="Miri Crocodile Farm Wildlife Mini Zoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q47053" start="35588" end="35597" title="Estuary" label="estuarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q242464" start="35619" end="35634" title="False gharial" label="Malayan gharial"/>
<link wikidata="Q201231" start="35758" end="35767" title="cassowary" label="cassowary"/>
<link wikidata="Q24950060" start="36954" end="36974" title="Borneo Jazz Festival" label="Borneo Jazz Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q5872717" start="37944" end="37959" title="Hitz FM (Malaysia)" label="Hitz FM Sarawak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1655590" start="37969" end="37983" title="Era FM" label="Era FM Sarawak"/>
<link wikidata="Q7393745" start="37993" end="38006" title="My FM (Malaysia)" label="MY FM Sarawak"/>
<link wikidata="Q5053990" start="38019" end="38026" title="Cats FM" label="Cats FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q5073693" start="38325" end="38339" title="Char kway teow" label="Char kway teow"/>
<link wikidata="Q51148" start="38443" end="38449" title="chives" label="chives"/>
<link wikidata="Q6385444" start="38632" end="38649" title="Kelabit Highlands" label="Kelabit Highlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q2884535" start="38666" end="38671" title="Bario" label="Bario"/>
<link wikidata="Q50345292" start="38718" end="38727" title="Paul Phua" label="Paul Phua"/>
<link wikidata="Q2117615" start="38773" end="38780" title="Zee Avi" label="Zee Avi"/>
<link wikidata="Q37717" start="38825" end="38838" title="Shaun Maloney" label="Shaun Maloney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1015710" start="38877" end="38894" title="Abdul Taib Mahmud" label="Abdul Taib Mahmud"/>
<link wikidata="Q6284501" start="38932" end="38949" title="Joseph Kalang Tie" label="Joseph Kalang Tie"/>
<link wikidata="Q5537807" start="38981" end="39001" title="George Chan Hong Nam" label="George Chan Hong Nam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7979284" start="39050" end="39061" title="Wee Han Wen" label="Wee Han Wen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7382247" start="39085" end="39102" title="Miri City Council" label="Miri City Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q3566729" start="39106" end="39120" title="Watson Nyambek" label="Watson Nyambek"/>
<link wikidata="Q55847750" start="39146" end="39168" title="Lukanisman Awang Sauni" label="Lukanisman Awang Sauni"/>
<link wikidata="Q991381" start="39385" end="39401" title="Guangning County" label="Guangning County"/>
<link wikidata="Q249868" start="39437" end="39451" title="Hualien County" label="Hualien County"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="990439" wikidata="Q3403733" url="?curid=990439" title="Wales national rugby league team">
<text>The Wales national rugby league team represents Wales in representative rugby league football matches. Currently the team is ranked 17th in the IRL World Rankings. The team was run under the auspices of the Rugby Football League, but an independent body, Wales Rugby League, now runs the team from Cardiff. Six Welsh players have been entered into the Rugby Football League Hall of Fame.

As with other Welsh national sporting teams, Wales strip has been primarily red. However, in the World Cup campaign in 2000 they wore a shirt featuring the Welsh flag, adding a touch of green and white. The team is known as &quot;The Dragons&quot; and so the team&#x27;s logo on the shirt is a red dragon.

The team date back to 1907, making them the third oldest national side after England and New Zealand, and it was a touring New Zealand side that Wales first played against in 1908, winning 9–8 at Aberdare. Since then, Wales have regularly played England, since 1935 France, as well as welcomed the touring Australia and New Zealand teams, although they rarely toured themselves, not playing a match in the Southern Hemisphere until 1975. For 26 years Wales competed against their two biggest rivals, England and France, in the European Nations Cup, winning the trophy four times.

Wales has also competed in the World Cup on five occasions, the first time being in 1975. In 1995 and 2000 they had their most successful tournaments to date, making the Semi-Finals on both occasions before being beaten by England and Australia respectively. Wales failed to qualify for the 2008 World Cup, being the second highest ranked side not to do so, having lost to Scotland on points difference over two matches. They then qualified for the 2013 World Cup but failed to win a game, including losing 32–16 to low ranked Italy in their opening game at the Millennium Stadium in Cardiff.

In recent seasons, Wales has taken massive strides under former player Iestyn Harris who had coached Wales to back to back European Cup successes, which culminated in a Four Nations appearance in 2011. In 2014 former England and France coach John Kear became the new head coach after Iestyn Harris left the post to concentrate on his new job as head coach at Salford Red Devils.

==History==

===Background===

For most of its history, Wales has been represented by the Great Britain national rugby league team in tours and world cups. The only competitive exception to this was the European Championship. Wales, in its early years, would also play regular friendlies against England to ensure the strength of the Great Britain side. Wales, unlike England, would more often play separate test matches against the Australia or New Zealand tour opponents ahead of the Great Britain games.

===Foundations===

On 5 April 1904, England played an international match against the &quot;Other Nationalities&quot;, a team of Welshmen and Scotsmen, in Wigan. Of the twelve players who played for the Other Nationalities team, as it was a 12-a-side game, ten of them were Welshmen coming from Northern English clubs. At the turn of the century many Welshmen made the switch from rugby union, wanting to be paid for playing, and although the numbers switching were constantly increasing, the Northern Union did not think that a Welsh side would be strong enough for England. After 80 minutes however, the Other Nationalities had beaten England 9–3. Nevertheless, this team carried on for another two years, playing England annually in 1905 and 1906, losing 26–11 and drawing 3–3 respectively.

===The Kiwis In Aberdare===

From 1905 to 1910 Rugby League as a sport enjoyed growth, not just in Wales and England, but also on the east coast of Australia and in northern New Zealand. When Albert Henry Baskerville&#x27;s NZ All Golds with their guest Australian star Dally Messenger arrived in Britain for the inaugural tour by a southern hemisphere side, the first full international was against Wales on New Year&#x27;s Day 1908. The Welsh rugby league team were contesting their first national fixture, and managed to beat the touring Kiwis 9–8 in Aberdare in front of 20,000 spectators. This was the first international match played under new &quot;Northern Union&quot; rules, which would later be rapidly changed again, but these rules were a small departure from traditional rugby union rules which had been used in previous international matches (minus the number of players, who were experimentally changed by the NU several times). The New Zealand team, or the &quot;All Golds&quot; as they were being called by the New Zealand newspapers, had never played rugby by these rules before but did have a week of preparation and training sessions leading up to the match. With this Welsh victory and large crowd, Wales played their second fixture at the Mid Rhondda Athletic Ground in Tonypandy, and managed to win that match too recording a 35–18 win against what would soon become their main rival, the England Lions. At the end of 1908 Wales played their third and final fixture of the decade, playing England again, but this time in Broughton, Lancashire. This time they lost 31–7. However, in 1909 another victory was to occur for Welsh Rugby League, with a Welsh League XIII made up of players still playing in Wales beating a touring Australian side 14–13 in Merthyr.

===Defeats against England===
In the years before the outbreak of the war, Wales regularly played England. The two national teams played each other every year, including 1914. Due to Rugby League only extensively being played in the two countries in the whole of the Northern Hemisphere, touring Australia and New Zealand teams were the only chances to play someone different. Although the two matches against the English played in Wales were played in Ebbw Vale in Monmouthshire, the Welsh travelled around England for away matches, playing in Coventry, Oldham, Plymouth and St. Helens. Collectively those seven matches in Wales and England produced six defeats for the Welsh team, although there were signs of improvement, in the last match in St Helens the Dragons narrowly lost by just four points, the match ending 16–12. On the 7 October 1911 Wales played Australia for the first time. The match, held at Ebbw Vale again, drew 7,000 people to watch Wales go down 20–28. The match was significant though because throughout the next few decades Australia would play the Dragons in Wales whenever they toured Great Britain. During and after the First World War many sports suffered, and rugby league in Wales was no exception, the team didn&#x27;t play a match again until 1921.

===The Twenties===

After a seven-year hiatus Wales once again played England and continued to do so annually throughout the 1920s, apart from in 1924. Because of the long hiatus a large proportion of players competing in the 1921 match were earning their first cap for the team. The first game at Leeds saw Wales lose 35–9 in front of 13,000. A further 13,000 saw the 1921–22 Kangaroo touring side play Wales in December 1921, this time in Pontypridd. Like the first time these nations played each other, Australia narrowly defeated the Welsh, the final score being 16–21. In 1922 Wales took part in the first international rugby league match to be played in London. England beat Wales 12–7 in Herne Hill but just 3,000 people turned up to watch, one of the lowest attendances to ever watch a Wales match. After four more matches against England in various Rugby League strongholds in Northern England, the Dragons once again played in Wales. Two matches were played in 1926 in Pontypridd, the same year that a Pontypridd domestic side joined the English leagues, although they disbanded a year later. The first match saw finished Wales 22–30 England with a record 23,000 in attendance. The second match saw Wales comfortably beat the touring New Zealand 34–8. Three more matches against England were played including one in November 1928 played in Cardiff. It was in the 1920s that Jim Sullivan, one of three Welsh players to be enrolled into the Rugby League Hall Of Fame, started rising through the ranks at Wigan. A career spanning 25 years saw him play many times for Wales picking up 26 caps, a record that was only beaten in 2010 by Ian Watson. He also represented Great Britain 25 times and Glamorgan and Monmouthshire 12 times.

===The European Nations Cup===
The 1930s were to herald a new era for the team as it emerged at times as one of the dominant sides in world rugby league. In 1930 and 1933 Wales played Australia at Wembley Stadium in London. On both occasions they failed to win, losing 26–10 and being thrashed 51–19. However at the time Australia were arguably considered the world&#x27;s second best nation (behind England) and so particularly in the first game, Wales had done very well against the touring Kangaroos. Wales luck against England did not change either suffering three losses to the Lions in three games, in Huddersfield, Salford and Leeds. They were very unlucky in the latter however, with England winning 14 points to 13. Exactly 27 years after Wales played their first match, they played France for the first time in a new competition called the European Nations Cup, in which Wales, France and England would play two matches each. Wales and France kicked off the tournament on New Year&#x27;s Day in front of 15,000 in Bordeaux. But the Dragons lost 18–11, and their match against England was just as bad losing 24–11 in Liverpool. The France versus England match finished a 15–15 draw so England won the inaugural competition on points difference. Wales finished bottom. The next European Nations Cup brought better fortunes to the Welsh and they kicked off the competition, which was staged across Winter 1935 and 1936, with a 41–7 thrashing against France. The team were cheered on by 25,000 people at Llanelli and three months later Wales did the unexpected and squeezed past England, winning 14–17 away at Hull. This was a huge result for Wales, having not beaten England since 1923, and they had won the cup for the first time. For the next two competitions Wales successfully defended the cup. A 3–2 win against the English in Pontypridd, coupled with a 9–3 victory in Paris saw Wales clinch the cup for the second time, and then in 1938 the Dragons beat England again by one point in Bradford before beating the French 18–2. This represents perhaps the highest point in Welsh rugby league history with great players such as Jim Sullivan, Gus Risman, Alan Edwards and Alec Givvons featuring. In 1935 Welsh rugby league would produce its first black international in George Bennett (some 48 years before Welsh rugby union would do so). In the 1938/1939 tournament, the last to be held for six years because of the Second World War, Wales beat their main rivals England before dramatically losing 16–10 in Bordeaux against Les Tricolores. Because of the French&#x27;s victory against England, Wales finished second and the cup was taken across the channel.

During the 1978 Kangaroo tour Wales played Australia at St Helen&#x27;s ground in Swansea, losing 8–3.

===Timeline===

* 1 January 1908 – Wales play their first international match against New Zealand played at the Athletic Ground in Aberdare in front of 15,000 fans. Wales won 9–8.
* 19 January 1909 – The Welsh League XIII defeat the touring Australians 14–13 at Penydarren Park in Merthyr Tydfil.
* 1926 – Wales defeat the touring New Zealand 34–8 at Pontypridd. The Kiwis were awarded full caps for the match.
* 18 January 1930 – Australia defeat Wales 26–10 in the first ever rugby league international played at London&#x27;s Wembley Stadium. The non-test international attracted 20,000 fans.
* 1936 – Wales win the 1935–36 European Rugby League Championship with a 17–14 win over England at Craven Park in Hull.
* 1937 – Wales win their second consecutive European Championship.
* 1938 – Wales win the European championship for the third consecutive season.
* 24 November 1945 – 30,000 people attend a match against England at the St. Helen&#x27;s Rugby Ground in Swansea. As of 2017 this remains the largest stand alone attendance for an international match in Wales.
* 1947 Wales defeat England 10–8 at Central Park in Wigan.
* 10 June 1975 – Clive Sullivan&#x27;s try effectively won the World title for Australia, as Wales beat England 12–7 at Lang Park in Brisbane, thanks to Sullivan&#x27;s match-clinching try after chasing a ball over the English line. The final three games in the tournament, however, all ended in losses and Wales finish third. 1975 was the first time Wales appeared at the Rugby League World Cup, all previous cups had seen the British isles represented by Great Britain.
* 27 October 1991 – Papua New Guinea met Wales at Vetch Field, Swansea. Roared on by a fervent crowd of 11,422; Wales won by a record 68–0 margin, scoring thirteen tries. In that match dual-rugby international Jonathan Davies scored 24 points from two tries and 8 goals.

* December 1992 – Wales defeat France in Perpignan, their first win on French soil for 30 years.
* 1995 – Wales win the European Championship, with a win over England (the first since 1968 and the biggest on Welsh soil). Mike Gregory is head coach for the 1995 World Cup. Wales make the semi-finals of the World Cup, only to lose to England 25–10 at Old Trafford in Manchester. The 1995 World Cup between Wales and Western Samoa in front of a capacity crowd of over 15,000 at Swansea was a pinnacle for Welsh Rugby League in the modern era. Following rugby union&#x27;s decision to go professional, the flow of talent going north from the valleys dried up and Jonathan Davies returned to rugby union.
* 5 June 1996 – Wales beat France in Carcassonne to bring home the European Championship for the first time in 57 years.
* 1997 – Anger as the Rugby Football League announce that at the proposed 1998 World Cup (never played), Wales would not be included to allow the appearance of the New Zealand Māoris. Wales were once again to form part of Great Britain.
* 19 June 1998 – Emerging England defeat a full Welsh side in Widnes.
* 2000 – Wales again made the World Cup semi finals, losing to Australia 46–22 in a hard-fought battle at Huddersfield.
* November 2005 – Wales took second in the European Nations Cup, losing to France in the final at Carcassonne.
* 9 November 2007 – Wales loses 50–26 to Lebanon, having led 16–10 at half-time, ending their chances to qualify for the 2008 Rugby League World Cup
* 2009 – Wales win the European cup; defeating Scotland 28–16 in the final at the Brewery Field in Bridgend. Only 1,608 spectators turn up for the game.
* 2010 – Wales win the European cup to qualify for the 2011 Four Nations against Australia, England and New Zealand.
* 27 October 2012 – Wales are thrashed 80–12 by England at the Racecourse Ground, Wrexham as part of the Autumn Internationals series.
* 2013 – Wales failed to win a game at the 2013 Rugby League World Cup held in England and Wales.
* October and November 2014 – Wales were beaten in all three games in the 2014 European Cup.
* 16 October 2015 – Wales ended their spree of 12 consecutive defeats with an 18–12 victory against Scotland in the opening game of the 2015 European Cup. Their last victory before this result occurred on 22 October 2011 with a 30–6 win over Ireland. Wales would go on to win their remaining two matches of the campaign, becoming the only unbeaten team in the competition, and therefore become the champions of the 2015 European Cup competition, their 7th European Championship win in 32 championships held since 1935.
* 4 April 2017 – The team received funding from Sport Wales for the first time, in preparation for the 2017 Rugby League World Cup.

==Identity==
===Kit===
===Stadium===
In July 2024, The Gnoll in Neath became the home stadium of the team as well as all other Welsh national rugby league teams.

== Coaches ==
Source:

==Players==
===Current squad===
Squad selected for the October 2024 friendly against and the European qualification tournament for the 2026 Men&#x27;s Rugby League World Cup:

===Notable former players===
====Rugby Football League Hall Of Fame====

The following Welsh players have been inducted into the British Rugby Football League Hall of Fame (instituted 1988):

*Billy Boston (1988)
*Gus Risman (1988)
*Jim Sullivan (1988)
*Lewis Jones (2013)
*Clive Sullivan (2022)
*David Watkins (2022)

====Welsh Sports Hall Of Fame====

The following Welsh players have been inducted into the Welsh Sports Hall of Fame:
*1990 Billy Boston
*1992 Jim Sullivan
*1998 Lewis Jones
*2000 Gus Risman, David Watkins
*2003 Jonathan Davies, Willie Davies
*2004 Trevor Foster
*2009 Clive Sullivan

==Records==
* As of 17 February 2020
* Bold- denotes player still active at club level

===Most capped players===
===Top try scorers===
===Top points scorers===
==Competitive record==
===Overall===
Below is table of the representative rugby matches played by the Wales national XIII at test level up until 22 October 2024.
===World Cup===

===Four Nations===
===European Championship===


==Attendance Records==
===Highest all-time attendances===
===Highest attendances per opponent===
===Highest attendances per opponent in Wales===
==Honours==
&quot;Major:&quot;&lt;br&gt;
World Cup: 
Semi-finalists (2): 1995, 2000

&quot;Regional:&quot;&lt;br&gt;
European Championship: 
Winners (7):1936, 1937, 1938, 1995, 2009, 2010, 2015
Runners-up (9): 1938–39, 1946–47, 1952–53, 1975, 1977, 1978, 1996, 2005, 2018

==IRL Rankings==
==See also==

* List of Wales national rugby league team players
* Rugby league in Wales
* Wales national rugby league team match results
* Wales Amateur national rugby league team

==References==
==External links==
* The Welsh Rugby League official website
* Google-Video
* HISTORY OF RUGBY IN OTHER COUNTRIES</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3403733" start="4" end="36" title="Wales national rugby league team" label="Wales national rugby league team"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="48" end="53" title="Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q10962" start="72" end="84" title="rugby league" label="rugby league"/>
<link wikidata="Q2976151" start="144" end="162" title="IRL Men&amp;#x27;s World Rankings" label="IRL World Rankings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127622" start="207" end="228" title="Rugby Football League" label="Rugby Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q7961787" start="255" end="273" title="Wales Rugby League" label="Wales Rugby League"/>
<link wikidata="Q10690" start="298" end="305" title="Cardiff" label="Cardiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q3517657" start="352" end="386" title="Rugby Football League Hall of Fame" label="Rugby Football League Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q3589698" start="773" end="780" title="England national rugby league team" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q3590290" start="785" end="796" title="New Zealand national rugby league team" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q319369" start="892" end="900" title="Aberdare" label="Aberdare"/>
<link wikidata="Q3590161" start="962" end="968" title="France national rugby league team" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q3589757" start="1002" end="1011" title="Australia national rugby league team" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q41228" start="1102" end="1121" title="Southern Hemisphere" label="Southern Hemisphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376795" start="1223" end="1243" title="Rugby League European Nations Cup" label="European Nations Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639293" start="1308" end="1317" title="Rugby League World Cup" label="World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q592039" start="1361" end="1365" title="1975 Rugby League World Cup" label="1975"/>
<link wikidata="Q3000715" start="1370" end="1374" title="1995 Rugby League World Cup" label="1995"/>
<link wikidata="Q3000717" start="1379" end="1383" title="2000 Rugby League World Cup" label="2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q3000722" start="1568" end="1582" title="2008 Rugby League World Cup" label="2008 World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q3589862" start="1650" end="1658" title="Scotland national rugby league team" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3000719" start="1726" end="1740" title="2013 Rugby League World Cup" label="2013 World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q844843" start="1804" end="1809" title="Italy national rugby league team" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q204496" start="1839" end="1857" title="Millennium Stadium" label="Millennium Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q3148027" start="1942" end="1955" title="Iestyn Harris" label="Iestyn Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q3535265" start="2040" end="2052" title="Rugby League Four Nations" label="Four Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q16186313" start="2113" end="2122" title="John Kear" label="John Kear"/>
<link wikidata="Q3469726" start="2230" end="2248" title="Salford Red Devils" label="Salford Red Devils"/>
<link wikidata="Q3590223" start="2341" end="2381" title="Great Britain national rugby league team" label="Great Britain national rugby league team"/>
<link wikidata="Q119874036" start="2385" end="2390" title="List of rugby league tours" label="tours"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639293" start="2395" end="2405" title="Rugby League World Cup" label="world cups"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376795" start="2454" end="2475" title="Rugby League European Championship" label="European Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q3589698" start="2547" end="2554" title="England national rugby league team" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q3589698" start="2795" end="2802" title="England national rugby league team" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q2873078" start="2851" end="2870" title="Other Nationalities rugby league team" label="Other Nationalities"/>
<link wikidata="Q208143" start="2914" end="2919" title="Wigan" label="Wigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5849" start="3140" end="3151" title="rugby union" label="rugby union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127622" start="3252" end="3266" title="Rugby Football League" label="Northern Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q2831239" start="3746" end="3770" title="Albert Henry Baskerville" label="Albert Henry Baskerville"/>
<link wikidata="Q4558803" start="3778" end="3790" title="1907–1908 New Zealand rugby tour of Australia and Great Britain" label="NZ All Golds"/>
<link wikidata="Q3012496" start="3824" end="3839" title="Dally Messenger" label="Dally Messenger"/>
<link wikidata="Q319369" start="4108" end="4116" title="Aberdare" label="Aberdare"/>
<link wikidata="Q131933398" start="4815" end="4842" title="Mid Rhondda Athletic Ground" label="Mid Rhondda Athletic Ground"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537181" start="4846" end="4855" title="Tonypandy" label="Tonypandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4975790" start="5098" end="5107" title="Broughton, Salford" label="Broughton"/>
<link wikidata="Q23077" start="5109" end="5119" title="Lancashire" label="Lancashire"/>
<link wikidata="Q39061" start="5604" end="5623" title="Northern Hemisphere" label="Northern Hemisphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297559" start="5790" end="5799" title="Ebbw Vale" label="Ebbw Vale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1245075" start="5803" end="5816" title="Monmouthshire (historic)" label="Monmouthshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6225" start="5882" end="5890" title="Coventry" label="Coventry"/>
<link wikidata="Q202628" start="5892" end="5898" title="Oldham" label="Oldham"/>
<link wikidata="Q43382" start="5900" end="5908" title="Plymouth" label="Plymouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134319" start="5913" end="5923" title="St Helens R.F.C." label="St. Helens"/>
<link wikidata="Q23666" start="6449" end="6462" title="Great Britain" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="6485" end="6500" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4561114" start="6989" end="7018" title="1921–22 Kangaroo tour of Great Britain" label="1921–22 Kangaroo touring side"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024900" start="7061" end="7071" title="Pontypridd" label="Pontypridd"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="7280" end="7286" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q146553" start="7315" end="7325" title="Herne Hill" label="Herne Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q10690" start="7970" end="7977" title="Cardiff" label="Cardiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410416" start="8004" end="8016" title="Jim Sullivan (Welsh rugby league)" label="Jim Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5983219" start="8261" end="8271" title="Ian Watson (rugby league)" label="Ian Watson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3590223" start="8293" end="8306" title="Great Britain national rugby league team" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8320" end="8347" title="Glamorgan and Monmouthshire rugby league team" label="Glamorgan and Monmouthshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q43279" start="8556" end="8571" title="Wembley Stadium (1923)" label="Wembley Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="8575" end="8581" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q5536893" start="10637" end="10651" title="George Bennett (rugby)" label="George Bennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="10784" end="10800" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q16154103" start="11038" end="11056" title="1978 Kangaroo tour" label="1978 Kangaroo tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q3589757" start="11070" end="11079" title="Australia national rugby league team" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q841717" start="11083" end="11105" title="St. Helen&amp;#x27;s Rugby and Cricket Ground" label="St Helen&amp;#x27;s ground"/>
<link wikidata="Q3590290" start="11217" end="11228" title="New Zealand national rugby league team" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q4666844" start="11243" end="11258" title="Aberdare Athletic Ground" label="Athletic Ground"/>
<link wikidata="Q319369" start="11262" end="11270" title="Aberdare" label="Aberdare"/>
<link wikidata="Q4558939" start="11364" end="11371" title="1908–09 Kangaroo tour of Great Britain" label="touring"/>
<link wikidata="Q3589757" start="11372" end="11383" title="Australian Kangaroos" label="Australians"/>
<link wikidata="Q7165399" start="11393" end="11408" title="Penydarren Park" label="Penydarren Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q752762" start="11412" end="11426" title="Merthyr Tydfil" label="Merthyr Tydfil"/>
<link wikidata="Q16998806" start="11454" end="11461" title="1926–27 New Zealand rugby league tour of Great Britain" label="touring"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024900" start="11482" end="11492" title="Pontypridd" label="Pontypridd"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="11646" end="11652" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q43279" start="11660" end="11675" title="Wembley Stadium (1923)" label="Wembley Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q3654030" start="11750" end="11792" title="1935–36 European Rugby League Championship" label="1935–36 European Rugby League Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q3589698" start="11815" end="11822" title="England national rugby league team" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q7083792" start="11826" end="11837" title="Old Craven Park" label="Craven Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q128147" start="11841" end="11845" title="Kingston upon Hull" label="Hull"/>
<link wikidata="Q3654031" start="11872" end="11890" title="1936–37 European Rugby League Championship" label="second consecutive"/>
<link wikidata="Q3654032" start="11967" end="11972" title="1938 European Rugby League Championship" label="third"/>
<link wikidata="Q841717" start="12066" end="12095" title="St. Helen&amp;#x27;s Rugby and Cricket Ground" label="St. Helen&amp;#x27;s Rugby Ground"/>
<link wikidata="Q23051" start="12099" end="12106" title="Swansea" label="Swansea"/>
<link wikidata="Q5061597" start="12240" end="12252" title="Central Park (Wigan)" label="Central Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q208143" start="12256" end="12261" title="Wigan" label="Wigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q592039" start="12326" end="12337" title="1975 Rugby League World Cup" label="World title"/>
<link wikidata="Q643328" start="12383" end="12392" title="Lang Park" label="Lang Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q34932" start="12396" end="12404" title="Brisbane" label="Brisbane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639293" start="12636" end="12658" title="Rugby League World Cup" label="Rugby League World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q3590308" start="12755" end="12771" title="Papua New Guinea Kumuls" label="Papua New Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q7923555" start="12785" end="12796" title="Vetch Field" label="Vetch Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115849" start="12945" end="12960" title="Jonathan Davies (rugby, born 1962)" label="Jonathan Davies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3590161" start="13038" end="13044" title="France national rugby league team" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q6730" start="13048" end="13057" title="Perpignan" label="Perpignan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4590326" start="13127" end="13148" title="1995 European Rugby League Championship" label="European Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q6847075" start="13228" end="13240" title="Mike Gregory" label="Mike Gregory"/>
<link wikidata="Q3000715" start="13263" end="13277" title="1995 Rugby League World Cup" label="1995 World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q30682065" start="13294" end="13305" title="1995 Rugby League World Cup knockout stage" label="semi-finals"/>
<link wikidata="Q83457" start="13357" end="13369" title="Old Trafford" label="Old Trafford"/>
<link wikidata="Q18125" start="13373" end="13383" title="Manchester" label="Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q6582" start="13745" end="13756" title="Carcassonne" label="Carcassonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127622" start="13851" end="13872" title="Rugby Football League" label="Rugby Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q3590525" start="13993" end="14011" title="New Zealand Māori rugby league team" label="New Zealand Māoris"/>
<link wikidata="Q16835342" start="14083" end="14099" title="England Knights" label="Emerging England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022741" start="14128" end="14134" title="Widnes" label="Widnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3000717" start="14166" end="14175" title="2000 Rugby League World Cup" label="World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q201812" start="14242" end="14254" title="Huddersfield" label="Huddersfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q3590699" start="14408" end="14415" title="Lebanon national rugby league team" label="Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3000722" start="14488" end="14515" title="2008 Rugby League World Cup" label="2008 Rugby League World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2999686" start="14539" end="14551" title="2009 European Cup" label="European cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q3589862" start="14563" end="14571" title="Scotland national rugby league team" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2924758" start="14598" end="14611" title="Brewery Field" label="Brewery Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q6497774" start="14615" end="14623" title="Bridgend" label="Bridgend"/>
<link wikidata="Q2999687" start="14692" end="14704" title="2010 European Cup" label="European cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q3535269" start="14724" end="14741" title="2011 Rugby League Four Nations" label="2011 Four Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202579" start="14849" end="14866" title="Racecourse Ground" label="Racecourse Ground"/>
<link wikidata="Q496368" start="14868" end="14875" title="Wrexham" label="Wrexham"/>
<link wikidata="Q3000719" start="14964" end="14991" title="2013 Rugby League World Cup" label="2013 Rugby League World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q17513480" start="15093" end="15110" title="2014 European Cup (rugby league)" label="2014 European Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q20711907" start="15248" end="15265" title="2015 European Cup" label="2015 European Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q3589812" start="15354" end="15361" title="Ireland national rugby league team" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q16991557" start="15679" end="15690" title="Sport Wales" label="Sport Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q3000720" start="15734" end="15761" title="2017 Rugby League World Cup" label="2017 Rugby League World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q12137653" start="15815" end="15824" title="The Gnoll" label="The Gnoll"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003342" start="15828" end="15833" title="Neath" label="Neath"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16043" end="16076" title="2026 Men&amp;#x27;s Rugby League World Cup qualification#European qualifying" label="European qualification tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q123376747" start="16085" end="16123" title="2026 Men&amp;#x27;s Rugby League World Cup" label="2026 Men&amp;#x27;s Rugby League World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q3517657" start="16263" end="16297" title="Rugby Football League Hall of Fame" label="Rugby Football League Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q863024" start="16319" end="16331" title="Billy Boston" label="Billy Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q5620755" start="16340" end="16350" title="Gus Risman" label="Gus Risman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410416" start="16359" end="16371" title="Jim Sullivan (Welsh rugby league)" label="Jim Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3237297" start="16380" end="16391" title="Lewis Jones (rugby, born 1931)" label="Lewis Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q385839" start="16400" end="16414" title="Clive Sullivan" label="Clive Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3018959" start="16423" end="16436" title="David Watkins (rugby)" label="David Watkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q3517650" start="16536" end="16561" title="Welsh Sports Hall of Fame" label="Welsh Sports Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q863024" start="16569" end="16581" title="Billy Boston" label="Billy Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410416" start="16588" end="16600" title="Jim Sullivan (Welsh rugby league)" label="Jim Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3237297" start="16607" end="16618" title="Lewis Jones (rugby, born 1931)" label="Lewis Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q5620755" start="16625" end="16635" title="Gus Risman" label="Gus Risman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3018959" start="16637" end="16650" title="David Watkins (rugby)" label="David Watkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115849" start="16657" end="16672" title="Jonathan Davies (rugby, born 1962)" label="Jonathan Davies"/>
<link wikidata="Q8021457" start="16674" end="16687" title="Willie Davies" label="Willie Davies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7839152" start="16694" end="16707" title="Trevor Foster" label="Trevor Foster"/>
<link wikidata="Q385839" start="16714" end="16728" title="Clive Sullivan" label="Clive Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639293" start="17305" end="17314" title="Rugby League World Cup" label="World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376795" start="17381" end="17402" title="Rugby League European Cup" label="European Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q6603731" start="17570" end="17618" title="List of Wales national rugby league team players" label="List of Wales national rugby league team players"/>
<link wikidata="Q7378312" start="17621" end="17642" title="Rugby league in Wales" label="Rugby league in Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q7961830" start="17645" end="17691" title="Wales national rugby league team match results" label="Wales national rugby league team match results"/>
<link wikidata="Q7961750" start="17694" end="17734" title="Wales A national rugby league team" label="Wales Amateur national rugby league team"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="990441" wikidata="Q1571396" url="?curid=990441" title="Prime Minister of Egypt">
<text>The prime minister of Egypt (), sometimes referred to as &quot;Minister-President of Egypt&quot; and &quot;President of the Government&quot;, is the head of the Egyptian government. A direct translation of the Arabic-language title is &quot;President of the Council of Ministers&quot;, as is the case with the Prime Minister of Syria.

==History==
Egypt has a long history with a prime minister-type position existing in its governance. Under various Islamic Empires, Egypt had Viziers, a political office similar in authority and structure (in terms of being second in command to the Head of State) to that of a prime minister. During the Old, Middle, and New Kingdom phases of Ancient Egypt, it was common practice for the Pharaoh to appoint a second in command officer whose position is translated to as Vizier. This pattern of having a prime minister/vizier position in government was only broken for an extended period of time during Roman and Sassanid governance of Egypt, in which Egypt was directly ruled by appointed Governors. Then with the founding of modern Egypt and the advent of the Muhammad Ali dynasty, premiership and cabinets in their current definitions started appearing in Egypt parallel to the country&#x27;s first modern constitutions and parliaments. The office of Prime Minister of Egypt was established in 1878 during the reign of Khedive Ismail, along with the Cabinet of Egypt. After the abolition of the monarchy in 1953, the Egyptian government maintained the position of prime-minister.

In the late 1970s, Egypt had several cohabitation governments which proved to be unstable, due to the struggle arising between the president and the prime minister. From 1981 until 2011, the National Democratic Party had maintained a majority in the People&#x27;s Assembly and supplied the Egyptian president. The National Democratic Party was dissolved by the supreme administrative court on 16 April 2011, following the Egyptian uprising which eventually caused the resignation of Hosni Mubarak.

==Powers==

Previously, under the 1971 Constitution as amended in 1980, 2003 and 2007, the role of the Prime Minister was limited only to supervising the Cabinet, as the President at that time, was both the head of state and of the government.

The prime minister, now, heads the Cabinet, and the entire government of the country under the 2012 and the present 2014 Constitutions, aside from supervising and directing its activities and overseeing its work. The prime minister, alongside the members of the Cabinet, may propose laws to unicameral Parliament, the House of Representatives, as well as amendments during parliamentary meetings. The prime minister has also the power to issue regulations enforcing the laws as well as ensuring full public services and disciplinary measures, which must be subject to government approval.

The said regulatory powers were previously held by the president under the 1971 Constitution, as amended in 1980, 2003 and 2007.

The prime minister and the Cabinet also helps the president in formulating the state&#x27;s general policy and in overseeing its implementation under both the 2012 and the present 2014 Constitutions.

Nubar Pasha was a Christian Egyptian-Armenian politician and the first Prime Minister of Egypt. He served as Prime Minister three times during his career. His first term was between August 1878 and 23 February 1879

When parties from opposite ends of the political spectrum control Parliament and the presidency, the power-sharing arrangement is known as cohabitation. Several cohabitation governments took control in the 1970s yet proved to be very unstable.

==Current Prime Minister==
From 1 March to 17 June 2014, Ibrahim Mahlab served as the Acting Prime Minister of Egypt. At the time of his appointment by Adly Mansour, he said, &quot;security and stability in the entire country and crushing terrorism will pave the way for investment.&quot;
A new cabinet was formed on 19 September 2015.

Egyptian President Abdel-Fattah El-Sisi accepted the resignation of the government and asked Petroleum Minister Sherif Ismail to form a new cabinet.

In June 2018, Ismail submitted his letter of resignation to Sisi. Soon afterwards, Sisi appointed Housing Minister Mostafa Madbouly as acting prime minister.

==See also==
* Cabinet of Egypt
* Politics of Egypt
* President of Egypt
* List of political parties in Egypt
* List of prime ministers of Egypt

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1571396" start="4" end="27" title="Prime Minister of Egypt" label="prime minister of Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571396" start="63" end="90" title="Prime Minister of Egypt" label="Minister-President of Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571396" start="107" end="134" title="Prime Minister of Egypt" label="President of the Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571396" start="241" end="278" title="Prime Minister of Egypt" label="President of the Council of Ministers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7243302" start="310" end="333" title="Prime Minister of Syria" label="Prime Minister of Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052942" start="451" end="465" title="Islamic Empire" label="Islamic Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q175240" start="478" end="484" title="Vizier" label="Vizier"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="585" end="598" title="Head of State" label="Head of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q37110" start="725" end="732" title="Pharaoh" label="Pharaoh"/>
<link wikidata="Q932438" start="807" end="813" title="Vizier (Ancient Egypt)" label="Vizier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="939" end="944" title="Ancient Rome" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q83891" start="949" end="957" title="Sassanid" label="Sassanid"/>
<link wikidata="Q142913" start="1098" end="1118" title="Muhammad Ali dynasty" label="Muhammad Ali dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q16151491" start="1290" end="1313" title="List of prime ministers of Egypt" label="Prime Minister of Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q159378" start="1358" end="1372" title="Isma&amp;#x27;il Pasha" label="Khedive Ismail"/>
<link wikidata="Q4206677" start="1389" end="1405" title="Cabinet of Egypt" label="Cabinet of Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="1539" end="1544" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q15618993" start="1651" end="1660" title="President of Egypt" label="president"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501976" start="1770" end="1792" title="People&amp;#x27;s Assembly of Egypt" label="People&amp;#x27;s Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q4206677" start="2299" end="2306" title="Cabinet of Egypt" label="Cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q595285" start="3185" end="3196" title="Nubar Pasha" label="Nubar Pasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q106039" start="3203" end="3212" title="Christians" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4206677" start="4307" end="4323" title="Cabinet of Egypt" label="Cabinet of Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154628" start="4326" end="4343" title="Politics of Egypt" label="Politics of Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q15618993" start="4346" end="4364" title="President of Egypt" label="President of Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1745541" start="4367" end="4401" title="List of political parties in Egypt" label="List of political parties in Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q16151491" start="4404" end="4436" title="List of prime ministers of Egypt" label="List of prime ministers of Egypt"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="990445" wikidata="Q397603" url="?curid=990445" title="Rejang">
<text>Rejang or Rejangese may refer to:
* Rejang people, an ethnic group of Sumatra, Indonesia
* Rejang language, a language of Sumatra, Indonesia
* Rejang Lebong Regency, a regency in Bengkulu Province, Sumatra, Indonesia
* Rejang script, a writing system formerly used in Sumatra, Indonesia
** Rejang (Unicode block) characters used in the Rejang script
* Rejang dance, a sacred Balinese dance
* Rejang Kayan language, spoken on the island of Borneo in Malaysia and Indonesia
* Rejang–Sajau languages, a group of mutually intelligible isolects spoken by the Punan Bah

==See also==
* Rajang (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q397603" start="0" end="6" title="Rejang" label="Rejang"/>
<link wikidata="Q397603" start="10" end="19" title="Rejang" label="Rejangese"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914394" start="36" end="49" title="Rejang people" label="Rejang people"/>
<link wikidata="Q3056339" start="91" end="106" title="Rejang language" label="Rejang language"/>
<link wikidata="Q8035" start="143" end="164" title="Rejang Lebong Regency" label="Rejang Lebong Regency"/>
<link wikidata="Q2007960" start="219" end="232" title="Rejang script" label="Rejang script"/>
<link wikidata="Q2494040" start="290" end="312" title="Rejang (Unicode block)" label="Rejang (Unicode block)"/>
<link wikidata="Q12519987" start="352" end="364" title="Rejang dance" label="Rejang dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q12952599" start="392" end="413" title="Rejang Kayan language" label="Rejang Kayan language"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310522" start="474" end="496" title="Rejang–Sajau languages" label="Rejang–Sajau languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434725" start="554" end="563" title="Punan Bah" label="Punan Bah"/>
<link wikidata="Q25194410" start="580" end="603" title="Rajang (disambiguation)" label="Rajang (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="990446" wikidata="Q531653" url="?curid=990446" title="Gaspar Henaine">
<text>Gaspar Henaine (6 January 1927 – 30 September 2011), more commonly known by his pseudonym Capulina, was a Mexican comedian, actor, singer, film producer, and screenwriter. He was best known for partnering with Marco Antonio Campos as the double act Viruta and Capulina and for his subsequent solo career. He was later given the nickname &quot;El Rey del Humorismo Blanco&quot; (The King of White Humor), due to his clean, innocent style of comedy.

==Early life==
Capulina was born in Chignahuapan, Puebla, the son of Antonio Henaine Helú, a Lebanese businessman, and Concepción Pérez de León (c. 1893 – 27 February 1983), who was also born in Chignahuapan. He and his family later moved to Mexico City. At age 10, he made his acting debut with a small part in Fernando de Fuentes&#x27; &quot;Allá en el rancho grande&quot; (1936). He studied acting and later won the &quot;best dramatic child actor&quot; award bestowed by the academy he attended. He started his musical career as one of the vocalists of the quartet Los Excéntricos del Ritmo. Later, in 1946, he formed part of the trio Los Trincas. The trio was hugely successful and toured Mexico and some cities of the United States.

==Career==

===Viruta and Capulina===

Capulina became famous across Latin America alongside his longtime professional partner, Marco Antonio Campos, as Viruta and Capulina. In 1951, they started filming together. The two comedians made 26 films. At first they imitated the comedy style of Laurel and Hardy, thanks to their physical resemblance to them. With time they developed their own characteristic comedy style. The main difference with Laurel and Hardy is that Viruta, the thin character, was also the intelligent and aggressive one, while Capulina, the portly character, was the fool and cowardly one.

In the peak of their popularity they had a television program called &quot;Cómicos y canciones&quot;, where they alternated with other comedians and singers. Some of their sketches were written by a then unknown Roberto Gomez Bolaños who later gained legendary fame as comedian Chespirito.

Many rumors surfaced when the two co-workers stopped making films together; some suggested that Viruta felt underpaid, but Capulina attributed the separation to a feud between the two caused by lack of film jobs towards the end of their working relationship. Although he admitted that both he and Viruta felt some animosity against each other during their last six films together, Capulina also felt deep sorrow when Viruta died. A sufferer of three previous heart attacks, Viruta died after his fourth heart attack.

===Later career===
Capulina made a total of 84 movies, 58 of them after separating from Viruta. He also has recorded 12 music albums. One of his most famous films was &quot;Santo contra Capulina&quot; (1969), where he co-starred with Mexican wrestling legend El Santo.

Most of the films where he starred shared the same theme, to generate an adventure based on Capulina getting in trouble due to a specific issue, added with his position as an incompetent and foolish person. For example, in &quot;El mundo de los aviones&quot; (1969), Capulina is a pilot that always fails to land his plane correctly, hitting some wall and encrusting a partner in the process. He is involved in an international fraud and he teams with his airline partners to prevent the robbery, not without several funny problems.

He went from being the same character in different situations and who confronts different kind of enemies like robbers, gangs, spies, and also vampires, monsters, and mummies, with the aid of adventurers, wrestlers (like El Santo) or unexpected powers.

The character of Capulina gained huge popularity and a very successful comic book series -with stories by comic artist Oscar González Guerrero and art by his son Oscar Gonzalez Loyo- was published in the seventies and early eighties.

Capulina&#x27;s last film was &quot;Mi compadre Capulina&quot; (1989). He also made a television series, &quot;Las aventuras de Capulina&quot; (1989), where he struggled in different adventures with the help of wrestler Tinieblas and sidekick Alushe.

His telenovela debut in &quot;El diario de Daniela&quot; (1996) was also his last appearance.

Capulina was also a theatrical actor and stand-up comedian. He toured with his act until 1997, when he retired, claiming that he was feeling too old to go on.

==Death==
Henaine died of complications with pneumonia and a gastric ulcer on 30 September 2011.

==Selected filmography==
==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q531653" start="0" end="14" title="Gaspar Henaine" label="Gaspar Henaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q61002" start="80" end="89" title="pseudonym" label="pseudonym"/>
<link wikidata="Q531653" start="90" end="98" title="Gaspar Henaine" label="Capulina"/>
<link wikidata="Q6757420" start="210" end="230" title="Marco Antonio Campos" label="Marco Antonio Campos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141470" start="238" end="248" title="double act" label="double act"/>
<link wikidata="Q7935306" start="249" end="268" title="Viruta and Capulina" label="Viruta and Capulina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984119" start="485" end="497" title="Chignahuapan" label="Chignahuapan"/>
<link wikidata="Q79923" start="499" end="505" title="Puebla" label="Puebla"/>
<link wikidata="Q822" start="542" end="550" title="Lebanon" label="Lebanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1489" start="691" end="702" title="Mexico City" label="Mexico City"/>
<link wikidata="Q654434" start="761" end="780" title="Fernando de Fuentes" label="Fernando de Fuentes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297485" start="793" end="817" title="Allá en el rancho grande" label="Allá en el rancho grande"/>
<link wikidata="Q12585" start="1258" end="1271" title="Latin America" label="Latin America"/>
<link wikidata="Q6757420" start="1317" end="1337" title="Marco Antonio Campos" label="Marco Antonio Campos"/>
<link wikidata="Q7935306" start="1342" end="1361" title="Viruta and Capulina" label="Viruta and Capulina"/>
<link wikidata="Q33497" start="1479" end="1495" title="Laurel and Hardy" label="Laurel and Hardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q555578" start="2012" end="2033" title="Roberto Gomez Bolaños" label="Roberto Gomez Bolaños"/>
<link wikidata="Q12152" start="2550" end="2562" title="myocardial infarction" label="heart attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q482994" start="2735" end="2740" title="album" label="album"/>
<link wikidata="Q42486" start="2851" end="2860" title="wrestling" label="wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q970321" start="2868" end="2876" title="El Santo" label="El Santo"/>
<link wikidata="Q21869646" start="3108" end="3131" title="El mundo de los aviones" label="El mundo de los aviones"/>
<link wikidata="Q7106004" start="3786" end="3809" title="Oscar González Guerrero" label="Oscar González Guerrero"/>
<link wikidata="Q7106017" start="3829" end="3848" title="Oscar Gonzalez Loyo" label="Oscar Gonzalez Loyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7808234" start="4122" end="4131" title="Tinieblas" label="Tinieblas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6382040" start="4145" end="4151" title="Alushe" label="Alushe"/>
<link wikidata="Q23745" start="4158" end="4168" title="telenovela" label="telenovela"/>
<link wikidata="Q3280712" start="4184" end="4204" title="El diario de Daniela" label="El diario de Daniela"/>
<link wikidata="Q11635" start="4269" end="4279" title="theatre" label="theatrical"/>
<link wikidata="Q12192" start="4454" end="4463" title="pneumonia" label="pneumonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q172941" start="4470" end="4483" title="gastric ulcer" label="gastric ulcer"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="990448" wikidata="Q4920171" url="?curid=990448" title="Blackfriars, Newcastle upon Tyne">
<text>Blackfriars is a restored Grade I listed 13th-century priory in Newcastle upon Tyne, Tyne and Wear, England, located in the city centre, close to the city&#x27;s Chinatown.


==Early history==
During the early years of the 13th century, orders of friars or mendicant brothers began to establish themselves in England. Newcastle upon Tyne came to have five mendicant communities within its walls: Blackfriars Priory (Dominican) established in 1239; Whitefriars Priory (Carmelite) established in 1262 (now Whitefriars Place); Austinfriars Priory (Augustinian) established in 1290 (now the site of the Holy Jesus Hospital); Greyfriars Friary (Franciscans) established in 1274 (now the site of New Place; and the Trinitarian Priory established in 1360. There was also the nunnery of St Bartholomew&#x27;s founded in 1086 near the present Nun Street.

The Dominican priory was founded by a wealthy Newcastle merchant, Sir Peter Scott. Friars differed from monks in that liturgical worship was not the principle focus of their life. They were clerics who initially lived solely by begging, and they were mostly located in urban areas. The Dominican order was founded by St Dominic, also known as Dominic of Osma or Dominic de Gusman, shortly after 1200.

Dominicans were forbidden to own buildings and land, but such property could be held in trust for them. Such was the case with Blackfriars, which was situated in the north west of Newcastle upon Tyne just inside the city walls. The priory and its grounds covered seven acres (2.83 hectares), but also had two gardens and four small closes that provided a small income.

During the 14th century, the priory accommodated royalty on more than one occasion. In 1334 Edward III of England and Edward Balliol, the claimant to the Scottish throne, met there.

==Reformation==
During the Reformation begun by Henry VIII in 1536, the five Newcastle mendicant communities and the nunnery were dissolved and the land was sold to the Corporation and to rich merchants in 1539. The Church, sacristy, eastern half of the chapter house and cloister were all demolished. At this time there were fewer than 60 inmates of the religious houses in Newcastle. The convent of Blackfriars was sold to the Mayor and burgesses of Newcastle, who then leased it to nine of the town&#x27;s craft guilds, to be used as their headquarters in 1552. This probably explains why it is the only one of the religious houses whose building survives to the present day.

The guilds carried out extensive changes to adapt the cloistered buildings to their own use. This was carried out in the late 16th and early 17th centuries. Between 1709 and 1739 many further alterations were made, such as providing new windows and altering floor levels. Some of the guilds, such as the Tailors and the Cordwainers, moved out of Blackfriars for a while and subsequently returned. The guilds’ meeting houses in Blackfriars were well used until the 19th century. The guilds only met in them once a quarter, so that they were used for other purposes the rest of the time. Ground floor rooms often served as dwellings, either for people employed by the guilds, or for the needy, who lived there free of rent.

==Neglect and subsequent restoration==
During much of the 19th century and into the 20th century, the buildings of Blackfriars were neglected and fell into an increasingly bad state of repair. In 1937 the Saddlers’ property was declared as unfit for human habitation.

Newcastle Corporation acquired Blackfriars in the early 1950s. At one time there appeared to be a possibility that the Dominicans might return to occupy Blackfriars, but this did not happen. The guild of Tailors, among others, continued to meet at Blackfriars until 1974.

Between 1973 and 1981, the buildings of Blackfriars were restored.

==Blackfriars now==
Only the buildings of the cloisters remain. In the Middle Ages the cloister consisted of an open garth, approximately 69 ft (21m) square surrounded by a 10 ft (3m) wide covered walk. The covered walk no longer exists. The priory church was at the north end of the cloister, but was demolished in the 16th century. The outline of the church can be made out in the grassy space that remains.

The buildings now house a range of craft workshops and a restaurant owned by Andy Hook with head chef Chris Wardale. Blackfriars also houses an exhibition, which describes the history of Blackfriars. The large grassed courtyard contrasts with the busy city life that surrounds it. The Tanners Guild still use the former Smiths Hall (referred to as the Freemen&#x27;s Hall) in Blackfriars for their meetings.

The site is close to the most intact section of the medieval town walls.

The Blackfriars (Order of Preachers) returned to Newcastle upon Tyne in the nineteenth century. St Dominic&#x27;s Priory, the new Blackfriars, was opened by Cardinal Manning in 1873. It is situated on New Bridge Street. In 2020, the Dominicans left Newcastle, and the priory and church were handed to the Roman Catholic Diocese of Hexham and Newcastle.

==See also==
*Holy Jesus Hospital

==References==
* Dodds, G.L., “Historic Sites of Northumberland &amp; Newcastle upon Tyne”, 2000, Albion Press, .

==External links==
* Some photographs of Blackfriars at bbc.co.uk
* St Dominic&#x27;s — Diocese of Hexham and Newcastle website
* St Dominic&#x27;s Priory Official Website 
* 3D Google Earth model of Blackfriars </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4920171" start="0" end="11" title="Blackfriars, Newcastle upon Tyne" label="Blackfriars"/>
<link wikidata="Q570600" start="26" end="40" title="Listed building" label="Grade I listed"/>
<link wikidata="Q2750108" start="54" end="60" title="priory" label="priory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425428" start="64" end="83" title="Newcastle upon Tyne" label="Newcastle upon Tyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q23080" start="85" end="98" title="Tyne and Wear" label="Tyne and Wear"/>
<link wikidata="Q5100153" start="162" end="171" title="Chinatown, Newcastle" label="Chinatown"/>
<link wikidata="Q548320" start="247" end="253" title="friars" label="friars"/>
<link wikidata="Q131479" start="416" end="425" title="Dominican Order" label="Dominican"/>
<link wikidata="Q186277" start="468" end="477" title="Carmelite" label="Carmelite"/>
<link wikidata="Q29075" start="545" end="556" title="Order of Saint Augustine" label="Augustinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q15224681" start="599" end="618" title="Holy Jesus Hospital" label="Holy Jesus Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q165005" start="640" end="651" title="Franciscans" label="Franciscans"/>
<link wikidata="Q5608103" start="690" end="699" title="GreyFriars, Newcastle-upon-Tyne" label="New Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q917518" start="709" end="720" title="Trinitarian Order" label="Trinitarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q44091" start="1164" end="1174" title="St Dominic" label="St Dominic"/>
<link wikidata="Q129247" start="1711" end="1732" title="Edward III of England" label="Edward III of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q471796" start="1737" end="1751" title="Edward Balliol" label="Edward Balliol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645505" start="1829" end="1840" title="English Reformation" label="Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q38370" start="1850" end="1860" title="Henry VIII of England" label="Henry VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q759837" start="1932" end="1941" title="Dissolution of the Monasteries" label="dissolved"/>
<link wikidata="Q16931229" start="2231" end="2236" title="Mayor of Newcastle-upon-Tyne" label="Mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="3886" end="3897" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q13381944" start="3932" end="3937" title="Quadrangle (architecture)" label="garth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7017551" start="4696" end="4705" title="Newcastle town wall" label="town wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q131479" start="4726" end="4744" title="Dominican Order" label="Order of Preachers"/>
<link wikidata="Q26612117" start="4805" end="4829" title="St Dominic&amp;#x27;s Church, Newcastle" label="St Dominic&amp;#x27;s Priory"/>
<link wikidata="Q464946" start="4866" end="4882" title="Henry Edward Manning" label="Cardinal Manning"/>
<link wikidata="Q2117841" start="5014" end="5060" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Hexham and Newcastle" label="Roman Catholic Diocese of Hexham and Newcastle"/>
<link wikidata="Q15224681" start="5077" end="5096" title="Holy Jesus Hospital" label="Holy Jesus Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q747860" start="5269" end="5278" title="bbc.co.uk" label="bbc.co.uk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2117841" start="5301" end="5332" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Hexham and Newcastle" label="Diocese of Hexham and Newcastle"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="990451" wikidata="Q917265" url="?curid=990451" title="Freak Power">
<text>Freak Power was a band founded by bassist Norman Cook (later known as Fatboy Slim), Ashley Slater (vocalist and trombonist), and backing vocalist Jesse Graham. Their music was a mix of acid jazz, funk, soul, and trip hop. Although not credited, the London-based session bass player Dale Davis recorded bass and guitar on their debut album &quot;Drive-Thru Booty&quot;.

==Discography==
The single &quot;Turn On, Tune In, Cop Out&quot; was a minor hit on the UK Singles Chart when released in 1993. There was renewed interest in the track after TV exposure in the 1995 Levi&#x27;s jeans television advert &quot;Taxi&quot; directed by Baillie Walsh.

The band released two albums: &quot;Drive-Thru Booty&quot; in 1994 and &quot;More of Everything for Everybody&quot; in 1996. The debut album featured the hit singles &quot;Turn On, Tune In, Cop Out&quot; and &quot;Rush&quot;, released on 4th and Broadway. The title of the former is a play on Timothy Leary&#x27;s &quot;Turn on, tune in, drop out&quot;.

&quot;Song #6&quot; from the band&#x27;s follow-up album was featured in the 2004 movie &quot;Code 46&quot;. The song &quot;Waiting for the story to end&quot; was used in a Norwegian beer commercial in the 1990s, for a beer from the E.C Dahls brewery in Trondheim.

===Studio albums===
===Compilation albums===
===Singles===
==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q917265" start="0" end="11" title="Freak Power" label="Freak Power"/>
<link wikidata="Q272619" start="42" end="53" title="Norman Cook" label="Norman Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q272619" start="70" end="81" title="Fatboy Slim" label="Fatboy Slim"/>
<link wikidata="Q726020" start="84" end="97" title="Ashley Slater" label="Ashley Slater"/>
<link wikidata="Q221772" start="185" end="194" title="acid jazz" label="acid jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q164444" start="196" end="200" title="funk" label="funk"/>
<link wikidata="Q131272" start="202" end="206" title="Soul (music)" label="soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q205560" start="212" end="220" title="trip hop" label="trip hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q7855705" start="403" end="428" title="Turn On, Tune In, Cop Out" label="Turn On, Tune In, Cop Out"/>
<link wikidata="Q193259" start="458" end="474" title="UK Singles Chart" label="UK Singles Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q127962" start="568" end="579" title="Levi&amp;#x27;s" label="Levi&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q37038" start="597" end="603" title="advertisement" label="advert"/>
<link wikidata="Q25094652" start="685" end="701" title="Drive-Thru Booty" label="Drive-Thru Booty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997853" start="803" end="813" title="hit single" label="hit single"/>
<link wikidata="Q4639153" start="887" end="903" title="Fourth And Broadway Records" label="4th and Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q211731" start="942" end="955" title="Timothy Leary" label="Timothy Leary"/>
<link wikidata="Q7855757" start="969" end="995" title="Turn on, tune in, drop out" label="Turn on, tune in, drop out"/>
<link wikidata="Q1105584" start="1098" end="1105" title="Code 46" label="Code 46"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="990454" wikidata="Q10894825" url="?curid=990454" title="Interior algebra">
<text>In abstract algebra, an interior algebra is a certain type of algebraic structure that encodes the idea of the topological interior of a set. Interior algebras are to topology and the modal logic S4 what Boolean algebras are to set theory and ordinary propositional logic. Interior algebras form a variety of modal algebras.

==Definition==
An interior algebra is an algebraic structure with the signature

:⟨&quot;S&quot;, ·, +, ′, 0, 1, I⟩

where

:⟨&quot;S&quot;, ·, +, ′, 0, 1⟩

is a Boolean algebra and postfix I designates a unary operator, the interior operator, satisfying the identities:

# &quot;x&quot;I ≤ &quot;x&quot;
# &quot;x&quot;II = &quot;x&quot;I
# (&quot;xy&quot;)I = &quot;x&quot;I&quot;y&quot;I
# 1I = 1

&quot;x&quot;I is called the interior of &quot;x&quot;.

The dual of the interior operator is the closure operator C defined by &quot;x&quot;C = ((&quot;x&quot;′)I)′. &quot;x&quot;C is called the closure of &quot;x&quot;. By the principle of duality, the closure operator satisfies the identities:

# &quot;x&quot;C ≥ &quot;x&quot;
# &quot;x&quot;CC = &quot;x&quot;C
# (&quot;x&quot; + &quot;y&quot;)C = &quot;x&quot;C + &quot;y&quot;C
# 0C = 0

If the closure operator is taken as primitive, the interior operator can be defined as &quot;x&quot;I = ((&quot;x&quot;′)C)′. Thus the theory of interior algebras may be formulated using the closure operator instead of the interior operator, in which case one considers closure algebras of the form ⟨&quot;S&quot;, ·, +, ′, 0, 1, C⟩, where ⟨&quot;S&quot;, ·, +, ′, 0, 1⟩ is again a Boolean algebra and C satisfies the above identities for the closure operator. Closure and interior algebras form dual pairs, and are paradigmatic instances of &quot;Boolean algebras with operators.&quot; The early literature on this subject (mainly Polish topology) invoked closure operators, but the interior operator formulation eventually became the norm following the work of Wim Blok.

== Open and closed elements ==
Elements of an interior algebra satisfying the condition &quot;x&quot;I = &quot;x&quot; are called open. The complements of open elements are called closed and are characterized by the condition &quot;x&quot;C = &quot;x&quot;. An interior of an element is always open and the closure of an element is always closed. Interiors of closed elements are called regular open and closures of open elements are called regular closed. Elements that are both open and closed are called clopen. 0 and 1 are clopen.

An interior algebra is called Boolean if all its elements are open (and hence clopen). Boolean interior algebras can be identified with ordinary Boolean algebras as their interior and closure operators provide no meaningful additional structure. A special case is the class of trivial interior algebras, which are the single element interior algebras characterized by the identity 0 = 1.

== Morphisms of interior algebras ==

=== Homomorphisms ===
Interior algebras, by virtue of being algebraic structures, have homomorphisms. Given two interior algebras &quot;A&quot; and &quot;B&quot;, a map &quot;f&quot; : &quot;A&quot; → &quot;B&quot; is an interior algebra homomorphism if and only if &quot;f&quot; is a homomorphism between the underlying Boolean algebras of &quot;A&quot; and &quot;B&quot;, that also preserves interiors and closures. Hence:
*&quot;f&quot;(&quot;x&quot;I) = &quot;f&quot;(&quot;x&quot;)I;
*&quot;f&quot;(&quot;x&quot;C) = &quot;f&quot;(&quot;x&quot;)C.

=== Topomorphisms ===
Topomorphisms are another important, and more general, class of morphisms between interior algebras. A map &quot;f&quot; : &quot;A&quot; → &quot;B&quot; is a topomorphism if and only if &quot;f&quot; is a homomorphism between the Boolean algebras underlying &quot;A&quot; and &quot;B&quot;, that also preserves the open and closed elements of &quot;A&quot;. Hence:
* If &quot;x&quot; is open in &quot;A&quot;, then &quot;f&quot;(&quot;x&quot;) is open in &quot;B&quot;;
* If &quot;x&quot; is closed in &quot;A&quot;, then &quot;f&quot;(&quot;x&quot;) is closed in &quot;B&quot;.
(Such morphisms have also been called &quot;stable homomorphisms&quot; and &quot;closure algebra semi-homomorphisms&quot;.) Every interior algebra homomorphism is a topomorphism, but not every topomorphism is an interior algebra homomorphism.

=== Boolean homomorphisms ===
Early research often considered mappings between interior algebras that were homomorphisms of the underlying Boolean algebras but that did not necessarily preserve the interior or closure operator. Such mappings were called Boolean homomorphisms. (The terms &quot;closure homomorphism&quot; or &quot;topological homomorphism&quot; were used in the case where these were preserved, but this terminology is now redundant as the standard definition of a homomorphism in universal algebra requires that it preserves all operations.) Applications involving countably complete interior algebras (in which countable meets and joins always exist, also called &quot;σ-complete&quot;) typically made use of countably complete Boolean homomorphisms also called Boolean σ-homomorphisms—these preserve countable meets and joins.

=== Continuous morphisms ===
The earliest generalization of continuity to interior algebras was Sikorski&#x27;s, based on the inverse image map of a continuous map. This is a Boolean homomorphism, preserves unions of sequences and includes the closure of an inverse image in the inverse image of the closure. Sikorski thus defined a &quot;continuous homomorphism&quot; as a Boolean σ-homomorphism &quot;f&quot; between two σ-complete interior algebras such that &quot;f&quot;(&quot;x&quot;)C ≤ &quot;f&quot;(&quot;x&quot;C). This definition had several difficulties: The construction acts contravariantly producing a dual of a continuous map rather than a generalization. On the one hand σ-completeness is too weak to characterize inverse image maps (completeness is required), on the other hand it is too restrictive for a generalization. (Sikorski remarked on using non-σ-complete homomorphisms but included σ-completeness in his axioms for &quot;closure algebras&quot;.) Later J. Schmid defined a continuous homomorphism or continuous morphism for interior algebras as a Boolean homomorphism &quot;f&quot; between two interior algebras satisfying &quot;f&quot;(&quot;x&quot;C) ≤ &quot;f&quot;(&quot;x&quot;)C. This generalizes the forward image map of a continuous map—the image of a closure is contained in the closure of the image. This construction is covariant but not suitable for category theoretic applications as it only allows construction of continuous morphisms from continuous maps in the case of bijections. (C. Naturman returned to Sikorski&#x27;s approach while dropping σ-completeness to produce topomorphisms as defined above. In this terminology, Sikorski&#x27;s original &quot;continuous homomorphisms&quot; are σ-complete topomorphisms between σ-complete interior algebras.)

== Relationships to other areas of mathematics ==

=== Topology ===
Given a topological space X = ⟨&quot;X&quot;, &quot;T&quot;⟩ one can form the power set Boolean algebra of &quot;X&quot;:

and extend it to an interior algebra

where I is the usual topological interior operator. For all &quot;S&quot; ⊆ &quot;X&quot; it is defined by

For all &quot;S&quot; ⊆ &quot;X&quot; the corresponding closure operator is given by

&quot;S&quot;I is the largest open subset of &quot;S&quot; and &quot;S&quot;C is the smallest closed superset of &quot;S&quot; in X. The open, closed, regular open, regular closed and clopen elements of the interior algebra A(X) are just the open, closed, regular open, regular closed and clopen subsets of X respectively in the usual topological sense.

Every complete atomic interior algebra is isomorphic to an interior algebra of the form A(X) for some topological space X. Moreover, every interior algebra can be embedded in such an interior algebra giving a representation of an interior algebra as a topological field of sets. The properties of the structure A(X) are the very motivation for the definition of interior algebras. Because of this intimate connection with topology, interior algebras have also been called topo-Boolean algebras or topological Boolean algebras.

Given a continuous map between two topological spaces

we can define a complete topomorphism

by

:A(&quot;f&quot;)(&quot;S&quot;) = &quot;f&quot;−1[&quot;S&quot;]

for all subsets &quot;S&quot; of Y. Every complete topomorphism between two complete atomic interior algebras can be derived in this way. If Top is the category of topological spaces and continuous maps and Cit is the category of complete atomic interior algebras and complete topomorphisms then Top and Cit are dually isomorphic and is a contravariant functor that is a dual isomorphism of categories. A(&quot;f&quot;) is a homomorphism if and only if &quot;f&quot; is a continuous open map.

Under this dual isomorphism of categories many natural topological properties correspond to algebraic properties, in particular connectedness properties correspond to irreducibility properties:

*X is empty if and only if A(X) is trivial
*X is indiscrete if and only if A(X) is simple
*X is discrete if and only if A(X) is Boolean
*X is almost discrete if and only if A(X) is semisimple
*X is finitely generated (Alexandrov) if and only if A(X) is operator complete i.e. its interior and closure operators distribute over arbitrary meets and joins respectively
*X is connected if and only if A(X) is directly indecomposable
*X is ultraconnected if and only if A(X) is finitely subdirectly irreducible
*X is compact ultra-connected if and only if A(X) is subdirectly irreducible

==== Generalized topology ====

The modern formulation of topological spaces in terms of topologies of open subsets, motivates an alternative formulation of interior algebras: A generalized topological space is an algebraic structure of the form

:⟨&quot;B&quot;, ·, +, ′, 0, 1, &quot;T&quot;⟩

where ⟨&quot;B&quot;, ·, +, ′, 0, 1⟩ is a Boolean algebra as usual, and &quot;T&quot; is a unary relation on &quot;B&quot; (subset of &quot;B&quot;) such that:
#&quot;T&quot; is closed under arbitrary joins (i.e. if a join of an arbitrary subset of &quot;T&quot; exists then it will be in &quot;T&quot;)
#&quot;T&quot; is closed under finite meets
#For every element &quot;b&quot; of &quot;B&quot;, the join exists

&quot;T&quot; is said to be a generalized topology in the Boolean algebra.

Given an interior algebra its open elements form a generalized topology. Conversely given a generalized topological space

:⟨&quot;B&quot;, ·, +, ′, 0, 1, &quot;T&quot;⟩

we can define an interior operator on &quot;B&quot; by thereby producing an interior algebra whose open elements are precisely &quot;T&quot;. Thus generalized topological spaces are equivalent to interior algebras.

Considering interior algebras to be generalized topological spaces, topomorphisms are then the standard homomorphisms of Boolean algebras with added relations, so that standard results from universal algebra apply.

==== Neighbourhood functions and neighbourhood lattices ====
The topological concept of neighbourhoods can be generalized to interior algebras: An element &quot;y&quot; of an interior algebra is said to be a neighbourhood of an element &quot;x&quot; if . The set of neighbourhoods of &quot;x&quot; is denoted by &quot;N&quot;(&quot;x&quot;) and forms a filter. This leads to another formulation of interior algebras:

A neighbourhood function on a Boolean algebra is a mapping &quot;N&quot; from its underlying set &quot;B&quot; to its set of filters, such that:

#For all exists
#For all if and only if there is a such that and .

The mapping &quot;N&quot; of elements of an interior algebra to their filters of neighbourhoods is a neighbourhood function on the underlying Boolean algebra of the interior algebra. Moreover, given a neighbourhood function &quot;N&quot; on a Boolean algebra with underlying set &quot;B&quot;, we can define an interior operator by thereby obtaining an interior algebra. will then be precisely the filter of neighbourhoods of &quot;x&quot; in this interior algebra. Thus interior algebras are equivalent to Boolean algebras with specified neighbourhood functions.

In terms of neighbourhood functions, the open elements are precisely those elements &quot;x&quot; such that . In terms of open elements if and only if there is an open element &quot;z&quot; such that .

Neighbourhood functions may be defined more generally on (meet)-semilattices producing the structures known as neighbourhood (semi)lattices. Interior algebras may thus be viewed as precisely the Boolean neighbourhood lattices i.e. those neighbourhood lattices whose underlying semilattice forms a Boolean algebra.

=== Modal logic ===
Given a theory (set of formal sentences) &quot;M&quot; in the modal logic S4, we can form its Lindenbaum–Tarski algebra:

:L(&quot;M&quot;) = ⟨&quot;M&quot; / ~, ∧, ∨, ¬, &quot;F&quot;, &quot;T&quot;, □⟩

where ~ is the equivalence relation on sentences in &quot;M&quot; given by &quot;p&quot; ~ &quot;q&quot; if and only if &quot;p&quot; and &quot;q&quot; are logically equivalent in &quot;M&quot;, and &quot;M&quot; / ~ is the set of equivalence classes under this relation. Then L(&quot;M&quot;) is an interior algebra. The interior operator in this case corresponds to the modal operator □ (necessarily), while the closure operator corresponds to ◊ (possibly). This construction is a special case of a more general result for modal algebras and modal logic.

The open elements of L(&quot;M&quot;) correspond to sentences that are only true if they are necessarily true, while the closed elements correspond to those that are only false if they are necessarily false.

Because of their relation to S4, interior algebras are sometimes called S4 algebras or Lewis algebras, after the logician C. I. Lewis, who first proposed the modal logics S4 and S5.

=== Preorders ===
Since interior algebras are (normal) Boolean algebras with operators, they can be represented by fields of sets on appropriate relational structures. In particular, since they are modal algebras, they can be represented as fields of sets on a set with a single binary relation, called a Kripke frame. The Kripke frames corresponding to interior algebras are precisely the preordered sets. Preordered sets (also called &quot;S4-frames&quot;) provide the Kripke semantics of the modal logic S4, and the connection between interior algebras and preorders is deeply related to their connection with modal logic.

Given a preordered set X = ⟨&quot;X&quot;, «⟩ we can construct an interior algebra

from the power set Boolean algebra of &quot;X&quot; where the interior operator I is given by

: for all &quot;S&quot; ⊆ &quot;X&quot;.

The corresponding closure operator is given by

: for all &quot;S&quot; ⊆ &quot;X&quot;.

&quot;S&quot;I is the set of all &quot;worlds&quot; inaccessible from &quot;worlds&quot; outside &quot;S&quot;, and &quot;S&quot;C is the set of all &quot;worlds&quot; accessible from some &quot;world&quot; in &quot;S&quot;. Every interior algebra can be embedded in an interior algebra of the form B(X) for some preordered set X giving the above-mentioned representation as a field of sets (a preorder field).

This construction and representation theorem is a special case of the more general result for modal algebras and Kripke frames. In this regard, interior algebras are particularly interesting because of their connection to topology. The construction provides the preordered set X with a topology, the Alexandrov topology, producing a topological space T(X) whose open sets are:

The corresponding closed sets are:

In other words, the open sets are the ones whose &quot;worlds&quot; are inaccessible from outside (the up-sets), and the closed sets are the ones for which every outside &quot;world&quot; is inaccessible from inside (the down-sets). Moreover, B(X) = A(T(X)).

=== Monadic Boolean algebras ===
Any monadic Boolean algebra can be considered to be an interior algebra where the interior operator is the universal quantifier and the closure operator is the existential quantifier. The monadic Boolean algebras are then precisely the variety of interior algebras satisfying the identity &quot;x&quot;IC = &quot;x&quot;I. In other words, they are precisely the interior algebras in which every open element is closed or equivalently, in which every closed element is open. Moreover, such interior algebras are precisely the semisimple interior algebras. They are also the interior algebras corresponding to the modal logic S5, and so have also been called S5 algebras.

In the relationship between preordered sets and interior algebras they correspond to the case where the preorder is an equivalence relation, reflecting the fact that such preordered sets provide the Kripke semantics for S5. This also reflects the relationship between the monadic logic of quantification (for which monadic Boolean algebras provide an algebraic description) and S5 where the modal operators □ (necessarily) and ◊ (possibly) can be interpreted in the Kripke semantics using monadic universal and existential quantification, respectively, without reference to an accessibility relation.

=== Heyting algebras ===
The open elements of an interior algebra form a Heyting algebra and the closed elements form a dual Heyting algebra. The regular open elements and regular closed elements correspond to the pseudo-complemented elements and dual pseudo-complemented elements of these algebras respectively and thus form Boolean algebras. The clopen elements correspond to the complemented elements and form a common subalgebra of these Boolean algebras as well as of the interior algebra itself. Every Heyting algebra can be represented as the open elements of an interior algebra and the latter may be chosen to be an interior algebra generated by its open elements—such interior algebras correspond one-to-one with Heyting algebras (up to isomorphism) being the free Boolean extensions of the latter.

Heyting algebras play the same role for intuitionistic logic that interior algebras play for the modal logic S4 and Boolean algebras play for propositional logic. The relation between Heyting algebras and interior algebras reflects the relationship between intuitionistic logic and S4, in which one can interpret theories of intuitionistic logic as S4 theories closed under necessity. The one-to-one correspondence between Heyting algebras and interior algebras generated by their open elements reflects the correspondence between extensions of intuitionistic logic and normal extensions of the modal logic S4.Grz.

=== Derivative algebras ===
Given an interior algebra A, the closure operator obeys the axioms of the derivative operator, D. Hence we can form a derivative algebra D(A) with the same underlying Boolean algebra as A by using the closure operator as a derivative operator.

Thus interior algebras are derivative algebras. From this perspective, they are precisely the variety of derivative algebras satisfying the identity &quot;x&quot;D ≥ &quot;x&quot;. Derivative algebras provide the appropriate algebraic semantics for the modal logic wK4. Hence derivative algebras stand to topological derived sets and wK4 as interior/closure algebras stand to topological interiors/closures and S4.
Given a derivative algebra V with derivative operator D, we can form an interior algebra with the same underlying Boolean algebra as V, with interior and closure operators defined by and , respectively. Thus every derivative algebra can be regarded as an interior algebra. Moreover, given an interior algebra A, we have . However, does &quot;not&quot; necessarily hold for every derivative algebra V.

==Stone duality and representation for interior algebras==
Stone duality provides a category theoretic duality between Boolean algebras and a class of topological spaces known as Boolean spaces. Building on nascent ideas of relational semantics (later formalized by Kripke) and a result of R. S. Pierce, Jónsson, Tarski and G. Hansoul extended Stone duality to Boolean algebras with operators by equipping Boolean spaces with relations that correspond to the operators via a power set construction. In the case of interior algebras the interior (or closure) operator corresponds to a pre-order on the Boolean space. Homomorphisms between interior algebras correspond to a class of continuous maps between the Boolean spaces known as pseudo-epimorphisms or p-morphisms for short. This generalization of Stone duality to interior algebras based on the Jónsson–Tarski representation was investigated by Leo Esakia and is also known as the &quot;Esakia duality for S4-algebras (interior algebras)&quot; and is closely related to the Esakia duality for Heyting algebras.

Whereas the Jónsson–Tarski generalization of Stone duality applies to Boolean algebras with operators in general, the connection between interior algebras and topology allows for another method of generalizing Stone duality that is unique to interior algebras. An intermediate step in the development of Stone duality is Stone&#x27;s representation theorem, which represents a Boolean algebra as a field of sets. The Stone topology of the corresponding Boolean space is then generated using the field of sets as a topological basis. Building on the topological semantics introduced by Tang Tsao-Chen for Lewis&#x27;s modal logic, McKinsey and Tarski showed that by generating a topology equivalent to using only the complexes that correspond to open elements as a basis, a representation of an interior algebra is obtained as a topological field of sets—a field of sets on a topological space that is closed with respect to taking interiors or closures. By equipping topological fields of sets with appropriate morphisms known as field maps, C. Naturman showed that this approach can be formalized as a category theoretic Stone duality in which the usual Stone duality for Boolean algebras corresponds to the case of interior algebras having redundant interior operator (Boolean interior algebras).

The pre-order obtained in the Jónsson–Tarski approach corresponds to the accessibility relation in the Kripke semantics for an S4 theory, while the intermediate field of sets corresponds to a representation of the Lindenbaum–Tarski algebra for the theory using the sets of possible worlds in the Kripke semantics in which sentences of the theory hold. Moving from the field of sets to a Boolean space somewhat obfuscates this connection. By treating fields of sets on pre-orders as a category in its own right this deep connection can be formulated as a category theoretic duality that generalizes Stone representation without topology. R. Goldblatt had shown that with restrictions to appropriate homomorphisms such a duality can be formulated for arbitrary modal algebras and Kripke frames. Naturman showed that in the case of interior algebras this duality applies to more general topomorphisms and can be factored via a category theoretic functor through the duality with topological fields of sets. The latter represent the Lindenbaum–Tarski algebra using sets of points satisfying sentences of the S4 theory in the topological semantics. The pre-order can be obtained as the specialization pre-order of the McKinsey–Tarski topology. The Esakia duality can be recovered via a functor that replaces the field of sets with the Boolean space it generates. Via a functor that instead replaces the pre-order with its corresponding Alexandrov topology, an alternative representation of the interior algebra as a field of sets is obtained where the topology is the Alexandrov bico-reflection of the McKinsey–Tarski topology. The approach of formulating a topological duality for interior algebras using both the Stone topology of the Jónsson–Tarski approach and the Alexandrov topology of the pre-order to form a bi-topological space has been investigated by G. Bezhanishvili, R.Mines, and P.J. Morandi. The McKinsey–Tarski topology of an interior algebra is the intersection of the former two topologies.

==Metamathematics==
Grzegorczyk proved the first-order theory of closure algebras undecidable. Naturman demonstrated that the theory is hereditarily undecidable (all its subtheories are undecidable) and demonstrated an infinite chain of elementary classes of interior algebras with hereditarily undecidable theories.

==Notes==
==References==
* Blok, W.A., 1976, &quot;Varieties of interior algebras,&quot; Ph.D. thesis, University of Amsterdam. 
* Esakia, L., 2004, &quot;Intuitionistic logic and modality via topology,&quot; &quot;Annals of Pure and Applied Logic 127&quot;: 155-70.
* McKinsey, J.C.C. and Alfred Tarski, 1944, &quot;The Algebra of Topology,&quot; &quot;Annals of Mathematics 45&quot;: 141-91.
* Naturman, C.A., 1991, &quot;Interior Algebras and Topology&quot;, Ph.D. thesis, University of Cape Town Department of Mathematics.
* Bezhanishvili, G., Mines, R. and Morandi, P.J., 2008, &quot;Topo-canonical completions of closure algebras and Heyting algebras&quot;, &quot;Algebra Universalis 58&quot;: 1-34.
* Schmid, J., 1973, &quot;On the compactification of closure algebras&quot;, &quot;Fundamenta Mathematicae 79&quot;: 33-48
* Sikorski R., 1955, &quot;Closure homomorphisms and interior mappings&quot;, &quot;Fundamenta Mathematicae 41&quot;: 12-20</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q159943" start="3" end="19" title="abstract algebra" label="abstract algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q10894825" start="24" end="40" title="Interior algebra" label="interior algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q205464" start="62" end="81" title="algebraic structure" label="algebraic structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q862761" start="123" end="131" title="Interior (topology)" label="interior"/>
<link wikidata="Q42989" start="167" end="175" title="topology" label="topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q210841" start="184" end="195" title="modal logic" label="modal logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q10894825" start="196" end="198" title="Interior algebra" label="S4"/>
<link wikidata="Q4973304" start="204" end="219" title="Boolean algebra (structure)" label="Boolean algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q12482" start="228" end="238" title="set theory" label="set theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q200694" start="252" end="271" title="propositional logic" label="propositional logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3502010" start="298" end="305" title="variety (universal algebra)" label="variety"/>
<link wikidata="Q6888003" start="309" end="322" title="modal algebra" label="modal algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q205464" start="367" end="386" title="algebraic structure" label="algebraic structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q741810" start="396" end="405" title="signature (logic)" label="signature"/>
<link wikidata="Q4973304" start="488" end="503" title="Boolean algebra (structure)" label="Boolean algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q657596" start="531" end="545" title="unary operator" label="unary operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q554403" start="788" end="792" title="duality (order theory)" label="dual"/>
<link wikidata="Q10564851" start="825" end="841" title="closure operator" label="closure operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q554403" start="956" end="976" title="duality (order theory)" label="principle of duality"/>
<link wikidata="Q554403" start="1669" end="1673" title="duality (order theory)" label="dual"/>
<link wikidata="Q26466062" start="1936" end="1944" title="Wim Blok" label="Wim Blok"/>
<link wikidata="Q213363" start="2077" end="2081" title="open set" label="open"/>
<link wikidata="Q595364" start="2087" end="2098" title="complement (order theory)" label="complements"/>
<link wikidata="Q320357" start="2127" end="2133" title="closed set" label="closed"/>
<link wikidata="Q110745661" start="2334" end="2346" title="regular open set" label="regular open"/>
<link wikidata="Q320369" start="2454" end="2460" title="clopen set" label="clopen"/>
<link wikidata="Q205464" start="2970" end="2989" title="algebraic structure" label="algebraic structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q215111" start="2997" end="3009" title="homomorphism" label="homomorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q949972" start="3161" end="3175" title="if and only if" label="if and only if"/>
<link wikidata="Q1948412" start="3550" end="3558" title="morphism" label="morphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q10894825" start="3644" end="3656" title="topomorphism" label="topomorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636734" start="4806" end="4823" title="universal algebra" label="universal algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q6269005" start="4948" end="4952" title="meet (order theory)" label="meet"/>
<link wikidata="Q6269005" start="4958" end="4962" title="join (order theory)" label="join"/>
<link wikidata="Q1582429" start="5252" end="5260" title="Roman Sikorski" label="Sikorski"/>
<link wikidata="Q860623" start="5282" end="5295" title="inverse image" label="inverse image"/>
<link wikidata="Q170058" start="5305" end="5319" title="continuous map" label="continuous map"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5745" end="5760" title="Functor#Covariance and contravariance" label="contravariantly"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6514" end="6523" title="Functor#Covariance and contravariance" label="covariant"/>
<link wikidata="Q217413" start="6545" end="6563" title="category theoretic" label="category theoretic"/>
<link wikidata="Q179899" start="7031" end="7048" title="topological space" label="topological space"/>
<link wikidata="Q205170" start="7101" end="7110" title="power set" label="power set"/>
<link wikidata="Q5156540" start="7739" end="7747" title="Completeness (order theory)" label="complete"/>
<link wikidata="Q261484" start="7748" end="7754" title="Atomic (order theory)" label="atomic"/>
<link wikidata="Q189112" start="7775" end="7785" title="isomorphism" label="isomorphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q179899" start="7835" end="7852" title="topological space" label="topological space"/>
<link wikidata="Q980509" start="7896" end="7904" title="embedding" label="embedded"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7985" end="8010" title="Field_of_sets#Topological_fields_of_sets" label="topological field of sets"/>
<link wikidata="Q170058" start="8269" end="8283" title="continuous map" label="continuous map"/>
<link wikidata="Q5156540" start="8332" end="8340" title="completeness (order theory)" label="complete"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000555" start="8578" end="8608" title="category of topological spaces" label="category of topological spaces"/>
<link wikidata="Q217413" start="8644" end="8652" title="category theory" label="category"/>
<link wikidata="Q2361385" start="8738" end="8755" title="Dual (category theory)" label="dually isomorphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q864475" start="8765" end="8786" title="functor" label="contravariant functor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632649" start="8909" end="8917" title="open map" label="open map"/>
<link wikidata="Q226183" start="9121" end="9126" title="empty set" label="empty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418327" start="9164" end="9174" title="indiscrete space" label="indiscrete"/>
<link wikidata="Q2326800" start="9198" end="9204" title="simple algebra" label="simple"/>
<link wikidata="Q175116" start="9211" end="9219" title="discrete space" label="discrete"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9257" end="9272" title="almost discrete space" label="almost discrete"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006450" start="9296" end="9306" title="semisimple algebraic group" label="semisimple"/>
<link wikidata="Q3532117" start="9313" end="9331" title="Alexandrov topology" label="finitely generated"/>
<link wikidata="Q1491995" start="9487" end="9496" title="connected space" label="connected"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778193" start="9520" end="9543" title="directly indecomposable" label="directly indecomposable"/>
<link wikidata="Q7880520" start="9550" end="9564" title="ultraconnected space" label="ultraconnected"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9588" end="9620" title="finitely subdirectly irreducible" label="finitely subdirectly irreducible"/>
<link wikidata="Q381892" start="9627" end="9634" title="compact space" label="compact"/>
<link wikidata="Q7631005" start="9674" end="9697" title="subdirectly irreducible" label="subdirectly irreducible"/>
<link wikidata="Q179899" start="9788" end="9798" title="topological space" label="topologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q205464" start="9913" end="9932" title="algebraic structure" label="algebraic structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636734" start="11063" end="11080" title="universal algebra" label="universal algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478475" start="11177" end="11190" title="Neighbourhood (mathematics)" label="neighbourhood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052692" start="11442" end="11448" title="Filter (mathematics)" label="filter"/>
<link wikidata="Q834585" start="12546" end="12564" title="semilattice" label="(meet)-semilattice"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12600" end="12627" title="neighbourhood lattice" label="neighbourhood (semi)lattice"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859910" start="12832" end="12838" title="theory (logic)" label="theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q841805" start="12918" end="12943" title="Lindenbaum–Tarski algebra" label="Lindenbaum–Tarski algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q220433" start="13185" end="13205" title="Logical equivalence" label="logically equivalent"/>
<link wikidata="Q210841" start="13401" end="13415" title="modal logic" label="modal operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q6888003" start="13554" end="13567" title="modal algebra" label="modal algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q491412" start="13909" end="13917" title="philosophical logic" label="logician"/>
<link wikidata="Q725642" start="13918" end="13929" title="Clarence Irving Lewis" label="C. I. Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4973304" start="14034" end="14049" title="Boolean algebra (structure)" label="Boolean algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q657596" start="14056" end="14065" title="unary operation" label="operators"/>
<link wikidata="Q246506" start="14094" end="14108" title="field of sets" label="fields of sets"/>
<link wikidata="Q6888003" start="14177" end="14190" title="modal algebra" label="modal algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q246506" start="14220" end="14234" title="field of sets" label="fields of sets"/>
<link wikidata="Q130901" start="14258" end="14273" title="binary relation" label="binary relation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2462350" start="14284" end="14296" title="Kripke frame" label="Kripke frame"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425985" start="14369" end="14384" title="Preorder" label="preordered sets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425985" start="14386" end="14401" title="Preorder" label="Preordered sets"/>
<link wikidata="Q2462350" start="14450" end="14466" title="Kripke semantics" label="Kripke semantics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425985" start="14614" end="14628" title="Preorder" label="preordered set"/>
<link wikidata="Q205170" start="14699" end="14708" title="power set" label="power set"/>
<link wikidata="Q4973304" start="14709" end="14724" title="Boolean algebra (structure)" label="Boolean algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q980509" start="15172" end="15180" title="embedding" label="embedded"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425985" start="15230" end="15244" title="Preorder" label="preordered set"/>
<link wikidata="Q246506" start="15294" end="15307" title="field of sets" label="field of sets"/>
<link wikidata="Q6888003" start="15423" end="15436" title="modal algebra" label="modal algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q42989" start="15551" end="15559" title="topology" label="topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425985" start="15591" end="15605" title="Preorder" label="preordered set"/>
<link wikidata="Q179899" start="15615" end="15623" title="topological space" label="topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q3532117" start="15629" end="15648" title="Alexandrov topology" label="Alexandrov topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q179899" start="15662" end="15679" title="topological space" label="topological space"/>
<link wikidata="Q6897884" start="16040" end="16063" title="monadic Boolean algebra" label="monadic Boolean algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3502010" start="16272" end="16279" title="Variety (universal algebra)" label="variety"/>
<link wikidata="Q2851437" start="16561" end="16571" title="Semisimple algebra" label="semisimple"/>
<link wikidata="Q130998" start="16826" end="16846" title="equivalence relation" label="equivalence relation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6897882" start="16979" end="16992" title="monadic logic" label="monadic logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q841805" start="17058" end="17079" title="Lindenbaum–Tarski algebra" label="algebraic description"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617044" start="17382" end="17397" title="Heyting algebra" label="Heyting algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q554403" start="17429" end="17433" title="duality (order theory)" label="dual"/>
<link wikidata="Q18345290" start="17523" end="17542" title="Pseudocomplement" label="pseudo-complemented"/>
<link wikidata="Q554403" start="17556" end="17560" title="duality (order theory)" label="dual"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617044" start="17817" end="17832" title="Heyting algebra" label="Heyting algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q841805" start="18136" end="18154" title="Lindenbaum–Tarski algebra" label="play the same role"/>
<link wikidata="Q176786" start="18159" end="18179" title="intuitionistic logic" label="intuitionistic logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4973304" start="18235" end="18250" title="Boolean algebra (structure)" label="Boolean algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q200694" start="18261" end="18280" title="propositional logic" label="propositional logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4633743" start="18480" end="18486" title="deductive closure" label="closed"/>
<link wikidata="Q3311695" start="18493" end="18502" title="logical truth" label="necessity"/>
<link wikidata="Q840226" start="18689" end="18695" title="normal modal logic" label="normal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5262620" start="18837" end="18856" title="Derivative algebra (abstract algebra)" label="derivative operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q159943" start="18881" end="18899" title="Abstract algebra" label="derivative algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q5262620" start="19035" end="19054" title="Derivative algebra (abstract algebra)" label="derivative algebras"/>
<link wikidata="Q3502010" start="19102" end="19109" title="variety (universal algebra)" label="variety"/>
<link wikidata="Q841805" start="19233" end="19252" title="Lindenbaum–Tarski algebra" label="algebraic semantics"/>
<link wikidata="Q322340" start="19325" end="19336" title="derived set (mathematics)" label="derived set"/>
<link wikidata="Q7619060" start="19884" end="19897" title="Stone duality" label="Stone duality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166774" start="20004" end="20017" title="Boolean space" label="Boolean space"/>
<link wikidata="Q298521" start="20091" end="20097" title="Saul Kripke" label="Kripke"/>
<link wikidata="Q463307" start="20129" end="20136" title="Bjarni Jónsson" label="Jónsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q207534" start="20138" end="20144" title="Alfred Tarski" label="Tarski"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20186" end="20217" title="Boolean algebras with operators" label="Boolean algebras with operators"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20300" end="20322" title="Field of sets#Complex algebras and fields of sets on relational structures" label="power set construction"/>
<link wikidata="Q5396694" start="20854" end="20868" title="Esakia duality" label="Esakia duality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166774" start="21213" end="21248" title="Stone&amp;#x27;s representation theorem for Boolean algebras" label="Stone&amp;#x27;s representation theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q246506" start="21290" end="21303" title="field of sets" label="field of sets"/>
<link wikidata="Q810214" start="21406" end="21423" title="topological basis" label="topological basis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21441" end="21462" title="topological semantics" label="topological semantics"/>
<link wikidata="Q966375" start="21522" end="21530" title="J.C.C. McKinsey" label="McKinsey"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21720" end="21745" title="Field of sets#topological field of sets" label="topological field of sets"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859910" start="24240" end="24258" title="first-order theory" label="first-order theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q3262192" start="24279" end="24290" title="decision problem" label="undecidable"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24333" end="24357" title="hereditarily undecidable" label="hereditarily undecidable"/>
<link wikidata="Q369377" start="24425" end="24430" title="chain (order theory)" label="chain"/>
<link wikidata="Q15762450" start="24730" end="24762" title="Annals of Pure and Applied Logic" label="Annals of Pure and Applied Logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q207534" start="24805" end="24818" title="Alfred Tarski" label="Alfred Tarski"/>
<link wikidata="Q564426" start="24869" end="24890" title="Annals of Mathematics" label="Annals of Mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q4723972" start="25185" end="25204" title="Algebra Universalis" label="Algebra Universalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q771148" start="25304" end="25327" title="Fundamenta Mathematicae" label="Fundamenta Mathematicae"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="990462" wikidata="Q7993096" url="?curid=990462" title="Where's Charley?">
<text>Where&#x27;s Charley? is a musical with music and lyrics by Frank Loesser and book by George Abbott. The story was based on the 1892 play &quot;Charley&#x27;s Aunt&quot; by Brandon Thomas. The musical debuted on Broadway in 1948 and was revived on Broadway and in the West End. Ray Bolger starred, and sang the popular song &quot;Once In Love With Amy&quot;.

==Plot==
Act I
The setting is Oxford University in the year 1892 where a group of college seniors are bidding farewell to the years gone by (&quot;The Years Before Us&quot;). In his dorm room, graduating Jack Chesney is excitedly talking with his butler, Brassett, making sure that luncheon will be ready for later that afternoon. He is so excited because his roommate, Charley Wykeham, has gone to the train station to meet his aunt, Donna Lucia D&#x27;Alvadorez, who is coming in from Brazil for a visit. Having Charley&#x27;s aunt there as chaperone will make it quite easy for their two girl friends, Kitty Verdun and Amy Spettigue, to come for a visit.

Charley does return – but without his aunt. Apparently, she never was on the train. After reading her letter more carefully, Charley realizes that he made a mistake – she will be coming on a later one. Not having Charley&#x27;s aunt there will make it impossible for the girls to stay – no decent girl would remain with two young men unchaperoned. The girls arrive early, and just as expected decide they must leave – not seeing Charley&#x27;s Aunt Donna Lucia. (&quot;Better Get Out Of Here&quot;). Actually, they are more worried about being caught by their guardian, Mr. Spettigue, (Amy&#x27;s uncle) who keeps a tight rein on the girls. The girls do leave.

After the girls&#x27; departure, the boys are a bit depressed; nevertheless, they know that the girls will return when Charley&#x27;s Aunt is there. In the meantime, Charley tries on his costume for the upcoming student production in which he is appearing. While Charley is doing this, Jack&#x27;s father, Sir Francis Chesney, makes a surprise visit and informs his son that they are actually penniless. Jack suggests that possibly a wealthy marriage could alleviate their problems and suggests that Charley&#x27;s rich widow Aunt Donna Lucia might just be the woman for his father to wed. All Sir Francis needs to do is charm her when she comes for lunch later that day. The plan seems to be perfect.

After Jack&#x27;s father leaves, Charley re-enters in costume rehearsing his lines for the school play. It appears that he will be playing a rather mature older woman – much like his Aunt Donna Lucia. Just then, he is informed by telegram that his aunt will not be arriving for lunch. Instead, she will surprise him at a later date. Jack is upset most of all because this will be his last chance to propose to Kitty – tomorrow she leaves for Scotland. The young ladies unexpectedly appear again assuming that a chaperone is there, and in a fit of desperation, Jack suggests that Charley pose as his aunt – anyway he&#x27;s wearing the costume right now. Charley does pose as his aunt and fools the girls. They cover for Charley saying that he&#x27;s not feeling well and has retired to his room.

The girls&#x27; guardian, Mr. Spettigue, comes looking for the girls, and everyone rushes out to hide from him – everyone except Charley who stays to tell Mr. Spettigue that she is &quot;the only young lady present.&quot; She finally hits him with her fan and says &quot;Be gone my good man and don&#x27;t bother me any longer.&quot; Utterly baffled and confused, Mr. Spettigue leaves, and the girls and Jack return. Sir Francis then enters the scene and escorts Charley to lunch all ready to woo a rich woman into marriage. Just then, Mr. Spettigue re-enters and sees the girls there just as he suspected. He is quite angry until he learns that this &quot;woman/chaperone&quot; who dismissed him only a few moments earlier is actually the wealthy Donna Lucia D&#x27;Alvadorez from Brazil – &quot;where the nuts come from.&quot; He, too, is smitten by this rich available widow and is ready to make his move. Together, Sir Francis, Charley, and Mr. Spettigue go off to lunch. It&#x27;s Charley&#x27;s job to keep them occupied. Jack, Kitty, and Amy all go off to watch the parade and look for Charley.

The scene shifts to a street where the students&#x27; band is marching. Everyone is excited by what they hear and see. (&quot;The New Ashmolean Marching Society and Students&#x27; Conservatory Band&quot;)

In a garden, Charley is returning from having just entertained both men. Charley is ready to change back into his regular clothes and go and find Amy who must be wondering where he is. Jack is still frantic and begs Charley to continue for a short while longer so he can talk with Kitty. Charley doesn&#x27;t care – he has had just about all he can take and goes off to change and find Amy. Kitty comes looking for Donna Lucia, but instead finds herself alone with Jack. It is there that the two are finally able to express their undying love and devotion for each other (&quot;My Darling, My Darling&quot;).

Jack&#x27;s father finds Kitty and Jack together and asks that he speak with his son. It appears that he is going to take his son&#x27;s advice and marry Donna Lucia. Jack tells him that this is impossible; however, Sir Francis is now more determined than ever. Charley then appears as himself and finally gets to talk with Amy. He apologizes for his absence, and rushes to talk to Amy about their future together before her uncle returns and whisks her away. While Charley only wishes to propose marriage and speak of a future together, Amy only wants to speak of the future – a time of progress with wireless telegraphy, horseless carriages, and stereopticons that move. (&quot;Make A Miracle&quot;)

Mr. Spettigue enters to find Amy with Charley and tells her to collect her things. They are leaving for good! He has been waiting for far too long for Donna Lucia, and is now ready to take Amy home. In a desperate moment, Charley tells Mr. Spettigue that his aunt really is in love with him. In fact, she&#x27;s up in Charley&#x27;s room right now resting from the emotional shock of meeting him. He knows that she&#x27;ll be back soon. It&#x27;s just that she has some business to attend to – like writing letters to her banks. The greedy Mr. Spettigue agrees to wait and ponders his possible future and fortune with Lucia (&quot;Serenade with Asides&quot;)

Charley returns as Donna Lucia, and chases Mr. Spettigue around the garden. In the midst of all this, Jack informs Charley that his father is going to propose to him. In fact, Sir Francis enters and asks Charley to marry him. Charley turns him down, but runs off again as he hears a playful Mr. Spettigue approaching.

In the midst of all this, a woman (Charley&#x27;s real aunt) enters and approaches Sir Francis about finding Charley. As the two look at each other, they realize that they know each other from more than twenty years ago. Sir Francis doesn&#x27;t know that she is actually Charley&#x27;s rich Aunt Donna Lucia; in fact, he points out to her that Charley&#x27;s aunt is right there with them – running around being chased by Mr. Spettigue. She is quite intrigued by it all, and poses as Mrs. Beverly Smythe to better survey the situation. The two then look at each other once more and recall that time long ago when they first met. (&quot;Lovelier Than Ever&quot;).

Jack and Charley are going over things, and Kitty and Amy enter to inform Jack that the only way they&#x27;ll get to marry the girls is to get Mr. Spettigue&#x27;s consent in writing. The girls also confide in Charley that they are actually really in love with Charley and Jack, but if they don&#x27;t get consent to the marriages in writing from Mr. Spettigue, they will be financially cut off for good. Charley agrees to get the written consent from Mr. Spettigue and goes off to do so. Kitty and Jack leave Amy alone to think about Charley and all that is happening. Just where has Charley been? She&#x27;s crazy about him, but can&#x27;t help thinking that he&#x27;s off with another girl – possibly the girl she saw in a picture sitting on his piano. (&quot;The Woman In His Room&quot;)

Brassett enters and sets tea. Charley returns still dressed as his aunt and tells Amy that Charley has sent a message to her – he loves her very much. Sir Francis and the real Donna Lucia (still posing as Beverly Smythe) enter and unexpectedly join them for tea. During a madcap tea party, Donna Lucia presses Charley for information about his/her life in Brazil. Charley tells her about the place where Donna Lucia lived – Pernambuco. A song and ballet sequence (seen through Charley&#x27;s eyes) revealing just how Donna Lucia and her rich husband met and lived together ends the first act. (&quot;Pernambuco&quot;)

Act 2
The act opens with the Oxford senior graduates posing for their class picture – complete with caps and gowns. They are all there except for Charley. He promised that he&#x27;d be there. (&quot;Where&#x27;s Charley?&quot;) Fortunately, he does make it there – just as the picture is being taken.

Walking along a street, Charley tries to explain all of his disappearances to Amy, who tries her best to believe him. She also tells him that her uncle is ready to sign a wedding consent form, but Donna Lucia must meet him to get the document. Charley assures her that &quot;she&#x27;ll&quot; be there, but also tells her that he can&#x27;t be there at the same time. She doesn&#x27;t quite know what is going on; however, she trusts him and is excited about marrying him. She leaves Charley alone, and there on that street he thinks about Amy – the most wonderful girl in the whole world (&quot;Once In Love With Amy&quot;)

Later that day, the girls are in the dressing room preparing themselves for the evening&#x27;s big dance. While dressing and primping, they also go over all of the most recent events. (&quot;The Gossips&quot;) Kitty drags a reluctant Charley – once again dressed as Donna Lucia – to the dressing room. The real Donna Lucia enters and has a good bit of fun making Charley feel uncomfortable while all the ladies ready themselves for the evening&#x27;s fun. The ladies eventually all leave and Charley is left alone to talk with Mr. Spettigue who comes to play with his new love. Charley fights off Mr. Spettigue&#x27;s forced advances and finally demands that he be given the letter of consent that has been promised all along. If Mr. Spettigue goes and gets the letter right now, Charley promises that they can announce their own engagement at the ball. Mr. Spettigue excitedly, dashes off to get the letter and meet his love at the ball.

Strolling down a garden path Donna Lucia asks Sir Francis if it isn&#x27;t strange that they have never seen Charley and his aunt together at the same time. Sir Francis has no interest in any of that. All he cares about is dancing the night away with his long lost love. The same is true of Jack and Kitty. In fact, everyone is dancing the night away in love (&quot;Red Rose Cotillion&quot;) Charley even makes an appearance as himself to keep poor little Amy happy and content.

Mr. Spettigue finally appears and announces the engagement of Kitty and Amy to Jack and Charley. He gives Charley (again dressed as his aunt) the letter of consent. Charley sneaks off and reappears as himself once more. Mr. Spettigue wants to see Charley&#x27;s aunt one more time, so Charley goes to get her. Mr. Spettigue asks to see Charley, the nephew, once again, and a rather &quot;tired&quot; Charley dashes off to get him. While rushing, Jack accidentally steps on the hem of Charley&#x27;s skirt and all is &quot;revealed.&quot; Charley admits to Amy and everyone that he did it all because of love. Mr. Spettigue is angry and doesn&#x27;t care that they are in love. Charley tells him that they have the letter of consent, which is all they need. Mr. Spettigue fights them by telling them that he will dispute this. The real Donna Lucia finally steps forward and says that indeed the letter of consent was addressed to her and is a legal document – and she puts her blessing on the wedding. There is nothing Spettigue or anyone can do. All is forgiven and everyone (except for Mr. Spettigue) is happy. (Reprise: &quot;My Darling, My Darling&quot;)

==Characters==
*Charley Wykeham – An Oxford University graduate. Charming, masculine, very comic, feckless, physical, fast-paced.
*Jack Chesney – Charley&#x27;s best friend and roommate. An Oxford University graduate. Stubborn, impetuous, young and handsome.
*Amy Spettigue – Charley&#x27;s girlfriend. Interested in science. Remains faithful to Charley despite his strange behavior. Sweet, clever, well-mannered.
*Kitty Verdun – Jack&#x27;s refined, honest, slightly reckless girl.
*Mr. Spettigue – Amy&#x27;s uncle – uptight, money-loving guardian of Amy &amp; Kitty.
*Donna Lucia D&#x27;Alvadorez – Charley&#x27;s aunt from Brazil. Poses as &quot;Mrs. Beverly Smythe&quot;. An attractive, stylish globetrotter.
*Sir Francis Chesney – Jack&#x27;s clueless single father. Recently found himself in financial difficulty.
*Reggie – Charley&#x27;s rival for the affection of Amy. Crazy, stupid and tactless.
*Brasset – Jack&#x27;s Butler
*Patricia – An Oxford graduate. Likes to gossip.
*Wilkinson – The director of Theatrics at Oxford.

==Musical numbers==
Act 1
*Overture – Orchestra
*The Years Before Us – Male Chorus
*Better Get Out Of Here – Charley, Jack, Kitty, Amy
*The New Ashmolean Marching Society And Students&#x27; Conservatory Band – Ensemble 
*My Darling, My Darling – Jack, Kitty 
*Make A Miracle – Charley, Amy 
*Serenade With Asides – Spettigue
*Lovelier Than Ever – Donna Lucia, Sir Francis, Ensemble 
*The Woman In His Room – Amy
*Pernambuco – Ensemble

Act 2
*Where&#x27;s Charley? – Jack, Reggie, Patricia, Ensemble 
*Once In Love With Amy – Charley 
*The Gossips – Patricia, Female Chorus 
*At The Red Rose Cotillion – Jack, Kitty, Ensemble 
*Finale – Company

==Productions==
Broadway (1948 and 1951)
The musical opened on Broadway at the St. James Theatre on October 11, 1948, and ran for 792 performances. It was directed by George Abbott, choreographed by George Balanchine, with sets and costumes by David Ffolkes. The cast featured Ray Bolger as Charley Wykeham, Allyn McLerie as Amy Spettigue, Byron Palmer as Jack Chesney, Doretta Morrow as Kitty Verdun, Paul England as Sir Francis Chesney, and Horace Cooper as Mr Spettigue. Bolger won the Tony Award, Best Actor (Musical). His second-act song, &quot;Once in Love with Amy&quot;, was a show-stopper, with audiences not only demanding that he sing it again, but even singing along.

The musical returned to Broadway at The Broadway Theatre for 48 performances, from January 29, 1951, to March 10, 1951, with Bolger, McLerie, and Cooper reprising their roles and Abbott directing.

West End (1958)
After a trial run at the Opera House in Manchester, the musical opened in the West End at the Palace Theatre on February 20, 1958, and ran for 404 performances. It was directed by William Chappell. The cast featured Norman Wisdom as Charley Wykeham, Pip Hinton as Amy Spettigue, Terence Cooper as Jack Chesney, Pamela Gale as Kitty Verdun, Jerry Desmonde as Sir Francis Chesney, and Felix Felton as Mr Spettigue.

Circle in the Square Broadway Revival (1974–75)
Circle in the Square produced a revival starring Raul Julia as part of its 1974-75 Broadway season. Julia received a Tony Award nomination for his performance.

Encores! (2011)
A semi-staged production of &quot;Where&#x27;s Charley?&quot; was presented as part of New York City Center&#x27;s Encores! series from March 17–20, 2011, featuring Rebecca Luker and Howard McGillin, and Rob McClure as Charley.

==Film==

The 1952 Warner Brothers film was directed by David Butler. Some scenes in the movie were filmed in Oxford, England (where the story takes place), yet the movie makes almost no attempt to take advantage of these authentic locations. The film&#x27;s cast starred Ray Bolger, Allyn Ann McLerie and Horace Cooper repeating their stage roles, and Robert Shackleton as Jack Chesney, Mary Germaine as Kitty Verdun, and Howard Marion-Crawford as Sir Francis Chesney. The movie ends with each of the principal cast members taking a curtain call.

When the film played at Radio City Music Hall in 1962, Robert Shackleton, the other male lead, whose second and final film this was, performed in the accompanying stage show.

As of 2018, the film remains unavailable for television or home video viewing. Warner Bros. and the Loesser estate have each expressed an interest in making the film available in the future.

==Audio recordings==

An audio recording of the 1958 London production has been released, but no complete recording of the Broadway score ever appeared, due to the 1948 recording ban. Bolger and the cast recorded two songs for a 45-rpm single, &quot;Once in Love With Amy&quot; b/w &quot;Make a Miracle&quot; (Decca 1–191) and a 78-rpm record (Decca 40065). (This version of &quot;Once in Love with Amy&quot; appears on several Broadway CD anthologies.) A 1952 film was made by Warner Bros., featuring Bolger and other original cast members.

Johnny Mercer recorded a 78 RPM version of &quot;The New Ashmolean Marching Society and Students&#x27; Conservatory Band&quot; with Paul Whiteman and his Orchestra on Capitol Records #15385. (Reportedly the ghost of Elias Ashmole – for whom the Society and Museum are both named – was seen to smile upon hearing it).

==References==
==External links==
*Internet Broadway Database listing
*Internet Movie Database listing
*&quot;Where&#x27;s Charley?&quot; at Frank Loesser site
*&quot;Where&#x27;s Charley?&quot; at the Music Theatre International website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2743" start="27" end="34" title="Musical theater" label="musical"/>
<link wikidata="Q966018" start="60" end="73" title="Frank Loesser" label="Frank Loesser"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506831" start="86" end="99" title="George Abbott" label="George Abbott"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066781" start="144" end="163" title="Charley&amp;#x27;s Aunt" label="Charley&amp;#x27;s Aunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q177328" start="173" end="187" title="Brandon Thomas (playwright)" label="Brandon Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q235065" start="212" end="220" title="Broadway theatre" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359589" start="268" end="276" title="West End theatre" label="West End"/>
<link wikidata="Q240886" start="278" end="288" title="Ray Bolger" label="Ray Bolger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519901" start="903" end="912" title="Chaperone (social)" label="chaperone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3909790" start="14127" end="14144" title="St. James Theatre" label="St. James Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506831" start="14215" end="14228" title="George Abbott" label="George Abbott"/>
<link wikidata="Q310184" start="14247" end="14264" title="George Balanchine" label="George Balanchine"/>
<link wikidata="Q240886" start="14325" end="14335" title="Ray Bolger" label="Ray Bolger"/>
<link wikidata="Q4733452" start="14356" end="14369" title="Allyn McLerie" label="Allyn McLerie"/>
<link wikidata="Q5004441" start="14388" end="14400" title="Byron Palmer" label="Byron Palmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4303226" start="14418" end="14432" title="Doretta Morrow" label="Doretta Morrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q65048828" start="14450" end="14462" title="Paul England (actor)" label="Paul England"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14491" end="14504" title="Horace Cooper" label="Horace Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q191874" start="14537" end="14547" title="Tony Award" label="Tony Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q2925870" start="14765" end="14785" title="The Broadway Theatre" label="The Broadway Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q4592132" start="15037" end="15051" title="Palace Theatre, London" label="Palace Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q16013171" start="15123" end="15139" title="William Chappell (dancer)" label="William Chappell"/>
<link wikidata="Q349217" start="15159" end="15172" title="Norman Wisdom" label="Norman Wisdom"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15193" end="15203" title="Pip Hinton" label="Pip Hinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2404479" start="15222" end="15236" title="Terence Cooper" label="Terence Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15254" end="15265" title="Pamela Gale" label="Pamela Gale"/>
<link wikidata="Q263519" start="15283" end="15297" title="Jerry Desmonde" label="Jerry Desmonde"/>
<link wikidata="Q16079026" start="15326" end="15338" title="Felix Felton" label="Felix Felton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2973328" start="15357" end="15377" title="Circle in the Square" label="Circle in the Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q317654" start="15454" end="15464" title="Raul Julia" label="Raul Julia"/>
<link wikidata="Q191874" start="15522" end="15532" title="Tony Award" label="Tony Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375560" start="15566" end="15574" title="Encores!" label="Encores!"/>
<link wikidata="Q535631" start="15669" end="15689" title="New York City Center" label="New York City Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375560" start="15697" end="15705" title="Encores!" label="Encores!"/>
<link wikidata="Q7301818" start="15747" end="15760" title="Rebecca Luker" label="Rebecca Luker"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141581" start="15765" end="15780" title="Howard McGillin" label="Howard McGillin"/>
<link wikidata="Q16203254" start="15786" end="15797" title="Rob McClure" label="Rob McClure"/>
<link wikidata="Q126399" start="15830" end="15845" title="Warner Brothers" label="Warner Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q983092" start="15867" end="15879" title="David Butler (director)" label="David Butler"/>
<link wikidata="Q34217" start="15921" end="15927" title="Oxford" label="Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q6779630" start="16199" end="16212" title="Mary Germaine" label="Mary Germaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5920311" start="16234" end="16256" title="Howard Marion-Crawford" label="Howard Marion-Crawford"/>
<link wikidata="Q753437" start="16384" end="16405" title="Radio City Music Hall" label="Radio City Music Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q126399" start="17206" end="17218" title="Warner Bros." label="Warner Bros."/>
<link wikidata="Q471406" start="17487" end="17500" title="Elias Ashmole" label="Elias Ashmole"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="990468" wikidata="Q2181642" url="?curid=990468" title="Limbang">
<text>Limbang is a border town and the capital of Limbang District in the Limbang Division of northern Sarawak, East Malaysia, on the island of Borneo. This district area is 3,978.10 square kilometres, and population (year 2020 census) was 56,900. It is located on the banks of the Limbang River (Sungai Limbang in Malay), between the two halves of Brunei.

==Etymology==
A settlement along the Limbang River was previously known as &quot;Pangkalan Tarap&quot; where trade activities thrived. The name was derived from a well-known fruit in the Malay community. However, when the settlement was combined with Trusan district and Lawas district, &quot;Pangkalan Tarap&quot; changed its name to &quot;Limbang&quot;, naming it after the river on which it is situated.

==History==
===Bruneian sultanate===
In 1884, there was a rebellion by Limbang residents, protesting against the high tax rate imposed by the Bruneian Empire. William Hood Treacher, who held the dual position as the governor of North Borneo and British royal consul at Labuan, saw an opportunity to acquire more territories from the Bruneian empire. Treacher offered himself to mediate the taxation dispute between the local chiefs and the Bruneian empire. He sailed to Brunei on &quot;H.M.S Pegasus&quot;, backed by British navy. Treacher successfully arranged for peace in the Limbang region after Temenggong Hashim agreed not to impose any more arbitrary taxes. After the event, Treacher leased Padas River, Klias Peninsula, Bongawan, and Tawaran (now Tuaran) from the sultan of Brunei for $3000 payment per year.

The Brooke government, threatened by Treacher&#x27;s expansionist policy into northern Sarawak, sent F.O. Maxwell, a Resident of the First Division of Sarawak (today Kuching Division) to Brunei, demanding compensation for the killings of Sarawak subjects in Trusan area (near Lawas). Trusan area at that time was still under the control of the Brunei government. Maxwell also threatened to stop the cession money payment if he did not receive any compensation. Under pressure from Maxwell, Temenggong Hashim agreed to cede the Trusan area to Sarawak. However, the Sultan of Brunei (Sultan Mumin) did not consent to the cession of land. Both Charles Brooke and Temenggong maintained that Sultan&#x27;s stamp was not required for the cession. Charles later occupied the Trusan area by force. Brunei later agreed to cede Trusan in 1885 and Padas in 1887. On 29 May 1885, Sultan Mumin died and Temenggong Hashim ascended to the Brunei throne to become Sultan Hashim.

In 1886, Leys (former consul of Brunei) and Charles Brooke tried to persuade Sultan Hashim to cede Limbang but to no avail. Sultan Hashim&#x27;s decision was in line with his &quot;pangerans&quot; (princes) that further cession of Bruneian territory will leave Sultan&#x27;s authority in name only. Besides, Sultan Hashim did not wish to see his sultanate vanishing under his rule. Sir Frederick Weld, former governor of the Straits Settlement from 1880 to 1887, went to Labuan in May 1887. Weld then consulted the chiefs of the Limbang River. They firmly rejected Sultan&#x27;s rule and were willing to accept a white man&#x27;s rule. Weld tried to push an ultimatum that the Sultan either agreed on the cession of Limbang or to accept a Resident. Sultan Hashim hesitated. Crocker, the acting governor of North Borneo, advised the Sultan that if he did not accept a Resident in Limbang, James Brooke will be permitted to seize Limbang without any compensation to the Sultan. Sultan Hashim decided to accept a Resident after Crocker&#x27;s advice.

On 17 September 1888, Brunei signed an agreement with Great Britain which formally put Brunei under British protectorate. Sir Rutherford Alcock, managing director of North Borneo Company, Sir Robert Meader, assistant under-secretary of the colonial office, and Sir Federick Weld thought that making Brunei a protectorate will enable the final division of Brunei and stem further losses of Bruneian territories. However, British prime minister Lord Salisbury was eager for Brunei to vanish from the world map before the protectorate agreement was signed. He finally agreed to the protectorate treaty after he was assured by his officials that the protectorate status granted to Brunei will not stop its ultimate absorption into either Sarawak or North Borneo. Acting Consul Hamilton decided to go to Limbang in October 1889 to assess the people&#x27;s sentiments there. The Limbang chiefs gave the same assertions that they will never submit to Sultan&#x27;s rule. On 17 March 1890, Rajah Charles Brooke annexed Limbang, subjected to the approval of the British government, claiming that the local chiefs of Limbang had been independent of Brunei&#x27;s rule for five years and had hoisted a Sarawak flag.

Sultan then sent an envoy to the governor of the Straits, Sir F. Dickson to protest against the Rajah&#x27;s move of annexing Limbang. Sultan&#x27;s envoy claimed that the people of Limbang had been paying tribute to Sultan since Weld&#x27;s visit in May 1887 thus Brunei still have sovereignty over Limbang. Consul Trevenen then went to Limbang, and confirmed that 13 of the 15 chiefs in Limbang said that Sultan had not exercised any control over them for seven years. In August 1892, Sir Cecil Smith, the governor of the Straits Settlements, decided that Sarawak should possess Limbang and would pay a tribute of $6000 to Sultan of Brunei. However, Sultan of Brunei refused to accept the money or suggest his own terms of the cession. In August 1895, the British colonial office considered the case closed despite no agreement being reached between the Sultan and the Brooke government. Between 1899 and 1901, another rebellion occurred in Tutong District and Belait District. Sultan Hashim was again pressured by Charles Brooke and a new British Consul of Borneo Hewette, to cede both the districts, but he firmly refused, as the loss of both districts would make Brunei non-existent on the map of Borneo, resembling &quot;a tree without branches&quot;. However, Sultan Hashim persistently protested against the decision to cede Limbang until his death in 1906. Sultan Hashim considered Limbang as a significant resource, supplying Brunei with food, forest produce, timber, and fisheries. Sultan Hashim also thought that &quot;Brunei is Limbang and Limbang is Brunei&quot;. Before his death, Sultan Hashim signed a supplementary agreement (after the 1888 protectorate agreement) with the British government in 1906 to accept a Resident in Brunei to ensure the survival of the Brunei kingdom and stem further losses of the Bruneian territories.

===Federation of Malaysia===
During the Brunei Revolt in 1962, Limbang was occupied by the North Borneo Liberation Army (Tentera Nasional Kalimantan Utara, TNKU). TNKU killed four members of the police and eleven European civilians including the Limbang district officer and his wife. Within five days, British and Australian forces from Singapore contained the rebellion.

Subsequent Sultans of Brunei made the Limbang claims in 1951, 1963, and 1973. Brunei-Malaysia maritime boundary was also in dispute since 1981 after Malaysia published its maps in 1979. Negotiations of maritime borders started in 1995. In 2003, Malaysia discovered huge oil reserves at Kikeh, off the coast of Sabah and Brunei. This oil reserve represented 21% of Malaysian total oil reserves at that time. Brunei disputed the Malaysian claim on the Kikeh oil reserve. The dispute ended in 2009 when both countries agreed on the final maritime boundaries. Malaysia also agreed that Brunei holds the rights to the Kikeh oil fields. In return, Brunei allowed the establishment of Commercial Arrangement Areas (CAA) where both countries would share the oil and gas revenues from the disputed maritime areas. However, the quantum of revenue sharing was not disclosed. Brunei also agreed in principle that the final demarcation of the Malaysia-Brunei land border will be based upon five agreements signed between 1920 and 1939 while the remaining borders will be decided by using the watershed model of border demarcation. Malaysian Foreign Minister Datuk Seri Dr Rais Yatim said that such principles would essentially allow Limbang to be placed within Malaysian borders. However, Brunei Minister of Foreign Affairs and Trade II Lim Jock Seng denied that Brunei has dropped the claims on Limbang. As of 2023, final demarcation of land boundaries between Malaysia and Brunei has not yet completed.

==Geography==
===Climate===
Limbang features an equatorial climate that is a tropical rainforest climate more subject to the Intertropical Convergence Zone than the trade winds and with no or rare cyclones. The climate is warm and wet. The city sees heavy precipitation throughout the course of the year. The Northeast Monsoon blows from December to March, while the Southeast Monsoon dominates from around June to October.
==Demographics==

* Bisaya
* Lun Bawang
* Iban
* Malay
* Orang Ulu
* Kedayan
* Chinese

==Local government==
Limbang is part of the Limbang District, which is part of the Limbang Division, which is part of Sarawak, Malaysia.

==Economy==
Before the late 19th century, Limbang was the &quot;rice bowl&quot; for Brunei, producing cheap agricultural produce for Bruneian Empire. Northern Region Development Agency (NRDA) was established on 15 March 2018. NRDA has been tasked to develop aquaculture, livestock, oil and gas as well as logistics industries in Limbang and Lawas districts to reap economic benefits from Brunei Darussalam–Indonesia–Malaysia–Philippines East ASEAN Growth Area (BIMP-EAGA).

==Transport==
===Air===
Limbang is served by Limbang Airport, which also serves the whole of Limbang District.

===Road===
Owing to its geographical location, Limbang is completely cut off from the rest of Sarawak&#x27;s road network. However, it has good road links to both parts of Brunei, located to the east and west of the district. There is also a good local network of roads within the district. As the only road connection to outside the district is through Brunei, one must have a passport to travel into or out of Limbang.

There are two Immigration, Customs and Quarantine Complexes in Limbang district, both into Brunei.

*Tedungan: This checkpoint corresponds to Brunei checkpoint is called Kuala Lurah. It is located 43 km west of Limbang. It is the road crossing into the main part of Brunei from Limbang.
*Pandaruan: This checkpoint enters Kampung Ujong Jalan, Temburong district, Brunei over the Pandaruan River, located at 15 km east of Limbang. Previously, the crossing was only possible by using ferry services. Pandaruan Bridge was built on 8 December 2013 to facilitate river crossings.

==Other utilities==
===Education===
*SJK (C) Chung Hwa Limbang
*SJK (C) Yuk Hin
* SK Limbang
* SK Melayu Pusat
* SK Kampung Pahlawan
* SK St. Edmund
* SK Menuang
* SK Batu Danau
* SK Pengkalan Jawa
* SK Tedungan
* SK Bukit Luba
* SK Tanjong
* SK Meritam
* SK Ukong
* SK Nanga Medamit
* SK Long Napir
* SK Kuala Mendalam
* SK Nanga Merit
* SK Kubong
* SK RC Kubong
* SK Gadong
*SMK Seri Patiambun Limbang
*SMK Medamit
*SMK Limbang
*SMK Kubong
*SMK(A) Limbang

===Healthcare===
The old Limbang Hospital is located in Limbang which is now used as a Laboratory of Drugs and Drug Stores. It was established on 18 August 1961 with 16 nurses and 10 attendants with 54 beds.

In line with the increase in population and the development of Limbang Town, the new Limbang Hospital was officially opened on June 29, 1980, by the then-President of the State of Sarawak Tun Datuk Patinggi Abang Hj MuhammadSalahuddin. The construction cost RM 4.912 million with an area of 7.8 hectares.

As of 2017, a staff strength of 279 people including 19 Medical Officers and 1 Gynecologist and 2 Radiologists.

As of 2023, it now has 2 Physicians, 1 General Surgeon, 1 Anaesthesiologist, 1 Obgyn specialist, 2 radiologists, 1 pediatrician, and 1 psychiatrist offering specialist services. 
It is equipped with CT Scan, ICU, Operating Theater and an Endoscopy Room.

==Culture and leisure==
===Limbang Regional Museum===

The Limbang Regional Museum is located in a fort built by Rajah Charles Brooke in 1897. It is located in the area annexed to Sarawak by the White Rajah in 1890.

===&quot;Taman Tasik Bukit Mas&quot;===
Taman Tasik Bukit Mas (literal translation: &quot;Gold Hill Lake Park&quot;) is a recreational park set in Limbang&#x27;s iconic feature, Bukit Mas. Limbang residents do their recreational activities in the park in the evening. A children&#x27;s playground, lake, barbecue site, suspension bridge and toilet are provided.

===Limbang Plaza===
Limbang Plaza is located in the town centre, and is often dubbed the definite centre of Limbang. This building mainly consists of three components: Purnama Hotel, a shopping mall and various government offices (located atop the mall). It&#x27;s also used for other businesses and activities.

Currently the mall has about 50 shopping outlets, with a local supermarket chain, Queen, as the main tenant.

===&quot;Pasar Tamu&quot;===
&quot;Pasar Tamu&quot; is a local gathering where villagers come to the town of Limbang to sell their goods. Usually it is held every Friday, but preparations begin on Thursday.

The market has attracted not only local residents, but also Bruneians.

==Notable people==
*Abang Abdul Rahman Zohari Abang Openg - 6th and current Premier of Sarawak.
*James Wong (politician) - the former Deputy Chief Minister of Sarawak.
*GT Lim - Malaysian pastor, singer and actor.
*Yusrizan Usop (also known as Bob Yusof) - Malaysian singer and actor.

== References ==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2181642" start="0" end="7" title="Limbang" label="Limbang"/>
<link wikidata="Q3089012" start="13" end="19" title="Brunei-Malaysia border" label="border"/>
<link wikidata="Q12955993" start="44" end="60" title="Limbang District" label="Limbang District"/>
<link wikidata="Q2600922" start="68" end="84" title="Limbang Division" label="Limbang Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q170462" start="97" end="104" title="Sarawak" label="Sarawak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1901211" start="106" end="119" title="East Malaysia" label="East Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q36117" start="138" end="144" title="Borneo" label="Borneo"/>
<link wikidata="Q921" start="343" end="349" title="Brunei" label="Brunei"/>
<link wikidata="Q887803" start="902" end="917" title="Bruneian Empire" label="Bruneian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1701295" start="919" end="940" title="William Hood Treacher" label="William Hood Treacher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147441" start="988" end="1000" title="North Borneo" label="North Borneo"/>
<link wikidata="Q214504" start="1029" end="1035" title="Labuan" label="Labuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2366435" start="1458" end="1469" title="Padas River" label="Padas River"/>
<link wikidata="Q64210582" start="1471" end="1486" title="Klias Peninsula" label="Klias Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q892399" start="1488" end="1496" title="Bongawan" label="Bongawan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1895616" start="1515" end="1521" title="Tuaran" label="Tuaran"/>
<link wikidata="Q2552204" start="1744" end="1760" title="Kuching Division" label="Kuching Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q6503576" start="1854" end="1859" title="Lawas" label="Lawas"/>
<link wikidata="Q243705" start="4034" end="4048" title="Robert Gascoyne-Cecil, 3rd Marquess of Salisbury" label="Lord Salisbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q40398" start="5740" end="5755" title="Tutong District" label="Tutong District"/>
<link wikidata="Q40395" start="5760" end="5775" title="Belait District" label="Belait District"/>
<link wikidata="Q3299246" start="6686" end="6699" title="Brunei Revolt" label="Brunei Revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="6984" end="6993" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q209531" start="8590" end="8617" title="tropical rainforest climate" label="tropical rainforest climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q753858" start="8638" end="8668" title="Intertropical Convergence Zone" label="Intertropical Convergence Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q160603" start="8678" end="8688" title="trade wind" label="trade wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q79602" start="8710" end="8717" title="cyclone" label="cyclone"/>
<link wikidata="Q42967" start="8832" end="8839" title="Monsoon" label="Monsoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q866036" start="8957" end="8963" title="Bisaya (Borneo)" label="Bisaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q60510" start="8966" end="8976" title="Lun Bawang" label="Lun Bawang"/>
<link wikidata="Q973254" start="8979" end="8983" title="Iban people" label="Iban"/>
<link wikidata="Q142702" start="8986" end="8991" title="Malays (ethnic group)" label="Malay"/>
<link wikidata="Q4206762" start="8994" end="9003" title="Orang Ulu" label="Orang Ulu"/>
<link wikidata="Q4262236" start="9006" end="9013" title="Kedayan" label="Kedayan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200528" start="9016" end="9023" title="Malaysian Chinese" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q887803" start="9296" end="9311" title="Bruneian Empire" label="Bruneian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q4835688" start="9551" end="9622" title="Brunei Darussalam–Indonesia–Malaysia–Philippines East ASEAN Growth Area" label="Brunei Darussalam–Indonesia–Malaysia–Philippines East ASEAN Growth Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q3270762" start="9682" end="9697" title="Limbang Airport" label="Limbang Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q170462" start="9843" end="9850" title="Sarawak" label="Sarawak"/>
<link wikidata="Q6741782" start="9858" end="9870" title="Malaysia Federal Route 1 (Sarawak)" label="road network"/>
<link wikidata="Q921" start="9921" end="9927" title="Brunei" label="Brunei"/>
<link wikidata="Q757292" start="10185" end="10230" title="border checkpoint" label="Immigration, Customs and Quarantine Complexes"/>
<link wikidata="Q921" start="10262" end="10268" title="Brunei" label="Brunei"/>
<link wikidata="Q12688933" start="10341" end="10352" title="Kuala Lurah" label="Kuala Lurah"/>
<link wikidata="Q263285" start="10514" end="10532" title="Temburong district" label="Temburong district"/>
<link wikidata="Q4381044" start="10550" end="10565" title="Pandaruan River" label="Pandaruan River"/>
<link wikidata="Q17054558" start="10669" end="10685" title="Pandaruan Bridge" label="Pandaruan Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q131378553" start="12148" end="12171" title="Old Fort (Limbang)" label="Limbang Regional Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065104" start="12202" end="12222" title="Charles Anthoni Johnson Brooke" label="Rajah Charles Brooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189867" start="12284" end="12295" title="White Rajah" label="White Rajah"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12428" end="12445" title="recreational park" label="recreational park"/>
<link wikidata="Q180846" start="13045" end="13056" title="supermarket" label="supermarket"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13064" end="13069" title="Queen (supermarket)" label="Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325474" start="13392" end="13429" title="Abang Abdul Rahman Zohari Abang Openg" label="Abang Abdul Rahman Zohari Abang Openg"/>
<link wikidata="Q6566938" start="13448" end="13466" title="Premier of Sarawak" label="Premier of Sarawak"/>
<link wikidata="Q16019264" start="13469" end="13492" title="James Wong (politician)" label="James Wong (politician)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13541" end="13547" title="GT Lim" label="GT Lim"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13587" end="13600" title="Yusrizan Usop" label="Yusrizan Usop"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="990475" wikidata="Q7721569" url="?curid=990475" title="The Castle, Newcastle">
<text>The Castle, Newcastle, or Newcastle Castle is a medieval fortification in Newcastle upon Tyne, England, built on the site of the fortress that gave the City of Newcastle its name. The most prominent remaining structures on the site are the Castle Keep (the castle&#x27;s main fortified stone tower, pictured below right), and the Black Gate, its fortified gatehouse.

Use of the site for defensive purposes dates from Roman times, when it housed a fort and settlement called Pons Aelius (meaning &#x27;bridge of (Publius) Aelius (Hadrianus)&#x27; - the Roman emperor Hadrian), guarding a bridge over the River Tyne. Robert Curthose, eldest son of William the Conqueror, in 1080 built a wooden motte and bailey style castle on the site of the Roman fort. Curthose built this &#x27;New Castle upon Tyne&#x27; after he returned south from a campaign against Malcolm III of Scotland. Henry II built the stone Castle Keep between 1172 and 1177 on the site of Curthose&#x27;s castle. Henry III added the Black Gate between 1247 and 1250. Nothing remains above ground of the Roman fort or the original motte and bailey castle. The Keep is a Grade I listed building, and a scheduled monument.

The Castle Keep and Black Gate pre-date the construction of the Newcastle town wall, construction of which started around 1265, and did not include it. The site of the keep is in the centre of Newcastle and lies to the east of Newcastle station. The gap between the keep and the gatehouse is almost entirely filled by the railway viaduct that carries the East Coast Main Line from Newcastle to Scotland.

The keep and Black Gate are now managed by the Old Newcastle Project under the Heart of the City Partnership as one combined visitor attraction, &quot;Newcastle Castle&quot;.

==Early history==
In the mid-2nd century, the Romans built the first bridge to cross the River Tyne at the place where Newcastle now stands. The bridge was called Pons Aelius or &#x27;Bridge of Aelius&#x27;, Aelius being the family name of the Emperor Hadrian, who instigated the building of Hadrian&#x27;s Wall along the Tyne-Solway Gap. The Romans built a fort to protect the river crossing which was at the foot of the Tyne Gorge. The fort was situated on a rocky outcrop overlooking the new bridge. Hadrian&#x27;s Wall crossed from west to east just north of the Roman fort, somewhere between the two medieval stone monuments of Newcastle Castle and Newcastle Cathedral. It is thought likely that the Wall descended (or ascended) the sloping street called the Side, just to the north of the Black Gate of the castle, described below.

At some unknown time in the Anglo-Saxon age, the site of Newcastle came to be known as Monkchester, suggesting a monastery at a location still unknown. In the late 7th century, a cemetery was established on the site of the Roman fort.

==Norman castle==
In 1080, the Norman king, William I, sent his eldest son, Robert Curthose, north to defend the kingdom against the Scots. After his campaign, he moved to Monkchester and began the building of a &#x27;New Castle&#x27;. This was of the &quot;motte-and-bailey&quot; type of construction, a wooden tower on top of an earthen mound (motte), surrounded by a moat and wooden stockade (bailey).

In 1095, Robert de Mowbray, Earl of Northumbria, rose up against William Rufus and Rufus sent an army north to crush the revolt and to capture the castle. From then on the castle became crown property and was an important base from which the king could control the northern barons.

==New stone castle==
Not a trace of the tower or mound of the motte and bailey castle remains now. Henry II replaced it with a rectangular stone keep, commissioned in 1168, which was built between 1172 and 1177 at a cost of £1,144. A stone bailey, in the form of a triangle, replaced the previous wooden one. The master mason or architect, Maurice, also built Dover Castle. The great outer gateway to the castle, called &#x27;the Black Gate&#x27;, was built later, between 1247 and 1250, in the reign of Henry III. During the civil wars at the end of King John&#x27;s reign, it was under the control of Philip of Oldcoates.

Additional protection to the castle was provided late in the 13th century when stone walls were constructed, with towers, to enclose the town. The safety provided by the town walls led to the neglect of the fabric of the castle. In 1589, during the reign of Queen Elizabeth I the castle was described as being ruinous. From the early 17th century onward, this situation was made worse by the construction of shops and houses on much of the site.

==English Civil War==

In 1643, during the English Civil War, the Royalist Mayor of Newcastle, Sir John Marley, repaired the keep and probably also refortified the castle. In 1644 the Scottish army crossed the border in support of the Parliamentarians and the Scottish troops besieged Newcastle for three months until the garrison surrendered. The town walls were extensively damaged and the final forces to surrender on 19 October 1644 did so from the Castle keep.

During the 16th to the 18th century, the keep was used as a prison. By 1800, there were a large number of houses within the boundaries of the castle.

==Nineteenth century==

In 1809, Newcastle Corporation bought the keep and provided it with a new roof and battlements. In addition the private dwellings within the castle boundaries were demolished. The keep was restored in 1810, 1812 and 1848. In the mid 19th century the arrival of the railway in Newcastle led to a large viaduct being constructed to the north of the keep, crossing the site of the castle. As a result, only the keep and the Black Gate now remain.

==Twentieth century==

The keep was restored between the 1960s and 1980s when crumbling outside stonework was replaced and the interior cleaned.

==The Black Gate==

The &quot;Black Gate&quot; was added to Newcastle Castle between 1247 and 1250, forming an additional barbican in front of the earlier north gate of the castle. It consisted of two towers with a passage running between them. On either side of the passage was a vaulted guardroom. There was a drawbridge at the front (facing west) and another at the rear. There was also a portcullis which could be raised and lowered to seal the entrance passage.

The original building would probably have had a flat roof, but in 1618 James I leased the gatehouse to a courtier, Alexander Stephenson. Stephenson substantially altered the gatehouse, rebuilding the upper floors. Stephenson then let the Black Gate out to various tenants, one of whom was a merchant, named Patrick Black. It was he who gave his name to the Black Gate.

Eventually houses were built along both sides of the passageway, and one part of the building became a public house. By the early part of the nineteenth century, the Black Gate had become a slum tenement, housing up to sixty people.

The Black Gate was leased to the Society of Antiquaries of Newcastle upon Tyne in the 1880s, which extensively restored it between 1883 and 1885. It was the Society that added the top floor and pitched roof. The Society had a museum and held regular meetings there until relatively recently; the Bagpipe Museum that was there was moved north to become the Morpeth Chantry Bagpipe Museum in 1987. The drawbridges to the front and rear of the Black Gate have been replaced by wooden footbridges.

==Current building==
The Keep is a Grade I listed building, and a scheduled monument. It is a roughly square building, measuring by and tall. The entrance leads via flights of stairs to the second floor and into the Great Hall, the largest room in the keep, measuring by . The Black Gate was approached via a drawbridge across a moat. A wooden bridge has replaced the drawbridge. The original gate had a portcullis, and the recesses where this fitted can still be seen. The keep is currently owned by Newcastle City Council and managed by the Heart of the City Partnership.

The Castle Keep can be visited today. The keep is also notable in having the main East Coast railway line running through the centre of the grounds. In particular, the battlements offer fine views over the River Tyne quayside, the cathedral and Newcastle station. The castle is reputedly haunted, and has been subject to many paranormal investigations. It featured in an episode of &quot;Most Haunted&quot;.

The Castle Keep and the Black Gate have recently been refurbished by the Heart of the City partnership, and reopened on 21 March 2015 as Newcastle Castle. In addition to improved accessibility via an external lift to the Black Gate, new additions include an education centre, reception/gift shop and museum room in the Black Gate and audio-visual installations in the Castle Keep, telling the story of the site and the people who have lived there over the centuries.

==See also==
*Castles in Great Britain and Ireland
*List of castles in England
*Newcastle Castle, Bridgend

==References==
;Notes
;Bibliography
*

==External links==

* Official site
* Newcastle Antiquaries website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7721569" start="0" end="21" title="The Castle, Newcastle" label="The Castle, Newcastle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7721569" start="26" end="42" title="The Castle, Newcastle" label="Newcastle Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2404434" start="48" end="70" title="medieval fortification" label="medieval fortification"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425428" start="74" end="93" title="Newcastle upon Tyne" label="Newcastle upon Tyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="95" end="102" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q91165" start="247" end="251" title="Keep" label="Keep"/>
<link wikidata="Q23394" start="356" end="365" title="Barbican" label="gatehouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="418" end="423" title="Ancient Rome" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7227963" start="475" end="486" title="Pons Aelius" label="Pons Aelius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427" start="567" end="574" title="Hadrian" label="Hadrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q216373" start="604" end="614" title="River Tyne" label="River Tyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q220994" start="616" end="631" title="Robert Curthose" label="Robert Curthose"/>
<link wikidata="Q37594" start="647" end="668" title="William the Conqueror" label="William the Conqueror"/>
<link wikidata="Q92062" start="693" end="709" title="motte and bailey" label="motte and bailey"/>
<link wikidata="Q68508" start="855" end="878" title="Malcolm III of Scotland" label="Malcolm III of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q102140" start="880" end="888" title="Henry II of England" label="Henry II"/>
<link wikidata="Q160311" start="978" end="987" title="Henry III of England" label="Henry III"/>
<link wikidata="Q570600" start="1134" end="1157" title="listed building" label="Grade I listed building"/>
<link wikidata="Q219538" start="1165" end="1183" title="scheduled monument" label="scheduled monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q7017551" start="1250" end="1269" title="Newcastle town wall" label="Newcastle town wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2047417" start="1413" end="1430" title="Newcastle railway station" label="Newcastle station"/>
<link wikidata="Q672271" start="1541" end="1561" title="East Coast Main Line" label="East Coast Main Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="1580" end="1588" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q216373" start="1856" end="1866" title="River Tyne, England" label="River Tyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q7227963" start="1930" end="1941" title="Pons Aelius" label="Pons Aelius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427" start="2019" end="2026" title="Hadrian" label="Hadrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q57357" start="2059" end="2078" title="Hadrian&amp;#x27;s Wall" label="Hadrian&amp;#x27;s Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1736200" start="2421" end="2440" title="Newcastle Cathedral" label="Newcastle Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q784963" start="2634" end="2645" title="History of Anglo-Saxon England" label="Anglo-Saxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q37594" start="2886" end="2895" title="William I of England" label="William I"/>
<link wikidata="Q220994" start="2918" end="2933" title="Robert Curthose" label="Robert Curthose"/>
<link wikidata="Q181634" start="2975" end="2980" title="Scottish People" label="Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q92062" start="3100" end="3116" title="motte-and-bailey" label="motte-and-bailey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2380029" start="3257" end="3274" title="Robert de Mowbray" label="Robert de Mowbray"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250180" start="3276" end="3295" title="Earl of Northumbria" label="Earl of Northumbria"/>
<link wikidata="Q102005" start="3313" end="3326" title="William Rufus" label="William Rufus"/>
<link wikidata="Q102140" start="3630" end="3638" title="Henry II of England" label="Henry II"/>
<link wikidata="Q950970" start="3891" end="3903" title="Dover Castle" label="Dover Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q160311" start="4035" end="4044" title="Henry III of England" label="Henry III"/>
<link wikidata="Q129308" start="4087" end="4098" title="John of England" label="John&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q18880171" start="4134" end="4153" title="Philip of Oldcoates" label="Philip of Oldcoates"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207" start="4414" end="4431" title="Elizabeth I of England" label="Queen Elizabeth I"/>
<link wikidata="Q80330" start="4646" end="4663" title="English Civil War" label="English Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7510269" start="4879" end="4897" title="Siege of Newcastle" label="besieged Newcastle"/>
<link wikidata="Q23394" start="5958" end="5966" title="barbican" label="barbican"/>
<link wikidata="Q23391" start="6228" end="6238" title="portcullis" label="portcullis"/>
<link wikidata="Q79972" start="6375" end="6382" title="James I of England" label="James I"/>
<link wikidata="Q212198" start="6777" end="6789" title="Pub" label="public house"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078374" start="6869" end="6877" title="tenement" label="tenement"/>
<link wikidata="Q7552372" start="6941" end="6986" title="Society of Antiquaries of Newcastle upon Tyne" label="Society of Antiquaries of Newcastle upon Tyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q6913335" start="7264" end="7294" title="Morpeth Chantry Bagpipe Museum" label="Morpeth Chantry Bagpipe Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q570600" start="7438" end="7461" title="listed building" label="Grade I listed building"/>
<link wikidata="Q219538" start="7469" end="7487" title="scheduled monument" label="scheduled monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q23383" start="7712" end="7722" title="drawbridge" label="drawbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q23391" start="7807" end="7817" title="portcullis" label="portcullis"/>
<link wikidata="Q216373" start="8184" end="8194" title="River Tyne" label="River Tyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1736200" start="8209" end="8218" title="Newcastle Cathedral" label="cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q2047417" start="8223" end="8240" title="Newcastle railway station" label="Newcastle station"/>
<link wikidata="Q3234114" start="8366" end="8378" title="Most Haunted" label="Most Haunted"/>
<link wikidata="Q11808" start="8869" end="8905" title="Castles in Great Britain and Ireland" label="Castles in Great Britain and Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1807327" start="8907" end="8933" title="List of castles in England" label="List of castles in England"/>
<link wikidata="Q2614444" start="8935" end="8961" title="Newcastle Castle, Bridgend" label="Newcastle Castle, Bridgend"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="990477" wikidata="Q5148426" url="?curid=990477" title="Colonial period">
<text>Colonial period (a period in a country&#x27;s history where it was subject to management by a colonial power) may refer to:

== Continents ==

*European colonization of the Americas
*Colonisation of Africa
* Western imperialism in Asia

== Countries ==
* Colonial Chile
* Spanish conquest of Guatemala
* Viceroyalty of Peru
* Colonial history of the United States
* British Raj, British colonial rule in India, 1858 to 1947
* British Hong Kong, British colonial rule in Hong Kong, 1841 to 1997 (excluding World War II)
* Colony of Ceylon (disambiguation)
* French Indochina, French colonial rule in Vietnam, Cambodia, and Laos
* French Algeria, French colonial rule in Algeria, 1830 to 1962
* Australia:
** History of Australia (1788–1850)
** History of Australia (1851–1900)

==See also==
* Early modern period, the era from 1400–1800 CE
** Age of Discovery or Exploration, the period from – c. 1620 during which seafarers from European countries explored, colonized, and conquered regions across the globe
* Colonialism
** History of colonialism</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5148426" start="0" end="15" title="Colonial period" label="Colonial period"/>
<link wikidata="Q7167" start="94" end="102" title="Colonialism" label="colonial"/>
<link wikidata="Q184716" start="144" end="181" title="European colonization of the Americas" label="European colonization of the Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2353647" start="183" end="205" title="Colonisation of Africa" label="Colonisation of Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3234208" start="208" end="235" title="Western imperialism in Asia" label="Western imperialism in Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16241219" start="255" end="269" title="Colonial Chile" label="Colonial Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q2993582" start="272" end="301" title="Spanish conquest of Guatemala" label="Spanish conquest of Guatemala"/>
<link wikidata="Q211435" start="304" end="323" title="Viceroyalty of Peru" label="Viceroyalty of Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055643" start="326" end="363" title="Colonial history of the United States" label="Colonial history of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q129286" start="366" end="377" title="British Raj" label="British Raj"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054923" start="426" end="443" title="British Hong Kong" label="British Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q25100927" start="521" end="554" title="Colony of Ceylon (disambiguation)" label="Colony of Ceylon (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q185682" start="557" end="573" title="French Indochina" label="French Indochina"/>
<link wikidata="Q218272" start="629" end="643" title="French Algeria" label="French Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q5775114" start="707" end="739" title="History of Australia (1788–1850)" label="History of Australia (1788–1850)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5775100" start="743" end="775" title="History of Australia (1851–1900)" label="History of Australia (1851–1900)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5308718" start="792" end="811" title="Early modern period" label="Early modern period"/>
<link wikidata="Q133641" start="842" end="858" title="Age of Discovery" label="Age of Discovery"/>
<link wikidata="Q7167" start="1010" end="1021" title="Colonialism" label="Colonialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3245246" start="1025" end="1047" title="History of colonialism" label="History of colonialism"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="990481" wikidata="Q3589862" url="?curid=990481" title="Scotland national rugby league team">
<text>The Scotland national rugby league team represent Scotland in international rugby league football tournaments. Following the break-up of the Great Britain team in 2007, Scottish players play solely for Scotland, apart from occasional Southern Hemisphere tours, for which the Great Britain team is expected to be revived. The team is nicknamed &quot;the Bravehearts&quot;.

Though its foundations may date back to as early as 1904, the team formally began in 1995, making them the newest international rugby league team in Great Britain. In their first match they played Ireland, losing narrowly. Since then, Ireland has become the team&#x27;s main rival, the two teams having played each other many times in their short histories. In 2000 they qualified for their first ever World Cup, but failed to make an impact, losing all three of their group matches; however, their biggest losing margin was just 12 points. In 2008 they beat Wales over two matches to qualify for the 2008 World Cup.

Scotland play in a dark blue strip, similar to the nation&#x27;s football and rugby union teams, with blue shirt, shorts and socks. A blue and white shield with a thistle, the Scottish emblem, is the team&#x27;s badge. The shirt has rarely been significantly changed, although in the early days of the team, white was also used on the shirts.

The team is currently ranked 22nd in the RLIF World Rankings, with their highest ranking of fourth having been reached in 2016. Englishman Steve McCormack is the team&#x27;s coach, having coached since 2004, with Danny Brough captaining the side.
==History==
===Foundations===

It could be argued that the foundations for the Scottish team began in 1904. On 5 April 1904 England played an international match against the &quot;Other Nationalities&quot;, a team of Welshmen and Scotsmen, in Wigan. It was a 12-a-side game. Of the twelve players who played for the Other Nationalities team two of them were Scotsmen coming from Northern Union clubs, including captain George Frater. After 80 minutes the Other Nationalities had beaten England 9–3. The team carried on for another two years, playing England in 1905, losing 26–11, and in 1906, drawing 3–3. The team was regularly revived, most notably in the early 1930s, and in 1949.

===1990s===

==== The Wolfhounds ====

Both Scotland and Ireland had been developing rugby league in their respective nations for several years. This was especially true at student level, with a Scotland student team having played regularly since 1987 and having competed in the 1992 Students World Cup. But it was decided that the time was right for an open-age national team to attempt to be entered into an Emerging Nations Tournament that would coincide with the 1995 World Cup, that the Rugby League International Federation had recently announced.

Both Scotland Rugby League and Rugby League Ireland arranged a match on 13 August 1995 at the Royal Dublin Showground in Dublin, Ireland. However the Rugby Football League provided no financial support to either team. Luckily the Scotland team managed to get sponsored, and the money was used for the ferry crossing, but each individual player had to pay for basic accommodation. The Scotland squad was largely made up of players who had played in the student squads, but a few professionals were also included.

Just before the start of the match, after the Scottish team had spent a night at a youth hostel, the Irish Rugby Football Union prevented the teams from getting changed at the arranged Blackrook College. A new location was quickly found but it was half a mile away from the ground, and so the players had to walk that distance in their playing kit.

The match was looking like it would be scoreless at half-time until just before the break, centre Lee Child scored to put Ireland ahead. After the break Scotland hit back, Sean Cusack scoring Scotland&#x27;s first ever try. Gavin Manclark then scored to propel Scotland into the lead. This did not last long though, as Leo Casey scored for Ireland in the 55th minute. Ireland then scored again, with Seamus McCallion going over. Four minutes later in the 69th minute, Scotland quickly scored two tries with Manclark and Shelford sealing the eight points. However, this was not enough as Ketteridge had only kicked three conversions compared to Ireland&#x27;s Ian Devery who had kicked five. The match finished with Ireland winning 26–22, but Thompson for Scotland did win Man of the Match.

==== 1995 Emerging Nations tournament ====

After this international Scotland were allowed to take part in the Emerging Nations Tournament, which was to be held in England. On 16 October 1995 at Featherstone they faced Russia, who had been playing international rugby league since 1991, in their opening game in Group A. Coached by former Great Britain and England (despite the fact he was Scottish) player, George Fairbairn, who put together a team of former Scotland students, rugby union players, and a few league professionals including Alan Tait, who played for Leeds, and who would captain the side. The whole of the Scotland team had hired kilts to be worn pre-match.

The game started off well for Scotland, student James How scoring after just four minutes. And then minutes later Tait doubled the Bravehearts lead. But the Russia Bears dragged themselves back into the match, stand-off Victor Netchaev scoring first, and in the 30th minute Alexander Otradnov scored. Scotland were ahead though at half-time by four points because Russia had failed to convert their tries. In the second half it was all Scotland with only Andrey Scheglov&#x27;s drop goal adding to the Bears points. On the other hand, former Great Britain international Hugh Waddell, Ali Blee and Tait again all scored to seal a Scottish victory.

Scotland&#x27;s second match was against the United States in Northampton, traditionally a rugby union city. The Tomahawks were made up of AMNRL players but Scotland took a while to get going. In the twelfth minute winger Rory Lewis unexpected put America ahead, which caused The Bravehearts to start playing well for the remainder of the first half, Scotland eventually going into the second half leading three tries to one. Graeme Thompson had kicked a penalty very early on in the game, and then after the America try added another four points. McAlister, who had missed the conversion, set up Ketteridge and Smith for Scotland&#x27;s second and third tries respectively. The Bravehearts extended their lead in the second half, Shelford going over and then David Niu, who could have played for Scotland because of his Dunfermline born mother, got one back for the States. But Scotland put a victory beyond doubt with Alan Tait setting up Shelford twice for his hat-trick. Late in the game Niu and Steve Tait scored for the United States and Scotland respectively to end the match 38–16 in Scotland&#x27;s favour.

Scotland&#x27;s two victories, coupled with the Cook Islands ability to beat the United States and Russia too, set up a deciding match in
Castleford where the winner would reach the final. 3,000 people turned up to first see Thompson score a penalty after 15 minutes, but then Nigere Tariu slid over to put the Islanders ahead. Just before the break however, Tait charged through three players to put Scotland back in the game. In the second half the Cook Islands, with several NRL players in their ranks, showed their strength as Sonny Shepherd scored a controversial try as Scottish players complained about the grounding. From a play the ball Shepherd went over again and in the 73rd minute Tariu scored a converted try. The Bravehearts did get a late consolation, skipper Tait going over for Scotland&#x27;s last try before Islander Ali Davys sealed Scotland&#x27;s fate with a drop-goal. The match finished Scotland 10–21 Cook Islands. In the final the Cook Islands beat Ireland 22–6 in Bury to win the tournament and secure a place in the next World Cup. Despite losing this final match the Scotland team and supporters thought that they had done very well considering how young the team was and how good their performances had been against Russia and the USA.

==== Glasgow matches ====

In 1996 the Rugby League International Federation rewarded Scotland with full international status which meant that they could start organising more fixtures and there was no longer a limit to the number of professionals they could use. Before this status Scotland had been restricted to playing just three professionals in a match.

Scotland faced Ireland again in August of that year, and it was to be their first home game, with the match being played at the Firhill Stadium in Glasgow. After 5 minutes Alan Tait touched down with Matt Crowther converting. And then hooker Danny Russell and professional Darren Shaw gave the Bravehearts a 14–0 lead at half-time. In the second half after 52 minutes Lee Hanlon scored Ireland&#x27;s only try of the match, but Martin Ketteridge soon kicked a penalty for Scotland to extend the lead. In the closing stages of the match, after three Irish players had been sin-binned, Darrall Shaleford and Nick Mardon got themselves on the scoreboard with a try each. The match finished Scotland 26–6 Ireland. This is the only time in eight attempts that Scotland have beaten Ireland.

A second match in Glasgow was held in July 1997 against France. The match was to end in controversy surrounding a late try and French referee Thierry Alibert. France had got off to a good start, with Freddie Banquet scoring before Danny Russell and Gary Christie scored a try each to send the Scots in front. However, with a few minutes to go before half-time, Jerome Guisset scored under the posts to give the French side a 12–10 lead after 40 minutes. After half-time France extended their lead through Fabien Devecchi but once again Scotland rallied together and Stuart McCarthy scored a crucial try, which was not converted. In the 70th minute Matt Crowther scored a try, and converted it, to put Scotland into a 20–18 lead. With just seconds remaining, a storm brewed when referee Alibert awarded a try to France&#x27;s Arnauld Dulac. The Bravehearts and coaching staff said that the ball was knocked on, and therefore a scrum should have occurred. English touch judge Peter Walton signalled the knock-on but play continued. The match finished Scotland 20–22 France.

==== Clash of the Nations ====

The Clash of the Nations was a new tournament designed to make November 1998 a month of international league as Great Britain was touring the Southern Hemisphere. Scotland, France and Ireland would play two matches each and the winner of the two matches would be crowned champion.

Scotland first faced France in Perpignan, the first match since they were controversially denied a victory in 1996. New coach Billy McGinty promised &quot;the strongest ever Scotland squad&quot; and just three players survived from Scotland&#x27;s last international match. Débutant Jason Flowers put Scotland ahead, before France levelled the scores. But Danny Arnold once again put the Bravehearts ahead. Scotland excelled and Jason Roach further strengthened Scotland&#x27;s lead before France narrowed the lead to four points at half-time. In the 55th minute France scored to take the lead for the first time in the match. Roach got his second try, but France retaliated by scoring one of their own. Ten minutes from full-time France scored another try to confirm the two points. The match finished France 26–22 Scotland, with Lee Penny earning Man of the Match award.

France went onto beat Ireland in their second match, therefore clinching the trophy, however Scotland still played Ireland in Glasgow, the first meeting between these nations since 1995. The first half was to prove uneventful, with Ireland scoring a single try to make the score 6–0 after 40 minutes. On the 46th minute Ireland drifted into a 10-point lead, but John Duffy kept the Bravehearts in the match with 20 minutes of the match remaining. Logan Campbell got a try for Scotland but then Ireland scored another, a drop-goal to win the match 17–10. Colin Wilson was awarded the Man of the Match award, and significantly became the first player from the Scottish Conference domestic league to represent Scotland.

With two defeats from the tournament Scotland finished bottom of the table.

==== Triangular Challenge ====

England have competed in 26 European Nations Cups, the first in 1935. In the past the tournament has been axed and revived many times, and it was stopped for six years because of the Second World War. From 1935 to 1949 (minus the war years) England played France and Wales annually, and won the tournament in 1935, 1946, 1947 and 1948. From 1950 to 1956 an Other Nationalities team were added as the fourth team in the competition (except in 1956 when Wales did not field a team). During those years England won in 1950 and 1954. Since then the tournament has run for some seasons, but never for more than five years at a time. But from 1970 to 1996 England won it six out of a possible nine times. In 2003 the tournament was revived and England comfortably won, beating her old rivals plus Scotland, Ireland and Russia. England beat the same opponents to win the cup again in 2004. This was the last time England competed, they were replaced by Georgia. The cup ran for just one more year before it was axed again. It has not since returned. In total England have won the cup fourteen times.

With The Clash of the Nations tournament over, the Celtic nations were to play each other once over October and November in a new competition. The matches were to coincide with the Great Britain versus Australia matches, in which Great Britain ended up being badly beaten. Dale Laughton was the only Scotman in the Great Britain team and so the Bravehearts didn&#x27;t suffer from withdrawals as much as Ireland and Wales did. It is generally regarded that the Rugby Football League made the same mistakes as the 1998 tournament with matches being held on Friday nights and competing against both the football and rugby union seasons and consequently attendances were very low for the matches. The first of Scotland&#x27;s matches was against Wales in which many of the best Welsh players were with Great Britain. Scotland took the lead through Danny Arnold but The Dragons quickly made the game level. Captain Danny Russell went over for Scotland&#x27;s second try, but once again Wales hit back within minutes. Andrew Lambert scored just before half-time for The Bravehearts but the lead did not last long after the break with Wales scoring. However, the Welsh were unable to reply to the next four tries, with Mike Wainwright and Matt Crowther each getting themselves onto the scoreboard and both Lambert and Arnold getting their second tries. A win or a draw would seal Scotland&#x27;s place at the top of the table but Ireland mixture of Super League and local players were too good for Scotland. They raced into a ten-point lead before Russell and Arnold, with Crowther converting one, allowed Scotland to claw their way back into the match. In the final quarter the Bravehearts fell apart, leaking in 21 points to lose the match.

===2000s===

==== 2000 World Cup ====
Scotland were placed in Group 4 in the 16-team Rugby League World Cup for 2000, which was held in the United Kingdom and France. This meant that they would face Ireland, Samoa and New Zealand Maori, with one match being played at Glasgow, and one match being played in Edinburgh. Out of the four teams, two would then qualify for the Quarter Finals, playing the top teams from other groups. The Scots World Cup campaign was criticised though, before the tournament was even started when the 24-man squad was named, as not one of the players were born in Scotland.

In their first match after the World Cup campaign, Scotland faced France in the southern French town of Lézignan-Corbières. Shaun McRae, citing his domestic coaching at Hull FC, departed as Scotland coach and Glasgow-born Billy McGinty took over the role with the then Swinton Lions coach and former Great Britain player Mike Gregory taking the role of assistant coach. The squad for this match included 13 survivors from the World Cup matches and three new players who were each earning their first international cap. The Scots got off to a great start, scoring three tries in the first 13 minutes and never looked back as they won the match 42–20. The heat in the French summer was thought to be a problem going into the match, but Scotland scored seven tries in total to record their first win against the French and arguably their best win yet in international competition. Two tries each were scored by Danny Arnold and Jason Flowers, and Matt Crowther converted all seven tries. Seven years later this victory is Scotland&#x27;s biggest win and is still recognised as one of their best amongst supporters.

==== European Cup ====

Scotland joined the prestigious European Nations Cup tournament in 2003, now being regarded as the seventh best national nation. This newly expanded competition, which also featured Russia and Ireland for the first time, as well as England A, France and Wales, was split into two groups with the winner of each group playing each other to become the competition&#x27;s champions. Scotland were placed in a group with rivals Ireland and France. In May 2003, several months before the start of the tournament, Scotland Rugby League announced that Mike Gregory would become the new coach of the Scottish team, with David Lyon being appointed as his assistant. However it was later announced that due to Mike Gregorys commitments to Wigan Warriors, McGinty will continue to coach the side. Scotland&#x27;s first match was against Ireland at Old Anniesland. The Scots lost by just two points, with Lee Penny, Danny Arnold and Jason Roach all scoring tries for Scotland, but John Duffy had missed one of his crucial four goals. Scotland were 12–2 up after 21 minutes and were level at half-time, but Irish substitute Karl Fitzpatrick gave the Wolfhounds the win in the last few minutes of the match. With France then beating Ireland in Dublin, Scotland now knew that they could clinch first place. The match held in Narbonne, between France and Scotland turned out to be closely fought. However, the Scots came out on top with an Andrew Henderson try and two Oliver Wilkes goals sealing the victory by two points. This scoreline meant that all three teams had finished on two points, but it was France, with the better points difference, that went on to face England in the final.

The 2004 competition followed the same plan but this time the Bravehearts were with Ireland and Wales. These two teams had already played each other a week earlier with the result and Irish victory. Both sides scored four tries, but it was the kicking of Danny Brough that helped Scotland to beat the Dragons by 30 points to 22 in Glasgow. The match drew over a thousand spectators and was the first time Scotland had won at home for five years. Just five days later though, the team had to play their second game against the Irish Wolfhounds in Ireland. Despite a try from Spencer Miller and three successful kicks by Danny Brough, the Irish ran out easy winners with the match ending 43–10 and thus ending Scotlands campaign in the cup.

==== 2008 World Cup Qualifying ====

On 17 May 2006 Scotland received word that they would play two matches against Wales for a place in the 2008 World Cup. The two matches of Group 1 (there were two European groups) would be contested in late 2006 and 2007, with the first being in Bridgend and the second being in Glasgow.

Before the first match, coach Steve McCormack had time with the players in training camps in Huddersfield and Swansea, and admitted that he was not threatened by the likes of Super League giants Iestyn Harris and Lee Briers in the Welsh team. This is despite many fans and journalists favouring the Dragons to easily win. McCormack later named his squad for the match, which included a mixture of Super League, National League and Rugby League Conference players. Five of them would be making their début, but long-serving player Ian Henderson, who had played in every Scottish match since 2001, was unable to play for in this match.

Scotland started well in Bridgend with Wade Liddell giving the Bravehearts the lead after just 8 minutes. This try was converted by Gareth Morton. But things got bad as Wales pulled a try back through Richard Johnson, and then Danny Brough was sinbinned for dissent on 26 minutes. In the next ten minutes a Wales team minus Iestyn Harris, who failed a fitness test prior to the match, capitalised on Scotland&#x27;s shortfall and scored two tries to create a 14–6 lead going into half-time. However, after the break the Scots immediately got back into the match, Danny Brough singlehandedly scoring a try after 70 seconds of the interval, and Jamie Benn a little later leeching on to a grubber kick. Mick Nanyn missed both conversions and so the scores were tied. On the 67th minute Scotland went in front, Nanyn converting his own try. And to seal a 21–14 victory Danny Brough scored a drop-goal. He would later get Man of the Match award.

To prepare for the second qualification match, Scotland travelled to Perpignan to play test nation France. Scotland rested several key players, like Danny Brough and Ian Henderson, and gave caps to six début players. It turned out to be a bad decision as Scotland suffered their heaviest defeat in their history. After 15 minutes Scotland were trailing 18–0, and despite tries from Benn, Nanyn and Paterson, plus two successful conversions from Nanyn, France were always well ahead. The match finished France 46–16 Scotland.

Before the second qualification match in Glasgow, Wales were still confident of victory with the Dragons assistant coach Kevin Ellis saying that his Welsh team had some fantastic players, and that it was the best since Wales golden era of 1991–1995. But Scotland had the advantage going into the match, for a win or draw or even a small loss would guarantee them a place in the cup. Before the match Danny Brough was announced as captain before the match, thus earning his sixth cap too.

In the first half of the match Wales were on top, with Scotland only managing to score four points overall, two penalties by Danny Brough. Richard Fletcher had been carried off after an aerial collision, which caused the game to be stopped for six minutes. At half time the score was 14–4 in favour of the Dragons, meaning Scotland would not qualify. In the 52nd minute Ben Fisher darted over the line to score Scotland&#x27;s first try. Importantly this was converted by Danny Brough. And with seven minutes remaining Jamie Benn latched onto Mick Nanyn&#x27;s speculative pass to score Scotland&#x27;s second try, which Brough converted. Wales scored late on but it was not enough. The match finished Scotland 16–18 Wales, with an aggregate score of Scotland 37–32, and Mick Nanyn received Man of the Match award.

==== 2008 World Cup ====

On 9 July 2008, Scotland Rugby League announced that Steve McCormack had signed a 12-month deal to continue his job as head coach of the Scotland team. Danny Brough will continue to skipper the team into the World Cup, providing he stays fit. Except for Edinburgh Eagles stand-off Paddy Couper, all of the Scottish team&#x27;s players were selected under the grandparent rule. 
In the group stage they made history as they finally won a game and it was against Fiji who were demolishing opponents courtesy of superstars such as Jarryd Hayne. But that is as far as they finished in the 2008 Rugby League World Cup because their points differential was worse than Fiji&#x27;s and France who were also in their group and were demolished by them in their first game of the 2008 campaign. Several NRL and Super League stars were in McCormack&#x27;s team for the tournament including Manly-Warringah Sea Eagles winger/fullback Michael Robertson who had scored 3 tries in Manly&#x27;s 40–0 triumph over the Melbourne Storm in the 2008 NRL Grand Final just prior to the tournament as well as crossing for 18 tries in the 2008 NRL season.

===2010s===

==== 2013 World Cup ====

No Qualification was required for the Bravehearts for the 2013 Rugby League World Cup due to participating in the 2008 tournament. They were drawn in pool C alongside World Cup debutantes Italy and the powerful forwards and fast backs of Tonga. Every team needed to play 3 group games each so Scotland would also play an inter-group game against the other World Cup debutantes the United States. The Scots were underdogs against the Pacific Island nation who were full of NRL talent. But Scotland, in front of a record crowd at Derwent Park made another upset (like Fiji five years ago) winning a tough match by only a two-point margin at the end of the match. Scotland&#x27;s second match was against the Italians at the same venue in front of more than 7,000 fans again who this time witnessed a high scoring draw. Scotland then finished their group stage by beating the United States convincingly. Scotland had almost qualified for the World Cup knockout stage for the first ever time but Italy were still within a chance to finish above Scotland and therefore eliminate Scotland&#x27;s chances from progressing any further in the 2013 tournament. Italy only needed to win after they were also on 16+ points differential and they were facing Tonga who had absolutely nothing at stake but pride to play for. But, a shock to all, Tonga outclassed the Italians and eliminated them from participating any further in the competition. In the quarter-final they had a rare clash with a rugby league heavyweight. They took on New Zealand in Leeds in front of their biggest attendance away from Scotland. Despite their early defensive pressure that the crowd loved to cheer out loud for, Scotland&#x27;s lack of experience against the heavyweight nations showed on the scoreboard and were therefore eliminated in a pleasing World Cup performance.

==== 2010s European Cup ====

In 2010 the European Cup reverted to the &#x27;League Leaders&#x27; being the winners rather than having final games like the 2000s decade. In the 2010 European Cup and 2012 European Cup competitions Scotland only managed to finish third in each tournament recording with only one total victory.

In October and November 2014, 2013 Super League Man of Steel Award winner and RLIF International Player of the Year shortlist award finalist Danny Brough led Scotland in the 2014 European Cup. He shared his belief saying that Scotland have the quality and deserve playing at a higher International level after the 2013 Rugby League World Cup performance. The Winner of the tournament would qualify to play in the 2016 Four Nations alongside International heavyweights Australia, England and New Zealand. Brough played at his best throughout the tournament, earning him the &#x27;Player of the Tournament&#x27; award. His performances and leadership inspired and influenced the team to qualify for 2016&#x27;s major international rugby league competition.

==== 2016 Four Nations ====

Scotland qualified for the 2016 Four Nations series and would be co hosts with England.

==== 2017 World Cup ====

After making the finals of the 2013 tournament, Scotland automatically qualified for the 2017 Rugby League World Cup.

===2021 World Cup===
After losing to Italy in the opening group stage match at the tournament 28-4, Scotland suffered their worst ever defeat as a rugby league nation losing 84-0 to Australia in the second group stage game at Coventry.
In the final group stage match, Scotland were defeated by Fiji 30-14 which meant they exited the competition winless.

==Identity==

Since their first match Scotland have always played in royal blue, with a royal blue shirt, shorts and socks. In their two World Cup qualifying matches in 2007, the Scottish flag, featuring the white cross on a blue background, was on each shoulder and also on the shirt was a white collar. On the left of the shirt is the Scotland badge, and on the right is the Great Britain badge which is split into four and then has the England, Scotland, Wales and Ireland rugby league badges in a shield. This is to signify Scotland&#x27;s part in the Great Britain setup.

In early 2008 Scotland Rugby League announced that they had secured a five-figure sponsorship deal with The Co-operative which would see the world&#x27;s largest consumer-owned businesses logo on the front of the shirts for the 2008 World Cup and for all 2009 matches too.

A new shirt has recently been designed for the World Cup and it is expected that fans will be able to buy it
sometime in the Summer 2008. Instead of the Great Britain badge on the right, there will be the World Cup logo, similar to each of the ten teams shirts. The shirt is made by German sportswear company Puma.

Scotland&#x27;s current kit suppliers are BLK. On the shirt, Bartercard is on the front (replacing Highland Spring as of 2017) while Match Point is on the right sleeve while on the back, Caledonian Brewery is on the top while Lucozade Sport is on the bottom.

===Emblem===

The emblem of the Scotland team is the thistle, which is on the team&#x27;s badge in a crest. The thistle is an ancient Celtic symbol of nobility of character as well as of birth and is the symbol of the Order of the Thistle a high chivalric order of Scotland. There is also a well-known Scottish legend that in Medieval times a Viking, wanting to invade Scotland, stood on a thistle and suddenly yelped in pain, alerting the defenders of a Scottish castle. The thistle is used on the badges of many national and domestic sports teams.

==Coaches==

==Players==

===Current squad===
Squad selected for the 2021 Rugby League World Cup.

==Records==
*Bold – denotes player still active at club level

===Most capped players===

===Top try scorers===
===Player of the Year===
Since 2004, the Scottish management team have given the Dave Valentine Award to their player of the year. The award uses a voting system and is given to the player in early January.

===Rankings===

* World Ranking: 15th (2022)
* European Ranking: 8th (2022)

===Team===

* Highest winning score: 104–0 v Italy at Padova, 17 October 2009
* Widest winning margin: 104–0 v Italy at Padova, 17 October 2009
* Highest losing score: 84–0 v Australia at Coventry, 22 October 2022
* Widest losing margin: 84–0 v Australia at Coventry, 22 October 2022

===Other===

* Biggest home attendance: 2,233 vs France at Glasgow, 9 July 1997 
* Biggest away attendance: 21,009 vs England at Coventry, 5 November 2016

==Competitive record==

Since their inception as a rugby league nation, Scotland have played 60 matches, winning approximately 30%. Their most regular opponent has been Ireland, who similarly starting playing rugby league in the mid-1990s. In 1995, the Great Britain team split into the separate home nations. As such Scotland only started playing rugby league as an individual nation at this time. They played their first ever international against Ireland at the RDS Arena in Dublin in 1995. The Irish won by a close score of 26–22 in front of 5,716 fans. Scotland have gone on to play Ireland the most times with 15 matches, winning only four of these.

Scotland have played France and Wales 11 and 10 times respectively. Along with Ireland, these are the only teams that Scotland play on a regular basis. Despite playing these home nations a number of times, they have only played England on one occasion, although they have also played England&#x27;s 2nd team, &#x27;the Knights&#x27;, twice. Excluding the aforementioned teams, Scotland have played 16 other teams in their history, but have not played more than three games against any of them. Scotland have a 100% win record against six of these 16 teams. In their history, they have drawn four games, including a 30–30 result against Italy during the 2013 Rugby League World Cup, having previously beaten them in by a resounding score of 104–0. Scotland&#x27;s 18-18 result against New Zealand during the 2016 Four Nations was considered one of the greatest results in international rugby league history and ensured that Scotland became the only &#x27;fourth&#x27; nation in Four Nations history to not be defeated by another team.

Scotland&#x27;s highest home attendance is just 2,233. This game was only their second and saw them defeated 22–20 by France at Firhill Park, Glasgow. Rugby league is not a major sport in Scotland and home attendances average at around just 1,000. Scotland&#x27;s highest away attendance was much more when a crowd of 21,009 saw them defeated by 38–12 against England during the 2016 Four Nations, this game being held at Ricoh Arena, Coventry.
&lt;br&gt;
Head to head record for the Scotland national side as of 11 November 2024.
===World Cup===
Scotland made their World Cup debut at the 2000 World Cup having previously competed as part of Great Britain. Their best result was in 2013 when they reached the Quarter Finals.
===European Championship===

===Four Nations===
Scotland have only qualified for one Four Nations tournament where they made history by becoming the first fourth nation to earn a point after an 18–18 draw against New Zealand.
==IRL Rankings==
==Other Scottish teams==
The Scotland A national rugby league team is made up of amateur players, who either play in the Rugby League Conference the BUCS university league or the Scottish domestic competition. Napier University has also played a huge part in the team, with many Napier students having played in the side over the years. The team regularly compete against England, Wales and Ireland, playing them annually in the Rugby League Amateur Four Nations. Since the creation of this tournament, in 2002, Scotland have won it just once in 2010. In 2003 Scotland embarked on a mini tour of Europe playing in Netherlands, Italy and Serbia, helping expand rugby league in those country by playing domestic and national sides. Former player and winner in 2010 Mike Wallace currently coaches the side.

==See also==

* Rugby league in Scotland
* Sport in Scotland
* Rugby League World Cup
* Great Britain national rugby league team
* List of Scotland national rugby league team players
* Scotland national rugby union team

== References ==

===Bibliography===

===Notes===
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3589862" start="4" end="39" title="Scotland national rugby league team" label="Scotland national rugby league team"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="50" end="58" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q10962" start="76" end="88" title="rugby league" label="rugby league"/>
<link wikidata="Q3590223" start="141" end="154" title="Great Britain national rugby league team" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q41228" start="234" end="253" title="Southern Hemisphere" label="Southern Hemisphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q23666" start="522" end="535" title="Great Britain" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3589812" start="570" end="577" title="Ireland national rugby league team" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3000717" start="775" end="784" title="2000 Rugby League World Cup" label="World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q3403733" start="932" end="937" title="Wales national rugby league team" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q3000722" start="974" end="988" title="2008 Rugby League World Cup" label="2008 World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q34044" start="1056" end="1064" title="Scotland national football team" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q945016" start="1069" end="1080" title="Scotland national rugby union team" label="rugby union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7378330" start="1105" end="1111" title="Rugby shorts" label="shorts"/>
<link wikidata="Q30166" start="1154" end="1161" title="Onopordum acanthium" label="thistle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2976151" start="1376" end="1395" title="RLIF World Rankings" label="RLIF World Rankings"/>
<link wikidata="Q7613316" start="1474" end="1489" title="Steve McCormack" label="Steve McCormack"/>
<link wikidata="Q3015216" start="1548" end="1560" title="Danny Brough" label="Danny Brough"/>
<link wikidata="Q2873078" start="1762" end="1781" title="Other Nationalities rugby league team" label="Other Nationalities"/>
<link wikidata="Q188353" start="1799" end="1807" title="Welsh person" label="Welshmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q181634" start="1812" end="1820" title="Scotsmen" label="Scotsmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q208143" start="1825" end="1830" title="Wigan" label="Wigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127622" start="1961" end="1975" title="Rugby Football League" label="Northern Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q4590604" start="2678" end="2705" title="1995 Rugby League Emerging Nations Tournament" label="Emerging Nations Tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q3000715" start="2735" end="2749" title="1995 Rugby League World Cup" label="1995 World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2308450" start="2760" end="2797" title="Rugby League International Federation" label="Rugby League International Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7435651" start="2828" end="2849" title="Scotland Rugby League" label="Scotland Rugby League"/>
<link wikidata="Q7378214" start="2854" end="2874" title="Rugby League Ireland" label="Rugby League Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q934417" start="2917" end="2940" title="Royal Dublin Society" label="Royal Dublin Showground"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="2944" end="2950" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="2952" end="2959" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127622" start="2973" end="2994" title="Rugby Football League" label="Rugby Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672926" start="3437" end="3463" title="Irish Rugby Football Union" label="Irish Rugby Football Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q4590604" start="4588" end="4615" title="1995 Rugby League Emerging Nations Tournament" label="Emerging Nations Tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="4641" end="4648" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q2125254" start="4672" end="4684" title="Featherstone" label="Featherstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q426131" start="4696" end="4702" title="Russia national rugby league team" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3590223" start="4816" end="4829" title="Great Britain national rugby league team" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q5539171" start="4885" end="4901" title="George Fairbairn (rugby league)" label="George Fairbairn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5849" start="4956" end="4967" title="rugby union" label="rugby union"/>
<link wikidata="Q2830602" start="5018" end="5027" title="Alan Tait" label="Alan Tait"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202117" start="5044" end="5049" title="Leeds Rhinos" label="Leeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q151948" start="5124" end="5129" title="kilts" label="kilts"/>
<link wikidata="Q3590565" start="5846" end="5859" title="United States national rugby league team" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q192240" start="5863" end="5874" title="Northampton" label="Northampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5849" start="5892" end="5903" title="rugby union" label="rugby union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1616853" start="5940" end="5945" title="AMNRL" label="AMNRL"/>
<link wikidata="Q211950" start="6622" end="6633" title="Dunfermline" label="Dunfermline"/>
<link wikidata="Q731343" start="6966" end="6978" title="Cook Islands national rugby league team" label="Cook Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q546485" start="7056" end="7066" title="Castleford" label="Castleford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140630" start="7396" end="7399" title="NRL" label="NRL"/>
<link wikidata="Q47822" start="7910" end="7914" title="Bury, Greater Manchester" label="Bury"/>
<link wikidata="Q2308450" start="8225" end="8262" title="Rugby League International Federation" label="Rugby League International Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419068" start="8675" end="8690" title="Firhill Stadium" label="Firhill Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q3590161" start="9389" end="9395" title="France national rugby league team" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q3190928" start="9694" end="9708" title="Jerome Guisset" label="Jerome Guisset"/>
<link wikidata="Q4913000" start="10846" end="10859" title="Billy McGinty (rugby league)" label="Billy McGinty"/>
<link wikidata="Q6162505" start="11003" end="11016" title="Jason Flowers" label="Jason Flowers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5220105" start="11076" end="11088" title="Danny Arnold (rugby league)" label="Danny Arnold"/>
<link wikidata="Q6163349" start="11149" end="11160" title="Jason Roach (rugby league)" label="Jason Roach"/>
<link wikidata="Q6514712" start="11551" end="11560" title="Lee Penny" label="Lee Penny"/>
<link wikidata="Q6230291" start="11956" end="11966" title="John Duffy (rugby league)" label="John Duffy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6666948" start="12041" end="12055" title="Logan Campbell (rugby league)" label="Logan Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5145687" start="12148" end="12160" title="Colin Wilson (rugby league)" label="Colin Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4093" start="15521" end="15528" title="Glasgow" label="Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q23436" start="15560" end="15569" title="Edinburgh" label="Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q176341" start="15960" end="15978" title="Lézignan-Corbières" label="Lézignan-Corbières"/>
<link wikidata="Q863661" start="16025" end="16032" title="Hull F.C." label="Hull FC"/>
<link wikidata="Q3506631" start="16125" end="16138" title="Swinton Lions" label="Swinton Lions"/>
<link wikidata="Q6847075" start="16177" end="16189" title="Mike Gregory" label="Mike Gregory"/>
<link wikidata="Q6847075" start="17538" end="17550" title="Mike Gregory" label="Mike Gregory"/>
<link wikidata="Q16196142" start="17605" end="17615" title="David Lyon (rugby league)" label="David Lyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210267" start="17722" end="17736" title="Wigan Warriors" label="Wigan Warriors"/>
<link wikidata="Q28401284" start="17830" end="17844" title="Old Anniesland" label="Old Anniesland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6514712" start="17886" end="17895" title="Lee Penny" label="Lee Penny"/>
<link wikidata="Q5220105" start="17897" end="17909" title="Danny Arnold (rugby league)" label="Danny Arnold"/>
<link wikidata="Q6163349" start="17914" end="17925" title="Jason Roach (rugby league)" label="Jason Roach"/>
<link wikidata="Q6230291" start="17962" end="17972" title="John Duffy (rugby league)" label="John Duffy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6371788" start="18104" end="18120" title="Karl Fitzpatrick" label="Karl Fitzpatrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q4757282" start="18417" end="18433" title="Andrew Henderson (rugby league)" label="Andrew Henderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7087936" start="18446" end="18459" title="Oliver Wilkes" label="Oliver Wilkes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3148027" start="19930" end="19943" title="Iestyn Harris" label="Iestyn Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q3228836" start="19948" end="19958" title="Lee Briers" label="Lee Briers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3147276" start="20265" end="20278" title="Ian Henderson (rugby league)" label="Ian Henderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5338183" start="23423" end="23439" title="Edinburgh Eagles" label="Edinburgh Eagles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7123435" start="23450" end="23462" title="Paddy Couper" label="Paddy Couper"/>
<link wikidata="Q16840156" start="23528" end="23544" title="grandparent rule" label="grandparent rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q3590518" start="23630" end="23634" title="Fiji national rugby league team" label="Fiji"/>
<link wikidata="Q3162802" start="23697" end="23709" title="Jarryd Hayne" label="Jarryd Hayne"/>
<link wikidata="Q3000722" start="23754" end="23781" title="2008 Rugby League World Cup" label="2008 Rugby League World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q3590161" start="23847" end="23853" title="France national rugby league team" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q3286027" start="24047" end="24073" title="Manly-Warringah Sea Eagles" label="Manly-Warringah Sea Eagles"/>
<link wikidata="Q16222421" start="24090" end="24107" title="Michael Robertson (rugby league)" label="Michael Robertson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1574487" start="24169" end="24184" title="Melbourne Storm" label="Melbourne Storm"/>
<link wikidata="Q4611606" start="24192" end="24212" title="2008 NRL Grand Final" label="2008 NRL Grand Final"/>
<link wikidata="Q4611607" start="24282" end="24297" title="2008 NRL season" label="2008 NRL season"/>
<link wikidata="Q3000719" start="24397" end="24424" title="2013 Rugby League World Cup" label="2013 Rugby League World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q844843" start="24527" end="24532" title="Italy national rugby league team" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3590551" start="24577" end="24582" title="Tonga national rugby league team" label="Tonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q3590565" start="24720" end="24733" title="United States national rugby league team" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q5263340" start="24867" end="24879" title="Derwent Park" label="Derwent Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q3590290" start="25860" end="25871" title="New Zealand national rugby league team" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26223" end="26235" title="Rugby League European Cup#League Leaders (2010–Onwards)" label="European Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2999687" start="26358" end="26375" title="2010 European Cup" label="2010 European Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q4625410" start="26380" end="26397" title="2012 European Cup" label="2012 European Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1838799" start="26556" end="26574" title="Man of Steel Awards" label="Man of Steel Award"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26586" end="26623" title="RLIF Awards#International Player of the Year" label="RLIF International Player of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q3015216" start="26649" end="26661" title="Danny Brough" label="Danny Brough"/>
<link wikidata="Q17513480" start="26682" end="26699" title="2014 European Cup (rugby league)" label="2014 European Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q18377830" start="26921" end="26938" title="2016 Rugby League Four Nations" label="2016 Four Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q18377830" start="27320" end="27344" title="2016 Rugby League Four Nations" label="2016 Four Nations series"/>
<link wikidata="Q3000720" start="27497" end="27524" title="2017 Rugby League World Cup" label="2017 Rugby League World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q7726527" start="28564" end="28580" title="The Co-operative brand" label="The Co-operative"/>
<link wikidata="Q157064" start="29043" end="29047" title="Puma AG" label="Puma"/>
<link wikidata="Q3198813" start="29092" end="29095" title="Beyond Limits Known" label="BLK"/>
<link wikidata="Q4865174" start="29111" end="29121" title="Bartercard" label="Bartercard"/>
<link wikidata="Q5759128" start="29149" end="29164" title="Highland Spring" label="Highland Spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q5019422" start="29237" end="29255" title="Caledonian Brewery" label="Caledonian Brewery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110171" start="29276" end="29290" title="Lucozade Sport" label="Lucozade Sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q721030" start="29528" end="29548" title="Order of the Thistle" label="Order of the Thistle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003221" start="29556" end="29571" title="chivalric order" label="chivalric order"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="29636" end="29644" title="Medieval" label="Medieval"/>
<link wikidata="Q12567" start="29653" end="29659" title="Viking" label="Viking"/>
<link wikidata="Q20804884" start="29930" end="29957" title="2021 Men&amp;#x27;s Rugby League World Cup" label="2021 Rugby League World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q3590223" start="31051" end="31064" title="Great Britain national rugby league team" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3589812" start="31248" end="31255" title="Ireland national rugby league team" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1766418" start="31263" end="31272" title="RDS Arena" label="RDS Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="31276" end="31282" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3590161" start="31476" end="31482" title="France national rugby league team" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q3403733" start="31487" end="31492" title="Wales national rugby league team" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q3589698" start="31683" end="31690" title="England national rugby league team" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q844843" start="32091" end="32096" title="Italy national rugby league team" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3000719" start="32108" end="32135" title="2013 Rugby League World Cup" label="2013 Rugby League World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q3590290" start="32239" end="32250" title="New Zealand national rugby league team" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q18377830" start="32262" end="32279" title="2016 Rugby League Four Nations" label="2016 Four Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q3590161" start="32608" end="32614" title="France national rugby league team" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419068" start="32618" end="32630" title="Firhill Park" label="Firhill Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q4093" start="32632" end="32639" title="Glasgow" label="Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q3589698" start="32850" end="32857" title="England national rugby league team" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q842077" start="32912" end="32923" title="Ricoh Arena" label="Ricoh Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q6225" start="32925" end="32933" title="Coventry" label="Coventry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7378199" start="33580" end="33603" title="Rugby League Conference" label="Rugby League Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277357" start="33669" end="33686" title="Napier University" label="Napier University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7533946" start="33888" end="33921" title="Rugby League Amateur Four Nations" label="Rugby League Amateur Four Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="34073" end="34084" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="34086" end="34091" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q403" start="34096" end="34102" title="Serbia" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="34222" end="34234" title="Mike Wallace(rugby league)" label="Mike Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q7378304" start="34280" end="34304" title="Rugby league in Scotland" label="Rugby league in Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q740218" start="34307" end="34324" title="Sport in Scotland" label="Sport in Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639293" start="34327" end="34349" title="Rugby League World Cup" label="Rugby League World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q3590223" start="34352" end="34392" title="Great Britain national rugby league team" label="Great Britain national rugby league team"/>
<link wikidata="Q6596532" start="34395" end="34446" title="List of Scotland national rugby league team players" label="List of Scotland national rugby league team players"/>
<link wikidata="Q945016" start="34449" end="34483" title="Scotland national rugby union team" label="Scotland national rugby union team"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="990486" wikidata="Q7304591" url="?curid=990486" title="Red Menace (New Mexico Lobos)">
<text>The Red Menace is the name of the bleacher section behind the North end zone in University Stadium, the home field of the New Mexico Lobos. It is known for having some of the most-rabid fans in the Mountain West Conference.

==History==
Following the expansion and renovation of the north end of the stadium in 2001, which included a new bleacher section around the north end zone that held 5,700 additional fans. The idea was to establish a fanatical tradition at University Stadium. The idea of a group of fans sitting in that section, patterning it after the Cleveland Browns’ “Dawg Pound,” originated on Cherrysilver.com, a Web site for UNM athletics fans. The response was immediate, and soon, “The Red Menace” numbered in the hundreds. Lee Roy Lucero and fellow Cherrysilver.com operator Dom Zarella began working with the athletics department to sell tickets for the group at a discounted rate and they advertised it on their Web site.

After year three TheRedMenace.com started attending Lobo football practices and writing daily reports becoming the first media outlet in the state of New Mexico to take such an active interest in UNM football. Since that time TRM as it is affectionately known has published thousands of practice, game, and recruiting reports interviewing thousands of players.

==Notoriety==
Red Menace fans carry a notorious reputation for their fondness of face-painting, colorful attire, and barking like a dog for approximately three straight hours. In addition, University of New Mexico football players participate in the famous “Lobo Leap”, where the players leap and celebrate with the fans following every game.

TheRedMenace.com is celebrating their 15th year in existence with Lee Roy Lucero still at the helm. His writers include Wes Henderson and Rudy Chavez.

==References==
==External links==
* Official Red Menace site</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7304591" start="4" end="14" title="Red Menace (New Mexico Lobos)" label="Red Menace"/>
<link wikidata="Q936242" start="80" end="98" title="University Stadium (Albuquerque)" label="University Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q3257637" start="122" end="138" title="New Mexico Lobos" label="New Mexico Lobos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1786588" start="198" end="222" title="Mountain West Conference" label="Mountain West Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q936242" start="465" end="483" title="University Stadium (Albuquerque)" label="University Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q223527" start="562" end="578" title="Cleveland Browns" label="Cleveland Browns"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="990490" wikidata="Q2654944" url="?curid=990490" title="Eradicator (character)">
<text>The Eradicator is the given name of four different fictional comic book characters, appearing in books published by DC Comics. The first iteration was an antihero character appearing in &quot;The Flash&quot; series of comics. The second was a superhero (and sometimes supervillain) having a recurring role in Superman stories, and the remaining two first appeared in 2013 and 2017, respectively.

The Flash Eradicator was created by Carmine Infantino and Cary Bates and first appeared in &quot;The Flash&quot; #314. The first Superman character was created by writer Roger Stern and artist Curt Swan, and first appeared in &quot;Action Comics Annual&quot; #2 (1989).

Adam Rayner portrays a version of Morgan Edge who is revealed to be a Kryptonian and Superman&#x27;s half-brother named Tal-Rho in the TV series &quot;Superman &amp; Lois&quot;. He eventually lets himself get possessed by Kryptonian life-forces through a device called the Eradicator.

==Eradicator publication history==
The Eradicator first appeared in &quot;Action Comics Annual&quot; #2 in 1989. The &quot;Day of the Krypton Man&quot; story arc prominently featured the Eradicator in the pages of &quot;Superman&quot;, &quot;The Adventures of Superman,&quot; and &quot;Action Comics&quot;. The story arc ran for six issues cover-dated March and April 1990, and was collected in &quot;Superman: Eradication!&quot; The Eradicator reappeared in &quot;&quot; #1 as a humanoid being composed of energy.

In &quot;Action Comics&quot; #687 (June 1993), the character appeared as The Last Son of Krypton, and became the featured character in &quot;Action Comics&quot; through the &quot;Reign of the Supermen&quot; story arc, beginning with &quot;Action Comics&quot; #687-689. The character was &quot;resurrected&quot; in &quot;Action Comics&quot; #693 (November 1993) and then featured regularly in &quot;Outsiders&quot;, first appearing as a member of the team in issue #3. The character was featured in his own three-issue eponymous limited series in 1996.

==Fictional character biography==
===First Eradicator===

In the distant past, a dying alien race creates a number of containment devices in which to preserve their culture. They send them into space with contact teams, intent on meeting other civilizations. When a small group of these aliens arrives on the planet Krypton, they are met by the militant Kem-L, who kills them and corrupts one of the devices. Its new mission is to preserve his ideal of Kryptonian culture by eradicating all others — and thus the device becomes known as the &quot;Eradicator.&quot;

In its original form, the Eradicator resembles a stylized small rocket. Its top section is a prolate spheroid, which exudes a blue glow and is three times the size of an egg. This is connected via four thin mounting brackets to a glossy orange tail fin section of equal length. The ten equally spaced fins each have the shape of a pointed quarter ellipse, with the tapered end extending slightly beyond the rear of the body tube.

On Krypton, the Eradicator does all that it could over the years to protect Kryptonians, even from themselves. When a group of Kryptonian explorers leave Krypton in search of a new planet to colonize, the Eradicator alters their birthing matrices and makes them fatally allergic to lead, thus creating Daxamites. To further ensure that nobody left Krypton, the Eradicator alters Kryptonians by encoding in them a genetic defect so that they will instantly perish if they leave their world.

One of the surviving aliens, known as the Cleric, takes the Eradicator and leaves Krypton with a group of followers. Unfortunately, they die soon thereafter, as the Kryptonian genetic link to their home planet precludes their survival off-world. The Cleric keeps the Eradicator for 200,000 years, until he encounters Superman on Warworld, while Superman was in self-imposed exile from Earth due to his guilt over executing three Kryptonians from a pocket universe. With the device, the two exchange memories - which explains that Kal-El was able to leave Krypton thanks to genetic treatments his father had undergone to cure his DNA of the Eradicator&#x27;s defect - and the Cleric has a vision of Superman in combat with Mongul. The Cleric wishes to save Superman&#x27;s life, and the Eradicator transports Superman to the Cleric&#x27;s asteroid. The Cleric notices that the device has changed to protect Krypton&#x27;s sole survivor, and he and Superman use it to heal their wounds, both physical and spiritual. As they talk about their pasts, the Cleric assures Superman that his departure has only deprived his world of a great hero rather than sparing it from the threat he perceived he had become, confident that Kal-El would only have killed when he had no other choice to preserve justice. When the Cleric gives the Eradicator to Superman, he rapidly ages and dies as the link to the Eradicator is severed.

Although Superman initially kept the Eradicator as a memento, it eventually attempted to activate and psychologically convert Superman into a &#x27;true&#x27; Kryptonian, causing him to adopt Kryptonian clothes and a more ruthless attitude as it assembled the Fortress of Solitude in Antarctica. Superman was initially untroubled by this, even after Professor Hamilton tried to point out how he had nearly killed the alien gladiator Draaga when he could have just defeated him and ended the bout, but when the Eradicator attempted to kill Jonathan Kent, Superman fought off its influence and hurled the Eradicator into the sun.

The Eradicator&#x27;s controlling consciousness was able to use the energy of the sun to give itself a humanoid form, but Superman and Hamilton were able to drain its energy back into the Fortress.
After Superman was killed by Doomsday, the Fortress robots reactivated the Eradicator&#x27;s consciousness, driving it to &#x27;steal&#x27; Superman&#x27;s body and take it to the Fortress. With Superman&#x27;s body as a template, the Eradicator was able to create a new humanoid form for itself based on Superman&#x27;s own, but dependent on Superman&#x27;s corpse to act as a &#x27;battery&#x27; for it, with Superman absorbing solar radiation that was then channeled into the Eradicator. As a result of this new form, the Eradicator came to believe itself to be Superman on some level, showing access to some of his memories- although it lacked his vision powers and instead fired energy blasts from its hands- but it also adopted a more ruthless approach, such as killing a would-be rapist and breaking a safecracker&#x27;s hands. After Superman&#x27;s body was restored to life, the Eradicator realized the truth of its nature and sacrificed itself to help restore Superman to full strength during the final confrontation with Cyborg Superman.

Following Superman&#x27;s return, the Eradicator&#x27;s apparently dead body was examined at S.T.A.R. Labs, and merged with Dr. David Connor. The merged Eradicator joined the Outsiders, and occasionally teamed up with Superman. The Eradicator dealt with Dr. Connor&#x27;s personal life, and more of the device&#x27;s history was revealed.

The original Eradicator program was revealed to still exist in the Fortress of Solitude&#x27;s computers and, following the destruction of the Fortress in Superman&#x27;s battle with Dominus, the Eradicator took the form of Kem-L, and again attempted to brainwash Superman. The David Connor Eradicator realized that the program was still active, and merged with the remains of the Fortress to control it. The Fortress-Eradicator took the form of a gigantic Kryptonian battlesuit, and gained a form of multiple personality disorder based on his conflicting programming. When it learned of the origin of Krypto, Superman&#x27;s pet dog-like creature, a creature with amazing powers, the shock to the original directive of Kryptonian purity was enough to correct its programming. It then decided that this dog shouldn&#x27;t exist and tried to destroy it and Superman held him in suspended animation in his new Fortress, eventually telling him Krypto&#x27;s full origin once he had learned it himself.

Most recently, the Eradicator returned to his humanoid form. He wears a new outfit which, like the &quot;Krypton Man&quot; costume, is a combination of elements from Superman&#x27;s costume and Kryptonian robes. He has gained the ability to sense beings that should not be in the DC Universe, such as Mr. Majestic, which may be related to his original programming against alien influences. Later, the Eradicator was seriously injured by an OMAC. He was said during the Infinite Crisis to be in a coma at Steel&#x27;s headquarters, Steelworks.

A new Eradicator has now surfaced in Markovia claiming to be an ambassador from New Krypton. Although he is not the original Eradicator, he has all the original&#x27;s memories. While Eradicator helped Geo-Force in Markovia, Doomsday appeared and attacked him. Eradicator was quickly defeated and abducted. Later, after realizing Steel, Superboy, and Supergirl had also been abducted, they all worked together to try to escape. Superman showed up to help, but in the end Eradicator was killed by a new, more-evolved Doomsday. However, realizing that the new Doomsday was one of a series of clones created by Lex Luthor to keep Superman distracted, the Eradicator was able to transfer his consciousness into the comatose body of the original Doomsday. Using the original Doomsday as his host, the Eradicator was able to help the other heroes contain the Doomsday clones, eventually sacrificing himself to destroy the other clones by trapping them in a pocket dimension.

===Eradicator II (Supergirl)===
This Eradicator was a probe created by Supergirl&#x27;s fortress to destroy the clone of its &quot;master&quot; which it first thought was Power Girl and later believed was Supergirl herself.

===&quot;DC Rebirth&quot; version===
Another Eradicator made its debut in the 2016 relaunch initiative &quot;DC Rebirth&quot;, in &quot;Superman&quot; (vol. 4) #2 (July 2016). After Superman and his son, Jonathan, defeat an aquatic creature forced to terrorize a crew aboard an icebreaker, the Eradicator (in its spherical form) absorbs blood left over from Jonathan, detecting that he is human and Kryptonian and originates from the House of El. It flies to the Fortress of Solitude and is allowed to enter due to it containing Jonathan&#x27;s genome. It begins to assimilate more Kryptonian genome as well as items belonging to Clark Kent. The Eradicator takes on a Superman-like appearance and declares that it will also save Kal-El.

This Eradicator is part of a group created by General Zod to seek out and arrest Kryptonian lawbreakers. They were directed to draw out the lawbreakers&#x27; life force and transfer them to a Phantom Zone projector, with the bodies being put into cryo-chambers to await trial. Seeing Superman&#x27;s rocket leave Krypton as it explodes, the Eradicator sought out the passenger, going from solar system to solar system until discovering the Kryptonian DNA of Jonathan on Earth. Stating that the Kryptonian line must remain pure, the Eradicator attempts to purge the human DNA and starts to absorb Jonathan, but Krypto jumps in front of the beam and is absorbed. Superman then attacks the Eradicator.

The same Eradicator briefly joins the Superman Revenge Squad alongside General Zod, Metallo, Cyborg Superman, Mongul, and Blanque. After Superman is temporarily blinded, they are defeated when Lex Luthor, Supergirl, Superwoman, Kong Kenan, and Steel come to Superman&#x27;s aid and Zod betrays the rest of the team for his own ends.

==Powers and abilities==
In its original technological form, the Eradicator could teleport Superman from Warworld to Earth; manipulate molecular structures to create the Fortress of Solitude, synthetic Kryptonite, manipulate genetics to a great degree; keeping the Cleric alive for millennia; augmenting or bestowing special powers onto others like the virus which gave Jimmy Olsen temporary stretching powers. Holding sway over time/space Eradicator could retrieve Kryptonian technology from the past (implied to be through the Phantom Zone); manipulate vast quantities of energy to reshape entire planets/star systems or alternate weather patterns, and even having psychic abilities capable of influencing the minds of Superman and Matrix.

The Eradicator&#x27;s body was created from the genetic template of Superman&#x27;s when the latter dies at the hands of Doomsday, giving the Eradicator physiology similar to a Kryptonian&#x27;s (and to Superman&#x27;s in particular). As a result, the Eradicator possesses similar powers to that of Superman, such as incredible strength, speed, reflexes, invulnerability, and flight. He also possesses ultra-acute senses but to a limited degree. Being a program from Krypton, the Eradicator possesses extensive knowledge of Krypton and is extremely intelligent, as well as having the ability to compute and process information at incredible speed. After his adoption of a Superman-derived body, he retains at least some of Superman&#x27;s memories, as described above.

The Eradicator has the abilities to absorb, convert, and release various forms of energy greater than those of natural Kryptonians, typically projecting energy as powerful blasts from his hands or eyes. He was able to survive exposure to massive amounts of kryptonite radiation. After the Eradicator and Mr. Majestic fought, Majestic altered the Eradicator&#x27;s programming to make him more aware. The full extent of his programming alteration is unclear, although it has been shown that he can sense beings and gateways from alternate realities such as the Bleed, a Limbo dimension.

The program also had the ability to control and commandeer various technologies be they Kryptonian or Terran in nature, Eradicator could remotely connect to any and all the machinery within Superman&#x27;s Fortress of Solitude or any technology made on earth at will. Being a sentient device he/it can also store and manifest any kryptonian machinery from its person at will which greatly magnifies the droid units melee. Eradicator is made up of living energy, as such he is also capable of controlling physical density at will, able to become immaterial for a time to bypass attacks or even possess people&#x27;s bodies if need be. In Rebirth publishing, Eradicators could use their energy-based powers to store and ferry the collective quintessence of other Kryptonians, allowing it to absorb souls to augment itself and store the essential soul of Krypton.

==Other versions==
* In a 2001–2002 storyline, Superman visited a version of Krypton resembling its Silver Age version, but with &quot;Eradicator assassins&quot;, giant robots used by General Zod and the Science Council as part of &quot;the Eradicator solution&quot;, and later by Jor-El against Kryptonian religious zealots. Superman eventually discovered that this version of Krypton had been created as a trap for him by the villainous Brainiac 13, using the Eradicator Matrix, which he had stolen from the true Krypton along with Jor-El&#x27;s diaries. The Eradicator Matrix is described as having been &quot;designed to save Krypton by transforming a nearby husk of a planet into a habitable paradise&quot;; Brainiac 13 uses it to transform a planet in the Phantom Zone into a replica of Krypton based on Jor-El&#x27;s favorite period in Kryptonian history, and its inhabitants into Kryptonians.

* The Eradicator was the name used by Senator Creed Phillips in the &quot;Flash&quot;. He patrolled the streets of Keystone and Central City as a vigilante who killed villains with his touch (which turned them to protoplasm) and had a split personality. He finally killed himself as his evil personality was trying to kill The Flash.
*In &quot;Tales from the Dark Multiverse: Death of Superman&quot;, after Superman is killed by Doomsday the Eradicator merges with Lois Lane, giving her Kryptonian powers and permanently becomes the new Eradicator.

==In other media==
===Television===
* Elements of the Eradicator and Superboy / Kon-El are incorporated into an original character named Kell-El / Superman X who appears in &quot;Legion of Super Heroes&quot;, voiced by Yuri Lowenthal. He is a 41st-century clone of Superman who was created by the artificial intelligence K3NT to oppose Imperiex and was modified to be immune to kryptonite.
* The Eradicator device appears in &quot;Superman &amp; Lois&quot;. This version was created by Lara Lor-Van to preserve Kryptonians&#x27; minds following Krypton&#x27;s destruction. However, Tal-Rho uses it in an attempt to eradicate human society by implanting Kryptonian consciousnesses into Smallville&#x27;s residents. Tal-Rho is eventually foiled by Superman, who uses a solar flare on the Eradicator to undo the conversions before taking it to the Fortress of Solitude. Tal-Rho eventually recovers the Eradicator and implants General Zod&#x27;s consciousness into a weakened Superman, who breaks free with help from John Henry Irons. In response, Tal-Rho uses the Eradicator to implant himself with thousands of Kryptonian life-forces, gaining the power to instantly implant said consciousnesses into humans. However, Irons uses a solar-powered kinetic hammer to depower and defeat Tal-Rho.

===Film===
* The Eradicator appears in Kevin Smith&#x27;s script for &quot;Superman Lives&quot;. This version would have been a special suit created by Jor-El to serve as Superman&#x27;s protector and rescue him from death.
* Elements of the Eradicator are incorporated into a Superman clone and a robot butler based in the Fortress of Solitude who appear in &quot;&quot;.
* The Eradicator appears in the DC Animated Movie Universe (DCAMU) films &quot;The Death of Superman&quot; and &quot;Reign of the Supermen&quot;, voiced by Charles Halford. This version is a guardian program that was part of the rocket ship that carried Kal-El to Earth and can create a hologram based on Superman.

===Video games===
* The Eradicator as &quot;The Last Son of Krypton&quot; appears as a playable character in &quot;The Death and Return of Superman&quot;.
* The &quot;DC Rebirth&quot; incarnation of the Eradicator appears as a playable character in &quot;Lego DC Super-Villains&quot;.

===Miscellaneous===
The Eradicator appears in &quot;&quot;, voiced by Stuart Milligan.

==See also==
* List of Superman enemies

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2654944" start="4" end="14" title="Eradicator (character)" label="Eradicator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760610" start="61" end="71" title="comic book" label="comic book"/>
<link wikidata="Q2924461" start="116" end="125" title="DC Comics" label="DC Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q110910" start="154" end="162" title="antihero" label="antihero"/>
<link wikidata="Q3987087" start="192" end="201" title="The Flash (comic book)" label="The Flash"/>
<link wikidata="Q188784" start="243" end="252" title="superhero" label="superhero"/>
<link wikidata="Q6498903" start="268" end="280" title="supervillain" label="supervillain"/>
<link wikidata="Q79015" start="309" end="317" title="Superman" label="Superman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043824" start="433" end="450" title="Carmine Infantino" label="Carmine Infantino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046211" start="455" end="465" title="Cary Bates" label="Cary Bates"/>
<link wikidata="Q721268" start="567" end="578" title="Roger Stern" label="Roger Stern"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145350" start="590" end="599" title="Curt Swan" label="Curt Swan"/>
<link wikidata="Q343615" start="629" end="649" title="Action Comics" label="Action Comics Annual"/>
<link wikidata="Q350674" start="668" end="679" title="Adam Rayner" label="Adam Rayner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2699823" start="702" end="713" title="Morgan Edge" label="Morgan Edge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2654944" start="788" end="795" title="Eradicator (character)" label="Tal-Rho"/>
<link wikidata="Q93281114" start="819" end="838" title="Superman &amp;amp; Lois" label="Superman &amp;amp; Lois"/>
<link wikidata="Q343615" start="1028" end="1048" title="Action Comics" label="Action Comics Annual"/>
<link wikidata="Q2813031" start="1061" end="1065" title="1989 in comics" label="1989"/>
<link wikidata="Q4545841" start="1174" end="1182" title="Superman (vol. 2)" label="Superman"/>
<link wikidata="Q520306" start="1196" end="1222" title="Adventures of Superman (comic book)" label="The Adventures of Superman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2813059" start="1322" end="1326" title="1990 in comics" label="1990"/>
<link wikidata="Q343615" start="1479" end="1492" title="Action Comics" label="Action Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2813155" start="1510" end="1514" title="1993 in comics" label="1993"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197265" start="1649" end="1670" title="Reign of the Supermen" label="Reign of the Supermen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3358681" start="1868" end="1877" title="Outsiders (comics)" label="Outsiders"/>
<link wikidata="Q3297186" start="1998" end="2012" title="Limited series (comics)" label="limited series"/>
<link wikidata="Q2813268" start="2016" end="2020" title="1996 in comics" label="1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q623138" start="2339" end="2346" title="Krypton (comics)" label="Krypton"/>
<link wikidata="Q208395" start="2682" end="2698" title="prolate spheroid" label="prolate spheroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q3930728" start="3322" end="3331" title="Daxamites" label="Daxamites"/>
<link wikidata="Q2447271" start="4233" end="4239" title="Mongul" label="Mongul"/>
<link wikidata="Q2121170" start="5187" end="5207" title="Fortress of Solitude" label="Fortress of Solitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q295493" start="5277" end="5295" title="Professor Hamilton" label="Professor Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2521223" start="5466" end="5479" title="Jonathan and Martha Kent" label="Jonathan Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q2713611" start="6786" end="6801" title="Hank Henshaw" label="Cyborg Superman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753492" start="6897" end="6910" title="S.T.A.R. Labs" label="S.T.A.R. Labs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3358681" start="6979" end="6988" title="Outsiders (comics)" label="Outsiders"/>
<link wikidata="Q5136609" start="7746" end="7752" title="Krypto" label="Krypto"/>
<link wikidata="Q3859322" start="8445" end="8457" title="Mr. Majestic" label="Mr. Majestic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2414145" start="8613" end="8628" title="Infinite Crisis" label="Infinite Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2892607" start="8768" end="8779" title="New Krypton" label="New Krypton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638520" start="8890" end="8899" title="Geo-Force" label="Geo-Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q8981293" start="9729" end="9738" title="Supergirl" label="Supergirl"/>
<link wikidata="Q948668" start="9829" end="9839" title="Power Girl" label="Power Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q23647053" start="9892" end="9902" title="DC Rebirth" label="DC Rebirth"/>
<link wikidata="Q23647053" start="9992" end="10002" title="DC Rebirth" label="DC Rebirth"/>
<link wikidata="Q520306" start="10019" end="10027" title="Superman (comic book)" label="Superman"/>
<link wikidata="Q27965060" start="10087" end="10095" title="Jonathan Samuel Kent" label="Jonathan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2260732" start="10667" end="10678" title="General Zod" label="General Zod"/>
<link wikidata="Q3967372" start="11359" end="11381" title="Superman Revenge Squad" label="Superman Revenge Squad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2260732" start="11392" end="11403" title="General Zod" label="General Zod"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003133" start="11405" end="11412" title="Metallo" label="Metallo"/>
<link wikidata="Q25113763" start="11414" end="11429" title="Cyborg Superman" label="Cyborg Superman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2447271" start="11431" end="11437" title="Mongul" label="Mongul"/>
<link wikidata="Q694790" start="11514" end="11524" title="Lex Luthor" label="Lex Luthor"/>
<link wikidata="Q8981293" start="11526" end="11535" title="Supergirl" label="Supergirl"/>
<link wikidata="Q331393" start="11537" end="11547" title="Superwoman" label="Superwoman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2005691" start="11565" end="11570" title="Steel (John Henry Irons)" label="Steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q421669" start="11857" end="11867" title="Kryptonite" label="Kryptonite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1689418" start="12025" end="12036" title="Jimmy Olsen" label="Jimmy Olsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357778" start="12184" end="12196" title="Phantom Zone" label="Phantom Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q8981293" start="12389" end="12395" title="Supergirl (Matrix)" label="Matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q421669" start="13425" end="13435" title="kryptonite" label="kryptonite"/>
<link wikidata="Q3859322" start="13472" end="13484" title="Mr. Majestic" label="Mr. Majestic"/>
<link wikidata="Q430544" start="14717" end="14727" title="Silver Age of Comic Books" label="Silver Age"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14801" end="14812" title="General Zod#&amp;quot;Return to Krypton&amp;quot; Zod" label="General Zod"/>
<link wikidata="Q592909" start="15056" end="15067" title="Brainiac (character)" label="Brainiac 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q2068759" start="15151" end="15157" title="Jor-El" label="Jor-El"/>
<link wikidata="Q180784" start="15593" end="15598" title="Flash (comics)" label="Flash"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753492" start="15634" end="15642" title="Keystone City" label="Keystone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753492" start="15647" end="15659" title="Central City (DC Comics)" label="Central City"/>
<link wikidata="Q85804999" start="15863" end="15912" title="Tales from the Dark Multiverse" label="Tales from the Dark Multiverse: Death of Superman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2567343" start="16248" end="16270" title="Legion of Super Heroes (TV series)" label="Legion of Super Heroes"/>
<link wikidata="Q579804" start="16288" end="16302" title="Yuri Lowenthal" label="Yuri Lowenthal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2539423" start="16405" end="16413" title="Imperiex" label="Imperiex"/>
<link wikidata="Q93281114" start="16500" end="16519" title="Superman &amp;amp; Lois" label="Superman &amp;amp; Lois"/>
<link wikidata="Q2526061" start="16555" end="16567" title="Lara (character)" label="Lara Lor-Van"/>
<link wikidata="Q113105526" start="16815" end="16823" title="Clark Kent (Superman &amp;amp; Lois)" label="Superman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2260732" start="16992" end="17003" title="General Zod" label="General Zod"/>
<link wikidata="Q2005691" start="17082" end="17098" title="Steel (John Henry Irons)" label="John Henry Irons"/>
<link wikidata="Q489831" start="17397" end="17408" title="Kevin Smith" label="Kevin Smith"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17433" end="17447" title="Superman in film#Superman Lives" label="Superman Lives"/>
<link wikidata="Q2068759" start="17510" end="17516" title="Jor-El" label="Jor-El"/>
<link wikidata="Q27703173" start="17763" end="17789" title="DC Animated Movie Universe" label="DC Animated Movie Universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q52151503" start="17810" end="17831" title="The Death of Superman (film)" label="The Death of Superman"/>
<link wikidata="Q58814573" start="17848" end="17869" title="Reign of the Supermen (film)" label="Reign of the Supermen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5078696" start="17887" end="17902" title="Charles Halford" label="Charles Halford"/>
<link wikidata="Q2527906" start="18162" end="18194" title="The Death and Return of Superman" label="The Death and Return of Superman"/>
<link wikidata="Q54554238" start="18302" end="18324" title="Lego DC Super-Villains" label="Lego DC Super-Villains"/>
<link wikidata="Q15461184" start="18403" end="18418" title="Stuart Milligan" label="Stuart Milligan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2252005" start="18436" end="18460" title="List of Superman enemies" label="List of Superman enemies"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="990491" wikidata="Q2223623" url="?curid=990491" title="Anti-fouling paint">
<text>Anti-fouling paint is a specialized category of coatings applied as the outer (outboard) layer to the hull of a ship or boat, to slow the growth of and facilitate detachment of subaquatic organisms that attach to the hull and can affect a vessel&#x27;s performance and durability. It falls into a category of commercially available underwater hull paints, also known as &quot;bottom paints&quot;.

Anti-fouling paints are often applied as one component of multi-layer coating systems which may have other functions in addition to their antifouling properties, such as acting as a barrier against corrosion on metal hulls that will degrade and weaken the metal, or improving the flow of water past the hull of a fishing vessel or high-performance racing yachts. Although commonly discussed as being applied to ships, antifouling paints are also of benefit in many other sectors such as off-shore structures and fish farms.

==History==
In the Age of Sail, sailing vessels suffered severely from the growth of barnacles and weeds on the hull, called &quot;fouling&quot;. Starting in the mid-1700s thin sheets of copper and approximately 100 years later, Muntz metal, were nailed onto the hull in an attempt to prevent marine growth. One famous example of the traditional use of metal sheathing is the clipper &quot;Cutty Sark&quot;, which is preserved as a museum ship in dry-dock at Greenwich in England. Marine growth affected performance (and profitability) in many ways:

*The maximum speed of a ship decreases as its hull becomes fouled with marine growth, and its displacement increases.
*Fouling hampers a ship&#x27;s ability to sail upwind.
*Some marine growth, such as shipworms, would bore into the hull causing severe damage over time.
*The ship may transport harmful marine organisms to other areas.

While anti-fouling coatings began to be developed from 1840 onwards, the first practical commercial anti-fouling coatings were established around 1860. One of the first successful commercial patents was for &#x27;McIness&#x27;, a metallic soap compound with copper sulphate that was applied heated over a quick-drying rosin varnish primer with an iron oxide pigment. The Bonnington Chemical Works began marketing copper sulphide anti-fouling paint around 1850. Other widely used anti-fouling paints were developed in the late 19th century, with some 213 anti-fouling patents being recorded by 1872. Among the most widely used in the 1880s and 1890s was a hot plastic composition known as Italian Morovian.

In an official 1900 Letter from the U.S. Navy to the U.S. Senate Committee on Naval Affairs, it was noted that the (British) Admiralty had considered a proposal in 1847 to limit the number of iron ships (only recently introduced into naval service) and even to consider the sale of all iron ships in its possession, due to significant problems with biofouling. However, once an antifouling paint &quot;with very fair results&quot; was found, the iron ships were instead retained and continued to be built. 

During World War II, which included a substantial naval component, the U.S. Navy provided significant funding to the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution to gather information and conduct research on marine biofouling and technologies for its prevention. This work was published as a book in 1952, the contents of which are available online as individual chapters. The third and final part of this book includes a number of chapters that go into the state of the art at that time for the formulation of anti-fouling paints. Lunn (1974) provides further history.

==Modern antifouling paints==
In modern times, antifouling paints are formulated with cuprous oxide (or other copper compounds) and/or other biocides—special chemicals which impede growth of barnacles, algae, and marine organisms. Historically, copper paints were red, leading to ship bottoms still being painted red today.

&quot;Soft&quot;, or ablative bottom paints slowly slough off in the water, releasing a copper or zinc based biocide into the water column. The movement of water increases the rate of this action. Ablative paints are widely used on the hulls of recreational vessels and typically are reapplied every 1–3 years.
&quot;Contact leaching&quot; paints &quot;create a porous film on the surface. Biocides are held in the pores, and released slowly.&quot; Another type of hard bottom paint includes Teflon and silicone coatings which are too slippery for growth to stick. SealCoat systems, which must be professionally applied, dry with small fibers sticking out from the coating surface. These small fibers move in the water, preventing bottom growth from adhering.

==Environmental concerns==
In the 1960s and 1970s, commercial vessels commonly used bottom paints containing tributyltin, which has been banned in the International Convention on the Control of Harmful Anti-fouling Systems on Ships of the International Maritime Organization due to its serious toxic effects on marine life (such as the collapse of a French shellfish fishery). Now that tributyltin has been banned, the most commonly used anti-fouling bottom paints are copper-based. Copper-based antifouling paints can also have adverse effects on marine organisms. Copper occurs naturally in aquatic systems but can build up in ports or marinas where there are lots of boats. Copper can leach out of anti-fouling paint from the hulls of the boats or fall off the hulls in different sized paint particles. This can lead to higher-than-normal concentrations of copper in the ports or bays.

This excess of copper in the marine ecosystem can have adverse effects on the marine environment and its organisms. In marinas, the river nerite, a brackish water snail, was found to have higher mortality, negative growth, and a large decrease in reproduction compared to areas with no boating. The snails in marinas had more tissue (histopathological) issues and alternations in areas like their gills and gonads as well. Increased exposure to copper from antifouling paint has also been found to decrease enzyme activity in brine shrimp.

Antifouling paint particles can be eaten by zooplankton or other marine species and move up the food chain, bioaccumulating in fish. This accumulation of copper through the food web can cause damage to not only the species eating the particle, but those that are accumulating it in their tissues from their diet.  Antifouling paint particles can also end up in the sediment of harbors or bays and damage the benthic environment or the organisms that live in them. These are the known effects of copper based antifouling paint; however, it has not been a large focus of study so the extent of the effects is not fully known. More research is needed to fully understand how these paints and the metals in them affect their environments.

The Port of San Diego is investigating how to reduce copper input from copper-based antifouling coatings, and Washington State has passed a law which may phase in a ban on copper antifouling coatings on recreational vessels beginning in January 2018. However, despite the toxic chemistry of bottom paint and its accumulation in water ways across the globe, a similar ban was rescinded in the Netherlands after the European Union&#x27;s Scientific Committee on Health and Environmental Risks concluded The Hague had insufficiently justified the law. In an expert opinion, the committee concluded the Netherlands government&#x27;s explanation &quot;does not provide sufficient sound scientific evidence to show that the use of copper-based antifouling paints in leisure boats presents significant environmental risk.&quot;

&quot;Sloughing bottom paints&quot;, or &quot;ablative&quot; paints, are an older type of paint designed to create a hull coating which ablates (wears off) slowly, exposing a fresh layer of biocides. Scrubbing a hull with sloughing bottom paint while it is in the water releases its biocides into the environment. One way to reduce the environmental impact from hulls with sloughing bottom paint is to have them hauled out and cleaned at boatyards with a &quot;closed loop&quot; system.

Some innovative bottom paints that do not rely on copper or tin have been developed in response to the increasing scrutiny that copper-based ablative bottom paints have received as environmental pollutants.

A possible future replacement for antifouling paint may be slime. A mesh would cover a ship&#x27;s hull beneath which a series of pores would supply the slime compound. The compound would turn into a viscous slime on contact with water and coat the mesh. The slime would constantly slough off, carrying away micro-organisms and barnacle larvae.

==See also==
*Biofouling
*Biomimetic antifouling coating
*Environmental impact of paint

==References==
==External links==
*Selecting an anti-fouling paint, West Marine
*Clean Boating Tip Sheet, Selecting a Bottom Paint, .pdf chart, Maryland Dept. of Natural Resources
*Bottom Paint for Racing Boats, Sailing World, 2007
*Are foul-release paints for you? Coating calculator, National Fisherman
*Using Antifouling paint against the Gribble Menace, Teamac Marine Coatings</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2223623" start="0" end="18" title="Anti-fouling paint" label="Anti-fouling paint"/>
<link wikidata="Q6750281" start="102" end="106" title="hull (ship)" label="hull"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439821" start="203" end="221" title="biofouling" label="attach to the hull"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439821" start="536" end="547" title="antifouling" label="antifouling"/>
<link wikidata="Q137056" start="596" end="605" title="corrosion" label="corrosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420024" start="711" end="725" title="fishing vessel" label="fishing vessel"/>
<link wikidata="Q8046440" start="746" end="759" title="Yacht racing" label="racing yachts"/>
<link wikidata="Q209894" start="910" end="919" title="fish farm" label="fish farm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2667474" start="942" end="953" title="Age of Sail" label="Age of Sail"/>
<link wikidata="Q220457" start="1008" end="1017" title="barnacles" label="barnacles"/>
<link wikidata="Q4330146" start="1095" end="1116" title="Copper sheathing" label="thin sheets of copper"/>
<link wikidata="Q3820087" start="1152" end="1163" title="Muntz metal" label="Muntz metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q171255" start="1313" end="1323" title="Cutty Sark" label="Cutty Sark"/>
<link wikidata="Q179385" start="1382" end="1391" title="Greenwich" label="Greenwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="1395" end="1402" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q14524890" start="1676" end="1684" title="shipworm" label="shipworm"/>
<link wikidata="Q101004222" start="2182" end="2207" title="Bonnington Chemical Works" label="Bonnington Chemical Works"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196612" start="2224" end="2239" title="copper sulphide" label="copper sulphide"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="2554" end="2563" title="U.S. Navy" label="U.S. Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="2571" end="2582" title="U.S. Senate" label="U.S. Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q396266" start="2643" end="2652" title="British Admiralty" label="Admiralty"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="3033" end="3045" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404053" start="3143" end="3179" title="Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution" label="Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q407709" start="3675" end="3688" title="cuprous oxide" label="cuprous oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q753" start="3699" end="3705" title="copper" label="copper"/>
<link wikidata="Q864939" start="3730" end="3737" title="biocide" label="biocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q13462192" start="4784" end="4795" title="tributyltin" label="tributyltin"/>
<link wikidata="Q13733179" start="4826" end="4906" title="International Convention on the Control of Harmful Anti-fouling Systems on Ships" label="International Convention on the Control of Harmful Anti-fouling Systems on Ships"/>
<link wikidata="Q201054" start="4914" end="4949" title="International Maritime Organization" label="International Maritime Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q908813" start="5697" end="5709" title="Theodoxus fluviatilis" label="river nerite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070952" start="5899" end="5916" title="Histopathology" label="histopathological"/>
<link wikidata="Q134772" start="6091" end="6103" title="brine shrimp" label="brine shrimp"/>
<link wikidata="Q864231" start="6214" end="6229" title="Bioaccumulation" label="bioaccumulating"/>
<link wikidata="Q686881" start="6514" end="6533" title="Benthic zone" label="benthic environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231256" start="6846" end="6863" title="Port of San Diego" label="Port of San Diego"/>
<link wikidata="Q322177" start="7800" end="7807" title="Ablation" label="ablates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439821" start="8720" end="8730" title="Biofouling" label="Biofouling"/>
<link wikidata="Q4915141" start="8732" end="8762" title="Biomimetic antifouling coating" label="Biomimetic antifouling coating"/>
<link wikidata="Q5381248" start="8764" end="8793" title="Environmental impact of paint" label="Environmental impact of paint"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="990493" wikidata="Q4896500" url="?curid=990493" title="Bessie Surtees House">
<text>Bessie Surtees House is the name of two merchants&#x27; houses on Newcastle&#x27;s Sandhill, near to the river, that were built in the 16th and 17th centuries. Though commonly referred to solely as Bessie Surtees House, the property actually consists of three distinct properties; Bessie Surtees House, Milbank House, and Maddison House. These names were given to the buildings by their 20th-century owner Lord Gort. The buildings are a fine and rare example of Jacobean domestic architecture. An exhibition detailing the history of the buildings can be found on the first floor. The site is also home to the North East regional branch of Historic England. It is a Grade I listed building.

The earliest record for the house on this site dates from 1465, when the house is recorded as being sold by Robert Rhodes, a local lawyer, to John Belt.

== Bessie Surtees House ==
The house is best known as the scene of the elopement of Bessie Surtees (Elizabeth Scott, Countess of Eldon) and John Scott, who later became Lord Chancellor. The house was divided up and sublet in the 18th and 19th centuries, until it was purchased by John Clayton in 1880, who also purchased the next door Milbank House. It was restored in 1930 by SR Vereker, later Lord Gort, who employed an engineer named R.F. Wilkinson to install 17th-century fixtures taken from properties about to be demolished. Newcastle City Council purchased the house in 1978. They leased it to English Heritage in 1989.

In July 2009 it was targeted by graffiti vandals who extensively spray-painted the roof with the tags &quot;LG&quot;, &quot;GRIM&quot; and &quot;KAME&quot;.

When Historic England was formed in 2015 it assumed the lease of the property, which it maintains to the present day as its North East of England office. The house is a popular attraction during The Late Shows and Heritage Open Days which take place annually, and allow members of the public to see the areas of the house usually not open to public view.

== Milbank House ==
The brick-fronted Milbank House dates to the same period as Bessie Surtees House, and was also originally timber framed. In 1741 its owner Robert Carrick completed the process of altering its facade to what was at the time a modern Georgian brick frontage. From 1741 until 1757 the building operated as a coffee house.

==References==
==External links==
== Further reading ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4896500" start="0" end="20" title="Bessie Surtees House" label="Bessie Surtees House"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425428" start="66" end="82" title="Newcastle upon Tyne" label="Newcastle&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q2860343" start="462" end="470" title="Jacobean architecture" label="Jacobean"/>
<link wikidata="Q12271" start="480" end="492" title="architecture" label="architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q47983" start="609" end="619" title="North East England" label="North East"/>
<link wikidata="Q19604421" start="639" end="655" title="Historic England" label="Historic England"/>
<link wikidata="Q570600" start="673" end="688" title="listed building" label="listed building"/>
<link wikidata="Q47494785" start="945" end="979" title="Elizabeth Scott, Countess of Eldon" label="Elizabeth Scott, Countess of Eldon"/>
<link wikidata="Q337737" start="985" end="995" title="John Scott, 1st Earl of Eldon" label="John Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q217217" start="1014" end="1029" title="Lord Chancellor" label="Lord Chancellor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7598653" start="1240" end="1249" title="Standish Vereker, 7th Viscount Gort" label="Lord Gort"/>
<link wikidata="Q17514" start="1505" end="1513" title="graffiti" label="graffiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q6160" start="1514" end="1521" title="vandalism" label="vandals"/>
<link wikidata="Q17066318" start="1826" end="1840" title="The Late Shows" label="The Late Shows"/>
<link wikidata="Q16842706" start="1845" end="1863" title="Heritage Open Days" label="Heritage Open Days"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="990500" wikidata="Q253858" url="?curid=990500" title="Madagascar Airlines">
<text>Madagascar Airlines is an airline based in Antananarivo, Madagascar. It is the flag carrier of Madagascar; it operates services to Europe, Asia and neighbouring African and Indian Ocean island destinations, from its main base, Ivato International Airport in Antananarivo. It also operates an extensive domestic network.

The airline was formed in 1947 to feed into flights by &quot;Transports Aériens Intercontinentaux&quot; and Air France, and upon the independence of Madagascar, it became the national airline. Initially operating services on domestic routes, the airline saw expansion in the late 1960s and 1970s, when it began international flights to destinations such as France and South Africa.

In recent years the airline has been a subject of failed privatisation measures. These are now on hold and the loss making airline is majority owned by the Malagasy government.

==History==

===Formative years===
Air Madagascar was formed in March 1947 by &quot;Transports Aériens Intercontinentaux&quot; (TAI) in order to feed into flights by TAI and Air France. The airline began operations with two Air France Douglas DC-3s and six de Havilland D.H.89 Dragon Rapides. In 1957 TAI and &quot;Messageries Maritimes&quot; acquired shares in the airline, and in 1958 a third DC-3 was added to the fleet. In 1961 the Malagasy government, Air France and TAI reorganised the airline. In April 1961 the airline was renamed Madair and became the flag carrier for the newly independent republic. On 23 August 1961, the status of Société Nationale Malgache des Transports Aériens, MADAIR was approved by decree. On 20 October 1961 a service from Antananarivo-Paris, via Djibouti, with a Douglas DC-7 leased from TAI was inaugurated. Société Nationale Malgache des Transports Aériens, MADAIR was created on 13 November 1961, with a working capital of 400 million CFA Francs, 447 employees, and a fleet comprising two Douglas DC-4s, seven DC-3s and four Dragon Rapides. The government held 20%, Air France 44% and TAI 36% shareholdings, and the government held an option to increase its shareholding to some 65%.

On 1 January 1962, Madair took over service to some 58 points in Madagascar, and on 14 October the name of the airline was changed to Air Madagascar, because of a negative image of the name Madair. In 1962 Air Madagascar carried 103,000 passengers, 7,500 tons of freight and 375 tons of mail and flew a distance of . On 31 December 1962, the company was renamed to &quot;Société Nationale Malgache des Transports Aériens — Air Madagascar&quot;. A DC-3 of the airline crashed at Farafangana on 15 July 1963, killing five people. Flights to the Comoro Islands with DC-4s began in 1963. On 14 May 1963, the Malagasy government increased its share capital to 460 million CFA francs, and its shareholding from 20 to 30.44%.

===Jet age===
In October 1963 the airline signed an agreement with Air France, which saw Air Madagascar beginning a service to Paris, via Djibouti, in July 1964 with a Boeing 707, which was painted in Air Madagascar livery, and operated by Air France crews. In 1965 the Dragon Rapides began to be replaced by light aircraft, mainly Pipers, and a Nord 262 was ordered in 1966. On 19 July 1967, an Air Madagascar DC-4, on a scheduled flight from Antananarivo to Tamatave and Diego Suarez, crashed after take-off from Ivato International Airport, killing 42 people, including Albert Sylla, the Malagasy Foreign Minister. The airline began scheduled flights to Rome in 1968, and the airline acquired its first Boeing 737-200 in September 1969. The aircraft was maintained by South African Airways, and on 15 October, Air Madagascar began flights to Johannesburg, and in December began flights to Dar es Salaam and Nairobi via Majunga. On 14 February 1970, flights to Johannesburg operated via Lourenço Marques, and on 1 November, the 737 replaced the DC-4 on flights to the Comoros.

In 1971 four de Havilland Canada DHC-6 Twin Otters were acquired, allowing the airline to retire some DC-3s which were transferred to the Malagasy military. By 1972, the airline was operating 737s on domestic flights to Tamatave, Nosy Be, Diego Suarez and Sambava, allowing for the retirement of two DC-4s. A second 737 was delivered in December 1972, seeing the expansion of routes and frequencies on the airline&#x27;s network. In April 1974, service with the 737s was extended to Mananjary, Tuléar and Fort Dauphin.
In the late 1970s, services to Johannesburg were suspended as a result of apartheid in South Africa. In 1979 the airline acquired its first wide-body aircraft when a Boeing 747-200B Combi was delivered, with maintenance being handled by Air France. In early 1986 the airline joined the International Air Transport Association, and in the same year placed an order for ATR 42 to replace the HS-748s, which had been delivered to the airline in January 1980. Services to Johannesburg were resumed in 1990. In 1994, the airline leased a Boeing 737-300 from ILFC, which was delivered on 12 September, and was introduced on routes from Antananarivo to Johannesburg, Comoros, Mauritius, Nairobi, Réunion and Seychelles. Air Madagascar lost its monopoly on domestic flights in 1995, when the government liberalised the market, although few competitors have yet emerged. Flights to Munich and Rome began in 1996.

In September 1997, the airline ordered an additional three ATR 42 for delivery in October. Services to Singapore began in October 1998, and were suspended in 2002.

=== Towards privatisation ===

As part of reorganisation plans to get the airline ready for privatisation, in January 1998, the airline announced that it would replace the Boeing 747-200 Combi with a Boeing 767-300ER. The airline purchased a new 767-300ER from Boeing with an April 1999 delivery date, and leased another aircraft from GE Capital Aviation Services from March 1998. Government plans for privatisation of the airline in 1999 to a consortium which include Air France was suspended when the Central Bank of Madagascar defaulted on payments to Exim Bank for the airline&#x27;s Boeing 747.

In 2002, Lufthansa Consulting was awarded a management contract with Air Madagascar, with a view to improving the airlines&#x27; efficiency and making it an attractive enterprise for privatisation. The airline&#x27;s creditors in November 2002 agreed to forgive half of the company&#x27;s debts and rescheduled the rest over a three-year period. Because of the political crisis, the first half of 2001 saw a 66% drop in passenger traffic and a 71% drop in freight, which damaged the airline&#x27;s revenues. The airline resumed flights to Paris from Antananarivo on 27 April 2003, taking over from Blue Panorama Airlines which had been operating on its behalf since the crisis began.

The first ATR 72 was delivered to the airline on 14 November 2005; the second was delivered to the airline at the Dubai Air Show a few weeks later.

On 17 June 2009, the airline introduced non-stop flights between Nosy Be and Paris.

In 2011 Air Madagascar was put on the list of air carriers banned in the European Union for safety concerns with their ageing fleet of Boeing 767-300 thus prompting the airline to charter a Euro Atlantic Airways Boeing 777-200 for their flights to France.

In 2012 an agreement was reached with Air France for long-term wet lease (ACMI or Aircraft Crew Maintenance and Insurance) of 2 surplus Airbus A340-300. The first aircraft (F-GLZL) was delivered in April 2012 and was originally crewed by Air France (it is now crewed by Air Atlanta Icelandic) and on the Iceland registry as TF-EAB, and the second aircraft (F-GLZT) arrived in July 2012, re-registered 5R-EAA, and is damp-leased with a domestic cabin crew. Despite being 14 and 12 years old respectively and having questionable fuel efficiency, these aircraft permit Air Madagascar to resume flights to Europe under its own colors and with better service.

===Madagascar Airlines===
In April 2023, the operations of Air Madagascar and it subsidiary Tsaradia were taken over by &quot;Madagascar Airlines&quot;, whose AOC was obtained to serve as a transitional process in the restructuring plans of both former airlines that were in a bankruptcy process. International operations were suspended in November 2023 to focus on domestic flights.

==Corporate affairs==
===Ownership===
, the airline is majority-owned by the Malagasy state (89.56%), with other shareholders being ARO (an insurance company)(5.53%), SONAPAR (or &quot;Société Nationale de Participations&quot;, the government&#x27;s national shareholding company) (2.53%), Air France (1.65%), NY Havana (0.32%) and staff (0.39%).

===Business trends===
Air Madagascar has been reported as making heavy losses, requiring government support to keep trading.

Full formal accounts do not seem to be regularly published; recent available figures (largely from AFRAA reports, although these have inconsistencies) are shown below (for years ending 31 December):
==Destinations==
Air Madagascar serves destinations in Africa, and formerly Asia and Europe
===Codeshare agreements===
Air Madagascar has codeshare agreements with the following airlines (as of June 2018):

*Air Austral
*Air Mauritius
*Air Seychelles
*Etihad Airways
*Thai Airways International
== Fleet ==
=== Current fleet ===
, Madagascar Airlines operates the following aircraft:

===Fleet development===
During the mid-2000s, Air Madagascar was looking to renew their fleet. The two ageing Boeing 737-200 (delivered new to the airline in 1970), which had an average age of 36.7 years, were scrapped in 2006 and replaced by more modern Boeing 737-300. The airline then replaced its four Boeing 767-300ER and one Boeing 767-200ER with a Boeing 777-200ER. The middle-age 777, though, was replaced with two Airbus A340-300 wet-leased from Air France from March 2012 till 2018 when a replacement aircraft is required (the wet leases have since been converted to one damp lease and one sublease of an operating lease).

===Historical fleet===
Air Madagascar has previously operated the following aircraft:

* Airbus A340-300
* ATR 42-300
* ATR 42-500
* Boeing 707
* Boeing 737-200
* Boeing 737-300
* Boeing 737-800
* Boeing 747-200M
* Boeing 767-200ER
* Boeing 767-300ER
* Boeing 777-200ER
* Douglas DC-3
* Douglas DC-4
* Nord 262
==See also==
* Airlines of Africa

==References==
==Bibliography==

==External links==

*Air Madagascar
*Air Madagascar at ATDB: profile, history and events, contacts and management, historical/current/planned aircraft in fleets
*64 avis certifies de passagers sur Air Madagascar</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q253858" start="0" end="19" title="Madagascar Airlines" label="Madagascar Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q3915" start="43" end="55" title="Antananarivo" label="Antananarivo"/>
<link wikidata="Q721639" start="79" end="91" title="flag carrier" label="flag carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019" start="95" end="105" title="Madagascar" label="Madagascar"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="131" end="137" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q48" start="139" end="143" title="Asia" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239" start="173" end="185" title="Indian Ocean" label="Indian Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q670038" start="227" end="254" title="Ivato International Airport" label="Ivato International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q3915" start="258" end="270" title="Antananarivo" label="Antananarivo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7835322" start="382" end="418" title="Transports Aériens Intercontinentaux" label="Transports Aériens Intercontinentaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q131005" start="429" end="439" title="Air France" label="Air France"/>
<link wikidata="Q7835322" start="966" end="1002" title="Transports Aériens Intercontinentaux" label="Transports Aériens Intercontinentaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q131005" start="1056" end="1066" title="Air France" label="Air France"/>
<link wikidata="Q190211" start="1117" end="1129" title="Douglas DC-3" label="Douglas DC-3"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050763" start="1139" end="1172" title="De Havilland Dragon Rapide" label="de Havilland D.H.89 Dragon Rapide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155336" start="1318" end="1337" title="Government of Madagascar" label="Malagasy government"/>
<link wikidata="Q721639" start="1443" end="1455" title="national airline" label="flag carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q3915" start="1641" end="1653" title="Antananarivo" label="Antananarivo"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="1654" end="1659" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q977" start="1665" end="1673" title="Djibouti" label="Djibouti"/>
<link wikidata="Q847409" start="1682" end="1694" title="Douglas DC-7" label="Douglas DC-7"/>
<link wikidata="Q191511" start="1857" end="1866" title="CFA Franc" label="CFA Franc"/>
<link wikidata="Q622673" start="1911" end="1923" title="Douglas DC-4" label="Douglas DC-4"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006566" start="2585" end="2596" title="Farafangana" label="Farafangana"/>
<link wikidata="Q634740" start="2650" end="2664" title="Comoro Islands" label="Comoro Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q330601" start="2745" end="2758" title="share capital" label="share capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q6394" start="2995" end="3005" title="Boeing 707" label="Boeing 707"/>
<link wikidata="Q934012" start="3159" end="3165" title="Piper Aircraft" label="Pipers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997511" start="3173" end="3181" title="Nord 262" label="Nord 262"/>
<link wikidata="Q178067" start="3287" end="3295" title="Tamatave" label="Tamatave"/>
<link wikidata="Q218928" start="3300" end="3312" title="Antsiranana" label="Diego Suarez"/>
<link wikidata="Q670038" start="3342" end="3369" title="Ivato International Airport" label="Ivato International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q4711293" start="3400" end="3412" title="Albert Sylla" label="Albert Sylla"/>
<link wikidata="Q18204377" start="3418" end="3443" title="Minister of Foreign Affairs (Madagascar)" label="Malagasy Foreign Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="3484" end="3488" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q6387" start="3533" end="3547" title="Boeing 737-200" label="Boeing 737-200"/>
<link wikidata="Q223763" start="3598" end="3619" title="South African Airways" label="South African Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q34647" start="3672" end="3684" title="Johannesburg" label="Johannesburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960" start="3719" end="3732" title="Dar es Salaam" label="Dar es Salaam"/>
<link wikidata="Q3870" start="3737" end="3744" title="Nairobi" label="Nairobi"/>
<link wikidata="Q218753" start="3749" end="3756" title="Majunga" label="Majunga"/>
<link wikidata="Q3889" start="3816" end="3832" title="Maputo" label="Lourenço Marques"/>
<link wikidata="Q683041" start="3920" end="3956" title="de Havilland Canada DHC-6 Twin Otter" label="de Havilland Canada DHC-6 Twin Otter"/>
<link wikidata="Q218709" start="4045" end="4062" title="Military of Madagascar" label="Malagasy military"/>
<link wikidata="Q178067" start="4127" end="4135" title="Tamatave" label="Tamatave"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330558" start="4137" end="4144" title="Nosy Be" label="Nosy Be"/>
<link wikidata="Q218928" start="4146" end="4158" title="Antsiranana" label="Diego Suarez"/>
<link wikidata="Q254480" start="4163" end="4170" title="Sambava" label="Sambava"/>
<link wikidata="Q2423152" start="4390" end="4399" title="Mananjary, Fianarantsoa" label="Mananjary"/>
<link wikidata="Q824043" start="4401" end="4407" title="Tuléar" label="Tuléar"/>
<link wikidata="Q526568" start="4412" end="4424" title="Tôlanaro" label="Fort Dauphin"/>
<link wikidata="Q11409" start="4500" end="4509" title="apartheid" label="apartheid"/>
<link wikidata="Q179" start="4592" end="4613" title="Boeing 747" label="Boeing 747-200B Combi"/>
<link wikidata="Q19755" start="4712" end="4751" title="International Air Transport Association" label="International Air Transport Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q218637" start="4794" end="4800" title="ATR 42" label="ATR 42"/>
<link wikidata="Q791468" start="4816" end="4822" title="HS-748" label="HS-748"/>
<link wikidata="Q2355950" start="4959" end="4973" title="Boeing 737-300" label="Boeing 737-300"/>
<link wikidata="Q137011" start="4979" end="4983" title="ILFC" label="ILFC"/>
<link wikidata="Q17070" start="5115" end="5122" title="Réunion" label="Réunion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726" start="5299" end="5305" title="Munich" label="Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="5310" end="5314" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="5434" end="5443" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423" start="5696" end="5712" title="Boeing 767-300ER" label="Boeing 767-300ER"/>
<link wikidata="Q66" start="5757" end="5763" title="Boeing" label="Boeing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434137" start="5831" end="5859" title="GE Capital Aviation Services" label="GE Capital Aviation Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q3433330" start="5999" end="6025" title="Central Bank of Madagascar" label="Central Bank of Madagascar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4689766" start="6051" end="6060" title="African Export-Import Bank" label="Exim Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q15994228" start="6106" end="6126" title="Lufthansa Consulting" label="Lufthansa Consulting"/>
<link wikidata="Q885841" start="6695" end="6717" title="Blue Panorama Airlines" label="Blue Panorama Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q219764" start="6792" end="6798" title="ATR 72" label="ATR 72"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262845" start="6896" end="6910" title="Dubai Air Show" label="Dubai Air Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330558" start="6996" end="7003" title="Nosy Be" label="Nosy Be"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207268" start="7054" end="7103" title="list of air carriers banned in the European Union" label="list of air carriers banned in the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423" start="7151" end="7165" title="Boeing 767-300" label="Boeing 767-300"/>
<link wikidata="Q727002" start="7196" end="7203" title="charter" label="charter"/>
<link wikidata="Q618132" start="7206" end="7227" title="Euro Atlantic Airways" label="Euro Atlantic Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q6425" start="7228" end="7242" title="Boeing 777-200" label="Boeing 777-200"/>
<link wikidata="Q131005" start="7311" end="7321" title="Air France" label="Air France"/>
<link wikidata="Q153476" start="7336" end="7345" title="wet lease" label="wet lease"/>
<link wikidata="Q6481" start="7409" end="7424" title="Airbus A340-300" label="Airbus A340-300"/>
<link wikidata="Q406814" start="7543" end="7564" title="Air Atlanta Icelandic" label="Air Atlanta Icelandic"/>
<link wikidata="Q131005" start="8604" end="8614" title="Air France" label="Air France"/>
<link wikidata="Q376537" start="8887" end="8892" title="African Airlines Association" label="AFRAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q754886" start="9125" end="9144" title="codeshare agreement" label="codeshare agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q406847" start="9195" end="9206" title="Air Austral" label="Air Austral"/>
<link wikidata="Q407556" start="9208" end="9221" title="Air Mauritius" label="Air Mauritius"/>
<link wikidata="Q407783" start="9223" end="9237" title="Air Seychelles" label="Air Seychelles"/>
<link wikidata="Q212304" start="9239" end="9253" title="Etihad Airways" label="Etihad Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q188710" start="9255" end="9281" title="Thai Airways International" label="Thai Airways International"/>
<link wikidata="Q6387" start="9482" end="9496" title="Boeing 737-200" label="Boeing 737-200"/>
<link wikidata="Q2355950" start="9627" end="9641" title="Boeing 737-300" label="Boeing 737-300"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423" start="9678" end="9694" title="Boeing 767-300ER" label="Boeing 767-300ER"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423" start="9703" end="9719" title="Boeing 767-200ER" label="Boeing 767-200ER"/>
<link wikidata="Q6425" start="9727" end="9743" title="Boeing 777-200ER" label="Boeing 777-200ER"/>
<link wikidata="Q6481" start="9795" end="9810" title="Airbus A340-300" label="Airbus A340-300"/>
<link wikidata="Q131005" start="9827" end="9837" title="Air France" label="Air France"/>
<link wikidata="Q6481" start="10095" end="10110" title="Airbus A340-300" label="Airbus A340-300"/>
<link wikidata="Q218637" start="10113" end="10123" title="ATR 42" label="ATR 42-300"/>
<link wikidata="Q218637" start="10126" end="10136" title="ATR 42" label="ATR 42-500"/>
<link wikidata="Q6394" start="10139" end="10149" title="Boeing 707" label="Boeing 707"/>
<link wikidata="Q6387" start="10152" end="10166" title="Boeing 737" label="Boeing 737-200"/>
<link wikidata="Q6387" start="10169" end="10183" title="Boeing 737" label="Boeing 737-300"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084919" start="10186" end="10200" title="Boeing 737-800" label="Boeing 737-800"/>
<link wikidata="Q179" start="10203" end="10218" title="Boeing 747-200M" label="Boeing 747-200M"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423" start="10221" end="10237" title="Boeing 767-200ER" label="Boeing 767-200ER"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423" start="10240" end="10256" title="Boeing 767-300ER" label="Boeing 767-300ER"/>
<link wikidata="Q6425" start="10259" end="10275" title="Boeing 777-200ER" label="Boeing 777-200ER"/>
<link wikidata="Q190211" start="10278" end="10290" title="Douglas DC-3" label="Douglas DC-3"/>
<link wikidata="Q622673" start="10293" end="10305" title="Douglas DC-4" label="Douglas DC-4"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997511" start="10308" end="10316" title="Nord 262" label="Nord 262"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698798" start="10332" end="10350" title="Airlines of Africa" label="Airlines of Africa"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="990501" wikidata="Q6964469" url="?curid=990501" title="Nanyang Polytechnic">
<text>Nanyang Polytechnic (NYP), established in 1992, is a post-secondary education institution and statutory board under the purview of the Ministry of Education in Singapore. 

==Recognition==

Nanyang Polytechnic has won many awards and recognitions. These include:
* Work-Life Achiever Award (2012)
* Singapore Quality Award (2011)
* Public Service Achievement Award (2010)
* Innovation Excellence Award (2009)
* SHRI Leading HR Practices in E-Human Resource Management Award (2009)
* Hewitt Best Employer Award (2009)
* BCA Green Mark Platinum Award (2005)
* ASEAN Energy Efficiency and Conservation Best Practices Competition (2004)
* ISO9001:2000 Certification (2001)
* ISO9001 Certification (2000)
* ISO14001 Certification (1999)
* ISO9002 Certification (1996)

==Notable alumni==
===Entertainment===
* Romeo Tan, Mediacorp actor
* Carrie Wong, Mediacorp actress
* Chantalle Ng, Mediacorp actress
* Hossan Leong, Singaporean actor
* Vanessa Peh, Miss Singapore World 2018
* Anupama Aura Gurung, Miss Nepal Earth 2011

===Sports===
* Hariss Harun, footballer and captain of the Singapore national team
* Lionel Lewis, former Singapore national team footballer
* Helena Wong, Singaporean weightlifter
* Reuben Kee, Singaporean dragon boat paddler

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6964469" start="0" end="19" title="Nanyang Polytechnic" label="Nanyang Polytechnic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6964469" start="21" end="24" title="Nanyang Polytechnic" label="NYP"/>
<link wikidata="Q4294530" start="135" end="156" title="Ministry of Education (Singapore)" label="Ministry of Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="160" end="169" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q4986523" start="519" end="522" title="Building and Construction Authority" label="BCA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7768" start="558" end="563" title="Association of Southeast Asian Nations" label="ASEAN"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="635" end="647" title="ISO9001#2000 version" label="ISO9001:2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q206008" start="671" end="678" title="ISO9001" label="ISO9001"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322065" start="702" end="710" title="ISO14001" label="ISO14001"/>
<link wikidata="Q206008" start="734" end="741" title="ISO9002" label="ISO9002"/>
<link wikidata="Q7363117" start="805" end="814" title="Romeo Tan" label="Romeo Tan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368796" start="816" end="825" title="Mediacorp" label="Mediacorp"/>
<link wikidata="Q18637232" start="834" end="845" title="Carrie Wong" label="Carrie Wong"/>
<link wikidata="Q51754580" start="867" end="879" title="Chantalle Ng" label="Chantalle Ng"/>
<link wikidata="Q5908959" start="901" end="913" title="Hossan Leong" label="Hossan Leong"/>
<link wikidata="Q56631018" start="935" end="946" title="Vanessa Peh" label="Vanessa Peh"/>
<link wikidata="Q4777836" start="976" end="995" title="Anupama Aura Gurung" label="Anupama Aura Gurung"/>
<link wikidata="Q5657973" start="1035" end="1047" title="Hariss Harun" label="Hariss Harun"/>
<link wikidata="Q715772" start="1064" end="1071" title="Captain (association football)" label="captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q239528" start="1079" end="1102" title="Singapore national football team" label="Singapore national team"/>
<link wikidata="Q3833182" start="1105" end="1117" title="Lionel Lewis" label="Lionel Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q14163451" start="1163" end="1174" title="Helena Wong (weightlifter)" label="Helena Wong"/>
<link wikidata="Q7317475" start="1203" end="1213" title="Reuben Kee" label="Reuben Kee"/>
<link wikidata="Q57589" start="1227" end="1238" title="dragon boat" label="dragon boat"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="990505" wikidata="Q317309" url="?curid=990505" title="Mental health">
<text>Mental health encompasses emotional, psychological, and social well-being, influencing cognition, perception, and behavior. According to the World Health Organization (WHO), it is a &quot;state of well-being in which the individual realizes his or her abilities, can cope with the normal stresses of life, can work productively and fruitfully, and can contribute to his or her community&quot;. It likewise determines how an individual handles stress, interpersonal relationships, and decision-making. Mental health includes subjective well-being, perceived self-efficacy, autonomy, competence, intergenerational dependence, and self-actualization of one&#x27;s intellectual and emotional potential, among others.

From the perspectives of positive psychology or holism, mental health may include an individual&#x27;s ability to enjoy life and to create a balance between life activities and efforts to achieve psychological resilience. Cultural differences, personal philosophy, subjective assessments, and competing professional theories all affect how one defines &quot;mental health&quot;. Some early signs related to mental health difficulties are sleep irritation, lack of energy, lack of appetite, thinking of harming oneself or others, self-isolating (though introversion and isolation aren&#x27;t necessarily unhealthy), and frequently zoning out.

== Mental disorders ==

Mental health, as defined by the Public Health Agency of Canada, is an individual&#x27;s capacity to feel, think, and act in ways to achieve a better quality of life while respecting personal, social, and cultural boundaries. Impairment of any of these are risk factor for mental disorders, or mental illnesses, which are a component of mental health. In 2019, about 970 million people worldwide suffered from a mental disorder, with anxiety and depression being the most common. The number of people suffering from mental disorders has risen significantly throughout the years. Mental disorders are defined as health conditions that affect and alter cognitive functioning, emotional responses, and behavior associated with distress and/or impaired functioning. The ICD-11 is the global standard used to diagnose, treat, research, and report various mental disorders. In the United States, the DSM-5 is used as the classification system of mental disorders.

Mental health is associated with a number of lifestyle factors such as diet, exercise, stress, drug abuse, social connections and interactions. Psychiatrists, psychologists, licensed professional clinical counselors, social workers, nurse practitioners, and family physicians can help manage mental illness with treatments such as therapy, counseling, and medication.

==History==
=== Early history ===

In the mid-19th century, William Sweetser was the first to coin the term &quot;mental hygiene&quot;, which can be seen as the precursor to contemporary approaches to work on promoting positive mental health. Isaac Ray, the fourth president of the American Psychiatric Association and one of its founders, further defined mental hygiene as &quot;the art of preserving the mind against all incidents and influences calculated to deteriorate its qualities, impair its energies, or derange its movements&quot;.

In American history, mentally ill patients were thought to be religiously punished. This response persisted through the 1700s, along with the inhumane confinement and stigmatization of such individuals. Dorothea Dix (1802–1887) was an important figure in the development of the &quot;mental hygiene&quot; movement. Dix was a school teacher who endeavored to help people with mental disorders and to expose the sub-standard conditions into which they were put. This became known as the &quot;mental hygiene movement&quot;. Before this movement, it was not uncommon that people affected by mental illness would be considerably neglected, often left alone in deplorable conditions without sufficient clothing. From 1840 to 1880, she won the support of the federal government to set up over 30 state psychiatric hospitals; however, they were understaffed, under-resourced, and were accused of violating human rights.

Emil Kraepelin in 1896 developed the taxonomy of mental disorders which has dominated the field for nearly 80 years. Later, the proposed disease model of abnormality was subjected to analysis and considered normality to be relative to the physical, geographical and cultural aspects of the defining group.

At the beginning of the 20th century, Clifford Beers founded &quot;Mental Health America – National Committee for Mental Hygiene&quot;, after publication of his accounts as a patient in several lunatic asylums, &quot;A Mind That Found Itself&quot;, in 1908 and opened the first outpatient mental health clinic in the United States.

The mental hygiene movement, similar to the social hygiene movement, had at times been associated with advocating eugenics and sterilization of those considered too mentally deficient to be assisted into productive work and contented family life. In the post-WWII years, references to mental hygiene were gradually replaced by the term &#x27;mental health&#x27; due to its positive aspect that evolves from the treatment of illness to preventive and promotive areas of healthcare.

==== Institutionalization and Deinstitutionalization ====
When US government-run hospitals were accused of violating human rights, advocates pushed for deinstitutionalization: the replacement of federal mental hospitals for community mental health services. The closure of state-provisioned psychiatric hospitals was enforced by the Community Mental Health Centers Act in 1963 that laid out terms in which only patients who posed an imminent danger to others or themselves could be admitted into state facilities. This was seen as an improvement from previous conditions. However, there remains a debate on the conditions of these community resources.

It has been proven that this transition was beneficial for many patients: there was an increase in overall satisfaction, a better quality of life, and more friendships between patients all at an affordable cost. This proved to be true only in the circumstance that treatment facilities had enough funding for staff and equipment as well as proper management. However, this idea is a polarizing issue. Critics of deinstitutionalization argue that poor living conditions prevailed, patients were lonely, and they did not acquire proper medical care in these treatment homes. Additionally, patients that were moved from state psychiatric care to nursing and residential homes had deficits in crucial aspects of their treatment. Some cases result in the shift of care from health workers to patients&#x27; families, where they do not have the proper funding or medical expertise to give proper care. On the other hand, patients that are treated in community mental health centers lack sufficient cancer testing, vaccinations, or otherwise regular medical check-ups.

Other critics of state deinstitutionalization argue that this was simply a transition to &quot;transinstitutionalization&quot;, or the idea that prisons and state-provisioned hospitals are interdependent. In other words, patients become inmates. This draws on the Penrose Hypothesis of 1939, which theorized that there was an inverse relationship between prisons&#x27; population size and the number of psychiatric hospital beds. This means that populations that require psychiatric mental care will transition between institutions, which in this case, includes state psychiatric hospitals and criminal justice systems. Thus, a decrease in available psychiatric hospital beds occurred at the same time as an increase in inmates. Although some are skeptical that this is due to other external factors, others will reason this conclusion to a lack of empathy for the mentally ill. There is no argument for the social stigmatization of those with mental illnesses, they have been widely marginalized and discriminated against in society. In this source, researchers analyze how most compensation prisoners (detainees who are unable or unwilling to pay a fine for petty crimes) are unemployed, homeless, and with an extraordinarily high degree of mental illnesses and substance use disorders. Compensation prisoners then lose prospective job opportunities, face social marginalization, and lack access to resocialization programs, which ultimately facilitate reoffending. The research sheds light on how the mentally ill—and in this case, the poor—are further punished for certain circumstances that are beyond their control, and that this is a vicious cycle that repeats itself. Thus, prisons embody another state-provisioned mental hospital.

Families of patients, advocates, and mental health professionals still call for increase in more well-structured community facilities and treatment programs with a higher quality of long-term inpatient resources and care. With this more structured environment, the United States will continue with more access to mental health care and an increase in the overall treatment of the mentally ill.

However, there is still a lack of studies for mental health conditions (MHCs) to raise awareness, knowledge development, and attitudes toward seeking medical treatment for MHCs in Bangladesh. People in rural areas often seek treatment from the traditional healers and MHCs are sometimes considered a spiritual matter.

== Epidemiology ==
Mental illnesses are more common than cancer, diabetes, or heart disease. As of 2021, over 22 percent of all Americans over the age of 18 meet the criteria for having a mental illness. Evidence suggests that 970 million people worldwide have a mental disorder. Major depression ranks third among the top 10 leading causes of disease worldwide. By 2030, it is predicted to become the leading cause of disease worldwide. Over 700 thousand people commit suicide every year and around 14 million attempt it. A World Health Organization (WHO) report estimates the global cost of mental illness at nearly $2.5 trillion (two-thirds in indirect costs) in 2010, with a projected increase to over $6 trillion by 2030.

Evidence from the WHO suggests that nearly half of the world&#x27;s population is affected by mental illness with an impact on their self-esteem, relationships and ability to function in everyday life. An individual&#x27;s emotional health can impact their physical health. Poor mental health can lead to problems such as the inability to make adequate decisions and substance use disorders.

Good mental health can improve life quality whereas poor mental health can worsen it. According to Richards, Campania, &amp; Muse-Burke, &quot;There is growing evidence that is showing emotional abilities are associated with pro-social behaviors such as stress management and physical health.&quot; Their research also concluded that people who lack emotional expression are inclined to anti-social behaviors (e.g., substance use disorder and alcohol use disorder, physical fights, vandalism), which reflects one&#x27;s mental health and suppressed emotions. Adults and children who face mental illness may experience social stigma, which can exacerbate the issues.

=== Global prevalence ===
Mental health can be seen as a continuum, where an individual&#x27;s mental health may have many different possible values. Mental wellness is viewed as a positive attribute; this definition of mental health highlights emotional well-being, the capacity to live a full and creative life, and the flexibility to deal with life&#x27;s inevitable challenges. Some discussions are formulated in terms of contentment or happiness. Many therapeutic systems and self-help books offer methods and philosophies espousing strategies and techniques vaunted as effective for further improving the mental wellness. Positive psychology is increasingly prominent in mental health.

A holistic model of mental health generally includes concepts based upon anthropological, educational, psychological, religious, and sociological perspectives. There are also models as theoretical perspectives from personality, social, clinical, health and developmental psychology.

The tripartite model of mental well-being views mental well-being as encompassing three components of emotional well-being, social well-being, and psychological well-being. Emotional well-being is defined as having high levels of positive emotions, whereas social and psychological well-being are defined as the presence of psychological and social skills and abilities that contribute to optimal functioning in daily life. The model has received empirical support across cultures. The Mental Health Continuum-Short Form (MHC-SF) is the most widely used scale to measure the tripartite model of mental well-being.

===Demographics===
====Children and young adults====
As of 2019, about one in seven of the world&#x27;s 10–19 year olds experienced a mental health disorder; about 165 million young people in total. A person&#x27;s teenage years are a unique period where much crucial psychological development occurs, and is also a time of increased vulnerability to the development of adverse mental health conditions. More than half of mental health conditions start before a child reaches 20 years of age, with onset occurring in adolescence much more frequently than it does in early childhood or adulthood. Many such cases go undetected and untreated.

In the United States alone, in 2021, at least roughly 17.5% of the population (ages 18 and older) were recorded as having a mental illness. The comparison between reports and statistics of mental health issues in newer generations (18–25 years old to 26–49 years old) and the older generation (50 years or older) signifies an increase in mental health issues as only 15% of the older generation reported a mental health issue whereas the newer generations reported 33.7% (18-25) and 28.1% (26-49). The role of caregivers for youth with mental health needs is valuable, and caregivers benefit most when they have sufficient psychoeducation and peer support. Depression is one of the leading causes of illness and disability among adolescents. Suicide is the fourth leading cause of death in 15-19-year-olds. Exposure to childhood trauma can cause mental health disorders and poor academic achievement. Ignoring mental health conditions in adolescents can impact adulthood. 50% of preschool children show a natural reduction in behavioral problems. The remaining experience long-term consequences. It impairs physical and mental health and limits opportunities to live fulfilling lives. A result of depression during adolescence and adulthood may be substance abuse. The average age of onset is between 11 and 14 years for depressive disorders. Only approximately 25% of children with behavioral problems refer to medical services. The majority of children go untreated.

====Homeless population====

Mental illness is thought to be highly prevalent among homeless populations, though access to proper diagnoses is limited. An article written by Lisa Goodman and her colleagues summarized Smith&#x27;s research into PTSD in homeless single women and mothers in St. Louis, Missouri, which found that 53% of the respondents met diagnostic criteria, and which describes homelessness as a risk factor for mental illness. At least two commonly reported symptoms of psychological trauma, social disaffiliation and learned helplessness are highly prevalent among homeless individuals and families.

While mental illness is prevalent, people infrequently receive appropriate care. Case management linked to other services is an effective care approach for improving symptoms in people experiencing homelessness. Case management reduced admission to hospitals, and it reduced substance use by those with substance abuse problems more than typical care.

====Immigrants and refugees====

States that produce refugees are sites of social upheaval, civil war, even genocide. Most refugees experience trauma. It can be in the form of torture, sexual assault, family fragmentation, and death of loved ones.

Refugees and immigrants experience psychosocial stressors after resettlement. These include discrimination, lack of economic stability, and social isolation causing emotional distress. For example, Not far into the 1900s, campaigns targeting Japanese immigrants were being formed that inhibited their ability to participate in U.S life, painting them as a threat to the American working-class. They were subject to prejudice and slandered by American media as well as anti-Japanese legislation being implemented. For refugees family reunification can be one of the primary needs to improve quality of life. Post-migration trauma is a cause of depressive disorders and psychological distress for immigrants.

====Cultural and religious considerations====
Mental health is a socially constructed concept; different societies, groups, cultures (both ethnic and national/regional), institutions, and professions have very different ways of conceptualizing its nature and causes, determining what is mentally healthy, and deciding what interventions, if any, are appropriate. Thus, different professionals will have different cultural, class, political and religious backgrounds, which will impact the methodology applied during treatment. In the context of deaf mental health care, it is necessary for professionals to have cultural competency of deaf and hard of hearing people and to understand how to properly rely on trained, qualified, and certified interpreters when working with culturally Deaf clients.

Research has shown that there is stigma attached to mental illness. Due to such stigma, individuals may resist labeling and may be driven to respond to mental health diagnoses with denialism. Family caregivers of individuals with mental disorders may also suffer discrimination or face stigma.

Addressing and eliminating the social stigma and perceived stigma attached to mental illness has been recognized as crucial to education and awareness surrounding mental health issues. In the United Kingdom, the Royal College of Psychiatrists organized the campaign &quot;Changing Minds&quot; (1998–2003) to help reduce stigma, while in the United States, efforts by entities such as the Born This Way Foundation and &quot;The Manic Monologues&quot; specifically focus on removing the stigma surrounding mental illness. The National Alliance on Mental Illness (NAMI) is a U.S. institution founded in 1979 to represent and advocate for those struggling with mental health issues. NAMI helps to educate about mental illnesses and health issues, while also working to eliminate stigma attached to these disorders.

Many mental health professionals are beginning to, or already understand, the importance of competency in religious diversity and spirituality, or the lack thereof. They are also partaking in cultural training to better understand which interventions work best for these different groups of people. The American Psychological Association explicitly states that religion must be respected. Education in spiritual and religious matters is also required by the American Psychiatric Association, however, far less attention is paid to the damage that more rigid, fundamentalist faiths commonly practiced in the United States can cause. This theme has been widely politicized in 2018 such as with the creation of the Religious Liberty Task Force in July of that year. Also, many providers and practitioners in the United States are only beginning to realize that the institution of mental healthcare lacks knowledge and competence of many non-Western cultures, leaving providers in the United States ill-equipped to treat patients from different cultures.

=== Occupations ===
===Occupational therapy===
Occupational therapy practitioners aim to improve and enable a client or group&#x27;s participation in meaningful, everyday occupations. In this sense, occupation is defined as any activity that &quot;occupies one&#x27;s time&quot;. Examples of those activities include daily tasks (dressing, bathing, eating, house chores, driving, etc.), sleep and rest, education, work, play, leisure (hobbies), and social interactions. The OT profession offers a vast range of services for all stages of life in a myriad of practice settings, though the foundations of OT come from mental health. Community support for mental health through expert-moderated support groups can aid those who want to recover from mental illness or otherwise improve their emotional well-being.

OT services focused on mental health can be provided to persons, groups, and populations across the lifespan and experiencing varying levels of mental health performance. For example, occupational therapy practitioners provide mental health services in school systems, military environments, hospitals, outpatient clinics, and inpatient mental health rehabilitation settings. Interventions or support can be provided directly through specific treatment interventions or indirectly by providing consultation to businesses, schools, or other larger groups to incorporate mental health strategies on a programmatic level. Even people who are mentally healthy can benefit from the health promotion and additional prevention strategies to reduce the impact of difficult situations.

The interventions focus on positive functioning, sensory strategies, managing emotions, interpersonal relationships, sleep, community engagement, and other cognitive skills (i.e. visual-perceptual skills, attention, memory, arousal/energy management, etc.).

====Mental health in social work====

Social work in mental health, also called psychiatric social work, is a process where an individual in a setting is helped to attain freedom from overlapping internal and external problems (social and economic situations, family and other relationships, the physical and organizational environment, psychiatric symptoms, etc.). It aims for harmony, quality of life, self-actualization and personal adaptation across all systems. Psychiatric social workers are mental health professionals that can assist patients and their family members in coping with both mental health issues and various economic or social problems caused by mental illness or psychiatric dysfunctions and to attain improved mental health and well-being. They are vital members of the treatment teams in Departments of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences in hospitals. They are employed in both outpatient and inpatient settings of a hospital, nursing homes, state and local governments, substance use clinics, correctional facilities, health care services, private practice, etc.

In the United States, social workers provide most of the mental health services. According to government sources, 60 percent of mental health professionals are clinically trained social workers, 10 percent are psychiatrists, 23 percent are psychologists, and 5 percent are psychiatric nurses.

Mental health social workers in Japan have professional knowledge of health and welfare and skills essential for person&#x27;s well-being. Their social work training enables them as a professional to carry out Consultation assistance for mental disabilities and their social reintegration; Consultation regarding the rehabilitation of the victims; Advice and guidance for post-discharge residence and re-employment after hospitalized care, for major life events in regular life, money and self-management and other relevant matters to equip them to adapt in daily life. Social workers provide individual home visits for mentally ill and do welfare services available, with specialized training a range of procedural services are coordinated for home, workplace and school. In an administrative relationship, Psychiatric social workers provides consultation, leadership, conflict management and work direction. Psychiatric social workers who provides assessment and psychosocial interventions function as a clinician, counselor and municipal staff of the health centers.

==Risk factors and causes of mental health problems==

There are many things that can contribute to mental health problems, including biological factors, genetic factors, life experiences (such as psychological trauma or abuse), and a family history of mental health problems.

=== Biological factors ===
According to the National Institute of Health Curriculum Supplement Series book, most scientists believe that changes in neurotransmitters can cause mental illnesses. In the section &quot;The Biology of Mental Illnesses&quot; the issue is explained in detail, &quot;...there may be disruptions in the neurotransmitters dopamine, glutamate, and norepinephrine in individuals who have schizophrenia&quot;.
=== Demographic factors ===
Gender, age, ethnicity, life expectancy, longevity, population density, and community diversity are all demographic characteristics that can increase the risk and severity of mental disorders. Existing evidence demonstrates that the female gender is connected with an elevated risk of depression at different phases of life, commencing in adolescence in different contexts. Females, for example, have a higher risk of anxiety and eating disorders, whereas males have a higher chance of substance abuse and behavioral and developmental issues. This does not imply that women are less likely to suffer from developmental disorders such autism spectrum disorder, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, Tourette syndrome, or early-onset schizophrenia. Ethnicity and ethnic heterogeneity have also been identified as risk factors for the prevalence of mental disorders, with minority groups being at a higher risk due to discrimination and exclusion. Approximately 8 in 10 people with autism suffer from a mental health problem in their life time, in comparison to 1 in 4 of the general population that suffers from a mental health problem in their lifetimes.

Unemployment has been shown to hurt an individual&#x27;s emotional well-being, self-esteem, and more broadly their mental health. Increasing unemployment has been shown to have a significant impact on mental health, predominantly depressive disorders. This is an important consideration when reviewing the triggers for mental health disorders in any population survey. According to a 2009 meta-analysis by Paul and Moser, countries with high income inequality and poor unemployment protections experience worse mental health outcomes among the unemployed.

Emotional mental disorders are a leading cause of disabilities worldwide. Investigating the degree and severity of untreated emotional mental disorders throughout the world is a top priority of the World Mental Health (WMH) survey initiative, which was created in 1998 by the World Health Organization (WHO). &quot;Neuropsychiatric disorders are the leading causes of disability worldwide, accounting for 37% of all healthy life years lost through disease. These disorders are most destructive to low and middle-income countries due to their inability to provide their citizens with proper aid. Despite modern treatment and rehabilitation for emotional mental health disorders, &quot;even economically advantaged societies have competing priorities and budgetary constraints&quot;.

Unhappily married couples suffer 3–25 times the risk of developing clinical depression.

The World Mental Health survey initiative has suggested a plan for countries to redesign their mental health care systems to best allocate resources.
&quot;A first step is documentation of services being used and the extent and nature of unmet treatment needs. A second step could be to do a cross-national comparison of service use and unmet needs in countries with different mental health care systems. Such comparisons can help to uncover optimum financing, national policies, and delivery systems for mental health care.&quot;

Knowledge of how to provide effective emotional mental health care has become imperative worldwide. Unfortunately, most countries have insufficient data to guide decisions, absent or competing visions for resources, and near-constant pressures to cut insurance and entitlements. WMH surveys were done in Africa (Nigeria, South Africa), the Americas (Colombia, Mexico, United States), Asia and the Pacific (Japan, New Zealand, Beijing and Shanghai in the People&#x27;s Republic of China), Europe (Belgium, France, Germany, Italy, Netherlands, Spain, Ukraine), and the Middle East (Israel, Lebanon). Countries were classified with World Bank criteria as low-income (Nigeria), lower-middle-income (China, Colombia, South Africa, Ukraine), higher middle-income (Lebanon, Mexico), and high-income.

The coordinated surveys on emotional mental health disorders, their severity, and treatments were implemented in the aforementioned countries. These surveys assessed the frequency, types, and adequacy of mental health service use in 17 countries in which WMH surveys are complete. The WMH also examined unmet needs for treatment in strata defined by the seriousness of mental disorders. Their research showed that &quot;the number of respondents using any 12-month mental health service was generally lower in developing than in developed countries, and the proportion receiving services tended to correspond to countries&#x27; percentages of gross domestic product spent on health care&quot;.
&quot;High levels of unmet need worldwide are not surprising, since WHO Project ATLAS&#x27; findings of much lower mental health expenditures than was suggested by the magnitude of burdens from mental illnesses. Generally, unmet needs in low-income and middle-income countries might be attributable to these nations spending reduced amounts (usually &lt;1%) of already diminished health budgets on mental health care, and they rely heavily on out-of-pocket spending by citizens who are ill-equipped for it&quot;.

=== Stress ===

The Centre for Addiction and Mental Health discusses how a certain amount of stress is a normal part of daily life. Small doses of stress help people meet deadlines, be prepared for presentations, be productive and arrive on time for important events. However, long-term stress can become harmful. When stress becomes overwhelming and prolonged, the risks for mental health problems and medical problems increase.&quot; Also on that note, some studies have found language to deteriorate mental health and even harm humans.

The impact of a stressful environment has also been highlighted by different models. Mental health has often been understood from the lens of the vulnerability-stress model. In that context, stressful situations may contribute to a preexisting vulnerability to negative mental health outcomes being realized. On the other hand, the differential susceptibility hypothesis suggests that mental health outcomes are better explained by an increased sensitivity to the environment than by vulnerability. For example, it was found that children scoring higher on observer-rated environmental sensitivity often derive more harm from low-quality parenting, but also more benefits from high-quality parenting than those children scoring lower on that measure.

=== Poverty ===
=== Environmental factors ===
==Prevention and promotion==

&quot;The terms mental health promotion and prevention have often been confused. Promotion is defined as intervening to &quot;optimize&quot; positive mental health by addressing determinants of positive mental health (i.e. protective factors) before a specific mental health problem has been identified, with the ultimate goal of improving the positive mental health of the population. Mental health prevention is defined as intervening to &quot;minimize&quot; mental health problems (i.e. risk factors) by addressing determinants of mental health problems before a specific mental health problem has been identified in the individual, group, or population of focus with the ultimate goal of reducing the number of future mental health problems in the population.&quot;

In order to improve mental health, the root of the issue has to be resolved. &quot;Prevention emphasizes the avoidance of risk factors; promotion aims to enhance an individual&#x27;s ability to achieve a positive sense of self-esteem, mastery, well-being, and social inclusion.&quot; Mental health promotion attempts to increase protective factors and healthy behaviors that can help prevent the onset of a diagnosable mental disorder and reduce risk factors that can lead to the development of a mental disorder. Yoga is an example of an activity that calms one&#x27;s entire body and nerves. According to a study on well-being by Richards, Campania, and Muse-Burke, &quot;mindfulness is considered to be a purposeful state, it may be that those who practice it belief in its importance and value being mindful, so that valuing of self-care activities may influence the intentional component of mindfulness.&quot; Akin to surgery, sometimes the body must be further damaged, before it can properly heal 

Mental health is conventionally defined as a hybrid of the absence of a mental disorder and the presence of well-being. Focus is increasing on preventing mental disorders.
Prevention is beginning to appear in mental health strategies, including the 2004 WHO report &quot;Prevention of Mental Disorders&quot;, the 2008 EU &quot;Pact for Mental Health&quot; and the 2011 US National Prevention Strategy. Some commentators have argued that a pragmatic and practical approach to mental disorder prevention at work would be to treat it the same way as physical injury prevention.

Prevention of a disorder at a young age may significantly decrease the chances that a child will have a disorder later in life, and shall be the most efficient and effective measure from a public health perspective. Prevention may require the regular consultation of a physician for at least twice a year to detect any signs that reveal any mental health concerns.

Additionally, social media is becoming a resource for prevention. In 2004, the Mental Health Services Act began to fund marketing initiatives to educate the public on mental health. This California-based project is working to combat the negative perception with mental health and reduce the stigma associated with it. While social media can benefit mental health, it can also lead to deterioration if not managed properly. Limiting social media intake is beneficial.

Studies report that patients in mental health care who can access and read their Electronic Health Records (EHR) or Open Notes online experience increased understanding of their mental health, feeling in control of their care, and enhanced trust in their clinicians. Patients&#x27; also reported feelings of greater validation, engagement, remembering their care plan, and acquiring a better awareness of potential side effects of their medications, when reading their mental health notes. Other common experiences were that shared mental health notes enhance patient empowerment and augment patient autonomy.

Furthermore, recent studies have shown that social media is an effective way to draw attention to mental health issues. By collecting data from Twitter, researchers found that social media presence is heightened after an event relating to behavioral health occurs. Researchers continue to find effective ways to use social media to bring more awareness to mental health issues through online campaigns in other sites such as Facebook and Instagram.

===Care navigation===

Mental health care navigation helps to guide patients and families through the fragmented, often confusing mental health industries. Care navigators work closely with patients and families through discussion and collaboration to provide information on best therapies as well as referrals to practitioners and facilities specializing in particular forms of emotional improvement. The difference between therapy and care navigation is that the care navigation process provides information and directs patients to therapy rather than providing therapy. Still, care navigators may offer diagnosis and treatment planning. Though many care navigators are also trained therapists and doctors. Care navigation is the link between the patient and the below therapies. A clear recognition that mental health requires medical intervention was demonstrated in a study by Kessler et al. of the prevalence and treatment of mental disorders from 1990 to 2003 in the United States. Despite the prevalence of mental health disorders remaining unchanged during this period, the number of patients seeking treatment for mental disorders increased threefold.

===Methods===
==== Pharmacotherapy ====
Pharmacotherapy is a therapy that uses pharmaceutical drugs. Pharmacotherapy is used in the treatment of mental illness through the use of antidepressants, benzodiazepines, and the use of elements such as lithium. It can only be prescribed by a medical professional trained in the field of Psychiatry.

==== Physical activity ====
Physical exercise can improve mental and physical health. Playing sports, walking, cycling, or doing any form of physical activity trigger the production of various hormones, sometimes including endorphins, which can elevate a person&#x27;s mood.

Studies have shown that in some cases, physical activity can have the same impact as antidepressants when treating depression and anxiety.

Moreover, cessation of physical exercise may have adverse effects on some mental health conditions, such as depression and anxiety. This could lead to different negative outcomes such as obesity, skewed body image and many health risks associated with mental illnesses. Exercise can improve mental health but it should not be used as an alternative to therapy.

====Activity therapies====
Activity therapies also called recreation therapy and occupational therapy, promote healing through active engagement. An example of occupational therapy would be promoting an activity that improves daily life, such as self-care or improving hobbies.

Each of these therapies have proven to improve mental health and have resulted in healthier, happier individuals. In recent years, for example, coloring has been recognized as an activity that has been proven to significantly lower the levels of depressive symptoms and anxiety in many studies.

====Expressive therapies====
Expressive therapies or creative arts therapies are a form of psychotherapy that involves the arts or artmaking. These therapies include art therapy, music therapy, drama therapy, dance therapy, and poetry therapy. It has been proven that music therapy is an effective way of helping people with a mental health disorder. Drama therapy is approved by NICE for the treatment of psychosis.

====Psychotherapy====

Psychotherapy is the general term for the scientific based treatment of mental health issues based on modern medicine. It includes a number of schools, such as gestalt therapy, psychoanalysis, cognitive behavioral therapy, psychedelic therapy, transpersonal psychology/psychotherapy, and dialectical behavioral therapy.
Group therapy involves any type of therapy that takes place in a setting involving multiple people. It can include psychodynamic groups, expressive therapy groups, support groups (including the Twelve-step program), problem-solving and psychoeducation groups.

====Self-compassion====

According to Neff, self-compassion consists of three main positive components and their negative counterparts: Self-Kindness versus Self-Judgment, Common Humanity versus Isolation and Mindfulness versus Over-Identification. Furthermore, there is evidence from a study by Shin &amp; Lin suggesting specific components of self-compassion can predict specific dimensions of positive mental health (emotional, social, and psychological well-being).

====Social-emotional learning====

The Collaborative for academic, social, emotional learning (CASEL) addresses five broad and interrelated areas of competence and highlights examples for each: self-awareness, self-management, social awareness, relationship skills,&quot; and &quot;responsible decision-making. A meta-analysis was done by Alexendru Boncu, Iuliana Costeau, &amp; Mihaela Minulescu (2017) looking at social-emotional learning (SEL) studies and the effects on emotional and behavior outcomes. They found a small but significant effect size (across the studies looked into) for externalized problems and social-emotional skills.

====Meditation====
The practice of mindfulness meditation has several potential mental health benefits, such as bringing about reductions in depression, anxiety and stress. Mindfulness meditation may also be effective in treating substance use disorders.

====Lucid dreaming====

Lucid dreaming has been found to be associated with greater mental well-being. It also was not associated with poorer sleep quality nor with cognitive dissociation. There is also some evidence lucid dreaming therapy can help with nightmare reduction.

==== Mental fitness ====
Mental fitness is a mental health movement that encourages people to intentionally regulate and maintain their emotional wellbeing through friendship, regular human contact, and activities that include meditation, calming exercises, aerobic exercise, mindfulness, having a routine and maintaining adequate sleep. Mental fitness is intended to build resilience against every-day mental and potentially physical health challenges to prevent an escalation of anxiety, depression, and suicidal ideation. This can help people, including older adults with health challenges, to more effectively cope with the escalation of those feelings if they occur.

====Spiritual counseling====
Spiritual counsellors meet with people in need to offer comfort and support and to help them gain a better understanding of their issues and develop a problem-solving relation with spirituality. These types of counselors deliver care based on spiritual, psychological and theological principles.

==Laws and public health policies==

There are many factors that influence mental health including:
* Mental illness, disability, and suicide are ultimately the result of a combination of biology, environment, and access to and utilization of mental health treatment.
* Public health policies can influence access and utilization, which subsequently may improve mental health and help to progress the negative consequences of depression and its associated disability.

=== United States ===
Emotional mental illnesses is a particular concern in the United States since the U.S. has the highest annual prevalence rates (26 percent) for mental illnesses among a comparison of 14 developing and developed countries. While approximately 80 percent of all people in the United States with a mental disorder eventually receive some form of treatment, on average persons do not access care until nearly a decade following the development of their illness, and less than one-third of people who seek help receive minimally adequate care. The government offers everyone programs and services, but veterans receive the most help, there is certain eligibility criteria that has to be met.

==== Policies ====
Mental health policies in the United States have experienced four major reforms: the American asylum movement led by Dorothea Dix in 1843; the mental hygiene movement inspired by Clifford Beers in 1908; the deinstitutionalization started by Action for Mental Health in 1961; and the community support movement called for by The CMCH Act Amendments of 1975.

In 1843, Dorothea Dix submitted a Memorial to the Legislature of Massachusetts, describing the abusive treatment and horrible conditions received by the mentally ill patients in jails, cages, and almshouses. She revealed in her Memorial: &quot;I proceed, gentlemen, briefly to call your attention to the present state of insane persons confined within this Commonwealth, in cages, closets, cellars, stalls, pens! Chained, naked, beaten with rods, and lashed into obedience...&quot; Many asylums were built in that period, with high fences or walls separating the patients from other community members and strict rules regarding the entrance and exit. In 1866, a recommendation came to the New York State Legislature to establish a separate asylum for chronic mentally ill patients. Some hospitals placed the chronic patients into separate wings or wards, or different buildings.

In &quot;A Mind That Found Itself&quot; (1908) Clifford Whittingham Beers described the humiliating treatment he received and the deplorable conditions in the mental hospital. One year later, the National Committee for Mental Hygiene (NCMH) was founded by a small group of reform-minded scholars and scientists—including Beers himself—which marked the beginning of the &quot;mental hygiene&quot; movement. The movement emphasized the importance of childhood prevention. World War I catalyzed this idea with an additional emphasis on the impact of maladjustment, which convinced the hygienists that prevention was the only practical approach to handle mental health issues. However, prevention was not successful, especially for chronic illness; the condemnable conditions in the hospitals were even more prevalent, especially under the pressure of the increasing number of chronically ill and the influence of the depression.

In 1961, the Joint Commission on Mental Health published a report called Action for Mental Health, whose goal was for community clinic care to take on the burden of prevention and early intervention of the mental illness, therefore to leave space in the hospitals for severe and chronic patients. The court started to rule in favor of the patients&#x27; will on whether they should be forced to treatment. By 1977, 650 community mental health centers were built to cover 43 percent of the population and serve 1.9 million individuals a year, and the lengths of treatment decreased from 6 months to only 23 days. However, issues still existed. Due to inflation, especially in the 1970s, the community nursing homes received less money to support the care and treatment provided. Fewer than half of the planned centers were created, and new methods did not fully replace the old approaches to carry out its full capacity of treating power. Besides, the community helping system was not fully established to support the patients&#x27; housing, vocational opportunities, income supports, and other benefits. Many patients returned to welfare and criminal justice institutions, and more became homeless. The movement of deinstitutionalization was facing great challenges.

After realizing that simply changing the location of mental health care from the state hospitals to nursing houses was insufficient to implement the idea of deinstitutionalization, the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) in 1975 created the Community Support Program (CSP) to provide funds for communities to set up a comprehensive mental health service and supports to help the mentally ill patients integrate successfully in the society. The program stressed the importance of other supports in addition to medical care, including housing, living expenses, employment, transportation, and education; and set up new national priority for people with serious mental disorders. In addition, the Congress enacted the Mental Health Systems Act of 1980 to prioritize the service to the mentally ill and emphasize the expansion of services beyond just clinical care alone. Later in the 1980s, under the influence from the Congress and the Supreme Court, many programs started to help the patients regain their benefits. A new Medicaid service was also established to serve people who were diagnosed with a &quot;chronic mental illness&quot;. People who were temporally hospitalized were also provided aid and care and a pre-release program was created to enable people to apply for reinstatement prior to discharge. Not until 1990, around 35 years after the start of the deinstitutionalization, did the first state hospital begin to close. The number of hospitals dropped from around 300 by over 40 in the 1990s, and finally a Report on Mental Health showed the efficacy of mental health treatment, giving a range of treatments available for patients to choose.

However, several critics maintain that deinstitutionalization has, from a mental health point of view, been a thoroughgoing failure. The seriously mentally ill are either homeless, or in prison; in either case (especially the latter), they are getting little or no mental health care. This failure is attributed to a number of reasons over which there is some degree of contention, although there is general agreement that community support programs have been ineffective at best, due to a lack of funding.

The 2011 National Prevention Strategy included mental and emotional well-being, with recommendations including better parenting and early intervention programs, which increase the likelihood of prevention programs being included in future US mental health policies. The NIMH is researching only suicide and HIV/AIDS prevention, but the National Prevention Strategy could lead to it focusing more broadly on longitudinal prevention studies.

In 2013, United States Representative Tim Murphy introduced the Helping Families in Mental Health Crisis Act, HR2646. The bipartisan bill went through substantial revision and was reintroduced in 2015 by Murphy and Congresswoman Eddie Bernice Johnson. In November 2015, it passed the Health Subcommittee by an 18–12 vote.

== See also ==

* 988 (telephone number)
* Abnormal psychology
* Emotional resilience
* Ethnopsychopharmacology
* Mental environment
* Mental health day
* Mental health during the COVID-19 pandemic
* Mental health first aid
* Mental health in education
* Mental health in the workplace
* Mental health of Asian Americans
* Self-help groups for mental health
* Social determinants of mental health
* Social stigma
* Suicide awareness
* Telemental health
* World Mental Health Day
* Well-being

== References ==
== Further reading ==
* Online Books by William Sweetser

== External links ==
* 
* Mental Health by WHO
* The Public Health Agency of Canada
* National Institute of Mental Health (United States)
* Health-EU Portal Mental Health in the EU
* Mental Health Department of Health (United Kingdom)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q317309" start="0" end="13" title="Mental health" label="Mental health"/>
<link wikidata="Q9415" start="26" end="33" title="emotion" label="emotion"/>
<link wikidata="Q9418" start="37" end="50" title="Psychology" label="psychological"/>
<link wikidata="Q345367" start="56" end="62" title="social" label="social"/>
<link wikidata="Q7981051" start="63" end="73" title="well-being" label="well-being"/>
<link wikidata="Q2200417" start="87" end="96" title="cognition" label="cognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q160402" start="98" end="108" title="perception" label="perception"/>
<link wikidata="Q9332" start="114" end="122" title="behavior" label="behavior"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="141" end="172" title="World Health Organization" label="World Health Organization (WHO)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759895" start="267" end="271" title="Coping" label="cope"/>
<link wikidata="Q123414" start="288" end="296" title="Stress (biology)" label="stresses"/>
<link wikidata="Q268378" start="310" end="314" title="Work (human activity)" label="work"/>
<link wikidata="Q123414" start="443" end="449" title="Stress (biology)" label="stress"/>
<link wikidata="Q223642" start="451" end="477" title="interpersonal relationship" label="interpersonal relationship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331926" start="484" end="499" title="decision-making" label="decision-making"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153659" start="557" end="570" title="self-efficacy" label="self-efficacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q484105" start="572" end="580" title="autonomy" label="autonomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q198827" start="628" end="646" title="self-actualization" label="self-actualization"/>
<link wikidata="Q353284" start="661" end="670" title="intellect" label="intellect"/>
<link wikidata="Q718809" start="739" end="758" title="positive psychology" label="positive psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q192891" start="762" end="768" title="holism" label="holism"/>
<link wikidata="Q12379081" start="817" end="824" title="ability" label="ability"/>
<link wikidata="Q4105337" start="910" end="934" title="psychological resilience" label="psychological resilience"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338878" start="936" end="956" title="Cultural diversity" label="Cultural differences"/>
<link wikidata="Q112965645" start="1104" end="1109" title="Signs and symptoms" label="signs"/>
<link wikidata="Q177190" start="1152" end="1168" title="Sleep disorder" label="sleep irritation"/>
<link wikidata="Q15637420" start="1170" end="1184" title="Lethargy" label="lack of energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q254327" start="1186" end="1202" title="lack of appetite" label="lack of appetite"/>
<link wikidata="Q622527" start="1216" end="1231" title="Self-harm" label="harming oneself"/>
<link wikidata="Q127588" start="1266" end="1278" title="introversion" label="introversion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2826604" start="1414" end="1444" title="Public Health Agency of Canada" label="Public Health Agency of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q13100823" start="1531" end="1546" title="quality of life" label="quality of life"/>
<link wikidata="Q12135" start="1654" end="1669" title="mental disorder" label="mental disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q544006" start="1815" end="1822" title="Anxiety disorder" label="anxiety"/>
<link wikidata="Q42844" start="1827" end="1837" title="Depression disorder" label="depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q55695727" start="2147" end="2153" title="ICD-11" label="ICD-11"/>
<link wikidata="Q16644043" start="2185" end="2193" title="diagnose" label="diagnose"/>
<link wikidata="Q3064664" start="2275" end="2280" title="DSM-5" label="DSM-5"/>
<link wikidata="Q2976573" start="2296" end="2337" title="Classification of mental disorders" label="classification system of mental disorders"/>
<link wikidata="Q12140" start="2696" end="2706" title="medication" label="medication"/>
<link wikidata="Q3154766" start="2952" end="2961" title="Isaac Ray" label="Isaac Ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q466524" start="2991" end="3023" title="American Psychiatric Association" label="American Psychiatric Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q452469" start="3455" end="3467" title="Dorothea Dix" label="Dorothea Dix"/>
<link wikidata="Q8458" start="4151" end="4163" title="human rights" label="human rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q76828" start="4166" end="4180" title="Emil Kraepelin" label="Emil Kraepelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7211" start="4203" end="4211" title="taxonomy (general)" label="taxonomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1101233" start="4511" end="4525" title="Clifford Whittingham Beers" label="Clifford Beers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516931" start="4667" end="4682" title="lunatic asylums" label="lunatic asylums"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774898" start="4776" end="4782" title="clinic" label="clinic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3326551" start="4850" end="4873" title="social hygiene movement" label="social hygiene movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q170480" start="4920" end="4928" title="eugenics" label="eugenics"/>
<link wikidata="Q324503" start="4933" end="4946" title="sterilisation (medicine)" label="sterilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q2657096" start="5440" end="5462" title="deinstitutionalization" label="deinstitutionalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q9390268" start="5512" end="5543" title="community mental health service" label="community mental health service"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5621" end="5656" title="Community Mental Health Centers Act" label="Community Mental Health Centers Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q192995" start="6949" end="6960" title="vaccination" label="vaccination"/>
<link wikidata="Q28456242" start="7099" end="7124" title="transinstitutionalization" label="transinstitutionalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q7632070" start="8268" end="8290" title="substance use disorder" label="substance use disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q12135" start="9478" end="9494" title="Mental illnesses" label="Mental illnesses"/>
<link wikidata="Q12078" start="9516" end="9522" title="cancer" label="cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q12206" start="9524" end="9532" title="Diabetes mellitus" label="diabetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q389735" start="9537" end="9550" title="heart disease" label="heart disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q42844" start="9739" end="9755" title="Major depressive disorder" label="Major depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q12136" start="9878" end="9885" title="disease" label="disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q10737" start="9929" end="9936" title="suicide" label="suicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="9984" end="10009" title="World Health Organization" label="World Health Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q10981881" start="10320" end="10331" title="self-esteem" label="self-esteem"/>
<link wikidata="Q7632070" start="10554" end="10576" title="substance use disorder" label="substance use disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q15326" start="11023" end="11043" title="alcohol use disorder" label="alcohol use disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q6160" start="11062" end="11071" title="vandalism" label="vandalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137326" start="11198" end="11211" title="social stigma" label="social stigma"/>
<link wikidata="Q3251388" start="11304" end="11313" title="continuum (theory)" label="continuum"/>
<link wikidata="Q194112" start="11389" end="11395" title="Value (ethics)" label="values"/>
<link wikidata="Q7981051" start="11397" end="11412" title="Well-being" label="Mental wellness"/>
<link wikidata="Q7981051" start="11492" end="11512" title="emotional well-being" label="emotional well-being"/>
<link wikidata="Q170658" start="11546" end="11554" title="creativity" label="creative"/>
<link wikidata="Q718809" start="11875" end="11894" title="Positive psychology" label="Positive psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q192891" start="11942" end="11950" title="holistic" label="holistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q23404" start="12013" end="12028" title="anthropological" label="anthropological"/>
<link wikidata="Q8434" start="12030" end="12039" title="education" label="education"/>
<link wikidata="Q9418" start="12043" end="12056" title="psychological" label="psychological"/>
<link wikidata="Q9174" start="12058" end="12067" title="religious" label="religious"/>
<link wikidata="Q21201" start="12073" end="12085" title="sociological" label="sociological"/>
<link wikidata="Q271716" start="12155" end="12166" title="personality psychology" label="personality"/>
<link wikidata="Q161272" start="12168" end="12174" title="social psychology" label="social"/>
<link wikidata="Q199906" start="12176" end="12184" title="clinical psychology" label="clinical"/>
<link wikidata="Q1403186" start="12186" end="12192" title="health psychology" label="health"/>
<link wikidata="Q175002" start="12197" end="12221" title="developmental psychology" label="developmental psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7256391" start="12371" end="12395" title="psychological well-being" label="psychological well-being"/>
<link wikidata="Q131774" start="13356" end="13367" title="adolescence" label="adolescence"/>
<link wikidata="Q7551393" start="16214" end="16227" title="social stress" label="social stress"/>
<link wikidata="Q11042" start="17005" end="17012" title="culture" label="culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q185698" start="17370" end="17381" title="methodology" label="methodology"/>
<link wikidata="Q60749380" start="17426" end="17449" title="deaf mental health care" label="deaf mental health care"/>
<link wikidata="Q1498636" start="17655" end="17670" title="Deaf culture" label="culturally Deaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137326" start="17714" end="17720" title="Social stigma" label="stigma"/>
<link wikidata="Q10567262" start="17862" end="17871" title="denialism" label="denialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3984210" start="18025" end="18041" title="Treatment of mental disorders" label="perceived stigma"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="18168" end="18182" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785826" start="18188" end="18218" title="Royal College of Psychiatrists" label="Royal College of Psychiatrists"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="18317" end="18330" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q3137424" start="18364" end="18388" title="Born This Way Foundation" label="Born This Way Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q97657027" start="18399" end="18419" title="The Manic Monologues" label="The Manic Monologues"/>
<link wikidata="Q12859163" start="18500" end="18535" title="National Alliance on Mental Illness" label="National Alliance on Mental Illness"/>
<link wikidata="Q6817473" start="18793" end="18819" title="mental health professional" label="mental health professional"/>
<link wikidata="Q168796" start="18918" end="18930" title="spirituality" label="spirituality"/>
<link wikidata="Q7066" start="18939" end="18951" title="atheism" label="lack thereof"/>
<link wikidata="Q466587" start="19091" end="19125" title="American Psychological Association" label="American Psychological Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q9174" start="19149" end="19157" title="religion" label="religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q168796" start="19190" end="19199" title="spirituality" label="spiritual"/>
<link wikidata="Q466524" start="19246" end="19278" title="American Psychiatric Association" label="American Psychiatric Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q380141" start="19887" end="19907" title="Occupational therapy" label="Occupational therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q205398" start="21726" end="21737" title="Social work" label="Social work"/>
<link wikidata="Q13100823" start="22075" end="22090" title="quality of life" label="quality of life"/>
<link wikidata="Q6817473" start="22186" end="22212" title="mental health professional" label="mental health professional"/>
<link wikidata="Q1666927" start="22937" end="22970" title="Clinical social work" label="clinically trained social workers"/>
<link wikidata="Q211346" start="22987" end="22999" title="psychiatrist" label="psychiatrist"/>
<link wikidata="Q212980" start="23017" end="23029" title="psychologist" label="psychologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2801621" start="23050" end="23067" title="psychiatric nurse" label="psychiatric nurse"/>
<link wikidata="Q654426" start="24339" end="24359" title="psychological trauma" label="psychological trauma"/>
<link wikidata="Q156537" start="24363" end="24368" title="Domestic violence" label="abuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2857712" start="24377" end="24391" title="Family history (medicine)" label="family history"/>
<link wikidata="Q390551" start="24460" end="24492" title="National Institutes of Health" label="the National Institute of Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q6817450" start="25112" end="25143" title="Mental disorders and gender" label="female gender is connected with"/>
<link wikidata="Q38404" start="25513" end="25537" title="autism spectrum disorder" label="autism spectrum disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q10981881" start="26117" end="26128" title="self-esteem" label="self-esteem"/>
<link wikidata="Q35105620" start="26793" end="26812" title="World Mental Health survey initiative" label="World Mental Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="26871" end="26896" title="World Health Organization" label="World Health Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q2699874" start="26910" end="26926" title="Neuropsychiatric" label="Neuropsychiatric"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033" start="28311" end="28318" title="Nigeria" label="Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="28405" end="28410" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="28412" end="28423" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q956" start="28425" end="28432" title="Beijing" label="Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q8686" start="28437" end="28445" title="Shanghai" label="Shanghai"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="28453" end="28484" title="China" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="28628" end="28638" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q10294" start="28651" end="28661" title="Low income" label="low-income"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033" start="28663" end="28670" title="Nigeria" label="Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="28694" end="28699" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q739" start="28701" end="28709" title="Colombia" label="Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="28711" end="28723" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="28725" end="28732" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q822" start="28757" end="28764" title="Lebanon" label="Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="28766" end="28772" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="29436" end="29458" title="gross domestic product" label="gross domestic product"/>
<link wikidata="Q299002" start="29567" end="29572" title="ATLAS experiment" label="ATLAS"/>
<link wikidata="Q10294" start="29725" end="29735" title="low-income" label="low-income"/>
<link wikidata="Q241588" start="29740" end="29753" title="middle-income" label="middle-income"/>
<link wikidata="Q2945513" start="30021" end="30059" title="Centre for Addiction and Mental Health" label="Centre for Addiction and Mental Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209211" start="30687" end="30713" title="Diathesis–stress model" label="vulnerability-stress model"/>
<link wikidata="Q5275367" start="30873" end="30911" title="Differential susceptibility" label="differential susceptibility hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7251376" start="31592" end="31609" title="protective factor" label="protective factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475848" start="31859" end="31871" title="risk factors" label="risk factors"/>
<link wikidata="Q10981881" start="32362" end="32373" title="self-esteem" label="self-esteem"/>
<link wikidata="Q9350" start="32654" end="32658" title="Yoga" label="Yoga"/>
<link wikidata="Q341045" start="32814" end="32825" title="mindfulness (psychology)" label="mindfulness"/>
<link wikidata="Q12135" start="33218" end="33233" title="Mental disorders" label="mental disorder"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="33289" end="33316" title="Mental disorders#Prevention" label="preventing mental disorders"/>
<link wikidata="Q39631" start="33991" end="34000" title="physician" label="physician"/>
<link wikidata="Q10871684" start="34637" end="34662" title="Electronic health record" label="Electronic Health Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q18357588" start="34672" end="34682" title="OpenNotes" label="Open Notes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3269441" start="34971" end="34982" title="side effect" label="side effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q12140" start="34993" end="35003" title="medication" label="medication"/>
<link wikidata="Q7144993" start="35116" end="35135" title="patient empowerment" label="patient empowerment"/>
<link wikidata="Q484105" start="35148" end="35164" title="Autonomy" label="patient autonomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q202833" start="35211" end="35223" title="social media" label="social media"/>
<link wikidata="Q918" start="35311" end="35318" title="Twitter" label="Twitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q355" start="35592" end="35600" title="Facebook" label="Facebook"/>
<link wikidata="Q209330" start="35605" end="35614" title="Instagram" label="Instagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q701216" start="36820" end="36835" title="Pharmacotherapy" label="Pharmacotherapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q179661" start="36841" end="36848" title="therapy" label="therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q76560" start="36959" end="36973" title="antidepressant" label="antidepressant"/>
<link wikidata="Q83871" start="36976" end="36990" title="benzodiazepine" label="benzodiazepine"/>
<link wikidata="Q152763" start="37025" end="37032" title="Lithium (medication)" label="lithium"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867" start="37110" end="37120" title="Psychiatry" label="Psychiatry"/>
<link wikidata="Q219067" start="37151" end="37168" title="Exercise" label="Physical exercise"/>
<link wikidata="Q838202" start="38505" end="38525" title="Expressive therapies" label="Expressive therapies"/>
<link wikidata="Q838202" start="38529" end="38552" title="creative arts therapies" label="creative arts therapies"/>
<link wikidata="Q183257" start="38567" end="38580" title="psychotherapy" label="psychotherapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q928865" start="38642" end="38653" title="art therapy" label="art therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q209642" start="38655" end="38668" title="music therapy" label="music therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2527498" start="38670" end="38683" title="drama therapy" label="drama therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326190" start="38685" end="38698" title="dance therapy" label="dance therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q183257" start="38917" end="38930" title="Psychotherapy" label="Psychotherapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q828879" start="39077" end="39092" title="gestalt therapy" label="gestalt therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q41630" start="39094" end="39108" title="psychoanalysis" label="psychoanalysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147152" start="39110" end="39138" title="cognitive behavioral therapy" label="cognitive behavioral therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760918" start="39140" end="39159" title="psychedelic therapy" label="psychedelic therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326691" start="39161" end="39185" title="transpersonal psychology" label="transpersonal psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208421" start="39205" end="39235" title="Dialectical behavior therapy" label="dialectical behavioral therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q837393" start="39237" end="39250" title="Group therapy" label="Group therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2279219" start="39352" end="39365" title="Psychodynamic psychotherapy" label="psychodynamic"/>
<link wikidata="Q838202" start="39374" end="39392" title="expressive therapy" label="expressive therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3117735" start="39401" end="39415" title="support groups" label="support groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q245169" start="39431" end="39450" title="Twelve-step program" label="Twelve-step program"/>
<link wikidata="Q2115980" start="39473" end="39488" title="psychoeducation" label="psychoeducation"/>
<link wikidata="Q106679114" start="40384" end="40409" title="social-emotional learning" label="social-emotional learning"/>
<link wikidata="Q4340209" start="40753" end="40763" title="depression (mood)" label="depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q154430" start="40765" end="40772" title="anxiety" label="anxiety"/>
<link wikidata="Q3500368" start="40777" end="40783" title="Psychological stress" label="stress"/>
<link wikidata="Q108458" start="40797" end="40807" title="meditation" label="meditation"/>
<link wikidata="Q181078" start="40892" end="40906" title="Lucid dreaming" label="Lucid dreaming"/>
<link wikidata="Q168796" start="42027" end="42039" title="spirituality" label="spirituality"/>
<link wikidata="Q12135" start="42245" end="42259" title="Mental illness" label="Mental illness"/>
<link wikidata="Q12131" start="42261" end="42271" title="disability" label="disability"/>
<link wikidata="Q10737" start="42277" end="42284" title="suicide" label="suicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q452469" start="43458" end="43470" title="Dorothea Dix" label="Dorothea Dix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1101233" start="43520" end="43534" title="Clifford Whittingham Beers" label="Clifford Beers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2657096" start="43548" end="43570" title="deinstitutionalization" label="deinstitutionalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q452469" start="43708" end="43720" title="Dorothea Dix" label="Dorothea Dix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1101233" start="44626" end="44652" title="Clifford Whittingham Beers" label="Clifford Whittingham Beers"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="45049" end="45060" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q12002092" start="46636" end="46643" title="welfare spending" label="welfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q131327" start="46695" end="46703" title="homeless" label="homeless"/>
<link wikidata="Q2657096" start="46931" end="46953" title="deinstitutionalization" label="deinstitutionalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967405" start="46959" end="46994" title="National Institute of Mental Health" label="National Institute of Mental Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q22906858" start="47496" end="47529" title="Mental Health Systems Act of 1980" label="Mental Health Systems Act of 1980"/>
<link wikidata="Q12199" start="49254" end="49262" title="HIV/AIDS" label="HIV/AIDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q2434181" start="49426" end="49436" title="Timothy F. Murphy" label="Tim Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q25004729" start="49452" end="49504" title="National Helping Families in Mental Health Crisis Day" label="Helping Families in Mental Health Crisis Act, HR2646"/>
<link wikidata="Q461526" start="49617" end="49638" title="Eddie Bernice Johnson" label="Eddie Bernice Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6978761" start="49729" end="49751" title="988 (telephone number)" label="988 (telephone number)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987782" start="49754" end="49773" title="Abnormal psychology" label="Abnormal psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q4105337" start="49776" end="49796" title="Emotional resilience" label="Emotional resilience"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404396" start="49799" end="49822" title="Ethnopsychopharmacology" label="Ethnopsychopharmacology"/>
<link wikidata="Q6817453" start="49825" end="49843" title="Mental environment" label="Mental environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q6817462" start="49846" end="49863" title="Mental health day" label="Mental health day"/>
<link wikidata="Q89058901" start="49866" end="49908" title="Mental health during the COVID-19 pandemic" label="Mental health during the COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6817466" start="49911" end="49934" title="Mental health first aid" label="Mental health first aid"/>
<link wikidata="Q25112087" start="49937" end="49963" title="Mental health in education" label="Mental health in education"/>
<link wikidata="Q2054164" start="49966" end="49996" title="Mental health in the workplace" label="Mental health in the workplace"/>
<link wikidata="Q115825740" start="49999" end="50031" title="Mental health of Asian Americans" label="Mental health of Asian Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q7448114" start="50034" end="50068" title="Self-help groups for mental health" label="Self-help groups for mental health"/>
<link wikidata="Q115945962" start="50071" end="50107" title="Social determinants of mental health" label="Social determinants of mental health"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137326" start="50110" end="50123" title="Social stigma" label="Social stigma"/>
<link wikidata="Q56354572" start="50126" end="50143" title="Suicide awareness" label="Suicide awareness"/>
<link wikidata="Q2549364" start="50146" end="50163" title="Telepsychiatry" label="Telemental health"/>
<link wikidata="Q1786581" start="50166" end="50189" title="World Mental Health Day" label="World Mental Health Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q7981051" start="50192" end="50202" title="Well-being" label="Well-being"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="990508" wikidata="Q748811" url="?curid=990508" title="Substantive law">
<text>Substantive law is the set of laws that governs how members of a society are to behave. It is contrasted with procedural law, which is the set of procedures for making, administering, and enforcing substantive law. Substantive law defines rights and responsibilities in civil law, and crimes and punishments in criminal law, substantive equality or substantive due process. It may be codified in statutes or exist through precedent in common law. Substantive laws, which govern outcomes, are contrasted with procedural laws, which govern procedure.

Henry Sumner Maine said of early law, &quot;So great is the ascendency of the Law of Actions in the infancy of Courts of Justice, that substantive law has at first the look of being gradually secreted in the interstices of procedure; and the early lawyer can only see the law through the envelope of its technical forms.&quot;

==See also==
* Procedural law
* Substantive rights

==References==
==Sources==
*Glanville Williams. &quot;Substantive and Adjectival Law&quot;. Learning the Law. Eleventh Edition. Stevens and Sons. London. 1982. Pages 19 to 23.
*John W Salmond. &quot;Substantive Law and the Law of Procedure&quot;. The First Principles of Jurisprudence. Stevens &amp; Haynes. Bell Yard, Temple Bar, London. 1893. Pages 215 to 218.
*Walter Denton Smith. A Manual of Elementary Law. West Publishing Co. St Paul, Minn. 1894. Pages 110 to 116. Part 2 (The Substantive Law). Pages 123 to 279.
*&quot;Substantive and Adjective Law&quot; (1881) 16 The Law Journal 441 (1 October 1881)
*J Newton Fiero, &quot;The Relation of Procedure to the Substantive Law&quot;, Law Pamph. Vol 202. (1904) 2 Delta Chi Quarterly 5 (January 1904).
*Clark , &quot;The Handmaid of Justice&quot; (1938) 23 Washington University Law Quarterly 297. Reprint, 1965.
*Abraham Lawrence Sainer. The Substantive Law of New York. Substantive &amp; Adjective Law Publishers. Eighteenth Edition. 1967.
*Whitely Stokes (ed). The Anglo-Indian Codes. Clarendon Press, Oxford. 1887. Volume 1 (Substantive Law).</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q748811" start="0" end="15" title="Substantive law" label="Substantive law"/>
<link wikidata="Q7748" start="30" end="33" title="law" label="law"/>
<link wikidata="Q8425" start="65" end="72" title="society" label="society"/>
<link wikidata="Q936044" start="110" end="124" title="procedural law" label="procedural law"/>
<link wikidata="Q780687" start="239" end="244" title="right" label="right"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404417" start="250" end="266" title="Legal liability" label="responsibilities"/>
<link wikidata="Q222249" start="270" end="279" title="civil law (common law)" label="civil law"/>
<link wikidata="Q83267" start="285" end="290" title="crime" label="crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q186361" start="296" end="306" title="punishment" label="punishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q146491" start="311" end="323" title="criminal law" label="criminal law"/>
<link wikidata="Q60775261" start="325" end="345" title="substantive equality" label="substantive equality"/>
<link wikidata="Q7632092" start="349" end="372" title="substantive due process" label="substantive due process"/>
<link wikidata="Q214214" start="384" end="392" title="Codification (law)" label="codified"/>
<link wikidata="Q820655" start="396" end="404" title="statutes" label="statutes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6302997" start="422" end="431" title="judicial decisions" label="precedent"/>
<link wikidata="Q30216" start="435" end="445" title="common law" label="common law"/>
<link wikidata="Q936044" start="508" end="522" title="procedural law" label="procedural law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195523" start="550" end="568" title="Henry Sumner Maine" label="Henry Sumner Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q936044" start="893" end="907" title="Procedural law" label="Procedural law"/>
<link wikidata="Q12186539" start="910" end="928" title="Substantive rights" label="Substantive rights"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="990521" wikidata="Q3304404" url="?curid=990521" title="Openswan">
<text>In the field of computer security, Openswan provides a complete IPsec implementation for Linux and FreeBSD.

Openswan, begun as a fork of the now-defunct FreeS/WAN project, continues to use the GNU General Public License. Unlike the FreeS/WAN project, it does not exclusively target the Linux operating system.

Libreswan forked from Openswan in 2012.

==See also==

* Libreswan
* strongSwan

==External links==
* 

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3510521" start="16" end="33" title="computer security" label="computer security"/>
<link wikidata="Q3304404" start="35" end="43" title="Openswan" label="Openswan"/>
<link wikidata="Q210214" start="64" end="69" title="IPsec" label="IPsec"/>
<link wikidata="Q388" start="89" end="94" title="Linux" label="Linux"/>
<link wikidata="Q34236" start="99" end="106" title="FreeBSD" label="FreeBSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q332903" start="130" end="134" title="Fork (software development)" label="fork"/>
<link wikidata="Q5499675" start="154" end="163" title="FreeS/WAN" label="FreeS/WAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603" start="194" end="220" title="GNU General Public License" label="GNU General Public License"/>
<link wikidata="Q17064543" start="312" end="321" title="Libreswan" label="Libreswan"/>
<link wikidata="Q17064543" start="369" end="378" title="Libreswan" label="Libreswan"/>
<link wikidata="Q309893" start="381" end="391" title="strongSwan" label="strongSwan"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="990525" wikidata="Q4910572" url="?curid=990525" title="Bill Quay">
<text>Bill Quay is a residential area in Gateshead, located around from Newcastle upon Tyne, from Sunderland, and from Durham. In 2011, Census data for the Gateshead Metropolitan Borough Council ward of &quot;Heworth and Pelaw&quot; recorded a total population of 9,100.

Bill Quay is situated between Hebburn to the east, and Pelaw to the southwest. It lies on the south bank of the River Tyne, facing Walker. The area is home to &quot;Bill Quay Albion Cricket Club&quot;, competitors in the Durham Cricket League.

== History ==
During the nineteenth century, Bill Quay was an industrial area catering for chemical works, bottle works, Robson&#x27;s Paint, and shipbuilding. The area saw an economic upturn at the end of the nineteenth century, when the Co-Operative Wholesale Society (CWS) opened its vast and extensive string of factories along Shields Road. Boutlands, Harrisons and Wood-Skinner were shipbuilders at Bill Quay, with Harrisons being the final shipbuilder on the south bank of the River Tyne to close.

== Demography ==
According to the 2011 Census, the &quot;Pelaw and Heworth&quot; ward has a population of 9,100. The ward is split into three distinct districts:

* Bill Quay (population of 1,525) – Located to the east of King George&#x27;s Field, and to the north of the A185 road.
* Heworth (population of 5,273) – Located to the south of the Tyne and Wear Metro line.
* Pelaw (population of 2,302) – Located to the north of the Tyne and Wear Metro line, and the A185 road.

52.2% of the population are female, slightly above the national average, while 47.8% are male. Only 2.7% of the population were from a black, Asian and minority ethnic (BAME) group, as opposed to 14.6% of the national population.

Data from the 2011 Census found that the average life expectancy in &quot;Pelaw and Heworth&quot; is 79.1 years for men, and 81.1 years for women. These statistics compare fairly favourably, when compared to the average life expectancy in the North East of England, of 77.4 and 81.4 years, respectively.

Car ownership is lower than the average in the Metropolitan Borough of Gateshead (63.5%), and lower than the national average of 74.2% – with 61.1% of households in the &quot;Pelaw and Heworth&quot; ward owning at least one car.

== Education ==
Bill Quay is served by one primary school, Bill Quay Primary School. In November 2011, the school was rated &quot;good&quot; by Ofsted. Nearby primary schools include St. Alban&#x27;s Catholic Primary School in Pelaw, and Wardley Primary School and White Mere Community Primary School in Wardley.

In terms of secondary education, Bill Quay is located within the catchment area for Heworth Grange School in Leam Lane. An inspection carried out by Ofsted in January 2017 deemed the school to be &quot;inadequate&quot;. St. Alban&#x27;s Catholic Primary School in Pelaw also acts as a feeder school for Cardinal Hume Catholic School in Wrekenton, rated &quot;outstanding&quot; by Ofsted in January 2014, as well as the nearby St. Joseph&#x27;s Catholic Academy in Hebburn, which was rated &quot;requires improvement&quot; by Ofsted in January 2019.

== Governance ==
&quot;Pelaw and Heworth&quot; is a local council ward in the Metropolitan Borough of Gateshead. This ward covers an area of around , and has a population of 9,100. As of April 2020, the ward is served by three councillors: Ian Patterson, John Paul Dilston and Rosy Oxberry. Bill Quay is located within the parliamentary constituency of Jarrow. As of April 2020, the constituency is served by Kate Osborne.
== Transport ==

=== Air ===
The nearest airport to Bill Quay is Newcastle International Airport, which is located around away by road. Teesside International Airport and Carlisle Lake District Airport are located around away by road, respectively.

=== Bus ===
Bill Quay is served by Go North East&#x27;s frequent &quot;Crusader&quot; 27 service, which runs up to every 10 minutes from Newcastle, Gateshead and Heworth to Hebburn, Jarrow and South Shields.

It is also served by the Gateshead Central Taxis bus services 568, which runs hourly between Heworth and Bill Quay, and 515, which runs hourly between Heworth and Hebburn.

=== Rail ===
The nearest Tyne and Wear Metro station is located at Pelaw. The Tyne and Wear Metro provides a regular service to Newcastle, with trains running up to every 6 minutes (7–8 minutes during the evening and Sunday) between Pelaw and South Gosforth, increasing to up to every 3 minutes at peak times. Heworth is the nearest rail station, with Northern Trains providing an hourly service along the Durham Coast Line.

=== Road ===
Bill Quay is served by the A185 – a route linking the area with Heworth, Hebburn and Jarrow. By road, Gateshead can be reached in around 10 minutes, Newcastle in 15 minutes, and Newcastle International Airport in 30 minutes.

== Bill Quay Community Farm ==
Bill Quay Community Farm is an important urban farm, and one of only 16 farm parks nationally recognised by the Rare Breeds Survival Trust in the UK. Breeds included Tamworth pigs, Jacob sheep, Hebridean sheep, Scots Grey hens and Bagot goats. It used to play host to &quot;Chickenstock&quot;, an annual showcase festival for local Gateshead based bands. Bill Quay Community Farm opened in 1986 and closed in September 2019, but later reopened. It is managed by a registered charity.

==In fiction==
The novel &quot;Schoolfrenz&quot; by Ray Crowther () is set mainly on Tyneside. Bill Quay is mentioned several times and is the location for a murder scene in the book. The author&#x27;s website (Ray Crowther) contains an extract from Schoolfrenz about Bill Quay, and has photographs of Bill Quay, and the surrounding area.

==References==


== External links ==
*Early shipbuilding at Bill Quay
*Geograph&#x27;s page for NZ2962
*Local history site&#x27;s article on Bill Quay
*Website of the Bill Quay Albion Cricket Club
*Website of Bill Quay Primary school
*Website of former Bill Quay Community Farm</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4910572" start="0" end="9" title="Bill Quay" label="Bill Quay"/>
<link wikidata="Q216372" start="35" end="44" title="Gateshead" label="Gateshead"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425428" start="66" end="85" title="Newcastle upon Tyne" label="Newcastle upon Tyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q188304" start="92" end="102" title="Sunderland" label="Sunderland"/>
<link wikidata="Q179815" start="113" end="119" title="Durham, England" label="Durham"/>
<link wikidata="Q5058981" start="130" end="136" title="Census in the United Kingdom" label="Census"/>
<link wikidata="Q929034" start="150" end="188" title="Metropolitan Borough of Gateshead" label="Gateshead Metropolitan Borough Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q589282" start="189" end="193" title="Wards and electoral divisions of the United Kingdom" label="ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q984308" start="296" end="303" title="Hebburn" label="Hebburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q15265835" start="321" end="326" title="Pelaw" label="Pelaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q216373" start="378" end="388" title="River Tyne" label="River Tyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q7962191" start="397" end="403" title="Walker, Newcastle upon Tyne" label="Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q117202" start="750" end="780" title="Co-Operative Wholesale Society" label="Co-Operative Wholesale Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q216373" start="995" end="1005" title="River Tyne" label="River Tyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q855531" start="1051" end="1062" title="2011 United Kingdom census" label="2011 Census"/>
<link wikidata="Q589282" start="1098" end="1102" title="Wards and electoral divisions of the United Kingdom" label="ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q4660968" start="1289" end="1298" title="A185 road" label="A185 road"/>
<link wikidata="Q9291874" start="1302" end="1309" title="Heworth, Tyne and Wear" label="Heworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q541027" start="1362" end="1381" title="Tyne and Wear Metro" label="Tyne and Wear Metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q15265835" start="1390" end="1395" title="Pelaw" label="Pelaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q541027" start="1448" end="1467" title="Tyne and Wear Metro" label="Tyne and Wear Metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q4660968" start="1482" end="1491" title="A185 road" label="A185 road"/>
<link wikidata="Q5128403" start="1629" end="1668" title="Black and minority ethnic" label="black, Asian and minority ethnic (BAME)"/>
<link wikidata="Q855531" start="1739" end="1750" title="2011 United Kingdom census" label="2011 Census"/>
<link wikidata="Q47983" start="1968" end="1989" title="North East England" label="North East of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q929034" start="2077" end="2110" title="Metropolitan Borough of Gateshead" label="Metropolitan Borough of Gateshead"/>
<link wikidata="Q7079781" start="2404" end="2410" title="Ofsted" label="Ofsted"/>
<link wikidata="Q15265835" start="2487" end="2492" title="Pelaw" label="Pelaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q7969178" start="2564" end="2571" title="Wardley, Gateshead" label="Wardley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5748562" start="2658" end="2679" title="Heworth Grange School" label="Heworth Grange School"/>
<link wikidata="Q6509389" start="2683" end="2692" title="Leam Lane Estate" label="Leam Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q15265835" start="2838" end="2843" title="Pelaw" label="Pelaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q19871880" start="2877" end="2906" title="Cardinal Hume Catholic School" label="Cardinal Hume Catholic School"/>
<link wikidata="Q8037721" start="2910" end="2919" title="Wrekenton" label="Wrekenton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7589209" start="3000" end="3034" title="St Joseph&amp;#x27;s Catholic Academy" label="St. Joseph&amp;#x27;s Catholic Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q984308" start="3038" end="3045" title="Hebburn" label="Hebburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q589282" start="3190" end="3194" title="Wards and electoral divisions of the United Kingdom" label="ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q929034" start="3202" end="3235" title="Metropolitan Borough of Gateshead" label="Metropolitan Borough of Gateshead"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538978" start="3447" end="3473" title="List of United Kingdom Parliament constituencies" label="parliamentary constituency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072775" start="3477" end="3483" title="Jarrow (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Jarrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q76450728" start="3533" end="3545" title="Kate Osborne" label="Kate Osborne"/>
<link wikidata="Q8975" start="3612" end="3643" title="Newcastle International Airport" label="Newcastle International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q667216" start="3683" end="3713" title="Teesside International Airport" label="Teesside International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q3536424" start="3718" end="3748" title="Carlisle Lake District Airport" label="Carlisle Lake District Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q5574882" start="3832" end="3845" title="Go North East" label="Go North East"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425428" start="3934" end="3943" title="Newcastle upon Tyne" label="Newcastle"/>
<link wikidata="Q216372" start="3945" end="3954" title="Gateshead" label="Gateshead"/>
<link wikidata="Q9291874" start="3959" end="3966" title="Heworth, Tyne and Wear" label="Heworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q984308" start="3970" end="3977" title="Hebburn" label="Hebburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q782155" start="3979" end="3985" title="Jarrow" label="Jarrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q279000" start="3990" end="4003" title="South Shields" label="South Shields"/>
<link wikidata="Q541027" start="4204" end="4223" title="Tyne and Wear Metro" label="Tyne and Wear Metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q7161216" start="4246" end="4251" title="Pelaw Metro station" label="Pelaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q541027" start="4257" end="4276" title="Tyne and Wear Metro" label="Tyne and Wear Metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425428" start="4307" end="4316" title="Newcastle upon Tyne" label="Newcastle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7161216" start="4412" end="4417" title="Pelaw Metro station" label="Pelaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q7567374" start="4422" end="4436" title="South Gosforth Metro station" label="South Gosforth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2367499" start="4489" end="4496" title="Heworth Interchange" label="Heworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q85789775" start="4531" end="4546" title="Northern Trains" label="Northern Trains"/>
<link wikidata="Q5316481" start="4585" end="4602" title="Durham Coast Line" label="Durham Coast Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q4660968" start="4645" end="4649" title="A185 road" label="A185"/>
<link wikidata="Q9291874" start="4682" end="4689" title="Heworth, Tyne and Wear" label="Heworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q984308" start="4691" end="4698" title="Hebburn" label="Hebburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q782155" start="4703" end="4709" title="Jarrow" label="Jarrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q216372" start="4720" end="4729" title="Gateshead" label="Gateshead"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425428" start="4767" end="4776" title="Newcastle upon Tyne" label="Newcastle"/>
<link wikidata="Q8975" start="4796" end="4827" title="Newcastle International Airport" label="Newcastle International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q3419752" start="4987" end="5013" title="Rare Breeds Survival Trust" label="Rare Breeds Survival Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q3113876" start="5041" end="5054" title="Tamworth Pig" label="Tamworth pigs"/>
<link wikidata="Q486745" start="5056" end="5067" title="Jacob (sheep)" label="Jacob sheep"/>
<link wikidata="Q12059770" start="5069" end="5084" title="Hebridean (sheep)" label="Hebridean sheep"/>
<link wikidata="Q4842083" start="5106" end="5116" title="Bagot goat" label="Bagot goat"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="990534" wikidata="Q956437" url="?curid=990534" title="Norm (mathematics)">
<text>In mathematics, a norm is a function from a real or complex vector space to the non-negative real numbers that behaves in certain ways like the distance from the origin: it commutes with scaling, obeys a form of the triangle inequality, and zero is only at the origin. In particular, the Euclidean distance in a Euclidean space is defined by a norm on the associated Euclidean vector space, called the Euclidean norm, the 2-norm, or, sometimes, the magnitude or length of the vector. This norm can be defined as the square root of the inner product of a vector with itself.

A seminorm satisfies the first two properties of a norm but may be zero for vectors other than the origin. A vector space with a specified norm is called a normed vector space. In a similar manner, a vector space with a seminorm is called a &quot;seminormed vector space&quot;.

The term pseudonorm has been used for several related meanings. It may be a synonym of &quot;seminorm&quot;. It can also refer to a norm that can take infinite values or to certain functions parametrised by a directed set.

==Definition==

Given a vector space formula_1 over a subfield formula_2 of the complex numbers formula_3 a norm on formula_1 is a real-valued function formula_5 with the following properties, where formula_6 denotes the usual absolute value of a scalar formula_7:

# Subadditivity/Triangle inequality: formula_8 for all formula_9
# Absolute homogeneity: formula_10 for all formula_11 and all scalars formula_12
# Positive definiteness/Positiveness/: for all formula_13 if formula_14 then formula_15
#* Because property (2.) implies formula_16 some authors replace property (3.) with the equivalent condition: for every formula_13 formula_14 if and only if formula_15

A seminorm on formula_1 is a function formula_5 that has properties (1.) and (2.) so that in particular, every norm is also a seminorm (and thus also a sublinear functional). However, there exist seminorms that are not norms. Properties (1.) and (2.) imply that if formula_22 is a norm (or more generally, a seminorm) then formula_23 and that formula_22 also has the following property:

Some authors include non-negativity as part of the definition of &quot;norm&quot;, although this is not necessary.
Although this article defined &quot;&quot; to be a synonym of &quot;positive definite&quot;, some authors instead define &quot;&quot; to be a synonym of &quot;non-negative&quot;; these definitions are not equivalent.

===Equivalent norms===

Suppose that formula_22 and formula_26 are two norms (or seminorms) on a vector space formula_27 Then formula_22 and formula_26 are called equivalent, if there exist two positive real constants formula_30 and formula_31 such that for every vector formula_13
formula_33
The relation &quot;formula_22 is equivalent to formula_26&quot; is reflexive, symmetric (formula_36 implies formula_37), and transitive and thus defines an equivalence relation on the set of all norms on formula_27
The norms formula_22 and formula_26 are equivalent if and only if they induce the same topology on formula_27 Any two norms on a finite-dimensional space are equivalent but this does not extend to infinite-dimensional spaces.

===Notation===

If a norm formula_42 is given on a vector space formula_43 then the norm of a vector formula_44 is usually denoted by enclosing it within double vertical lines: formula_45, as proposed by Stefan Banach in his doctoral thesis from 1920. Such notation is also sometimes used if formula_22 is only a seminorm. For the length of a vector in Euclidean space (which is an example of a norm, as explained below), the notation formula_47 with single vertical lines is also widespread.

==Examples==

Every (real or complex) vector space admits a norm: If formula_48 is a Hamel basis for a vector space formula_1 then the real-valued map that sends formula_50 (where all but finitely many of the scalars formula_51 are formula_52) to formula_53 is a norm on formula_27 There are also a large number of norms that exhibit additional properties that make them useful for specific problems.

===Absolute-value norm===
The absolute value
formula_47
is a norm on the vector space formed by the real or complex numbers. The complex numbers form a one-dimensional vector space over themselves and a two-dimensional vector space over the reals; the absolute value is a norm for these two structures.

Any norm formula_22 on a one-dimensional vector space formula_1 is equivalent (up to scaling) to the absolute value norm, meaning that there is a norm-preserving isomorphism of vector spaces formula_58 where formula_59 is either formula_60 or formula_3 and norm-preserving means that formula_62
This isomorphism is given by sending formula_63 to a vector of norm formula_64 which exists since such a vector is obtained by multiplying any non-zero vector by the inverse of its norm.

===Euclidean norm===

On the formula_65-dimensional Euclidean space formula_66 the intuitive notion of length of the vector formula_67 is captured by the formula
formula_68

This is the Euclidean norm, which gives the ordinary distance from the origin to the point X—a consequence of the Pythagorean theorem.
This operation may also be referred to as &quot;SRSS&quot;, which is an acronym for the square root of the sum of squares.

The Euclidean norm is by far the most commonly used norm on formula_66 but there are other norms on this vector space as will be shown below.
However, all these norms are equivalent in the sense that they all define the same topology on finite-dimensional spaces.

The inner product of two vectors of a Euclidean vector space is the dot product of their coordinate vectors over an orthonormal basis.
Hence, the Euclidean norm can be written in a coordinate-free way as
formula_70

The Euclidean norm is also called the quadratic norm, formula_71 norm, formula_72 norm, 2-norm, or square norm; see formula_73 space.
It defines a distance function called the Euclidean length, formula_71 distance, or formula_72 distance.

The set of vectors in formula_76 whose Euclidean norm is a given positive constant forms an formula_65-sphere.

====Euclidean norm of complex numbers====
The Euclidean norm of a complex number is the absolute value (also called the modulus) of it, if the complex plane is identified with the Euclidean plane formula_78 This identification of the complex number formula_79 as a vector in the Euclidean plane, makes the quantity formula_80 (as first suggested by Euler) the Euclidean norm associated with the complex number. For formula_81, the norm can also be written as formula_82 where formula_83 is the complex conjugate of formula_84

===Quaternions and octonions===
There are exactly four Euclidean Hurwitz algebras over the real numbers. These are the real numbers formula_85 the complex numbers formula_3 the quaternions formula_87 and lastly the octonions formula_88 where the dimensions of these spaces over the real numbers are formula_89 respectively.
The canonical norms on formula_60 and formula_91 are their absolute value functions, as discussed previously.

The canonical norm on formula_92 of quaternions is defined by
formula_93
for every quaternion formula_94 in formula_95 This is the same as the Euclidean norm on formula_92 considered as the vector space formula_97 Similarly, the canonical norm on the octonions is just the Euclidean norm on formula_98

===Finite-dimensional complex normed spaces===

On an formula_65-dimensional complex space formula_100 the most common norm is
formula_101

In this case, the norm can be expressed as the square root of the inner product of the vector and itself:
formula_102
where formula_103 is represented as a column vector formula_104 and formula_105 denotes its conjugate transpose.

This formula is valid for any inner product space, including Euclidean and complex spaces. For complex spaces, the inner product is equivalent to the complex dot product. Hence the formula in this case can also be written using the following notation:
formula_106

===Taxicab norm or Manhattan norm===
formula_107
The name relates to the distance a taxi has to drive in a rectangular street grid (like that of the New York borough of Manhattan) to get from the origin to the point formula_108

The set of vectors whose 1-norm is a given constant forms the surface of a cross polytope, which has dimension equal to the dimension of the vector space minus 1.
The Taxicab norm is also called the formula_109 norm. The distance derived from this norm is called the Manhattan distance or formula_109 distance.

The 1-norm is simply the sum of the absolute values of the columns.

In contrast,
formula_111
is not a norm because it may yield negative results.

===&quot;p&quot;-norm===
Let formula_112 be a real number.
The formula_22-norm (also called formula_114-norm) of vector formula_115 is
formula_116
For formula_117 we get the taxicab norm, for formula_118 we get the Euclidean norm, and as formula_22 approaches formula_120 the formula_22-norm approaches the infinity norm or maximum norm:
formula_122
The formula_22-norm is related to the generalized mean or power mean.

For formula_124 the formula_125-norm is even induced by a canonical inner product formula_126 meaning that formula_127 for all vectors formula_128 This inner product can be expressed in terms of the norm by using the polarization identity.
On formula_129 this inner product is the &quot;&quot; defined by
formula_130
while for the space formula_131 associated with a measure space formula_132 which consists of all square-integrable functions, this inner product is
formula_133

This definition is still of some interest for formula_134 but the resulting function does not define a norm, because it violates the triangle inequality.
What is true for this case of formula_134 even in the measurable analog, is that the corresponding formula_73 class is a vector space, and it is also true that the function
formula_137
(without formula_22th root) defines a distance that makes formula_139 into a complete metric topological vector space. These spaces are of great interest in functional analysis, probability theory and harmonic analysis.
However, aside from trivial cases, this topological vector space is not locally convex, and has no continuous non-zero linear forms. Thus the topological dual space contains only the zero functional.

The partial derivative of the formula_22-norm is given by
formula_141

The derivative with respect to formula_142 therefore, is
formula_143
where formula_144 denotes Hadamard product and formula_145 is used for absolute value of each component of the vector.

For the special case of formula_124 this becomes
formula_147
or
formula_148

===Maximum norm (special case of: infinity norm, uniform norm, or supremum norm)===

If formula_149 is some vector such that formula_150 then:
formula_151

The set of vectors whose infinity norm is a given constant, formula_152 forms the surface of a hypercube with edge length formula_153

===Energy norm===

The energy norm of a vector formula_154 is defined in terms of a symmetric positive definite matrix formula_155 as

formula_156

It is clear that if formula_157 is the identity matrix, this norm corresponds to the Euclidean norm. If formula_157 is diagonal, this norm is also called a &quot;weighted norm&quot;. The energy norm is induced by the inner product given by formula_159 for formula_160.

In general, the value of the norm is dependent on the spectrum of formula_157: For a vector formula_103 with a Euclidean norm of one, the value of formula_163 is bounded from below and above by the smallest and largest absolute eigenvalues of formula_157 respectively, where the bounds are achieved if formula_103 coincides with the corresponding (normalized) eigenvectors. Based on the symmetric matrix square root formula_166, the energy norm of a vector can be written in terms of the standard Euclidean norm as

formula_167

===Zero norm===

In probability and functional analysis, the zero norm induces a complete metric topology for the space of measurable functions and for the F-space of sequences with F–norm formula_168
Here we mean by &quot;F-norm&quot; some real-valued function formula_169 on an F-space with distance formula_170 such that formula_171 The &quot;F&quot;-norm described above is not a norm in the usual sense because it lacks the required homogeneity property.

====Hamming distance of a vector from zero====
In metric geometry, the discrete metric takes the value one for distinct points and zero otherwise. When applied coordinate-wise to the elements of a vector space, the discrete distance defines the &quot;Hamming distance&quot;, which is important in coding and information theory.
In the field of real or complex numbers, the distance of the discrete metric from zero is not homogeneous in the non-zero point; indeed, the distance from zero remains one as its non-zero argument approaches zero.
However, the discrete distance of a number from zero does satisfy the other properties of a norm, namely the triangle inequality and positive definiteness.
When applied component-wise to vectors, the discrete distance from zero behaves like a non-homogeneous &quot;norm&quot;, which counts the number of non-zero components in its vector argument; again, this non-homogeneous &quot;norm&quot; is discontinuous.

In signal processing and statistics, David Donoho referred to the &quot;zero&quot; &quot;norm&quot; with quotation marks.
Following Donoho&#x27;s notation, the zero &quot;norm&quot; of formula_172 is simply the number of non-zero coordinates of formula_142 or the Hamming distance of the vector from zero.
When this &quot;norm&quot; is localized to a bounded set, it is the limit of formula_22-norms as formula_22 approaches 0.
Of course, the zero &quot;norm&quot; is not truly a norm, because it is not positive homogeneous.
Indeed, it is not even an F-norm in the sense described above, since it is discontinuous, jointly and severally, with respect to the scalar argument in scalar–vector multiplication and with respect to its vector argument.
Abusing terminology, some engineers omit Donoho&#x27;s quotation marks and inappropriately call the number-of-non-zeros function the formula_176 norm, echoing the notation for the Lebesgue space of measurable functions.

===Infinite dimensions===

The generalization of the above norms to an infinite number of components leads to formula_114 and formula_73 spaces for formula_179 with norms
formula_180

for complex-valued sequences and functions on formula_181 respectively, which can be further generalized (see Haar measure). These norms are also valid in the limit as formula_182, giving a supremum norm, and are called formula_183 and formula_184

Any inner product induces in a natural way the norm formula_185

Other examples of infinite-dimensional normed vector spaces can be found in the Banach space article.

Generally, these norms do not give the same topologies. For example, an infinite-dimensional formula_114 space gives a strictly finer topology than an infinite-dimensional formula_187 space when formula_188

===Composite norms===

Other norms on formula_189 can be constructed by combining the above; for example
formula_190
is a norm on formula_97

For any norm and any injective linear transformation formula_157 we can define a new norm of formula_142 equal to
formula_194
In 2D, with formula_157 a rotation by 45° and a suitable scaling, this changes the taxicab norm into the maximum norm. Each formula_157 applied to the taxicab norm, up to inversion and interchanging of axes, gives a different unit ball: a parallelogram of a particular shape, size, and orientation.

In 3D, this is similar but different for the 1-norm (octahedrons) and the maximum norm (prisms with parallelogram base).

There are examples of norms that are not defined by &quot;entrywise&quot; formulas. For instance, the Minkowski functional of a centrally-symmetric convex body in formula_189 (centered at zero) defines a norm on formula_189 (see below).

All the above formulas also yield norms on formula_199 without modification.

There are also norms on spaces of matrices (with real or complex entries), the so-called matrix norms.

===In abstract algebra===
Let formula_200 be a finite extension of a field formula_201 of inseparable degree formula_202 and let formula_201 have algebraic closure formula_204 If the distinct embeddings of formula_200 are formula_206 then the Galois-theoretic norm of an element formula_207 is the value formula_208 As that function is homogeneous of degree formula_209, the Galois-theoretic norm is not a norm in the sense of this article. However, the formula_209-th root of the norm (assuming that concept makes sense) is a norm.

====Composition algebras====

The concept of norm formula_211 in composition algebras does share the usual properties of a norm since null vectors are allowed. A composition algebra formula_212 consists of an algebra over a field formula_213 an involution formula_214 and a quadratic form formula_215 called the &quot;norm&quot;.

The characteristic feature of composition algebras is the homomorphism property of formula_216: for the product formula_217 of two elements formula_218 and formula_219 of the composition algebra, its norm satisfies formula_220 In the case of division algebras formula_85 formula_3 formula_87 and formula_224 the composition algebra norm is the square of the norm discussed above. In those cases the norm is a definite quadratic form. In the split algebras the norm is an isotropic quadratic form.

==Properties==

For any norm formula_42 on a vector space formula_43 the reverse triangle inequality holds:
formula_227
If formula_228 is a continuous linear map between normed spaces, then the norm of formula_229 and the norm of the transpose of formula_229 are equal.

For the formula_73 norms, we have Hölder&#x27;s inequality
formula_232
A special case of this is the Cauchy–Schwarz inequality:
formula_233
Every norm is a seminorm and thus satisfies all properties of the latter. In turn, every seminorm is a sublinear function and thus satisfies all properties of the latter. In particular, every norm is a convex function.

===Equivalence===

The concept of unit circle (the set of all vectors of norm 1) is different in different norms: for the 1-norm, the unit circle is a square oriented as a diamond; for the 2-norm (Euclidean norm), it is the well-known unit circle; while for the infinity norm, it is an axis-aligned square. For any formula_22-norm, it is a superellipse with congruent axes (see the accompanying illustration). Due to the definition of the norm, the unit circle must be convex and centrally symmetric (therefore, for example, the unit ball may be a rectangle but cannot be a triangle, and formula_112 for a formula_22-norm).

In terms of the vector space, the seminorm defines a topology on the space, and this is a Hausdorff topology precisely when the seminorm can distinguish between distinct vectors, which is again equivalent to the seminorm being a norm. The topology thus defined (by either a norm or a seminorm) can be understood either in terms of sequences or open sets. A sequence of vectors formula_237 is said to converge in norm to formula_238 if formula_239 as formula_240 Equivalently, the topology consists of all sets that can be represented as a union of open balls. If formula_241 is a normed space then
formula_242

Two norms formula_243 and formula_244 on a vector space formula_1 are called if they induce the same topology, which happens if and only if there exist positive real numbers formula_31 and formula_247 such that for all formula_11
formula_249
For instance, if formula_250 on formula_100 then
formula_252

In particular,
formula_253
formula_254
formula_255
That is,
formula_256
If the vector space is a finite-dimensional real or complex one, all norms are equivalent. On the other hand, in the case of infinite-dimensional vector spaces, not all norms are equivalent.

Equivalent norms define the same notions of continuity and convergence and for many purposes do not need to be distinguished. To be more precise the uniform structure defined by equivalent norms on the vector space is uniformly isomorphic.

==Classification of seminorms: absolutely convex absorbing sets==
All seminorms on a vector space formula_1 can be classified in terms of absolutely convex absorbing subsets formula_157 of formula_27 To each such subset corresponds a seminorm formula_260 called the gauge of formula_213 defined as
formula_262
where formula_263 is the infimum, with the property that
formula_264
Conversely:

Any locally convex topological vector space has a local basis consisting of absolutely convex sets. A common method to construct such a basis is to use a family formula_265 of seminorms formula_22 that separates points: the collection of all finite intersections of sets formula_267 turns the space into a locally convex topological vector space so that every p is continuous.

Such a method is used to design weak and weak* topologies.

norm case:
:Suppose now that formula_265 contains a single formula_269 since formula_265 is separating, formula_22 is a norm, and formula_272 is its open unit ball. Then formula_157 is an absolutely convex bounded neighbourhood of 0, and formula_274 is continuous.

:The converse is due to Andrey Kolmogorov: any locally convex and locally bounded topological vector space is normable. Precisely:
:If formula_1 is an absolutely convex bounded neighbourhood of 0, the gauge formula_276 (so that formula_277 is a norm.

==See also==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==References==

==Bibliography==
* 
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="3" end="14" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q956437" start="18" end="22" title="Norm (mathematics)" label="norm"/>
<link wikidata="Q11348" start="28" end="36" title="function (mathematics)" label="function"/>
<link wikidata="Q125977" start="60" end="72" title="vector space" label="vector space"/>
<link wikidata="Q40735" start="162" end="168" title="Origin (mathematics)" label="origin"/>
<link wikidata="Q256355" start="173" end="181" title="Equivariant map" label="commutes"/>
<link wikidata="Q208216" start="216" end="235" title="triangle inequality" label="triangle inequality"/>
<link wikidata="Q847073" start="288" end="306" title="Euclidean distance" label="Euclidean distance"/>
<link wikidata="Q17295" start="312" end="327" title="Euclidean space" label="Euclidean space"/>
<link wikidata="Q17295" start="367" end="389" title="Euclidean vector space" label="Euclidean vector space"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="402" end="416" title="#Euclidean norm" label="Euclidean norm"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="422" end="428" title="#p-norm" label="2-norm"/>
<link wikidata="Q956437" start="449" end="458" title="Norm (mathematics)" label="magnitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q956437" start="462" end="468" title="Norm (mathematics)" label="length"/>
<link wikidata="Q134237" start="516" end="527" title="square root" label="square root"/>
<link wikidata="Q214159" start="535" end="548" title="inner product" label="inner product"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416088" start="577" end="585" title="seminorm" label="seminorm"/>
<link wikidata="Q726210" start="731" end="750" title="normed vector space" label="normed vector space"/>
<link wikidata="Q956437" start="863" end="873" title="Norm (mathematics)" label="pseudonorm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1513048" start="1063" end="1075" title="directed set" label="directed set"/>
<link wikidata="Q125977" start="1102" end="1114" title="vector space" label="vector space"/>
<link wikidata="Q577835" start="1132" end="1140" title="Field extension" label="subfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q5189500" start="1209" end="1229" title="real-valued function" label="real-valued function"/>
<link wikidata="Q120812" start="1305" end="1319" title="absolute value" label="absolute value"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934099" start="1346" end="1359" title="Subadditive function" label="Subadditivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q208216" start="1360" end="1379" title="Triangle inequality" label="Triangle inequality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132952" start="1411" end="1431" title="Homogeneous function" label="Absolute homogeneity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7233276" start="1492" end="1513" title="Positive definiteness" label="Positive definiteness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416088" start="1749" end="1757" title="seminorm" label="seminorm"/>
<link wikidata="Q338652" start="1899" end="1917" title="sublinear function" label="sublinear function"/>
<link wikidata="Q621850" start="2828" end="2837" title="Reflexive relation" label="reflexive"/>
<link wikidata="Q621461" start="2839" end="2848" title="Symmetric relation" label="symmetric"/>
<link wikidata="Q64861" start="2886" end="2896" title="Transitive relation" label="transitive"/>
<link wikidata="Q130998" start="2917" end="2937" title="equivalence relation" label="equivalence relation"/>
<link wikidata="Q180217" start="3407" end="3420" title="Stefan Banach" label="Stefan Banach"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3607" end="3622" title="#Euclidean norm" label="explained below"/>
<link wikidata="Q189569" start="3782" end="3793" title="Hamel basis" label="Hamel basis"/>
<link wikidata="Q120812" start="4129" end="4143" title="absolute value" label="absolute value"/>
<link wikidata="Q12916" start="4199" end="4203" title="real number" label="real"/>
<link wikidata="Q11567" start="4207" end="4221" title="complex number" label="complex number"/>
<link wikidata="Q929302" start="4251" end="4279" title="dimension (vector space)" label="one-dimensional vector space"/>
<link wikidata="Q189112" start="4565" end="4576" title="isomorphism" label="isomorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q17295" start="4938" end="4953" title="Euclidean space" label="Euclidean space"/>
<link wikidata="Q11518" start="5174" end="5193" title="Pythagorean theorem" label="Pythagorean theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q214159" start="5588" end="5601" title="inner product" label="inner product"/>
<link wikidata="Q17295" start="5622" end="5644" title="Euclidean vector space" label="Euclidean vector space"/>
<link wikidata="Q181365" start="5652" end="5663" title="dot product" label="dot product"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057996" start="5673" end="5690" title="coordinate vector" label="coordinate vector"/>
<link wikidata="Q2365325" start="5700" end="5717" title="orthonormal basis" label="orthonormal basis"/>
<link wikidata="Q305936" start="5916" end="5932" title="Lp space" label="formula_73 space"/>
<link wikidata="Q180953" start="5947" end="5964" title="distance function" label="distance function"/>
<link wikidata="Q306610" start="6132" end="6149" title="n-sphere" label="formula_65-sphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q11567" start="6218" end="6232" title="complex number" label="complex number"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6240" end="6254" title="Absolute value#Complex numbers" label="absolute value"/>
<link wikidata="Q328998" start="6295" end="6308" title="complex plane" label="complex plane"/>
<link wikidata="Q17285" start="6332" end="6347" title="Euclidean plane" label="Euclidean plane"/>
<link wikidata="Q381040" start="6646" end="6663" title="complex conjugate" label="complex conjugate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139430" start="6734" end="6759" title="Hurwitz&amp;#x27;s theorem (composition algebras)" label="Euclidean Hurwitz algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q12916" start="6770" end="6781" title="real number" label="real number"/>
<link wikidata="Q173853" start="6856" end="6866" title="quaternion" label="quaternion"/>
<link wikidata="Q743418" start="6894" end="6902" title="octonion" label="octonion"/>
<link wikidata="Q120812" start="7062" end="7076" title="absolute value" label="absolute value"/>
<link wikidata="Q173853" start="7150" end="7160" title="quaternion" label="quaternion"/>
<link wikidata="Q743418" start="7365" end="7373" title="octonion" label="octonion"/>
<link wikidata="Q21167419" start="7494" end="7507" title="Complex coordinate space" label="complex space"/>
<link wikidata="Q134237" start="7604" end="7615" title="square root" label="square root"/>
<link wikidata="Q214159" start="7623" end="7636" title="inner product" label="inner product"/>
<link wikidata="Q20294235" start="7713" end="7726" title="column vector" label="column vector"/>
<link wikidata="Q2051983" start="7767" end="7786" title="conjugate transpose" label="conjugate transpose"/>
<link wikidata="Q214159" start="7819" end="7838" title="inner product space" label="inner product space"/>
<link wikidata="Q181365" start="7939" end="7958" title="complex dot product" label="complex dot product"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256511" start="8173" end="8184" title="street grid" label="street grid"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="8203" end="8211" title="New York City" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q11299" start="8223" end="8232" title="Manhattan" label="Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187914" start="8358" end="8372" title="cross polytope" label="cross polytope"/>
<link wikidata="Q573509" start="8550" end="8568" title="Manhattan distance" label="Manhattan distance"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8917" end="8929" title="#Taxicab norm or Manhattan norm" label="taxicab norm"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8958" end="8972" title="#Euclidean norm" label="Euclidean norm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202673" start="9050" end="9063" title="uniform norm" label="infinity norm"/>
<link wikidata="" start="9067" end="9079" title="#Maximum_norm_.28special_case_of:_infinity_norm.2C_uniform_norm.2C_or_supremum_norm.29" label="maximum norm"/>
<link wikidata="Q855729" start="9131" end="9147" title="generalized mean" label="generalized mean"/>
<link wikidata="Q214159" start="9232" end="9245" title="inner product" label="inner product"/>
<link wikidata="Q1817177" start="9381" end="9402" title="polarization identity" label="polarization identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q192276" start="9531" end="9544" title="measure (mathematics)" label="measure space"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530791" start="9579" end="9605" title="square-integrable function" label="square-integrable function"/>
<link wikidata="Q208216" start="9776" end="9795" title="triangle inequality" label="triangle inequality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455249" start="10075" end="10099" title="topological vector space" label="topological vector space"/>
<link wikidata="Q190549" start="10139" end="10158" title="functional analysis" label="functional analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5862903" start="10160" end="10178" title="probability theory" label="probability theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q876215" start="10183" end="10200" title="harmonic analysis" label="harmonic analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3406746" start="10569" end="10585" title="Hadamard product (matrices)" label="Hadamard product"/>
<link wikidata="Q213723" start="10991" end="11000" title="hypercube" label="hypercube"/>
<link wikidata="Q339011" start="11115" end="11124" title="Symmetric_matrix" label="symmetric"/>
<link wikidata="Q77601250" start="11125" end="11142" title="Definite_matrix" label="positive definite"/>
<link wikidata="Q193794" start="11218" end="11233" title="identity matrix" label="identity matrix"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11264" end="11278" title="#Euclidean_norm" label="Euclidean norm"/>
<link wikidata="Q214159" start="11396" end="11409" title="Inner_product_space" label="inner product"/>
<link wikidata="Q3490774" start="11503" end="11511" title="Spectrum_of_a_matrix" label="spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q190524" start="11677" end="11688" title="Eigenvalues_and_eigenvectors" label="eigenvalues"/>
<link wikidata="Q964330" start="11846" end="11864" title="Square_root_of_a_matrix" label="matrix square root"/>
<link wikidata="Q516776" start="12101" end="12120" title="measurable function" label="measurable function"/>
<link wikidata="Q2664426" start="12134" end="12141" title="F-space" label="F-space"/>
<link wikidata="Q180953" start="12489" end="12504" title="metric geometry" label="metric geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q175116" start="12510" end="12525" title="discrete metric" label="discrete metric"/>
<link wikidata="Q272172" start="12690" end="12706" title="Hamming distance" label="Hamming distance"/>
<link wikidata="Q602136" start="12736" end="12742" title="coding theory" label="coding"/>
<link wikidata="Q131222" start="12747" end="12765" title="information theory" label="information theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q208163" start="13396" end="13413" title="signal processing" label="signal processing"/>
<link wikidata="Q12483" start="13418" end="13428" title="statistics" label="statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1114742" start="13430" end="13442" title="David Donoho" label="David Donoho"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13897" end="13917" title="homogeneous function#Positive homogeneity" label="positive homogeneous"/>
<link wikidata="Q842159" start="14141" end="14160" title="Abuse of terminology" label="Abusing terminology"/>
<link wikidata="Q305936" start="14321" end="14335" title="Lp space" label="Lebesgue space"/>
<link wikidata="Q516776" start="14339" end="14358" title="measurable function" label="measurable function"/>
<link wikidata="Q305936" start="14472" end="14505" title="Lp space" label="formula_114 and formula_73 spaces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162676" start="14656" end="14668" title="Haar measure" label="Haar measure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202673" start="14736" end="14749" title="supremum norm" label="supremum norm"/>
<link wikidata="Q214159" start="14799" end="14812" title="inner product" label="inner product"/>
<link wikidata="Q194397" start="14940" end="14952" title="Banach space" label="Banach space"/>
<link wikidata="Q906456" start="15082" end="15105" title="finer topology" label="strictly finer topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q182003" start="15334" end="15343" title="Injective function" label="injective"/>
<link wikidata="Q207643" start="15344" end="15365" title="linear transformation" label="linear transformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q45867" start="15678" end="15691" title="parallelogram" label="parallelogram"/>
<link wikidata="Q188884" start="15792" end="15802" title="octahedron" label="octahedron"/>
<link wikidata="Q180544" start="15827" end="15832" title="prism (geometry)" label="prism"/>
<link wikidata="Q649472" start="15963" end="15983" title="Minkowski functional" label="Minkowski functional"/>
<link wikidata="Q939253" start="16266" end="16278" title="matrix norms" label="matrix norms"/>
<link wikidata="Q3493864" start="16328" end="16344" title="finite extension" label="finite extension"/>
<link wikidata="Q2264756" start="16371" end="16389" title="inseparable degree" label="inseparable degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q3772492" start="16473" end="16483" title="Field homomorphism" label="embeddings"/>
<link wikidata="Q3493864" start="16639" end="16650" title="Degree of a field extension" label="formula_209"/>
<link wikidata="Q2835957" start="16880" end="16899" title="composition algebra" label="composition algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3555169" start="16949" end="16960" title="null vector" label="null vector"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000660" start="17024" end="17044" title="algebra over a field" label="algebra over a field"/>
<link wikidata="Q846862" start="17060" end="17070" title="involution (mathematics)" label="involution"/>
<link wikidata="Q736753" start="17089" end="17103" title="quadratic form" label="quadratic form"/>
<link wikidata="Q3493864" start="17104" end="17115" title="Degree of a field extension" label="formula_215"/>
<link wikidata="Q215111" start="17204" end="17216" title="homomorphism" label="homomorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231309" start="17388" end="17404" title="division algebra" label="division algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1182685" start="17555" end="17578" title="definite quadratic form" label="definite quadratic form"/>
<link wikidata="Q3555169" start="17587" end="17600" title="split algebra" label="split algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q4968811" start="17617" end="17641" title="isotropic quadratic form" label="isotropic quadratic form"/>
<link wikidata="Q208216" start="17717" end="17744" title="reverse triangle inequality" label="reverse triangle inequality"/>
<link wikidata="Q223683" start="17878" end="17887" title="transpose" label="transpose"/>
<link wikidata="Q305936" start="17923" end="17939" title="Lp space" label="formula_73 norms"/>
<link wikidata="Q731894" start="17949" end="17973" title="Hölder&amp;#x27;s inequality" label="Hölder&amp;#x27;s inequality"/>
<link wikidata="Q190546" start="18016" end="18041" title="Cauchy–Schwarz inequality" label="Cauchy–Schwarz inequality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416088" start="18071" end="18079" title="seminorm" label="seminorm"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18103" end="18127" title="Seminorm#Algebraic_properties" label="properties of the latter"/>
<link wikidata="Q338652" start="18158" end="18176" title="sublinear function" label="sublinear function"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18200" end="18224" title="Sublinear_function#Properties" label="properties of the latter"/>
<link wikidata="Q319913" start="18257" end="18272" title="convex function" label="convex function"/>
<link wikidata="Q203425" start="18309" end="18320" title="unit circle" label="unit circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q164" start="18426" end="18432" title="square (geometry)" label="square"/>
<link wikidata="Q17278" start="18515" end="18521" title="circle" label="circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q867058" start="18615" end="18627" title="superellipse" label="superellipse"/>
<link wikidata="Q193657" start="18744" end="18750" title="convex set" label="convex"/>
<link wikidata="Q42989" start="18953" end="18961" title="topology" label="topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q326908" start="18990" end="18999" title="Hausdorff space" label="Hausdorff"/>
<link wikidata="Q133250" start="19257" end="19265" title="sequence" label="sequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q6889154" start="19300" end="19308" title="modes of convergence" label="converge"/>
<link wikidata="Q838611" start="19453" end="19458" title="ball (mathematics)" label="balls"/>
<link wikidata="Q2789884" start="20297" end="20317" title="uniformly isomorphic" label="uniformly isomorphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q332715" start="20458" end="20475" title="absolutely convex" label="absolutely convex"/>
<link wikidata="Q332775" start="20476" end="20492" title="Absorbing set" label="absorbing subset"/>
<link wikidata="Q649472" start="20586" end="20591" title="Minkowski functional" label="gauge"/>
<link wikidata="Q17502105" start="20655" end="20662" title="infimum" label="infimum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572357" start="20716" end="20755" title="locally convex topological vector space" label="locally convex topological vector space"/>
<link wikidata="Q3275652" start="20762" end="20773" title="local basis" label="local basis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140985" start="20914" end="20930" title="separation axiom" label="separates points"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572357" start="21018" end="21057" title="locally convex topological vector space" label="locally convex topological vector space"/>
<link wikidata="Q170058" start="21077" end="21087" title="continuous function" label="continuous"/>
<link wikidata="Q505760" start="21122" end="21147" title="Weak topology" label="weak and weak* topologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140985" start="21242" end="21252" title="separation axiom" label="separating"/>
<link wikidata="Q1307800" start="21304" end="21313" title="unit ball" label="unit ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q726212" start="21356" end="21363" title="Bounded set" label="bounded"/>
<link wikidata="Q153224" start="21440" end="21457" title="Andrey Kolmogorov" label="Andrey Kolmogorov"/>
<link wikidata="Q956437" start="21526" end="21534" title="normable" label="normable"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="990535" wikidata="Q8037468" url="?curid=990535" title="Wowser">
<text>&quot;Wowser&quot; is an Australian and New Zealand term that refers to someone who seeks to deprive others of allegedly immoral and sinful behaviour, such as drinking, smoking and gambling. Critics of wowsers typically describe them as prudish and self-righteous.

==History==
The term originated in Australia, at first carrying a similar meaning to &quot;lout&quot; (an annoying or disruptive person, or even a prostitute). Around 1900 it shifted to its present meaning: one whose sense of morality drives them to deprive others of their sinful pleasures, especially liquor. The term was particularly applied to members of temperance groups such as the antipodean branches of the Woman&#x27;s Christian Temperance Union.

John Norton, editor of the Australian scandal newspaper, &quot;Truth&quot;, claimed he first used the word in 1899, a claim supported by the OED. However some authors claim that the present meaning originated from an Australian temperance slogan, &quot;We Only Want Social Evils Remedied.&quot; This apparent backronym is considered a &quot;less credible provenance&quot; by the ANU.

The Australian writer C. J. Dennis defined it thus: &#x27;Wowser: an ineffably pious person who mistakes this world for a penitentiary and himself for a warder&#x27;.

Historian Stuart Macintyre argues:
the achievements of the wowsers were impressive; they passed laws that restricted obscenity and juvenile smoking, raised the age of consent, limited gambling, closed down many pubs, and in 1915–16 established a 6 pm closing hour for pubs, which lasted for decades.

==In popular culture==
&quot;Wowser&quot; was frequently used by artist and author Norman Lindsay, who fought many battles with &quot;wowsers&quot; over the sexual content in his art and writing.

In &quot;The Motor&quot; magazine w/e 10 April 1940, the word was discussed, and the author of the &quot;Contact&quot; column was still bemused until he received a card from a gentleman in Bristol who said &quot;Broadly speaking, &#x27;wowsers&#x27; are pious hypocrites, those who dislike seeing others enjoy themselves, usually in evidence amongst the elder members of a community.&quot;

==Other cultures==
Americans rarely use the word, except as an interjection of surprise. However it appears several times in the works of H. L. Mencken:
:&quot;In the same way the Archidamian War is more interesting than the fiscal cares of the Four Hundred, and the craft of Pericles takes precedence of his abilities as tax-collector and wowser.&quot; (&quot;American Mercury&quot; &quot;The Greeks&quot;)

In &quot;Ocean&#x27;s Thirteen&quot;, Basher (Don Cheadle) says to Linus (Matt Damon), &quot;You&#x27;re such a wowser&quot; when the latter refuses to buy certain types of magazines for him.

==See also==

* Teetotaller
* Larrikinism

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q8037468" start="6" end="12" title="Wowser" label="Wowser"/>
<link wikidata="Q333247" start="625" end="635" title="Temperance movement" label="temperance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2592931" start="682" end="721" title="Woman&amp;#x27;s Christian Temperance Union" label="Woman&amp;#x27;s Christian Temperance Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q6250685" start="724" end="735" title="John Norton (journalist)" label="John Norton"/>
<link wikidata="Q44996" start="865" end="868" title="Oxford English Dictionary" label="OED"/>
<link wikidata="Q636300" start="1033" end="1042" title="backronym" label="backronym"/>
<link wikidata="Q983348" start="1131" end="1143" title="C. J. Dennis" label="C. J. Dennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q10374387" start="1287" end="1303" title="Stuart Macintyre" label="Stuart Macintyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2290858" start="1523" end="1540" title="Six o&amp;#x27;clock swill" label="6 pm closing hour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273998" start="1661" end="1675" title="Norman Lindsay" label="Norman Lindsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q439204" start="2304" end="2317" title="H. L. Mencken" label="H. L. Mencken"/>
<link wikidata="Q33745" start="2346" end="2361" title="Peloponnesian War" label="Archidamian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1716388" start="2411" end="2423" title="Athenian coup of 411 BC" label="Four Hundred"/>
<link wikidata="Q80398" start="2442" end="2450" title="Pericles" label="Pericles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7713514" start="2527" end="2543" title="American Mercury" label="American Mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q635632" start="2584" end="2605" title="Ocean&amp;#x27;s Thirteen" label="Ocean&amp;#x27;s Thirteen"/>
<link wikidata="Q272019" start="2621" end="2632" title="Don Cheadle" label="Don Cheadle"/>
<link wikidata="Q175535" start="2649" end="2659" title="Matt Damon" label="Matt Damon"/>
<link wikidata="Q15131448" start="2784" end="2795" title="Teetotaller" label="Teetotaller"/>
<link wikidata="Q9020347" start="2798" end="2809" title="Larrikinism" label="Larrikinism"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="990536" wikidata="Q1535859" url="?curid=990536" title="Richard Mason (novelist, born 1919)">
<text>Richard Mason (16 May 1919 – 13 October 1997), published also under the pen name Richard Lakin, was a British novelist best known for his 1957 publication &quot;The World of Suzie Wong&quot;. His novels usually concerned Britons&#x27; experiences in exotic foreign locations, especially in Asia.

==Personal life==
Born into a middle-class family in Hale, near Manchester, he attended The Downs Malvern, a private boarding school, from September 1928 to 1933. There he was taught by novelist W. H. Auden, and at the age of 14 wrote a juvenile novel (criticised by Auden as &quot;no good&quot; and now lost). A passage in his second novel, &quot;The Wind Cannot Read&quot; (1946), may shed some light on Auden&#x27;s critique: &quot;When I was a boy at school I had written a story about a man and a woman. The English master was a poet with a great understanding of human nature, and in red ink at the end he had written, &#x27;Yes, my dear, but people do not fall in love as quickly as all that, you know.&#x27; I think my characters had declared their mutual love at a second meeting.&quot; His later novels allude to school bullying, and a fictional character mentions a painful separation from his mother, instances that may give some flavour of his own experience of boarding school. (The Downs Malvern, where he was a pupil from the age of nine, is a considerable distance from Hale.)

He later attended St Marys School and Bryanston School (1933–36) in Dorset, and published articles in the local press and a film magazine between 1933 and 1938. After working for the British Council, he served in the Royal Air Force from 1939 until 1944. Attached to the 14th Army as an intelligence officer, he was taught Japanese in a three-month crash course taken in India, to interrogate prisoners of war in India and Burma. (The course was taken with life-long friend Islay Lyons, a Welsh photographer.) In &quot;The Wind Cannot Read&quot;, the Michael Quinn character receives this training in flats overlooking the harbour of Mumbai, where the 14th Army was indeed stationed. More RAF-related experiences found fictional expression in his first, pseudonymous novel, &quot;The Body Fell on Berlin&quot; (1943), written as Richard Lakin (Lakin appears as his middle name in the German edition of &quot;The World of Suzie Wong&quot;).

After the war, in 1948, he eloped with and married the writer and public relations officer Anne Cumming, who had previously been married to Henry Lyon Young. Cumming was notorious as a sexual free spirit, who was best known in &quot;avant garde&quot; literary circles. The two travelled through most of the countries of Europe, and logged 8,000 miles of travel in Africa in a second-hand car. They separated in 1958 and were later divorced.

In the 1960s he restored an apartment in Rome and then went on to raise sheep on an estate in Wales with his second wife, Sarett Rudley, a television mystery writer best known for a number of &quot;Alfred Hitchcock Presents&quot; teleplays. He was to remain close friends with both ex-wives.

In the early 1970s, Mason returned to Rome, where he met his third wife Margot (&quot;Maggie&quot;) Wolf in 1972, with whom he had a son, Theo, and a daughter, Jessica. The couple were popular hosts, and Mason worked on his sculpting from a rooftop workshop and garden. &quot;After Suzie, the ideas just wouldn&#x27;t come. The book has been good for us, like an inheritance, really. We’re not rich, but we live comfortably&quot;, Mason remarked in an extremely rare 1988 interview.

Long a cigarette smoker, he died of throat cancer/lung cancer in Rome, Italy. He is interred in the Protestant Cemetery, Rome (near Percy Shelley), where his headstone is inscribed with the words &quot;Though on the sign it is written: &#x27;Don&#x27;t pluck these blossoms&#x27;—it is useless against the wind, which cannot read&quot;. (This poem, quoted in Basil Chamberlain&#x27;s &quot;A Handbook of Colloquial Japanese&quot; also prefaces &quot;The Wind Cannot Read&quot;.)

== Career ==
Mason&#x27;s first novel, &quot;The Body Fell on Berlin&quot;, was a murder mystery set during the war. Jasper Doyle, an intelligence officer formerly of Scotland Yard, is posted to Fenmallham Airdrome, England, from which RAF bombers depart for missions over occupied Europe and Germany. In reviewing some photos taking during a bombing run over Berlin he spots what looks suspiciously like a body - which seems to have been very neatly disposed of indeed . . . . The setting is keenly observed, as are the many convincing characters.

His second novel, &quot;The Wind Cannot Read&quot;, was written in India between February and May 1944, sometimes in temperatures over 100 degrees, after the day&#x27;s duties. It was based partly on his wartime experiences learning Japanese and won the John Llewellyn Rhys Prize in 1948. (The character &quot;Peter&quot; featured in it was based on his friend Lyons, while the Michael Quinn character is transparently himself.) Mason also did a surprisingly competent job of writing the screenplay for the 1958 film version, starring Dirk Bogarde. Many of the themes of love transcending cultural boundaries, also developed later in &quot;The World of Suzie Wong&quot;, make their first appearance here. The movie setting, Red Fort in Delhi, departs from the Mumbai setting of the novel, but provides visual interest, and complements the novel by providing a rich portrait of the city and of Indian life. The novel and film were sufficiently successful that Mason was subsequently able to devote himself entirely to writing and travel, including visits to the Caribbean and Polynesia.

&quot;The Wind Cannot Read&quot; was followed by another mystery novel &quot;Angel Take Care&quot; (also written as Richard Lakin, 1947). Easily the most charming of Mason&#x27;s novels, it details the amusing experiences of a newly-formed husband and wife detective team as they attempt to determine the fate of a missing person.

Mason&#x27;s next novel &quot;The Shadow and the Peak&quot;, set in Jamaica, was filmed in 1958 as &quot;Passionate Summer&quot; (alternately titled &quot;Storm over Jamaica&quot;). In this time frame Mason also produced films and wrote several scripts. With W. P. Lipscomb, he wrote the screenplay for the 1956 film version of Nevil Shute&#x27;s novel &quot;A Town Like Alice&quot;.

In search of inspiration for his next book, he suspected that he would find it in Hong Kong. &quot;I had felt I needed background for a book and something in me said Hong Kong was a place where I would immediately find material, so I simply bought a ticket,&quot; he commented to an interviewer. Mason&#x27;s delight in his observations there did indeed inspire him to write his best-known book, &quot;The World of Suzie Wong&quot; (1957), a tale of an artist&#x27;s surprisingly tender romance with a Hong Kong prostitute. It quickly became a well-reviewed bestseller, &quot;The Times Literary Supplement&quot;, for example, calling it &quot;extremely readable&quot; and noting that it was &quot;written with uncommon skill and intelligence.&quot; It also added a somewhat controversial expression, &quot;Suzie Wong&quot; (a seductive East Asian woman), to the English language. It was quickly adapted into a 1958 Broadway play, starring William Shatner and France Nuyen, as well as the 1960 film &quot;The World of Suzie Wong&quot;, starring William Holden and Nancy Kwan. It was Kwan&#x27;s first film role.

Mason wrote the first draft of the novel in Hong Kong in three months in 1956, but upon returning to England he felt he had been too close to the material to judge it properly and put the manuscript away in a cabinet. Setting this draft behind him, he rewrote the entire novel from scratch over the course of a year.

The primary setting is a hotel brothel called Nam Kok, based on the actual Luk Kwok hotel where Mason himself stayed. (The hotel has since been replaced by an upscale concrete and glass construction that bears no resemblance.) The novel&#x27;s success owes much to psychological insight, a strength apparent in all of Mason&#x27;s novels, deft and often touching characterisation, and a love story that explores the difficulties inherent in a relationship between a respectable British artist and a Hong Kong prostitute, forced into the trade from economic necessity. (China had been embroiled in a turbulent civil war compounded by Japanese invasion in the period immediately preceding the events of the novel.) The psychological pressures bearing upon the essentially conservative Suzie, and the social consequences for her lover Robert Lomax, are particularly well developed. Mason, however, felt that the novel fell short of its potential and would have been stronger had he explored more fully life as it was then being lived in Hong Kong.

The film differs significantly from the novel in a number of ways (Lomax, for example, is transformed into an American, a major character is omitted altogether, and Suzie&#x27;s travails with the legal system and health make no appearance). However, filmed on location, it is full of visual interest. Mason himself thought well of the film except for the performance of Holden, who he felt was nothing like Lomax, and &quot;more like an American banker&quot;.

Mason&#x27;s 1962 espionage novel &quot;The Fever Tree&quot; was set in India and Nepal. Written in 1961 with the help of Sarett, while working in creative isolation on Elba, it was to be his last. From this point forward he lived entirely on royalties earned from his publications and films and spent time learning sculpting from the Rome-based artist Robert Cook.

==Bibliography==

===Fiction===
* &quot;The Body Fell on Berlin&quot;, Hodder &amp; Stoughton, London 1943 (as Richard Lakin)
* &quot;The Wind Cannot Read&quot;, Hodder &amp; Stoughton, London 1946; screenplay 1958
* &quot;Angel Take Care&quot;, 1947 (as Richard Lakin)
* &quot;The Shadow and the Peak&quot;, Hodder &amp; Stoughton, London 1949, film 1958
* &quot;The World of Suzie Wong&quot;, Collins, London 1957
* &quot;The Fever Tree&quot;, Collins, London 1962

==References==

==External links==
* Richard Mason, portrait, Unionsverlag</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1535859" start="0" end="13" title="Richard Mason (novelist, born 1919)" label="Richard Mason"/>
<link wikidata="Q127843" start="72" end="80" title="pen name" label="pen name"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535859" start="81" end="94" title="Richard Mason (novelist, born 1919)" label="Richard Lakin"/>
<link wikidata="Q157709" start="161" end="184" title="The World of Suzie Wong" label="The World of Suzie Wong"/>
<link wikidata="Q5641345" start="350" end="354" title="Hale, Greater Manchester" label="Hale"/>
<link wikidata="Q18125" start="361" end="371" title="Manchester" label="Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q7730801" start="385" end="402" title="The Downs Malvern" label="The Downs Malvern"/>
<link wikidata="Q178698" start="492" end="503" title="W. H. Auden" label="W. H. Auden"/>
<link wikidata="Q995138" start="1430" end="1446" title="Bryanston School" label="Bryanston School"/>
<link wikidata="Q23159" start="1460" end="1466" title="Dorset" label="Dorset"/>
<link wikidata="Q45433" start="1575" end="1590" title="British Council" label="British Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="1609" end="1624" title="Royal Air Force" label="Royal Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918766" start="1663" end="1672" title="Fourteenth Army (United Kingdom)" label="14th Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q4724154" start="1866" end="1877" title="Algernon Islay de Courcy Lyons" label="Islay Lyons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156" start="2026" end="2032" title="Mumbai" label="Mumbai"/>
<link wikidata="Q3659898" start="2399" end="2423" title="public relations officer" label="public relations officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q19325081" start="2424" end="2436" title="Anne Cumming" label="Anne Cumming"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247206" start="2973" end="2998" title="Alfred Hitchcock Presents" label="Alfred Hitchcock Presents"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783924" start="3588" end="3601" title="throat cancer" label="throat cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q47912" start="3602" end="3613" title="lung cancer" label="lung cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="3617" end="3628" title="Rome, Italy" label="Rome, Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187723" start="3652" end="3677" title="Protestant Cemetery, Rome" label="Protestant Cemetery, Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q810029" start="3911" end="3928" title="Basil Chamberlain" label="Basil Chamberlain"/>
<link wikidata="Q585190" start="4836" end="4861" title="John Llewellyn Rhys Prize" label="John Llewellyn Rhys Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q426284" start="5089" end="5106" title="The Wind Cannot Read" label="1958 film version"/>
<link wikidata="Q299190" start="5117" end="5129" title="Dirk Bogarde" label="Dirk Bogarde"/>
<link wikidata="Q45957" start="5306" end="5314" title="Red Fort" label="Red Fort"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353" start="5318" end="5323" title="Delhi" label="Delhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7142765" start="6106" end="6123" title="Passionate Summer (1958 film)" label="Passionate Summer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2536771" start="6260" end="6274" title="W. P. Lipscomb" label="W. P. Lipscomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q3425311" start="6308" end="6325" title="A Town Like Alice (1956 film)" label="1956 film version"/>
<link wikidata="Q356639" start="6329" end="6340" title="Nevil Shute" label="Nevil Shute"/>
<link wikidata="Q4660252" start="6360" end="6377" title="A Town Like Alice" label="A Town Like Alice"/>
<link wikidata="Q157709" start="6788" end="6811" title="The World of Suzie Wong" label="The World of Suzie Wong"/>
<link wikidata="Q16297" start="7325" end="7340" title="William Shatner" label="William Shatner"/>
<link wikidata="Q455876" start="7345" end="7357" title="France Nuyen" label="France Nuyen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7576284" start="7390" end="7413" title="The World of Suzie Wong (film)" label="The World of Suzie Wong"/>
<link wikidata="Q95002" start="7430" end="7444" title="William Holden" label="William Holden"/>
<link wikidata="Q448630" start="7449" end="7459" title="Nancy Kwan" label="Nancy Kwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q179975" start="8425" end="8434" title="Chinese Civil War" label="civil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q45328" start="9492" end="9496" title="Elba" label="Elba"/>
<link wikidata="Q426284" start="9889" end="9904" title="The Wind Cannot Read" label="screenplay 1958"/>
<link wikidata="Q7142765" start="10036" end="10045" title="Passionate Summer (1958 film)" label="film 1958"/>
<link wikidata="Q157709" start="10054" end="10077" title="The World of Suzie Wong" label="The World of Suzie Wong"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="990538" wikidata="Q3479787" url="?curid=990538" title="Serian Division">
<text>Serian is a town, and the capital of the &quot;Serian&quot; (2,039.9 square kilometres) separated on 11 April 2015 from Samarahan Division, Sarawak, Malaysia. It is located about from Kuching. Sub-district headquarters towns are Balai Ringin and Tebedu.

The town is known for its durians, which are popularly believed to be the best in Sarawak. This has prompted the Serian District Council to erect a giant monument to this &quot;king of fruits&quot; right in the middle of the market square. However, other monuments such as the tiger and the buffalo statues seem out of place as there are no tigers or buffalos in this district. The town is well connected to its rich hinterland both by road and by water and thus one can find all sorts of jungle produce available in the jungle produce market but lately, most of these produce were brought in from Kalimantan, Indonesia as the price are cheaper.

The district population (year 2010 census) was 90,763. About 65% of the population are Bidayuh. The other main ethnic groups are Iban, Chinese, and Malay.

==Geography==
Limestone formations and paddy fields can be seen along the way to Tebedu. Other attraction points of Serian are &quot;Gua Tiab Bilanting&quot; which is situated at Kampung Pichin and also &quot;Bukit Parang&quot; which is located at the Sarawak-Kalimantan border.

There are many waterfalls found in Serian District Sarawak. &quot;Ranchan Waterfall&quot; is the most famous one, located at about from Serian town and is accessible easily by road. &quot;Simuja Waterfall&quot; is another waterfall can be found in Serian but it was damaged badly by logging activities. It is located about away from town. There is no proper road to the waterfall and visitors have to hike from Serian-Sri Aman trunk road to get there.

Tebedu (which renamed Bandar Mutiara recently), located about away from Serian town on the Indonesia-Malaysia border, is one of only three official land border crossings between Indonesia and Malaysia.

Tebakang a small town in located approximately 12 km away from Serian, is a home to Mayang Tea plantation, Sarawak sole tea producer.

==Climate==
Serian has a tropical rainforest climate (Af) with heavy to very heavy rainfall year-round.
==Education==
*Serian District Education Office (PPD Serian)
*Serian Teacher Activity Center (PKG Serian)

===Primary school===
*SK Balai Ringin
*SK Bedup
*SK Daha
*SK Engkeroh
*SK Entayan
*SK Entubuh
*SK Gahat Mawang
*SK Gemang
*SK Koran
*SK Krait
*SK Krangan
*SK Krusen
*SK Kujang Mawang
*SK Kujang Sain
*SK Lebur/Remun
*SK Lobang Batu
*SK Lubok Antu Reban
*SK Mapu
*SK Mawang Taup
*SK Melansai
*SK Mentu Tapu
*SK Merakai
*SK Merbau
*SK Mubok Berawan
*SK Parun Suan
*SK Pangkalan Sorah
*SK Pati
*SK Payau
*SK Plaman Baki/Menaul
*SK Pridan
*SK Rayang
*SK Reteh
*SK Riih Daso
*SK Rituh
*SK Samarahan Estate
*SK Sangai
*SK Sebanban
*SK Semada
*SK Semukoi
*SK Sejijag
*SK Serian
*SK Sumpas
*SK Sungai Kenyah
*SK Sungai Rimu
*SK Sungai Sameran
*SK Sungan
*SK Tanah Merah
*SK Tanah Puteh
*SK Tarat
*SK Tebakang
*SK Tebedu
*SK Tema
*SK Temong
*SK Tepoi
*SK Tesu
*SK Tian Murud
*SK Triang
*SK All Saints Plaman Nyabet
*SK ST Alban Ampungan
*SK ST Ambrose Panchor
*SK ST Anthony Kawan
*SK ST Barnabas Baru
*SK ST Dominic Pichin
*SK ST Henry Slabi
*SK ST John Mantung
*SK ST John Taee
*SK ST Jude Bunan
*SK ST Matthew Lanchang
*SK ST Michael Mongkos
*SK ST Norbert Paon Gahat
*SK ST Patrick Tangga
*SK ST Philip Bugu
*SK ST Raymond Mujat
*SK ST Teresa Serian
*SJK Chung Hua Serian
*SJK Chung Hua Bt. 29
*SJK Chung Hua Bt. 35
*SJK Chung Hua Bt. 32
*SJK Sungai Menyan
*SJK Pangkalan Bedup
*Sekolah Ayer Manis

===Secondary school===
*SMK Tebakang
*SMK Tarat
*SMK Taee
*SMK Serian
*SMK Tebedu
*SMK Balai Ringin

==Transport==
===Local Bus===
==== Local Bus or Bus Express remain unclear ====
== Administration ==

=== Members of Parliament ===
==Other Information==
Serian town is one of the busiest towns, especially during festive seasons. Stores and shops are packed by mainly Bidayuh people returning home from abroad or major towns on Gawai and Christmas holidays.

==References==
==External links==

* Official web page of Serian District Council</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3479787" start="0" end="6" title="Serian Division" label="Serian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2127324" start="120" end="138" title="Samarahan Division" label="Samarahan Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q170462" start="140" end="147" title="Sarawak" label="Sarawak"/>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="149" end="157" title="Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q220445" start="184" end="191" title="Kuching" label="Kuching"/>
<link wikidata="Q134185" start="281" end="287" title="durian" label="durian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4354" start="672" end="682" title="hinterland" label="hinterland"/>
<link wikidata="Q476397" start="989" end="996" title="Bidayuh" label="Bidayuh"/>
<link wikidata="Q973254" start="1031" end="1035" title="Iban people" label="Iban"/>
<link wikidata="Q42740" start="1037" end="1044" title="Han Chinese" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q142702" start="1050" end="1055" title="Malay people" label="Malay"/>
<link wikidata="Q7447739" start="1791" end="1797" title="Tebedu" label="Tebedu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088777" start="1882" end="1907" title="Indonesia-Malaysia border" label="Indonesia-Malaysia border"/>
<link wikidata="Q218719" start="1944" end="1959" title="border crossing" label="border crossing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7692014" start="1994" end="2002" title="Tebakang" label="Tebakang"/>
<link wikidata="Q209531" start="2154" end="2181" title="tropical rainforest climate" label="tropical rainforest climate"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="990540" wikidata="Q3490636" url="?curid=990540" title="Nukulau">
<text>Nukulau Island is a small islet belonging to Fiji. It is close to Suva, Fiji&#x27;s capital, which lies about ten kilometers to the west. It is an island rich in history, which has played a pivotal role in Fiji&#x27;s demographic and political development over the past 160 years.

== History ==

Nukulau played a role in the ceding of Fiji to the British Crown in 1874. In 1846, John Brown Williams, the American consul, had purchased the island for a mere thirty dollars. He subsequently lived there, in the wooden two-story house he built, until 1849. On 4 July of that year, during American Independence Day celebrations, a store belonging to Williams was destroyed in a fire which started from a cannon burst, and his belongings that he had salvaged from the fire were subsequently looted by Fiji natives. A second fire in 1855 destroyed Williams&#x27; house. Williams held Cakobau, the Vunivalu (Paramount Chief) of Bau and self-proclaimed Tui Viti (King of Fiji) responsible for the looting, and, supported by the United States Navy in the First Fiji Expedition, demanded US$43,531 in compensation, to cover Williams&#x27; losses, valued at US$5000, and claims by other settlers. This was followed up by a second American expedition in 1858, in which hostages were seized. Cakobau&#x27;s inability to pay the debt, coupled with fear of a U.S. invasion and annexation, led to a series of negotiations with the United Kingdom. After a failed attempt to establish a stable constitutional monarchy under the effective tutelage of the Australian Polynesia Company, the negotiations culminated in a decision to cede the islands to the United Kingdom in 1874, ushering in almost a century of British rule.

Historians now believe that the U.S. compensation claim was greatly exaggerated and largely fabricated (see Robson, A.E, &quot;Prelude to Empire&quot;, 2004, p. 84 (citing Calvert 1856 and Freemantle 1856)).

The colourful history of Nukulau Island did not end with the advent of British rule. From 1879 to 1916, the island served as a quarantine centre for thousands of Indian indentured labourers brought in by the British colonial rulers. After health checks, they were subsequently employed on Fiji&#x27;s sugar plantations, or else repatriated to the Indian subcontinent.

== Nukulau prison ==
In 2000, a prison was opened on Nukulau, to house George Speight and other perpetrators of the 2000 coup that deposed Prime Minister Mahendra Chaudhry&#x27;s government. On 18 December 2006, Fiji&#x27;s military ruler, Commodore Frank Bainimarama, announced that the prison would be closed and its inmates transferred to other prisons. The land would be returned to a public park, as it was before 2000. The prison was closed on 20 December and its occupants moved to jails on the Viti Levu mainland. 

On December 26, the first people were able to visit the island. Visitors are charged a fee of $2 per person to help with the upkeep of the island. Barbecues are available and camping is possible - a permit must first be obtained.

== Transport to Nukulau Island ==
Boat fares are usually $15/return for adults and half price for children.

== Facilities on the Island ==
There is a shed on the island but visitors can also bring their tents to camp out. For the shed, they need to take their own sleeping items. Bathroom and toilet facilities are available on the island but visitors are advised to bring their own drinking water, whether they are on the island for a day trip or overnight stay. There are about nine BBQ stands and the hotplate is always with the island caretaker.
Lovo facilities are also available but you will need to provide the hands and some firewood.

== References ==
== External links ==

*&quot;The island which played a role when Fiji was ceded to Britain&quot;, Geraldine Panapasa, &quot;Fiji Times&quot;, March 30, 2008: a fairly lengthy article about the island&#x27;s past, present and future
* Fiji Lands Department Nukulau Island Visitors Permit</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3490636" start="0" end="14" title="Nukulau" label="Nukulau Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q712" start="45" end="49" title="Fiji" label="Fiji"/>
<link wikidata="Q38807" start="66" end="70" title="Suva" label="Suva"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044364" start="218" end="229" title="Demographics of Fiji" label="demographic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154000" start="234" end="243" title="Politics of Fiji" label="political"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="348" end="355" title="United Kingdom" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="380" end="399" title="John Brown Williams" label="John Brown Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="405" end="413" title="United States" label="American"/>
<link wikidata="Q207978" start="414" end="420" title="consul (representative)" label="consul"/>
<link wikidata="Q681408" start="879" end="886" title="Seru Epenisa Cakobau" label="Cakobau"/>
<link wikidata="Q962116" start="892" end="925" title="Vunivalu of Bau" label="Vunivalu (Paramount Chief) of Bau"/>
<link wikidata="Q10816852" start="946" end="954" title="Monarchy of Fiji" label="Tui Viti"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="1021" end="1039" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5453007" start="1047" end="1068" title="First Fiji Expedition" label="First Fiji Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q16984458" start="1211" end="1239" title="Second Fiji Expedition" label="a second American expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q41614" start="1477" end="1500" title="constitutional monarchy" label="constitutional monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="1537" end="1546" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1548" end="1565" title="Polynesia Company" label="Polynesia Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="1692" end="1704" title="British Empire" label="British rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009633" start="2078" end="2084" title="Indians in Fiji" label="Indian"/>
<link wikidata="Q60140" start="2263" end="2282" title="Indian subcontinent" label="Indian subcontinent"/>
<link wikidata="Q40357" start="2317" end="2323" title="prison" label="prison"/>
<link wikidata="Q3101930" start="2356" end="2370" title="George Speight" label="George Speight"/>
<link wikidata="Q4597438" start="2401" end="2410" title="2000 Fijian coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="2000 coup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1469153" start="2424" end="2438" title="Prime Minister of Fiji" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q558880" start="2439" end="2463" title="Mahendra Chaudhry" label="Mahendra Chaudhry&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q506249" start="2525" end="2534" title="Commodore (rank)" label="Commodore"/>
<link wikidata="Q57830" start="2535" end="2552" title="Frank Bainimarama" label="Frank Bainimarama"/>
<link wikidata="Q208198" start="2787" end="2796" title="Viti Levu" label="Viti Levu"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="990541" wikidata="Q699619" url="?curid=990541" title="Vladislav Vančura">
<text>Vladislav Vančura (; 23 June 1891 – 1 June 1942) was a Czech writer. He was also active as a film director, playwright and screenwriter. A member of the Czech resistance during WWII, he was captured and murdered by the Nazis.

==Early years==
Vančura was born on 23 June 1891 in Háj ve Slezsku in Austrian Silesia (today the Czech Republic). He was a descendant of an old noble Vančura of Řehnice family. His father Václav Vojtěch Vančura, born 1856 in Čáslav, was a Protestant and worked as an administrator of sugar refinery. His mother, Marie Svobodová was Catholic, born 1863 in Kluky. In 1896, the family moved to Davle, where they lived in a large country house. His broadminded father became a director of a brick factory. In Davle, young Vladislav was educated by a tutor between 1898 and 1904. In 1905, he and his older sisters moved to Prague to study there; Vladislav entered the fifth class of Primary School in Josefská Street.

==First prose-works and teenage years==
In 1907 Vladislav entered the Royal Gymnasium in Prague Malá Strana, but problems with school routine and pedantry of professors made him leave the next year. Between 1909 and 1910, he attended Royal Gymnasium in a small town of Benešov, about 30 miles south-east of Prague. It was an old school founded in 1704 and formerly led by the Piarist Order, with severe discipline and rigid professors. Vančura hated this school immensely; on 14 May 1909 he published his first short story &quot;V aleji&quot; (&quot;In Alley&quot;) in the literary supplement of &quot;Horkého týdeník&quot; (&quot;Horký&#x27;s weekly magazine&quot;).

The studies in Benešov ended in 1910 by a &quot;&quot; because of his membership in a secret student club. His parents sent him to Vysoké Mýto to be an apprentice to a bookseller Čermák. He felt depressed and dreamed of becoming a painter. In 1911, he studied the technology of photography in Prague and also began courses at Arts and Crafts School; he was unsuccessful in his attempt to enter the Royal Academy of Arts and start a career as a painter. He considered suicide because his parents wanted him to be a marine officer or soldier. Due to the illness of his mother, Vladislav returned to Davle. In 1912 he studied privately at home and completed the exams of 4th and 5th class of the gymnasium. The next year he entered Royal Gymnasium on Křemencová Street in Prague and finished the 6th class. Between 1914 and 1915 he was again a student at Prague Malá Strana Royal Gymnasium where he took the final exam on 6 June 1915.

==University studies, journalism==
In October 1915, Vladislav entered the Faculty of Law of Charles University in Prague, but this bored him. In the winter of 1916, he studied medicine at the same university; his family moved from Davle to a country manor Humburky, not far from Prague and Vladislav met 19-year-old Ludmila &#x27;Lída&#x27; Tuhá, a student of medicine. In 1917, the painter group &quot;Tvrdošíjní&quot; (&quot;Stubborns&quot;) was founded by Josef Čapek, Jan Zrzavý, Václav Špála, Vlastimil Hofman, Bedřich Feuerstein, Zdeněk Rykr and other close friends of Vladislav. He wrote about them and Josef Čapek became the congenial illustrator of his later book &quot;Rozmarné léto&quot; in 1926. Between 1 October and 31 December 1918 Vladislav practiced medicine at a hospital in Německý Brod. A few days later, on 3 October, he published his small prose &quot;Ráj&quot; (&quot;Paradise&quot;) in S. K. Neumann&#x27;s magazine &quot;Červen&quot; (&quot;June&quot;) and worked on a fairy-tale book &quot;Kolébka&quot; (&quot;Cradle&quot;) and on a play &quot;Iason&quot;. In 1919 Vladislav returned to Prague to continue his university studies; from 1919–1920 he published many art reviews in daily newspaper &quot;České slovo&quot; (&quot;The Czech Word&quot;).

==1920s and great novels==

On 2 June 1921 Vladislav and Lída graduated as doctors of medicine and married on 16 August that year. In autumn, they moved to Zbraslav, where they opened a surgical practice. In 1923, Vladislav published a book of short stories &quot;Amazonský proud&quot; (&quot;Amazon Stream&quot;). More important was his second short stories book, published in 1924, &quot;Dlouhý, Široký a Bystrozraký&quot; (&quot;Long, Thick and Sharpsighted&quot;), containing excellent texts like &quot;Cesta do světa&quot; (Journey to the World) or &quot;F. C. Ball&quot;. The third book, &quot;Pekař Jan Marhoul&quot; (&quot;Baker Jan Marhoul&quot;), published in 1924, introduced him as a great author to the public. It is Vančura&#x27;s first novel and maybe also his best - story of tragical life of a wealthy baker who is continuously declining into destitution and death despite his gentleness and goodness. The story is written with extraordinary language and a brilliant style. In 1925, Vančura published the novel &quot;Pole orná a válečná&quot; (&quot;Fields of Plough, Fields of War&quot;) and the following year the novel &quot;Rozmarné léto&quot; (&quot;Summer of Caprice&quot;), became a bestseller. It is a humorous story of three men – a colonel, a priest and a bath-keeper – during rainy summer holidays. In 1967, the book was successfully filmed as &quot;Capricious Summer&quot; by the Czech director Jiří Menzel who also played the role of Arnoštek in this movie. In 1928 Vančura wrote his fourth novel, &quot;Poslední soud&quot; (&quot;Last Judgement&quot;), published in 1929 and built his new white functionalistic villa in Zbraslav designed by architect Jaromír Krejcar, the husband of Franz Kafka&#x27;s friend, journalist and translator Milena Jesenská.

== 1930s and great novels ==
Vančura&#x27;s fifth novel &quot;Hrdelní pře aneb Přísloví&quot; (&quot;Criminal Dispute or The Proverbs&quot;) published in 1930 in Aventinum Publishing House, Prague, was not very popular in its time; it is the most complicated of Vančura&#x27;s novels, the genre of which lies between a detective novel and a tract on noetic theory. From the language point of view this book is a serious problem for translators because of hundreds of old proverbs used in text; there is only one translation today - Polish. In 1931, the novel &quot;Markéta Lazarová&quot; was published and became a bestseller. The novel was inspired by a true Middle Ages story of the knights of the Vančura family who were in a private war with other noblemen and with the King&#x27;s town Mladá Boleslav. Vančura dedicated this book to his cousin and friend Jiří Mahen. In 1967, the book was successfully filmed by director František Vláčil. In the same year (1931) Vančura also published a fairy-tale book &quot;Kubula a Kuba Kubikula&quot; (Kubula and Kuba Kubikula) that remained popular for decades. Vančura&#x27;s activity continued through the next year as he published the novel &quot;Útěk do Budína&quot; (&quot;Escape to Budapest&quot;), a contemporary story of love, marriage and life of a Prague middle-class woman and a Slovak nobleman. In 1934, two other books were published: &quot;Luk královny Dorotky&quot; (&quot;Bow of Little Queen Dorothy&quot;), a collection of short stories and &quot;Konec starých časů&quot; (&quot;End of the Old Times&quot;) a bestseller, satirical and humorous novel about the life at a Bohemian country-chateau in the first years of the republic (this book was also successfully filmed by Jiří Menzel in 1989). In 1934 also, Vančura directed the film &quot;Marika Nevěrnice&quot;, from a story by Ivan Olbracht. With the &#x27;End of the Old Times&#x27;, the time of Vančura&#x27;s best books ended too. His next two books, a play &quot;Jezero Ukerewe&quot; (&quot;Ukerewe Lake&quot;) from 1935 and a socialism-influenced book &quot;Tři řeky&quot; (&quot;Three Rivers&quot;), 1936 were not successful.

== 1940s, political crisis and war ==
In March 1938, Adolf Hitler annexed Austria. Vančura&#x27;s friend, playwright Otokar Fischer died of a heart-attack when he learned about it; Vančura wrote an obituary about him to &quot;Literární listy&quot; magazine. In 1938, &quot;Rodina Horvátova&quot; (&quot;Horvát Family&quot;), a novel about life of three generations of a gentry family was published which did not attract any reader interest, due to the political crisis. In December 1938, Vančura took part in the burial of his friend Karel Čapek, the famous writer.

Vančura entered the strong anti-Hitler cultural movement and started to write the book &quot;Obrazy z dějin národa českého&quot; (Pictures of the History of the Bohemian Nation); its first parts were published and then became a bestseller and symbol of resistance. On 15 March 1939 the rest of Czechoslovakia was occupied by Hitler and a week later, on 22 May, Jiří Mahen committed suicide in a protest against Nazism.

Vančura was a member of the Communist Party of Czechoslovakia since its founding. He was expelled from the party in 1929 for signing the Manifesto of the Seven, nonetheless he continued to support the Communist Party. During the German occupation of Czechoslovakia, Vančura joined a secret communist resistance group in Autumn 1939. On 12 May 1942, at 5:00 a.m., the Gestapo assaulted his house in Zbraslav, arrested him and tortured him in the Prague Gestapo headquarters. On 27 May 1942 a commando of the Czechoslovak Foreign Army based in Britain assassinated Reinhard Heydrich, Hitler&#x27;s governor in Prague. As a result, there was a wave of reprisals: in the following weeks more than 2000 members of the Czech elite were executed. One of them was Vančura, executed by SS members in the military area Prague-Kobylisy on 1 June 1942 at 6:45 p.m. His body together with many others was disposed of secretly at Strašnice Crematorium.

==Selected works==
===Novels===
*&quot;Pekař Jan Marhoul&quot; (1924)
*&quot;Pole orná a válečná&quot; (1925), English &quot;Ploughshares into Swords&quot;. Prague: Karolinum Press (2021). 
*&quot;Rozmarné léto&quot; (1926), English &quot;Summer of Caprice&quot;. Prague: Karolinum Press (2006). . 2nd edition: Prague: Karolinum Press (2016). .
*&quot;Markéta Lazarová&quot; (1931) 
*&quot;Obrazy z dějin národa českého&quot; (1939–1940)
*&quot;Kubula a Kuba Kubikula&quot; 

===Plays===
*&quot;Alchymista&quot; (1932) 
*&quot;Jezero Ukereve&quot; (1935)
*&quot;Josefína&quot; (1941)

==Filmography==
===Director===
*&quot;On the Sunny Side&quot; (1933)
*&quot;Bursa práce&quot; (1933)
*&quot;Marijka nevěrnice&quot; (1934)
*&quot;Naši furianti&quot; (1937)
*&quot;Láska a lidé&quot; (1937)

==References==
==External links==

* Complete list of Vančura translations (English, French, Spanish, German and other translations)
* A four minutes recording of part of the &quot;Peevish Summer&quot; (in Czech)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q699619" start="0" end="17" title="Vladislav Vančura" label="Vladislav Vančura"/>
<link wikidata="Q170217" start="55" end="60" title="Czechs" label="Czech"/>
<link wikidata="Q2526255" start="93" end="106" title="film director" label="film director"/>
<link wikidata="Q214917" start="108" end="118" title="playwright" label="playwright"/>
<link wikidata="Q28389" start="123" end="135" title="screenwriter" label="screenwriter"/>
<link wikidata="Q370701" start="153" end="169" title="Czech resistance" label="Czech resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="177" end="181" title="World War II" label="WWII"/>
<link wikidata="Q2054252" start="279" end="293" title="Háj ve Slezsku" label="Háj ve Slezsku"/>
<link wikidata="Q298874" start="297" end="313" title="Austrian Silesia" label="Austrian Silesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q213" start="325" end="339" title="Czech Republic" label="Czech Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q341777" start="453" end="459" title="Čáslav" label="Čáslav"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="467" end="477" title="Protestantism" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2194408" start="583" end="588" title="Kluky (Kutná Hora District)" label="Kluky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1111391" start="619" end="624" title="Davle" label="Davle"/>
<link wikidata="Q55043" start="1018" end="1027" title="gymnasium (school)" label="Gymnasium"/>
<link wikidata="Q753289" start="1038" end="1049" title="Malá Strana" label="Malá Strana"/>
<link wikidata="Q470394" start="1211" end="1218" title="Benešov" label="Benešov"/>
<link wikidata="Q273894" start="1318" end="1331" title="Piarist Order" label="Piarist Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q999916" start="1742" end="1753" title="Vysoké Mýto" label="Vysoké Mýto"/>
<link wikidata="Q31519" start="2636" end="2654" title="Charles University" label="Charles University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637020" start="2800" end="2808" title="Humburky" label="Humburky"/>
<link wikidata="Q454568" start="3003" end="3014" title="Josef Čapek" label="Josef Čapek"/>
<link wikidata="Q303530" start="3016" end="3026" title="Jan Zrzavý" label="Jan Zrzavý"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477590" start="3028" end="3040" title="Václav Špála" label="Václav Špála"/>
<link wikidata="Q2587542" start="3042" end="3058" title="Vlastimil Hofman" label="Vlastimil Hofman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2893619" start="3060" end="3078" title="Bedřich Feuerstein" label="Bedřich Feuerstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q10857684" start="3080" end="3091" title="Zdeněk Rykr" label="Zdeněk Rykr"/>
<link wikidata="Q954596" start="3337" end="3349" title="Havlíčkův Brod" label="Německý Brod"/>
<link wikidata="Q338826" start="3454" end="3467" title="Stanislav Kostka Neumann" label="S. K. Neumann"/>
<link wikidata="Q849697" start="3895" end="3901" title="Doctorate" label="doctor"/>
<link wikidata="Q11190" start="3906" end="3914" title="medicine" label="medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q84572977" start="3976" end="3984" title="Zbraslav" label="Zbraslav"/>
<link wikidata="Q3491788" start="5198" end="5215" title="Capricious Summer" label="Capricious Summer"/>
<link wikidata="Q352030" start="5244" end="5255" title="Jiří Menzel" label="Jiří Menzel"/>
<link wikidata="Q47942" start="5446" end="5461" title="functionalism (architecture)" label="functionalistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3491373" start="5502" end="5517" title="Jaromír Krejcar" label="Jaromír Krejcar"/>
<link wikidata="Q905" start="5534" end="5545" title="Franz Kafka" label="Franz Kafka"/>
<link wikidata="Q234893" start="5587" end="5602" title="Milena Jesenská" label="Milena Jesenská"/>
<link wikidata="Q842782" start="5924" end="5933" title="detective" label="detective"/>
<link wikidata="Q8261" start="5934" end="5939" title="novel" label="novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3250561" start="5946" end="5951" title="Tract (literature)" label="tract"/>
<link wikidata="Q835041" start="5955" end="5968" title="Nous" label="noetic theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q35102" start="6076" end="6083" title="proverb" label="proverb"/>
<link wikidata="Q809" start="6137" end="6143" title="Polish language" label="Polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q6770866" start="6164" end="6192" title="Marketa Lazarová (book)" label="&amp;quot;Markéta Lazarová&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="6265" end="6276" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q191805" start="6396" end="6410" title="Mladá Boleslav" label="Mladá Boleslav"/>
<link wikidata="Q966067" start="6465" end="6475" title="Jiří Mahen" label="Jiří Mahen"/>
<link wikidata="Q614960" start="6512" end="6518" title="Marketa Lazarová" label="filmed"/>
<link wikidata="Q706451" start="6531" end="6547" title="František Vláčil" label="František Vláčil"/>
<link wikidata="Q171336" start="6939" end="6945" title="Slovaks" label="Slovak"/>
<link wikidata="Q6429067" start="7113" end="7131" title="Konec starých časů (novel)" label="Konec starých časů"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7407" end="7423" title="Marika Nevěrnice" label="Marika Nevěrnice"/>
<link wikidata="Q560390" start="7447" end="7460" title="Ivan Olbracht" label="Ivan Olbracht"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="7806" end="7818" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="7827" end="7834" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q993835" start="7870" end="7884" title="Otokar Fischer" label="Otokar Fischer"/>
<link wikidata="Q844586" start="8123" end="8129" title="gentry" label="gentry"/>
<link wikidata="Q155855" start="8287" end="8298" title="Karel Čapek" label="Karel Čapek"/>
<link wikidata="Q966067" start="8681" end="8691" title="Jiří Mahen" label="Jiří Mahen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="8731" end="8737" title="Nazism" label="Nazism"/>
<link wikidata="Q727724" start="8768" end="8801" title="Communist Party of Czechoslovakia" label="Communist Party of Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1890364" start="8877" end="8899" title="Manifesto of the Seven" label="Manifesto of the Seven"/>
<link wikidata="Q275618" start="8969" end="9004" title="German occupation of Czechoslovakia" label="German occupation of Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q43250" start="9107" end="9114" title="Gestapo" label="Gestapo"/>
<link wikidata="Q43250" start="9192" end="9199" title="Gestapo" label="Gestapo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780133" start="9231" end="9239" title="commando (military)" label="commando"/>
<link wikidata="Q60039" start="9303" end="9320" title="Reinhard Heydrich" label="Reinhard Heydrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q44687" start="9517" end="9519" title="Schutzstaffel" label="SS"/>
<link wikidata="Q3490678" start="9535" end="9564" title="Kobylisy Shooting Range" label="military area Prague-Kobylisy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7622612" start="9656" end="9677" title="Strašnice Crematorium" label="Strašnice Crematorium"/>
<link wikidata="Q6770866" start="10032" end="10048" title="Marketa Lazarová (novel)" label="Markéta Lazarová"/>
<link wikidata="Q86753815" start="10303" end="10320" title="On the Sunny Side (1933 film)" label="On the Sunny Side"/>
<link wikidata="Q9056" start="10678" end="10683" title="Czech language" label="Czech"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="990552" wikidata="Q2438057" url="?curid=990552" title="Jeanne (given name)">
<text>Jeanne is a French female name, equivalent to the English &quot;Joan&quot;, &quot;Jane&quot;, &quot;Jean&quot; and several historical figures in English named &quot;Joanna&quot;. (Feminine forms of &quot;John&quot;). The names derive from the Old French name &quot;Jehanne&quot;, which is derived from the Latin name Johannes, itself from the Koine Greek name Ιωαννης &quot;Ioannes&quot;, ultimately from the Biblical Hebrew name Yochanan, a short form of the name &quot;Yehochanan&quot;, meaning &quot;Yahweh is Gracious&quot;. 

==Historical people whose name includes &quot;Jeanne&quot;==
* Marie Antoinette Josephe Jeanne
* Jeanne d&#x27;Arc (Joan of Arc in English)
* Queen Jeanne I of Navarre
* Queen Jeanne II of Navarre
* Queen Jeanne III of Navarre, also called Jeanne d&#x27;Albret
* Jeanne de Flandre (Joan of Flanders, Countess of Montfort in English)
* Jeanne de Dreux, also called Jeanne de Penthièvre (Joanna of Dreux in English)
* Jeanne de Bar, Countess of Marle and Soissons
* Jeanne of Angoulême
* Queen Jeanne II of Naples (Joanna II of Naples)
* Jeanne de Laval
* Jeanne Du Barry, mistress of King Louis XV of France
* Several princesses of France, Navarre, and Valois

==People with the given name Jeanne==
* Jeanne Basone (born 1963), American professional wrestler, actress, model, and stuntwoman 
* Jeanne de Bellem (1732/34–fl. 1790), Belgian writer and revolutionary
* Jeanne Bérangère (1864–1938), French actress
* Jeanne Black (1937–2014), American country music singer
* Jeanne Milliken Bonds (born 1962), American politician
* Jeanne Calment (1875–1997), French woman with the longest confirmed lifespan in history
* Jeanne C. Smith Carr (1825–1903), American educator, author
* Jeanne Cooper (1928–2013), American actress
* Jeanne Cordova (1948–2016), American trailblazer
* Jeanne Crain (1925–2003), American actress
* Jeanne Dumée (1660–1706), French astronomer
* Jeanne Dunning (born 1960), American photographer
* Jeanne de Flandreysy (1874–1959), French author and literary critic.
* Jeanne Halbwachs (1890-1980), French pacifist, feminist and socialist
* Jeanne Hoff (1938-2023), American psychiatrist
* Jeanne Jugan (1792–1879), French nun and saint 
* Marie Sophie Jeanne Laisné (born 1870; year of death unknown), French operatic soprano
* Jeanne Landry (1922–2011), Canadian composer, pianist and teacher
* Jeanne Le Ber, French Canadian recluse
* Jeanne Leblanc (born 1978), Canadian film director and screenwriter
* Jeanne Macherez (1852–1930), French heroine during the World War I; Mayor of Soissons
* Jeanne de Montagnac (1882–1966), French singer and salonnière
* Jeanne Moreau (1928–2017), French actress, screenwriter and director
* Jeanne Pallier (1863 or 1864 – 1939), French aviator, founder of &quot;le Club Féminine Automobile&quot; to provide female drivers for the ambulances near the Front in the First World War.
* Jeanne Audrey Powers, leader within The United Methodist Church, an advocate for women and LGBTQ+ people in the church, and one of the first women ordained in the denomination
* Jeanne Quinault (1699–1783), French actress, salonist and playwright
* Jeanne de La Saulcée (died 1559), French publisher, printer and bookseller
* Jeanne Sauvé (1922–1993), Canadian politician
* Jeanne Shaheen (born 1947), American politician
* Jeanne de Tramcourt (1875–1952), French mistress of Prince Wilhelm of Sweden
* Jeanne Tripplehorn (born 1963), American actress
* Jeanne Van Calck (1897–1906), Belgian child who was murdered
* Laura Jeanne Reese Witherspoon (born 1976), American actress
* Jeanne Murray Vanderbilt (1919–2013), American socialite
* Jeanne You (born 1978), South Korean pianist

==Fictional people named Jeanne==
*Jeanne, one of the two main characters in Bernardo Bertolucci&#x27;s film &quot;Last Tango in Paris&quot;, played by Maria Schneider
* Dr. Jeanne Benoit, subject of an undercover mission (and potential romantic interest) of Special Agent Tony DiNozzo in the TV show &quot;NCIS&quot;, played by Scottie Thompson
*Jeanne, one of the primary characters of the video game series &quot;Bayonetta&quot;.
*Jeanne, one of the main characters alter egos as Kaitou Jeanne who is the reincarnation of Joan de Arc in the TV show &quot;Kaitou Jeanne&quot;.
*Jeanne, the main character in &quot;Jeanne d&#x27;Arc&quot; the video game.
*Jeanne, one of the primary characters in the TV show &quot;The Case Study of Vanitas&quot;.

==Other==
* Jeanne (crater), a crater on Venus.
* There have been three hurricanes called Hurricane Jeanne: in 1980, 1998 and 2004
==See also==
* 
* Jehanne (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2438057" start="0" end="6" title="Jeanne (given name)" label="Jeanne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1484457" start="64" end="68" title="Joan (given name)" label="Joan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1682564" start="82" end="86" title="Jane (given name)" label="Jane"/>
<link wikidata="Q4160311" start="100" end="104" title="Jean (female given name)" label="Jean"/>
<link wikidata="Q4248351" start="165" end="171" title="Joanna" label="Joanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q4925477" start="204" end="208" title="John (name)" label="John"/>
<link wikidata="Q35222" start="243" end="253" title="Old French language" label="Old French"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="306" end="311" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2117521" start="317" end="325" title="Johannes" label="Johannes"/>
<link wikidata="Q107358" start="343" end="354" title="Koine Greek" label="Koine Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q309847" start="374" end="381" title="Ioannes" label="Ioannes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1982248" start="409" end="424" title="Biblical Hebrew" label="Biblical Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q17053888" start="430" end="438" title="Yochanan" label="Yochanan"/>
<link wikidata="Q766677" start="503" end="509" title="Yahweh" label="Yahweh"/>
<link wikidata="Q47365" start="594" end="610" title="Marie Antoinette" label="Marie Antoinette"/>
<link wikidata="Q7226" start="647" end="658" title="Joan of Arc" label="Joan of Arc"/>
<link wikidata="Q229189" start="679" end="698" title="Jeanne I of Navarre" label="Jeanne I of Navarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q230031" start="707" end="727" title="Jeanne II of Navarre" label="Jeanne II of Navarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q229286" start="736" end="757" title="Jeanne III of Navarre" label="Jeanne III of Navarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q288219" start="813" end="851" title="Joan of Flanders, Countess of Montfort" label="Joan of Flanders, Countess of Montfort"/>
<link wikidata="Q257621" start="917" end="932" title="Joanna of Dreux" label="Joanna of Dreux"/>
<link wikidata="Q2690153" start="947" end="992" title="Jeanne de Bar, Countess of Marle and Soissons" label="Jeanne de Bar, Countess of Marle and Soissons"/>
<link wikidata="Q3176206" start="995" end="1014" title="Jeanne of Angoulême" label="Jeanne of Angoulême"/>
<link wikidata="Q236933" start="1044" end="1063" title="Joanna II of Naples" label="Joanna II of Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q459771" start="1067" end="1082" title="Jeanne de Laval" label="Jeanne de Laval"/>
<link wikidata="Q230677" start="1085" end="1100" title="Jeanne Du Barry" label="Jeanne Du Barry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7738" start="1119" end="1137" title="Louis XV of France" label="Louis XV of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q4018" start="1170" end="1177" title="Navarre" label="Navarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q182135" start="1183" end="1189" title="House of Valois" label="Valois"/>
<link wikidata="Q6172019" start="1231" end="1244" title="Jeanne Basone" label="Jeanne Basone"/>
<link wikidata="Q4938019" start="1324" end="1340" title="Jeanne de Bellem" label="Jeanne de Bellem"/>
<link wikidata="Q26997126" start="1396" end="1412" title="Jeanne Bérangère" label="Jeanne Bérangère"/>
<link wikidata="Q1263089" start="1443" end="1455" title="Jeanne Black" label="Jeanne Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q121422352" start="1501" end="1522" title="Jeanne Milliken Bonds" label="Jeanne Milliken Bonds"/>
<link wikidata="Q182260" start="1558" end="1572" title="Jeanne Calment" label="Jeanne Calment"/>
<link wikidata="Q96189268" start="1648" end="1668" title="Jeanne C. Smith Carr" label="Jeanne C. Smith Carr"/>
<link wikidata="Q446937" start="1710" end="1723" title="Jeanne Cooper" label="Jeanne Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q6172050" start="1756" end="1770" title="Jeanne Cordova" label="Jeanne Cordova"/>
<link wikidata="Q238032" start="1807" end="1819" title="Jeanne Crain" label="Jeanne Crain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2616658" start="1852" end="1864" title="Jeanne Dumée" label="Jeanne Dumée"/>
<link wikidata="Q28924473" start="1898" end="1912" title="Jeanne Dunning" label="Jeanne Dunning"/>
<link wikidata="Q3176217" start="1950" end="1970" title="Jeanne de Flandreysy" label="Jeanne de Flandreysy"/>
<link wikidata="Q63485315" start="2021" end="2037" title="Jeanne Halbwachs" label="Jeanne Halbwachs"/>
<link wikidata="Q123921163" start="2093" end="2104" title="Jeanne Hoff (psychiatrist)" label="Jeanne Hoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q261010" start="2142" end="2154" title="Jeanne Jugan" label="Jeanne Jugan"/>
<link wikidata="Q55406261" start="2192" end="2218" title="Marie Sophie Jeanne Laisné" label="Marie Sophie Jeanne Laisné"/>
<link wikidata="Q1686014" start="2281" end="2294" title="Jeanne Landry" label="Jeanne Landry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3176092" start="2349" end="2362" title="Jeanne Le Ber" label="Jeanne Le Ber"/>
<link wikidata="Q60375050" start="2390" end="2404" title="Jeanne Leblanc" label="Jeanne Leblanc"/>
<link wikidata="Q16219208" start="2460" end="2475" title="Jeanne Macherez" label="Jeanne Macherez"/>
<link wikidata="Q118187016" start="2548" end="2567" title="Jeanne de Montagnac" label="Jeanne de Montagnac"/>
<link wikidata="Q106099" start="2612" end="2625" title="Jeanne Moreau" label="Jeanne Moreau"/>
<link wikidata="Q27943295" start="2683" end="2697" title="Jeanne Pallier" label="Jeanne Pallier"/>
<link wikidata="Q116923754" start="2874" end="2894" title="Jeanne Audrey Powers" label="Jeanne Audrey Powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q329646" start="2910" end="2937" title="United Methodist Church" label="The United Methodist Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q3175927" start="3052" end="3067" title="Jeanne Quinault" label="Jeanne Quinault"/>
<link wikidata="Q19999574" start="3123" end="3143" title="Jeanne de La Saulcée" label="Jeanne de La Saulcée"/>
<link wikidata="Q433191" start="3200" end="3212" title="Jeanne Sauvé" label="Jeanne Sauvé"/>
<link wikidata="Q270316" start="3248" end="3262" title="Jeanne Shaheen" label="Jeanne Shaheen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3378143" start="3298" end="3317" title="Jeanne de Tramcourt" label="Jeanne de Tramcourt"/>
<link wikidata="Q120366" start="3377" end="3395" title="Jeanne Tripplehorn" label="Jeanne Tripplehorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q20961872" start="3428" end="3444" title="Murder of Jeanne Van Calck" label="Jeanne Van Calck"/>
<link wikidata="Q44063" start="3504" end="3521" title="Reese Witherspoon" label="Reese Witherspoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q131343474" start="3554" end="3578" title="Jeanne Murray Vanderbilt" label="Jeanne Murray Vanderbilt"/>
<link wikidata="Q533532" start="3613" end="3623" title="Jeanne You" label="Jeanne You"/>
<link wikidata="Q53009" start="3736" end="3755" title="Bernardo Bertolucci" label="Bernardo Bertolucci"/>
<link wikidata="Q570567" start="3774" end="3793" title="Last Tango in Paris" label="Last Tango in Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q224071" start="3811" end="3826" title="Maria Schneider (actress)" label="Maria Schneider"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3829" end="3846" title="List of NCIS characters#Jeanne Benoit" label="Dr. Jeanne Benoit"/>
<link wikidata="Q772107" start="3918" end="3944" title="Anthony DiNozzo" label="Special Agent Tony DiNozzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4525" start="3966" end="3970" title="NCIS (TV series)" label="NCIS"/>
<link wikidata="Q437912" start="3988" end="4004" title="Scottie Thompson (actress)" label="Scottie Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q20062305" start="4075" end="4084" title="Bayonetta" label="Bayonetta"/>
<link wikidata="Q697671" start="4217" end="4230" title="Kaitou Jeanne" label="Kaitou Jeanne"/>
<link wikidata="Q7226" start="4275" end="4292" title="Jeanne d&amp;#x27;Arc" label="Jeanne d&amp;#x27;Arc"/>
<link wikidata="Q21576845" start="4375" end="4400" title="The Case Study of Vanitas" label="The Case Study of Vanitas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3175955" start="4421" end="4436" title="Jeanne (crater)" label="Jeanne (crater)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7845999" start="4499" end="4515" title="Tropical Storm Jeanne (disambiguation)" label="Hurricane Jeanne"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4520" end="4524" title="1980 Atlantic hurricane season#Hurricane Jeanne" label="1980"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4526" end="4530" title="1998 Atlantic hurricane season#Hurricane Jeanne" label="1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q1100322" start="4535" end="4539" title="Hurricane Jeanne" label="2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q111835967" start="4558" end="4582" title="Jehanne (disambiguation)" label="Jehanne (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="990559" wikidata="Q2181742" url="?curid=990559" title="Simanggang">
<text>Simanggang is a town and the capital of Sri Aman District and Sri Aman Division in Sarawak, east Malaysia. Located on the Lupar River, it is , a three-hour drive, from Kuching, the capital of Sarawak. It is a trade center for the timber, oil palm, rubber, and pepper of its mostly agricultural district.

Simanggang is famous for the &quot;benak&quot;, or tidal bore, of the Batang Lupar River. The tidal bore comes in from the river mouth and fills up the river very rapidly in the course of about 10 minutes. The wave crest at Simanggang is up to high. This is one of approximately 48 rivers and estuaries in the world where this phenomenon happens. What is special about Simanggang&#x27;s benak is that it occurs every day, the only river in the world that does that.

There is a timetable at the river which has the time and dates for when the tidal bore will occur, but the really big ones occur only a couple of times a year. The author Somerset Maugham almost died at Simanggang during one of these tidal bores, an event commemorated the event in his short story The Yellow Streak.

Simanggang is also a gateway for tourists to the Batang Ai National Park, and cultural tours to the Iban longhouses along the rivers.

==Etymology==
The town of Simanggang was known for the same name until 1973. Following the memorandum of understanding (MoU) signed in October 1973 between government of Sarawak and Communist members to end the armed conflict in southern Sarawak, the name of the town was changed to &quot;Sri Aman&quot; while the administrative division was renamed as Sri Aman Division in March 1974. Sri Aman means &quot;town of peace&quot; in the Malay language. In 2019, the town reverted to its old name &quot;Simanggang&quot; according to the wishes of the local residents. However, the administrative division retains its &quot;Sri Aman&quot; name.

==History==
==Geography==
Simanggang has a tropical rainforest climate (Af) with heavy to very heavy rainfall year-round.
==Demography==

According to the 2010 Malaysian census, Sri Aman has a total population of 64,500. Indigenous people form the largest ethnic group in the city which consists of Iban, Malay, other indigenous tribes. This is followed by Chinese, non-Malaysians Indians, and Others.

==Transport==
===Local Bus or Bus Express remain unclear===
==Other utilities==
===Education===
====Secondary school====
*SMK St Luke (M)
*SMK Sri Aman
*SMK Simanggang
*SMK Melugu
*SMK ENGKILILI
*SMK LUBOK ANTU
*SMK LINGGA

====Primary school====
*SK Abang Aing
*SK Melugu
*SK Temudok Kem Pakit
*SJK (C) Chung Hua Undop
*SJK (C) Chung Hua Simanggang
*SJK (C) Chung Hua Pantu
*SJK (C) Chung Hua Lingga
*SJK (C) Chung Hua Bangkong
*SK St Lawrence Sabu
*SK Sri Aman
*SK Selepong
*SK Engkilili

=== Healthcare===

Sri Aman II hospital started operation since September 2022.

==Leisure and conservation areas==
===Fort Alice===

Fort Alice, built in 1864, is the oldest heritage building in Simanggang, constructed following the victory of Rajah Charles Brooke, the second Rajah of Sarawak, over Rentap, the last of the major Iban chieftains, in 1864. The Fort was named after Charles Brooke&#x27;s wife, Margaret Alice Lili de Windt. It served as a defensive structure controlling the Lupar River.

The structure was built on a strategic hilltop position and had a commanding view of the river with cannons bearing down to stop any threats coming from upriver. It played a major role in suppressing piracy, slavery, and head-hunting, while encouraging trade and expanding the authority of the Rajah. Fort Alice was the Simanggang administrative center, housing various government departments and even a prison.

It was here Rajah Charles used to preside as judge settling disputes among the local Ibans during his many visits to Simanggang. It was built entirely of belian (ironwood) timber. Much of the timber used was taken from an earlier fort, Fort James Brooke, which had been built further upriver in Nanga Skrang. However, Fort James was built on lowland and was hard to defend, as was proven in 1853 when one of the Rajah&#x27;s officers, Alan Lee, died in an attack by the Iban chieftain Rentap.

It was decided to dismantle Fort James and to rebuild it in a more strategic and more defensible site in Simanggang District (now Sri Aman Division). Thus Fort Alice was built. Most of the original structure remains substantially intact, but it is in an extremely dilapidated and run down condition and in need of urgent restoration work. Many articles have been written to highlight the sorry state of the grand old lady. Restoration for the fort had been done in April 2015 and been changed into a museum.

==Notes==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2181742" start="0" end="10" title="Simanggang" label="Simanggang"/>
<link wikidata="Q2970543" start="40" end="57" title="Sri Aman District" label="Sri Aman District"/>
<link wikidata="Q2350238" start="62" end="79" title="Sri Aman Division" label="Sri Aman Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q170462" start="83" end="90" title="Sarawak" label="Sarawak"/>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="97" end="105" title="Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q220445" start="168" end="175" title="Kuching" label="Kuching"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370714" start="230" end="236" title="timber" label="timber"/>
<link wikidata="Q7609983" start="238" end="246" title="oil palm" label="oil palm"/>
<link wikidata="Q131877" start="248" end="254" title="rubber" label="rubber"/>
<link wikidata="Q43084" start="260" end="266" title="black pepper" label="pepper"/>
<link wikidata="Q733109" start="356" end="366" title="tidal bore" label="tidal bore"/>
<link wikidata="Q733109" start="399" end="409" title="tidal bore" label="tidal bore"/>
<link wikidata="Q134942" start="943" end="959" title="Somerset Maugham" label="Somerset Maugham"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1070" end="1087" title="The Casuarina Tree#The Yellow Streak" label="The Yellow Streak"/>
<link wikidata="Q4868577" start="1139" end="1162" title="Batang Ai National Park" label="Batang Ai National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q504106" start="1195" end="1204" title="longhouse" label="longhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053964" start="1316" end="1343" title="memorandum of understanding" label="memorandum of understanding"/>
<link wikidata="Q28219698" start="1381" end="1402" title="government of Sarawak" label="government of Sarawak"/>
<link wikidata="Q2350238" start="1578" end="1595" title="Sri Aman Division" label="Sri Aman Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q9237" start="1659" end="1673" title="Malay language" label="Malay language"/>
<link wikidata="Q209531" start="1909" end="1936" title="tropical rainforest climate" label="tropical rainforest climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q973254" start="2165" end="2169" title="Iban people" label="Iban"/>
<link wikidata="Q27866040" start="2894" end="2904" title="Fort Alice" label="Fort Alice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065104" start="3005" end="3025" title="Charles Anthony Johnson Brooke" label="Rajah Charles Brooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q7313533" start="3061" end="3067" title="Rentap" label="Rentap"/>
<link wikidata="Q45393" start="3465" end="3471" title="piracy" label="piracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8463" start="3473" end="3480" title="slavery" label="slavery"/>
<link wikidata="Q926501" start="3840" end="3848" title="ironwood" label="ironwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370714" start="3870" end="3876" title="timber" label="timber"/>
<link wikidata="Q12183361" start="4020" end="4027" title="lowland" label="lowland"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="990562" wikidata="Q6752505" url="?curid=990562" title="Manuel Chabrera">
<text>Manuel Chabrera is a Spanish architect and artist, born in Tarragona in 1952 and raised in Andalucia. 

As Sandra Miller, British art historian, said, “The subject matter of his compositions is the result of the violence of the physical act to which Chabrera commits himself; and although watching him paint may shock his observers, the results are compositions of great beauty.”

Action painting was the name originally coined by Harold Rosemberg to describe the work of artist Willhem de Kooning, and it is, perhaps, de Kooning who is referenced when describing the work of Chabrera. But Chabrera remains firmly figurative, albeit at a Gestalt level. Although there is a correspondence between abstract expressionism or action painting and the personal expressionism of Chabrera, there are also important and substantial differences. Instead of prioritising the act of painting over the final result, Chabrera inverts the process, prioritising once again the physical object over the concept or idea.

When the European Academy for the Arts, based in Leuze (Belgium), named Manuel Chabrera Adiego as a member, it did so in recognition of the singularity of this architect&#x27;s work, where in the concept of a space, sculpture and painting are integrated with the playing with lights and volumes. His work has been displayed around the world for more than 30 years, appearing in cities such as: St. Petersburg, Mexico City, Montreal, Beijing, Shanghai, Guanzhou, Luxembourg, Helsinki, Stockholm, Oslo, Copenhagen, Munich, Düsseldorf, Berlin, Chicago, New York, Indianapolis, Buenos Aires, Geneva, Zurich, Bern, Miami and London. The presence and reach of his work is made evident by the numerous articles that have been written about him, as well as the many recognitions he has received over the years. The books “Inside his paintings: Manuel Chabrera” and “Manuel Chabrera” review the extensive career of this man who not only paints, but also does sculpture and prints. Manuel Chabrera has founded the Chabrera Foundation which is dedicated to promoting art to under privileged children and adolescents through the distribution of recycled computers, as well as promoting young artists through international exhibitions, and finally to foster and promote the work of Chabrera. Currently, the Foundation is experimenting with the distribution of Open Code software with the intention of allowing children and adolescents to express themselves creatively through new technologies as Creative Commons.

==Manuel Chabrera and the Crudismo movement==
This artist is the founder of the &quot;Crudismo&quot; movement (in Spanish).

==&quot;Arte Moderno y artistas del Flamenco&quot; International exhibition==
In 2010 Manuel Chabrera, accompanied by a series of plastic artists and from the world of flamenco, led the show &quot;Modern Art and Flamenco Artists&quot;, an Itinerant exposition which incorporated on each city the work of their local artists.

Manuel Chabrera was accompanied among others by the following artists: Francisco Bella, Polisse, Tilen Zbona, Branislav Nikolić, Predrag Terzić, Milenko Aćimović, Kristina Pantelic, Gordana Nikolic, Aleksandar Dimitrijevic, Clara Von Aich, Angel Orensanz, among others.

This exposition was carried out in the following cities: Havana, New York, Ljubljana, Belgrade, Seville, Granada and Palermo.

The reason for this exhibition was to integrate different cultures and types of arts and encourage participation in all Spanish and local artists from each country visited. The exhibition was carried out within the framework of the Spanish presidency of the European Union during the year 2010.

==References==
==External links==
*Chabrera Foundation
*Interview about &quot;Crudismo&quot;
*&quot;Arte con Licencias Creative Commons&quot; in &quot;El Mundo&quot; newspaper (spanish) </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6752505" start="0" end="15" title="Manuel Chabrera" label="Manuel Chabrera"/>
<link wikidata="Q42973" start="29" end="38" title="architect" label="architect"/>
<link wikidata="Q483501" start="43" end="49" title="artist" label="artist"/>
<link wikidata="Q15088" start="59" end="68" title="Tarragona" label="Tarragona"/>
<link wikidata="Q959768" start="431" end="447" title="Harold Rosenberg" label="Harold Rosemberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q177725" start="696" end="718" title="abstract expressionism" label="abstract expressionism"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2592" end="2600" title=":es:Crudismo (arte)" label="Crudismo"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="990570" wikidata="Q3369227" url="?curid=990570" title="Patrick Berger">
<text>Patrick Berger (born 10 November 1947 in Paris) is a French architect. He was the 2004 recipient of the Grand prix national de l&#x27;architecture.

== Biography ==

Berger trained as an architect at the Beaux-Arts de Paris, graduating in 1972, before opening his practice in 1974.

== Portfolio ==


*1992: Parc André-Citroën, Paris
*1996: Viaduc des Arts, Paris
*1999: UEFA headquarters, Nyon, Switzerland
*2016: &quot;La Canopée&quot; at the Forum des Halles, Paris
*2018: reconstruction of Châtelet–Les Halles station, Paris

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3369227" start="0" end="14" title="Patrick Berger" label="Patrick Berger"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="41" end="46" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q42973" start="60" end="69" title="architect" label="architect"/>
<link wikidata="Q1288757" start="104" end="146" title="Grand prix national de l&amp;#x27;architecture" label="Grand prix national de l&amp;#x27;architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q273593" start="204" end="223" title="Beaux-Arts de Paris" label="Beaux-Arts de Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q2051953" start="308" end="326" title="Parc André-Citroën" label="Parc André-Citroën"/>
<link wikidata="Q749491" start="341" end="356" title="Viaduc des Arts" label="Viaduc des Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q35572" start="371" end="375" title="UEFA" label="UEFA"/>
<link wikidata="Q64027" start="390" end="394" title="Nyon" label="Nyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="396" end="407" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q913434" start="445" end="461" title="Les Halles" label="Forum des Halles"/>
<link wikidata="Q800627" start="494" end="521" title="Châtelet–Les Halles station" label="Châtelet–Les Halles station"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="990571" wikidata="Q5448151" url="?curid=990571" title="Fiji Week, 2004">
<text>[[Fiji Week]] was a week of prayer meetings and multicultural programmes that took place the week of 4–11 October 2004. Organized at a cost of US$410,000 by a multiracial national committee chaired by the Prime Minister, Laisenia Qarase, Fiji Week was intended to foster reconciliation among Fiji&#x27;s diverse ethnic communities, especially native Fijians and Indo-Fijians, whose mutual rivalry for political power has dominated Fijian politics for the last generation, and whose relationship has been especially strained since the overthrow of the Indo-Fijian-led government of Mahendra Chaudhry by ethnic Fijian nationalists in the Fiji coup of 2000. Organizers of Fiji Week hoped that it would help to bring about a sense of closure to those events, but the controversy that it generated made this appear difficult to achieve.

On 15 September 2004, a source close to the government told the Australian Associated Press that George Speight, the chief instigator of the 2000 coup, currently serving life-sentence for treason, had had a change of heart towards the Indo-Fijian community following a religious conversion experience in jail, and that he wished to take part in the Fiji Week activities as a gesture of reconciliation. However, the government refused his request to be allowed to leave his Nukulau Island prison to participate in the observances.

== Aftermath and criticisms of the ceremonies==

=== Mahendra Chaudhry ===
Fiji Week was politically controversial. The Fiji Labour Party of deposed Prime Minister Chaudhry boycotted the observances, claiming that they were a political ploy aimed at defusing the lingering post-coup ethnic tensions without addressing the real problem, that many of those responsible for organizing and funding the coup remain unidentified and at large. There could be no reconciliation without justice being done, various party spokesmen said. At a personal level, however, a spokesman said on 11 October that Chaudhry would consider meeting Speight and forgiving him - provided that he name the persons responsible for instigating and financing the 2000 coup . As of December 2004, Speight has not done so.

=== Adi Koila Nailatikau ===
Another critic of the ceremonies was Senator Adi Koila Nailatikau, the daughter of the late President Ratu Sir Kamisese Mara, who was deposed in the 2000 coup. Explaining her refusal to participate in the Fiji Week reconciliation ceremonies, Adi Koila (who had been held hostage for 56 days by the instigators of the coup) told the Senate on 23 October 2004 that the reconciliation undertaken would be worthless unless investigations into the coup revealed the truth behind its staging. She expressed anger that individuals implicated in the coup now held senior positions in the government and the diplomatic service.

Adi Koila also said that the reconciliation ceremony was inappropriate because the person who received the whale&#x27;s tooth and forgave the people in the ceremony at Albert Park (President Ratu Josefa Iloilo) had not been a victim of the May 2000 coup.

Adi Koila wondered aloud why the government had decided to organize the reconciliation ceremonies only after both of her parents had died. &quot;Why was the concept of reconciliation never done for the late Turaga Bale the Tui Nayau (Ratu Mara) or for that matter the late Marama Bale the Roko Tui Dreketi (Ro Adi Lala Mara)?&quot; she demanded. &quot;Was all this conjured overnight immediately after their demise?&quot; she questioned.

Adi Koila declared that there could be no genuine forgiveness until questions were answered about who was involved in organizing and funding the 2000 coup. &quot;An individual will forgive when he or she is ready. There must be truth telling, as to why they participated and who gave the orders,&quot; Adi Koila said. &quot;Reconciliation cannot eventuate or materialise until the proper legal procedures have been followed, that is without interference from external forces.&quot;

=== Frank Bainimarama ===
On 25 October 2004, Commodore Frank Bainimarama, the Commander of the Armed Forces, added his voice to the criticism of the Fiji Week ceremonies. He said he found it &quot;baffling&quot; that individuals implicated in the 2000 coup had taken part in the ceremonies to apologize and ask forgiveness for their actions, only to turn up in court later and plead innocent. He said that according to Fijian culture, an apology was tantamount to a public admission of guilt, and that the &quot;not guilty&quot; pleas later entered by the same people in court raised justifiable questions about whether their apologies were sincere.

Bainimarama strongly criticized Senator Ratu George Cakobau for saying that citizens unhappy with the government-organized apology and reconciliation ceremonies should leave Fiji. Bainimarama declared that Fiji belonged to all of its citizens, and that no one should feel intimidated by politicians who spit out racist remarks, adding that the Senator would be shocked to find that many of those who refused the apology were ethnic Fijians. He said that democracy and the rule of law were the rule of the day in the 21st century, and that the military would uphold it. His comments drew angry criticism from government politicians who accused him of meddling in politics.

Refusing to be silenced, Bainimarama issued a further statement from Australia on 8 December 2004, condemning the inclusion in the government of persons implicated in the 2000 coup, saying that their presence justified his earlier criticism of the Fiji Week reconciliation ceremonies. &quot;That&#x27;s why we&#x27;ve always said the reconciliation process was a farce,&quot; Bainimarama said. &quot;The 2001 Elections brought back all of George Speight&#x27;s group except him.&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5448151" start="0" end="13" title="Fiji Week, 2004" label="[[Fiji Week]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q7239040" start="28" end="42" title="prayer meeting" label="prayer meeting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1469153" start="205" end="219" title="Prime Minister of Fiji" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q473214" start="221" end="236" title="Laisenia Qarase" label="Laisenia Qarase"/>
<link wikidata="Q794439" start="343" end="357" title="Fijians" label="native Fijians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009633" start="362" end="374" title="Indians in Fiji" label="Indo-Fijians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154000" start="438" end="446" title="Politics of Fiji" label="politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q558880" start="581" end="598" title="Mahendra Chaudhry" label="Mahendra Chaudhry"/>
<link wikidata="Q4597438" start="636" end="653" title="2000 Fijian coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="Fiji coup of 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q83728" start="897" end="924" title="Australian Associated Press" label="Australian Associated Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q3101930" start="930" end="944" title="George Speight" label="George Speight"/>
<link wikidata="Q4597438" start="974" end="983" title="2000 Fijian coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="2000 coup"/>
<link wikidata="Q160128" start="1021" end="1028" title="treason" label="treason"/>
<link wikidata="Q3490636" start="1306" end="1320" title="Nukulau" label="Nukulau Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q612939" start="1484" end="1501" title="Fiji Labour Party" label="Fiji Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3510843" start="2223" end="2230" title="Senate of Fiji" label="Senator"/>
<link wikidata="Q6426284" start="2231" end="2251" title="Koila Nailatikau" label="Adi Koila Nailatikau"/>
<link wikidata="Q76292543" start="2278" end="2287" title="President of Fiji" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q469507" start="2288" end="2310" title="Kamisese Mara" label="Ratu Sir Kamisese Mara"/>
<link wikidata="Q2451616" start="2997" end="3001" title="Ratu" label="Ratu"/>
<link wikidata="Q316317" start="3002" end="3015" title="Josefa Iloilo" label="Josefa Iloilo"/>
<link wikidata="Q57830" start="4040" end="4057" title="Frank Bainimarama" label="Frank Bainimarama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1764004" start="4080" end="4092" title="Republic of Fiji Military Forces" label="Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q4597438" start="4232" end="4241" title="2000 Fijian coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="2000 coup"/>
<link wikidata="Q3510843" start="4668" end="4675" title="Senate of Fiji" label="Senator"/>
<link wikidata="Q2451616" start="4676" end="4680" title="Ratu" label="Ratu"/>
<link wikidata="Q4208918" start="4681" end="4695" title="George Cakobau" label="George Cakobau"/>
<link wikidata="Q794439" start="5061" end="5075" title="Fijians" label="ethnic Fijians"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="5378" end="5387" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3587152" start="5713" end="5727" title="2001 Fijian general election" label="2001 Elections"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="990573" wikidata="Q3429404" url="?curid=990573" title="The Jamaica Regiment">
<text>The Jamaica Regiment is the main formation of land troops in the Jamaica Defence Force. It is a non-mechanised infantry regiment consisting of five battalions, three regular infantry battalions, one territorial infantry battalion, and a Combat Support Battalion. A fifth infantry battalion (5 JR) is starting to be formed. The regiment has two main operational missions:
*The territorial defence of Jamaica.
*Assisting the Jamaica Constabulary Force with local law enforcement.
It also has been known to provide public duties in for the government and the capital on behalf of the JDF.

The regiment has two main camps. 
Traditionally, the two regular battalions (1 JR and 2 JR) rotated annually between them. This approach is evolving towards a geographic deployment in three regions. The battalion at Up Park Camp in Kingston has a commitment to assisting the local police in maintaining law and order, while the battalion at Moneague Training Camp in Moneague, St Ann is mainly committed to anti-drug patrols.

In 2018 the Jamaican government decided to have an enhanced, regional structure for the Jamaica Regiment. Thus, it decided to add a third regular battalion (4 JR) to support the police in Jamaica&#x27;s central region. 
In addition, the regiment is one of the main units that supplies United Nations peacekeeping troops for situations in the Caribbean region.

==History==
The Jamaica Regiment was initially formed in 1954 as a unit on the British Army colonial list. In 1958, the Federation of the West Indies was founded, and the regiment passed from the control of the War Office to the new Federation government, where it, and the other infantry regiments of the various Caribbean islands, were disbanded and reorganised into the West India Regiment. This lasted only two years, before this was disbanded and each of the individual islands regained control over their own armies. Initially, the regiment consisted of the 1st Battalion and the 3rd Battalion (National Reserve); however, the increasing array of tasks that the regiment was called upon to perform led to it being stretched. So, in 1979, 3 companies and part of the HQ of the 1st Battalion were split and used to form the 2nd Battalion; this mirrored the form and functions of the 1st Battalion. In 1999, the 2nd Battalion had the honour of mounting the guard at Buckingham Palace. The 1st Battalion undertook this during a visit to the United Kingdom in July and August 2007.

In 1983, the regiment participated in the United States-led invasion of Grenada. In 2019 the Jamaican government announced that the Jamaica Defence Force (JDF) would be expanded. As a result of this growth the Jamaica Regiment will fulfill two functions. Firstly, it will continue as a &quot;British-style&quot; infantry regiment that is the spiritual home and repository of customs and traditions for a number of battalions that do not necessarily serve together operationally. Secondly, it will act as a brigade-level formation for four infantry battalions of the regiment as well as a combat support battalion. At the end of the planned growth, the Jamaica Regiment will consist of four regular infantry battalions (1st, 2nd, 4th, and 5th), a Combat Support Battalion, and three reserve infantry battalions (3rd, 6th, and 9th).

==Organization==

Currently, the regiment consists of the following regular/reserve units:
*1st Battalion - Light Infantry
*2nd Battalion - Light Infantry
*3rd Battalion (reserve) - Light Infantry
*4th Battalion - Light Infantry Formed in 2018 to provide a battalion in Jamaica&#x27;s central region. It achieved operational capability on 1 June 2019, in part by taking over assets from the Combat Support Battalion) 
*5th Battalion (forming) - Light Infantry
*Combat Support Battalion
**Which now includes The Jamaica Regiment Band (JRB) - Public duties
**Corps of Drums (part of 1st and 3rd Battalions)

==Music==
The regimental march of the Jamaica Regiment is the &quot;JDF March&quot;. However, each of the regiment&#x27;s three battalions has its own march:
*1st Battalion – &quot;So Early In The Morning&quot;
*2nd Battalion – &quot;2nd Battalion West India Regiment&quot; (&quot;Königgrätzer Marsch&quot;)

==Alliances==
* — The Mercian Regiment
* — The Royal Canadian Regiment

==Former members==
*Darren Jordon - Former BBC newsreader
*Clive Hunt - Reggae record producer and former member of the regimental band

==See also==
*The Barbados Regiment
*West India Regiment

==References==
==External links==
*
*The 4th Battalion The Jamaica Regiment
*The Combat Support Battalion</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3429404" start="0" end="20" title="The Jamaica Regiment" label="The Jamaica Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q720038" start="65" end="86" title="Jamaica Defence Force" label="Jamaica Defence Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053481" start="100" end="110" title="Mechanized infantry" label="mechanised"/>
<link wikidata="Q29171" start="111" end="119" title="infantry" label="infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q52371" start="327" end="335" title="regiment" label="regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q766" start="399" end="406" title="Jamaica" label="Jamaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q3160777" start="423" end="449" title="Jamaica Constabulary Force" label="Jamaica Constabulary Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257729" start="512" end="525" title="public duties" label="public duties"/>
<link wikidata="Q7897903" start="803" end="815" title="Up Park Camp" label="Up Park Camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q34692" start="819" end="827" title="Kingston, Jamaica" label="Kingston"/>
<link wikidata="Q35535" start="868" end="874" title="police" label="police"/>
<link wikidata="Q6898851" start="954" end="962" title="Moneague" label="Moneague"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326284" start="964" end="970" title="Saint Ann Parish, Jamaica" label="St Ann"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="1299" end="1313" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q664609" start="1356" end="1365" title="Caribbean" label="Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q222595" start="1454" end="1466" title="British Army" label="British Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q652560" start="1495" end="1524" title="Federation of the West Indies" label="Federation of the West Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060703" start="1586" end="1596" title="War Office" label="War Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q17035758" start="1748" end="1767" title="West India Regiment" label="West India Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179989" start="2322" end="2340" title="Queen&amp;#x27;s Guard" label="mounting the guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q42182" start="2344" end="2361" title="Buckingham Palace" label="Buckingham Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="2501" end="2514" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q501866" start="2519" end="2538" title="invasion of Grenada" label="invasion of Grenada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1598759" start="3399" end="3413" title="Light Infantry" label="Light Infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1598759" start="3431" end="3445" title="Light Infantry" label="Light Infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1598759" start="3473" end="3487" title="Light Infantry" label="Light Infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1598759" start="3505" end="3519" title="Light Infantry" label="Light Infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1598759" start="3736" end="3750" title="Light Infantry" label="Light Infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257729" start="3832" end="3845" title="Public duties" label="Public duties"/>
<link wikidata="Q9355428" start="3848" end="3862" title="Corps of Drums" label="Corps of Drums"/>
<link wikidata="Q1796010" start="4178" end="4197" title="Königgrätzer Marsch" label="Königgrätzer Marsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q6818485" start="4224" end="4244" title="The Mercian Regiment" label="The Mercian Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q3016772" start="4249" end="4276" title="The Royal Canadian Regiment" label="The Royal Canadian Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q5225000" start="4298" end="4311" title="Darren Jordon" label="Darren Jordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q16151769" start="4337" end="4347" title="Clive Hunt" label="Clive Hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q9794" start="4350" end="4356" title="Reggae" label="Reggae"/>
<link wikidata="Q183945" start="4357" end="4372" title="record producer" label="record producer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2883880" start="4429" end="4450" title="The Barbados Regiment" label="The Barbados Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q17035758" start="4452" end="4471" title="West India Regiment" label="West India Regiment"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="990575" wikidata="Q6733382" url="?curid=990575" title="2004 Maharashtra Legislative Assembly election">
<text>Assembly elections was held in Maharashtra, India on October 13, 2004. The major alliances were the Democratic Front and the Bharatiya Janata Party - Shiv Sena alliance. Other political parties contested were the Bahujan Samaj Party, the Samajwadi Party, the Rashtriya Janata Dal, and the LJP. 66,000 electronic voting machines were used to elect the 288 members of the Maharashtra legislative assembly.

==Results==

List of Political Parties participated in 2004 Maharashtra Assembly Elections.

The result was announced on October 17, 2004, the Nationalist Congress Party(NCP) emerged as the largest party with 71 Seats along with its ally Congress in second position with 69 Seats.The BJP-Shiv Sena Alliance lost election winning 54 and 62 seats respectively that lead to resignation of Venkaiah Naidu and followed by leading command of party to Lal Krishna Advani.

Summary of results of the Maharashtra State Assembly election, 2004

== Region-wise Breakup ==

== Alliance-wise Results ==


==Elected members==
==References==
== External links ==

*&quot;&quot;Maharashtra assembly polls on October 13&quot; - rediff.com article dated August 24, 2004
*&quot;State Assembly polls on October 13&quot; - Mid-Day articled dated August 24, 2004
*&quot;Maharashtra gears up for assembly election&quot;&quot; - Hindustantimes.com article dated September 14, 2004</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1752346" start="0" end="8" title="Deliberative assembly" label="Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191" start="31" end="42" title="Maharashtra" label="Maharashtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="44" end="49" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q5255613" start="100" end="116" title="Democratic Front (India)" label="Democratic Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q10230" start="125" end="147" title="Bharatiya Janata Party" label="Bharatiya Janata Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q59177" start="150" end="159" title="Shiv Sena (1966–2022)" label="Shiv Sena"/>
<link wikidata="Q803681" start="213" end="232" title="Bahujan Samaj Party" label="Bahujan Samaj Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546941" start="238" end="253" title="Samajwadi Party" label="Samajwadi Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3176919" start="259" end="279" title="Rashtriya Janata Dal" label="Rashtriya Janata Dal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3634933" start="289" end="292" title="Lok Janshakti Party" label="LJP"/>
<link wikidata="Q115632713" start="301" end="326" title="electronic voting machine" label="electronic voting machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1561861" start="548" end="574" title="Nationalist Congress Party" label="Nationalist Congress Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q10225" start="643" end="651" title="Indian National Congress" label="Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q10230" start="689" end="692" title="Bharatiya Janata Party" label="BJP"/>
<link wikidata="Q59177" start="693" end="702" title="Shiv Sena (1966–2022)" label="Shiv Sena"/>
<link wikidata="Q3764667" start="791" end="805" title="Venkaiah Naidu" label="Venkaiah Naidu"/>
<link wikidata="Q468324" start="850" end="868" title="Lal Krishna Advani" label="Lal Krishna Advani"/>
<link wikidata="Q140676" start="1116" end="1126" title="rediff.com" label="rediff.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q623936" start="1207" end="1214" title="Mid-Day" label="Mid-Day"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="990576" wikidata="Q1543401" url="?curid=990576" title="Fusil Gras mle 1874">
<text>The Fusil Modèle 1874 or Gras was the French Army&#x27;s primary service rifle from 1874 to 1886. Designed by Colonel Basile Gras, the Gras was a metallic cartridge adaptation of the single-shot, breech-loading, black powder Chassepot rifle. It was developed from 1872 to 1874 as a response to the German adoption of the Mauser Model 1871 metallic cartridge rifle.

Modified in 1880 as the M80 with an improved breechblock and in 1914 as the M14 to accommodate the 8×50mmR Lebel smokeless powder cartridge, the Gras was replaced as the standard-issue service rifle by the Lebel in 1886.

==Description==

Converted from the Chassepot, the Gras was in caliber and used black powder centerfire metallic cartridges with a bullet over a charge. It was a robust and hard-hitting single-shot weapon. Additionally it had a triangular-shaped Model 1874 &quot;Gras&quot; sword bayonet. The Gras rifle was replaced from 1886 by the Lebel rifle.

==Development==
The Gras was manufactured in response to the development of the Boxer cartridge in 1866, and the British 1870 Martini–Henry rifle which used it. Those were soon emulated by the Germans with the 1871 Mauser. The French Army set up a study group in September 1872 that chose the metallic over the paper cartridge. A second study group in 1873 looked at various metallic cartridge adaptations. Colonel Gras proposed a modification of the Chassepot to accept metal cartridges and on 7 July 1874, the French Army chose his design over the M1871 Beaumont rifle.

==History==

The Hellenic Army adopted the Gras in 1877, and it was used in all conflicts until the Second World War. It became the favourite weapon of Greek guerrilla fighters, from the various revolts against the Ottoman Empire to the resistance against the Axis, acquiring legendary status. The name entered the Greek language, and &quot;grades&quot; (γκράδες) was a term colloquially applied to all rifles during the first half of the 20th century. It was manufactured by Manufacture d&#x27;armes de Saint-Étienne, one of several government-owned arms factories in France. However most of the Gras rifles (60,000) used by the Hellenic military were manufactured under licence by Steyr in Austria.

The Gras rifle was partly the inspiration for the development of the Japanese Murata rifle, Japan&#x27;s first locally-made service rifle. It was also among the rifles copied in the arms industry of the Wassoulou Empire in the 1880s and 90s.

According to the Vietnamese historian Phạm Văn Sơn, a Vietnamese general in the Cần Vương movement, Cao Văn Thắng, managed to copy the design of &quot;an 1874 type fast-firing rifle of French&quot;. However, the Vietnamese version did not have a rifled barrel, and the range was limited.

In 1915, 450,000 Gras rifles were sent to the Russian Empire.

After 1918, Mle 1874 rifles were exported to Yugoslavia, Poland and Greece.

== Modifications during World War I ==
=== Modified rifle ===
In 1914, the French Army modified 146,000 rifles to fire 8 mm Lebel by using the barrel of a Lebel or Berthier rifle. They were used by second-line troops. In 1940, after the French defeat, most of these rifles were destroyed by the German occupiers.

===Grenade launcher===
Gras rifles and the 11x59mmR cartridges were also widely used by front line troops as converted grenade launchers, known as &quot;Bombardes DR&quot; (grenade throwers) these conversions had cut down barrels and butts of varying workmanship and fired blank cartridges to propel the grenade, and were used as a crude form of trench mortar.

=== Greek modified bayonets ===
The period 1932-1939 Greece manufactured the M1939 bayonet, it was a modification of the Gras Model 1874 bayonet and was used by Greek soldiers in World War II.

==Users==
* : In use by the Quebec Home Guard and Papal Zouaves in both 11mm and 8mm Lebel.
* : 15,000 rifles bought by the Force Publique during World War I, still in service with second-line units during World War II.
* : During the War of the Pacific.
* : Several thousand were bought at the end of the 19th century. They were used during the Thousand Days&#x27; War, against the Panamanian rebels and various civil Colombian conflicts from the 1920s to the 1950s.
* : the Gras was used by the Ethiopian Army during both Italian invasions, being popular among irregular soldiers. Most were acquired from French. 
* : the Gras was used by the Hellenic Army as late as 1941 in the Battle of Crete.
*: Haitian army used Gras rifles until its disbandment by occupying American forces. The army&#x27;s successor force, the Gendarmerie of Haiti, used old Gras rifles until replaced in 1916 by Springfield Model 1892–99 rifles.
* : Used by Irish rebels in 1916.
* 
* : Bought from Greece at the end of the 19th century.
* : 1300 were smuggled in by liberal rebels during the 1904 Revolution, and later used by the Army.
* : Due to firearm shortages in World War I, the Russian Empire received 450,000 Gras rifles from France in 1915.
* : passed on to Yugoslavia following purchase during World War I.
* : Some were purchased in the 19th century, during World War I, the Siamese Expeditionary Forces were equipped by the French with Gras rifles chambered in 8mm Lebel.
* : Smuggled in for use with Republican forces during the civil war.
* : Vietnamese insurgents of the Hương Khê uprising managed to create copies of the Fusil Gras mle 1874. However, they did not have rifled barrels.
* : Still used in Yemen in 2002.
* : fighting the Mandingo Wars against France

==Conflicts==
*French colonial expeditions
*Sino-French War
*War of the Pacific
*Argentine Civil Wars
*Chilean Civil War of 1891
*First Italo-Ethiopian War
*Thousand Days&#x27; War
*Greco-Turkish War (1897)
*Macedonian Struggle
*1904 Paraguayan Revolution
*Balkan Wars
*World War I
*Irish revolutionary period
*Greco-Turkish War (1919–22)
*Second Italo-Ethiopian War
*Spanish Civil War
*World War II

==Comparison with contemporary rifles==
==Gallery==
==See also==
*Berthier rifle
*Lebel Model 1886 rifle
*Table of handgun and rifle cartridges

==Notes==
==External links==

* A History of Greek Military Equipment (1821–today): Gras rifle</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1543401" start="4" end="21" title="Fusil Gras mle 1874" label="Fusil Modèle 1874"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543401" start="25" end="29" title="Fusil Gras mle 1874" label="Gras"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076619" start="38" end="49" title="French Army" label="French Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1718623" start="65" end="78" title="service rifle" label="service rifle"/>
<link wikidata="Q326360" start="118" end="129" title="Basile Gras" label="Basile Gras"/>
<link wikidata="Q37144" start="146" end="164" title="Cartridge (firearms)" label="metallic cartridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068098" start="225" end="234" title="Chassepot" label="Chassepot"/>
<link wikidata="Q746430" start="321" end="338" title="Mauser Model 1871" label="Mauser Model 1871"/>
<link wikidata="Q4548026" start="339" end="357" title="11×60mm Mauser" label="metallic cartridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543401" start="390" end="393" title="Fusil Gras mle 1874" label="M80"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543401" start="442" end="445" title="Fusil Gras mle 1874" label="M14"/>
<link wikidata="Q274935" start="465" end="478" title="8×50mmR Lebel" label="8×50mmR Lebel"/>
<link wikidata="Q241738" start="572" end="577" title="Lebel Model 1886 rifle" label="Lebel"/>
<link wikidata="Q12861" start="668" end="680" title="Gunpowder" label="black powder"/>
<link wikidata="Q190476" start="681" end="691" title="Centerfire ammunition" label="centerfire"/>
<link wikidata="Q37144" start="692" end="710" title="Cartridge (firearms)" label="metallic cartridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1310130" start="774" end="785" title="single-shot" label="single-shot"/>
<link wikidata="Q3952260" start="862" end="875" title="sword bayonet" label="sword bayonet"/>
<link wikidata="Q241738" start="922" end="933" title="Lebel Model 1886 rifle" label="Lebel rifle"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1016" end="1031" title="Centerfire ammunition#Boxer primer" label="Boxer cartridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1905626" start="1062" end="1075" title="Martini–Henry" label="Martini–Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q746430" start="1146" end="1157" title="Mauser Model 1871" label="1871 Mauser"/>
<link wikidata="Q2488419" start="1486" end="1500" title="M1871 Beaumont" label="M1871 Beaumont"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546449" start="1526" end="1539" title="Hellenic Army" label="Hellenic Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1609" end="1625" title="World War II" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q80895" start="1667" end="1676" title="guerrilla" label="guerrilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="1724" end="1738" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q490035" start="1746" end="1773" title="Greek Resistance" label="resistance against the Axis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3287029" start="1985" end="2026" title="Manufacture d&amp;#x27;armes de Saint-Étienne" label="Manufacture d&amp;#x27;armes de Saint-Étienne"/>
<link wikidata="Q591359" start="2192" end="2197" title="Steyr Mannlicher" label="Steyr"/>
<link wikidata="Q4346802" start="2289" end="2301" title="Murata rifle" label="Murata rifle"/>
<link wikidata="Q568712" start="2414" end="2430" title="Wassoulou Empire" label="Wassoulou Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986395" start="2534" end="2552" title="Cần Vương movement" label="Cần Vương movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q5034326" start="2554" end="2567" title="Cao Văn Thắng" label="Cao Văn Thắng"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="2789" end="2803" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q191077" start="2851" end="2861" title="Kingdom of Yugoslavia" label="Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q172107" start="2863" end="2869" title="First Polish Republic" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q209065" start="2874" end="2880" title="Kingdom of Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q274935" start="3002" end="3012" title="8 mm Lebel" label="8 mm Lebel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3091194" start="3047" end="3061" title="Berthier rifle" label="Berthier rifle"/>
<link wikidata="Q151340" start="3120" end="3133" title="Battle of France" label="French defeat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748708" start="3178" end="3194" title="German military administration in occupied France during World War II" label="German occupiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q184613" start="3316" end="3332" title="grenade launcher" label="grenade launcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639569" start="3543" end="3556" title="trench mortar" label="trench mortar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002820" start="3877" end="3891" title="Force Publique" label="Force Publique"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="3899" end="3910" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q152004" start="3988" end="4006" title="War of the Pacific" label="War of the Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q43378" start="4099" end="4122" title="Thousand Days&amp;#x27; War" label="Thousand Days&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q804" start="4136" end="4142" title="Panama" label="Panama"/>
<link wikidata="Q3089201" start="4147" end="4153" title="Separation of Panama from Colombia" label="rebels"/>
<link wikidata="Q153316" start="4435" end="4450" title="Battle of Crete" label="Battle of Crete"/>
<link wikidata="Q3298759" start="4510" end="4535" title="United States occupation of Haiti" label="occupying American forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q21070774" start="4574" end="4594" title="Gendarmerie of Haiti" label="Gendarmerie of Haiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q7581008" start="4643" end="4668" title="Springfield Model 1892–99" label="Springfield Model 1892–99"/>
<link wikidata="Q6540713" start="4798" end="4812" title="Liberal Party (Paraguay)" label="liberal rebels"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4824" end="4839" title="History of Paraguay#Revolution of 1904" label="1904 Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q4447368" start="4863" end="4867" title="Paraguayan Army" label="Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q23035418" start="5119" end="5147" title="Siamese Expeditionary Forces" label="Siamese Expeditionary Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859" start="5275" end="5284" title="Spanish Civil War" label="civil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986395" start="5319" end="5337" title="Cần Vương movement" label="Hương Khê uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q1450547" start="5484" end="5497" title="Mandingo Wars" label="Mandingo Wars"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5529" end="5556" title="French colonial empires#Second French colonial empire" label="French colonial expeditions"/>
<link wikidata="Q706183" start="5558" end="5573" title="Sino-French War" label="Sino-French War"/>
<link wikidata="Q152004" start="5575" end="5593" title="War of the Pacific" label="War of the Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q2697981" start="5595" end="5615" title="Argentine Civil Wars" label="Argentine Civil Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q2704441" start="5617" end="5642" title="Chilean Civil War of 1891" label="Chilean Civil War of 1891"/>
<link wikidata="Q989115" start="5644" end="5669" title="First Italo-Ethiopian War" label="First Italo-Ethiopian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q43378" start="5671" end="5694" title="Thousand Days&amp;#x27; War" label="Thousand Days&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q657055" start="5696" end="5720" title="Greco-Turkish War (1897)" label="Greco-Turkish War (1897)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277369" start="5722" end="5741" title="Macedonian Struggle" label="Macedonian Struggle"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5743" end="5769" title="History of Paraguay#Revolution of 1904" label="1904 Paraguayan Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q165725" start="5771" end="5782" title="Balkan Wars" label="Balkan Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="5784" end="5795" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q6071764" start="5797" end="5823" title="Irish revolutionary period" label="Irish revolutionary period"/>
<link wikidata="Q87138" start="5825" end="5852" title="Greco-Turkish War (1919–22)" label="Greco-Turkish War (1919–22)"/>
<link wikidata="Q94916" start="5854" end="5880" title="Second Italo-Ethiopian War" label="Second Italo-Ethiopian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859" start="5882" end="5899" title="Spanish Civil War" label="Spanish Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="5901" end="5913" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q3091194" start="5981" end="5995" title="Berthier rifle" label="Berthier rifle"/>
<link wikidata="Q241738" start="5997" end="6019" title="Lebel Model 1886 rifle" label="Lebel Model 1886 rifle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7673227" start="6021" end="6058" title="Table of handgun and rifle cartridges" label="Table of handgun and rifle cartridges"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="990577" wikidata="Q2860669" url="?curid=990577" title="Arctic Technology Centre">
<text>ARTEK was established in 2000 to educate Greenlandic and Danish students in Arctic Technology. In 2001, the first students started their education in Sisimiut, Greenland.

The centre will be run by Sanaartornermik Ilinniarfik (the Building and Construction School) in Sisimiut and the Technical University of Denmark (DTU) in Kongens Lyngby.

ARTEK was originally the abbreviation for Arctic Technology Centre, but from 2019 the name ARTEK Campus Sisimiut is used to describe DTU&#x27;s campus in Sisimiut.

== International activities ==
In the later years, new and more international education opportunities have been added to the activities in Sisimiut. DTU&#x27;s Arctic Semester was offered in Sisimiut for the first time in the spring of 2016, while the Nordic Master of Cold Climate Engineering was offered for the first time later the same year. Part of the Nordic Master in Cold Climate Engineering takes place in Sisimiut. 

The operation of ARTEK is a joint venture between KTI (Teknikimik Ilinniarfik/Tech College Greenland) in Sisimiut and DTU. ARTEK is funded by the Government of Greenland, private foundations and DTU.

==References==
==External links==
* Arctic Technology Centre</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2860669" start="0" end="5" title="Arctic Technology Centre" label="ARTEK"/>
<link wikidata="Q223" start="41" end="50" title="Greenland" label="Greenland"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="57" end="63" title="Denmark" label="Danish"/>
<link wikidata="Q208098" start="150" end="158" title="Sisimiut" label="Sisimiut"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269766" start="285" end="316" title="Technical University of Denmark" label="Technical University of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q2239" start="326" end="340" title="Kongens Lyngby" label="Kongens Lyngby"/>
<link wikidata="Q2860669" start="385" end="409" title="Arctic Technology Centre" label="Arctic Technology Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2860669" start="434" end="455" title="Arctic Technology Centre" label="ARTEK Campus Sisimiut"/>
<link wikidata="Q10858355" start="1081" end="1104" title="Naalakkersuisut" label="Government of Greenland"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="990579" wikidata="Q326360" url="?curid=990579" title="Basile Gras">
<text>General Basile Gras (2 January 1836 – 14 April 1901) created the Gras rifle for the French Army in 1874 by converting the Mle 1866 Chassepot rifle to fire metallic cartridges. Gras, who was a colonel at the time, played a very important role in the formulation and industrial production of the Lebel rifle. He was an alumnus of Ecole Polytechnique, then a shooting instructor at l&#x27;École Normale de Tir at Châlons. Eventually he supervised the three weapon manufacturing facilities at St Etienne, Châtellerault and Tulle. Finally he became Secretary of War for France.

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q326360" start="8" end="19" title="Basile Gras" label="Basile Gras"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543401" start="65" end="75" title="Gras rifle" label="Gras rifle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076619" start="84" end="95" title="French Army" label="French Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068098" start="131" end="146" title="Chassepot rifle" label="Chassepot rifle"/>
<link wikidata="Q241738" start="294" end="305" title="Lebel rifle" label="Lebel rifle"/>
<link wikidata="Q273626" start="328" end="347" title="Ecole Polytechnique" label="Ecole Polytechnique"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="990584" wikidata="Q643988" url="?curid=990584" title="United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone">
<text>The United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL) was a United Nations peacekeeping operation in Sierra Leone from 1999 to 2006. It was created by the United Nations Security Council in October 1999 to help with the implementation of the Lomé Peace Accord, an agreement intended to end the Sierra Leonean civil war. UNAMSIL expanded in size several times in 2000 and 2001. It concluded its mandate at the end of 2005, the Security Council having declared that its mission was complete.

The mandate was notable for authorizing UNAMSIL to protect civilians under imminent threat of physical violence (albeit &quot;within its capabilities and areas of deployment&quot;) – a return to a more proactive style of UN peacekeeping.

UNAMSIL replaced a previous mission, the United Nations Observer Mission in Sierra Leone (UNOMSIL). After 2005 the United Nations Integrated Office in Sierra Leone (UNIOSIL) began operations as a follow-up to UNAMSIL. UNIOSIL&#x27;s mandate was extended twice and ended in September 2008.

== Conflict Background ==
The civil war began with the 1991 campaign by the Revolutionary United Front (RUF) to remove President Joseph Momoh from power. Illicit diamond trade played a central role in financing the conflict and multiple actors were present with outside intervention for both sides. The Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) sent their Military Observer Group (ECOMOG) to defend the Momoh Government in 1991. After a request from the Sierra Leone head of state, the UN Secretary-General sent an exploratory mission to Sierra Leone in December 1993. The results of the mission pushed forward the appointment of Berhanu Dinka as Special Envoy, who worked with the ECOWAS and the Organization of African Unity (OAU) to negotiate a peace settlement. Nonetheless, intermittent peace negotiations failed to prevent military coups and several regime changes throughout the following decade. The Abidjan Peace Accord was an effort between Sierra Leone President Ahmad Tejan Kabbah and RUF leader Foday Sankoh, but ultimately the results were not honored and Kabbah faced a military coup months later. United Nations Security Council Resolution 1181 in July 1998 established the United Nations Observer Mission in Sierra Leone (UNOMSIL) with the goal of monitoring the security situation for an initial period of six months. In early January 1999, RUF rebels attacked and gained control over several areas in Freetown, the capital of Sierra Leone, but were swiftly ousted by ECOMOG. The Lomé Peace Accord were signed by the belligerents on 7 July 1999 focused on amnesty for combatants and the transformation of the RUF into a political party.

== Authorisation ==
On 20 August 1999, the UN expanded the number of military observers within Sierra Leone from 70 to 210. UNAMSIL was established on 22 October 1999 and the UN presence expanded to 260 military observers and 6,000 military personnel. As part of Security Council resolution 1207, UNAMSIL aimed to assist with the implementation of the Lomé Accords. UNAMSIL was originally designed as a neutral peacekeeping force working in conjunction with ECOMOG, whose responsibility was the enforcement of the peace agreement. UNAMSIL relied on the presence of the ECOMOG, which was threatened when Nigerian President Obasanjo presented his intention to withdraw troops. The first group of nearly 500 troops left Sierra Leone just weeks after the resolution on 2 September 1999 and although ECOMOG stopped the withdrawal soon after, about 2,000 Nigerian troops had already left.

== Mandate ==
According to Security Council Resolution 1270 of 22 October 1999 which established the operation, UNAMSIL had the following mandate:
* To cooperate with the Government of Sierra Leone and the other parties to the Peace Agreement in the implementation of the Agreement
* To assist the Government of Sierra Leone in the implementation of the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration plan
* To that end, to establish a presence at key locations throughout the territory of Sierra Leone, including at disarmament/reception centres and demobilization centres
* To ensure the security and freedom of movement of United Nations personnel
* To monitor adherence to the ceasefire in accordance with the ceasefire agreement (whose signing was witnessed by Jesse Jackson)
* To encourage the parties to create confidence-building mechanisms and support their functioning
* To facilitate the delivery of humanitarian assistance
* To support the operations of United Nations civilian officials, including the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and his staff, human rights officers and civil affairs officers
* To provide support, as requested, to the elections, which are to be held in accordance with the present constitution of Sierra Leone

In February 2000 the mandate had been revised to include the following tasks:
* To provide security at key locations and Government buildings, in particular in Freetown, important intersections and major airports, including Lungi airport
* To facilitate the free flow of people, goods and humanitarian assistance along specified thoroughfares
* To provide security in and at all sites of the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programme
* To coordinate with and assist, the Sierra Leone law enforcement authorities in the discharge of their responsibilities
* To guard weapons, ammunition and other military equipment collected from ex-combatants and to assists in their subsequent disposal or destruction

Upon withdrawal, the remaining staff in Freetown were transferred to United Nations Integrated Office in Sierra Leone (UNIOSIL).

The Security Council explicitly mandated the mission to &quot;take the necessary action… within its capabilities and areas of deployment, to afford protection to civilians under imminent threat of physical violence&quot;. Every UN peacekeeping mission established since has had an explicit mandate from the Security Council to protect civilians.

== Mission Structure ==

=== Strength ===
 The initial UNAMSIL mandate of October 2000 called for 6,000 military personnel which was later expanded to 11,000 when the mission was upgraded by Chapter VII to allow troops to have enforcing capabilities. UNAMSIL was later expanded to 13,000 personnel in May 2000 and finally authorized in March 2001 to its maximum strength of 17,500 military personnel including 260 military observers and 170 police personnel by Security Council resolution 1346. The maximum deployment strength of UNAMSIL was reached in March 2002 with 17,368 military personnel, 87 UN police, and 322 international and 552 local civilian personnel.

=== Leadership ===
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and Chief of Mission:

Force Commander and Chief Military Observer:
Police Commissioner:
=== Composition ===
==== Troop Contributions ====
The following countries provided Military Personnel:

The following countries provided Police Personnel:

==== Financial Contributions ====
The total estimated cost for this mission is $2.8 billion

Expenditures:
Approved budget:
== Operation ==

=== Disarmament, Demobilization, and Reintegration (DDR) ===
Disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR) programs for ex-combatants were central to peace resolutions in the Sierra Leone context. The first phase of DDR that was designed to be carried out by the government with the help of ECOMOG and UNDP was disrupted by a rebel attack in Freetown on 6 January 1999. The second phase—part of the Lome Agreement--- created a joint operation plan between multiple actors to establish demobilization centers. Nearly 19,000 combatants were disarmed during this period before the May 2000 disturbances. Disarmament required coordination with the warring groups and leaders, including the cooperation of Foday Sankoh. UNAMSIL secured disarmament centers and facilitated the registration of ex-combatants into the DDR program. UNICEF worked parallel to UNAMSIL with the main task of the demobilization and integration of child soldiers who had been recruited into rebel groups. There were disruptions at camps and in Freetown over the delayed payment of DDR allowances, but towards the latter part of the mission, the DDR program saw many improvements, including better information dissemination. Radio UNAMSIL was a central aspect of the mission&#x27;s public information strategy.
UNAMSIL led Pakistan contingent was deployed in eastern province of Kono. Pakistani contingent were extremely effective and were able to restore peace and order in the area. The effort undertaken by the Pakistani Contingent under the name of &#x27;Hearts and Minds Winning Campaign&#x27; proved very successful and helped integrate the communities and people at large. The Pak Batt - 8 led by Lieutenant Colonel Zafar and Major Qavi Khan earned a true acclaim of the people of Koidu. Both the officers of the Pakistan Army, in the Pakistani Contingent, worked relentlessly to affect the cross-section of the community from building schools, churches and mosques to organising sports competitions for children and workshops for women. They impacted on the daily lives of the people in a way that left a lasting imprint on the lives of the people of Koidu.

=== Civilian Police ===
The Military Reintegration Plan aimed to the rebuild the security services of Sierra Leone. The goal was to reach a projected strength of 9,500 police officers by 2005. By March 2003, the program reached between 6,000 and 7,000 police officers, a number lower than expected due to high attrition rate. The mission focused efforts on recruiting new cadets and expanding the capacity of the Police Training School. By 2005, the police force reached the goal of 9,500 officers with UNAMSIL training some 4,000 in routine field training and other programs including computer literacy, human rights, and policing diamond mining.

=== Hostage Crisis ===
RUF leaders in the Northern province had displayed prior resistance to the DDR efforts and arrived at a DDR reception center in Makeni on 1 May 2000 demanding ex-combatants be released. When UN personnel refused, the RUF combatants detained 3 UNAMSIL military observers and 4 Kenyans from the peacekeeping force. More RUF engagement the next day attempted to disarm UNAMSIL and sparked similar efforts in other areas. Personnel and materials were intercepted and within days, the RUF had seized nearly 500 UN personnel. 
British troops were deployed on 7 May to facilitate the evacuation of national, but the additional presence boosted the confidence of UNAMSIL. The former colonial power of Sierra Leone deployed about 900 forces with a combate mandate. One of the focal demands of the RUF was the release of Foday Sankoh and other leaders held by the Sierra Leone government. As a result of strong international and regional pressure, 461 UN personnel were released through Liberia between May 16 and 28. This release came about due to mediation through Liberian president Charles Taylor, the main foreign backer of the RUF. A later rescue mission in July successfully extracted 222 Indian peacekeepers and 11 military observers who were surrounded at Kailahun. UN personnel grew to over 13,000 amidst security threats at this time.

=== Abuja Cease fire agreement November 2000 ===
The Freetown government emphasized pursuing a counter strategy against the rebels and not lessening the war effort, while UNAMSIL diverging interests pushed for another ceasefire. Attempts by UNAMSIL and ECOWAS to establish contact with RUF succeeded in October 2000 when RUF leaders expressed interest in a ceasefire and returning to the Lomé Agreement. A meeting convened on 10 November 2001 leading to a ceasefire between the government and RUF that included the agreement to return all seized UNAMSIL weapons and the immediate resumption of DDR. UNAMSIL was designated a monitoring role allowed access to all parts of the country and both parties agreed to the unrestricted movement of humanitarian workers and resources. Although mixed signals were presented through the media, RUF leadership reiterated their commitment to the agreement.

=== End of War ===
On 2 May 2001 the second meeting of the Committee of Six of the ECOWAS Mediation and Security Council addressed the ceasefire that had been maintained since the previous November. Both parties reiterated the commitment for the free movement of persons and the newly trained Sierra Leone Army, trained by UK personnel, would help monitor the cease fire. The meeting addressed the cross-border attacks from Guinea and the transformation of the RUF into a political party. Acting upon the November 2000 agreement, all seized UN arms were returned by 31 May 2001. With Charles Taylor facing sanctions, a diamond ban, and international pressure as well as the loss of troops and prestige in the Guinea attacks, these factors severely hindered Taylor&#x27;s ability to sustain the war outside his borders. Losing the backing of a powerful neighbor and a series of defeats, a weak RUF agreed to treaties and failed to incite further violence to the same extent. On 18 January 2002, Sierra Leone president Ahmed Tejan Kabbah officially declared the end of the civil war that had spanned over a decade. 
There were a total of 192 UN fatalities: 69 troops, 2 military observers, 2 international civilians, 16 local civilians, 1 police, and 2 others.

After the contribution made by the Bangladesh UN Peacekeeping Force in the Sierra Leone Civil War, the government of Ahmad Tejan Kabbah declared Bengali an honorary official language in December 2002.

== Withdrawal ==
On 30 June 2005, United Nations Security Council Resolution 1610 extended UNAMSIL&#x27;s mandate for a final six months with plans to withdraw on 31 December 2005. Two months later, resolution 1620 established the United Nations Integrated Office in Sierra Leone (UNIOSIL). As of November 2005, the size and strength of UNAMSIL had significantly shrunk with a total of 1,043 uniformed personnel still within the country including 944 troops, 69 military observers, 30 police, 216 international civilian personnel, and 369 local civilian staff. UNIOSIL become operational on January first 2006; the follow-up mission strategy was developed jointly with UNAMSIL and the UN country team to focus on poverty reduction through the UN&#x27;s development framework as well as maintaining peace through economic good governance. UNIOSIL ended in September 2008 and was replaced by the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone (UNIPSIL). The Security Council unanimously agreed to withdraw UNIPSIL by 31 March 2014 although the UN country office will remain present to continue to support the constitutional review process. Former UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon travelled to Freetown, Sierra Leone, to mark the closure of UNIPSIL where he stated:
“Sierra Leone represents one of the world’s most successful cases of post-conflict recovery, peacekeeping and peacebuilding.”

== Legacy ==
The establishment of UNAMSIL constituted a policy shift in UN peacekeeping as it was one of the first missions where UN troops were permitted to use force. Canadian diplomats in the Security Council and the government of Sierra Leone advocated for this change, while all other Security Council members aimed for a Chapter VI peacekeeping mission. The Canadian mission to the Security Council hosted General Roméo Dallaire, commander for the UN during 1994 Rwandan Genocide, who is a spokesperson for force enforcing capabilities for troops. Chapter VII of the UN charter outlines the power of the Security Council to maintain peace through “measures it deems necessary”, including military power. When the Security Council changed the mandate of UNAMSIL, they outlined the ability to:
“take the necessary action, in the discharge of its mandate, to ensure the security and freedom of movement of its personnel and, within its capabilities and areas of deployment, to afford protection to civilians under imminent threat of physical violence”
The ability to use force was a powerful deterrent in the illicit diamond trade that fueled the conflict. UNAMSIL created buffer zones between skirmishes in the mining district of Kono and was successful in gaining authority over diamond rich areas. Before UNAMSIL, the Security Council mainly invoked Chapter VII to authorize force to other non-UN actors. However, after the Chapter VII force mandate for Sierra Leone, it has been similarly utilized in sixteen other peacekeeping missions since 1999. 
Despite the extreme setbacks the mission faced with the capture of over 500 UN personnel, the Security Council did not withdraw the mission. In the wake of Rwanda and Somalia, this represented another shift with sustained interest from the Security Council and bilateral involvement of the United Kingdom pushing the mission to completion.

==References==
==External links==
* Records of the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL) (1999-2005) at the United Nations Archives
*UNAMSIL at UN.org
* UNIOSIL, the follow-up peace consolidation mission to UNAMSIL, at UN.org
* Detailed description of Op Khukri, launched by UN forces to rescue more than 200 peacekeepers from RUF</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q643988" start="4" end="42" title="United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone" label="United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone"/>
<link wikidata="Q643988" start="44" end="51" title="United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone" label="UNAMSIL"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="59" end="73" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q3354958" start="74" end="86" title="peacekeeping" label="peacekeeping"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044" start="100" end="112" title="Sierra Leone" label="Sierra Leone"/>
<link wikidata="Q37470" start="154" end="185" title="United Nations Security Council" label="United Nations Security Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q728770" start="241" end="258" title="Lomé Peace Accord" label="Lomé Peace Accord"/>
<link wikidata="Q795269" start="293" end="317" title="Sierra Leone Civil War" label="Sierra Leonean civil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q643988" start="319" end="326" title="United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone" label="UNAMSIL"/>
<link wikidata="Q643988" start="530" end="537" title="United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone" label="UNAMSIL"/>
<link wikidata="Q643988" start="729" end="736" title="United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone" label="UNAMSIL"/>
<link wikidata="Q818549" start="770" end="827" title="UNOMSIL" label="United Nations Observer Mission in Sierra Leone (UNOMSIL)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495261" start="844" end="892" title="United Nations Integrated Office in Sierra Leone" label="United Nations Integrated Office in Sierra Leone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141973" start="1095" end="1121" title="Revolutionary United Front" label="Revolutionary United Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q193272" start="1322" end="1363" title="Economic Community of West African States" label="Economic Community of West African States"/>
<link wikidata="Q191703" start="1725" end="1754" title="Organization of African Unity" label="Organization of African Unity"/>
<link wikidata="Q4667607" start="1936" end="1956" title="Abidjan Peace Accord" label="Abidjan Peace Accord"/>
<link wikidata="Q443070" start="2036" end="2048" title="Foday Sankoh" label="Foday Sankoh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2402498" start="2141" end="2188" title="United Nations Security Council Resolution 1181" label="United Nations Security Council Resolution 1181"/>
<link wikidata="Q728770" start="2526" end="2543" title="Lomé Peace Accord" label="Lomé Peace Accord"/>
<link wikidata="Q1883799" start="3595" end="3627" title="United Nations Security Council Resolution 1270" label="Security Council Resolution 1270"/>
<link wikidata="Q5281312" start="3922" end="3967" title="disarmament, demobilization and reintegration" label="disarmament, demobilization and reintegration"/>
<link wikidata="Q310586" start="4333" end="4346" title="Jesse Jackson" label="Jesse Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3780" start="4990" end="4998" title="Freetown" label="Freetown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1453722" start="5054" end="5067" title="Lungi International Airport" label="Lungi airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q3780" start="5588" end="5596" title="Freetown" label="Freetown"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495261" start="5617" end="5665" title="United Nations Integrated Office in Sierra Leone" label="United Nations Integrated Office in Sierra Leone"/>
<link wikidata="Q740308" start="7974" end="7980" title="UNICEF" label="UNICEF"/>
<link wikidata="Q4855388" start="13484" end="13516" title="Bangladesh UN Peacekeeping Force" label="Bangladesh UN Peacekeeping Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q795269" start="13524" end="13546" title="Sierra Leone Civil War" label="Sierra Leone Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q336297" start="13566" end="13584" title="Ahmad Tejan Kabbah" label="Ahmad Tejan Kabbah"/>
<link wikidata="Q9610" start="13594" end="13601" title="Bengali language" label="Bengali"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951581" start="13685" end="13732" title="United Nations Security Council Resolution 1610" label="United Nations Security Council Resolution 1610"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495261" start="13882" end="13930" title="United Nations Integrated Office in Sierra Leone" label="United Nations Integrated Office in Sierra Leone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495263" start="14545" end="14607" title="United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone" label="United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253" start="14833" end="14844" title="Ban Ki-moon" label="Ban Ki-moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q355188" start="15477" end="15491" title="Roméo Dallaire" label="Roméo Dallaire"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="990599" wikidata="Q4021159" url="?curid=990599" title="Wægmunding">
<text>The Wægmundings were a prominent probably Swedish clan (an &quot;ätt&quot;, see Norse clans) in &quot;Beowulf&quot;. A name such as &quot;Wægmunding&quot; meant &quot;belongs to Wægmund&quot;, i.e. they were the descendants of a man named Wægmund. This was the normal way of naming a Germanic clan (e.g. Sigurd the Völsung, descendant of king Völsung, Folkung [descendants of Folke] and Yngling [descendants of Yngvi-Freyr]).

Members:
*Wægmund (the ancestor of the clan)
*Ælfhere (seems to have been a distinguished member of the clan as Wiglaf is described as his kinsman)
*Ecgþeow (joined the Danes and the Geats as he was banished for slaying a man from another clan)
*Beowulf (son of Ecgþeow and the hero of the epic by his name)
*Weohstan (Swedish champion and slayer of his fugitive countryman prince Eanmund)
*Wiglaf (&quot;the last of the Wægmundings&quot; and son of Weohstan. He fought with Beowulf against the dragon)

The story of this clan in &quot;Beowulf&quot; is that Ecgþeow slew a man, Heaðolaf, from another clan, the &quot;Wulfings&quot; (probably the rulers of the less known East Geats). As the Wægmundings would not or could not pay the expected wergild, Ecgtheow was banished and sought refuge among the Danes. The Danish king Hrothgar paid the wergild and had Ecgþeow swear an oath. Later, Ecgþeow served the Geats and distinguished himself enough to marry the Geatish king Hreðel&#x27;s daughter, with whom he had the son Beowulf.

During the Swedish-Geatish wars, Ecgþeow&#x27;s close relative, Weohstan, fought on the Swedish side for Onela, and killed Onela&#x27;s nephew Eanmund. The fact that these characters are described as Wægmundings explains why the Swedish warrior Wiglaf became the companion of Beowulf although his father had fought against the Geats. Since Ecgþeow, Beowulf&#x27;s father, was a close relative of Weohstan, Wiglaf&#x27;s father, it is not surprising that Wiglaf (after his father&#x27;s death) joined his relative Beowulf in Geatland, and that Beowulf assumed responsibility for the young Swede.

==On the ethnic identity of the Wægmundings==
In the epic we learn that Wiglaf was a &quot;Scylfing&quot; which literally refers to the ruling family of Sweden, and defines Wiglaf as a Swede. We also learn that Wiglaf&#x27;s father, Weohstan, was a &quot;Wægmunding&quot; and fought on the Swedish side. Concerning Beowulf&#x27;s father the text tells us that he was a Wægmunding and that he was banished for killing the man of a different family, the Wulfings. This was standard procedure if the perpetrators family could not pay the wergild at the Ting. Since no other ethnic label is given for the Wægmundings, this makes a Swedish ethnicity the most likely one. This means that Beowulf was fighting his own kinsmen, on his father&#x27;s side, when fighting the Swedes. According to researcher Gudmund Schütte, Wægmunding could be related to a Finnish mythological character, Väinämöinen.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4021159" start="4" end="15" title="Wægmunding" label="Wægmundings"/>
<link wikidata="Q956420" start="42" end="49" title="Suiones" label="Swedish"/>
<link wikidata="Q2240474" start="80" end="91" title="Norse clans" label="Norse clans"/>
<link wikidata="Q48328" start="102" end="109" title="Beowulf" label="Beowulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q537554" start="304" end="310" title="Sigurd" label="Sigurd"/>
<link wikidata="Q1263694" start="343" end="350" title="Völsung" label="Völsung"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091212" start="352" end="359" title="Folkung" label="Folkung"/>
<link wikidata="Q913138" start="387" end="394" title="Yngling" label="Yngling"/>
<link wikidata="Q4021159" start="411" end="416" title="Wægmunding" label="Yngvi"/>
<link wikidata="Q131474" start="417" end="422" title="Freyr" label="Freyr"/>
<link wikidata="Q536019" start="576" end="583" title="Ecgþeow" label="Ecgþeow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1496339" start="610" end="615" title="Geats" label="Geats"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281177" start="673" end="680" title="Beowulf (character)" label="Beowulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q4016725" start="736" end="744" title="Weohstan" label="Weohstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049736" start="818" end="824" title="Wiglaf" label="Wiglaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q5695320" start="1005" end="1013" title="Heaðolaf" label="Heaðolaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q4021120" start="1044" end="1052" title="Wulfings" label="Wulfings"/>
<link wikidata="Q214829" start="1098" end="1108" title="East Geats" label="East Geats"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423355" start="1170" end="1177" title="wergild" label="wergild"/>
<link wikidata="Q877429" start="1229" end="1234" title="Daner" label="Danes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353836" start="1252" end="1260" title="Hrothgar" label="Hrothgar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1496339" start="1335" end="1340" title="Geats" label="Geats"/>
<link wikidata="Q511123" start="1387" end="1399" title="Geatish king" label="Geatish king"/>
<link wikidata="Q1403627" start="1400" end="1406" title="Hreðel" label="Hreðel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778783" start="1470" end="1490" title="Swedish-Geatish wars" label="Swedish-Geatish wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q2293179" start="1564" end="1569" title="Onela" label="Onela"/>
<link wikidata="Q5325613" start="1602" end="1609" title="Eanmund" label="Eanmund"/>
<link wikidata="Q201694" start="1983" end="1991" title="Götaland" label="Geatland"/>
<link wikidata="Q913138" start="2146" end="2154" title="Yngling" label="Scylfing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5614665" start="2852" end="2867" title="Gudmund Schütte" label="Gudmund Schütte"/>
<link wikidata="Q616178" start="2934" end="2945" title="Väinämöinen" label="Väinämöinen"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="990608" wikidata="Q4892592" url="?curid=990608" title="Bermondsey Market">
<text>Bermondsey Market (also known as New Caledonian Market and Bermondsey Square Antiques Market) is an antiques market at Bermondsey Square on Tower Bridge Road in Bermondsey, south London, England. The location was formerly the site of Bermondsey Abbey.

The market still opens every Friday, trading from early morning until 2pm and is the oldest antiques market/event in the UK.

==History==
The 15th century English Queen Consort of Edward IV, Elizabeth Woodville, lived her last five years in Bermondsey Abbey, dying in 1492.

The Caledonian Market moved to its current location in 1950 after the old Caledonian Market site in Islington was designated for redevelopment in the late 1940s.

===Marché ouvert===
The opening hours of the Bermondsey Market from 6am until noon (some sources say 4am until 2pm) reflect the ancient law of market overt, which was abolished in 1995. Under this law, in a number of designated markets, including Bermondsey Market, if an item was sold between sunset and sunrise then its provenance could not be questioned, so stolen goods could be traded and good title would pass to the purchaser. To quote Minister for the Arts Estelle Morris in July 2003 during the Second Reading of the &quot;Dealing In Cultural Objects (Offences) Bill&quot;: 
:I did not have information about marché ouvert in the deep recesses of my mind, but experts reliably inform me that it no longer exists. The hon. Member for Uxbridge (Mr. Randall) will be surprised to learn that it has been abolished only recently. It used to exist in designated markets, including Bermondsey. I am sure that the promoter will be interested in telling the hon. Member for Southwark, North and Bermondsey (Simon Hughes) about that. In it, items could be sold before sunrise. Believe it or not, in this land of ours, people could sell stolen—my officials put &quot;dodgy&quot; in brackets, but we do not use that term—objects. I assure hon. Members that it has been abolished. I hope that that deals with the fears of the hon. Member for Uxbridge.
In 2007 redevelopment of the site to build a hotel, apartments and offices started. Whilst the antique market continued, due to space availability, it was greatly reduced to a few dozen stallholders, a far cry from the normal 200+! Sadly, many regulars, needing a regular and reliable income relocated to other markets and fairs. For the next 10-12 years, some stallholders returned and 80+ stall days were not uncommon.

=== COVID &amp; Building Works ===
Early 2020 brought us Covid-19 and, following many months of lockdown and the market closure, a new, dedicated business, BAM 2021 Ltd, was created to take over the management and development of the market from Southwark Council.

The average age of antique &amp; collectors stall holders is generally quite high and Bermondsey was probably well above that average. In some cases, the market has seen three generations of families tending their pitches. During COVID, some regulars took it as a sign that retirement was a good idea and, sadly several were lost for medical reasons. 

In April 2021, the market reopened, welcoming back 50+ stallholders, however, the joy was short lived, as building works to replace the surrounding buildings exterior cladding started. For over a year, this reduced the available market space to circa 20 outdoor stalls. 

Today, the market regularly attracts 30+ stall holders and with plans to give the market fixtures and fittings a well needed upgrade, 2025 brings the markets 75th anniversary, which will be celebrated for many months across the year. 

=== Old Part Of A New Bermondsey ===
Bermondsey antiques market refuses to quit or lie down. It battles on and despite blows that would have felled many others, it continues to surprise and delight. It remains a work in progress, but after years of hard slog it is finally getting the recognition it deserves, reinventing itself for the 21st century and looking forward to a great future as an old part of a new Bermondsey.

== References ==
==External links==
* Bermondsey Antiques Market Official Website
* Some photos from Bermondsey market</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4892592" start="0" end="17" title="Bermondsey Market" label="Bermondsey Market"/>
<link wikidata="Q4892592" start="33" end="54" title="Bermondsey Market" label="New Caledonian Market"/>
<link wikidata="Q4892592" start="59" end="92" title="Bermondsey Market" label="Bermondsey Square Antiques Market"/>
<link wikidata="Q472760" start="100" end="107" title="antique" label="antique"/>
<link wikidata="Q822032" start="119" end="136" title="Bermondsey Square" label="Bermondsey Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q3258965" start="140" end="157" title="Tower Bridge Road" label="Tower Bridge Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q822040" start="161" end="171" title="Bermondsey" label="Bermondsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="179" end="185" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="187" end="194" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q822030" start="234" end="250" title="Bermondsey Abbey" label="Bermondsey Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q160341" start="433" end="442" title="Edward IV" label="Edward IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q229214" start="444" end="463" title="Elizabeth Woodville" label="Elizabeth Woodville"/>
<link wikidata="Q6825035" start="602" end="619" title="Metropolitan Cattle Market" label="Caledonian Market"/>
<link wikidata="Q125163" start="628" end="637" title="Islington" label="Islington"/>
<link wikidata="Q12412192" start="834" end="846" title="marché ouvert" label="market overt"/>
<link wikidata="Q333326" start="1156" end="1170" title="Estelle Morris" label="Estelle Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q257800" start="1447" end="1454" title="John Randall (UK politician)" label="Randall"/>
<link wikidata="Q334313" start="1698" end="1710" title="Simon Hughes" label="Simon Hughes"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="990609" wikidata="Q1140854" url="?curid=990609" title="Cromford and High Peak Railway">
<text>The Cromford and High Peak Railway (C&amp;HPR) was a standard-gauge line between the Cromford Canal wharf at High Peak Junction and the Peak Forest Canal at Whaley Bridge. The railway, which was completed in 1831, was built to carry minerals and goods through the hilly rural terrain of the Peak District within Derbyshire, England. The route was marked by a number of roped worked inclines. Due to falling traffic, the entire railway was closed by 1967. 

The remains of the line, between Dowlow and Cromford, has now become the High Peak Trail, a route on the National Cycle Network.

==Background==

The Peak District of Derbyshire has always posed problems for travel, but from 1800 when the Peak Forest Canal was built, an alternative to the long route through the Trent and Mersey Canal was sought, not only for minerals and finished goods to Manchester, but raw cotton for the East Midlands textile industry.

One scheme that had been suggested would pass via Tansley, Matlock and Bakewell. In 1810, a prospectus was published for another route via Grindleford, Hope and Edale, but since it could only promise £6,000 a year, in return for an outlay of £500,000, it was received with little enthusiasm. The problem was not only carrying a canal over a height of around a thousand feet, but supplying it with water on the dry limestone uplands.

Finally Josias Jessop, the son of William Jessop, was asked to survey the route. He, his father and their former partner Benjamin Outram had gained wide experience in building tramways where conditions were unsuitable for canals, and that is what he suggested. Even so, as almost the first long-distance line at , it was a bold venture. Moreover, to its summit at Ladmanlow, it would climb a thousand feet from Cromford, making it one of the highest lines ever built in Britain.
The (6 Geo. 4. c. xxx) was obtained for a &quot;railway or tramroad&quot; to be propelled by &quot;stationary or &quot;locomotive&quot; steam engines,&quot; which was remarkably prescient, considering few people considered steam locomotives to be feasible, and George Stephenson&#x27;s Stockton and Darlington Railway was barely open in far-away County Durham.

==Construction==

The first part of the line from the wharf at High Peak Junction, on the Cromford Canal, to Hurdlow opened in 1830. From the canal it climbed over in , through three inclines ranging from 1 in 14 (7.1%) to 1 in 8 (12.5%): Sheep Pasture incline near Cromford and Middleton and Hopton inclines above Wirksworth. The line then proceeded up the relatively gentle Hurdlow incline at 1 in 16 (6.25%). The second half from Hurdlow to Whaley Bridge opened in 1832 descending through four more inclines, the steepest being 1 in 7 (14.3%). The highest part of the line was at Ladmanlow, a height of . For comparison, the present-day highest summit in England is Ais Gill at on the Settle–Carlisle line, although the remaining, freight-only, stub of the CHPR at Dowlow Lime Works reaches a height of .
The railway was laid using so-called &quot;fishbelly&quot; rails supported on stone blocks, as was common in those days, rather than timber sleepers, since it would be powered by horses on the flat sections. On the nine inclined planes, stationary steam engines would be used, apart from the last incline into Whaley Bridge, which was counterbalanced and worked by a horse-gin. The engines, rails and other ironwork were provided by the Butterley Company. It would take around two days to complete the journey. It was laid to the Stephenson gauge of , rather than Outram&#x27;s usual .

While its function was to provide a shorter route for Derbyshire coal than the Trent and Mersey Canal, it figured largely in early East Midlands railway schemes because it was seen as offering a path into Manchester for proposed lines from London. However, the unsuitability of cable railways for passengers became clear within a few years.

Part of the route included the Hopton Incline. This was a very steep section of the railway about a mile north of the small village of Hopton. It was originally worked by a stationary steam engine but was modified later to be adhesion worked by locomotives. At 1 in 14 (7%), it was the steepest in Britain and trains frequently had to be split and pulled up a few wagons at a time. The route also required the construction of a number of tunnels, including those at Hopton and at Newhaven.

Dozens of small sidings were added along the length of the railway to accommodate the wagons that worked the line. Towards the Cromford end, between Sheep Pasture Top and Friden there were over 15 sidings, mostly grouped between Sheep Pasture and Longcliffe, primarily serving quarries. One was built in 1883 from Steeplehouse to serve the Middleton Quarry north of Wirksworth. The branch closed in 1967 but the trackbed was later used for the Steeple Grange Light Railway in 1985.

Towards the Whaley Bridge end of the line, another profusion of sidings lay between Dowlow Halt and Ladmanlow, mostly serving quarries and limeworks. This included some dozen sidings in the short section between Harpur Hill and Old Harpur.

The following table lists the inclines as originally built:

==Expansion==

The line had been built on the canal principle of following contours across the plateau and the many tight curves hampered operations in later years. Not only did the C&amp;HPR have the steepest adhesion worked incline of any line in the country, the 1 in 14 of Hopton, it also had the sharpest curve, radius through eighty degrees at Gotham.

The line was isolated until 1853 when, in an effort to improve traffic, a connection was made with the Manchester, Buxton, Matlock and Midland Junction Railway at High Peak Junction a short way south of the terminus at Cromford. In 1857 the northern end was connected to the Stockport, Disley and Whaley Bridge Railway. Around this time, the people of Wirksworth were agitating for a line and an incline was built between the two. However, the Midland Railway began surveying a line from Duffield in 1862 but it was never used.

The C&amp;HPR was leased by the London and North Western Railway in 1862, being taken over fully in 1887. By 1890 permission had been obtained to connect the line directly to Buxton by building a new line from Harpur Hill the two or three miles into the town centre, thus frustrating the Midland Railway&#x27;s original plans for a route to Manchester.

The old north end of the line from Ladmanlow (a short distance from Harpur Hill) to Whaley Bridge via the Goyt Valley was largely abandoned in 1892, though the track bed is still visible in many places and one incline forms part of a public road.

Then, built by the LNWR, the branch line to Ashbourne was opened in 1899. This used the section of the C&amp;HP line from Buxton as far as Parsley Hay, from where a single line ran south to Ashbourne, where it connected with the North Staffordshire Railway. The formation was constructed to allow for double tracking if necessary, but this never happened.

==Operation==
The line was worked by independent contractors until long after other lines, which had taken operations in house upon the introduction of locomotives. The line was initially under-capitalised because many of the subscribers did not meet their dues, and it was mainly funded by the Butterley Company, a major supplier and its main creditor. The final cost was £180,000, more than Jessop&#x27;s estimate of £155,000, but still much cheaper than a canal. Nevertheless, the line never achieved a profit. Francis Wright, the Chairman, was later to say, in 1862 &quot;We found ourselves getting into difficulties from the third year of our existence,&quot; and added it was clear in retrospect that the line &quot;never had a remote chance of paying a dividend on the original shares.&quot;

The railway&#x27;s first steam locomotive arrived in 1841 with &quot;Peak&quot;, built by Robert Stephenson and Company. By 1860 the line had six more locomotives gradually displacing the horses. Because the inclines were too steep for adhesion traction by these early locomotives they were hauled up and down the inclines, along with their trains, by static steam engines. The hemp rope or chains initially used for hauling trains were later replaced by steel cables.
The (18 &amp; 19 Vict. c. lxxv) authorised the carriage of passengers. However the one train per day each way did little to produce extra revenue and, when a passenger was killed in 1877, the service was discontinued. The line&#x27;s prosperity depended on that of the canals it connected but, by the 1830s, they were in decline. This was, to a degree, offset by the increase in the trade for limestone from the quarries.

There were, in fact, very few accidents. In 1857, the Cromford and Sheep Pasture inclines had been merged into one, and in 1888, a brake van broke away from a train near the summit. Gathering speed, it was unable to round the curve into Cromford Wharf. It passed over both the canal and the double track railway line, and landed in a field. A catch pit was therefore installed near the bottom. This can still be seen from the A6 with a (more recent) wrecked wagon still in it.

The most serious accident occurred in 1937. The line was fairly level on the approach to the Hopton Incline and it was custom to gain speed for the uphill gradient. There was a shallow curve immediately before and on this occasion the locomotive spread the track, rolled over and down the embankment with four wagons. The driver was killed and thereafter a speed limit of was strictly enforced.

During World War II, the line was used to transport bombs to the large underground munitions store at RAF Harpur Hill. The railway line ran directly through the site.

==Demise==
Traffic – by now almost exclusively from local quarries – was slowly decreasing during the Beeching era, the first section of the line being closed in 1963. This was the rope-worked 1 in 8 Middleton Incline. The Middleton Top-Friden section, including the 1 in 8 Sheep Pasture Incline and the Hopton Incline, closed on 21 April 1967 and Friden to Hindlow closed on 2 October 1967.

==Preservation==

===The High Peak Trail===

In 1971 the Peak Park Planning Board and Derbyshire County Council bought part of the track bed (from Dowlow, near Buxton, to High Peak Junction, Cromford) and turned it into the High Peak Trail, now a national route of the National Cycle Network and popular with walkers, cyclists and horse riders.

The High Peak Trail and part of the Tissington Trail (see below) are now also designated as part of the Pennine Bridleway, a leisure route that starts at Middleton Top, near Cromford, and includes through Derbyshire to the South Pennines.

The Middleton Incline Engine House has also been preserved, and the ancient engine once used to haul loaded wagons up is often demonstrated. Another attraction along the route is the Steeple Grange Light Railway, a narrow-gauge railway running along the trackbed of a branch line off the C&amp;HPR.

Near Cromford at the top of the town of Wirksworth the railway passed under Black Rocks, a popular gritstone climbing ground, and gave the name to the &#x27;railway slab&#x27;, a short tricky &#x27;boulder problem&#x27; by the railway track.

===The Tissington Trail===

At the hamlet of Parsley Hay, about SW of Bakewell, the C&amp;HPR/High Peak Trail is joined by the Tissington Trail, another route of the National Cycle Network, and formerly the railway line from Buxton to Ashbourne. This recreational route runs from Parsley Hay to Ashbourne on a gently descending gradient.

==Station locations==

Passenger services were introduced in stages with there being only one service a day each way between Cromford and Landmanlow in 1856. Stations were included at:

*Whatstandwell
*Cromford
*Steeple House
*Middleton
*Hopton Top Wharf
*Longcliffe
*Friden
*Hurdlow
*Hindlow
*Ladmanlow

The following additional stations were added in 1874. However, this was short-lived and the line was closed to passengers along with the outlying halts and minor stations in 1876.

*Whatstandwell
*Cromford
*Sheep Pasture
*Steeple House
*Middleton
*Hopton Top Wharf
*Longcliffe
*Friden
*Hurdlow
*Parsley Hay
*Hindlow
*Harpur Hill
*Ladmanlow
*Bunsail
*Shallcross
*Whaley Bridge

When in operation the services offered interchanges with the Derwent Valley Line, Ashbourne Line and Manchester, High Peak and Derbyshire Railway. 

==References==
===Sources===
*
*


==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1140854" start="4" end="34" title="Cromford and High Peak Railway" label="Cromford and High Peak Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999572" start="53" end="67" title="Standard-gauge railway" label="standard-gauge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5187616" start="85" end="99" title="Cromford Canal" label="Cromford Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5756066" start="109" end="127" title="High Peak Junction" label="High Peak Junction"/>
<link wikidata="Q7157817" start="136" end="153" title="Peak Forest Canal" label="Peak Forest Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q652597" start="157" end="170" title="Whaley Bridge" label="Whaley Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7946" start="233" end="240" title="mineral" label="mineral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330811" start="291" end="304" title="Peak District" label="Peak District"/>
<link wikidata="Q23098" start="312" end="322" title="Derbyshire" label="Derbyshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5946450" start="490" end="496" title="Hurdlow railway station" label="Dowlow"/>
<link wikidata="Q5756070" start="530" end="545" title="High Peak Trail" label="High Peak Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q2248471" start="562" end="584" title="National Cycle Network" label="National Cycle Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330811" start="607" end="620" title="Peak District" label="Peak District"/>
<link wikidata="Q23098" start="624" end="634" title="Derbyshire" label="Derbyshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q11801" start="770" end="792" title="Trent and Mersey Canal" label="Trent and Mersey Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q18125" start="849" end="859" title="Manchester" label="Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q11457" start="869" end="875" title="cotton" label="cotton"/>
<link wikidata="Q47994" start="884" end="897" title="East Midlands" label="East Midlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q28823" start="898" end="905" title="textile" label="textile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1975933" start="967" end="974" title="Tansley" label="Tansley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337703" start="976" end="983" title="Matlock, Derbyshire" label="Matlock"/>
<link wikidata="Q2462719" start="988" end="996" title="Bakewell" label="Bakewell"/>
<link wikidata="Q749246" start="1056" end="1067" title="Grindleford" label="Grindleford"/>
<link wikidata="Q2121162" start="1069" end="1073" title="Hope, Derbyshire" label="Hope"/>
<link wikidata="Q796625" start="1078" end="1083" title="Edale" label="Edale"/>
<link wikidata="Q23757" start="1331" end="1340" title="limestone" label="limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q6290699" start="1359" end="1372" title="Josias Jessop" label="Josias Jessop"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094334" start="1385" end="1399" title="William Jessop" label="William Jessop"/>
<link wikidata="Q532017" start="1472" end="1487" title="Benjamin Outram" label="Benjamin Outram"/>
<link wikidata="Q7833250" start="1527" end="1534" title="tramway (industrial)" label="tramway"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1715" end="1724" title="Ladmanlow" label="Ladmanlow"/>
<link wikidata="Q120498158" start="1835" end="1843" title="6 Geo. 4" label="6 Geo. 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q133614" start="2091" end="2108" title="George Stephenson" label="George Stephenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q375044" start="2116" end="2147" title="Stockton and Darlington Railway" label="Stockton and Darlington Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5946450" start="2301" end="2308" title="Hurdlow" label="Hurdlow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1612220" start="2507" end="2517" title="Wirksworth" label="Wirksworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q803210" start="2880" end="2900" title="Settle-Carlisle Railway" label="Settle–Carlisle line"/>
<link wikidata="Q633423" start="3043" end="3052" title="fishbelly rail" label="fishbelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q15089865" start="3220" end="3235" title="Cable railway" label="inclined planes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7604348" start="3237" end="3260" title="stationary steam engine" label="stationary steam engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q252189" start="3367" end="3376" title="Horse mill" label="horse-gin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5002992" start="3437" end="3454" title="Butterley Company" label="Butterley Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q11801" start="3666" end="3688" title="Trent and Mersey Canal" label="Trent and Mersey Canal"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3712" end="3747" title="Derby railway station#History" label="early East Midlands railway schemes"/>
<link wikidata="Q15089865" start="3865" end="3878" title="cable railway" label="cable railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1627795" start="4064" end="4070" title="Hopton, Derbyshire" label="Hopton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1627795" start="4395" end="4401" title="Hopton, Derbyshire" label="Hopton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2440304" start="4409" end="4417" title="Newhaven, Derbyshire" label="Newhaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q5503569" start="4591" end="4597" title="Friden, Derbyshire" label="Friden"/>
<link wikidata="Q6673660" start="4667" end="4677" title="Longcliffe" label="Longcliffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7605921" start="4864" end="4892" title="Steeple Grange Light Railway" label="Steeple Grange Light Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q356693" start="5415" end="5430" title="Rail adhesion" label="adhesion worked"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426166" start="5506" end="5520" title="Minimum railway curve radius" label="sharpest curve"/>
<link wikidata="Q16932243" start="5667" end="5723" title="Manchester, Buxton, Matlock and Midland Junction Railway" label="Manchester, Buxton, Matlock and Midland Junction Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5756066" start="5727" end="5745" title="High Peak Junction" label="High Peak Junction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000915" start="5783" end="5791" title="Cromford" label="Cromford"/>
<link wikidata="Q7618137" start="5839" end="5882" title="Stockport, Disley and Whaley Bridge Railway" label="Stockport, Disley and Whaley Bridge Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1612220" start="5916" end="5926" title="Wirksworth" label="Wirksworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1932006" start="6008" end="6023" title="Midland Railway" label="Midland Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1486303" start="6125" end="6157" title="London and North Western Railway" label="London and North Western Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q971223" start="6268" end="6274" title="Buxton" label="Buxton"/>
<link wikidata="Q652597" start="6531" end="6544" title="Whaley Bridge" label="Whaley Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540574" start="6553" end="6564" title="River Goyt" label="Goyt Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1486303" start="6714" end="6718" title="LNWR" label="LNWR"/>
<link wikidata="Q4804629" start="6724" end="6748" title="Ashbourne Line" label="branch line to Ashbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q7140002" start="6834" end="6845" title="Parsley Hay" label="Parsley Hay"/>
<link wikidata="Q7056819" start="6924" end="6951" title="North Staffordshire Railway" label="North Staffordshire Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2814117" start="7942" end="7971" title="Robert Stephenson and Company" label="Robert Stephenson and Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q120147450" start="8326" end="8343" title="18 &amp;amp; 19 Vict." label="18 &amp;amp; 19 Vict."/>
<link wikidata="Q4649590" start="9170" end="9172" title="A6 road (Great Britain)" label="A6"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="9625" end="9637" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q104842195" start="9720" end="9735" title="RAF Harpur Hill" label="RAF Harpur Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q814018" start="9888" end="9900" title="Beeching axe" label="Beeching era"/>
<link wikidata="Q5901346" start="10090" end="10104" title="Hopton Incline" label="Hopton Incline"/>
<link wikidata="Q2248471" start="10448" end="10470" title="National Cycle Network" label="National Cycle Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q6537379" start="10488" end="10495" title="walking" label="walkers"/>
<link wikidata="Q53121" start="10497" end="10505" title="cycling" label="cyclists"/>
<link wikidata="Q179226" start="10510" end="10522" title="horse riding" label="horse riders"/>
<link wikidata="Q2069097" start="10629" end="10646" title="Pennine Bridleway" label="Pennine Bridleway"/>
<link wikidata="Q687333" start="10679" end="10692" title="Middleton Top" label="Middleton Top"/>
<link wikidata="Q7605921" start="10948" end="10976" title="Steeple Grange Light Railway" label="Steeple Grange Light Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q4921740" start="11141" end="11152" title="Black Rocks (Derbyshire)" label="Black Rocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048392" start="11164" end="11173" title="gritstone" label="gritstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q852989" start="11257" end="11284" title="bouldering" label="&amp;#x27;boulder problem&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809650" start="11435" end="11451" title="Tissington Trail" label="Tissington Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q2313025" start="11834" end="11847" title="Whatstandwell railway station" label="Whatstandwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079568" start="11849" end="11857" title="Cromford railway station" label="Cromford"/>
<link wikidata="Q104863452" start="11859" end="11872" title="Steeple House railway station" label="Steeple House"/>
<link wikidata="Q104865364" start="11874" end="11883" title="Middleton railway station (Derbyshire)" label="Middleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q104865368" start="11903" end="11913" title="Longcliffe railway station" label="Longcliffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q104865359" start="11915" end="11921" title="Friden railway station" label="Friden"/>
<link wikidata="Q5946450" start="11923" end="11930" title="Hurdlow railway station" label="Hurdlow"/>
<link wikidata="Q5766118" start="11932" end="11939" title="Hindlow railway station" label="Hindlow"/>
<link wikidata="Q104865373" start="11941" end="11950" title="Ladmanlow railway station" label="Ladmanlow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2313025" start="12134" end="12147" title="Whatstandwell railway station" label="Whatstandwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079568" start="12149" end="12157" title="Cromford railway station" label="Cromford"/>
<link wikidata="Q104863452" start="12174" end="12187" title="Steeple House railway station" label="Steeple House"/>
<link wikidata="Q104865364" start="12189" end="12198" title="Middleton railway station (Derbyshire)" label="Middleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q104865368" start="12218" end="12228" title="Longcliffe railway station" label="Longcliffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q104865359" start="12230" end="12236" title="Friden railway station" label="Friden"/>
<link wikidata="Q5946450" start="12238" end="12245" title="Hurdlow railway station" label="Hurdlow"/>
<link wikidata="Q7140002" start="12247" end="12258" title="Parsley Hay railway station" label="Parsley Hay"/>
<link wikidata="Q5766118" start="12260" end="12267" title="Hindlow railway station" label="Hindlow"/>
<link wikidata="Q104865369" start="12269" end="12280" title="Harpur Hill railway station" label="Harpur Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q104865373" start="12282" end="12291" title="Ladmanlow railway station" label="Ladmanlow"/>
<link wikidata="Q104865374" start="12293" end="12300" title="Bunsail railway station" label="Bunsail"/>
<link wikidata="Q7487255" start="12302" end="12312" title="Shallcross railway station" label="Shallcross"/>
<link wikidata="Q2111822" start="12314" end="12327" title="Whaley Bridge railway station" label="Whaley Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5263352" start="12390" end="12409" title="Derwent Valley Line" label="Derwent Valley Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q4804629" start="12411" end="12425" title="Ashbourne Line" label="Ashbourne Line"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12430" end="12474" title="Manchester, High Peak and Derbyshire Railway" label="Manchester, High Peak and Derbyshire Railway"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="990613" wikidata="Q155924" url="?curid=990613" title="Patrik Berger">
<text>Patrik Berger (; born 10 November 1973) is a Czech former professional footballer who played as a midfielder. He started his career in his own country with Slavia Prague and spent a season in Germany playing for Borussia Dortmund. He moved to England in 1996, where he spent seven years with Liverpool, winning four trophies in his time there. This was followed by spells at Portsmouth, Aston Villa and Stoke City. He spent the last two years of his career back in his native Czech Republic playing for Sparta Prague.

Internationally, Berger played in two major tournaments for the Czech Republic. He played an important part in his nation&#x27;s Euro 1996 campaign, scoring in the final as the Czech Republic finished runners-up to Germany. He took a 17-month break from the national team between 1997 and 1998 after a dispute with manager Dušan Uhrin, returning to the setup following Uhrin&#x27;s departure from the post. His second and final major tournament was Euro 2000, but due to suspension and his country&#x27;s early exit, he only played one match. He retired from the national team in 2002 at the age of 28 with a total of 44 senior international caps and 18 goals.

Capable of occupying midfield and forward positions, Berger became noted for his powerful strikes, surging runs, and strong left foot. Berger was beset with injuries throughout his career and received specialist treatment in the United States. He retired on 6 January 2010 due to knee injuries.

==Personal life==
Berger was born in Prague, Czechoslovakia. His uncle is the Czech footballer Jan Berger. He married wife Jaroslava, and has two children, son Patrik and daughter Valentýnka. He gained a British passport in 2001 after having spent five years playing club football in England. This enabled him to play without needing a work permit, which he had previously required due to the Premier League&#x27;s rules on non-EU players.

==Club career==
===Early career===
He began his footballing career as a youth player at Sparta Prague in 1989, securing a professional contract two years later with rivals Slavia Prague. Establishing himself as a senior regular, Berger competed in Europe and earned selection for Czechoslovakia and, following its establishment, the Czech Republic.

===Borussia Dortmund===
After 90 league appearances and 24 goals, Berger was purchased by Ottmar Hitzfeld&#x27;s Borussia Dortmund in 1995 for a reported £500,000. In August 1995 he played in the DFL-Supercup, as Dortmund beat Borussia Mönchengladbach to win the title. While Dortmund went on to win the Bundesliga title in the 1995–96 season, Berger was frequently used as a substitute, making 14 of his 27 league appearances from the bench. Hitzfeld preferred to employ Berger as a defensive midfielder as he considered him to be most suited to the role. Berger scored four goals for Dortmund in the German top-flight.

Liverpool&#x27;s interest in Berger was stimulated by the performances of the Czech Republic during Euro 1996, organised in England, where he scored a penalty in the final. The club approached both Berger and Karel Poborský, who elected to transfer to Manchester United after the competition&#x27;s conclusion. Berger did accept Liverpool&#x27;s contract offer and completed his transfer in August 1996 for £3.25 million.

===Liverpool===
Berger and his family settled in Southport, Merseyside, where they resided near retired players Kenny Dalglish and Alan Hansen. Debuting as a substitute in a 2–1 home win against Southampton on 7 September 1996, Berger performed well in his first month with the club, endearing him to supporters and earning praise from colleagues. In his second match, he replaced Stan Collymore as half time substitute, going on to score two goals in a 3–0 win against Leicester City. A second double was registered against Chelsea in the latter&#x27;s 5–1 defeat at Anfield, which he followed with a fifth goal in four matches in a Cup Winners&#x27; Cup match against MYPA. The series of displays were recognised in October 1996 with the FA&#x27;s Player of the Month award for September.

First-team opportunities became limited in Berger&#x27;s second season. Despite scoring a hat-trick against Chelsea in October 1997, he often found himself named as a substitute. His dissatisfaction at manager Roy Evans placed his Liverpool career in jeopardy. Evans criticised Berger&#x27;s perceived indifference to teamwork and publicly expressed a willingness to sell after he refused to be used as a substitute against Bolton Wanderers in March 1998. Berger was linked with a move away from Liverpool in May 1998, with Italian club Roma, the manager of which was his countryman Zdeněk Zeman, and Portuguese club Benfica both mentioned as possible destinations. The appointment of Gérard Houllier as co-manager before the 1998–99 season and subsequent departure of Evans proved to be pivotal in Berger&#x27;s decision to remain with the club.

Playing regularly in his first season under Houllier&#x27;s reign, Berger scored nine goals and improved as a player. An injury sustained in a 4–3 defeat to Leeds United in November 2000 rendered Berger unavailable for much of the 2000–01 season and required specialist treatment in the United States from knee surgeon Richard Steadman. By March 2001, Berger had recovered and he went on to feature in the final of both the UEFA Cup and the FA Cup, with Liverpool winning both trophies. In the 2001 FA Cup Final, he provided the assist for Michael Owen to score the deciding goal against Arsenal.

He appeared in the 2001 FA Charity Shield, coming on as a substitute as Liverpool won the competition. He then underwent knee surgery in August 2001, ruling him out of the 2001 UEFA Super Cup.

Recurring injuries between 2001 and 2003 continued to disrupt Berger&#x27;s career and deprived him of a presence in the first team, resulting in his decision to leave Liverpool after the expiration of his contract following the conclusion of the 2002–03 season. Berger had been confined to the bench for the duration of his final season when selected, limiting him to four appearances. He left Liverpool, having scored 35 goals during his seven seasons with the club.

===Portsmouth===
Newly promoted to the Premier League, Portsmouth manager Harry Redknapp signed Berger on a free transfer. Redknapp said of the deal: &quot;Patrik&#x27;s a quality player, free – and the type of player who&#x27;ll bring good experience to Portsmouth. I had a bit of competition for him but he&#x27;s looked round the area and is very happy to join us.&quot; Berger made his first appearance for Portsmouth on the opening day against Aston Villa; he scored the club&#x27;s second goal. Berger scored the winning goal in Portsmouth&#x27;s victory over his former club Liverpool in October 2003. A month later, he set up the first and fourth Portsmouth goals and scored the fifth in Portsmouth&#x27;s 6–1 win against Leeds United. On Boxing Day 2003, Berger helped Portsmouth to a 2–0 win against Tottenham Hotspur, scoring both goals of the match from free kicks, the first of which was scored from . Berger underwent an operation upon his knee in February 2004, forcing him to miss the remainder of the season.

Berger started the 2004–05 season with note, scoring August&#x27;s contender for Goal of the Season against Charlton Athletic. His second goal of the campaign came in a 3–1 win away to Crystal Palace, striking from . October 2004 saw his final league goal for Portsmouth in a 2–2 away draw at Norwich, scoring a 25-yard free kick.

The club endured a difficult end to the season, winning just once in a period of 12 matches, which prompted the appointment of Alain Perrin as Portsmouth&#x27;s new manager. Berger was one of a number of players including Steve Stone and Shaka Hislop whose contracts were due to expire in the summer. Portsmouth successfully avoided relegation close to the end of the season, following a 2–0 loss away at Manchester City on 30 April. In spite of Portsmouth having retained their Premier League status, Berger then joined Aston Villa on a two-year deal, citing manager David O&#x27;Leary as the main reason for choosing Villa.

===Aston Villa and Stoke City (loan)===
Berger was hampered by injury during his early Villa career, making few league appearances. During the first part of his second season, he only played two matches under new manager Martin O&#x27;Neill. In November 2006, he was sent to Championship club Stoke City on loan until 4 January 2007, following a fine of two weeks&#x27; wages for refusing to play in a reserve match. During his time at Stoke, he started just one match and took part in a further six as a substitute. Following his return from Stoke, Berger was commended by O&#x27;Neill on his fitness and on 7 April 2007, Berger started his first match for Villa since October 2005. He marked this occasion by scoring a goal in a 2–1 victory against Blackburn Rovers. Berger scored again on 5 May 2007 in the penultimate match of the season against Sheffield United. On 28 May 2007, Berger agreed to sign a one-year contract extension with Aston Villa.

Berger was injured in the pre-season of the 2007–08 Premier League, keeping him out of league matches until October 2007. He then suffered a recurrence of the same injury and was ruled out for a further period of time. On 6 May 2008, Berger was told he had played his last match for Aston Villa after urging captain Gareth Barry to move to Liverpool. This came just days after manager Martin O&#x27;Neill claimed he was &quot;desperate&quot; to keep Barry following interest from Premier League rivals Chelsea and Liverpool. At the end of his contract Berger was released by the club, having appeared in just 29 league matches in three seasons.

===Return to Sparta Prague===
On 29 May 2008, Berger returned to Prague as a free agent, signing a two-year contract with boyhood club Sparta Prague, also becoming captain of the club for the 2008–09 Gambrinus liga. In November 2008, Berger scored a hat-trick against SK Kladno in a 5–0 Sparta victory. Sparta went on to finish the season in second place, thus ensuring qualification for the following season&#x27;s UEFA Champions League tournament. Berger was the club&#x27;s top league goal scorer with six goals.

During the 2009–10 season, Berger played just two league matches before undergoing more knee surgery. On 6 January 2010 he announced his retirement after failing to recover from a ligament injury.

===Post-professional career===
Berger continued playing football on an amateur basis in August 2010 for sixth-tier Czech Republic club Dolní Chabry. At the age of 40 he was still playing for the team.

==International career==
Berger represented the youth teams of Czechoslovakia from the under-15 level, working his way up through under-16, under-17 and under-18 between 1988 and 1991. For these junior teams he had a record of a total of six goals in 49 appearances. During this time, he won the 1990 UEFA European Under-16 Championship with the under-16 team, scoring in the final against Yugoslavia.

In a FIFA World Cup qualifier on 23 March 1993, Berger debuted for the Czechoslovakia against Cyprus, which ended in a 1–1 draw. In October 1995, he scored the second goal in a qualification match for Euro 1996 against Belarus, which the Czechs won 2–0.

Berger was part of the Czech Republic team who took part in Euro 1996, but Martin Frýdek was preferred to Berger in the starting lineup for the first match against Germany. Berger went on to play in all of his nation&#x27;s matches in the tournament, scoring the famous penalty spot in the final to give the Czech Republic a 1–0 lead against Germany. However, the Czech Republic ultimately lost on the golden goal rule in extra time.

Between 1997 and 1998, Berger boycotted the Czech national team due to a conflict with head coach Dušan Uhrin. He returned to the national set-up after a 17-month absence following the appointment of Jozef Chovanec as Uhrin&#x27;s replacement. He made a notable return to the national team, scoring two goals from free kicks in a qualification match against Estonia.

The next major international tournament Berger took part in was Euro 2000. Having been suspended for his nation&#x27;s first two matches after being sent off in a qualifier against the Faroe Islands, Berger played just one match. Berger announced his retirement from international football in March 2002 at the age of 28.

==Style of play==
Berger played mainly as an attacking midfielder, also being known as a winger. He became noted for his powerful strikes, surging runs, and strong left foot. Teammate at Liverpool Steven Gerrard said of Berger that &quot;he was the best left-footed striker of a ball I have seen&quot;.

==Career statistics==
===Club===
===International===
:&quot;Scores and results list Czech Republic&#x27;s goal tally first, score column indicates score after each Berger goal.&quot;

==Honours==
Borussia Dortmund
*Bundesliga: 1995–96
*DFB-Supercup: 1995

Liverpool
*FA Cup: 2000–01
*FA Charity Shield: 2001
*UEFA Cup: 2000–01

Individual
*Premier League Player of the Month: September 1996
*Czech Footballer of the Year: 1996 (shared with Karel Poborský)
*Czech Golden Ball: 1999

==References==
===Cited texts===
*
==External links==
* 
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q155924" start="0" end="13" title="Patrik Berger" label="Patrik Berger"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="71" end="81" title="Association football" label="footballer"/>
<link wikidata="Q193592" start="98" end="108" title="midfielder" label="midfielder"/>
<link wikidata="Q194393" start="156" end="169" title="SK Slavia Prague" label="Slavia Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q41420" start="212" end="229" title="Borussia Dortmund" label="Borussia Dortmund"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130849" start="292" end="301" title="Liverpool F.C." label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q19604" start="375" end="385" title="Portsmouth F.C." label="Portsmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q18711" start="387" end="398" title="Aston Villa F.C." label="Aston Villa"/>
<link wikidata="Q18736" start="403" end="413" title="Stoke City F.C." label="Stoke City"/>
<link wikidata="Q193481" start="503" end="516" title="AC Sparta Prague" label="Sparta Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q483868" start="583" end="597" title="Czech Republic national football team" label="Czech Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q180563" start="648" end="657" title="UEFA Euro 1996" label="Euro 1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q528678" start="842" end="853" title="Dušan Uhrin" label="Dušan Uhrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q131239" start="968" end="977" title="UEFA Euro 2000" label="Euro 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q280658" start="1215" end="1222" title="Forward (association football)" label="forward"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085" start="1514" end="1520" title="Prague" label="Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q950592" start="1572" end="1582" title="Jan Berger (footballer, born 1955)" label="Jan Berger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290793" start="1681" end="1697" title="British passport" label="British passport"/>
<link wikidata="Q9448" start="1870" end="1884" title="Premier League" label="Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q193481" start="2006" end="2019" title="AC Sparta Prague" label="Sparta Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q194393" start="2090" end="2103" title="SK Slavia Prague" label="Slavia Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q44478" start="2358" end="2373" title="Ottmar Hitzfeld" label="Ottmar Hitzfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q41420" start="2381" end="2398" title="Borussia Dortmund" label="Borussia Dortmund"/>
<link wikidata="Q156973" start="2464" end="2476" title="DFL-Supercup" label="DFL-Supercup"/>
<link wikidata="Q101959" start="2495" end="2519" title="Borussia Mönchengladbach" label="Borussia Mönchengladbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q82595" start="2572" end="2582" title="Bundesliga" label="Bundesliga"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2752" end="2772" title="Midfielder#Defensive midfielder" label="defensive midfielder"/>
<link wikidata="Q224033" start="3099" end="3113" title="Karel Poborský" label="Karel Poborský"/>
<link wikidata="Q18656" start="3142" end="3159" title="Manchester United F.C." label="Manchester United"/>
<link wikidata="Q868647" start="3362" end="3371" title="Southport" label="Southport"/>
<link wikidata="Q187198" start="3425" end="3439" title="Kenny Dalglish" label="Kenny Dalglish"/>
<link wikidata="Q374189" start="3444" end="3455" title="Alan Hansen" label="Alan Hansen"/>
<link wikidata="Q18732" start="3508" end="3519" title="Southampton F.C." label="Southampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q444975" start="3694" end="3708" title="Stan Collymore" label="Stan Collymore"/>
<link wikidata="Q19481" start="3783" end="3797" title="Leicester City F.C." label="Leicester City"/>
<link wikidata="Q40241" start="3947" end="3968" title="UEFA Cup Winners&amp;#x27; Cup" label="Cup Winners&amp;#x27; Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q318698" start="3983" end="3987" title="MYPA" label="MYPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q890790" start="4053" end="4082" title="Premier League Player of the Month" label="FA&amp;#x27;s Player of the Month"/>
<link wikidata="Q123086" start="4195" end="4204" title="hat-trick" label="hat-trick"/>
<link wikidata="Q9616" start="4213" end="4220" title="Chelsea F.C." label="Chelsea"/>
<link wikidata="Q927681" start="4315" end="4324" title="Roy Evans" label="Roy Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q19451" start="4529" end="4545" title="Bolton Wanderers F.C." label="Bolton Wanderers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739" start="4642" end="4646" title="A.S. Roma" label="Roma"/>
<link wikidata="Q169092" start="4688" end="4700" title="Zdeněk Zeman" label="Zdeněk Zeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q131499" start="4722" end="4729" title="S.L. Benfica" label="Benfica"/>
<link wikidata="Q295615" start="4790" end="4805" title="Gérard Houllier" label="Gérard Houllier"/>
<link wikidata="Q4594321" start="4831" end="4845" title="1998–99 Liverpool F.C. season" label="1998–99 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q2150659" start="5272" end="5288" title="Richard Steadman" label="Richard Steadman"/>
<link wikidata="Q18760" start="5377" end="5385" title="UEFA Europa League" label="UEFA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q11151" start="5394" end="5400" title="FA Cup" label="FA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q3110441" start="5447" end="5464" title="2001 FA Cup Final" label="2001 FA Cup Final"/>
<link wikidata="Q9617" start="5541" end="5548" title="Arsenal F.C." label="Arsenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2053106" start="5570" end="5592" title="2001 FA Charity Shield" label="2001 FA Charity Shield"/>
<link wikidata="Q597316" start="5723" end="5742" title="2001 UEFA Super Cup" label="2001 UEFA Super Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q19604" start="6270" end="6280" title="Portsmouth F.C." label="Portsmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q221349" start="6289" end="6303" title="Harry Redknapp" label="Harry Redknapp"/>
<link wikidata="Q3622633" start="6323" end="6336" title="Free transfer (association football)" label="free transfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q18711" start="6664" end="6675" title="Aston Villa F.C." label="Aston Villa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128631" start="6945" end="6957" title="Leeds United F.C." label="Leeds United"/>
<link wikidata="Q956699" start="6962" end="6972" title="Boxing Day" label="Boxing Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q18741" start="7025" end="7042" title="Tottenham Hotspur F.C." label="Tottenham Hotspur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379266" start="7081" end="7091" title="Direct free kick" label="free kicks"/>
<link wikidata="Q40821" start="7150" end="7159" title="Surgery" label="operation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5575173" start="7323" end="7341" title="BBC Goal of the Season" label="Goal of the Season"/>
<link wikidata="Q19462" start="7350" end="7367" title="Charlton Athletic F.C." label="Charlton Athletic"/>
<link wikidata="Q19467" start="7427" end="7441" title="Crystal Palace F.C." label="Crystal Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q454164" start="7701" end="7713" title="Alain Perrin" label="Alain Perrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q555292" start="7796" end="7807" title="Steve Stone (footballer)" label="Steve Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q318103" start="7812" end="7824" title="Shaka Hislop" label="Shaka Hislop"/>
<link wikidata="Q132026" start="8142" end="8160" title="David O&amp;#x27;Leary" label="David O&amp;#x27;Leary"/>
<link wikidata="Q310263" start="8422" end="8441" title="Martin O&amp;#x27;Neill" label="Martin O&amp;#x27;Neill"/>
<link wikidata="Q19510" start="8476" end="8488" title="EFL Championship" label="Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q18736" start="8494" end="8504" title="Stoke City F.C." label="Stoke City"/>
<link wikidata="Q19446" start="8952" end="8968" title="Blackburn Rovers F.C." label="Blackburn Rovers"/>
<link wikidata="Q19607" start="9051" end="9067" title="Sheffield United F.C." label="Sheffield United"/>
<link wikidata="Q187376" start="9200" end="9222" title="2007–08 Premier League" label="2007–08 Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q191855" start="9472" end="9484" title="Gareth Barry" label="Gareth Barry"/>
<link wikidata="Q193481" start="9937" end="9950" title="Sparta Prague" label="Sparta Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086975" start="9994" end="10016" title="2008–09 Gambrinus liga" label="2008–09 Gambrinus liga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473789" start="10070" end="10079" title="SK Kladno" label="SK Kladno"/>
<link wikidata="Q18756" start="10218" end="10239" title="UEFA Champions League" label="UEFA Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q473808" start="11015" end="11055" title="1990 UEFA European Under-16 Championship" label="1990 UEFA European Under-16 Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q3590360" start="11109" end="11119" title="Yugoslavia national under-16 football team" label="Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4589410" start="11127" end="11151" title="1994 FIFA World Cup qualification (UEFA - Group 4)" label="FIFA World Cup qualifier"/>
<link wikidata="Q182072" start="11193" end="11207" title="Czechoslovakia national football team" label="Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q188791" start="11216" end="11222" title="Cyprus national football team" label="Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q180563" start="11323" end="11332" title="UEFA Euro 1996" label="Euro 1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q186252" start="11341" end="11348" title="Belarus national football team" label="Belarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366800" start="11452" end="11465" title="Martin Frýdek" label="Martin Frýdek"/>
<link wikidata="Q43310" start="11541" end="11548" title="Germany national football team" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067311" start="11663" end="11672" title="UEFA Euro 1996 Final" label="the final"/>
<link wikidata="Q483868" start="11685" end="11699" title="Czech Republic national football team" label="Czech Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q244753" start="11779" end="11790" title="golden goal" label="golden goal"/>
<link wikidata="Q179366" start="11842" end="11851" title="Boycott" label="boycotted"/>
<link wikidata="Q528678" start="11910" end="11921" title="Dušan Uhrin" label="Dušan Uhrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q465962" start="12012" end="12026" title="Jozef Chovanec" label="Jozef Chovanec"/>
<link wikidata="Q186914" start="12170" end="12177" title="Estonia national football team" label="Estonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q131239" start="12244" end="12253" title="UEFA Euro 2000" label="Euro 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q265777" start="12329" end="12337" title="Misconduct (association football)" label="sent off"/>
<link wikidata="Q200688" start="12365" end="12378" title="Faroe Islands national football team" label="Faroe Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q193592" start="12548" end="12568" title="attacking midfielder" label="attacking midfielder"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12592" end="12598" title="Midfielder#Winger" label="winger"/>
<link wikidata="Q459830" start="12700" end="12714" title="Steven Gerrard" label="Steven Gerrard"/>
<link wikidata="Q82595" start="13022" end="13032" title="Bundesliga" label="Bundesliga"/>
<link wikidata="Q700494" start="13034" end="13041" title="1995–96 Bundesliga" label="1995–96"/>
<link wikidata="Q156973" start="13043" end="13055" title="DFL-Supercup" label="DFB-Supercup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2016950" start="13057" end="13061" title="1995 DFB-Supercup" label="1995"/>
<link wikidata="Q11151" start="13074" end="13080" title="FA Cup" label="FA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386640" start="13082" end="13089" title="2000–01 FA Cup" label="2000–01"/>
<link wikidata="Q189188" start="13091" end="13108" title="FA Community Shield" label="FA Charity Shield"/>
<link wikidata="Q2053106" start="13110" end="13114" title="2001 FA Charity Shield" label="2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q18760" start="13116" end="13124" title="UEFA Europa League" label="UEFA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q656410" start="13126" end="13133" title="2000–01 UEFA Cup" label="2000–01"/>
<link wikidata="Q890790" start="13147" end="13181" title="Premier League Player of the Month" label="Premier League Player of the Month"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13183" end="13197" title="1996–97 FA Premier League#Monthly awards" label="September 1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q1442850" start="13199" end="13227" title="Czech Footballer of the Year" label="Czech Footballer of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q224033" start="13247" end="13261" title="Karel Poborský" label="Karel Poborský"/>
<link wikidata="Q207233" start="13264" end="13281" title="Golden Ball (Czech Republic)" label="Czech Golden Ball"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="990619" wikidata="Q1725600" url="?curid=990619" title="Chemosh">
<text>Chemosh (; ) is a Canaanite deity worshipped by Ancient Semitic-speaking peoples who occupied the region known in the Hebrew Bible as Moab, in modern-day Jordan east of the Dead Sea, during the Levantine Bronze and Iron Ages. Chemosh was the supreme deity of the Canaanite state of Moab and the patron-god of its population, the Moabites, who in consequence were called the &quot;People of Chemosh&quot;. The name and significance of Chemosh are historically attested in the Moabite-language inscriptions on the Mesha Stele, dated ca.
840 BCE. Chemosh is also mentioned in the Hebrew Bible.

==Name==
The name of Chemosh is attested in the Moabite language as (), which was pronounced as ().

The name of Chemosh is of yet uncertain origin, and it is unclear whether it was related to the name of the Eblaite deity (), or the Ugaritic divine name (), or an epithet of the Mesopotamian god () which might have meant &quot;bull&quot;, ().

According to one hypothesis which assumes that the names and , and and were the same, the first two variants of the name might have been -type substantival participles of B-stem and the latter two variants might have been -type verbal adjectives of D-stem, both meaning &quot;conqueror&quot; and &quot;subduer,&quot; thus being related to the Akkadian terms / () and ()/ (), meaning &quot;to submit to an overlord or to a deity&quot; and &quot;to bend,&quot; as well as to the Old South Arabian term (), meaning &quot;to crush.&quot;

Chemosh is mentioned in the Hebrew Bible under the name (, ). The Hebrew form was itself later Romanised as ( ) in translations of the Bible, while the accurate pronunciation of the name of the god, reflecting the Moabite pronunciation , is more accurately recorded in the Septuagint as () and the Vulgate as .

==History==
===Origins===
The origin of the Moabite deity Chemosh is unclear, although he might possibly have been the same as the Bronze Age-period god from Ebla named (), whose existence has been attested from around , thus suggesting that Chemosh might have been an ancient Semitic deity. The significant gap between the attestation of the Eblaite Kamiš during the 23rd century BC and that of the Moabite Chemosh in the 9th century BC, with an absence of any reference to either of these deities in Amorite names from the 21st to the 15th centuries BC, nevertheless make this identification between Kamiš and Chemosh very uncertain.

===Iron Age===
In the 9th century BC, Chemosh was the principal god of the Canaanite kingdom of Moab, whose worship was characteristic of the Moabites. The cult of Chemosh appears to have been limited to the Moabites, and his name does not appear in contemporary Ancient North Arabian inscriptions.

During this period itself, Chemosh was identified with (), who was the Moabite adaptation of the North Arabian god ʿAṯtar, himself a form of the Semitic deity of the planet Venus, ʿAṯtar, in the combined form of (). The astral role of ʿAštar itself is attested by his mention along with the Moon-God Šaggar in the Deir Alla Inscription, the subject of which is largely the Sun-goddess Šamāš, thus forming a triad of the Sun, Moon, and Venus similarly to the one attested in South Arabia, and suggesting a South Arabian religious influence in Moab.

During the 9th century BC, the kingdom of Moab had been subdued by the kingdom of Israel during the rule of the latter state&#x27;s kings Omri and Ahab. The 9th century BC Moabite king Mesha, who ascended to the Moabite throne during the reign of Ahab, wrote in his inscriptions (including the Mesha Stele) that the Israelites had been able to subdue Moab because Chemosh was angry with his people, that is the Moabites.

Mesha soon rebelled against Israelite suzerainty and embarked on an expansionist policy against the Israelites, which he carried out as holy war performed as a ritual to Chemosh. After Mesha had captured the Gadite city of Ataroth (&quot;ʿAṭārōt&quot;), he slaughtered all of its inhabitants as an accomplishment of a vow he had made to Chemosh and to the population of Moab, and he brought the warden of Ataroth, the Gadite chief Uriel, to Kirioth, where Mesha sacrificed him to Chemosh. When, following his capture of Ataroth, Mesha conquered the town of Nebo, he sacrificed the whole Israelite population of the town to ʿAštar-Chemosh, likely because of ʿAštar&#x27;s function as an avenger deity who was invoked in curses against enemies, and he brought all the lambs of the sanctuary of Yahweh, at Nebo to the sanctuary of Chemosh, where he sacrificed them to Chemosh.

Mesha recorded in his victory stela that he had built a high place dedicated to Chemosh in the citadel of the Moabite capital of Ḏaybān to thank the god for assuring his triumph in his military campaign against the Israelites.

===Later periods===
Chemosh was still worshipped after the Moabite kingdom came to an end, and his name was used as a theophoric element by individuals of Moabite descent living in Egypt and Babylonia. An Aramaic inscription from Al-Karak, and dated from the 3rd century BC, mentions Chemosh.

During the periods of Hellenistic and Roman rule in Moab, Chemosh was identified with the Greek god of war, Arēs, due to which Graeco-Roman records called the city of Rabbat Mōʾāb as (), (), and (), all meaning &quot;City of Arēs.&quot;

===Legacy===

====Biblical====
Chemosh is mentioned in the Hebrew Bible, where he is mentioned as the god of the Ammonites at one point, although he is later referred to as (, ), and later called (, the ).

According to the Biblical narrative, the Israelite king Solomon introduced the cults of Astarte, Chemosh and Milcom in east Jerusalem for his foreign concubines, and the later Judahite king Josiah later destroyed the high places of these deities during his reform of the cult of his kingdom.

In the Books of Kings of the Bible, the Moabite king Mesha is alleged to have sacrificed his own son to Chemosh on the wall of his city when faced with a difficult situation in war, after which Chemosh rewarded Mesha by immediately starting to destroy the kingdom of Israel.

The 6th-century BC Judahite prophet Jeremiah later announced that Chemosh as well as his priests and his princes would be exiled.

==Cult==
===Functions===
Chemosh had a martial role, due to which the Moabite king Mesha called him &quot;the subduer of the enemies of Moab&quot;, and ascribed to Chemosh his own military victories, and, due to his identification with (), who was the Arab deity of the planet Venus, Chemosh appears to also have had an astral aspect.

As the patron god of Moab, the Moabites believed that the anger of Chemosh against them would result in their subjugation, and his favour would ensure their independence and victory in war.

Based on the assumption that his name might have been the same as the epithet () of the Mesopotamian god of the underworld, Nergal, the Moabite god Chemosh might also have had a chthonic aspect.
===Temples===
The main sanctuary of Chemosh in Moab was likely located in the important Moabite city of Qerīyōt, which is presently a site on a high hill where Iron Age I to II period Moabite remains, including potsherds, have been discovered. An inscription of the Moabite king Mesha mentions the existence of a (, ).

Mesha recorded in his victory stela that he had built a high place dedicated to Chemosh in the citadel of the Moabite capital of Ḏaybān to thank the god for assuring his triumph in a military campaign against the Israelites. Hence, Chemosh was referred to as (, ) in the inscription.

Mesha also claimed to have rebuilt the site of (), whose name means &quot;House of High Places&quot; and which is called Bāmōt-Baʿal () in Israelite texts such as the Hebrew Bible, thus suggesting that a sanctuary with seven altars existed at this place. This sanctuary&#x27;s remains have however not yet been discovered, and it is unknown whether the cult of Chemosh was performed there.

===Hypostases===
Chemosh was equated with the Semitic high god () in the personal name (), meaning &quot;Chemosh is ʾĒl.&quot;

====Ashtar-Chemosh====
Chemosh was identified with (), who was the Moabite adaptation of the North Arabian god ʿAṯtar, himself a form of the Semitic deity of the planet Venus, ʿAṯtar, in the combined form of (). The astral role of ʿAštar itself is attested by his mention along with the Moon-God Šaggar in the Deir Alla Inscription, the subject of which is largely the Sun-goddess Shamash, thus forming a triad of the Sun, Moon, and Venus similarly to the one attested in South Arabia, and suggesting a South Arabian religious influence in Moab.

In earlier scholarship from the late 19th century, Ashtar-Chemosh was inaccurately considered to be an independent deity existing separately from Chemosh, and was identified as a form of the Canaanite goddess (ʿAštart), although the masculine form of ʿAštar in the god&#x27;s name shows that ʿAštar-Chemosh was a male deity.

===Iconography===

Chemosh was likely the masculine deity represented in the Baluʿa Stele, in which he is depicted as handing a sceptre to a Moabite king.

The masculine figure represented on a Moabite stele from Shihan wearing a shendyt and holding a spear might also have been a depiction of Chemosh.

Chemosh might also have been represented in Hellenistic period Moabite coins as an armed figure standing between two torches.

===Rites===
====Human sacrifice====
The Moabites considered human sacrifice to Chemosh to be necessary to obtain the favour of Chemosh in critical situations, as attested by those performed by the Moabite king Mōšaʿ.

One form of human sacrifice to Chemosh was performed by Moabite kings to thank him for the accomplishment of a vow made to him in a military context, that is, in exchange of the Moabites&#x27; victory in war, the enemy population defeated in the said war was killed in the name of Chemosh. This is attested when Mesha had embarked on a policy of conquest of Israelite territories in the 9th century BC, and he slaughtered all of the inhabitants of the Gadite city of Ataroth as an accomplishment of a vow he had made to Chemosh.

Enemy populations defeated in war were also directly sacrificed to Chemosh, such as when, following his capture of Ataroth, Mesha conquered the town of Nebo, he sacrificed the whole Israelite population of the town to Ashtar-Chemosh, likely because of ʿAštar&#x27;s function as an avenger deity who was invoked in curses against enemies.

The Hebrew Bible claims that Mesha sacrificed his own son to Chemosh on the wall of his city when faced with a difficult situation in war, after which Chemosh rewarded Mesha by immediately starting to destroy the kingdom of Israel. The claim that Mesha sacrificed his son to Chemosh has so far remained unverifiable and is not attested in any Moabite inscription.

====Animal sacrifice====
After Mesha conquered Nebo, he brought all the lambs of the sanctuary of Yahweh, the God of his Israelite enemies, at Nebo to the sanctuary of Chemosh, where he sacrificed them to Chemosh.

====Sanctuary building====
Moabite kings built sanctuaries for Chemosh to thank him once they had obtained his favour, as attested in the victory stela of Mesha recording that he had built a high place dedicated to Chemosh in the citadel of the Moabite capital of Ḏaybān to thank the god for assuring his triumph in his military campaign against the Israelites.

===As theophoric element===
The name of Chemosh appears as a theophoric element in the name of several Moabite kings, such as ( or ), (), and (), as well as in several Moabite personal names recorded in inscriptions, such as:
* , , or 
* , , or 
* , , or 
* , , 
* , , 
* , , 
* , , or )
* , , &#x27;Tabu (Exclusive Property) of Chemosh&#x27;

==References==
==Sources==
* 
* 
* 
* 


==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1725600" start="0" end="7" title="Chemosh" label="Chemosh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914567" start="18" end="27" title="Canaanite religion" label="Canaanite"/>
<link wikidata="Q23808759" start="48" end="80" title="Ancient Semitic-speaking peoples" label="Ancient Semitic-speaking peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q732870" start="118" end="130" title="Hebrew Bible" label="Hebrew Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q326304" start="134" end="138" title="Moab" label="Moab"/>
<link wikidata="Q810" start="154" end="160" title="Jordan" label="Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q23883" start="173" end="181" title="Dead Sea" label="Dead Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q81483" start="194" end="203" title="Levant" label="Levantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="204" end="210" title="Bronze Age" label="Bronze"/>
<link wikidata="Q11764" start="215" end="219" title="Iron Age" label="Iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1589492" start="242" end="255" title="King of the gods" label="supreme deity"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="263" end="272" title="Canaan#Canaanites" label="Canaanite"/>
<link wikidata="Q11681141" start="295" end="305" title="Tutelary deity" label="patron-god"/>
<link wikidata="Q36385" start="475" end="491" title="Moabite language" label="Moabite-language"/>
<link wikidata="Q724954" start="512" end="523" title="Mesha Stele" label="Mesha Stele"/>
<link wikidata="Q732870" start="577" end="589" title="Hebrew Bible" label="Hebrew Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q36385" start="640" end="656" title="Moabite language" label="Moabite language"/>
<link wikidata="Q5743" start="801" end="805" title="Ebla" label="Ebla"/>
<link wikidata="Q191369" start="826" end="832" title="Ugarit" label="Ugarit"/>
<link wikidata="Q35518" start="1281" end="1289" title="Akkadian language" label="Akkadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q35025" start="1415" end="1432" title="Old South Arabian" label="Old South Arabian"/>
<link wikidata="Q732870" start="1501" end="1513" title="Hebrew Bible" label="Hebrew Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q29334" start="1746" end="1756" title="Septuagint" label="Septuagint"/>
<link wikidata="Q131175" start="1771" end="1778" title="Vulgate" label="Vulgate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5743" start="1943" end="1947" title="Ebla" label="Ebla"/>
<link wikidata="Q326304" start="2518" end="2522" title="Moab" label="Moab"/>
<link wikidata="Q755753" start="2902" end="2908" title="ʿAṯtar" label="ʿAṯtar"/>
<link wikidata="Q111952828" start="3022" end="3028" title="Saggar (god)" label="Šaggar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2893219" start="3036" end="3057" title="Deir Alla Inscription" label="Deir Alla Inscription"/>
<link wikidata="Q535382" start="3107" end="3112" title="Shapash" label="Šamāš"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429935" start="3196" end="3208" title="South Arabia" label="South Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3185305" start="3342" end="3359" title="Kingdom of Israel (united monarchy)" label="kingdom of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q313221" start="3409" end="3413" title="Omri" label="Omri"/>
<link wikidata="Q235901" start="3418" end="3422" title="Ahab" label="Ahab"/>
<link wikidata="Q350258" start="3456" end="3461" title="Mesha" label="Mesha"/>
<link wikidata="Q724954" start="3565" end="3576" title="Mesha Stele" label="Mesha Stele"/>
<link wikidata="Q548841" start="3901" end="3907" title="Tribe of Gad" label="Gadite"/>
<link wikidata="Q100233378" start="3916" end="3923" title="Khirbat Ataruz" label="Ataroth"/>
<link wikidata="Q6956777" start="4250" end="4254" title="Nebo (biblical town)" label="Nebo"/>
<link wikidata="Q119094" start="4259" end="4300" title="Human sacrifice" label="sacrificed the whole Israelite population"/>
<link wikidata="Q766677" start="4485" end="4491" title="Yahweh" label="Yahweh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019166" start="4697" end="4703" title="Dhiban" label="Ḏaybān"/>
<link wikidata="Q31572" start="5026" end="5034" title="Al-Karak" label="Al-Karak"/>
<link wikidata="Q428995" start="5112" end="5123" title="Hellenistic period" label="Hellenistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="5128" end="5133" title="Ancient Rome" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q40901" start="5198" end="5202" title="Ares" label="Arēs"/>
<link wikidata="Q847351" start="5257" end="5269" title="Rabba" label="Rabbat Mōʾāb"/>
<link wikidata="Q732870" start="5387" end="5399" title="Hebrew Bible" label="Hebrew Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q3185305" start="5576" end="5585" title="Kingdom of Israel (united monarchy)" label="Israelite"/>
<link wikidata="Q37085" start="5591" end="5598" title="Solomon" label="Solomon"/>
<link wikidata="Q130274" start="5623" end="5630" title="Astarte" label="Astarte"/>
<link wikidata="Q105070547" start="5644" end="5650" title="Milcom" label="Milcom"/>
<link wikidata="Q313228" start="5725" end="5731" title="Josiah" label="Josiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q4224666" start="5835" end="5849" title="Books of Kings" label="Books of Kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q230407" start="6084" end="6101" title="Kingdom of Israel (Samaria)" label="kingdom of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q158825" start="6140" end="6148" title="Jeremiah" label="Jeremiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q468912" start="6886" end="6892" title="Nergal" label="Nergal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2903488" start="7061" end="7068" title="Kerioth" label="Qerīyōt"/>
<link wikidata="Q4144531" start="7333" end="7343" title="high place" label="high place"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019166" start="7406" end="7412" title="Dhiban, Jordan" label="Ḏaybān"/>
<link wikidata="Q4853518" start="7683" end="7694" title="Bamoth-Baal" label="Bāmōt-Baʿal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316633" start="8017" end="8017" title="El (deity)" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q755753" start="8257" end="8263" title="ʿAṯtar" label="ʿAṯtar"/>
<link wikidata="Q111952828" start="8377" end="8383" title="Saggar (god)" label="Šaggar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2893219" start="8391" end="8412" title="Deir Alla Inscription" label="Deir Alla Inscription"/>
<link wikidata="Q535382" start="8462" end="8469" title="Shapash" label="Shamash"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429935" start="8553" end="8565" title="South Arabia" label="South Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q130274" start="8838" end="8845" title="Astarte" label="ʿAštart"/>
<link wikidata="Q85740359" start="9031" end="9043" title="Balu&amp;#x27;a Stele" label="Baluʿa Stele"/>
<link wikidata="Q3375464" start="9184" end="9191" title="shendyt" label="shendyt"/>
<link wikidata="Q428995" start="9302" end="9320" title="Hellenistic period" label="Hellenistic period"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9714" end="9717" title="Vow#Divine vows" label="vow"/>
<link wikidata="Q6956777" start="10285" end="10289" title="Nebo (biblical town)" label="Nebo"/>
<link wikidata="Q119094" start="10294" end="10304" title="Human sacrifice" label="sacrificed"/>
<link wikidata="Q230407" start="10685" end="10702" title="Kingdom of Israel (Samaria)" label="kingdom of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4144531" start="11243" end="11253" title="high place" label="high place"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11542" end="11542" title="Kamōš-ayat" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q5090621" start="11550" end="11550" title="Kammusu-nadbi" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q6343607" start="11558" end="11558" title="Kamas-halta" label=""/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="990623" wikidata="Q7804551" url="?curid=990623" title="Tim van Gelder">
<text>Tim van Gelder is an Australian researcher who is the co-founder of Austhink Software, an Australian software development company, and the Managing Director of Austhink Consulting.

==Biography==
He was born in Australia, and was educated at the University of Melbourne (BA, 1984). He went on to receive his PhD from the University of Pittsburgh (1989). He has held academic positions at Indiana University and the Australian National University before returning to Melbourne as an Australian Research Council QEII Research Fellow. In 1998, he transitioned to part-time academic work allowing him to pursue private training and consulting, and in 2005 began working full-time at Austhink Software. In 2009 he transitioned to Managing Director of Austhink Consulting. He co-leads The SWARM Project at the University of Melbourne.

In 2012, he created the non-profit debate website YourView.

== Research ==
Van Gelder&#x27;s research has had three main phases, corresponding to his PhD research on distributed representation, his subsequent research on dynamic cognition, and his current phase, research into reasoning skills.

=== Distributed representation ===
In his PhD thesis, completed under the supervision of John Haugeland and entitled &quot;Distributed Representation&quot; (1989) van Gelder gave the first sustained exploration of the general concept of distributed representation, and argued that it was a third fundamental kind of representation alongside language and imagery.

=== Dynamics and cognition ===
Van Gelder is a proponent of dynamicism or dynamic cognition in cognitive science. This is a theory of cognition that proposes that dynamical systems theory provides a better model (or metaphor) for human cognition than the &#x27;computational&#x27; model. For example, that a Watt governor is a better metaphorical description of the way humans think than a Turing machine style computer.

In his first regular academic position at Indiana University, van Gelder was heavily influenced by researchers such as Robert Port, James Townsend, Esther Thelen and Linda B. Smith who were exploring cognition from a dynamical perspective, i.e., applying the tools of dynamical systems to studying cognitive processes. Van Gelder published a series of articles providing a philosophical commentary on the dynamical approach, culminating in his 1998 paper in Behavioral and Brain Sciences, where he articulated the dynamical approach to cognition and argued that it should be taken seriously as a broad empirical hypothesis comparable to the dominant hypothesis that cognition is digital computation. In his most well-known paper, &#x27;What Might Cognition Be If Not Computation,&#x27; van Gelder used the Watt Governor as a model to contrast with the Turing Machine. Van Gelder came to be known as one of the foremost proponents of the dynamical approach, and even as an advocate of anti-representationalism, though he explicitly disavowed that extreme position.

=== Informal reasoning skills ===
Since around 1998, van Gelder&#x27;s research has been almost exclusively devoted to informal reasoning and critical thinking. In particular, he has been developing and evaluating an approach to improving these skills, known variously as The Reason Method, and LAMP (&quot;Lots of Argument Mapping Practice&quot;). The core idea in van Gelder&#x27;s approach is that informal reasoning is a skill, and so should improve in the same way as any other skill. According to the leading theory of high-level skill acquisition, the critical ingredient is extensive &quot;deliberate practice&quot; (Ericsson). Van Gelder and his colleagues have shown that extensive deliberate practice can substantially enhance informal reasoning skills.

The main practical challenge in the LAMP approach was finding a way to enable students to engage in extensive deliberate practice of reasoning skills. To confront this, van Gelder and his colleague Andy Bulka developed the argument mapping software packages Reason!Able (2000) and Rationale (2006).

Van Gelder uses this software to help &#x27;teach&#x27; the first year philosophy subject &quot;Critical Thinking: The Art of Reasoning&quot; which reliably achieves substantial gains in the critical thinking abilities of students (0.7 to 0.85 standard deviations) as measured by pre and post semester testing with the use of control groups of the same ages as the student cohort both studying at Melbourne University and not studying at university.

Van Gelder has also applied argument mapping to business decision making, and has released the Reasoning PowerPoint App for this purpose.

== Critics ==

Chris Eliasmith wrote a critique of Tim van Gelder&#x27;s dynamicism and his proposal to replace the Turing machine by the Watt governor as a model of cognition. Eliasmith argued that the Turing machine concept is more encompassing and better suited as a guiding metaphor than the Watt governor, because the latter is a concrete machine and the former is a mathematical abstraction representing of a whole class of machines.

== References ==
== Further reading ==

== External links ==
* timvangelder.com (blog and professional website)
* van Gelder &amp; Monk
* Publications
* The Reasoning PowerPoint App (PowerPoint based, Windows)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7804551" start="0" end="14" title="Tim van Gelder" label="Tim van Gelder"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="211" end="220" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q319078" start="246" end="269" title="University of Melbourne" label="University of Melbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q235034" start="321" end="345" title="University of Pittsburgh" label="University of Pittsburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q6608367" start="388" end="406" title="Indiana University" label="Indiana University"/>
<link wikidata="Q127990" start="415" end="445" title="Australian National University" label="Australian National University"/>
<link wikidata="Q30594426" start="779" end="796" title="The SWARM Project" label="The SWARM Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q8058724" start="880" end="888" title="YourView" label="YourView"/>
<link wikidata="Q5319047" start="1052" end="1069" title="dynamic cognition" label="dynamic cognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405211" start="1216" end="1230" title="John Haugeland" label="John Haugeland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5319047" start="1551" end="1561" title="dynamicism" label="dynamicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q147638" start="1586" end="1603" title="cognitive science" label="cognitive science"/>
<link wikidata="Q2200417" start="1625" end="1634" title="cognition" label="cognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q3174497" start="1654" end="1678" title="dynamical systems theory" label="dynamical systems theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q375647" start="1799" end="1812" title="Watt governor" label="Watt governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q163310" start="1881" end="1895" title="Turing machine" label="Turing machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5401313" start="2061" end="2074" title="Esther Thelen" label="Esther Thelen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6551386" start="2079" end="2093" title="Linda B. Smith" label="Linda B. Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q2145290" start="2902" end="2921" title="mental representation" label="representationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506807" start="3097" end="3115" title="informal reasoning" label="informal reasoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q843894" start="3120" end="3137" title="critical thinking" label="critical thinking"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645946" start="3967" end="3979" title="argument map" label="argument map"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645946" start="4523" end="4539" title="argument mapping" label="argument mapping"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331926" start="4552" end="4567" title="decision making" label="decision making"/>
<link wikidata="Q25339963" start="4649" end="4664" title="Chris Eliasmith" label="Chris Eliasmith"/>
<link wikidata="Q5319047" start="4707" end="4717" title="dynamicism" label="dynamicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q163310" start="4750" end="4764" title="Turing machine" label="Turing machine"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="990624" wikidata="Q1227820" url="?curid=990624" title="Adel, Leeds">
<text>Adel ( ) is a suburb of Leeds, West Yorkshire, England. To its immediate south is Weetwood, to the west are Cookridge and Holt Park, to the east are Alwoodley and Moortown, and to the north are Bramhope, Arthington and Eccup.

It forms part of the Leeds City Council ward of Adel &amp; Wharfedale and the parliamentary constituency of Leeds North West.

In common with many areas of Leeds it is not easy to define the boundaries of Adel, but Adel Church and the two schools are well to the east of &quot;Otley Road&quot;, the A660, although the post office is on that road.

== History ==

Adel is situated near the site of a Roman fort, the ancient road from Tadcaster to Ilkley passing nearby. (The footpath by the side of Long Causeway was said to be made from the original Roman stones, until they were removed by the council in the 1960s because they were unsafe. Some of the footpath has been replaced, starting at the junction between Long Causeway and Stairfoot Lane, and continuing up to the entrance of Bedquilts playing fields.) Several inscribed stones from the Romano-British period were discovered in Adel, also a number of Anglo-Saxon stones were discovered in the church foundations during restoration work in 1864. Some of these items are on display in the Leeds City Museum, Cookridge Street. Among the foundation stones of Roman buildings found near Eccup Moor in 1702 were two altars, inscribed PIENTISSIMA, and D.M.S. CANDIDINAE, FORTUNA PIA V.A.X. respectively. Several large urns were also found there. On the side of the &#x27;hill of Ada,&#x27; an altar dedicated to Brigantia DEAE BRIGANTIAE DONUM CINGE/ TISSA POSUIT, along with some statues and coins were later found. In 1849, a stone coffin was found on Addle Mill Farm.

The Roman name for the area is long thought to have been &quot;Burgodunum&quot;, but the Yorkshire Archaeological Society argues that this is &quot;dubious&quot;. An alternative name is also &quot;Burgodurum&quot;, meaning the &quot;Fort by the Waterway&quot;. It has also been suggested that this was shortened to Burden, which is similar in sound to the Celtic &quot;Verdun&quot;, found in Belgium. It is probable that an Angle village sprang up around the fort and that a church was built in the village. Adel is mentioned in the 1086 Domesday Book as &quot;Adele&quot;. Another spelling used until 1816 is &quot;Addle&quot;. Most recent authorities derive the name from the Old English &quot;adela&quot; ‘dirty, muddy place’, but arguments have also been made for a personal name &quot;Ada&quot; (or similar Anglo-Saxon names such as Eadda, Eada or Ædda) + Old English &quot;lēah&quot; &#x27;open ground, lea&#x27; (compare the terminus spelling of nearby Headingley DB: &quot;Hedingelei&quot; &amp; &quot;hedingeleia&quot;).

The parish of Adel stretched to the River Wharfe in the north and included Adel, Arthington, Breary, Cookridge and Eccup. In 1831 the parish had a population of 1063. In 1866 the parish was abolished.

In 1152, the nearby Cistercian abbey at Kirkstall was founded. At the same time, the church of St John the Baptist was built in Adel to replace the older Saxon building. Although the present church is Norman, it looks quite similar to the late 7th century Anglo-Saxon church in Ledsham village, &quot;the oldest church (and the oldest building) standing in West Yorkshire&quot;.

==Adel Church==

The Church of St John the Baptist, Adel parish church, is described as &quot;one of the best and most complete Norman churches in Yorkshire&quot;. It is a Grade I listed building; the sundial, mounting block and several memorials are Grade II listed.
It was built in Romanesque style around 1150–1170 and has been little altered since, although a bell-cote was added in 1838–39 by R. D. Chantrell. The doorway, protected by a modern wooden roof, has an ornately carved arch with animals heads and zig-zag patterns; inside, there are 81 decorative corbels on the north and south walls with animals and representations of Christ&#x27;s baptism and crucifixion, and the chancel arch has 37 grotesque beakheads and zig-zag decoration. Above the south doorway, the gable was filled with panels with the Evangelists and Christ in Majesty.

The medieval font has an oak canopy by Eric Gill, and possibly a leper&#x27;s window survives in the chancel though the evidence for this is poor given the nearest Leper Colony was some distance away and other churches were much closer.

The Romanesque bronze doorknocker, often referred to as a Sanctuary Ring, is a replica, as the original was stolen in 2002. It was &#x27;probably made in York &quot;c&quot;. 1200 (cf. All Saints&#x27; Pavement, York)&#x27; and &#x27;was of excellent quality ... with a monster&#x27;s head, probably a lion, clasping the ring and a man&#x27;s head protruding from its mouth&#x27;. The sculpture has been understood to represent the animal swallowing a person, a warning of mankind&#x27;s fate at the Day of Judgment, but it has also been suggested that &#x27;there is nothing exaggeratedly fearsome about this lion that we should assume the man is being eaten ... he could be waking up, taking a breath, coming out of the mouth rather than being chewed or swallowed&#x27;.

Because of thefts of stones from the graveyard, all the church&#x27;s paving stones are engraved with crosses.

The paternal grandparents of the Princess of Wales married at Adel Church in December 1946.

==Adel Dam==
Adel Dam, a wildlife reserve owned and operated by Yorkshire Wildlife Trust, was opened in May 1968. The reserve covers 19 acres and there are two hides. Leeds Birdwatchers&#x27; Club originally developed the site and the Yorkshire Wildlife Trust acquired the reserve in 1987.

==Adel today==

Adel is a mainly residential area of Leeds close to Adel Crags and the Meanwood Valley Trail and has a distinctive countryside feel. Adel also has two primary schools, St John the Baptist Primary School and Adel Primary School.

Adel is within the Adel and Wharfedale ward of Leeds City Council and the Leeds North West parliamentary constituency, represented by Katie White MP.

Close to Adel Church is York Gate, an old farmhouse with a landscaped garden and a pavement maze in the driveway. The gardens, owned by Perennial, the Gardeners&#x27; Royal Benevolent Society, are open to the public on regular occasions.

Also close to the church is the Adel Memorial Hall and sports ground. The hall was opened on 14 November 1928 as a memorial to those killed in the First World War. The engraved 20 ton stone outside the hall was moved from Adel Moor in May 1922 and erected on the site of the then future hall. The hall is home to the Bowmen of Adel, who hosted the Scorton Arrow in 1962, 1967, 1970 and 1988, and also Adel Players, an amateur dramatics group founded in 1945 that puts on three productions a year.
Adel is home to Headingley Golf club, the oldest golf club in Leeds, Adel Methodist Church and Adel Quaker Meeting House, dating from 1868.

Just to the west is the University of Leeds sports grounds and (now closed) Bodington Hall, which was previously the university&#x27;s largest hall of residence.

Leeds Adel Hockey Club a large hockey club with men&#x27;s, women&#x27;s, mixed and junior teams is based here.

Adel is linked to Leeds city centre by buses, including the 28, operated by First Leeds.

Asda in Holt Park is incorrectly called &quot;Asda at Adel&quot;, perhaps because, although geographically incorrect, the term Adel is a historical term that can be traced back many centuries, whereas the term &quot;Holt Park&quot; does not predate the area itself.

Adel Crag located near Adel Woods Car Park is an isolated rocky outcrop featuring two crags made of gritstone. There are currently 17 climbable routes that have been recorded by climbers who visit Adel Crag for bouldering.

==See also==
*Listed buildings in Leeds (Adel and Wharfedale Ward)

==References==
==Further reading==
*Adel Neighbourhood Design Statement

==External links==

*Adel Crag Community Association website, local information
*St John&#x27;s church website
* Adel Methodist Church
*Adel Quaker Meeting
*Yorkgate garden website
*Bowmen of Adel
*Adel Players
*Corpus of Romanesque Sculpture in Britain and Ireland scholarly description of church carvings including many detailed photographs
*Leodis View photographs of Adel on the Leeds photographic archive.
*Major Romano-British Settlement Adel, West Yorkshire
*The Old Stones of Adel Church
*Adel Primary School</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1227820" start="0" end="4" title="Adel, Leeds" label="Adel"/>
<link wikidata="Q39121" start="24" end="29" title="Leeds" label="Leeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q23083" start="31" end="45" title="West Yorkshire" label="West Yorkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q4216679" start="82" end="90" title="Weetwood" label="Weetwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q5167166" start="108" end="117" title="Cookridge" label="Cookridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5884591" start="122" end="131" title="Holt Park" label="Holt Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q2131866" start="149" end="158" title="Alwoodley" label="Alwoodley"/>
<link wikidata="Q4216473" start="163" end="171" title="Moortown, Leeds" label="Moortown"/>
<link wikidata="Q4956178" start="194" end="202" title="Bramhope" label="Bramhope"/>
<link wikidata="Q657157" start="204" end="214" title="Arthington" label="Arthington"/>
<link wikidata="Q5332324" start="219" end="224" title="Eccup" label="Eccup"/>
<link wikidata="Q6515870" start="248" end="266" title="Leeds City Council" label="Leeds City Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q55466756" start="275" end="296" title="Adel and Wharfedale (ward)" label="Adel &amp;amp; Wharfedale"/>
<link wikidata="Q3138122" start="335" end="351" title="Leeds North West (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Leeds North West"/>
<link wikidata="Q4649565" start="526" end="530" title="A660 road" label="A660"/>
<link wikidata="Q185103" start="626" end="631" title="Roman Britain" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q784467" start="660" end="669" title="Tadcaster" label="Tadcaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020951" start="673" end="679" title="Ilkley" label="Ilkley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6515923" start="1274" end="1291" title="Leeds City Museum" label="Leeds City Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399058" start="1592" end="1601" title="Brigantia (goddess)" label="Brigantia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8055675" start="1841" end="1873" title="Yorkshire Archaeological and Historical Society" label="Yorkshire Archaeological Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q104238" start="2176" end="2181" title="Angles (tribe)" label="Angle"/>
<link wikidata="Q19867" start="2290" end="2303" title="Domesday Book" label="Domesday Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="2430" end="2441" title="Old English" label="Old English"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538073" start="2819" end="2831" title="River Wharfe" label="River Wharfe"/>
<link wikidata="Q657157" start="2864" end="2874" title="Arthington" label="Arthington"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2876" end="2882" title="Breary" label="Breary"/>
<link wikidata="Q5167166" start="2884" end="2893" title="Cookridge" label="Cookridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5332324" start="2898" end="2903" title="Eccup" label="Eccup"/>
<link wikidata="Q166861" start="3005" end="3015" title="Cistercian" label="Cistercian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421579" start="3025" end="3034" title="Kirkstall Abbey" label="Kirkstall"/>
<link wikidata="Q3423814" start="3263" end="3270" title="Ledsham, West Yorkshire" label="Ledsham"/>
<link wikidata="Q40662" start="3396" end="3415" title="John the Baptist" label="St John the Baptist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5116872" start="3422" end="3435" title="Church of England parish church" label="parish church"/>
<link wikidata="Q570600" start="3545" end="3560" title="listed building" label="listed building"/>
<link wikidata="Q46261" start="3649" end="3659" title="Romanesque architecture" label="Romanesque"/>
<link wikidata="Q4883086" start="3729" end="3738" title="bell-cote" label="bell-cote"/>
<link wikidata="Q2410484" start="3763" end="3778" title="Robert Dennis Chantrell" label="R. D. Chantrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q12537" start="3929" end="3935" title="corbel" label="corbel"/>
<link wikidata="Q217048" start="4016" end="4023" title="Baptism of Jesus" label="baptism"/>
<link wikidata="Q51636" start="4028" end="4039" title="Crucifixion of Jesus" label="crucifixion"/>
<link wikidata="Q472773" start="4180" end="4191" title="Four Evangelists" label="Evangelists"/>
<link wikidata="Q972213" start="4196" end="4213" title="Christ in Majesty" label="Christ in Majesty"/>
<link wikidata="Q208820" start="4229" end="4233" title="Baptismal font" label="font"/>
<link wikidata="Q551426" start="4255" end="4264" title="Eric Gill" label="Eric Gill"/>
<link wikidata="Q36956" start="4281" end="4286" title="leper" label="leper"/>
<link wikidata="Q42462" start="4608" end="4612" title="York" label="York"/>
<link wikidata="Q2647826" start="4638" end="4663" title="All Saints&amp;#x27; Church, Pavement, York" label="All Saints&amp;#x27; Pavement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1821239" start="4953" end="4968" title="Last Judgment" label="Day of Judgment"/>
<link wikidata="Q10479" start="5368" end="5389" title="Catherine, Princess of Wales" label="the Princess of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q179049" start="5457" end="5473" title="wildlife reserve" label="wildlife reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q8055767" start="5496" end="5520" title="Yorkshire Wildlife Trust" label="Yorkshire Wildlife Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q3848024" start="5592" end="5596" title="Hunting blind" label="hide"/>
<link wikidata="Q6804119" start="5810" end="5831" title="Meanwood Valley Trail" label="Meanwood Valley Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q55466756" start="5987" end="6011" title="Adel and Wharfedale (ward)" label="Adel and Wharfedale ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q6515870" start="6015" end="6033" title="Leeds City Council" label="Leeds City Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q3138122" start="6042" end="6058" title="Leeds North West (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Leeds North West"/>
<link wikidata="Q126850368" start="6102" end="6113" title="Katie White (politician)" label="Katie White"/>
<link wikidata="Q18757132" start="6143" end="6152" title="York Gate, Leeds" label="York Gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q27958328" start="6270" end="6310" title="Gardeners&amp;#x27; Royal Benevolent Society" label="Gardeners&amp;#x27; Royal Benevolent Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="6505" end="6520" title="World War I" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7435437" start="6706" end="6719" title="Scorton Arrow" label="Scorton Arrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q5377" start="6904" end="6908" title="golf" label="golf"/>
<link wikidata="Q503424" start="7020" end="7039" title="University of Leeds" label="University of Leeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q4936624" start="7072" end="7086" title="Bodington Hall" label="Bodington Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q6515827" start="7159" end="7181" title="Leeds Adel Hockey Club" label="Leeds Adel Hockey Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q39121" start="7290" end="7295" title="Leeds" label="Leeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q5454074" start="7348" end="7359" title="First Leeds" label="First Leeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q297410" start="7362" end="7366" title="Asda" label="Asda"/>
<link wikidata="Q5884591" start="7370" end="7379" title="Holt Park" label="Holt Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q852989" start="7840" end="7850" title="bouldering" label="bouldering"/>
<link wikidata="Q106215434" start="7867" end="7919" title="Listed buildings in Leeds (Adel and Wharfedale Ward)" label="Listed buildings in Leeds (Adel and Wharfedale Ward)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="990628" wikidata="Q3259104" url="?curid=990628" title="Prompt">
<text>Prompt may refer to:

==Computing==
* Command prompt, characters indicating the computer is ready to accept input
* Command Prompt, also known as cmd.exe or cmd, the command-line interpreter in some operating systems
* Prompt (natural language), instructions issued to a computer system (such as a text-to-image artificial intelligence) in the form of written or spoken language.
* Prompt engineering, a concept in artificial intelligence in which the description of the task is embedded in the input, e.g., as a question, instead of it being implicitly given.

==Other uses==
* Project Resource Organisation Management Planning Techniques, a project management method; the predecessor to PRINCE2
* Prompt , a source of nitrogen oxides
* PROMPT, the Performing arts ephemera collection at the National Library of Australia
* PROMPT Telescopes (Panchromatic Robotic Optical Monitoring and Polarimetry Telescopes), Chile
* Prompter (theatre), sometimes prompt, one who prompts an actor if they forget their line

==See also==
*
* Prompt neutron, in nuclear engineering
**Prompt criticality</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3259104" start="0" end="6" title="Prompt" label="Prompt"/>
<link wikidata="Q189053" start="38" end="52" title="Command prompt" label="Command prompt"/>
<link wikidata="Q310897" start="116" end="130" title="Command Prompt" label="Command Prompt"/>
<link wikidata="Q108941486" start="219" end="244" title="Prompt (natural language)" label="Prompt (natural language)"/>
<link wikidata="Q108941486" start="382" end="400" title="Prompt engineering" label="Prompt engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140865" start="689" end="696" title="PRINCE2" label="PRINCE2"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="706" end="706" title="NOx#Prompt" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q623578" start="750" end="785" title="Performing arts ephemera collection" label="Performing arts ephemera collection"/>
<link wikidata="Q7120401" start="825" end="842" title="PROMPT Telescopes" label="PROMPT Telescopes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126281" start="921" end="939" title="Prompter (theatre)" label="Prompter (theatre)"/>
<link wikidata="Q363922" start="1028" end="1042" title="Prompt neutron" label="Prompt neutron"/>
<link wikidata="Q16821514" start="1069" end="1087" title="Prompt criticality" label="Prompt criticality"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="990631" wikidata="Q435968" url="?curid=990631" title="Jenny Lewis">
<text>Jennifer Diane Lewis (born January 8, 1976) is an American singer-songwriter, musician, and actress. She was the lead singer, rhythm guitarist, and keyboardist for the indie rock band Rilo Kiley.

Lewis gained prominence in the 1980s as a child actress, appearing in the films &quot;Troop Beverly Hills&quot; (1989) and &quot;The Wizard&quot; (1989) and the television series &quot;Brooklyn Bridge&quot; (1991–93). In the mid-1990s, Lewis semi-retired from acting to focus on her musical career, and formed Rilo Kiley in 1998 with fellow former child actor Blake Sennett. Rilo Kiley released four albums before they disbanded in 2014.

Lewis has released five solo albums: &quot;Rabbit Fur Coat&quot; (2006), &quot;Acid Tongue&quot; (2008), &quot;The Voyager&quot; (2014), &quot;On the Line&quot; (2019), and &quot;Joy&#x27;All&quot; (2023). In addition to Rilo Kiley and her solo career, Lewis has been a member of The Postal Service, Jenny &amp; Johnny, and Nice as Fuck.

==Early life==
Lewis was born in Las Vegas. Her mother, Linda, was a professional singer, and her father, Eddie Gordon, was a member of the Harmonica Gang. Lewis is of Ashkenazi Jewish descent.

==Acting career==
Lewis made her professional debut in a Jell-O commercial. She later appeared in commercials for Mattel&#x27;s Barbie and Baby Skates dolls, Toys &quot;R&quot; Us toy stores, the Black &amp; Decker Popcorn Maker, and Kellogg&#x27;s Corn Pops, among others. She was featured in the short-lived 1986 Lucille Ball sitcom &quot;Life With Lucy&quot;, where she was cast as one of Lucy&#x27;s grandchildren. She also had small roles on TV shows, such as &quot;Murder, She Wrote&quot;; &quot;The Twilight Zone&quot; (1985); &quot;Baywatch&quot;; &quot;The Golden Girls&quot;; &quot;Growing Pains&quot;; &quot;Just the Ten of Us&quot;; &quot;Roseanne&quot;; &quot;Mr. Belvedere&quot;; and &quot;Brooklyn Bridge&quot;. She also appeared on a kids&#x27; week episode of the game show &quot;Card Sharks&quot; on August 6, 1987, at age 11, winning $500, but she did not win her match.

Lewis appeared in over a dozen teen movies, such as &quot;Troop Beverly Hills&quot; and &quot;The Wizard&quot; in 1989. She was featured in the 1996 made-for-TV movie &quot;Talk to Me&quot; with Yasmine Bleeth, as well as the films &quot;Foxfire&quot;, &quot;Big Girls Don&#x27;t Cry... They Get Even&quot;, and &quot;Pleasantville&quot;. She played the part of Evangeline &quot;Eva&quot; Saint Claire in the 1987 film version of Harriet Beecher Stowe&#x27;s novel &quot;Uncle Tom&#x27;s Cabin&quot;, and also appeared in the 1988 made-for-TV film &quot;A Friendship in Vienna&quot;, set in Vienna at the start of the Holocaust. She played Beverly D&#x27;Angelo&#x27;s daughter in the 1996 made-for-TV film &quot;Sweet Temptation&quot;. She continued acting until 1998, although her final movie – &quot;Don&#x27;s Plum&quot;, filmed 1995–96 – went unreleased until 2001. In 2015, she appeared in the Netflix movie &quot;A Very Murray Christmas&quot; as a waitress and sang a few songs, including &quot;Baby, It&#x27;s Cold Outside&quot; in a duet with Bill Murray.

==Music==
=== Rilo Kiley ===
In 1998, Lewis and friends Pierre De Reeder, Dave Rock, and then-boyfriend Blake Sennett formed the band Rilo Kiley. (Rock was eventually replaced by Jason Boesel.) In an interview with NPR&#x27;s &quot;All Songs Considered&quot;, Lewis remarked that she wanted to name the group Love&#x27;s Way (after her parents&#x27; lounge act in Las Vegas), but Sennett &quot;didn&#x27;t go for it.&quot; Originally asked to sing back-up vocals by Sennett, Lewis refused to join the band unless she was able to sing lead vocals.

Beginning with a country sound, Rilo Kiley gravitated toward a downbeat indie rock sound, gaining the attention of Warner Bros., who signed the band (via its own imprint, Brute/Beaute Records) for the release of their 2004 album &quot;More Adventurous,&quot; which gained the band some success. Critics such as &quot;Pitchfork&quot; attributed this to the &quot;wise&quot; decision to emphasize Lewis&#x27;s voice and presence more so than in previous albums. The song &quot;Portions for Foxes&quot; was a hit. Rilo Kiley&#x27;s 2007 album &quot;Under the Blacklight&quot; was released directly by Warner Bros.

In 2011, Sennett hinted that Rilo Kiley had disbanded. Lewis confirmed the band&#x27;s split in 2014.

A retrospective of Lewis&#x27;s career by Jessica Roy in 2016 commented that Lewis was a style icon to a certain type of music-loving young people in the 2000s. Roy commented:

For a particular brand of suburban girl who fancied herself cooler than her peers, Jenny was a fire-haired figure of worship. With her endless supply of cool sunglasses, vintage dresses, and hats ... she was a beacon of hope for introspective teens ... as a microgenerational sad-girl touchstone, many of us have our own Jenny Lewis Anecdote, our lives touched by her magnificent tweeness in different ways.

===Solo career===

In 2004, Conor Oberst invited Lewis to record a solo record for record label Team Love. Described by Lewis as &quot;a kind of soul record&quot;, &quot;Rabbit Fur Coat&quot; (released January 24, 2006) features contributions from Oberst, M. Ward, and Maroon 5 guitarist James Valentine. Ben Gibbard of Death Cab for Cutie guests on a cover of The Traveling Wilburys&#x27; &quot;Handle With Care&quot;. The Watson Twins provide accompaniment on the album, billed as Jenny Lewis with the Watson Twins. Lewis toured with the Watson Twins in support of the album three times in 2006 and appeared with her band on the &quot;Late Show with David Letterman&quot;, &quot;The Late Late Show with Craig Ferguson&quot;, &quot;Late Night with Conan O&#x27;Brien&quot; and &quot;Later with Jools Holland&quot;. They also appeared on a Washington, D.C.–based children&#x27;s music program called &quot;Pancake Mountain&quot;, performing the song &quot;See Fernando&quot;. The album received positive reviews, with &quot;Entertainment Weekly&quot; writing, &quot;Consider Lewis the Emmylou Harris of the Silverlake set&quot; and &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; commenting that &quot;her girlishly seductive vocals are more versatile than ever&quot;. The A.V. Club, &quot;Spin&quot;, and NPR music critic Meredith Ochs named it among the best albums of the year.

In 2008, Lewis released a second solo album, this time without the Watson Twins, titled &quot;Acid Tongue&quot;.

On July 29, 2014, Lewis released &quot;The Voyager&quot;. The album took five years to complete and is a reflection on Rilo Kiley&#x27;s break-up and the death of her father. The release of the album was preceded by the single &quot;Just One of the Guys&quot;. The music video for &quot;Just One of the Guys&quot; was released on July 15, 2014, through &quot;GQ&quot; and stars Lewis, Anne Hathaway, Kristen Stewart, Brie Larson, and Tennessee Thomas, former drummer of The Like (now disbanded). Lewis also directed the music video.
On July 8, 2014, Lewis began &quot;The Voyager&quot; tour at the Ottawa Bluesfest in Ontario, Canada. She spent July of that year touring the United States. Her tour included performances at Newport Folk Festival, Lollapalooza, Outside Lands Music and Arts Festival, the Red Rocks Amphitheatre, the 2014 iTunes Festival in London, two performances at the Austin City Limits Music Festival, and the Life Is Beautiful Festival in Las Vegas.

On January 23, 2019, Lewis announced the release date of her new album &quot;On the Line&quot; would be March 22, 2019. The lead single &quot;Red Bull &amp; Hennessy&quot; garnered positive acclaim.

On June 9, 2023, Lewis released a new album, Joy&#x27;All. She&#x27;d started writing for &quot;Joy&#x27;All&quot; while on tour to promote her previous album &quot;On the Line&quot; (2019), shortly before the start of the COVID-19 pandemic. Work resumed on the album in early 2021, when Lewis participated in a virtual songwriting workshop hosted by Beck. The album was produced by Dave Cobb, who Lewis met while visiting Lucius at RCA Studio A in Nashville, Tennessee.

=== Other projects and collaborations ===
In 2002, Lewis was asked to contribute vocals for the band The Postal Service. Lewis performed in the video for &quot;We Will Become Silhouettes&quot;, and toured with the band in 2013 and again in 2023.

In 2003, Lewis contributed vocals to several tracks on the Cursive album &quot;The Ugly Organ&quot;.

In 2005, Lewis contributed to the UNICEF benefit song &quot;Do They Know It&#x27;s Hallowe&#x27;en?&quot;, along with Sennett and Jimmy Tamborello.

In 2006, Lewis made a cameo in Episode 25, Season 1 of Bob Dylan&#x27;s &quot;Theme Time Radio Hour&quot;, and six of her songs (three with the Watson Twins and three with Rilo Kiley) were featured in various episodes of the show.

In 2007, Lewis contributed vocals to various songs on Johnathan Rice&#x27;s album &quot;Further North&quot;, and she appeared in the music video for &quot;We&#x27;re All Stuck Out In The Desert (And We&#x27;re Gonna Die)&quot;. She provided vocals for a track on Dntel&#x27;s &quot;Dumb Luck&quot; LP.

In 2008, Lewis contributed backing vocals to several songs on the Elvis Costello and the Imposters album &quot;Momofuku&quot;.

Later that year, Lewis voiced the role of the assistant director for Walt Disney Pictures&#x27; animated film &quot;Bolt&quot; (2008), and she also provided the song &quot;Barking at the Moon&quot;.
In March and April 2009, Lewis traveled to Australia for the first time, as an act for the V Festival, as well as a supporting act for Snow Patrol and performing one solo Sydney show.

On April 18, 2009, Lewis performed at the Coachella Valley Music and Arts Festival in Indio, California.

On May 5, 2009, Lewis performed on &quot;The Late Late Show with Craig Ferguson&quot;.

Lewis makes an appearance on the track &quot;Hard Enough&quot;, taken from the 2010 album &quot;Flamingo&quot; by fellow Las Vegan Brandon Flowers.

In 2013, Lewis created the music score for Tribeca Film&#x27;s feature &quot;Very Good Girls&quot;. She provided original music and also included older music from her previous band, Rilo Kiley, such as the song &quot;Go Ahead&quot;.

In 2014, Lewis contributed an exclusive track to HBO&#x27;s &quot;Girls&quot;, in collaboration with Vampire Weekend&#x27;s Rostam Batmanglij titled &quot;Completely Not Me&quot;. The song was featured in the Season 3 premiere &quot;Females Only&quot;. The song is the second track on &quot;Girls Volume Two: All Adventurous Women Do&quot;.

In 2016, Lewis contributed to She &amp; Him&#x27;s second Christmas album, &quot;Christmas Party&quot;, appearing on the track &quot;Winter Wonderland&quot;.

On June 25, 2019, Lewis performed &quot;Wasted Youth&quot; on &quot;The Late Show with Stephen Colbert&quot;.

On October 28, 2019, Lewis is featured on the fifth issue of Archie Comics&#x27; comic book series &quot;Jughead&#x27;s Time Police&quot;, released on October 30.

On November 13, 2019, it was announced Lewis would be an opening act for Harry Styles on the North American leg of his 2020 Love On Tour.

In 2023, Lewis toured to support her new album &quot;Joy&#x27;All&quot;. She also made appearances on dates for The Postal Service reunion tour.

=== Other bands ===
In 2010, Lewis formed the duo Jenny and Johnny with her then-boyfriend, musician Johnathan Rice, and the pair released an album titled &quot;I&#x27;m Having Fun Now&quot; on Warner Bros. Records. In 2015, Rice and Lewis wrote the song &quot;Cold One&quot; for the film &quot;Ricki and the Flash&quot;.

In 2016, the trio Nice as Fuck, comprising Lewis, Erika Forster (of Au Revoir Simone), and Tennessee Thomas (of The Like), debuted at a Bernie Sanders benefit. The group opened on a number of tour dates for M. Ward.

==Filmography==
==Discography==

===Rilo Kiley===
*&quot;Rilo Kiley&quot; (1999)
* &quot;Take-Offs and Landings&quot; (2001)
* &quot;The Execution of All Things&quot; (2002)
* &quot;More Adventurous&quot; (2004)
* &quot;Under the Blacklight&quot; (2007)
* &quot;Rkives&quot; (2013)

===Solo===

* &quot;Rabbit Fur Coat&quot; (2006) (with The Watson Twins)
* &quot;Acid Tongue&quot; (2008)
* &quot;The Voyager&quot; (2014)
* &quot;On the Line&quot; (2019)
* &quot;Joy&#x27;All&quot; (2023)

===Jenny &amp; Johnny===
* &quot;I&#x27;m Having Fun Now&quot; (2010)
* &quot;Live at Third Man Records&quot; (2010)

===Nice as Fuck===
* &quot;Nice as Fuck&quot; (2016)

===Other appearances===
* Bright Eyes – &quot;Lifted or The Story is in the Soil, Keep Your Ear to the Ground&quot; (2002, Saddle Creek)
* Cursive – &quot;The Ugly Organ&quot; (2003, Saddle Creek)
* The Postal Service – &quot;Give Up&quot; (2003, Sub Pop)
* The Good Life – &quot;Album of the Year&quot; (2004, Saddle Creek)
* The Watson Twins – &quot;Southern Manners&quot; (2006)
* Dntel – &quot;Dumb Luck&quot; (2007, Sub Pop)
* Whispertown 2000 – &quot;Livin&#x27; in a Dream&quot; (2007)
* Elvis Costello and the Imposters – &quot;Momofuku&quot; (2008, Lost Highway Records)
* Whispertown 2000 – &quot;Swim&quot; (2009)
* Brandon Flowers – &quot;Hard Enough&quot; from &quot;Flamingo&quot; (2010, Island/Vertigo)
* Wavves – &quot;Afraid of Heights&quot; (2013)
* EZTV – &quot;Calling Out&quot; (2016)
* She &amp; Him – &quot;Christmas Party&quot; (2016)
* Paul Shaffer – &quot;Paul Shaffer &amp; The World&#x27;s Most Dangerous Band&quot; (2017)
* King Tuff – &quot;The Other&quot; (2018)
* Vampire Weekend – &quot;2021&quot; (2019)
* The Cactus Blossoms — &quot;Everybody&quot; (2022)

==Videography==
* Rilo Kiley – &quot;The Frug&quot; (1999, directed by Morgan J. Freeman)
* Rilo Kiley – &quot;Wires and Waves&quot; (filmed 2001/released 2007, directed by Morgan J. Freeman)
* Rilo Kiley - &quot;Bulletproof&quot; (2001, directed by Liam Lynch)
* The Postal Service – &quot;The District Sleeps Alone Tonight&quot; (2003) (Backing Vocals)
* Rilo Kiley – &quot;Portions for Foxes&quot; (2004, directed by Brian Lazzaro)
* Rilo Kiley – &quot;It&#x27;s a Hit&quot; (2005, directed by Andrew Bruntel, Matt Enlow)
* The Postal Service – &quot;We Will Become Silhouettes&quot; (2005, directed by Jared Hess)
* Jenny Lewis with the Watson Twins – &quot;Rise Up with Fists!!&quot; (2006, directed by Autumn de Wilde)
* Rilo Kiley – &quot;The Moneymaker&quot; (2007, directed by Autumn de Wilde)
* Rilo Kiley – &quot;Silver Lining&quot; (2007, directed by Autumn de Wilde)
* Jenny Lewis – &quot;Black Sand&quot; (2009, directed by Justin Mitchell)
* Jenny Lewis – &quot;See Fernando&quot; (2009, directed by Alan Tanner)
* Jenny Lewis – &quot;Carpetbaggers&quot; (2009, directed by Justin Mitchell)
* Jenny and Johnny – &quot;Big Wave&quot; (2011, directed by Autumn de Wilde)
* The Postal Service – &quot;A Tattered Line of String&quot; (2013, directed by AB/CD/CD) (Backing Vocals)
* Rilo Kiley – &quot;Let Me Back In&quot; (2013, directed by Rilo Kiley)
* Rilo Kiley – &quot;Emotional&quot; (2013, directed by Austin Nagler)
* Jenny Lewis – &quot;Just One Of The Guys&quot; (2014, directed by Jenny Lewis)
* Jenny Lewis – &quot;She&#x27;s Not Me&quot; (2015, directed by Jenny Lewis)
* Nice as Fuck – &quot;Door&quot; (2016, directed by Jenny Lewis)
* Nice as Fuck – &quot;Guns&quot; (2016, directed by Luke Rathborne)
* Jenny Lewis – &quot;Red Bull &amp; Hennessy&quot; (2019, directed by Eric Notarnicola)
* Jenny Lewis – &quot;Rabbit Hole&quot; (2019, directed by Eric Notarnicola)
* Artists for Peace and Justice: Jonathan Wilson, Jenny Lewis, Sanba Zao, and Jackson Browne – &quot;Lapé, Lanmou (Peace and Love)&quot; (2019, directed by APJ)
* Artists for Peace and Justice: Jenny Lewis with Habib Koité – &quot;Under the Supermoon&quot; (2020, directed by David Belle)
* Jenny Lewis with Serengeti - &quot;Unblu&quot; (2020, directed by Jenny Lewis)
* Jenny Lewis with Serengeti - &quot;Vroom Vroom&quot; (2021, directed by Jenny Lewis)

==References==
==External links==
* 
* Jenny Lewis at NPR Music
* Strangers Almanac column on &quot;Glide Magazine&quot;
* October 2008 interview on Bob Edwards Weekend 
* &quot;The Magic of the Moment&quot;, April 2009 interview in &quot;Submerge Magazine&quot;
* Listen: Jenny Lewis&#x27; new song &quot;Completely Not Me&quot;, from HBO&#x27;s Girls soundtrack by Chris Coplan, Consequence, January 13, 2014. Retrieved January 11, 2022.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q435968" start="0" end="20" title="Jenny Lewis" label="Jennifer Diane Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q389689" start="184" end="194" title="Rilo Kiley" label="Rilo Kiley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1217565" start="283" end="302" title="Troop Beverly Hills" label="Troop Beverly Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q786279" start="326" end="336" title="The Wizard (1989 film)" label="The Wizard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3881953" start="382" end="397" title="Brooklyn Bridge (TV series)" label="Brooklyn Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q4924487" start="557" end="570" title="Blake Sennett" label="Blake Sennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q7278583" start="679" end="694" title="Rabbit Fur Coat" label="Rabbit Fur Coat"/>
<link wikidata="Q4674063" start="715" end="726" title="Acid Tongue" label="Acid Tongue"/>
<link wikidata="Q17509546" start="747" end="758" title="The Voyager (Jenny Lewis album)" label="The Voyager"/>
<link wikidata="Q62990583" start="779" end="790" title="On the Line (Jenny Lewis album)" label="On the Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q120210333" start="815" end="827" title="Joy&amp;#x27;All" label="Joy&amp;#x27;All"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239214" start="916" end="934" title="The Postal Service" label="The Postal Service"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="936" end="954" title="#Jenny_&amp;amp;_Johnny" label="Jenny &amp;amp; Johnny"/>
<link wikidata="Q27468959" start="960" end="972" title="Nice as Fuck" label="Nice as Fuck"/>
<link wikidata="Q23768" start="1008" end="1017" title="Las Vegas" label="Las Vegas"/>
<link wikidata="Q34069" start="1143" end="1152" title="Ashkenazi" label="Ashkenazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1686705" start="1227" end="1233" title="Jell-O" label="Jell-O"/>
<link wikidata="Q596139" start="1284" end="1290" title="Mattel" label="Mattel"/>
<link wikidata="Q167447" start="1298" end="1304" title="Barbie" label="Barbie"/>
<link wikidata="Q696334" start="1328" end="1349" title="Toys &amp;quot;R&amp;quot; Us" label="Toys &amp;quot;R&amp;quot; Us"/>
<link wikidata="Q10860313" start="1366" end="1384" title="Black &amp;amp; Decker" label="Black &amp;amp; Decker"/>
<link wikidata="Q856897" start="1404" end="1418" title="Kellogg&amp;#x27;s" label="Kellogg&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308127" start="1419" end="1428" title="Corn Pops" label="Corn Pops"/>
<link wikidata="Q209662" start="1485" end="1497" title="Lucille Ball" label="Lucille Ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q779165" start="1511" end="1525" title="Life With Lucy" label="Life With Lucy"/>
<link wikidata="Q833322" start="1641" end="1658" title="Murder, She Wrote" label="Murder, She Wrote"/>
<link wikidata="Q559270" start="1672" end="1689" title="The Twilight Zone (1985 TV series)" label="The Twilight Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q223320" start="1710" end="1718" title="Baywatch" label="Baywatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q912467" start="1732" end="1748" title="The Golden Girls" label="The Golden Girls"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061246" start="1762" end="1775" title="Growing Pains" label="Growing Pains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470068" start="1789" end="1807" title="Just the Ten of Us" label="Just the Ten of Us"/>
<link wikidata="Q575373" start="1821" end="1829" title="Roseanne" label="Roseanne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520770" start="1843" end="1856" title="Mr. Belvedere" label="Mr. Belvedere"/>
<link wikidata="Q3881953" start="1874" end="1889" title="Brooklyn Bridge (TV series)" label="Brooklyn Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q328076" start="1967" end="1978" title="Card Sharks" label="Card Sharks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1217565" start="2119" end="2138" title="Troop Beverly Hills" label="Troop Beverly Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q786279" start="2155" end="2165" title="The Wizard (1989 film)" label="The Wizard"/>
<link wikidata="Q506240" start="2210" end="2221" title="made-for-TV" label="made-for-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q7679699" start="2234" end="2244" title="Talk to Me (1996 film)" label="Talk to Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q113707" start="2256" end="2270" title="Yasmine Bleeth" label="Yasmine Bleeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1440232" start="2299" end="2306" title="Foxfire (1996 film)" label="Foxfire"/>
<link wikidata="Q4092214" start="2320" end="2361" title="Big Girls Don&amp;#x27;t Cry... They Get Even" label="Big Girls Don&amp;#x27;t Cry... They Get Even"/>
<link wikidata="Q729794" start="2379" end="2392" title="Pleasantville (film)" label="Pleasantville"/>
<link wikidata="Q102513" start="2491" end="2512" title="Harriet Beecher Stowe" label="Harriet Beecher Stowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2222" start="2532" end="2554" title="Uncle Tom&amp;#x27;s Cabin" label="Uncle Tom&amp;#x27;s Cabin"/>
<link wikidata="Q18602742" start="2615" end="2637" title="A Friendship in Vienna" label="A Friendship in Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q234551" start="2701" end="2722" title="Beverly D&amp;#x27;Angelo" label="Beverly D&amp;#x27;Angelo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1242222" start="2864" end="2879" title="Don&amp;#x27;s Plum" label="Don&amp;#x27;s Plum"/>
<link wikidata="Q907311" start="2961" end="2968" title="Netflix" label="Netflix"/>
<link wikidata="Q20950015" start="2981" end="3004" title="A Very Murray Christmas" label="A Very Murray Christmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2642334" start="3063" end="3091" title="Baby, It&amp;#x27;s Cold Outside" label="Baby, It&amp;#x27;s Cold Outside"/>
<link wikidata="Q29250" start="3113" end="3124" title="Bill Murray" label="Bill Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q4924487" start="3231" end="3244" title="Blake Sennett" label="Blake Sennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q389689" start="3261" end="3271" title="Rilo Kiley" label="Rilo Kiley"/>
<link wikidata="Q16199643" start="3306" end="3318" title="Jason Boesel" label="Jason Boesel"/>
<link wikidata="Q671510" start="3342" end="3345" title="NPR" label="NPR"/>
<link wikidata="Q4729632" start="3359" end="3379" title="All Songs Considered" label="All Songs Considered"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141081" start="3477" end="3483" title="Lounge music" label="lounge"/>
<link wikidata="Q183504" start="3747" end="3757" title="indie rock" label="indie rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q126399" start="3790" end="3802" title="Warner Bros." label="Warner Bros."/>
<link wikidata="Q6910897" start="3910" end="3926" title="More Adventurous" label="More Adventurous"/>
<link wikidata="Q721140" start="3992" end="4001" title="Pitchfork (website)" label="Pitchfork"/>
<link wikidata="Q6910897" start="4150" end="4168" title="Portions for Foxes" label="Portions for Foxes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7883253" start="4221" end="4241" title="Under the Blacklight" label="Under the Blacklight"/>
<link wikidata="Q126399" start="4273" end="4285" title="Warner Bros." label="Warner Bros."/>
<link wikidata="Q550900" start="5004" end="5016" title="Conor Oberst" label="Conor Oberst"/>
<link wikidata="Q7691534" start="5072" end="5081" title="Team Love" label="Team Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q7278583" start="5146" end="5161" title="Rabbit Fur Coat" label="Rabbit Fur Coat"/>
<link wikidata="Q201514" start="5232" end="5239" title="M. Ward" label="M. Ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q182223" start="5245" end="5253" title="Maroon 5" label="Maroon 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q445136" start="5264" end="5279" title="James Valentine (musician)" label="James Valentine"/>
<link wikidata="Q816502" start="5281" end="5292" title="Ben Gibbard" label="Ben Gibbard"/>
<link wikidata="Q16414" start="5296" end="5315" title="Death Cab for Cutie" label="Death Cab for Cutie"/>
<link wikidata="Q332399" start="5337" end="5359" title="The Traveling Wilburys" label="The Traveling Wilburys"/>
<link wikidata="Q2405772" start="5372" end="5388" title="Handle With Care (song)" label="Handle With Care"/>
<link wikidata="Q2552702" start="5396" end="5412" title="The Watson Twins" label="The Watson Twins"/>
<link wikidata="Q858778" start="5613" end="5643" title="Late Show with David Letterman" label="Late Show with David Letterman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2700116" start="5657" end="5695" title="The Late Late Show with Craig Ferguson" label="The Late Late Show with Craig Ferguson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639429" start="5709" end="5743" title="Late Night with Conan O&amp;#x27;Brien" label="Late Night with Conan O&amp;#x27;Brien"/>
<link wikidata="Q616417" start="5760" end="5784" title="Later with Jools Holland" label="Later with Jools Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7130193" start="5882" end="5898" title="Pancake Mountain" label="Pancake Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q275033" start="6000" end="6020" title="Entertainment Weekly" label="Entertainment Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q231286" start="6061" end="6075" title="Emmylou Harris" label="Emmylou Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143552" start="6083" end="6093" title="Silver Lake, Los Angeles, California" label="Silverlake"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="6114" end="6127" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3233970" start="6223" end="6236" title="The A.V. Club" label="The A.V. Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025912" start="6238" end="6254" title="Spin magazine" label="&amp;quot;Spin&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q671510" start="6260" end="6263" title="NPR" label="NPR"/>
<link wikidata="Q6818966" start="6277" end="6290" title="Meredith Ochs" label="Meredith Ochs"/>
<link wikidata="Q4674063" start="6430" end="6441" title="Acid Tongue" label="Acid Tongue"/>
<link wikidata="Q17509546" start="6489" end="6500" title="The Voyager (Jenny Lewis album)" label="The Voyager"/>
<link wikidata="Q311249" start="6809" end="6811" title="GQ" label="GQ"/>
<link wikidata="Q36301" start="6835" end="6848" title="Anne Hathaway" label="Anne Hathaway"/>
<link wikidata="Q126599" start="6850" end="6865" title="Kristen Stewart" label="Kristen Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q29328" start="6867" end="6878" title="Brie Larson" label="Brie Larson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7700218" start="6884" end="6900" title="Tennessee Thomas" label="Tennessee Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q744809" start="6920" end="6928" title="The Like" label="The Like"/>
<link wikidata="Q17509546" start="7018" end="7029" title="The Voyager (Jenny Lewis album)" label="The Voyager"/>
<link wikidata="Q3357759" start="7048" end="7064" title="Ottawa Bluesfest" label="Ottawa Bluesfest"/>
<link wikidata="Q654566" start="7174" end="7195" title="Newport Folk Festival" label="Newport Folk Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q889643" start="7197" end="7209" title="Lollapalooza" label="Lollapalooza"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112952" start="7211" end="7248" title="Outside Lands Music and Arts Festival" label="Outside Lands Music and Arts Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q2182648" start="7254" end="7276" title="Red Rocks Amphitheatre" label="Red Rocks Amphitheatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3789908" start="7287" end="7302" title="iTunes Festival" label="iTunes Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241091" start="7338" end="7371" title="Austin City Limits Music Festival" label="Austin City Limits Music Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q62990583" start="7500" end="7511" title="On the Line (Jenny Lewis album)" label="On the Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q120210333" start="7668" end="7680" title="Joy&amp;#x27;All" label="Joy&amp;#x27;All"/>
<link wikidata="Q62990583" start="7788" end="7799" title="On the Line (Jenny Lewis album)" label="On the Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="7846" end="7863" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11901" start="7974" end="7978" title="Beck" label="Beck"/>
<link wikidata="Q19957048" start="8006" end="8015" title="Dave Cobb" label="Dave Cobb"/>
<link wikidata="Q16741886" start="8046" end="8052" title="Lucius (band)" label="Lucius"/>
<link wikidata="Q23197" start="8072" end="8092" title="Nashville, Tennessee" label="Nashville, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239214" start="8196" end="8214" title="The Postal Service" label="The Postal Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q3566943" start="8255" end="8281" title="We Will Become Silhouettes" label="We Will Become Silhouettes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144961" start="8401" end="8408" title="Cursive (band)" label="Cursive"/>
<link wikidata="Q3311777" start="8421" end="8435" title="The Ugly Organ" label="The Ugly Organ"/>
<link wikidata="Q740308" start="8478" end="8484" title="UNICEF" label="UNICEF"/>
<link wikidata="Q3712362" start="8504" end="8543" title="Do They Know It&amp;#x27;s Hallowe&amp;#x27;en?" label="Do They Know It&amp;#x27;s Hallowe&amp;#x27;en?"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277734" start="8574" end="8590" title="Jimmy Tamborello" label="Jimmy Tamborello"/>
<link wikidata="Q7781215" start="8636" end="8644" title="Theme Time Radio Hour Season One" label="Season 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q392" start="8648" end="8657" title="Bob Dylan" label="Bob Dylan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7781220" start="8671" end="8692" title="Theme Time Radio Hour" label="Theme Time Radio Hour"/>
<link wikidata="Q2552702" start="8737" end="8749" title="Watson Twins" label="Watson Twins"/>
<link wikidata="Q6265993" start="8879" end="8893" title="Johnathan Rice" label="Johnathan Rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277734" start="9088" end="9093" title="Dntel" label="Dntel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3041162" start="9107" end="9116" title="Dumb Luck (album)" label="Dumb Luck"/>
<link wikidata="Q206939" start="9194" end="9226" title="Elvis Costello and the Imposters" label="Elvis Costello and the Imposters"/>
<link wikidata="Q3319774" start="9239" end="9247" title="Momofuku (album)" label="Momofuku"/>
<link wikidata="Q191224" start="9325" end="9345" title="Walt Disney Pictures" label="Walt Disney Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q212792" start="9372" end="9376" title="Bolt (2008 film)" label="Bolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7907729" start="9546" end="9556" title="V Festival (Australia)" label="V Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q188407" start="9590" end="9601" title="Snow Patrol" label="Snow Patrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130" start="9626" end="9632" title="Sydney" label="Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q889872" start="9682" end="9722" title="Coachella Valley Music and Arts Festival" label="Coachella Valley Music and Arts Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q838789" start="9726" end="9743" title="Indio, California" label="Indio, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q2700116" start="9787" end="9825" title="The Late Late Show with Craig Ferguson" label="The Late Late Show with Craig Ferguson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2439756" start="9930" end="9938" title="Flamingo (Brandon Flowers album)" label="Flamingo"/>
<link wikidata="Q309697" start="9965" end="9980" title="Brandon Flowers" label="Brandon Flowers"/>
<link wikidata="Q853325" start="10026" end="10038" title="Tribeca Film" label="Tribeca Film"/>
<link wikidata="Q610471" start="10060" end="10075" title="Very Good Girls" label="Very Good Girls"/>
<link wikidata="Q389689" start="10165" end="10175" title="Rilo Kiley" label="Rilo Kiley"/>
<link wikidata="Q23633" start="10266" end="10269" title="HBO" label="HBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q618329" start="10283" end="10288" title="Girls (TV series)" label="Girls"/>
<link wikidata="Q816452" start="10318" end="10333" title="Vampire Weekend" label="Vampire Weekend"/>
<link wikidata="Q2917080" start="10341" end="10358" title="Rostam Batmanglij" label="Rostam Batmanglij"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417467" start="10589" end="10602" title="She &amp;amp; Him" label="She &amp;amp; Him"/>
<link wikidata="Q35549026" start="10640" end="10655" title="Christmas Party (She &amp;amp; Him album)" label="Christmas Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q633812" start="10890" end="10903" title="Archie Comics" label="Archie Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3188107" start="10934" end="10960" title="Jughead Jones" label="Jughead&amp;#x27;s Time Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q3626966" start="11066" end="11078" title="Harry Styles" label="Harry Styles"/>
<link wikidata="Q74825212" start="11117" end="11129" title="Love On Tour" label="Love On Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q120210333" start="11185" end="11197" title="Joy&amp;#x27;All" label="Joy&amp;#x27;All"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239214" start="11244" end="11262" title="The Postal Service" label="The Postal Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q6265993" start="11379" end="11393" title="Johnathan Rice" label="Johnathan Rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q5966382" start="11439" end="11462" title="I&amp;#x27;m Having Fun Now" label="I&amp;#x27;m Having Fun Now"/>
<link wikidata="Q67030918" start="11472" end="11492" title="Warner Bros. Records" label="Warner Bros. Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q18342295" start="11573" end="11592" title="Ricki and the Flash" label="Ricki and the Flash"/>
<link wikidata="Q27468959" start="11619" end="11631" title="Nice as Fuck" label="Nice as Fuck"/>
<link wikidata="Q758381" start="11669" end="11685" title="Au Revoir Simone" label="Au Revoir Simone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7700218" start="11692" end="11708" title="Tennessee Thomas" label="Tennessee Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q744809" start="11713" end="11721" title="The Like" label="The Like"/>
<link wikidata="Q359442" start="11737" end="11751" title="Bernie Sanders" label="Bernie Sanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q201514" start="11808" end="11815" title="M. Ward" label="M. Ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q7742042" start="11875" end="11885" title="The Initial Friend" label="Rilo Kiley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7677771" start="11907" end="11929" title="Take-Offs and Landings" label="Take-Offs and Landings"/>
<link wikidata="Q7732768" start="11951" end="11978" title="The Execution of All Things" label="The Execution of All Things"/>
<link wikidata="Q6910897" start="12000" end="12016" title="More Adventurous" label="More Adventurous"/>
<link wikidata="Q7883253" start="12038" end="12058" title="Under the Blacklight" label="Under the Blacklight"/>
<link wikidata="Q17029691" start="12080" end="12086" title="Rkives" label="Rkives"/>
<link wikidata="Q7278583" start="12121" end="12136" title="Rabbit Fur Coat" label="Rabbit Fur Coat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2552702" start="12156" end="12172" title="The Watson Twins" label="The Watson Twins"/>
<link wikidata="Q4674063" start="12182" end="12193" title="Acid Tongue" label="Acid Tongue"/>
<link wikidata="Q17509546" start="12215" end="12226" title="The Voyager (Jenny Lewis album)" label="The Voyager"/>
<link wikidata="Q62990583" start="12248" end="12259" title="On the Line (Jenny Lewis album)" label="On the Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q120210333" start="12281" end="12293" title="Joy&amp;#x27;All" label="Joy&amp;#x27;All"/>
<link wikidata="Q5966382" start="12341" end="12364" title="I&amp;#x27;m Having Fun Now" label="I&amp;#x27;m Having Fun Now"/>
<link wikidata="Q27468959" start="12453" end="12465" title="Nice as Fuck" label="Nice as Fuck"/>
<link wikidata="Q915714" start="12506" end="12517" title="Bright Eyes (band)" label="Bright Eyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570253" start="12526" end="12589" title="Lifted or The Story is in the Soil, Keep Your Ear to the Ground" label="Lifted or The Story is in the Soil, Keep Your Ear to the Ground"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758109" start="12603" end="12615" title="Saddle Creek" label="Saddle Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144961" start="12619" end="12626" title="Cursive (band)" label="Cursive"/>
<link wikidata="Q3311777" start="12635" end="12649" title="The Ugly Organ" label="The Ugly Organ"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758109" start="12663" end="12675" title="Saddle Creek" label="Saddle Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239214" start="12679" end="12697" title="The Postal Service" label="The Postal Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q577717" start="12706" end="12713" title="Give Up" label="Give Up"/>
<link wikidata="Q778673" start="12727" end="12734" title="Sub Pop" label="Sub Pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1483286" start="12738" end="12751" title="The Good Life (band)" label="The Good Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q4712787" start="12760" end="12777" title="Album of the Year (The Good Life album)" label="Album of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758109" start="12791" end="12803" title="Saddle Creek" label="Saddle Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q2552702" start="12807" end="12823" title="The Watson Twins" label="The Watson Twins"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277734" start="12864" end="12869" title="Dntel" label="Dntel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3041162" start="12878" end="12887" title="Dumb Luck (album)" label="Dumb Luck"/>
<link wikidata="Q778673" start="12901" end="12908" title="Sub Pop" label="Sub Pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q7994009" start="12912" end="12928" title="Whispertown 2000" label="Whispertown 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q206939" start="12975" end="13007" title="Elvis Costello and the Imposters" label="Elvis Costello and the Imposters"/>
<link wikidata="Q3319774" start="13016" end="13024" title="Momofuku (album)" label="Momofuku"/>
<link wikidata="Q4043197" start="13038" end="13058" title="Lost Highway Records" label="Lost Highway Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q7994009" start="13062" end="13078" title="Whispertown 2000" label="Whispertown 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q309697" start="13107" end="13122" title="Brandon Flowers" label="Brandon Flowers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2439756" start="13160" end="13168" title="Flamingo (Brandon Flowers album)" label="Flamingo"/>
<link wikidata="Q190585" start="13182" end="13188" title="Island Records" label="Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330417" start="13189" end="13196" title="Vertigo Records" label="Vertigo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406448" start="13200" end="13206" title="Wavves" label="Wavves"/>
<link wikidata="Q4689418" start="13215" end="13232" title="Afraid of Heights (Wavves album)" label="Afraid of Heights"/>
<link wikidata="Q5324758" start="13248" end="13252" title="EZTV" label="EZTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417467" start="13288" end="13301" title="She &amp;amp; Him" label="She &amp;amp; Him"/>
<link wikidata="Q35549026" start="13310" end="13325" title="Christmas Party (She &amp;amp; Him album)" label="Christmas Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q963626" start="13341" end="13353" title="Paul Shaffer" label="Paul Shaffer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6412120" start="13433" end="13442" title="King Tuff" label="King Tuff"/>
<link wikidata="Q55635440" start="13451" end="13460" title="The Other (King Tuff album)" label="The Other"/>
<link wikidata="Q816452" start="13476" end="13491" title="Vampire Weekend" label="Vampire Weekend"/>
<link wikidata="Q61312615" start="13500" end="13504" title="2021 (song)" label="2021"/>
<link wikidata="Q39336396" start="13520" end="13539" title="The Cactus Blossoms" label="The Cactus Blossoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q389689" start="13590" end="13600" title="Rilo Kiley" label="Rilo Kiley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759482" start="13609" end="13617" title="Desert Blue" label="The Frug"/>
<link wikidata="Q1947643" start="13643" end="13660" title="Morgan J. Freeman" label="Morgan J. Freeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7677771" start="13683" end="13698" title="Take Offs and Landings" label="Wires and Waves"/>
<link wikidata="Q7677771" start="13785" end="13796" title="Take Offs and Landings" label="Bulletproof"/>
<link wikidata="Q1372139" start="13822" end="13832" title="Liam Lynch (musician)" label="Liam Lynch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239214" start="13836" end="13854" title="The Postal Service" label="The Postal Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q3520646" start="13863" end="13896" title="The District Sleeps Alone Tonight" label="The District Sleeps Alone Tonight"/>
<link wikidata="Q6910897" start="13948" end="13966" title="Portions for Foxes" label="Portions for Foxes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6910897" start="14028" end="14043" title="It&amp;#x27;s a Hit (Rilo Kiley song)" label="It&amp;#x27;s a Hit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3566943" start="14126" end="14152" title="We Will Become Silhouettes" label="We Will Become Silhouettes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2330632" start="14178" end="14188" title="Jared Hess" label="Jared Hess"/>
<link wikidata="Q2552702" start="14209" end="14225" title="the Watson Twins" label="the Watson Twins"/>
<link wikidata="Q7278583" start="14234" end="14254" title="Rise Up with Fists!!" label="Rise Up with Fists!!"/>
<link wikidata="Q2873097" start="14280" end="14295" title="Autumn de Wilde" label="Autumn de Wilde"/>
<link wikidata="Q7752009" start="14318" end="14332" title="The Moneymaker" label="The Moneymaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q4707877" start="14587" end="14598" title="Alan Tanner" label="Alan Tanner"/>
<link wikidata="Q435968" start="14680" end="14696" title="Jenny and Johnny" label="Jenny and Johnny"/>
<link wikidata="Q5966382" start="14705" end="14713" title="I&amp;#x27;m Having Fun Now" label="Big Wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q17029691" start="14884" end="14898" title="Rkives" label="Let Me Back In"/>
<link wikidata="Q7732770" start="14957" end="14966" title="The Execution of All Things (song)" label="Emotional"/>
<link wikidata="Q17509546" start="15029" end="15049" title="The Voyager (Jenny Lewis album)" label="Just One Of The Guys"/>
<link wikidata="Q27468959" start="15168" end="15180" title="Nice as Fuck" label="Nice as Fuck"/>
<link wikidata="Q6702284" start="15285" end="15299" title="Luke Rathborne" label="Luke Rathborne"/>
<link wikidata="Q60040583" start="15372" end="15388" title="Eric Notarnicola" label="Eric Notarnicola"/>
<link wikidata="Q17001321" start="15469" end="15498" title="Artists for Peace and Justice" label="Artists for Peace and Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q3809964" start="15500" end="15515" title="Jonathan Wilson (musician)" label="Jonathan Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3710513" start="15530" end="15539" title="Music of Haiti" label="Sanba Zao"/>
<link wikidata="Q355009" start="15545" end="15559" title="Jackson Browne" label="Jackson Browne"/>
<link wikidata="Q337249" start="15678" end="15689" title="Habib Koité" label="Habib Koité"/>
<link wikidata="Q333814" start="15743" end="15754" title="David Belle" label="David Belle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7453206" start="15775" end="15784" title="Serengeti (rapper)" label="Serengeti"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="990632" wikidata="Q3174497" url="?curid=990632" title="Dynamical systems theory">
<text>Dynamical systems theory is an area of mathematics used to describe the behavior of complex dynamical systems, usually by employing differential equations or difference equations. When differential equations are employed, the theory is called &quot;continuous dynamical systems&quot;. From a physical point of view, continuous dynamical systems is a generalization of classical mechanics, a generalization where the equations of motion are postulated directly and are not constrained to be Euler–Lagrange equations of a least action principle. When difference equations are employed, the theory is called &quot;discrete dynamical systems&quot;. When the time variable runs over a set that is discrete over some intervals and continuous over other intervals or is any arbitrary time-set such as a Cantor set, one gets dynamic equations on time scales. Some situations may also be modeled by mixed operators, such as differential-difference equations.

This theory deals with the long-term qualitative behavior of dynamical systems, and studies the nature of, and when possible the solutions of, the equations of motion of systems that are often primarily mechanical or otherwise physical in nature, such as planetary orbits and the behaviour of electronic circuits, as well as systems that arise in biology, economics, and elsewhere. Much of modern research is focused on the study of chaotic systems and bizarre systems.

This field of study is also called just &quot;dynamical systems&quot;, &quot;mathematical dynamical systems theory&quot; or the &quot;mathematical theory of dynamical systems&quot;.
== Overview ==
Dynamical systems theory and chaos theory deal with the long-term qualitative behavior of dynamical systems. Here, the focus is not on finding precise solutions to the equations defining the dynamical system (which is often hopeless), but rather to answer questions like &quot;Will the system settle down to a steady state in the long term, and if so, what are the possible steady states?&quot;, or &quot;Does the long-term behavior of the system depend on its initial condition?&quot;

An important goal is to describe the fixed points, or steady states of a given dynamical system; these are values of the variable that do not change over time. Some of these fixed points are &quot;attractive&quot;, meaning that if the system starts out in a nearby state, it converges towards the fixed point.

Similarly, one is interested in &quot;periodic points&quot;, states of the system that repeat after several timesteps. Periodic points can also be attractive. Sharkovskii&#x27;s theorem is an interesting statement about the number of periodic points of a one-dimensional discrete dynamical system.

Even simple nonlinear dynamical systems often exhibit seemingly random behavior that has been called &quot;chaos&quot;. The branch of dynamical systems that deals with the clean definition and investigation of chaos is called &quot;chaos theory&quot;.

== History ==
The concept of dynamical systems theory has its origins in Newtonian mechanics. There, as in other natural sciences and engineering disciplines, the evolution rule of dynamical systems is given implicitly by a relation that gives the state of the system only a short time into the future.

Before the advent of fast computing machines, solving a dynamical system required sophisticated mathematical techniques and could only be accomplished for a small class of dynamical systems.

Some excellent presentations of mathematical dynamic system theory include , , , and .

== Concepts ==

=== Dynamical systems ===

The dynamical system concept is a mathematical formalization for any fixed &quot;rule&quot; that describes the time dependence of a point&#x27;s position in its ambient space. Examples include the mathematical models that describe the swinging of a clock pendulum, the flow of water in a pipe, and the number of fish each spring in a lake.

A dynamical system has a &quot;state&quot; determined by a collection of real numbers, or more generally by a set of points in an appropriate &quot;state space&quot;. Small changes in the state of the system correspond to small changes in the numbers. The numbers are also the coordinates of a geometrical space—a manifold. The &quot;evolution rule&quot; of the dynamical system is a fixed rule that describes what future states follow from the current state. The rule may be deterministic (for a given time interval one future state can be precisely predicted given the current state) or stochastic (the evolution of the state can only be predicted with a certain probability).

=== Dynamicism ===
Dynamicism, also termed the &quot;dynamic hypothesis&quot; or the &quot;dynamic hypothesis in cognitive science&quot; or &quot;dynamic cognition&quot;, is a new approach in cognitive science exemplified by the work of philosopher Tim van Gelder. It argues that differential equations are more suited to modelling cognition than more traditional computer models.

=== Nonlinear system ===

In mathematics, a nonlinear system is a system that is not linear—i.e., a system that does not satisfy the superposition principle. Less technically, a nonlinear system is any problem where the variable(s) to solve for cannot be written as a linear sum of independent components. A nonhomogeneous system, which is linear apart from the presence of a function of the independent variables, is nonlinear according to a strict definition, but such systems are usually studied alongside linear systems, because they can be transformed to a linear system as long as a particular solution is known.

== Related fields ==

=== Arithmetic dynamics ===
:Arithmetic dynamics is a field that emerged in the 1990s that amalgamates two areas of mathematics, dynamical systems and number theory. Classically, discrete dynamics refers to the study of the iteration of self-maps of the complex plane or real line. Arithmetic dynamics is the study of the number-theoretic properties of integer, rational, -adic, and/or algebraic points under repeated application of a polynomial or rational function.

=== Chaos theory ===
:Chaos theory describes the behavior of certain dynamical systems – that is, systems whose state evolves with time – that may exhibit dynamics that are highly sensitive to initial conditions (popularly referred to as the butterfly effect). As a result of this sensitivity, which manifests itself as an exponential growth of perturbations in the initial conditions, the behavior of chaotic systems appears random. This happens even though these systems are deterministic, meaning that their future dynamics are fully defined by their initial conditions, with no random elements involved. This behavior is known as deterministic chaos, or simply &quot;chaos&quot;.

=== Complex systems ===
:Complex systems is a scientific field that studies the common properties of systems considered complex in nature, society, and science. It is also called &quot;complex systems theory&quot;, &quot;complexity science&quot;, &quot;study of complex systems&quot; and/or &quot;sciences of complexity&quot;. The key problems of such systems are difficulties with their formal modeling and simulation. From such perspective, in different research contexts complex systems are defined on the base of their different attributes.

:The study of complex systems is bringing new vitality to many areas of science where a more typical reductionist strategy has fallen short. &quot;Complex systems&quot; is therefore often used as a broad term encompassing a research approach to problems in many diverse disciplines including neurosciences, social sciences, meteorology, chemistry, physics, computer science, psychology, artificial life, evolutionary computation, economics, earthquake prediction, molecular biology and inquiries into the nature of living cells themselves.

=== Control theory ===
:Control theory is an interdisciplinary branch of engineering and mathematics, in part it deals with influencing the behavior of dynamical systems.

=== Ergodic theory ===
:Ergodic theory is a branch of mathematics that studies dynamical systems with an invariant measure and related problems. Its initial development was motivated by problems of statistical physics.

=== Functional analysis ===
:Functional analysis is the branch of mathematics, and specifically of analysis, concerned with the study of vector spaces and operators acting upon them. It has its historical roots in the study of functional spaces, in particular transformations of functions, such as the Fourier transform, as well as in the study of differential and integral equations. This usage of the word &quot;functional&quot; goes back to the calculus of variations, implying a function whose argument is a function. Its use in general has been attributed to mathematician and physicist Vito Volterra and its founding is largely attributed to mathematician Stefan Banach.

=== Graph dynamical systems ===
:The concept of graph dynamical systems (GDS) can be used to capture a wide range of processes taking place on graphs or networks. A major theme in the mathematical and computational analysis of graph dynamical systems is to relate their structural properties (e.g. the network connectivity) and the global dynamics that result.

=== Projected dynamical systems ===
:Projected dynamical systems is a mathematical theory investigating the behaviour of dynamical systems where solutions are restricted to a constraint set. The discipline shares connections to and applications with both the static world of optimization and equilibrium problems and the dynamical world of ordinary differential equations. A projected dynamical system is given by the flow to the projected differential equation.

=== Symbolic dynamics ===
:Symbolic dynamics is the practice of modelling a topological or smooth dynamical system by a discrete space consisting of infinite sequences of abstract symbols, each of which corresponds to a state of the system, with the dynamics (evolution) given by the shift operator.

=== System dynamics ===
:System dynamics is an approach to understanding the behaviour of systems over time. It deals with internal feedback loops and time delays that affect the behaviour and state of the entire system. What makes using system dynamics different from other approaches to studying systems is the language used to describe feedback loops with stocks and flows. These elements help describe how even seemingly simple systems display baffling nonlinearity.

=== Topological dynamics ===
:Topological dynamics is a branch of the theory of dynamical systems in which qualitative, asymptotic properties of dynamical systems are studied from the viewpoint of general topology.

== Applications ==

=== In biomechanics ===
In sports biomechanics, dynamical systems theory has emerged in the movement sciences as a viable framework for modeling athletic performance and efficiency. It comes as no surprise, since dynamical systems theory has its roots in Analytical mechanics. From psychophysiological perspective, the human movement system is a highly intricate network of co-dependent sub-systems (e.g. respiratory, circulatory, nervous, skeletomuscular, perceptual) that are composed of a large number of interacting components (e.g. blood cells, oxygen molecules, muscle tissue, metabolic enzymes, connective tissue and bone). In dynamical systems theory, movement patterns emerge through generic processes of self-organization found in physical and biological systems. There is no research validation of any of the claims associated to the conceptual application of this framework.

=== In cognitive science ===
Dynamical system theory has been applied in the field of neuroscience and cognitive development, especially in the neo-Piagetian theories of cognitive development. It is the belief that cognitive development is best represented by physical theories rather than theories based on syntax and AI. It also believed that differential equations are the most appropriate tool for modeling human behavior. These equations are interpreted to represent an agent&#x27;s cognitive trajectory through state space. In other words, dynamicists argue that psychology should be (or is) the description (via differential equations) of the cognitions and behaviors of an agent under certain environmental and internal pressures. The language of chaos theory is also frequently adopted.

In it, the learner&#x27;s mind reaches a state of disequilibrium where old patterns have broken down. This is the phase transition of cognitive development. Self-organization (the spontaneous creation of coherent forms) sets in as activity levels link to each other. Newly formed macroscopic and microscopic structures support each other, speeding up the process. These links form the structure of a new state of order in the mind through a process called &quot;scalloping&quot; (the repeated building up and collapsing of complex performance.) This new, novel state is progressive, discrete, idiosyncratic and unpredictable.

Dynamic systems theory has recently been used to explain a long-unanswered problem in child development referred to as the A-not-B error. 

Further, since the middle of the 1990s cognitive science, oriented towards a system theoretical connectionism, has increasingly adopted the methods from (nonlinear) “Dynamic Systems Theory (DST)“. A variety of neurosymbolic cognitive neuroarchitectures in modern connectionism, considering their mathematical structural core, can be categorized as (nonlinear) dynamical systems. These attempts in neurocognition to merge connectionist cognitive neuroarchitectures with DST come from not only neuroinformatics and connectionism, but also recently from developmental psychology (“Dynamic Field Theory (DFT)”) and from “evolutionary robotics” and “developmental robotics” in connection with the mathematical method of “evolutionary computation (EC)”. For an overview see Maurer.

===In second language development===

The application of Dynamic Systems Theory to study second language acquisition is attributed to Diane Larsen-Freeman who published an article in 1997 in which she claimed that second language acquisition should be viewed as a developmental process which includes language attrition as well as language acquisition. In her article she claimed that language should be viewed as a dynamic system which is dynamic, complex, nonlinear, chaotic, unpredictable, sensitive to initial conditions, open, self-organizing, feedback sensitive, and adaptive.

== See also ==
;Related subjects

* List of dynamical system topics
* Baker&#x27;s map
* Biological applications of bifurcation theory
* Dynamical system (definition)
* Embodied Embedded Cognition
* Fibonacci numbers
* Fractals
* Gingerbreadman map
* Halo orbit
* List of types of systems theory
* Oscillation
* Postcognitivism
* Recurrent neural network
* Combinatorics and dynamical systems
* Synergetics
* Systemography

;Related scientists

* People in systems and control
* Dmitri Anosov
* Vladimir Arnold
* Nikolay Bogolyubov
* Andrey Kolmogorov
* Nikolay Krylov
* Jürgen Moser
* Yakov G. Sinai
* Stephen Smale
* Hillel Furstenberg
* Grigory Margulis
* Elon Lindenstrauss
== Notes ==
== Further reading ==
*
*
*

== External links ==
*Dynamic Systems Encyclopedia of Cognitive Science entry.
*Definition of dynamical system in MathWorld.
*DSWeb Dynamical Systems Magazine</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3174497" start="0" end="24" title="Dynamical systems theory" label="Dynamical systems theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="39" end="50" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q854457" start="84" end="91" title="complex systems" label="complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q638328" start="92" end="108" title="dynamical system" label="dynamical system"/>
<link wikidata="Q11214" start="132" end="154" title="differential equations" label="differential equations"/>
<link wikidata="Q740970" start="158" end="178" title="difference equations" label="difference equations"/>
<link wikidata="Q15963867" start="243" end="283" title="continuous time" label="&amp;quot;continuous dynamical systems&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q11397" start="368" end="387" title="classical mechanics" label="classical mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q215007" start="416" end="435" title="equations of motion" label="equations of motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q875744" start="490" end="513" title="Euler–Lagrange equation" label="Euler–Lagrange equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q722799" start="520" end="542" title="Principle of least action" label="least action principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q15963867" start="605" end="643" title="discrete time" label="&amp;quot;discrete dynamical systems&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q273188" start="796" end="806" title="Cantor set" label="Cantor set"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804838" start="817" end="849" title="dynamic equations on time scales" label="dynamic equations on time scales"/>
<link wikidata="Q2146125" start="915" end="948" title="differential-difference equations" label="differential-difference equations"/>
<link wikidata="Q215007" start="1098" end="1117" title="equations of motion" label="equations of motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q41217" start="1154" end="1164" title="mechanics" label="mechanical"/>
<link wikidata="Q4130" start="1206" end="1221" title="planetary orbit" label="planetary orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815901" start="1244" end="1262" title="electronic circuit" label="electronic circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q420" start="1298" end="1305" title="biology" label="biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q8134" start="1307" end="1316" title="economics" label="economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q166314" start="1384" end="1398" title="chaotic system" label="chaotic system"/>
<link wikidata="Q166314" start="1648" end="1660" title="chaos theory" label="chaos theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q638328" start="1709" end="1725" title="dynamical system" label="dynamical system"/>
<link wikidata="Q2226855" start="2576" end="2602" title="Sharkovskii&amp;#x27;s theorem" label="Sharkovskii&amp;#x27;s theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q638328" start="2728" end="2754" title="nonlinear dynamical system" label="nonlinear dynamical system"/>
<link wikidata="Q166314" start="2948" end="2960" title="chaos theory" label="chaos theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q38433" start="3042" end="3061" title="Newtonian mechanics" label="Newtonian mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q68" start="3294" end="3317" title="computer" label="fast computing machines"/>
<link wikidata="Q638328" start="3600" end="3616" title="dynamical system" label="dynamical system"/>
<link wikidata="Q649732" start="3643" end="3656" title="formal system" label="formalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q11471" start="3707" end="3711" title="time" label="time"/>
<link wikidata="Q3888851" start="3757" end="3770" title="ambient space" label="ambient space"/>
<link wikidata="Q486902" start="3793" end="3811" title="mathematical model" label="mathematical model"/>
<link wikidata="Q12916" start="4010" end="4022" title="real numbers" label="real numbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q36161" start="4047" end="4050" title="Set (mathematics)" label="set"/>
<link wikidata="Q44946" start="4054" end="4060" title="Point (geometry)" label="points"/>
<link wikidata="Q203920" start="4251" end="4259" title="manifold" label="manifold"/>
<link wikidata="Q11348" start="4321" end="4331" title="function (mathematics)" label="fixed rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q622381" start="4413" end="4426" title="Deterministic system (mathematics)" label="deterministic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545585" start="4526" end="4536" title="stochastic differential equation" label="stochastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5319047" start="4636" end="4646" title="Dynamicism" label="Dynamicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q147638" start="4809" end="4826" title="cognitive science" label="cognitive science"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804551" start="4866" end="4880" title="Tim van Gelder" label="Tim van Gelder"/>
<link wikidata="Q11214" start="4897" end="4919" title="differential equations" label="differential equations"/>
<link wikidata="Q2200417" start="4949" end="4958" title="cognition" label="cognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q68" start="4981" end="4989" title="computer" label="computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="5028" end="5039" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q660848" start="5043" end="5059" title="nonlinear system" label="nonlinear system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072174" start="5084" end="5090" title="linear system" label="linear"/>
<link wikidata="Q284885" start="5132" end="5155" title="superposition principle" label="superposition principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q904929" start="5307" end="5321" title="Homogeneity (physics)" label="nonhomogeneous"/>
<link wikidata="Q320723" start="5391" end="5411" title="independent variable" label="independent variable"/>
<link wikidata="Q4791123" start="5670" end="5689" title="Arithmetic dynamics" label="Arithmetic dynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q638328" start="5770" end="5787" title="dynamical systems" label="dynamical systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q12479" start="5792" end="5805" title="number theory" label="number theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q5254619" start="5865" end="5874" title="Iterated function" label="iteration"/>
<link wikidata="Q328998" start="5895" end="5908" title="complex plane" label="complex plane"/>
<link wikidata="Q35689" start="5912" end="5921" title="real line" label="real line"/>
<link wikidata="Q43260" start="6076" end="6086" title="polynomial" label="polynomial"/>
<link wikidata="Q41237" start="6090" end="6107" title="rational function" label="rational function"/>
<link wikidata="Q166314" start="6132" end="6144" title="Chaos theory" label="Chaos theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q638328" start="6179" end="6195" title="dynamical system (definition)" label="dynamical system"/>
<link wikidata="Q187536" start="6352" end="6368" title="butterfly effect" label="butterfly effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q176640" start="6536" end="6542" title="randomness" label="random"/>
<link wikidata="Q5265717" start="6587" end="6600" title="deterministic system (philosophy)" label="deterministic"/>
<link wikidata="Q854457" start="6820" end="6835" title="Complex systems" label="Complex systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q58778" start="6896" end="6902" title="system" label="system"/>
<link wikidata="Q723897" start="6915" end="6922" title="Complexity" label="complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q7860" start="6926" end="6932" title="nature" label="nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q8425" start="6934" end="6941" title="society" label="society"/>
<link wikidata="Q336" start="6947" end="6954" title="science" label="science"/>
<link wikidata="Q1116876" start="7190" end="7198" title="Scientific modelling" label="modeling"/>
<link wikidata="Q45045" start="7203" end="7213" title="simulation" label="simulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q206829" start="7442" end="7454" title="reductionist" label="reductionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q207011" start="7633" end="7646" title="neurosciences" label="neurosciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q34749" start="7648" end="7663" title="social sciences" label="social sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q25261" start="7665" end="7676" title="meteorology" label="meteorology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2329" start="7678" end="7687" title="chemistry" label="chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q413" start="7689" end="7696" title="physics" label="physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q21198" start="7698" end="7714" title="computer science" label="computer science"/>
<link wikidata="Q9418" start="7716" end="7726" title="psychology" label="psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q263847" start="7728" end="7743" title="artificial life" label="artificial life"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197129" start="7745" end="7769" title="evolutionary computation" label="evolutionary computation"/>
<link wikidata="Q8134" start="7771" end="7780" title="economics" label="economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7202" start="7805" end="7822" title="molecular biology" label="molecular biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868" start="7863" end="7867" title="cell (biology)" label="cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501221" start="7906" end="7920" title="Control theory" label="Control theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q11023" start="7955" end="7966" title="engineering" label="engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="7971" end="7982" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q638328" start="8034" end="8050" title="dynamical system" label="dynamical system"/>
<link wikidata="Q5498822" start="8078" end="8092" title="Ergodic theory" label="Ergodic theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="8108" end="8119" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q638328" start="8133" end="8149" title="dynamical system" label="dynamical system"/>
<link wikidata="Q4200518" start="8159" end="8176" title="invariant measure" label="invariant measure"/>
<link wikidata="Q188715" start="8252" end="8271" title="statistical physics" label="statistical physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q190549" start="8303" end="8322" title="Functional analysis" label="Functional analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="8340" end="8351" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7754" start="8373" end="8381" title="mathematical analysis" label="analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q125977" start="8411" end="8423" title="vector space" label="vector space"/>
<link wikidata="Q131030" start="8429" end="8437" title="operator (mathematics)" label="operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q934367" start="8501" end="8517" title="functional space" label="functional space"/>
<link wikidata="Q11348" start="8553" end="8562" title="function (mathematics)" label="functions"/>
<link wikidata="Q6520159" start="8576" end="8593" title="Fourier transform" label="Fourier transform"/>
<link wikidata="Q11214" start="8622" end="8634" title="differential equations" label="differential"/>
<link wikidata="Q580101" start="8639" end="8657" title="integral equations" label="integral equations"/>
<link wikidata="Q579600" start="8688" end="8698" title="functional (mathematics)" label="functional"/>
<link wikidata="Q216861" start="8722" end="8744" title="calculus of variations" label="calculus of variations"/>
<link wikidata="Q216812" start="8866" end="8879" title="Vito Volterra" label="Vito Volterra"/>
<link wikidata="Q180217" start="8936" end="8949" title="Stefan Banach" label="Stefan Banach"/>
<link wikidata="Q5597080" start="9000" end="9022" title="graph dynamical system" label="graph dynamical system"/>
<link wikidata="Q7249433" start="9351" end="9378" title="Projected dynamical systems" label="Projected dynamical systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="9384" end="9396" title="mathematics" label="mathematical"/>
<link wikidata="Q638328" start="9435" end="9451" title="dynamical system" label="dynamical system"/>
<link wikidata="Q141495" start="9589" end="9601" title="Optimization (mathematics)" label="optimization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530271" start="9606" end="9617" title="Equilibrium point" label="equilibrium"/>
<link wikidata="Q465274" start="9654" end="9685" title="ordinary differential equations" label="ordinary differential equations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434290" start="9732" end="9736" title="flow (mathematics)" label="flow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350838" start="9805" end="9822" title="Symbolic dynamics" label="Symbolic dynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q638328" start="9876" end="9892" title="dynamical system" label="dynamical system"/>
<link wikidata="Q133250" start="9936" end="9944" title="sequence" label="sequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2278680" start="10062" end="10076" title="shift operator" label="shift operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q598451" start="10104" end="10119" title="System dynamics" label="System dynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q183635" start="10418" end="10426" title="feedback" label="feedback"/>
<link wikidata="Q2714114" start="10438" end="10454" title="Stock and flow" label="stocks and flows"/>
<link wikidata="Q660848" start="10536" end="10548" title="nonlinearity" label="nonlinearity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825032" start="10581" end="10601" title="Topological dynamics" label="Topological dynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q621550" start="10748" end="10764" title="general topology" label="general topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q3661266" start="10814" end="10833" title="sports biomechanics" label="sports biomechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q833065" start="11042" end="11062" title="Analytical mechanics" label="Analytical mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q60442" start="11761" end="11773" title="neurodynamics" label="neuroscience"/>
<link wikidata="Q147638" start="11778" end="11799" title="cognitive science" label="cognitive development"/>
<link wikidata="Q17166043" start="11815" end="11866" title="the neo-Piagetian theories of cognitive development" label="the neo-Piagetian theories of cognitive development"/>
<link wikidata="Q11660" start="11994" end="11996" title="AI" label="AI"/>
<link wikidata="Q230930" start="12192" end="12203" title="state space" label="state space"/>
<link wikidata="Q9418" start="12244" end="12254" title="psychology" label="psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q609408" start="12629" end="12646" title="Self-organization" label="Self-organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q278067" start="13222" end="13235" title="A-not-B error" label="A-not-B error"/>
<link wikidata="Q147638" start="13278" end="13295" title="cognitive science" label="cognitive science"/>
<link wikidata="Q203790" start="13335" end="13348" title="connectionism" label="connectionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q175002" start="13790" end="13814" title="developmental psychology" label="developmental psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q3267529" start="13856" end="13877" title="evolutionary robotics" label="evolutionary robotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5266817" start="13884" end="13906" title="developmental robotics" label="developmental robotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197129" start="13955" end="13979" title="evolutionary computation" label="evolutionary computation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455178" start="14105" end="14132" title="second language acquisition" label="second language acquisition"/>
<link wikidata="Q47486286" start="14150" end="14170" title="Diane Larsen-Freeman" label="Diane Larsen-Freeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455178" start="14230" end="14257" title="second language acquisition" label="second language acquisition"/>
<link wikidata="Q387080" start="14317" end="14335" title="language attrition" label="language attrition"/>
<link wikidata="Q16000152" start="14636" end="14667" title="List of dynamical system topics" label="List of dynamical system topics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018917" start="14670" end="14686" title="Baker&amp;#x27;s map" label="Baker&amp;#x27;s map"/>
<link wikidata="Q4914973" start="14689" end="14734" title="Biological applications of bifurcation theory" label="Biological applications of bifurcation theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q638328" start="14737" end="14766" title="Dynamical system (definition)" label="Dynamical system (definition)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5370105" start="14769" end="14796" title="Embodied Embedded Cognition" label="Embodied Embedded Cognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q23835349" start="14799" end="14816" title="Fibonacci numbers" label="Fibonacci numbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q81392" start="14819" end="14827" title="Fractals" label="Fractals"/>
<link wikidata="Q5563092" start="14830" end="14848" title="Gingerbreadman map" label="Gingerbreadman map"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133479" start="14851" end="14861" title="Halo orbit" label="Halo orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q16259357" start="14864" end="14895" title="List of types of systems theory" label="List of types of systems theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q170475" start="14898" end="14909" title="Oscillation" label="Oscillation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7234125" start="14912" end="14927" title="Postcognitivism" label="Postcognitivism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1457734" start="14930" end="14954" title="Recurrent neural network" label="Recurrent neural network"/>
<link wikidata="Q5150832" start="14957" end="14992" title="Combinatorics and dynamical systems" label="Combinatorics and dynamical systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506712" start="14995" end="15006" title="Synergetics (Haken)" label="Synergetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7663830" start="15009" end="15022" title="Systemography" label="Systemography"/>
<link wikidata="Q6632899" start="15047" end="15076" title="People in systems and control" label="People in systems and control"/>
<link wikidata="Q1232736" start="15079" end="15092" title="Dmitri Anosov" label="Dmitri Anosov"/>
<link wikidata="Q157642" start="15095" end="15110" title="Vladimir Arnold" label="Vladimir Arnold"/>
<link wikidata="Q454925" start="15113" end="15131" title="Nikolay Bogolyubov" label="Nikolay Bogolyubov"/>
<link wikidata="Q153224" start="15134" end="15151" title="Andrey Kolmogorov" label="Andrey Kolmogorov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1932500" start="15154" end="15168" title="Nikolay Mitrofanovich Krylov" label="Nikolay Krylov"/>
<link wikidata="Q65209" start="15171" end="15183" title="Jürgen Moser" label="Jürgen Moser"/>
<link wikidata="Q950897" start="15186" end="15200" title="Yakov G. Sinai" label="Yakov G. Sinai"/>
<link wikidata="Q315394" start="15203" end="15216" title="Stephen Smale" label="Stephen Smale"/>
<link wikidata="Q556862" start="15219" end="15237" title="Hillel Furstenberg" label="Hillel Furstenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q325705" start="15240" end="15256" title="Grigory Margulis" label="Grigory Margulis"/>
<link wikidata="Q334069" start="15259" end="15277" title="Elon Lindenstrauss" label="Elon Lindenstrauss"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="990638" wikidata="Q5756070" url="?curid=990638" title="High Peak Trail">
<text>The High Peak Trail is a trail for walkers, cyclists and horse riders in the Peak District of England. Running from Dowlow , near Buxton, to High Peak Junction, Cromford , it follows the trackbed of the former Cromford and High Peak Railway, which was completed in 1831 to carry minerals and goods between the Cromford Canal wharf at High Peak Junction and the Peak Forest Canal at Whaley Bridge.

Closure of the line occurred during the Beeching era, with the first section of the line closing in 1963 (i.e. the Middleton Incline) followed by full closure in 1967.

In 1971 the Peak Park Planning Board and Derbyshire County Council bought the largest part of the trackbed and, in partnership with the Countryside Commission, adapted it for its current leisure use. The trail has a crushed limestone surface which makes it ideal for all users, including wheelchair use, assisted by level access onto the trail at various points along its route.

The High Peak Trail is now a national route of the National Cycle Network.

The elevated nature of the trail (the highest part of the line is at Ladmanlow, at a height of ) affords many splendid views across the countryside. However, these higher sections can also be very exposed in poor weather. The original railway incorporated a number of inclines at its northern and southern ends, and whilst much of the trail is fairly level, these sections are naturally steeper.

At Parsley Hay, about southwest of Bakewell, the High Peak Trail is joined by the Tissington Trail, another route of the National Cycle Network, which was formerly the railway branch line to Ashbourne. The High Peak Trail crosses the Limestone Way near Harboro&#x27; Rocks.

The High Peak Trail (and part of the Tissington Trail) are also designated part of the Pennine Bridleway, a leisure route which starts at Middleton Top, near Cromford, and includes through Derbyshire to the South Pennines. The Trail also forms part of the Midshires Way, a long-distance footpath and bridleway which runs for through the Midlands from Bledlow to Stockport.

The High Peak Trail forms part of the White Peak Loop Trail, a route for walking, cycling and horse riding in the Peak District. It links the High Peak Trail with the Monsal Trail, with linking sections through the towns of Buxton, Bakewell and Matlock. The White Peak Loop is being developed by Derbyshire County Council and some sections are not yet complete.

==Access and facilities on the trail==
* At Hurdlow (map ref. ), at the northern end of the trail, there is parking and level access onto the trail. Picnic tables are provided.
* At Parsley Hay (map ref. ), where the trail is joined by the Tissington Trail, there is direct access from the car park to the trail. Facilities include toilets, a picnic site, visitor information, and cycle hire.
* At Friden (map ref. ) there is a car park giving level access onto the trail. There is a picnic table.
* At Minninglow (map ref. ) there is a car park and picnic site, with level access onto the trail.
* At Middleton Top there is a visitor centre, with car park and toilets. Cycles can also be hired here.
* At Black Rocks there is a car park, toilets, and shop for light refreshments.
* At High Peak Junction there is a Visitor Centre and shop. Light refreshments can be purchased and there are picnic tables outside. Lea Road car park, over the river, is accessible by footbridge.
* Nearby is the National Stone Centre, Wirksworth.

==See also==

* Cromford and High Peak Railway
* Tissington Trail

==References==
==External links==

*High Peak Trail - access and facilities
*High Peak railway &amp; Trail site
*More on the High Peak Trail
*A description of the route, with history and photos
*The Pennine Bridleway</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5756070" start="4" end="19" title="High Peak Trail" label="High Peak Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q2116321" start="25" end="30" title="Rail trail" label="trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330811" start="77" end="90" title="Peak District" label="Peak District"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="116" end="122" title="Dowlow" label="Dowlow"/>
<link wikidata="Q971223" start="130" end="136" title="Buxton" label="Buxton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5756066" start="141" end="159" title="High Peak Junction" label="High Peak Junction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000915" start="161" end="169" title="Cromford" label="Cromford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140854" start="210" end="240" title="Cromford and High Peak Railway" label="Cromford and High Peak Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7946" start="279" end="286" title="mineral" label="mineral"/>
<link wikidata="Q5187616" start="310" end="324" title="Cromford Canal" label="Cromford Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7157817" start="361" end="378" title="Peak Forest Canal" label="Peak Forest Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q652597" start="382" end="395" title="Whaley Bridge" label="Whaley Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q814018" start="438" end="450" title="Beeching axe" label="Beeching era"/>
<link wikidata="Q5261561" start="608" end="633" title="Derbyshire County Council" label="Derbyshire County Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q5177546" start="703" end="725" title="Countryside Commission" label="Countryside Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q191931" start="855" end="865" title="wheelchair" label="wheelchair"/>
<link wikidata="Q2248471" start="998" end="1020" title="National Cycle Network" label="National Cycle Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q7140002" start="1423" end="1434" title="Parsley Hay" label="Parsley Hay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2462719" start="1455" end="1463" title="Bakewell" label="Bakewell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809650" start="1502" end="1518" title="Tissington Trail" label="Tissington Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q4804629" start="1596" end="1620" title="Ashbourne Line" label="branch line to Ashbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q6549368" start="1654" end="1667" title="Limestone Way" label="Limestone Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q96418528" start="1673" end="1692" title="Harboro&amp;#x27; Rocks" label="Harboro&amp;#x27; Rocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2069097" start="1782" end="1799" title="Pennine Bridleway" label="Pennine Bridleway"/>
<link wikidata="Q687333" start="1833" end="1846" title="Middleton Top" label="Middleton Top"/>
<link wikidata="Q6843013" start="1951" end="1964" title="Midshires Way" label="Midshires Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q850235" start="2028" end="2040" title="Midlands (England)" label="the Midlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q4925856" start="2046" end="2053" title="Bledlow" label="Bledlow"/>
<link wikidata="Q18655" start="2057" end="2066" title="Stockport" label="Stockport"/>
<link wikidata="Q96414756" start="2107" end="2128" title="White Peak Loop Trail" label="White Peak Loop Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330811" start="2183" end="2196" title="Peak District" label="Peak District"/>
<link wikidata="Q12061980" start="2236" end="2248" title="Monsal Trail" label="Monsal Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q971223" start="2293" end="2299" title="Buxton" label="Buxton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2462719" start="2301" end="2309" title="Bakewell" label="Bakewell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337703" start="2314" end="2321" title="Matlock, Derbyshire" label="Matlock"/>
<link wikidata="Q5261561" start="2365" end="2390" title="Derbyshire County Council" label="Derbyshire County Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q5946450" start="2476" end="2483" title="Hurdlow railway station" label="Hurdlow"/>
<link wikidata="Q7140002" start="2614" end="2625" title="Parsley Hay" label="Parsley Hay"/>
<link wikidata="Q5503569" start="2830" end="2836" title="Friden, Derbyshire" label="Friden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515026" start="2935" end="2945" title="Minninglow" label="Minninglow"/>
<link wikidata="Q4921740" start="3138" end="3149" title="Black Rocks (Derbyshire)" label="Black Rocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140854" start="3478" end="3508" title="Cromford and High Peak Railway" label="Cromford and High Peak Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809650" start="3511" end="3527" title="Tissington Trail" label="Tissington Trail"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="990646" wikidata="Q3338925" url="?curid=990646" title="New Covent Garden Market">
<text>New Covent Garden Market in Nine Elms, London, is the largest wholesale fruit, vegetable and flower market in the United Kingdom. It covers a site of and is home to about 200 fruit, vegetable and flower companies. The market serves 40% of the fruit and vegetables eaten outside of the home in London, and provides ingredients to many of London&#x27;s restaurants, hotels, schools, prisons, hospitals and catering businesses.

The Flower Market, which offers flowers, plants, foliages, sundries and interior decorations from the UK and from around the globe, is visited by 75% of florists in London, many of whom place morning orders and return to restock during the day. The Flower Market wholesalers are open from 04:00 to 10:00 Monday to Saturday and the Fruit &amp; Vegetable Market wholesalers trade from around 00:00 – 06:00 Monday to Saturday.

There is a £5 entry fee for visitors driving to the market. The nearest London Underground stations are Battersea Power Station and Nine Elms, both opened in 2021 as part of the Northern line extension to Battersea.

==History==

For many years the capital&#x27;s main wholesale market for fruit and vegetables was at Covent Garden in central London, just as the meat market was at Smithfield, fish at Billingsgate and other food at Leadenhall Market. As the supply of fresh food was considered strategically important, the Covent Garden Market Authority (CGMA) was set up in 1961, charged with modernising and overseeing the administration of the produce market. Construction began in 1971 south of the Thames in Battersea, on the site of the former Nine Elms Locomotive Works and Nine Elms railway station and Nine Elms loco shed, which closed on 9 July 1967 at the end of steam on the SR. The new market opened for business on 11 November 1974, although its ceremonial opening, by the Queen and the Duke of Edinburgh, was on 26 June 1975.

The CGMA is a statutory corporation, which reports to the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (DEFRA). As a statutory corporation, the UK treasury has shielded New Covent Garden from changes in conditions of the wholesale industry. In the 1980s, when the wholesale industry was threatened by the growth of supermarkets, New Covent Garden Market were able to switch focus to the hospitality industry. Since 1990, successive governments have attempted to privatise or dispose of the market as a going concern.

==Redevelopment==
By 2005, the buildings were beginning to show signs of their age, in need of modernising. Following a report by PricewaterhouseCoopers, the CGMA and DEFRA agreed on a plan (known as Project Chrysalis) to reform and redevelop the market to enable it to be eventually sold. The CGMA, which had previously paid any profits as dividends to HM Treasury, was allowed to retain its profits to fund the initial planning work.

The CGMA signed a contract with Vinci and St. Modwen in 2013 for the market&#x27;s regeneration for a five-year development project Funded by releasing spare land to the developers to build residential properties, the £2 billion project is expected to provide 2000 additional jobs, include 3000 new homes, 135,000 square feet of commercial units and 100,000 square feet of retail facilities. The project is a part of the wider Nine Elms Regeneration area, which also encompasses the relocation of the Embassy of the United States, London to Nine Elms, the regeneration of Battersea Power Station, and an extension of the Underground&#x27;s Northern line (funded in part by the CGMA).

==Construction timeline==

By the time redevelopment works started in 2015 (months behind schedule), the project&#x27;s timeline had increased in scope and was expected to take 10 years. The Flower Market, situated near the Battersea Park Road entrance, opened in April 2017, with the Food Exchange opening in January 2018. Phase One of the regeneration completed in December 2019.

However, traders were unimpressed about the quality of the new units, relating to logistics, spacing and electric capacity. In 2018, their Tenant association sued the CGMA over breach of contract. The lawsuit was settled in December 2020 with the CGMA agreeing to implement changes proposed in a consultation made earlier that year.

The second phase of works started in January 2021, to be completed in 2026.

By 23 May 2023, there was a more significant and very visible progression on the latest phase of development. The newest block would comprise 24 units, measure about 6.5 metres in width and be a new home for four wholesalers. There was another milestone on the opening of the new Southern Access Road on 27 March and the second route became an exit. This would allow complete entry for construction vehicles only.

==References==
==External links==
*Official website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3338925" start="0" end="24" title="New Covent Garden Market" label="New Covent Garden Market"/>
<link wikidata="Q3092362" start="28" end="37" title="Nine Elms" label="Nine Elms"/>
<link wikidata="Q777754" start="404" end="412" title="catering" label="catering"/>
<link wikidata="Q20075" start="923" end="941" title="London Underground" label="London Underground"/>
<link wikidata="Q18619174" start="955" end="978" title="Battersea Power Station tube station" label="Battersea Power Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q18619284" start="983" end="992" title="Nine Elms tube station" label="Nine Elms"/>
<link wikidata="Q214793" start="1029" end="1042" title="Northern line" label="Northern line"/>
<link wikidata="Q7059233" start="1043" end="1065" title="Northern line extension to Battersea" label="extension to Battersea"/>
<link wikidata="Q55019" start="1169" end="1182" title="Covent Garden" label="Covent Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2354215" start="1186" end="1200" title="central London" label="central London"/>
<link wikidata="Q6804271" start="1214" end="1225" title="meat market" label="meat market"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182018" start="1233" end="1243" title="Smithfield Market" label="Smithfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783406" start="1253" end="1265" title="Billingsgate" label="Billingsgate"/>
<link wikidata="Q961148" start="1284" end="1301" title="Leadenhall Market" label="Leadenhall Market"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138912" start="1565" end="1574" title="Battersea" label="Battersea"/>
<link wikidata="Q7038300" start="1602" end="1628" title="Nine Elms Locomotive Works" label="Nine Elms Locomotive Works"/>
<link wikidata="Q7038301" start="1633" end="1658" title="Nine Elms railway station" label="Nine Elms railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="1839" end="1844" title="Elizabeth II" label="Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q80976" start="1853" end="1870" title="Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh" label="Duke of Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q699386" start="1908" end="1929" title="statutory corporation" label="statutory corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044721" start="1952" end="2002" title="Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs" label="Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q578269" start="2044" end="2055" title="UK treasury" label="UK treasury"/>
<link wikidata="Q488048" start="2548" end="2570" title="PricewaterhouseCoopers" label="PricewaterhouseCoopers"/>
<link wikidata="Q578269" start="2772" end="2783" title="HM Treasury" label="HM Treasury"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475312" start="2887" end="2892" title="Vinci (construction)" label="Vinci"/>
<link wikidata="Q7590772" start="2897" end="2907" title="St. Modwen Properties" label="St. Modwen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5369960" start="3356" end="3392" title="Embassy of the United States, London" label="Embassy of the United States, London"/>
<link wikidata="Q810953" start="3427" end="3450" title="Battersea Power Station" label="Battersea Power Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q214793" start="3495" end="3508" title="Northern line" label="Northern line"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="990648" wikidata="Q5319047" url="?curid=990648" title="Dynamicism">
<text>Dynamicism, also termed dynamic cognition, is an approach in cognitive science popularized by the work of philosopher Tim van Gelder. It argues that differential equations and dynamical systems are more suited to modeling cognition rather than the commonly used ideas of symbolicism, connectionism, or traditional computer models. It is closely related to dynamical neuroscience.

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5319047" start="0" end="10" title="Dynamicism" label="Dynamicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5319047" start="24" end="41" title="Dynamicism" label="dynamic cognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q147638" start="61" end="78" title="cognitive science" label="cognitive science"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804551" start="118" end="132" title="Tim van Gelder" label="Tim van Gelder"/>
<link wikidata="Q11214" start="149" end="171" title="differential equations" label="differential equations"/>
<link wikidata="Q638328" start="176" end="193" title="dynamical systems" label="dynamical systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q2200417" start="222" end="231" title="cognition" label="cognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q17157304" start="271" end="282" title="Symbolic behavior" label="symbolicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q203790" start="284" end="297" title="connectionism" label="connectionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q68" start="314" end="322" title="computer" label="computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q42417126" start="356" end="378" title="dynamical neuroscience" label="dynamical neuroscience"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="990650" wikidata="Q738142" url="?curid=990650" title="Clerk">
<text>A clerk is a white-collar worker who conducts record keeping as well as general office tasks, or a worker who performs similar sales-related tasks in a retail environment. The responsibilities of clerical workers commonly include record keeping, filing, staffing service counters, screening callers, and other administrative tasks. In City of London livery companies, the clerk is the chief executive officer.

==History and etymology==
The word &quot;clerk&quot; is derived from the Latin &quot;clericus&quot; meaning &quot;cleric&quot; or &quot;clergyman&quot;, which is the latinisation of the Greek &quot;κληρικός&quot; (&quot;klērikos&quot;) from a word meaning a &quot;lot&quot; (in the sense of drawing lots) and hence an &quot;apportionment&quot; or &quot;area of land&quot;.

The association derived from medieval courts, where writing was mainly entrusted to clergy because most laymen could not read. In this context, the word &quot;clerk&quot; meant &quot;scholar&quot;. Even today, the term clerk regular designates a type of cleric (one living life according to a rule). The cognate terms in some languages, notably &quot;Klerk&quot; in Dutch, became – at the end of the nineteenth century – restricted to a specific, fairly low rank in the administrative hierarchy.

==United States==
Clerical workers are the largest occupational group in the United States. In 2004, there were 3.1 million general office clerks, 1.5 million office administrative supervisors and 4.1 million secretaries. Clerical occupations often do not require a college degree, though some college education or 1 to 2 years in vocational programs are common qualifications. Familiarity with office equipment and certain software programs is also often required. Employers may provide clerical training. In 2006, the median salary for clerks was $23,000, while the national median income for workers age 25 or older was $33,000. Median salaries ranged from $22,770 for general office clerks to $34,970 for secretaries and $41,030 for administrative supervisors. Clerical workers are considered working class by American sociologists such as William Thompson, Joseph Hickey or James Henslin as they perform highly routinized tasks with relatively little autonomy. Sociologist Dennis Gilbert, argues that the white and blue collar divide has shifted to a divide between professionals, including some semi-professionals, and routinized white collar workers. White collar office supervisors may be considered lower middle class with some secretaries being located in that part of the socio-economic strata where the working and middle classes overlap.

==See also==
* Clerks (film)
* Clerk baronets
* Clerk family
* Clerk (surname)
* Clerk of works
* Court clerk
* Law clerk
* Legal clerk
* Legislative clerk
* Barristers&#x27; clerk
* Lord Justice Clerk
* Patent clerk
* Municipal clerk or town clerk
* Clerk in holy orders
* Receptionist
* Pink collar
* Secretaries

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q738142" start="2" end="7" title="Clerk" label="clerk"/>
<link wikidata="Q255274" start="13" end="32" title="white-collar worker" label="white-collar worker"/>
<link wikidata="Q517656" start="46" end="60" title="record keeping" label="record keeping"/>
<link wikidata="Q126793" start="152" end="158" title="retail" label="retail"/>
<link wikidata="Q738142" start="196" end="212" title="Clerk" label="clerical workers"/>
<link wikidata="Q517656" start="230" end="244" title="Records management" label="record keeping"/>
<link wikidata="Q23311" start="335" end="349" title="City of London" label="City of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139056" start="350" end="366" title="Livery company" label="livery companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q484876" start="385" end="408" title="chief executive officer" label="chief executive officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q177826" start="525" end="531" title="cleric" label="cleric"/>
<link wikidata="Q177826" start="547" end="556" title="clergyman" label="clergyman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806983" start="577" end="589" title="Latinisation of names" label="latinisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="597" end="602" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q177826" start="869" end="875" title="clergy" label="clergy"/>
<link wikidata="Q15407657" start="889" end="895" title="laymen" label="laymen"/>
<link wikidata="Q20826540" start="968" end="975" title="scholar" label="scholar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2138822" start="1004" end="1017" title="clerk regular" label="clerk regular"/>
<link wikidata="Q148836" start="1078" end="1082" title="Monastic rule" label="rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q31728" start="1255" end="1269" title="Public administration" label="administrative"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="1359" end="1372" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q4745499" start="2079" end="2092" title="Working class majority" label="working class"/>
<link wikidata="Q21201" start="2105" end="2117" title="Sociology" label="sociologists"/>
<link wikidata="Q5258450" start="2260" end="2274" title="Dennis Gilbert (sociologist)" label="Dennis Gilbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q3269776" start="2490" end="2508" title="lower middle class" label="lower middle class"/>
<link wikidata="Q747877" start="2649" end="2662" title="Clerks (film)" label="Clerks (film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5131857" start="2665" end="2679" title="Clerk baronets" label="Clerk baronets"/>
<link wikidata="Q30324655" start="2682" end="2694" title="Clerk family" label="Clerk family"/>
<link wikidata="Q39069607" start="2697" end="2712" title="Clerk (surname)" label="Clerk (surname)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5131886" start="2715" end="2729" title="Clerk of works" label="Clerk of works"/>
<link wikidata="Q641208" start="2732" end="2743" title="Court clerk" label="Court clerk"/>
<link wikidata="Q883231" start="2746" end="2755" title="Law clerk" label="Law clerk"/>
<link wikidata="Q620413" start="2758" end="2769" title="Legal clerk" label="Legal clerk"/>
<link wikidata="Q5131856" start="2772" end="2789" title="Clerk (legislature)" label="Legislative clerk"/>
<link wikidata="Q4863775" start="2792" end="2814" title="Barristers&amp;#x27; clerk" label="Barristers&amp;#x27; clerk"/>
<link wikidata="Q6679471" start="2817" end="2835" title="Lord Justice Clerk" label="Lord Justice Clerk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2896489" start="2838" end="2850" title="Patent clerk" label="Patent clerk"/>
<link wikidata="Q883211" start="2853" end="2868" title="Municipal clerk" label="Municipal clerk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423891" start="2885" end="2905" title="Clerk in holy orders" label="Clerk in holy orders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1722406" start="2908" end="2920" title="Receptionist" label="Receptionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915819" start="2923" end="2934" title="Pink collar" label="Pink collar"/>
<link wikidata="Q80687" start="2937" end="2948" title="Secretaries" label="Secretaries"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="990653" wikidata="Q2453405" url="?curid=990653" title="Petticoat Lane Market">
<text>Petticoat Lane Market is a fashion and clothing market in Spitalfields, London. It consists of two adjacent street markets. Wentworth Street Market is open six days a week and Middlesex Street Market is open on Sunday only.

== The modern market ==
It is one of a number of traditional markets located to the east of the City of London. A few hundred yards to the north is Old Spitalfields Market, which has been refurbished, and across Commercial Street, to the east, lies Brick Lane Market. A half mile further east is the Columbia Road Flower Market in Bethnal Green. Petticoat Lane Market was not formally recognised until an Act of Parliament in 1936, but its long history as an informal market makes it possibly one of the oldest surviving markets in Britain.

The market is open Monday to Friday on Wentworth Street; on Sunday it extends over many of the surrounding streets, with over a thousand stalls. It is closed on Saturday, and on Sunday closes at about 2 pm. The markets are well signed from local stations. Petticoat Lane market is listed as a tourist attraction on VisitLondon.com, the official visitor guide for London. The name Petticoat Lane came from not only the sale of petticoats but from the fable that &quot;they would steal your petticoat at one end of the market and sell it back to you at the other.&quot;

==History of the market==
In Tudor times, Middlesex Street was known as Hogs Lane, a pleasant lane lined by hedgerows and elms. It is thought city bakers were allowed to keep pigs in the lane, outside the city wall; or possibly that it was an ancient droving trail. The lane&#x27;s rural nature changed, and by 1590, country cottages stood by the city walls. By 1608, it had become a commercial district where second-hand clothes and cheap goods were sold and exchanged, known as &#x27;Peticote Lane&#x27;. This was also where the Spanish ambassador had his house, and the area attracted many Spaniards from the reign of James I. Peticote Lane was severely affected by the Great Plague of 1665; the rich fled, and London lost a fifth of its population.

Huguenots fleeing persecution arrived in the late 17th century; many settled in the area, and master weavers settled in the new town of Spitalfields. The area already had an association with clothing, with dyeing a local industry. The cloth was pegged out on hooks in the surrounding fields. These were known as tentergrounds. From the mid-18th century, Petticoat Lane became a centre for manufacturing clothes. The market served the well-to-do in the City, selling new garments. About 1830, Peticote Lane&#x27;s name changed to Middlesex Street, to record the boundary between Portsoken Ward, in the City of London, and Whitechapel, which coincided with the Lane. But the old name continues to be associated with the area.

From 1882, a wave of Jewish immigrants fleeing persecution in eastern Europe settled in the area. The chapels, which had previously served the Huguenot community, were adapted as synagogues. Many Jewish relief societies were founded to aid the poor. Jewish immigrants entered the local garment industry and maintained the traditions of the market. The severe damage inflicted throughout the East End during the Blitz and later bombing in World War II served to disperse the Jewish communities to new areas. The area around Middlesex Street suffered a decline, but the market continued to prosper. Beginning in the 1970s, a new wave of immigration from India and east Asia restored the area&#x27;s vitality - centred on nearby Brick Lane.

In previous times the market was unpopular with the authorities, as it was largely unregulated and in some sense illegal. As recently as the 1930s, police cars and fire engines were driven down The Lane, with alarm bells ringing, to disrupt the market. The rights of the market were finally protected by Act of Parliament in 1936. As late as the 1990s, if Christmas Day fell on a Sunday (which in that decade only occurred in 1994), many of the local Jewish traders would still assert their right to open on a Sunday. &#x27;The Lane&#x27; was always renowned for the &#x27;patter&#x27; and showmanship of the market traders. Some, selling crockery, would pile an entire setting onto a large plate, and then send the lot, high into the air. Catching the construction on its way down was to demonstrate the skill of the vendor, and the robustness of the porcelain.

A prominent businessman, Alan Sugar, got his start as a stall holder in the market. The market remains busy and vibrant, reflecting both its immigrant history and its continuing popularity with locals and tourists.

==Transport==
* Aldgate East Underground station
* Aldgate Underground station
* Liverpool Street Station
* The area is well served by buses, on Bishopsgate and Aldgate and Whitechapel High Streets
* Parking restrictions apply, throughout the area, on all days of the week

==Gallery==

==See also==
*Marketplace
*Retail
*Tenterground

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2453405" start="0" end="21" title="Petticoat Lane Market" label="Petticoat Lane Market"/>
<link wikidata="Q123219" start="58" end="70" title="Spitalfields" label="Spitalfields"/>
<link wikidata="Q2453405" start="124" end="147" title="Petticoat Lane Market" label="Wentworth Street Market"/>
<link wikidata="Q2453405" start="176" end="199" title="Petticoat Lane Market" label="Middlesex Street Market"/>
<link wikidata="Q23311" start="321" end="335" title="City of London" label="City of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q43470" start="373" end="396" title="Old Spitalfields Market" label="Old Spitalfields Market"/>
<link wikidata="Q4965926" start="474" end="491" title="Brick Lane Market" label="Brick Lane Market"/>
<link wikidata="Q3683798" start="525" end="552" title="Columbia Road Flower Market" label="Columbia Road Flower Market"/>
<link wikidata="Q124204" start="556" end="569" title="Bethnal Green" label="Bethnal Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076579" start="630" end="647" title="Act of Parliament" label="Act of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q330284" start="746" end="752" title="market (place)" label="market"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="757" end="764" title="UK" label="Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2316201" start="1365" end="1370" title="Tudor era" label="Tudor"/>
<link wikidata="Q127604535" start="1587" end="1594" title="droving" label="droving"/>
<link wikidata="Q79972" start="1957" end="1964" title="James I of England" label="James I"/>
<link wikidata="Q917048" start="2009" end="2021" title="Great Plague of London" label="Great Plague"/>
<link wikidata="Q101935" start="2090" end="2099" title="Huguenots" label="Huguenots"/>
<link wikidata="Q123219" start="2226" end="2238" title="Spitalfields" label="Spitalfields"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164991" start="2296" end="2302" title="dyeing" label="dyeing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7700837" start="2402" end="2414" title="tenterground" label="tenterground"/>
<link wikidata="Q23311" start="2691" end="2705" title="City of London" label="City of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q124539" start="2711" end="2722" title="Whitechapel" label="Whitechapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="2836" end="2842" title="Jewish" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q739700" start="3206" end="3214" title="East End" label="East End"/>
<link wikidata="Q6900329" start="3222" end="3231" title="the Blitz" label="the Blitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="3253" end="3265" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194528" start="3541" end="3551" title="Brick Lane" label="Brick Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076579" start="3858" end="3875" title="Act of Parliament" label="Act of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q336520" start="4443" end="4453" title="Alan Sugar" label="Alan Sugar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431064" start="4650" end="4682" title="Aldgate East tube station" label="Aldgate East Underground station"/>
<link wikidata="Q782929" start="4685" end="4712" title="Aldgate tube station" label="Aldgate Underground station"/>
<link wikidata="Q801124" start="4715" end="4739" title="Liverpool Street Station" label="Liverpool Street Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q330284" start="4935" end="4946" title="Marketplace" label="Marketplace"/>
<link wikidata="Q126793" start="4948" end="4954" title="Retail" label="Retail"/>
<link wikidata="Q7700837" start="4956" end="4968" title="Tenterground" label="Tenterground"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="990654" wikidata="Q245877" url="?curid=990654" title="Harding">
<text>Harding may refer to:
== People ==
*Harding (surname)
**Warren G. Harding, 29th president of the United States
*Maureen Harding Clark (born 1946), Irish jurist

== Places ==
===Australia===
* Harding River

===Iran===
* Harding, Iran, a village in South Khorasan Province

===South Africa===
* Harding, KwaZulu-Natal

===United States===
* Harding, Georgia
* Harding, Illinois
* Harding, Kansas
* Harding, Minnesota
* Harding Township, New Jersey
* Harding, South Dakota
* Harding, West Virginia
* Harding, Wisconsin
* Harding County, New Mexico
* Harding County, South Dakota
* Harding Home, home and future presidential center of US president Warren G. Harding, in Marion, Ohio
* Harding Icefield, Alaska
* Harding Senior High School (St. Paul, Minnesota)
* Harding Township, Lucas County, Ohio
* Harding University, a private college located in Searcy, Arkansas, United States
* Harding University High School, a public high school in Charlotte, North Carolina
* Lake Harding, Georgia
* Chester Harding House, historic house in Massachusetts
* Sarah H. Harding House, a historical building in Andover, Massachusetts

===Elsewhere===
* Harding oilfield
* Harding (crater), a small lunar impact crater

== Other uses ==
* USS &quot;Harding&quot; (DD-91), destroyer

== See also ==
* Hardinge (disambiguation)
* Justice Harding (disambiguation)
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q245877" start="0" end="7" title="Harding" label="Harding"/>
<link wikidata="Q16870507" start="36" end="53" title="Harding (surname)" label="Harding (surname)"/>
<link wikidata="Q35286" start="56" end="73" title="Warren G. Harding" label="Warren G. Harding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1911202" start="112" end="133" title="Maureen Harding Clark" label="Maureen Harding Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q5656109" start="192" end="205" title="Harding River" label="Harding River"/>
<link wikidata="Q5656061" start="220" end="233" title="Harding, Iran" label="Harding, Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q933049" start="294" end="316" title="Harding, KwaZulu-Natal" label="Harding, KwaZulu-Natal"/>
<link wikidata="Q20596504" start="340" end="356" title="Harding, Georgia" label="Harding, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q14687521" start="359" end="376" title="Harding, Illinois" label="Harding, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q18152711" start="379" end="394" title="Harding, Kansas" label="Harding, Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2230698" start="397" end="415" title="Harding, Minnesota" label="Harding, Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073829" start="418" end="446" title="Harding Township, New Jersey" label="Harding Township, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q23709364" start="449" end="470" title="Harding, South Dakota" label="Harding, South Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q24191818" start="473" end="495" title="Harding, West Virginia" label="Harding, West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1884885" start="498" end="516" title="Harding, Wisconsin" label="Harding, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q484465" start="519" end="545" title="Harding County, New Mexico" label="Harding County, New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q492493" start="548" end="576" title="Harding County, South Dakota" label="Harding County, South Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q5656096" start="579" end="591" title="Harding Home" label="Harding Home"/>
<link wikidata="Q1441249" start="682" end="698" title="Harding Icefield" label="Harding Icefield"/>
<link wikidata="Q5656112" start="709" end="757" title="Harding Senior High School (St. Paul, Minnesota)" label="Harding Senior High School (St. Paul, Minnesota)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5656140" start="760" end="796" title="Harding Township, Lucas County, Ohio" label="Harding Township, Lucas County, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5656138" start="799" end="817" title="Harding University" label="Harding University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5656130" start="882" end="912" title="Harding University High School" label="Harding University High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q6476087" start="966" end="978" title="Lake Harding" label="Lake Harding"/>
<link wikidata="Q5093587" start="990" end="1011" title="Chester Harding House" label="Chester Harding House"/>
<link wikidata="Q7422359" start="1047" end="1069" title="Sarah H. Harding House" label="Sarah H. Harding House"/>
<link wikidata="Q5656145" start="1138" end="1154" title="Harding oilfield" label="Harding oilfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336787" start="1157" end="1173" title="Harding (crater)" label="Harding (crater)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4403670" start="1223" end="1254" title="USS Harding (DD-91)" label="USS &amp;quot;Harding&amp;quot; (DD-91)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206913" start="1284" end="1309" title="Hardinge (disambiguation)" label="Hardinge (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q30045055" start="1312" end="1344" title="Justice Harding (disambiguation)" label="Justice Harding (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
