<doc id="308502" wikidata="Q339830" url="?curid=308502" title="Alfred Waterhouse">
<text>Alfred Waterhouse (19 July 1830 – 22 August 1905) was an English architect, particularly associated with Gothic Revival architecture, although he designed using other architectural styles as well. He is perhaps best known for his designs for Manchester Town Hall and the Natural History Museum in London. He designed other town halls, the Manchester Assize buildings—bombed in World War II—and the adjacent Strangeways Prison. He also designed several hospitals, the most architecturally interesting being the Royal Infirmary Liverpool and University College Hospital London. He was particularly active in designing buildings for universities, including both Oxford and Cambridge but also what became Liverpool, Manchester and Leeds universities. He designed many country houses, the most important being Eaton Hall in Cheshire. He designed several bank buildings and offices for insurance companies, most notably the Prudential Assurance Company. Although not a major church designer he produced several notable churches and chapels.

Financially speaking, Waterhouse was probably the most successful of all Victorian architects. He designed some of the most expensive buildings of the Victorian age. The three most costly were Manchester Town Hall, Eaton Hall and the Natural History Museum; they were also among the largest buildings of their type built during the period. Waterhouse had a reputation for being able to plan logically laid out buildings, often on awkward or cramped sites. He built soundly constructed buildings, having built up a well structured and organised architectural office, and used reliable sub-contractors and suppliers. His versatility in stylistic matters also attracted clients. Though expert within Neo-Gothic, Renaissance revival and Romanesque revival styles, Waterhouse never limited himself to a single architectural style. He often used eclecticism in his buildings. Styles that he used occasionally include Tudor revival, Jacobethan, Italianate, and some only once or twice, such as Scottish baronial architecture, Baroque Revival, Queen Anne style architecture and Neoclassical architecture.

As with the architectural styles he used when designing his buildings, the materials and decoration also show the use of diverse materials. Waterhouse is known for the use of terracotta on the exterior of his buildings, most famously at the Natural History Museum. He also used faience, once its mass production was possible, on the interiors of his buildings. But he also used brick, often a combination of different colours, or with other materials such as terracotta and stone. This was especially the case with his buildings for the Prudential Assurance Company, educational, hospital and domestic buildings. In his Manchester Assize Courts, he used different coloured stones externally to decorate it. At Manchester Town Hall and Eaton Hall the exterior walls are almost entirely of a single type of stone. His interiors ranged from the most elaborate at Eaton Hall and Manchester Town Hall, respectively for Britain&#x27;s richest man and northern England&#x27;s richest city cottonopolis, to the simplest in buildings like the Royal Liverpool Infirmary, where utility and hygiene dictated the interior design, and the even starker Strangeways Prison.

==Early life and education (1830–1854)==
His father was Alfred Waterhouse Senior (1798–1873), a cotton broker, and his mother was Mary Waterhouse, née Bevan (1805–1880), of Tottenham, both Quakers. Alfred, first of their eight children, was born on 19 July 1830 when the family was living at Stone Hill, Liverpool. Shortly after his birth, the family moved to Oakfield, a Tudor-style villa in Aigburth, Liverpool, Lancashire. His brothers were accountant Edwin Waterhouse (1841–1917), co-founder of the &quot;Price Waterhouse&quot; partnership, which now forms part of PriceWaterhouseCoopers, and solicitor Theodore Waterhouse (1838–1891), who founded the law firm Waterhouse &amp; Co, now part of Field Fisher Waterhouse LLP in the City of London. Alfred Waterhouse was educated at the Quaker Grove House School in Tottenham, later to become Leighton Park School.

He began his architectural studies in 1848 under Richard Lane in Manchester. He was taught to produce architectural drawings with crisp lines and pale tints, very different from the style he would develop later. He was taught theory by copying extracts from books, including Henry William Inwood&#x27;s &quot;Of the Resources of Design in the Architecture of Greece, Egypt, and other Countries, obtained by the Studies of the Architects of those Countries from Nature&quot; (1834) and William Chamber&#x27;s &quot;A treatise on civil architecture&quot; (1759). He also traced the designs in Frederick Apthorp Paley&#x27;s &quot;Manual of Gothic Mouldings&quot; (1845). The scrapbook he used survives in which he sets out Chambers and Paley&#x27;s opposing views. He is also known to have read during this period John Ruskin&#x27;s &quot;The Stones of Venice&quot; (1849) and Augustus Pugin&#x27;s &quot;Contrasts&quot; (1836) and &quot;The True Principles of Pointed or Christian Architecture&quot; (1841). He joined a sketching club, where he met Frederic Shields and Alfred Darbyshire.

In May 1853 he set out to tour Europe with school friend Thomas Hodgkin who stated that Waterhouse &quot;was entirely under the influence of Ruskin, and communicated his own admiration for Gothic art and a perfect detestation of that beastly Renaissance&quot;. The trip lasted nine months. Sailing to Dieppe, passing through Rouen, then Paris, taking a steamer from Dijon down the Saône to Lyons, then on to Nîmes, Arles and Orange. Staying the night at the Grande Chartreuse, passing into Piedmont to Susa and Turin, they walked over the Great St Bernard Pass in a snowstorm into Switzerland. In Basel Waterhouse parted company with Hodgkin and returned to Italy in the company of a Manchester acquaintance George Rooke. Waterhouse&#x27;s sketchbook from the trip survives and is titled &quot;Scraps from France, Switzerland, and Italy&quot;. Every notebook sketch is dated and labelled so his itinerary can be followed. In Italy he visited Isola Bella, Certosa di Pavia, Milan, Bergamo, Monza and Venice where he remained for two weeks in August. Here he sketched the Doge&#x27;s Palace and St Mark&#x27;s Basilica. The tour continued in Padua, Vicenza and Verona. By the end of September he arrived in Florence, where he stayed a week, sketching Giotto&#x27;s Campanile, amongst other buildings. He continued via Siena, Fiesole, Lucca and Pisa to Naples, where he stayed around three weeks and toured surrounding towns. In November he arrived in Rome and stayed into the new year. Returning to northern Italy
he revisited several cities before passing through Turin on the way to Basel and Strasbourg.

Much later in life, Waterhouse in his 1890 presidential address at the RIBA had this to say about sketching by architectural students:

On his return to Britain, Alfred set up in 1854 his own architectural practice based in Cross Street Chambers, Manchester.

==Manchester practice (1854–1865)==

Waterhouse continued to practice in Manchester for 11 years, until moving his practice to London in 1865. At this stage of his career most of his commissions were either in the north-west or north-east of England. His earliest commissions were mainly for domestic buildings. Among Waterhouse&#x27;s first commissions in 1854 were for his family: a set of stables at Sneyd Park, for his father, who had moved to Bristol, and alterations to the home of his uncle Roger Waterhouse at Mossley Bank in Liverpool. In executing the commission for the cemetery buildings at Warrington Road, Ince in Makerfield (1855–56), he began his move towards designing public buildings in his developing Neo-Gothic style, building a lodge for the registrar, and two chapels, one Church of England in Gothic style, and one for Roman Catholic and Non-conformists in Norman style. His first commission for a commercial building was for the now demolished Binyon &amp; Fryer warehouse and sugar refinery in Chester Street, Manchester (1855). The building was of two floors made of brick with stone dressings and Italianate in style. The intended upper floors based on the Doge&#x27;s Palace remained unbuilt. Also he designed the Droylesden Institute (1858, demolished) in the Manchester suburb of Droylsden. It contained a reading room and other educational facilities and had some Gothic details. A similar building was the Bingley Mechanics&#x27; Institute built (1862–65), located in Bingley, with a hall and reading room in a Gothic style.

His first large new country house design was Hinderton Hall (1856–57), Cheshire, for Liverpool merchant Christopher Bushell, built of red sandstone, slate roofs, stables, gardener&#x27;s cottage and boundary walls. Hinderton, Gothic in style, is very restrained and plain compared with his more mature works. Representative of the several suburban houses of his early career is New Heys (1861–65), Allerton, Liverpool, built for lawyer W.G. Benson at a cost of £6,700 (approx £800,000 in 2019), built of brick with stone dressing, with slate roof, it included stables, conservatory, garden layout and furniture.

In Nantwich, Churchside, Waterhouse designed the former Manchester and Liverpool District Bank (1863–66), built of red brick. It included the manager&#x27;s house. Waterhouse&#x27;s first completely new parish church was the Anglican St John the Divine (1863), Brooklands Road, Sale, Cheshire. It is Gothic, built of Hollington stone, with aisles and transepts, patterned brickwork inside, with external stonework of a single colour. The design of the roof is also restrained compared with Waterhouse&#x27;s later designs. Other early chapels included three for the Congregational church, Ancoats (1861–65, demolished), Rusholme (1863, demolished) and the Besses o&#x27; th&#x27; Barn (1863) now United Reform church, all were Gothic in style.

Waterhouse had connections with wealthy Quaker industrialists through schooling, marriage and religious affiliations, many of whom commissioned him to design and build country houses, especially near Darlington. Several were built for members of the Backhouse family, founders of Backhouse&#x27;s Bank, a forerunner of Barclays Bank. In Darlington Backhouse&#x27;s Bank is of 1864-67. For Alfred Backhouse, Waterhouse built Pilmore Hall (1863), now known as Rockliffe Hall, in Hurworth-on-Tees. Waterhouse designed for Joseph Pease Hutton Hall in Yorkshire (1864–71), a large house Gothic of red brick with stone dressings and a slate roof. The commission included the gardens; the billiard room and conservatory were added in (1871–74) and there were further alterations and new stables added in 1875. Hutton Hall also had a feature unique in a Waterhouse house: a Turkish bath. The first of his significant public buildings outside Manchester was Darlington town clock and covered market hall (1861–64) in Gothic style, with the market built from cast iron, divided into five sections. The main building contractor was R. Stapp; chimneypieces were provided by Joseph Bonehill; the iron work was by F.A. Skidmore and J.W. Russell &amp; Son and the clerk of works was S. Harrison. The building cost £9,851, with an extension and repairs (1865–66) costing £2,615. The clock tower was paid for by Joseph Pease.

During his period in Manchester Waterhouse&#x27;s most important commissions were for the Assize Courts and Strangeways prison. The competition to design the new Manchester Assize Courts was launched in 1859. It received 107 entries, by many leading architects including: Edward Middleton Barry; Cuthbert Brodrick; a joint entry by Richard Norman Shaw and William Eden Nesfield; Edward Buckton Lamb; Thomas Worthington; and the runner up Thomas Allom. His success as a designer of public buildings was assured when he won the competition. The building, constructed 1859–65 (now demolished) not only showed his ability to plan a complicated building on a large scale, but also marked him out as a champion of the Gothic cause. The building cost £120,000 (approx £14,500,000 in 2019) to build. The Gothic style of the building was influenced by John Ruskin and his views on Venetian Gothic architecture. Designer John Gregory Crace carried out the elaborate decoration in the Grand Jury Room and the elaborate carving in the central hall was by O&#x27;Shea and Whelan. The exterior also had elaborate decoration in contrasting coloured stonework with sculpture and carvings. The foundations were dug by H. Southern &amp; Co.; the building&#x27;s superstructure was erected by Samuel Bramall; heating and ventilation was the responsibility of G.N. Haden as well as O&#x27;Shea and Whelan. Stone carving was also done by Thomas Woolner and Farmer &amp; Brindley; ceramic tiles were provided by Thomas Oakenden; stained glass was by R.B Edmundson, Lavers &amp; Barraud, George Shaw and Heaton, Butler &amp; Bayne; furniture and furnishings were provided by Doveston, Bird &amp; Hull, James Lamb, Kendal &amp; Co., J. Beaumont, Minton &amp; Co. and Marsh &amp; Jones Co.; iron work was by F.A. Skidmore &amp; R. Jones; chimneypieces were by J. Bonehill, W. Wilson and H. Patterson; plaster ceiling roses were by J.W. Hindshaw. The clerk of works were John Shaw, G.O. Roberts and Henry Littler. This building was Waterhouse&#x27;s first exercise in High Victorian Gothic.

John Ruskin, writing to his father in 1863:

The Times&quot; edition of 11 February 1867, in an article entitled &quot;The New Courts of Law&quot;, declared that the Manchester Assize Courts were &quot;&quot;the best courts of law in the world.
Writing in 1872 in his book &quot;History of the Gothic Revival&quot;, Charles Eastlake had this to say about the building:

Eastlake went on to describe the interior:

The Builder in 1859 described the buildings style:

The Ecclesiologist in 1861 described it as:

As a consequence of the success in the competition for the new court building Waterhouse was given the commission in December 1861 to design the new Strangeways Prison. This was immediately behind the Assize Courts. When completed in 1869 the prison cost £170,000 (approx £20,500,000 in 2019). Waterhouse adopted the radial plan of HM Prison Pentonville and showed his plans to its designer Joshua Jebb for his approval. The plan consists of six wings, three storeys high, opening off a twelve-sided central hall. Although the main prison is in a simplified Gothic style, there are also some Romanesque details. The entrance gatehouse is in French Chateau style, with banded stone and brickwork. There was also a Governor&#x27;s house and boundary walls. The interiors were easily the starkest designed by Waterhouse, devoid of all but the most basic of decoration. The prison was built by the company owned by Mrs Bramall; heating and ventilation was by G.N. Haden; tiles by J. Grundy &amp; Woolfscraft; window glass was provided by R.B. Edmubndson; chimneypieces by W. Wilson; iron work by R. Jones and F.A. Skidmore; fittings for the gas lighting by Hart, Son, Peard &amp; Co.. The clerk of works was Henry Littler.

==London practice (1865–1902)==
Waterhouse&#x27;s move to London, was at a fortuitous time. The capital was undergoing major expansion and rebuilding in the 1860s. Both his brothers Edwin and Theodore were already living there. Before his move he had already been commissioned to design the Quaker-run Alexander and Cunliffe&#x27;s Bank (1864–67) in Lombard Street, City of London, (demolished), Italianate with Gothic features, four-storied of stone. The competition to design the Royal Courts of Justice was by invitation only. It was decided in late 1865 to limit it to six competitors, of which Waterhouse was one. The instructions were drafted in 1866. Due to objections the number of invited architects was increased to twelve. But John Gibson dropped out leaving eleven: Waterhouse, William Burges, George Gilbert Scott, John Pollard Seddon, Edward Middleton Barry, the little known Henry Robert Abrahms, the also obscure Henry B. Garling, John Raphael Rodrigues Brandon, Henry Francis Lockwood, Thomas Deane and the eventual winner George Edmund Street. All the competitors chose to produce Gothic designs .Waterhouse&#x27;s design was based around two large halls that formed a cruciform design. The lower level of the north-south hall was for the general public with short corridors linked to staircases leading to public galleries in the courtrooms. The east-west hall 478 by 60 feet, crossed the lower one at upper level reserved for the use by lawyers. There were four towers the tallest 354 feet in height. Waterhouse explained the building&#x27;s plan:

The &quot;Building News&quot; magazine issue of February 1867 reviewed Waterhouse&#x27;s drawings of the design:

There were seven judges. After the first round of voting, the three designs that were in the running were Barry&#x27;s with two votes, Street&#x27;s with two votes and Waterhouse&#x27;s with three votes. Waterhouse&#x27;s design was supported by the two lawyers Cockburn and Palmer on the jury. After the second round, Barry had four votes and Street three. After much political intrigue, Street was appointed the winner at the end of 1868.

===Organisation of Waterhouse&#x27;s architectural office===

To cope with the large number of architectural projects the office handled, efficient organisation of the office was vital. At its peak the office could be designing up to thirty different projects at a time. Over his 48-year career Waterhouse employed dozens of draughtsmen and assistants. On setting up the London Office Waterhouse&#x27;s chief clerk, Willey sought the advice of Waterhouse&#x27;s brother Edwin:

The salaries Waterhouse paid ranged from 5 shillings per week (about £30 in 2019) for an office lad to £3 per week (about £363 in 2019) for senior draughtsman like C.H. Scott who worked for Waterhouse from 1859 to 1875 and chief clerk John Willey worked for Waterhouse from 1859 to 1865. A senior draughtsman would typically be responsible for several projects, T. Cooper worked for Waterhouse from 1865 to 1876 covered Backhouse&#x27;s Bank, Strangeways Prison, Allerton Priory, Foxhill, The Natural History Museum and Eaton Hall. Supervision was entrusted to assistants such as Giles Redmayne who worked for Waterhouse 1859-64, occasionally they would take over jobs in their own right. However, there were never many in the office, Waterhouse would regularly check and correct drawings himself, often he worked alone in the office long after the staff had left for the day. The office had to produce vast numbers of drawings, up to 1875 there were 88 known employees of the office, 29 worked for less than a year some of whom lasted less than a month, 25 draughtsmen were employed for a year or two, of the remaining 33 only 5 lasted through 1865-75.

Under the supervision of one of the seniors a team would be assembled for each job, for example forty draughtsmen were involved at Manchester Town Hall, although it was usually below twenty at any given time. The drawings from 1858 were consistent in style throughout Waterhouse&#x27;s career, it was a crisp style with strong lines with colour coding, buff red for brick, yellow for stone, brown for timber, blue for metal. Blueprints were introduced into the office in c.1890.

Waterhouse also employed his own quantity surveyor, from 1860 to 1875 this was Michael Robinson, though of the one hundred jobs he was involved in most were in the north. Waterhouse also sought reliable clerk of works, for example J. Battye, he worked on the Manchester Assize Courts, Yorkshire College and the Victoria Building University of Liverpool. Building contractors were vital in ensuring Waterhouse&#x27;s designs were both soundly built and faithful to the design, he favoured firms like Parnell&#x27;s of Rugby who built 16 of his buildings or Holland and Hannen who built 13 buildings. He often chose locally based building contractors like Stephens &amp; Bastow of Reading for his buildings in the area.

====Artists, suppliers and sub-contractors====
Also of importance to the success of Waterhouse&#x27;s architectural practice were good quality subcontractors, for example for stained-glass in his early career he favoured Lavers, Barraud and Westlake, whereas the more famous Clayton and Bell only received two orders from Waterhouse, later he preferred Heaton, Butler and Bayne. Frederic Shields designed the sixteen stained-glass windows in the Chapel at Eaton Hall as well as the accompanying mosaic decoration. Hardman &amp; Co. was used occasionally for metalwork. In the 1860s he used Mintons or Maw &amp; Co for ceramic tiles. Later he preferred Craven Dunnill or William Godwin. For furniture Maple &amp; Co. and Liberty&#x27;s were favoured, though for Holborn Bars the Gloster Wagon Company provided the office furniture. He tried Francis Skidmore for decorative iron work at Eaton Hall, but finding him unreliable turned to Robert Jones of Manchester and Hart, Son, Peard and Co. for the rest of his career. Jesse Rust &amp; Co. were responsible for executing many mosaic floors in Waterhouse&#x27;s buildings and the wall mosaics in Eaton Hall Chapel. For heating systems he favoured Haden&#x27;s of Trowbridge or W.W. Phipson. Other suppliers were Guynan&#x27;s for blinds and Gibbons of Wolverhampton for locks.

Many of Waterhouse&#x27;s buildings include carving and sculpture, Thomas Earp was commissioned on about a dozen occasions most notably Harris&#x27;s Bank Leighton Buzzard and St Elizabeth&#x27;s Reddish. Farmer &amp; Brindley were favoured for sculpture, working on nearly one hundred of Waterhouse&#x27;s buildings, including a tombstone in West Norwood Cemetery, the pulpit in Stanmore Church and the extensive carving on Eaton Hall, plus all the models for the terracotta decoration on the Prudential Assurance buildings. The ceiling of the Great Hall, at the Natural History Museum, is decorated with paintings of plants from across the world, the paintings are executed in a subdued palette and with gilding for highlights, the individual panels have the Latin name of the plant below. Designed by Waterhouse the ceiling was painted by Best &amp; Lea of John Dalton Street, Manchester. The most famous artworks to adorn one of Waterhouse&#x27;s buildings are The Manchester Murals, painted by Ford Madox Brown in the Great Hall at Manchester Town Hall.

====The Waterhouse drawings collection====

The Royal Institute of British Architects Drawings Collection housed in the dedicated study room at Victoria and Albert Museum contains over 9,000 of the drawings from Waterhouse&#x27;s practice. The collection covers pages from note-books up to metre square drawings, rough onsite sketches to highly finished watercolours perspectives of complete buildings. The drawings span Waterhouse&#x27;s full career from the 1850s to 1901. Each finished drawing has two numbers normally in the top left corner: the first of upper number is the &#x27;office number&#x27; that related to a now lost register in which the draughtsmen&#x27;s time was recorded; the second number is the &#x27;job number&#x27;, records the sequence of drawings for an individual commission, against which charges for the client were calculated. Each of the completed drawings is also dated, some surviving sheets are either unnumbered or damaged. A smaller commission may have needed as few as fifty drawings. Most of the drawings are anonymous and thanks to the uniform style of production it is not possible to distinguish individuals, though some of the seniors in the office like G.T. Redmayne were allowed to initial drawings. In the very early years of his practice the lettering used on the drawings was Gothic, but this was abandoned by the mid-1860s for a plain script. Waterhouse was known for his ability to paint watercolour perspectives, sometimes they were produced for architectural competitions such as the entry for The Royal Courts of Justice competition and Manchester Town Hall, but based on their dates sometimes they were produced towards the end of the building process, most likely for publication. Some of the drawings were produced onsite with annotations by the clerk of works alerting the office staff to problems in the design, in a few cases the replies to these have survived. Some drawings were annotated by the client for example The Duke of Westminster queried the design of the screen in the Chapel at Eaton Hall. The collection allows a detailed picture of how the office functioned to be built up, although not unique for the period it is rare. None of the sets of drawings is complete and several of Waterhouse&#x27;s commissions are no longer represented in the collection.

In addition to the collection at the RIBA, the Natural History Museum holds a significant quantity of drawings by Waterhouse relating to the design of the terracotta sculpture on the building. The 136 pages of drawings are bound together in two volumes and cover the period 1874 to 1878. The subject matter is not just flora, insects, fish, lizards, snakes and animals, some of extinct species, but ornament as well. Extinct species decorated the eastern side of the building internally and externally, living species likewise decorated the western half of the building as well as the North Hall and Main Hall. 
 The designs are for the sculpture on the top of the facade, gargoyles, column capitals, friezes, relief panels, lunettes, spandrels and other architectural features of the building, both external and internal. These drawings would be turned into the finished terracotta by Gibbs and Canning, who employed Brindley and Farmer and their employee a Frenchman M. Dujardin to do so.

Other institutions have holdings of Waterhouse drawings: the Public Record Office have drawings for the Natural History Museum; the Victoria and Albert Museum holds several of his perspective drawings; Manchester School of Architecture have drawings and perspectives of Manchester Town Hall and some of his other buildings; Balliol College, Oxford, drawings for his work at the College; The Waterhouse family still own some of his drawings, sketches and watercolours.

=====Gallery of drawings produced by Waterhouse&#x27;s practice=====
====Waterhouse as a planner of buildings====

Waterhouse has a lasting reputation as a planner of efficient buildings, he was adept at using awkward sites to advantage, and with his public buildings combining large and small rooms and circulation spaces in a coherent manner.

Part of Waterhouse&#x27;s presidential address at the Royal Institute of British Architects in 1890 addresses the subject of planning buildings:

====Building materials and service technology====

Waterhouse is well known for his use of terracotta and faience as a building material, one of the driving factors being its resistance to air pollution, an increasing problem as the industrial age advanced. He relied on Gibbs and Canning to supply the terracotta for the Natural History Museum, who he worked with to improve the quality of the material. He used Gibbs and Canning for Holborn Bars, though for the regional Prudential buildings terracotta from Ruabon was used. Waterhouse liked terracotta because of its versatility giving him control over the texture of his buildings. Waterhouse had this to say about irregularity in colouring found in terracotta:

He used terracotta in buildings of all styles from the Romanesque of the Natural History Museum, the Early English Gothic at Girton College, or the Perpendicular Gothic at St Paul&#x27;s School Hammersmith, even neoclassical at the Parrot House Eaton Hall. When Burmantofts Pottery developed their process to produce faience in 1879 Waterhouse started using it for his interiors. Most notably at The Victoria Building, University of Liverpool; the Chapel, Royal Liverpool Infirmary; Yorkshire College; the National Liberal Club and the final phase of Holborn Bars. He especially liked to clad columns in faience, but walls and fireplaces as well. He also made much use of glazed tiles and terracotta within buildings, for example in the corridors at Manchester Town Hall.

He was fairly cautious in the use of cast iron, a result of a problem with the market building at Darlington, his only known building failure. On the opening day the floor gave way, pitching two prize bulls and a spectator into the basement. The problem was traced to a faulty casting and Waterhouse was exonerated of any blame. This left him distrustful of the material, though he did use it in his designs. When using the material he used either Andrew Handyside and Company or J.S. Bergheim, both of whom supplied the iron for Manchester Town Hall. He was more at home using decorative wrought iron, especially for balustrades, iron screens and gates, finials and other decorative uses of the material.

Waterhouse was a great enthusiast for the use of brick, especially as the abolition of the Brick tax in 1850 had lowered the price of the material. Until the early 1870s much of Waterhouse&#x27;s brickwork was polychrome in nature using decoration such as diapering, later he preferred plain brick often with dressings of contrasting material. His sketchbooks are full of details of brickwork on the continent. He never used coloured tiles on his roofs but occasionally designed patterned slate roofs, as on Manchester Town Hall. He also enjoyed using stone, he delivered a lecture on the subject at the Royal Academy of Art in 1885. He used polychromatic stonework at Manchester Assize Courts. His timber work is characterised by its solidity and large size of the members.

Generally he provided open fires to heat his buildings, in Manchester Town Hall he used a Plenum space heating system, distributing hot air up the stairwells. From the 1880s he increasingly used electric light instead of gas lighting he used in his earlier buildings, he also introduced lifts and Plenum heating and ventilation.

=====Gallery of external decorative elements on Waterhouse&#x27;s buildings, often appropriate to or symbolic of the buildings use=====
====Interior design, furniture and fittings====

Waterhouse designed furniture but only for his own buildings, and only for a specific commission, ensuring stylistic harmony. His first known design being a desk in the 1850s for his father. Buildings that have Waterhouse designed furniture include Manchester Town Hall, both the grand rooms and the office areas; classroom desks at Reading Grammar School; office furniture for the Prudential Assurance offices and the National Liberal Club. He preferred simple sturdy designs for his furniture.

For eighteen of his buildings including Manchester Town Hall, he used the contractor Robert Pollitt to execute the painted decoration. Extensive correspondence survives between Waterhouse and Minton&#x27;s and Maw&#x27;s about patterns and colours that their tiles came in, both for floors and walls.

When it came to fireplaces Waterhouse usually designed them in timber, but in his grander buildings like Manchester Town Hall and Eaton Hall he used stone and marble. The most important have elaborate carved decoration. He also often designed fireplace mantels. Often there is a hierarchy of design, in his Refuge Assurance Building in Manchester, for instance, polished stone and timber in the boardroom, faience in the public offices and simpler designs for the managers and clerks offices. The Manchester Town Hall fireplaces contain tiling in the fireplace, some with medieval designs, others classical designs, Turkish designs and Japanese in the Mayor&#x27;s Suite.

Staircase balustrades in his domestic work were usually either timber or iron often with elaborate designs, he preferred iron, faience or stone in his public buildings. He also designed light fittings such as the large gasoliers in the Great Hall at Manchester Town Hall. He designed grilles and screens such as those on his staircase at Balliol College, Oxford. Floors of terrazzo or mosaic are common in circulation spaces of his public buildings. His early ceiling designs tended to have ceiling roses by J.W. Hindshaw, usually of bold geometric design. Later he tended to pattern the whole ceiling with simple ribs. Rarely did he design painted ceilings, Manchester Town Hall, Eaton Hall and the Main and North halls at the Natural History Museum, being exceptions. Waterhouse had this to say in his 1891 Presidential address at the RIBA about stained glass:

In domestic and public buildings he preferred glass in muted greys and pinks of simple geometric patterns, he rarely uses heraldic or narrative designs, Eaton Hall was an exception with the Arthurian Scenes. When he used figured glass he would turn to designers like Heaton, Butler and Bayne, or his friend Frederic Shield, who designed windows at Eaton Hall Chapel, for the restoration of St Ann&#x27;s Church, Manchester, the chapel at Coodham in Scotland and St Elizabeth&#x27;s Reddish. Waterhouse took interior design seriously, liking to control the overall look, this is why he liked using faience, in his 1890 presidential address at the RIBA he had this to say:

=====Gallery of internal decorative elements in Waterhouse&#x27;s buildings, showing different styles, materials, techniques and designs=====
===Public buildings===


Waterhouse designed the former North Western Hotel (1868–71), Lime Street, Liverpool, in the style of French Renaissance Revival architecture, it acted as the station hotel for Liverpool Lime Street railway station. Almost symmetrical in design, built from stone, five floors high plus dormer windows in the roof, there are towers with steep pavilion roofs at each corner and also two close together in the centre of the facade these have spire-like roofs with tourelles, the windows are mainly arched, there are double-storey oriel windows at the ends of the facade. Internally there is an impressive stone staircase with wrought-iron balustrade. The building cost £80,268. The main builders were Haigh &amp; Co; heating and ventilation was by G.N. Haden and D.O. Boyd; the stone carving was by Farmer &amp; Brindley; ceramic tiles were manufactured by Hargreaves &amp; Craven; stained glass, notably the ceiling over the grand staircase was by Heaton, Butler &amp; Baine; chimneypieces were provided by W.H. Burke; the iron work was manufactured by Lester &amp; Hodkinson; and R. Jones; the plaster ceiling roses were made by J.W. Hindshaw.
The other major hotel designed by Waterhouse is the Metropole Hotel (1888–89) in Brighton, a seafront hotel, six floors high (a seventh was added later not by Waterhouse). It is in an Italian Renaissance style. Built from red Rowlands Castle brick and terracotta, with a Ruabon tile and zinc roof, there are decorative iron balconies along much of the facade. The facilities included an attached ballroom, with garden court, and Victorian Turkish baths. The builders were J.T. Chappel; structural steel-work was by A. Handyside &amp; Co.; the terracotta was manufactured by Gibbs and Canning and Joseph Cliff &amp; Son; faience tiling was by Burmantofts; clocks were by Gillett &amp; Co.; with the lifts by Waygood. The clerk of works was T. Holloway. Built at the cost of £14,720 (approx £1,850,000 in 2019).

The former Liverpool Seamen&#x27;s Orphan Institution and chapel (now called Newsham Park Hospital) (1870–75) (the Chapel has been demolished), built in a Gothic style with tall pavilion roofs, Built from brick with stone dressings, with slate roofs. It provided a home and school for over 300 orphans. L-shaped in plan, there is a tall tower on the south-west angle, there is also a large hall that separated the boys&#x27; and girls&#x27; wings. The builders were Haigh &amp; Co.; structural steel work was by J. S. Bergheim; the heating and ventilation systems were by G.N. Haden and D.O. Boyd; the stone carvings were executed by Farmer &amp; Brindley; ceramic tiling was made by W. Godwin; the window glass was made by F.T. Odell; the chimneypieces were made by the Hopton Wood Stone Co.; decorative iron work was by R. Jones and Hart Son Peard &amp; Co.; the bell was cast by John Warner &amp; Sons. The orphanage cost £26,925 and the Chapel £6,550.
The former Knutsford Town Hall (1871–72) in Knutsford, Cheshire, paid for by William Egerton, 1st Baron Egerton, at a cost £6,740 (approx £770,000 in 2019). It consisted of market hall with Assembly Rooms above. Gothic in style, built from red and blue brick with a tiled roof, there is a limited amount of stone in the building. It was built by J. Parnell &amp; Sons; heating was by G.N. Haden; the stone was carved by Farmer &amp; Brindley; ceramic tiles were made by W. Godwin; the stained glass was by R.B. Edmundson and F.T. Odell; decorative iron work was by R. Jones and; the plaster ceiling roses were made by J.W. Hindshaw.
Waterhouse designed the Shire Hall at Bedford in two phases (1878–81) and (1881–83), that acted as the town&#x27;s assize courts. Gothic in style was built from dark red brick and red terracotta with a slate roof. The building cost for the first phase £14,495 and for the second £10,345. The builders were John Wood; heating and ventilation was by G.N. Haden and D.O. Boyd; the modelling of the terracotta was by Farmer &amp; Brindley; the ceramic tiles were made Craven Dunnill &amp; Co. and W. Godwin; glass was provided by F.T. Odell; chimney-pieces were by the Hopton Wood Stone Co.; furniture was made by Wells &amp; Co. of Bedford; decorative iron work was executed by Hart Son Peard &amp; Co. and R. Jones; locks and door furniture was made by J. Gibbons.

Wigan Free Library (now the Museum of Wigan Life) (1873–78), is Tudor in style, brick with stone dressings, included internal fittings. Its construction was funded by mill owner Thomas Taylor. The building cost £9,955. It was built by the firm of Hughes of Liverpool; the heating and ventilation was by G.N. Haden and D.O. Boyd; the stone carving was by Earp &amp; Co.; the window glass was by F.T. Odell; chimney-pieces were made by the Hopton Wood Stone Co.; internal decoration was by R. Pollitt; furniture and fittings were made by G. Goodall &amp; Co.; decorative iron work was made by R. Jones and Hart Son Peard &amp; Co.
The Turner Memorial Home (1882–85), Liverpool, extended in (1887–89), Gothic home and chapel for seamen, stone and with tiled roof and half-timbered porch. Built for Mrs Anne Turner as a memorial to her dead husband and son. It cost £32,170 (approx £3,750,000 in 2019). The builders were Holme &amp; Nichol; heating and ventilation was by G.N. Haden and D.O. Boyd; the stone carving was by Earp &amp; Hobbs; granite columns were provided by G. &amp; J. Fenning; ceramic tiles were made by Craven Dunnill &amp; Co.; the stained glass was made by Heaton Butler &amp; Bayne and R.B. Edmundson; chimney-pieces were provided by W.H. Burke, Blackmore &amp; Nixon and the Hopton Wood Stone Co.; decorative iron work was made by R. Jones and Hart Son Peard &amp; Co.; the external clock was made by Gillett &amp; Co.; the organ in the chapel was by Gray and Davison.
The Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors (1896), 12 Great George Street, Westminster, London. The building consists of offices, hall, library and museum, Built of red brick and Darley Dale stone, built in a Jacobethan style, it cost £27,770 to build (approx £3,500,000 in 2019). The builders were Foster &amp; Dicksee, with the structural steel work by A. Handyside &amp; Co.; heating and ventilation systems were installed by J. Jeffreys; the stone carving was by Farmer &amp; Brindley; ceramic tiles were made by Craven Dunnill &amp; Co.; the mosaic flooring was made by L. Oppenheimer; decorative iron work was made by Hart Son Peard &amp; Co.

As well as Manchester, Waterhouse designed two town halls Reading and Hove, as well as designing the clock tower of Rochdale Town Hall, in England and one in Scotland at Alloa.
In (1871–76) Waterhouse extended Reading&#x27;s Georgian Town Hall, with his range of Gothic Municipal Buildings, of sandstone, brick and terracotta, it contained a new council chamber and office, there is a clock tower with carillon added in 1881, cost £8,650 (approx £980,000 in 2019). The builders were J. Parnell &amp; Sons; structural steel work was by J.S. Bergheim; the terracotta was modelled by Farmer &amp; Brindley; ceramic tiles were by Craven &amp; Co.; stained glass was by F.T. Odell; interior painted decoration was by R. Pollitt; fittings and furnishings were made by H. Capel; the decorative iron work was executed by Hart Son Peard &amp; Co.; the clock and bells were manufactured by Gillett &amp; Bland. 

Waterhouse designed the new Town Hall in Hove Sussex, built in a Gothic style in (1880–83), it had a clock tower, it was demolished after being damaged by fire in 1966. The building contained municipal offices and the town&#x27;s fire station. It was built from brick with terracotta dressings with a slate roof. It cost £39,920. The builders were John T. Chappell; heating and ventilation was by D.O. Boyd; stone carving and modelling of the terracotta was by Farmer &amp; Brindley; ceramic tiles were made by W. Godwin; granite columns were provided by G. &amp; J. Fenning; stained glass was made by F.T. Odell; chimney-pieces were by the Hopton Wood Stone Co.; mosaic work was by Salviati; decorative iron work was by Hart Son Peard &amp; Co. and R. Jones; the clock was manufactured by Gillett &amp; Bland; the organ in the main hall was built by Henry Willis; the decorative plaster work was J.W. Hindshaw.
After the tower at Rochdale Town Hall was destroyed by fire Waterhouse designed its replacement (1885–88) it is 190 feet high, Gothic of stone to match the original building by William Henry Crossland. It cost £11,900 to build. The builder was W.A. Peters &amp; Sons; the stone carving was by Earp &amp; Hobbs; decorative iron work was by Hart Son Peard &amp; Co., the clock was manufactured by Potts &amp; Sons of Leeds and the bells were cast by John Taylor &amp; Co.
The town hall in Alloa, Clackmannanshire, Scotland, is French Renaissance in style (1886–89). Built of Polmaise stone with a slate roof, of three floors, designed to contain not just the council, but a public library and art school, as well as a large hall. The building was paid for by local mill owner John Thompson Paton, it cost £18,008. The builders were G. &amp; R. Cousin; heating and ventilation was installed by W.W. Phipson and D.O. Boyd; faience decoration was by Burmantofts; the mosaic flooring was made by W.H. Burke &amp; Co.; the stained glass was made by R.B. Edmundson &amp; Sons; the internal decoration was executed by Reed &amp; Downie of Edinburgh; the enamelled and painted ceiling lights were made by Edmeston of Manchester; gas fittings were installed by Hart Son Peard &amp; Co.; furniture and fittings were by Taylor &amp; Sons and Whitlock &amp; Reed of Edinburgh; the organ in the main hall was built by Forster and Andrews.

===Commercial buildings===

In addition to his extensive work for the Prudential Assurance Company (see section below), Waterhouse designed banks, offices, the occasional shop and warehouse buildings. Manchester even after he had moved to London proved a particularly fruitful source of commissions. Including 16 Nicholas Street (1872–75) a warehouse, built for Bryce Smith &amp; Co. cotton manufacturers, in a Jacobethan style, five floors plus a basement and attic. Stylistically there are some Renaissance details but with Gothic as well. It is of red brick with stone dressings and a slate roof. It cost £8,625. There are a couple of building by Waterhouse in Spring Gardens, Manchester, no. 41 (1888–90) was built for the National Provincial Bank, built on a curving corner, five floors high, stone-faced, in a German Renaissance style, it cost £36,495. No 60-62 (1881–83) was built as a warehouse built for the company of J.H. Gartside &amp; Co. who were cotton weavers, in a Renaissance revival style. It is stone-faced with rusticated arches on the ground floor, and with octagonal domed turrets at the corners. Three storeys tall with basement and attics with dormer windows with pediments, it cost £22,965.

Other commercial buildings by Waterhouse are the former Bassett and Harris Bank (1865–67) in Leighton Buzzard, Bedfordshire, is a solid two-story stone building, in a Gothic style. In London he designed 1a Old Bond Street (1880), Westminster, for Wakefield Christy, a shop with offices above, at a cost of £11,310 (approx £1,350,000 in 2019). He also designed offices for the National Provincial Bank in Piccadilly, London (1892–96), four floors high with a stone facade.

The distinctive Foster&#x27;s Bank (1891–94), Sidney Street, Cambridge, built on an irregular site. In style it is Jacobethan. The exterior has a stone ground floor with banded stone and red brick covering the two upper floors and the gables. There is a clock tower on the right of the facade above the main entrance. The banking hall is octagonal and domed the centre of which is glazed, the walls and columns have faience decoration the floor is of mosaic. The builder was William Sindall; the structural steel work was by A. Hanyside &amp; Co.; the stone carving, mainly around the doorway, on the clock tower and in the gables was by Farmer &amp; Brindley; the ceramic tiles were made by Craven Dunnill &amp; Co.; the faience was by Burmantofts; the mosaic flooring was by J.F. Ebner and J. Rust; the decorative iron work and light fittings were made by Hart Son Peard &amp; Co.; the lighting was by Belshaw &amp; Co.; the clock in the tower was made by John Moore &amp; Sons of Clerkenwell. The bank cost £32,190.

In Leeds Waterhouse designed (1895–98) a bank and offices for the Williams Brown &amp; Co. Bank, (now known as Greek Street Chambers) on Park Row. The ground floor is of polished dark grey granite with mullioned windows and porch with Ionic columns, the two upper floors are of banded red brick and buff terracotta, the roof is slate. There are low square towers with pyramidal roofs on two of the corners. The foundations were dug by S.M. McFarlane; the superstructure was erected by Armitage &amp; Hodgson; the structural steel work was by J. Butler &amp; Co.; stone carving was by W. Beveridge; the modelling of the terracotta was by Farmer &amp; Brindley; the terracotta was manufactured by Burmantofts who also manufactured the faience used inside; internally the ceramic tiles were made by A. Whitehead who also laid the mosaic flooring; the furniture and fittings were made by Marsh Jones &amp; Cribb. The building cost £45,110.

Waterhouse designed the Pearl Life Assurance Building (1896–98), St John&#x27;s Lane, Liverpool, clad in stone, with a corner turret, of three floors with gabled attic windows. Though similar to his work for rivals the Prudential, the use of materials and the plainer walls set it subtly apart. The main office has walls clad in faience. The builders were F. Morrison &amp; Sons; the structural steel work was by A. Hanyside &amp; Co.; heating and ventilation was by J. Grundy; the stone carving was by Farmer &amp; Brindley; the faience was manufactured by Burmantofts; the mosaic flooring was by J. Rust and J.F. Ebner; the chimney-pieces were made by Shuffrey &amp; Co. and their principal Leonard Shuffrey; the decorative iron work and light fittings were made by Hart Son Peard &amp; Co.. The cost was £20,076.
Waterhouse designed the corporate headquarters of the Refuge Assurance Building (1891–96), in Oxford Street, Manchester, in a Jacobethan style. It is five floors high of red brick and plum coloured terracotta, this first phase cost £86,525, the clock tower and wing to its right were added later by Paul Waterhouse. The foundations were dug by the company of C.H. Normanton, the superstructure was erected by William Southern &amp; Sons., with the structural steel work by A. Handyside &amp; Co.; heating and ventilation was by G.N. Haden; the terracotta was manufactured by Doulton &amp; Co.; the modelling of the terracotta was by Earp &amp; Hobbs; ceramic tiles were made by William de Morgan and D. Conway; the faience was by Burmantofts; the mosaic flooring was by J.F. Ebner; chimney-pieces were provided by J. &amp; H. Patterson and W. Wilson; internal decoration was executed by Heighway &amp; Son; furniture and fittings were made by G. Goodall &amp; Co.; the decorative iron work was by Hart Son Peard &amp; Co. and R. Jones.

===Domestic buildings===
During his career Waterhouse built or made major alterations to around ninety houses for clients of varying wealth. The clients were largely upper middle class rather than aristocrats. The houses ranged from country cottages, parsonages, suburban houses mainly in the expanding cities of the Victorian age to large country houses. In the 1860s and 1870s Waterhouse received an increasing number of commissions for larger country mansions from bankers and industrialists. Later in his career from around 1880, Waterhouse received fewer commissions for houses, fashions were changing. Late Victorian taste was turning to houses in the Queen Anne Style and in the Arts and Crafts style, both of which were at odds with Waterhouse&#x27;s robust style.

From the late 1860s, Waterhouse lived in Reading, Berkshire, and was responsible for several significant buildings there. These included, alterations to and a new stable block (1861–62) at his parents&#x27; home Whiteknights House, his own residences of Foxhill House (1867–68) both houses are now used by University of Reading. Waterhouse built a new country house for himself at Yattendon, called Yattendon Court (1877–78), demolished c.1926. Foxhill House was built with the main block containing the hall, morning room, drawing room and dining room, upstairs were five bedrooms, two dressing rooms and a night and day nursery. The servants wing projected to the east, it was hidden by a conservatory to its south. There was an attached stable yard with servants bedrooms above the coach house. Yattendon Court was a larger house, built from red brick with terracotta decoration, with light coloured stone mouldings, with a tile roof. It was in an early Tudor style with some Gothic details. There was a four storey battlemented tower on the west side, there were gables and prominent chimney stacks. The house was sited on knoll 400 feet above sea level, to provide good views. The house was entered from a porch to the north, leading to the large hall, the drawing room and library were to its south, a corridor stretched east of the hall. The rooms laid out to the south of the corridor were the dining room and school room, with the butler&#x27;s pantry and housekeeper&#x27;s room to the north. The kitchen, servants&#x27; hall and scullery were in a block to the east. there were separate, stables, coach house, laundry and kitchen garden. The landscaping of the grounds was carried out by Edward Milner from 1878, and included planting 3,000 trees, evergreens and rhododendrons, a small lake was also created and a rose garden was laid out. The cost of Yattendon was £11,865.

Goldney Hall (1865–68), Clifton, Bristol, was built for Lewis Fry a member of the chocolate manufacturing Fry family. It is a suburban house, but with large gardens. It is in Italianate style one rarely used by Waterhouse, he refaced the existing eighteenth-century house in Bath stone, adding the tower with its belvedere, also entrance cloister and new main staircase, plus a new kitchen wing in brick. The cost was £12,850. The builders were J. &amp; J. Foster; ceramic tiles were provided by W. Godwin; the stained glass was made by Heaton Butler &amp; Bayne; the panelling in the drawing room was executed by Howard &amp; Son; chimneypieces in the hall were by Benham &amp; Co., in the staircase hall by W.H. Burke &amp; Co. and the oak chimneypieces used in other rooms were by W. Farmer; decoration was by J. Hankins; decorative iron work was by Hart Son Peard &amp; Co. and F.A. Skidmore &amp; Co.; the decorative plasterwork was executed by J.W. Hindshaw. The clerk of works was Alexander Gray.

Easneye Park (1866) near Stanstead Abbotts, Hertfordshire, was a country house built for Thomas Fowell Buxton, a large red brick in early Tudor style, with typical diaper work and terracotta decoration with crow-stepped gable and tiled roof the chimneys are base on those at Hampton Court Palace. The commission included the mansion, stables and entrance lodge. The building cost £32,800. The main block of the house is entered from a porch on the east front, the large entrance hall has to the west the drawing room of two sections, to the south is the study and school room. There is a wing to the north, this is set slightly to the east of the main block, it contains the dining room, gun room, butler&#x27;s pantry. Another wing, also slightly to the east, contains the housekeeper&#x27;s room and kitchen. The builder was William Brass, central heating and ventilation was by G.N. Haden; the modelling of the terracotta and carving on the building was by Farmer &amp; Brindley; the ceramic tiles were made by W.B. Simpson; stained glass windows were by Heaton Butler &amp; Bayne and F.T. Odell; the chimneypieces were manufactured by the Lizard Serpentine Co. and W.H. Burke; fittings were made by W. Wilson; decorative iron work was by Hart Son Peard &amp; Co., R. Jones and Lester &amp; Hodkinson; the plaster ceiling roses were executed by J.W. Hindshaw; advice on the garden design was given by Robert Marnock.

Allerton Priory a large house was designed by Waterhouse in 1866 and built (1868–71), the picture gallery was added in (1872–76). Located in the Liverpool suburb of Allerton. It is built from brick with sandstone dressings and in a French Gothic style, with the distinctive four storey tower with its steep pyramidal roof surrounded by four tourelles rising above the entrance porch. Also by Waterhouse is the large entrance lodge to the extensive grounds and a vinery. The building was built for John Grant Morris, a colliery owner, who served as Lord Mayor of Liverpool (1866–67). It cost of £16,500 (roughly £1,900,000 in 2019) to build, the work of (1872–76) cost about £5,000. The building is L-shaped in plan, the servants wing sticking out from the main block. The large single storey picture gallery housed the owners extensive collection of contemporary British art and made the building&#x27;s plan U-shaped. The main rooms were the long entrance hall entered from the porch on the north front, around which are the billiards room, study, smoking room, library, drawing room and dining room with its separate serving room. There is also a schoolroom and a butler&#x27;s pantry within the block. The servants wing contains the kitchen, servants&#x27; hall and housekeeper&#x27;s room. The builders were Holme &amp; Nicol; the heating and ventilation system was by G.N. Haden; the stone carving on the building was executed by Farmer &amp; Brindley; decorative ceramic tiles were manufactured by W. Godwin and L. Oppenheimer; the stained glass windows were made by Heaton Butler &amp; Bayne, R.D. Edmundson and F.T. Odell; the chimneypieces were supplied by the Lizard Serpentine Co., W.H. Burke and W. Wilson, the iron grates were made by Hart Son Peard &amp; Co. and D.O. Boyd; the fittings and furniture was made by Gillows of Lancaster and London; the decorative iron work was by R. Jones, F.A. Skidmore and Lester &amp; Hodkinson; the plaster ceiling roses were executed by J.W. Hindshaw. The clerk of works was J. Dickson.


Another large country house is Blackmoor House, in Blackmoor, Hampshire, built in stages around an existing farm house, they were 1865, (1866–67), (1868–73) and (1882–83). Gothic in style and built of stone with a tiled roof. The commission included stables, lodges gardens and furniture. It was built for Roundell Palmer. Dryderdale Hall (1871–72), near Hamsterley, mansion, stables and lodge, stone in the style of Scottish baronial architecture, built for Alfred Backhouse. Coodham (1872–79), Kilmarnock, a large house with chapel, music room and conservatory, lodge, cottages and farm buildings for William Houldsworth. For Lt-Col James Fenton Greenall, Waterhouse designed Lingholm, Keswick, a large stone house with slate roof. In Hurworth-on-Tees he designed Hurworth Grange (1873–75), now the Hurworth Grange Community Centre, which Alfred Backhouse had commissioned as a wedding gift for his nephew, James E. Backhouse, large brick house with stone dressing. Waterhouse was commissioned (1873–76) by Henry Pease (MP), to extended his existing mansion Pierrmont in Darlington, adding a new wing and conservatory, redecorated the hall, and built the gatehouse and the prominent clock tower. Silwood Park, Sunninghill, Berkshire (1876–79), built for Charles P. Stewart was a large mansion, with double height great hall, red brick with stone dressings. Rockcliffe, Kirkcudbrightshire, Baron&#x27;s Craig (1879), granite faced house with rubble stone walls and dressed stone with battlemented tower, for Christopher Morris. Crimplesham Hall (1880–82), Norfolk, built for John Grant Morris for his daughter Mrs A.T. Bagge, built from yellow brick and low pitched slate roofs, in a simplified classical style. East Thorpe House, Reading, built in 1880-82, house and stables of brick and terracotta for Alfred Palmer, it is now the Museum of English Rural Life.

===Ecclesiastical buildings===
Waterhouse was never a major church designer, but throughout his career he received commissions for churches and chapels. In 1865 Waterhouse was commissioned to rebuild the ruinous medieval parish church of St Martin&#x27;s Brasted in Kent, only the original tower was kept, apart from a new north aisle the building was rebuilt on the old foundations, the south window in the tower was also new, Gothic in style, the windows are a mixture of geometrical and perpendicular tracery, it is built of stone with a tile roof. St Seiriol&#x27;s parish church (1867–68), Penmaenmawr, Wales, is in the Early English Period style built from local granite with sandstone dressings and slate roof, the tower was added in 1885. The builder was H. Atkinson, heating system was by G.N. Haden, stained glass was by F.T. Odell, decorative iron work was by R. Jones, the fittings were made by Mark Foggett, the organ was made by Bevington and the font was carved by T.L. Carter. The church cost £3,610. He designed the Chapel (1873–74) for Reading Grammar School that he had designed in 1868 from red brick, it is Early English Gothic in style

Another of Waterhouse&#x27;s parish churches this time in Decorated Gothic is St Matthew&#x27;s Blackmoor (1867–70), built of stone with tiled roofs. It was built for Roundell Palmer, 1st Earl of Selborne. The builder was Thomas Kemp; the heating system was by G.N. Haden; the stone carving was by Farmer &amp; Brindley, ceramic floor tiles were by W. Godwin; the stained glass was made by Heaton Butler &amp; Bayne and F.T. Odell; furnishings and fittings were manufactured by Christopher Prat and Heal &amp; Sons; the decorative iron work was by Lester &amp; Hodkinson and R. Jones; the grate in the vestry was by D.O. Boyd; the organ was manufactured by Bevington; the clock in the tower was made by E. White; the bells were cast by John Warner &amp; Sons. The church cost £8,635.

St Mary&#x27;s Church of England parish church in Twyford, Hampshire (1876–78) is a village church it replaced the previous dilapidated medieval church. It was built in a decorated Gothic style, the roof is covered in red tiles and the walls are of knapped flint with bands of red brick. Showing similar patterning to the Natural History Museum and was designed at the same time. The columns in the nave and windows in the clerestory are from the old church and were incorporated into the building. The builders were Messers Dyer. Stained glass was made by Heaton Butler &amp; Bayne and F.T. Odell, decorative iron work was by Hart Son Peard &amp;Co., ceramic floor tiles were made by W. Godwin and the heating system was by G.N. Haden. Thomas Fairbairn donated £1,000 towards the cost of the building his wife gave £500, a local woman Mrs Waddington gave £700 to build the spire to an amended design, originally it was to be much taller and built from stone at a cost of £2,000. The spire as built is of wood with a tile covering. The nave is of five bays with aisles, the tower is in the north west corner of the nave, the chancel is of two bays with transepts, the vestry is on the east side of the north transept. The total cost of the building was £7,655.

St Elisabeth&#x27;s Church, Reddish (1883–85) is a Church of England parish church and was designed for William Houldsworth, for whom Waterhouse designed other buildings in the area all part of Houldsworth Model Village. The church is of red brick with stone dressings, it is Romanesque in style. The chancel which is vaulted of three bays, the Lady Chapel to the south of the chancel is also vaulted, both have an apse. The nave has aisles and is of four bays, there is a south porch leading to the western bay of the nave, the foursquare bell tower rises from just south of the chancel, it has a short lead-covered spire with four pyramidal lead pinnacles around its corners. The bells were cast by John Taylor &amp; Co. The builders were for the foundation C.H. Normanton, the superstructure was built by William Southern. The stained glass in the clerestory was designed by Frederic Shields and made by Heaton Butler &amp; Bayne, the rest of the stained glass was to Waterhouse&#x27;s design and was executed by F.T. Odell. Internal decoration was executed by Watts &amp; Co. The polished granite for the monolithic nave columns was provided by G &amp; J Jenning. The stone carving was by Thomas Earp that included the marble and alabaster rood screen that supports four marble statues of the Four Evangelists, reredos and sedilia. The sanctuary walls are clad in pale green and grey marbles, this and the other marble work was provided by W.H. Burke. Ceramic tiles used to pave the floor were by W. Godwin. The decorative ironwork including the screens separating the Lady Chapel and the organ built by William Hill &amp; Sons, from the chancel was made by Hart Son Peard &amp; Co. and R, Jones. The heating system was provided by G.N. Haden. Waterhouse also designed the communion-plate, altar-frontal and altar cross. The church cost £19,425 (approx £2,230,000 in 2019), this is one of Waterhouse&#x27;s finest and his most lavishly decorated church.
Lyndhurst Road Congregational Church (1883–84), Camden, originally built for the Congregational church, is unusual as the body of the church is hexagonal built in purple brick with red brick and terracotta dressings in a Romanesque style. The builders were J. Parnell &amp; Son; structural steel work was by W.H. Lindsay, heating and ventilation was by D.O. Boyd; the modelling of the terracotta decoration was by Farmer &amp; Brindley; ceramic tiles were by Craven Dunnill &amp; Co., and the decorative iron work was made by Hart Son Peard &amp; Co. and R. Jones. The church cost £15,970 to build. The building is now the Air Lyndhurst complex of recording studios.
The former King&#x27;s Weigh House chapel (1889–90) in Mayfair, another Congregational church, is built from red brick and orange terracotta, it has an oval nave and a tower in the south-west corner, built in a Romanesque style. The builders were John Shillitoe &amp; Son, the structural steel work was by A. Handyside &amp; Co., heating and ventilation was by G.N. Haden, the ceramic tiles were manufactured by Craven Dunnill &amp; Co., faience tiling was by Burmantofts, and decorative ironwork by Hart Son Peard &amp; Co.. The cost was £26,495.

===Hospital buildings===

Waterhouse&#x27;s hospital designs all date from later in his career. These include: the Lister Institute of Preventive Medicine in Chelsea (1898–1903); the Royal Alexandra Hospital in Rhyl (1899–1902); added the Jubilee Wing to Nottingham General Hospital (1900); Saint Mary&#x27;s Hospital, Manchester (1899–1901). Architecturally the two most important of his hospitals were Liverpool Royal Infirmary and University College Hospital London.

Liverpool Royal Infirmary (1886–92) was Waterhouse&#x27;s largest hospital, the design was three rectangular medical wards projecting south linked by a corridor to their north, they have loggias on their southern end, to the north of the spine corridor at each end are two circular surgical wards, the administration block is on the northern edge of the site along Pembroke Place is linked by a corridor, with the chapel to one side to the spine corridor. The style of the building is neo-Romanesque with grey brick walls and dressings in red Ruabon terracotta. The interiors use white and grey glazed bricks with terrazzo floors, lacking any mouldings therefore easy to keep clean. The chapel has bright coloured faience work and tiling by Burmantofts Pottery. The Nightingale ward plan was used, women were on the first floor, the men on the second floor. The building also incorporated a medical school, linked to the University of Liverpool and a nurses&#x27; home. The cost of the building was £123,500 (approx £15,500,000 in 2019). The main building contractor was Holme &amp; Green; the structural steel was by W.H. Lindsay &amp; Co.; heating and ventilation by W.W. Phipson; terracotta was provided by J.C. Edwards the modelling of the terracotta was by Farmer &amp; Brindley; tiles were provided by Johnson &amp; Co. and Craven Dunhill &amp; Co.; faience was by Burmantofts; chimneypieces were provided by J &amp; H Patterson &amp; Co., Blackmore &amp; Co. and the Hopton Wood Co.; iron work was by W.H. Peake &amp; Co. and Hart Son Peard &amp; Co. The hospital closed in 1978 and is now used by the University of Liverpool.


Waterhouse&#x27;s other major hospital is what is now University College London&#x27;s Cruciform Building (1894–1903), the former site of University College Hospital; whereas Liverpool Royal Infirmary was a fairly conventional layout for a Victorian hospital University College Hospital would be a radical departure. The site was roughly square, but cramped, in order to maximise the building&#x27;s size but ensure light and air to the wards Waterhouse came up with the X-plan design sitting diagonally across the site, and sitting on a two-storey high building. The lower two floors one of which is a semi-basement, contained the outpatients&#x27; department, waiting rooms, and casualty wards. The central tower contained the lifts, main staircase and operating theatres. The four upper stories consist of three wings that contained wards, the fourth was the nurses&#x27; home. The toilets and bathrooms were located at the far end of each wing. The wards contained 24 beds, again like Liverpool on the Nightingale Ward principal. A total of nearly three hundred beds. It was probably the world&#x27;s first vertically planned hospital. Built of red brick and terracotta with a few thin bands of stone, with some classical details especially around the main entrance on Gower Street facing University College. It cost £200,000 (approx £24,600,000 in 2019) and was paid for by John Blundell Maple as a gift. The main building contractor was Thomas Holloway; structural steelwork was by A. Handyside &amp; Co.; heating and ventilation was by G.N. Haden and Ashwell &amp; Nesbitt; furniture and fittings were provided by Maple &amp; Co.

===Educational buildings===

Many of Waterhouse&#x27;s commissions for educational buildings involved multi-phase development, sometimes over several decades. This is so of both the Northern universities and Oxford and Cambridge colleges. His school buildings, smaller and usually new-built were more usually built in a single phase.

====School buildings====

Waterhouse designed a few school buildings. The Cricket Pavilion at Marlborough College has half-timbered gables, red brick and a wooden veranda. Middlesbrough High School (1873–77) redbrick with stone dressing, two storeys with dormer attic and tower. City and Guilds of London Institute in London&#x27;s Exhibition Road (1881–86), red brick and terracotta, it was an example of Queen Anne style architecture, cost £88,120 (approx £10,100,000 in 2019), demolished 1962. In Yorkshire Waterhouse designed (1887–89) Guisborough Grammar School, now Prior Pursglove and Stockton Sixth Form College, this consisted of the Master&#x27;s House, school itself, of grey stone ground floor, the upper floor of red brick with yellow terracotta and slate roof, there were further alterations in 1897. At Leighton Park School in Reading, Waterhouse designed new dormitories and classrooms and extended the dining room (1890–91), then (1892–95) a new sanatorium and boarding house Grove House. St Margaret&#x27;s School, Bushey (1894), built to educate the orphans of Anglican clergy, included the school building, chapel and entrance lodge, built of brick, cost £34,325 (approx £4,150,000 in 2019).
Another educational building by Waterhouse is his large Reading Grammar School (1868–72), that consists of a long range of buildings, consisting of the school rooms, hall, masters&#x27; houses. In style the school is Gothic, built of red brick and terracotta. It cost to build £19,709 (approx £2,100,000 in 2019). The main building contractor was J. Parnell &amp; Sons; heating and ventilation was by D.O. Boyd; stone carving was by Farmer &amp; Brindley; ceramic tiles were provided by R.M. Taylor; stained glass was made by F.T. Odell; chimneypieces were made by Thomas Harrison; furniture and fittings were manufactured by H. Capel; iron work was made by R. Jones; plaster ceiling roses were by J.W. Hindshaw; the bells were cast by J. Warner &amp; Co. 

St Paul&#x27;s School in Hammersmith (1881–1884; demolished 1968), built for the Worshipful Company of Mercers, Gothic, in dark brick and terracotta, with slate roof. In consisted of a master&#x27;s house, caretakers lodge and gazebo, surrounding walls matching school, this was Waterhouse&#x27;s largest school, with 1000 pupils, the building of three floors plus dormers and basement, it had an E-plan layout. The main facade to the north was symmetrical, with the hall and two three-storey wings of classrooms projecting south in an asymmetrical composition. It cost £105,735 to build (approx £12,150,000 in 2019). The main building contractor was J. Parnell &amp; Sons; structural steelwork was by W.H. Lindsay &amp; Co. and J.S. Bergheim; heating and ventilation was provided by G.N. Haden and D.O. Boyd; modelling of terracotta was by Farmer &amp; Brindley; granite stonework was provided by G. &amp; J. Fenning; ceramic tiles were manufactured by Craven, Dunhill &amp; Co.; window glass was provided by F.T. Odell; chimneypieces were by W,H, Burke and the Hopton Wood Stone Co.; furniture and fittings were provided by Maple &amp; Co. and the North of England School Furniture Co.; ironwork was by Hart Son Peard &amp; Co. and R. Jones; the main clock was by Gillett &amp; Bland. the clerk of works was T.M. Rickman

====Northern universities====
Waterhouse was to design three northern English universities, Manchester, Leeds and Liverpool, all would be in the Gothic style. All three would form The Victoria University.

What is now Manchester University began as Owens College later Victoria University of Manchester, for which the first buildings by Waterhouse were erected between 1869 and 1875. This first phase of 1869 was E-shaped in plan. Extensions followed, first the medical school (1882–83). The main facade behind which was the Council Room approached by a dramatic curved staircase, the museum lined Oxford Road, this being stone, brick with stone dressings was used for the earlier stages (1884–88), then the extensions to the engineering laboratory (1886–88). The medical school was again extended in (1891–96). The Schorlemmer Laboratory was built (1894–96). The Library was built (1895). Then followed by Whitworth Hall named after the donor Joseph Whitworth and the entrance tower on Oxford Road (1898–1902). All the buildings formed what is known as Main Quadrangle.

The first phase of building was constructed by the firm of Thomas Clay; structural steel work was by J.S. Bergheim, fireproofing by Dennett &amp; Co.; stone carving by Farmer &amp; Brindley; heating and ventilation by G.N. Haden and D.O. Boyd; ceramic tiling by Craven Dunhill &amp; Co.; mosaic flooring by Jesse Rust; stained Glass by R.B. Edmundson and F.T. Odell; chimneypieces by Hopton Wood Stone Co.; ironwork by Hart Son Peard &amp; Co. and R. Jones; the furnishing and fittings were by Lamb and H. Chapel; the cost was £105,000. The (1882–83) was by building firm William Southern &amp; Co.; fireproofing and the heating and ventilation were by the firms used in phase 1; Thomas Earp &amp; Hobbs did the stone carving; this time only Hart Son Peard &amp; Co. were responsible for the ironwork; decorative stonework was by Hopton Wood Stone Co; the cost was £12,980. The (1884–88) phase was by William Southern &amp; Co; fireproofing and the heating and ventilation were by the firms used in phase 1; stone carving by Farmer &amp; Brindley, Thomas Earp &amp; Hobbs; ceramic tiles were by Craven Dunhill &amp; Co.; faience by Burmantofts; chimneypieces by Hopton Wood Stone Co. and J. &amp; H. Patterson; ironwork by Hart Son Peard &amp; Co; the cost was £75,725. The (1886–88) extension was by W.W. Harrison, cost £2,230. The (1891–96) was by R. Neill; structural steelwork by A. Handyside &amp; Co.; ironwork by Hart Son Peard &amp; Co.; stonework by Hopton Wood Stone Co.; cost £40,830. The (1894–96) extension was by R. Neill; heating and ventilation by G.N. Haden; ironwork by Hart Son Peard &amp; Co, the cost was £4,370. The (1896) extension was by Henry Vickers; structural steelwork by A. Handyside &amp; Co.; heating and ventilation by J. Grundy; stone carving by Earp &amp; Hobbs; ceramic tiles by D. Conway; mosaic flooring by J.F. Ebner; ironwork by Hart Son Peard &amp; Co.; furnishing and decoration by Heighway &amp; Sons; the cost was £17,565. The final phase (1898–1902) cost £36,350.

Waterhouse designed buildings from 1877 for Yorkshire College, that from 1904 became Leeds University. The first building then known as Clothworkers Building, largely paid for by The Worshipful Company of Clothworkers was built 1878-80, modest in size, of red brick with Spinkwell stone dressings, it contained a lecture theatre, museum and weaving sheds. The next phase of (1881–85) was partially funded by Sir Edward Baines, this was the three floor Baines Wing, gabled with a tower that has a pyramidal roof, it contained laboratories and classrooms. In (1884–86) the original Clothworkers Building was extended. Next the Engineering block (1885) of red brick with stone dressings and slate roof was built. The next phase was the Great Hall of (1890–95), of brick with stone bands and large perpendicular window in the gable end flanked by towers. The interior has an impressive staircase decorated with Burmantofts faience. The floors beneath the Great Hall originally contained a library and a refectory. In 1898 a new engine house and Leather Industries Laboratories was added.

The first phase of (1878–81) was built by Wooley &amp; Sons; structural steelwork was by J.S. Bergheim and Fairburn, Kennedy &amp; Naylor; heating and ventilation was by G.N. Haden and D.O. Boyd; stone carving by Farmer &amp; Brindley; ceramic tiles were by W. Godwin; iron work by Hart Son Peard &amp; Co. and R. Jones; chimneypieces by the Hopton Wood Stone Co.; cost £9,785. The (1881–85) phase was built by J. Wood &amp; Sons; chimneypieces by the Hopton Wood Stone Co.; ironwork by Hart Son Peard &amp; Co.; cost £34,135. The (1884–86) extension was by J. Wood &amp; Sons; stone carving by Farmer &amp; Brindley; iron work by Hart Son Peard &amp; Co. and R. Jones; cost £8,830. The (1885) was built by J. Wood &amp; Sons; heating and ventilation was by D.O. Boyd; chimneypieces by the Hopton Wood Stone Co.; iron work by Hart Son Peard &amp; Co. and R. Jones; cost £6,420. The next phase (1890–95) was built by J. Wood &amp; Sons; structural steelwork by A. Handyside &amp; Co.; ceramic tiles by Craven Dunhill &amp; Co.; faience work by Burmantofts; mosaic flooring by J.F. Ebner; chimneypieces by Hopton Wood Stone Co.; the furniture and fittings for the library by Carr Brother; ironwork by Hart Son Peard &amp; Co.; cost £21,025. The (1898) phase was by J. Wood &amp; Sons and Charles Myers; cost £9,640.

Waterhouse began designing from 1881 buildings for what became University of Liverpool, with extensions to the former Liverpool Asylum to form University College. This would become his most extensive set of commissions for any of the three universities. The first new building was the chemistry laboratories (1884–87), followed by the Walker engineering laboratory built (1887–91). The Victoria Building and Jubilee Tower of red brick and terracotta from Ruabon and slate roofs, were constructed (1888–93) and contained the main teaching and administration facilities, that includes a large lecture theatre and library. The interiors including the main hall, corridors and main staircase are decorated using different coloured Burmantofts faience. The next phase was the Gossage Chemistry Laboratories, the medical School and the Thompson Yates laboratory (1895–1898) for the study of physiology and pathology. In (1899–1902) a new medical school and anatomy theatre and teaching rooms were built, this was Waterhouse&#x27;s final work at the university. 

The work of (1881) was by building contractor William Tomkinson &amp; Son; heating and ventilation by G.N. Haden and D.O. Boyd; ceramic tiles by D, Conway; chimneypieces by Blackmore &amp; Nixon; ironwork by Hart Son Peard &amp; Co.; furniture and furnishings by North of England Furnishing Co.; cost £4,540. The buildings of (1884–87) were built by Jones &amp; Sons; heating and ventilation was by G.N. Haden; iron work by Hart Son Peard &amp; Co. and R. Jones; stonework by Hopton Wood Stone Co.; cost £15,805. The phase of (1887–91) foundations were dug and laid by William Tomkinson &amp; Sons; the superstructure was built by Brown &amp; Backhouse; structural steelwork by W.H Lindsay &amp; Co.; heating and ventilation was installed by G.N. Haden; the terracotta was manufactured by J.C. Edwards and modelled by Farmer &amp; Brindley; ceramic tiles were manufactured by Craven Dunhill &amp; Co.; the faience was manufactured by Burmantofts; the chimneypieces were made by J. &amp; H. Patterson; ironwork was provided by Hart Son Peard &amp; Co.; the cost was £13,845. The (1888–93) phase foundation were by Isaac Dilworth; the superstructure was constructed by Brown &amp; Blackburn; structural steelwork by A. Handyside &amp; Co.; modelling of the terracotta was by Farmer &amp; Brindley and Earp &amp; Hobbs; the faience work was provided by Burmantofts; mosaic flooring was by Jesse Rust; chimneypieces by Hopton Wood Stone Co. and J. &amp; H. Patterson; ironwork was provided by Hart Son Peard &amp; Co.; the cost was £47,580. The (1895–1898) phase was built by Jones &amp; Sons apart from the Thompson Yates Laboratories by William Tomkinson &amp; Son; structural steelwork by A. Handyside &amp; Co.; heating and ventilation by G. N. Haden; the terracotta was manufactured by J.C. Edwards and modelled by Farmer &amp; Brindley; ironwork was provided by Hart Son Peard &amp; Co.; the faience work was provided by Burmantofts; mosaic flooring was by J.F. Ebner; furniture and fittings were made by Doulton, Jones &amp; Son; the cost was £36,055. The final phase (1899–1902) was built by William Tomkinson at a cost of £12,740.

====Oxford and Cambridge universities====

Colleges at both the University of Oxford and the University of Cambridge would commission buildings from Waterhouse, indeed from 1865 to his retirement he was almost at continual work at one or both Universities. In (1865–67) the Cambridge Union Society commissioned a new debating hall, smoking room and caretaker&#x27;s house, he returned twenty years later to double the size of the building with a new wing. At Balliol College, Oxford, his first work was the new Master&#x27;s Lodge facing Broad Street and the main range L-shaped with a tower above the entrance to the college with a lecture hall (1866–71), in style French thirteenth-century Gothic. In (1873–78) he designed the new Great Hall. Charles Eastlake in 1872 described the style of the new buildings:

In 1866 he was approached to rebuild and extended part of Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, this is Tree Court built (1868–70), that provided sixty sets of rooms in a four-storey building. &quot;Building News&quot; magazine reviewed the design of Tree Court in the May 1869 issue:
At Gonville and Caius, out of deference to the Renaissance treatment of the older parts of the college, this Gothic element was intentionally mingled with classic detail, the steep roofs are reminiscent of French Renaissance buildings. He returned to Gonville and Caius in 1883 to add a new lecture theatre block. In (1868–70) Waterhouse added to Jesus College, Cambridge a new three-storey range of undergraduate rooms, in red brick with stone dressings in style matching the existing Tudor buildings. He also restored the Master&#x27;s Lodge and added a new gateway. At Trinity Hall, Cambridge (1870–73) he added the East range of the South Court, housing sets of rooms over four floors. At Pembroke College, Cambridge, with a generous budget of £70,000 (over £8,000,000 in 2019) he added the new Master&#x27;s Lodge (1871–73) and South Range known as the Red Buildings (1871–72), he used a French Gothic style for the buildings. They are of red brick with stone dressings. He went on to design the new Hall in (1875–79), fellows&#x27; sets and a new library (1877–78), with its bold clock tower. In (1878–80) the Oxford Union commissioned an extension from Waterhouse, consisting of a new debating hall.

He was commissioned by Emily Davies to design his only new college at either of the ancient universities, the Women&#x27;s college Girton College, Cambridge. Gothic of red brick and terracotta.
Emily writing in a letter in 1866 to her friend Anna Richardson, in which she outlined her vision for the college:


A year later she wrote again to Richardson:

The first phase dates from 1871–75 and consisted of 18 sets of undergraduate rooms, Fellows&#x27; rooms and Hall forming the north side of what became Emily Davies Court. In 1875-77 he added more undergraduate sets, classroom, laboratory and gymnasium. In 1878 he designed additional college rooms. In 1883-85 he designed additional rooms and service areas, extended the Hall, built Stanley Library named after Henrietta Stanley, Baroness Stanley of Alderley and the Mistress&#x27;s flat, In 1886-89 the gate tower and new ranges of college rooms forming Cloisters Court and the garden layout. Finally in 1898–1902 came the Chapel, two new ranges of rooms, a new Hall and Kitchens and an indoor swimming pool. A unique facility in a Cambridge College. Unlike most colleges at Cambridge, Waterhouse choose to access the rooms via corridors rather than the normal sets of rooms off staircases.

The budgets for the different phases of Girton College were: phase 1 £11,370, phase 2 £3,020, phase 3 £6,470 phase 4 £16,295 and phase 5 not known. The contractors involved were: general construction by the building firm of J. Loveday; the heating and ventilation was installed by G.N. Haden; the decorative tiling was supplied by W. Godwin; the simple patterned glass was made by F.T. Odell; chimneypieces were made by the Hopton, Wood Stone Co. with iron grates manufactured by D.O. Boyd; decorative ironwork was made by Hart Son Peard &amp; Co. and Robert Jones; the main clock was manufactured by J. Moore &amp; Son, with the bell cast by J. Warner &amp; Sons. The College was later extended during the early decades of the twentieth century by both Paul Waterhouse and later Michael Waterhouse.

===Manchester Town Hall===

Manchester Town Hall was the result of a two-stage competition, after the first stage a shortlist was drawn up and the candidates allowed to amend their designs. The first stage closed in August 1867. A total of 137 sets of drawings by 123 competitors were entered. This first stage was judged by George Godwin. The designs were whittled down to these architects: Waterhouse, William Lee, Speakman &amp; Charlesworth, Cuthbert Brodrick, Thomas Worthington, John Oldrid Scott, Thomas Henry Wyatt and Edward Salomons. The second stage was judged by Thomas Leverton Donaldson, a classicist, and gothicist George Edmund Street. In March 1868 Donaldson and Street chose Waterhouse&#x27;s design as the winning design, this was their conclusion:
Waterhouse revised the design, working on the main elevation and tower throughout 1868 and 1869, as late as July 1875 well into the construction of the building Waterhouse revised the main tower design to add an extra 16 feet to its height. In the Town Hall Waterhouse showed a firmer and more original handling of the Gothic style. Built 1868-77, the building would cost £521,357 (over £60,000,000 in 2019) but with the purchase cost of land, furnishings and fees the total cost was £859,000 (over £99,000,000 in 2019) making it Waterhouse&#x27;s most expensive building. The building was opened on 13 September 1877, overseen by the Mayor of Manchester Abel Heywood, who was the driving force behind the building of the new Town Hall.

The main facade to Albert Square is 328 feet long, the tower is 285 feet high. The building is an irregular quadrilateral in plan, the Princess Street facade is 388 feet wide, the Cooper Street facade is 94 feet wide, the facade on Lloyd street, is 350 feet wide. The main entrance is in the centre of the Albert Square facade below the tower, a low vestibule leads to the main staircases with two branches sweeping up to the landing outside the Great Hall. The main rooms are along the first floor overlooking Albert Square, these are the Banqueting Room, Reception Room, Lobby below the tower, Mayor&#x27;s Parlour, Ante-Room and Council Chamber. The site of the building is essential a triangle with a truncated tip, the Public Hall sits in the middle of the site surrounded by three small courtyards, with a corridor running along all three sides, with the offices and main rooms facing the outside streets. Where each corridor meets is a circular staircase linking all floors, two further staircases are placed one each in the middle of the two long corridors running behind the offices on the Princess Street and Lloyd Street fronts. The ground floor originally included a police station with cells, fire station and post office, accessed from Lloyd Street.

In the 17 October 1874 issue of the Builder was the following review of the building, described as:
Writing in the book published in 1878 to celebrate the opening of Manchester Town Hall, &quot;An Architectural and General Description of the Town Hall Manchester&quot; edited by E.A. Axon, the following description of the building&#x27;s style is given:

The building is faced in Spinkwell stone chosen for its ability to resist damage from pollution, though the core and inner part of the walls are built of yellow brick, the roof is of slate. Hopton Wood stone is used internally for example for chimneypieces. Numerous contractors, craftsmen and artists were involved in the construction of the building. Those contractors involved in the physical structure of the building were: the foundations were dug by firm of Thomas Clay; the superstructure was built by the building firm of George Smith; fireproof construction was the responsibility of Dennett &amp; Co.; structural steelwork was provided by J.S. Bergheim and Andrew Handyside and Company; the heating and ventilation of the building was the responsibility of Dennett &amp; Company. Certain features of the building were designed by specialists: the clock in the main tower was designed by Gillett &amp; Bland and the bells in the tower were cast by John Taylor &amp; Co. The organ in the Great Hall was built by Aristide Cavaillé-Coll. The Hydraulic hoists were designed and installed by Edward T. Bellhouse &amp; Co. When it came to the decoration and furnishing of the building, multiple firms, designers and artists were involved. Gibbs and Canning provided terracotta used internally as wall cladding. Ceramic tiling for walls and floors were by Craven Dunnill &amp; Co, W. Godwin and W.B. Simpson. The stone carving internally and externally was by Farmer and Brindley. Mosaic flooring was laid by J.Rust. Marble flooring was installed W.H. Burke and company. The painted decoration, mainly ceilings, including the great hall, vestibule and corridors was painted by Heaton, Butler &amp; Bayne, R. Pollitt and Best &amp; Lea. The simple stained glass used throughout the building was created by F.T. Odell. The decorative iron work was produced by Francis Skidmore, R. Jones, and Hart, Son, Peard and Co. The chimneypieces were made by the Hopton Wood Stone Co.. Furniture &amp; wooden fittings were made by Doveston, Bird &amp; Hull and H. Capel. The curtains in the main rooms were designed by R.E. Holding and made by the Royal School of Needlework. The Murals in the Great Hall were painted by Ford Madox Brown. The large number of contractors involved show the sheer complexity involved in coordinating the project, the clerk of works who was in charge of the building site was K.J. Osbourne.

===Natural History Museum===


Waterhouse received, without competition, the commission to build the Natural History Museum in South Kensington, he was approached by William Cowper First Commissioner of Works at the end of 1865 to carry out the design for the museum by the architect Francis Fowke who had just died. However a change of government meant plans were put on hold for eighteen months, in March 1868 Waterhouse submitted a new design, but the government changed again and the new First Commissioner Austen Henry Layard wanted the museum to be built in a new location on the Thames Embankment, but another change of First Commissioner Acton Smee Ayrton, switched the site back to the original site on Cromwell Road, he also cut the budget from £500,000 to £330,000 (about £39,000,000 in 2019). All this meant Waterhouse had to keep amending the designs for the museum. The solution to the reduced budget that Waterhouse came up with including omitting the large lecture theatre that had been part of the design from the beginning, and to build the Museum in two stages. That first stage is the Museum as it was opened. The second stage that was never built, was to build the side facades and the rear facade of the Museum. As late as 1911-13 plans were produced to complete the east and west facades, but the outbreak of World War I prevented its execution.

Finally in spring 1873 work began on the building, the contractors who worked on the building were for the general construction of the building G. Baker &amp; G. Shaw and Mowlem, with the structural iron work being manufactured by J.S. Bergheim, all the terracotta used was manufactured by the firm of Gibbs and Canning. The Museum opened to the public in April 1881, only two years before the director and driving force behind the museum Richard Owen retired. The design which marks an epoch in the modern use of architectural terracotta and which was to become his best-known work. The eventual cost of the building was £412,000 (roughly £47,000,000 in 2019). But by the time the costs of the fittings were added the total cost was £549,045 (approx £63,000,000 in 2019) with additional expenditure of £7,200 in 1882 when the Spirit Room (where animal specimens were preserved in spirit) was built as a separate building, it has been demolished, and £2,500 in 1884 for two entrance lodges to the grounds. The building was the first in England to have its facades completely clad in terracotta. The style of the building is Romanesque Revival architecture, and is especially influenced by German buildings, notably The Liebfrauen Kirche, Andernach and Worms Cathedral. The main facade is 750 feet in length. &quot;The Magazine of Art&quot;, vol 4, 1881 p36 described the style of the Museum:

The distinctive features of the building&#x27;s facade are the end pavilions with their octagonal attic towers supporting steep roofs, and the twin towers 190 feet high flanking the arched main entrances. Entering through the main doors, these are reached via an exterior staircase. The visitor passes from the Entrance Hall beneath the arch supporting the main staircase from the 1st to the 2nd floor, ahead on the end wall of the main hall, lies the main staircase imperial in form, rising from the ground to the first floor. The Main Hall has a gallery at first floor level running down both its flanks, that links the two parts of the main staircases. Immediately north of the Main Hall is the North Hall. Although Romanesque in style, the drama is more akin to Baroque architecture. The front part of the building has three floors of public galleries. Flanking the Main Hall on each side are three large top lit galleries, the large galleries are separated from each other by narrower galleries. The roofs of these single floor galleries is the same form as the Main and North Halls, the lower half of the slope is glass the upper solid. All the ground floor galleries open to the south off an east-west corridor that links them to the Main Hall. Leading off the corridors are links to the ground floor galleries along the Museum&#x27;s main facade.

The interior and exterior also has much decorative and sculptural terracotta. The Museum&#x27;s Director Richard Owen provided advice on animals living and extinct that Waterhouse could use in the decoration. The Waterhouse drawings for all the terracotta decoration in and on the building were converted to three dimensional clay models by a Frenchman by the name of M. Du Jardin, who worked as a foreman for Farmer and Brindley, who also carved and installed the marble window sills in the Museum. These clay models were then used to make moulds from Plaster-of-Paris, these moulds were then used to create the actual terracotta sculptures by Gibbs and Canning, the same sculpture is often used multiple times to decorate the Museum. The east wing of the museum has terracotta sculptures of extinct creatures, the central block and west wing of living species. The ceilings of the Main Hall and of the North Hall are decorated with paintings of plants. It is likely that the Museum&#x27;s Keeper of Botany William Carruthers provided guidance and plant specimens for Waterhouse to base his designs on. The plants that decorate the Main Hall are from right across the Globe, the North Hall is decorated with paintings of native British plants. The Waterhouse drawings were converted into full size paintings by the Manchester firm of Best &amp; Lea. The decorative ceramic tile-work was manufactured by W.B. Simpson &amp; Sons Ltd. The simple stained glass was executed by F.T. Odell, designed by Waterhouse in his preferred light colours. It is either geometrical or based on a botanical theme. The decorative ironwork, for example the cresting on the roofs and the railings around the Museum, was executed by Hart, Son, Peard and Co.

An important aspect of the building&#x27;s design was fire proof construction, the galleries in the front part of the Museum are supported by internal iron columns that are sheathed in terracotta to protect them from fire. These columns supported fireproof concrete vaulted ceilings, hidden by plaster ceilings. The roofs of the single storey galleries were made from iron and glass. The floors throughout the Museum were of terrazzo and mosaic, the flooring was executed by the firm of W.H. Burke &amp; Company. Both hard wearing and inflammable. All windows in the building were iron framed. Further iron shutters were used to close the arched entrance doors to the different galleries. The use of gas lighting in the Museum was restricted to certain areas, the Index Room this is now the North Hall located behind the staircase in the Main Hall, and the ground floor front galleries. When the lighting was in use the rest of the Museum would be isolated by lowering the iron shutters. Additionally the tops of the two towers flanking the main entrance housed large water tanks that supplied fire-hoses.

The heating and ventilation system drew fresh air and expelled stale air from vents in the four square pinnacles around the base of the octagons on top of the two towers in the centre of the facade and in a similar manner from the tops of the two pavilions at either end of the facade. The fresh air is brought into the galleries via vents around the tops of their walls. There are two slender northern towers in the middle of the back facade of the Museum that function in the same way for the single storey galleries. The north-east tower also housed the flue from the heating boiler located beneath the North Hall. The mechanical parts of the heating and ventilation systems was installed by Stevens &amp; Son.

In the 22 June 1878 issue of the Builder was the following review of the building:

===Eaton Hall===

The most important domestic building of Waterhouse&#x27;s career was Eaton Hall in Cheshire, built for the richest man in Britain Hugh Grosvenor, 1st Duke of Westminster. He was commissioned in 1869 and work was completed in 1883. This Gothic mansion was the most expensive domestic commission of the Victorian age by 1883 £740,550 (approx £85,100,000 in 2019). There was later expenditure on the buildings, in 1884-91 of £3,725 and in 1898-99 of £1,120 (in total approx £600,000 in 2019).

Waterhouse had to completely remodel and extended the current house. Work began with the new library wing to the south of the building, the library was 90 by 30 feet, followed by a new billiard room and wing containing bedrooms for bachelor guests to the north-west, new bedrooms were added above the existing state rooms, and a separate private wing built to the north-east, the stable yard behind the Chapel was built between 1877 and 1879. The large new Chapel with its 185-foot tall clock tower that also contains a carillon, is along with the stable court the only part of the building surviving. The house contained 190 rooms. The servants&#x27; wing contained a double-height kitchen that was 55 by 25 feet. Running through the building from the Library at the southern end to the chapel at the northern was a corridor 330 feet in length, at its southern end rose the Grand Staircase. Built from stone lined with granite columns and stone arches. The balustrade unusually for a staircase in a Waterhouse house, was also of stone. The corridor then opened out into the entrance hall and saloon, both rooms were heighten to two floors. Passing on through the new service wing, until it met the corridor linking the Chapel to the large new private wing. At roughly 100 feet square, this in itself was as large as a country house. The building incorporated the latest in Victorian technology. Although all the main rooms had fireplaces there is a central heating and ventilation system that was installed by G.N. Haden. There were goods lifts, thirty-three toilets and eight bathrooms. Initially gas was used for lighting and cooking, but electric light was installed in 1887. A narrow-gauge railway was laid in 1896 to link the Hall with the Great Western Railway sidings at Balderton, Cheshire.

Attached to the house to the north of the Chapel are the surviving stables, stretching over three hundred feet in length. These are formed around two courtyards, the larger with the stables proper and in its centre is a bronze statue of a rearing horse being restrained by a man, sculpted by Joseph Edgar Boehm. The stables have heated stalls. The arch in the north range, flanked by octagonal towers with conical roofs, leads into the second smaller courtyard. This is surrounded by the Carriage houses of red brick, plainer in style than the stables. The courtyard is roofed with a cast-iron and glass roof. There is also a riding hall. The buildings are of red brick with and half-timbered, a mixture of French gothic and Tudor style. Even the latches and hinges of the doors are of polished brass, these are some of the largest and most richly appointed country house stables of the Victorian period. 

The interiors were all remodelled using sumptuous and costly materials and furnishings, much use being made of various coloured marbles and alabaster in carved fireplaces, columns and other features, rich marble mosaic work on the floors, in the Library there was walnut panelling inlaid with boxwood and mother of pearl. The decoration of the interiors was the responsibility of many craftspeople: Heaton, Butler and Bayne designed both armorial stained-glass and six illustrating Alfred, Lord Tennyson&#x27;s Idylls of the King; Gertrude Jekyll designed the tapestry panels on the staircase, woven at the Royal School of Needlework; Henry Stacy Marks painted murals of the Pilgrims from The Canterbury Tales on the walls of the Saloon; decorative ceramic tiles were by William De Morgan; Farmer &amp; Brindley were responsible for the extensive carving inside and out in the building. Although the furniture in the house was largely that used in the previous building additional furniture and furnishings were provided by the firm of Best &amp; Lea.

The surviving Chapel&#x27;s decoration shows what was lost: the building consists of a five bay nave, the first bay of which has a stone screen supporting a gallery below the east window dividing it from the chapel forming the ante-chapel. There is a three bay chancel with an apse. The chapel is stone vaulted. The exterior of the Chapel as with the rest of the mansion, was mainly of Manley sandstone. The interior used Spinkwell, Waverton, red Mansfield and light red Runcorn stones, the vaulting is of Streetly and Minera stone. Frederic Shields designed the sixteen stained-glass windows in the Chapel, which were made by Heaton, Butler and Bayne, on the theme of the Te Deum and Shields also designed the accompanying mosaic decoration, that was executed by Jesse Rust; William Morris was consulted over the design of the mosaics, he recommended marble as opposed to glass mosaics; the iron work is probably by Francis Skidmore, the nave has an encaustic tile floor, the chancel has Cosmati style paving with porphyry and marble. Alabaster is used in the font, the low screen separating the chancel from the nave, the reredos and pulpit. The pews with seating for about one hundred people and the choir stalls are carved from walnut. The reredos was designed by William Morris and installed in 1893. Housed above the vestry that connects the Chapel to the clock tower, is the organ of 1881, designed by Charles Whiteley &amp; Co. The clock in the tower was by Messrs Gillett &amp; Co. the four faces being nine feet eight inches in diameter, the accompanying twenty-eight bells and carillon were by Van Aerschodt, the largest bell weighing fifty hundredweight. John Stainer composed tunes for the carillon. &quot;Building News&quot; magazine reviewed the water-colour perspective for the chapel in their May 1875 edition:

Waterhouse designed several of the buildings and lodges on the Eaton Hall estate, the rare for Waterhouse, use of the Neoclassical style in the Parrot House (1881–83), circular in plan, built of bright yellow terracotta supplied by J.C. Edwards (Ruabon) Ltd, the interior also of terracotta is decorated with griffins and caryatids, although heated it was never actually used as was intended to house parrots. Also in a classical style is the Temple (c.1880), of three arches flanked by Ionic columns, built to house an ancient Roman altar. He adapted the Golden Gates by the Davies brothers of Bersham, having Skidmores extend them at the sides and designed the two lodges (1880) flanking the gates, this used to face the main entrance to the Waterhouse mansion. The North Lodge (1881) to the Eaton Hall Estate was also Waterhouse&#x27;s, it is a four-storey round tower with a conical roof, in the style of late medieval French chateau.

====Gallery of Eaton Hall====
===National Liberal Club===


One of the Waterhouse&#x27;s significant public buildings in London is the National Liberal Club (1884–87) a Gentlemen&#x27;s club, it is a study in Renaissance composition. He himself belonged to the Liberal Party and his brother Theodore was solicitor to the club. It was built on a key site overlooking Whitehall Gardens and Victoria Embankment. The budget was a generous £200,000 (about £23,000,000 in 2019) of which £169,950 was spent on the building. The club members had decided they wanted the building in an Italian Classic style. The Builder magazine trying to describe in issue xlvii of 1885 the style of the building had this to say:

The site was on an awkward corner, being trapezoidal in shape. The design had to incorporate both several large rooms and the largest number of members&#x27; bedrooms in any London Club, well over a hundred. The building is clad in Portland stone at the insistence of the Crown Estate, owners of the land. The entrance hall leads to the main staircase, elliptical in plan, originally it was based on the Bramante Staircase in the Vatican, but damaged by bombing in World War II it was rebuilt as a cantilevered stair, though the marble balustrade is close to the original. The main staircase is at the centre of the building and the other rooms are designed around it. The lower flight leads down to the original double height Smoking Room that is entered from the basement, where the extensive wine cellars were. The Smoking Room has faience covered walls, Ionic columns and ceiling, easy to clean nicotine stains off, the ceilings in the rest of the building are plaster. The rest of the entrance level known as the lower ground floor is taken up with a reception lobby, cloak rooms, billiard room and other ancillary spaces. The next floor up, the upper ground floor, contains the Grill Room overlooking Whitehall Place, the main dining room overlooking the Embankment, the Writing Room that overlooks Northumberland Avenue, these are all double height rooms. The terrace outside the dining room runs the full length of the building and is above the former billiards room on the lower floor, this contained six full sized billiard tables. The main staircase rise to the first floor where it ends, this floor contains more public rooms, including the Reading Room overlooking the Embankment, with the Gladstone Library next door that overlooks Northumberland Avenue, the walls are lined by two levels of book cases the upper reached from a gallery running around the room, with an iron work balustrade. There used to be 35,000 books on the shelves, these were sold to the University of Bristol in 1975 and have been replaced by fake book spines.

The roof of the building is influenced by French Renaissance buildings such as Château de Chambord. Rising a total of seven floors including the rooms in the roof. The structure has external load-bearing stone walls, but with steelwork columns and beams internally. The steelwork was the most complex yet used in a London building, it enabled the lower floors with a series of large rooms, the dining room for instance is 110 feet long by 35 feet wide, to support the walls of the much smaller bedrooms. The building also incorporated other advanced features, the use of electric lighting, the provision of hydraulic lifts, and sewage disposal systems, the use of dropped ceilings in the main rooms allowed space for the ventilation system, the air for which was cleansed by high pressure water jets before being circulated through the rooms. Additionally the building had a large number of bathrooms and toilets. Much decorative use is made internally of faience of varying colours to clad columns and other features. The major rooms are all lined by rows of columns along their walls, each room having a slightly different style of column and colour of faience cladding. The original main staircase used a variety of different types of marbles for the balustrade and Tuscan columns that use to support it. Waterhouse also designed most of the furniture and furnishings.

Several contractors were involved in the building&#x27;s construction, the foundations were dug and laid by Henry Lovatt; general construction of the buildings superstructure was by William Southern; structural steel-work was installed by W.H. Lindsay; the fireproofing was installed by Dennett &amp; Ingle; the heating and ventilation system was designed and installed by W.W. Phipson and electric lighting was installed by the Edison and Swan Electric Light Company. When it came to the decoration and furnishing, the contractors involved were, the stone carving mainly on the exterior of the building was by Farmer and Brindley, and C. Smith; the faience decoration, used extensively internally, was manufactured by Wilcock &amp; Co.; the interior tiling was provided by Carter Johnson &amp; Co.; mosaic flooring was installed by J.F. Ebner &amp; Son; chimney-pieces were manufactured by the Hopton Wood Stone Co, with fire grates provided by D.O. Boyd; the decorative ironwork was forged by Hart, Son, Peard and Co.; the ornamental plaster-work was the work of G. Jackson; furniture and furnishings were manufactured by Morris &amp; Norton, W. James &amp; Co., Maple &amp; Co., who also provided the carpets for the building. The clerk of works for the building was Thomas Warburton. Since 1985 the Club has only used the Upper Ground Floor the rest of the building is now part of The Royal Horseguards Hotel.

===Prudential Assurance Company===

The Prudential Assurance Company founded in 1848, was growing rapidly by the 1870s, and adopted a policy of constructing custom-built offices with speculative office development Waterhouse&#x27;s first commission for the company were the headquarters building the first phase of Holborn Bars (1876–79) on the corner of Brooke Street (this phase was replaced in 1932) built on the site of Furnival&#x27;s Inn, initially the capacity was for 500 clerks. The building would expand in three more phases up to 1901 by which time it filled the entire block. Phase 2 (1885–88) extensions on Brooke Street and Greville Street, phase 3 (1895) the north range of the main courtyard, phase 4 (1897–1901) was the main entrance block along High Holburn, this contains the grand interiors that use Burmantoft&#x27;s faience the elaborate Directors&#x27; Staircase has mosaic and terrazzo floors, it leads to the first floor board room with elaborate wood panelling. This final phase resulted in a building with a footprint of 2.5 acres, and used 1,500 tons of steel framing provided by Handyside. The steel columns allowed open interiors. The columns were clad in faience. The most opulent of the offices were the Cashiers Office and Public Office located on the ground floor behind the main facade.

The cost of the phases were: phase 1 £144,940, phase 2 £20,455 plus £6,765 for alterations to the existing building; phases 3 &amp; 4 £150,155, (in total approx £37,000,000 in 2019). The contractors for the building work were Holland &amp; Hannen; structural steel work by J.S. Bergheim; heating and ventilation by W.W. Phipson &amp; D.O. Boyd; the terracotta was manufactured by Gibbs &amp; Canning; granite stonework was laid by Farmer &amp; Brindley, who in conjunction with F. W. Pomeroy, also provided the models for the terracotta decoration, namely the frieze of cherubs that runs around the building below the first floor windows and the decoration and statue over the entrance arch; ceramic tiles by W.B. Simpson; the decorative faience tiles were by Burmantofts, used in the entrance halls, on the main staircase and in the offices used by members of the public; the chimney-pieces were provided by W.H. Burks; internal decoration was by L. Liberty &amp; Co.; furniture and fittings were manufactured by H, Capel, Glouster Wagon Company, and Maple &amp; Co.; decorative ironwork was manufactured by Hart Son Peard &amp; Co. &quot;The Building News&quot; of 8 April 1878 described the new building:


Between 1876 and 1901 he would go onto design buildings for the Prudential not just their headquarters but a further twenty-one offices at towns and cities throughout Britain, Paul Waterhouse would design further buildings for the company after his father retired. The sites for the buildings were often awkward and hemmed in, but had to include a large public office, space for the clerks and separate offices for the managers. The public offices and managers rooms were normally at the front of the buildings on the ground floor. The buildings also had separate chambers that were leased to other businesses, for example the Leeds office had twenty different occupiers. An early restaurant chain Ye Mecca leased basement space in the Prudential buildings at Nottingham, Leeds and Birmingham. The buildings were built to a standard form, with polished grey granite base, most are built from hard red terracotta and brick, Newcastle and Glasgow use stone and brick. while Edinburgh and Dundee use stone. Leeds used light coloured terracotta and red brick. All the buildings had elaborate roofs with gables and many have towers or turrets. The interiors have typical faience clad walls and columns in the public offices and managers offices. The statue of Prudence above the main entrance to the Nottingham building was modelled by F.W. Pomeroy. The bright red terracotta used on many of the regional buildings was manufactured by J.C. Edwards of Ruabon.

This is a chronological list of Prudential Offices outside London designed by Waterhouse:
* Liverpool, Dale Street, (1885–88) cost £15,360, was extended in 1904-06 by Paul Waterhouse
* Manchester, King Street, (1886–89, the gables and roof have been removed and replaced by a plain parapet and a recessed top floor) cost £8,230
* Portsmouth, Guildhall Walk. (1886–93) cost £20,356
* Glasgow, corner of Renfield Street and West Regent Street, (1888–93) cost £30,040
* Birmingham (1889–92, demolished) alterations (1895–96), cost £16,390 and £625
* Bolton, corner of Nelson Square and Bradshawgate, (1889), cost unknown (the ground floor has been redesigned to serve as a shop, and the roofline has been simplified)
* Leeds, Park Row, (1890–94) alterations (1895), cost £44,785 and £790
* Cardiff, Saint Mary Street, (1891–94) alterations (1895), cost £8,375 and £100 (the ground floor has been completely redesigned to serve as a shop)
* Newcastle, Mosley Street, (1891–97) alterations (1898–1900) cost £37,155 and £1,090
* Leicester (1892–96, demolished), cost unknown
* Bradford, Ivegate, (1893–96) cost £19,070
* Nottingham, junction of Queen Street and King Street (1893–98) cost £28,730
* Dundee, Meadowside, (1895–98) cost £15,475
* Edinburgh, Saint Andrew&#x27;s Square, (1895–99) cost £31,155
* Sheffield, Pinstone Street, (1895–98) cost £20,820
* Oldham, Union Street, (1898) cost £20,225
* Bristol, Clare Street, (1899–1901) cost £15,000
* Huddersfield, corner of New Street and Ramsden Street, (1899–1901) £7,995 (the ground floor has been completely redesigned to serve as a shop)
* Plymouth (1899–1903, demolished during post-war rebuilding of the city centre) cost £7,500
* Hull, Queen Victoria Street, (1901–03, destroyed in World War II) cost £24,525
* Southampton, Above Bar Street, (1901–04) cost £21,815.

In 1901 Waterhouse designed Staple Inn Buildings on High Holburn, for the Prudential, it is nearly opposite Holburn Bars. Built as extra chambers for the Company. Waterhouse wanted to use buff terracotta as more sympathetic to Staple Inn next door, but the Company insisted that he stick with the house style of red brick and terracotta. The roof is of slate. Its five floors high, plus rooms in the attic. Built by Holland &amp; Hannen at a cost of £29,305.

After Waterhouse announced his retirement, the board of the Prudential wrote to Paul Waterhouse to say:

===Building restoration===

Building restoration, though never a major part of his work, Waterhouse was occasionally commissioned to restore buildings.

Heythrop Park, Oxfordshire, originally built (1706–13) designed by Thomas Archer, was gutted by fire in 1831. The restoration 1871-77 for Albert Brassey, left the exterior virtually as built, Waterhouse was freer with the reconstruction of the interiors of the house. Though using the original English Baroque style. The major interior is the saloon, in the style of John Vanbrugh, stone-walled, rising through two floors, with a stone staircase rising behind an arcade. Above the large stone chimneypiece are three stained glass windows by Morris &amp; Co. of Faith, Hope and Charity (1877). He also designed the stables, the walled garden, a lodge, and cottages. The builders were William Cubitt and Company; the heating and ventilation was by D.O. Boyd; stone carving internally and externally was by Farmer &amp; Brindly; decorative ceramic tiles were designed by J.M. Akllen, W. Godwin and William De Morgan; apart from Morris &amp; Co., stained glass was also made by Edmundson &amp; Sons and F.T. Odell; the chimneypieces were made by W.H. Burke &amp; Co.; decorative iron work was by Hart Son Peard &amp; Co. and R. Jones; plaster-work was executed by G. Jackson. The total cost was £153,000 (approx £16,800,000 in 2019).

Between 1887 and 1891 he restored St Ann&#x27;s Church, Manchester, completed 1712. The Baroque style north door is probably by him. Internally he panelled the apse, a platform was created to support a new altar and reredos. The carved cherubs and swags were copied from the contemporary to the church, work of Grinling Gibbons in the choir of St Paul&#x27;s Cathedral. He also rebuilt three galleries supported by Tuscan columns. Plus he added the north and south vestries. He commissioned stained glass designs from Frederic Shields. It was made by Heaton, Butler &amp; Bayne. The general contractor for the building work was William Southern; marble work was by J. &amp; H. Patterson; fixtures, fittings and furnishings were made by Doveston, Davey and Hull &amp; Co.; decorative iron work was made by Hart Son Peard &amp; Co. The cost was £3,100 with further work in 1896 at £445 and in 1901 at £205.

The Prudential Assurance Company acquired Staple Inn that is sited nearly opposite their Holburn Bars headquarters. They paid £68,000 for it in November 1886. In early December Waterhouse was asked to survey the building and come with a proposal to repair the Inn, while preserving its character. Work commenced in 1887, the plaster that had hidden the half-timbering since the 1660s was stripped off, and the sash windows replaced with wooden mullioned windows more appropriate for an Elizabethan building built 1586. The Society for the Protection of Ancient Buildings attempted to stop this, but failed. Internally the only major change was the insertion of five tie rods into the roof of the Hall. The builders for the work were Holland, Hannen &amp; Cubitts; heating was by W.W. Phipson and D.O. Boyd, with the iron work in the hall by Hart Son Peard &amp; Co. The work cost £9,900.

==Personal life and family==
In 1860 Waterhouse married Elizabeth Hodgkin (1834–1918), who was also a Quaker, daughter of John Hodgkin and sister of the historian Thomas Hodgkin, who was a school friend of Waterhouse. Elizabeth was herself the author of several books, including a collection of verse and some anthologies. Her best known work was &quot;The Island of Anarchy&quot;, a 
Utopian story set in the late 20th century, first published in 1887 and more recently re-published by the Reading-based Two Rivers Press. Elizabeth was also an accomplished water-colourist and she and Alfred would often paint together, also she produced designs for embroidery and copper and brass ware in the style of the Arts and Crafts movement. Elizabeth also organised between 1890 and 1914 evening craft classes in Yattendon. She also arranged amateur theatricals at home.

The eldest of the five children the couple had was Paul Waterhouse (1861–1924), after being educated at Eton College and taking a degree in Classics at Balliol College, Oxford he would follow his father&#x27;s profession joining the practice in 1884, his father made him a partner in 1891. Paul&#x27;s son Michael Theodore Waterhouse (1888–1968) would also become an architect. In turn Michael&#x27;s son David Barclay Waterhouse (1921–1998) was the fourth generation to follow the profession retiring in 1989.

Alfred&#x27;s and Elizabeth&#x27;s other children were: the pianist (Mary) Monica Waterhouse (1863–1949) who married Robert Bridges in 1884; Florence Eliot Waterhouse (1866–1953); Alfred Maurine Waterhouse (1868-c.1881) and Amyas Theodore Waterhouse (1872–1956).

In 1877 Alfred, Elizabeth and Paul changed their faith, all were baptised into the Church of England, the four younger children were baptised a few months later.

Alfred&#x27;s great-granddaughter Prudence Waterhouse (daughter of Michael), also an architect, was joint author with architectural historian Colin Cunningham of &quot;Alfred Waterhouse 1830–1905 Biography of a Practice&quot; published in 1992 by Oxford University Press.

Waterhouse designed his own house in 1860, Barcombe Cottage, Fallowfield, Manchester. The purchase of 8 (now 61) New Cavendish Street, Marylebone, London, a late eighteenth-century Georgian terraced house was negotiated in the autumn of 1864, preparatory to his relocating in 1865 to London. Waterhouse went on to design the Gothic Foxhill House (1867–68), Reading, as the family&#x27;s first country residence. The site was next door to his parents&#x27; house, Whiteknights House. In 1877 he built the even grander Yattendon Court near Yattendon for £11,865 (approximately £1,400,000 in 2019). Waterhouse&#x27;s grandson sold Yattendon Court to Edward Iliffe, 1st Baron Iliffe, and it was demolished and replaced by the current house in 1926. After moving to Yattendon Waterhouse sold Foxhill. In the village of Yatton Waterhouse designed and paid for several buildings: a Reading Room and caretaker&#x27;s cottage (1877) cost £570; several cottages, village shop and farm buildings (c.1878–1900); alterations to the parish church including a new porch, vestry, new altar and organ, and partial rebuilding of the tower (1881) cost £370; a new village school (1885–86) for £2,077. 
Friends of Alfred and Elizabeth who regularly stayed at Yattendon included Hamo Thornycroft and Edmund Gosse; they also let the old manor house at Yattendon to their future son-in-law Robert Bridges. In the spring each year the Waterhouses held regular Thursday night dinners at their London house in New Cavendish Street. Guests included Hamo Thornycroft, his sister Theresa Thornycroft, Edmund Gosse, Frank Dicksee, Lawrence Alma-Tadema, Ford Madox Brown, Mary Augusta Ward, Benjamin Jowett, James Bryce, 1st Viscount Bryce and his sister Julia Gaskell. Alfred was a friend of fellow architects Richard Norman Shaw and William Burges. In 1861 Shaw designed a wooden cradle for the newly born Paul Waterhouse. It is now in the V&amp;A Museum. He had been a guest of the Foreign Architectural Book Society, founded in 1859, it was restricted to fifteen members, so it was only on the death of Burges in 1881 that Waterhouse could join. Other members included William Eden Nesfield, John Norton, Arthur Blomfield, John Loughborough Pearson &amp; George Devey.

Hamo Thornycroft spent the Christmas of 1882 at Yattendon, on 23 December he wrote to his future wife Agatha Cox:

In 1865 Waterhouse took a three week holiday in the Loire Valley, from which forty of his sketches survive. In the spring of 1870 the family holidayed in Italy, followed by winter holidays in Rome during 1873 and 1874. Often during August the family would take an Alpine holiday. Other foreign trips included in 1884 Sicily, Norway in 1886 and in 1890 Spain.
Waterhouse suffered a stroke in 1901, leading to his retirement from architecture in 1902, having practised in partnership with his son, Paul Waterhouse, from 1891, his son took over the practice. He died at Yattendon Court on 22 August 1905. The &quot;Building News&#x27;s&quot; obituary described Alfred as &quot;genial, cheery, and yet modest and unassuming demeanor&quot; which had &quot;won him a wide circle of friends within and without the profession&quot;.

==Recognition and professional life==
Waterhouse became a fellow of the Royal Institute of British Architects in 1861, and was president from 1888 to 1891. Waterhouse&#x27;s presidential address included the following:

He was awarded a rappel to the grand prix for architecture at the Paris Exposition of 1867. In 1878 he received the Royal Gold Medal of the Royal Institute of British Architects. Waterhouse first exhibited one of his designs at the Royal Academy of Arts in 1857, and then from 1868 to 1901 with the exception of 1873 he exhibited mainly designs of his own buildings annually. But in later years he sometimes exhibited topographical views from both his British and European travels. Waterhouse was made an associate of the Royal Academy on 16 January 1878, of which body he became a full member on 4 June 1885. His diploma piece is an 1887 pen and ink drawing with colour washes, a perspective of the main facade of Manchester Town Hall and he was the Royal Academy&#x27;s treasurer from 17 November 1897 to 5 December 1901. He was also a member of the academies of Vienna (1869), Brussels (1886), Antwerp (1887), Milan (1888) and Berlin(1889), and a corresponding member of the Institut de France (1893). In 1895 Victoria University of Manchester, made Waterhouse an LL.D.

Starting in 1864 with Congleton Town Hall won by Edward William Godwin, he was constantly called upon to act as assessor in architectural competitions. By the time of the last competition he assessed in 1899 for Cartwright Hall, Bradford won by John William Simpson and E.J. Milner Allen, a total of sixty. The more notable include: Plymouth Guildhall selected 1869 the design by Edward William Godwin; Barrow-in-Furness Town Hall 1877, selected the design by William Henry Lynn; Victoria Law Courts, Birmingham 1886, selected the design by Ingress Bell and Aston Webb; He was a member of the international jury appointed to adjudicate on the designs for the west front of Milan Cathedral in 1887; Sheffield Town Hall 1889 design by Edward William Mountford; The Victoria and Albert Museum, then known as the South Kensington Museum 1891 selected the design by Aston Webb; Belfast City Hall 1896 design by Brumwell Thomas and City Hall, Cardiff 1897 by Lanchester, Rickards and Stewart.

Architects who received their training in Waterhouse&#x27;s office included: George Tunstal Redmayne (1840–1912) articled (1859–63) who married Waterhouse&#x27;s sister Katherine in 1870; Issac Steane d.1908. articled (1863–72); William Edward Willink (1856–1924) articled 1873; Winter Hargreaves Raffles (b.1862 or 63) articled (1883–87); Paul Waterhouse articled (1884–87); Frank Albert Whitwell (1871–1943) articled 1891.

In 1887 &quot;Building News&quot; magazine ran a poll of who was considered Britain&#x27;s leading living architect. Waterhouse received over ninety percent of the votes.

In 1890 he served as architectural member of the Royal Commission on the proposed enlargement of Westminster Abbey as a place of burial.

The JD Wetherspoon pub on Princess Street, Manchester, is named &quot;The Waterhouse&quot; after Alfred Waterhouse.

==List of architectural work==
The names of the buildings and the names of the county they are located in, both in the lists and gallery, are those in use when Waterhouse designed the buildings.

*List of ecclesiastical works by Alfred Waterhouse
*List of domestic works by Alfred Waterhouse
*List of educational buildings by Alfred Waterhouse
*List of commercial buildings by Alfred Waterhouse
*List of public and civic buildings by Alfred Waterhouse

==See also==
*Architectural terracotta
*Burmantofts Pottery

== References ==
== External links ==
* Photograph of Backhouse Bank, High Row, Darlington
* Photograph of The Town Clock, Darlington
* Waterhouse images from the NHM picture library
* Waterhouse - the firm of architects still survives today
* St Mary&#x27;s Church, Twyford 
* Profile on Royal Academy of Arts Collections
*http://www.scottisharchitects.org.uk/building_full.php?id=413336
*Manchester Victorian Architects</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q339830" start="0" end="17" title="Alfred Waterhouse" label="Alfred Waterhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q42973" start="65" end="74" title="architect" label="architect"/>
<link wikidata="Q186363" start="105" end="132" title="Gothic Revival architecture" label="Gothic Revival architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2578415" start="242" end="262" title="Manchester Town Hall" label="Manchester Town Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q309388" start="271" end="293" title="Natural History Museum, London" label="Natural History Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="297" end="303" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="377" end="389" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q24826" start="701" end="710" title="Liverpool" label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q18125" start="712" end="722" title="Manchester" label="Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q39121" start="727" end="732" title="Leeds" label="Leeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q186363" start="1733" end="1743" title="Gothic Revival architecture" label="Neo-Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q502163" start="1745" end="1764" title="Renaissance Revival architecture" label="Renaissance revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q744373" start="1769" end="1787" title="Romanesque revival architecture" label="Romanesque revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q2479493" start="1876" end="1887" title="Eclecticism in architecture" label="eclecticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7851317" start="1947" end="1960" title="Tudor Revival architecture" label="Tudor revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q6119627" start="1962" end="1972" title="Jacobethan" label="Jacobethan"/>
<link wikidata="Q615196" start="1974" end="1984" title="Italianate architecture" label="Italianate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3476363" start="2023" end="2053" title="Scottish baronial architecture" label="Scottish baronial architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q911397" start="2055" end="2070" title="Baroque Revival architecture" label="Baroque Revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q529819" start="2072" end="2101" title="Queen Anne style architecture" label="Queen Anne style architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q54111" start="2106" end="2131" title="Neoclassical architecture" label="Neoclassical architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q209671" start="2412" end="2419" title="faience" label="faience"/>
<link wikidata="Q5175771" start="3116" end="3128" title="cottonopolis" label="cottonopolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q503375" start="3466" end="3475" title="Tottenham" label="Tottenham"/>
<link wikidata="Q170208" start="3482" end="3489" title="Religious Society of Friends" label="Quakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4696833" start="3686" end="3694" title="Aigburth" label="Aigburth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5346906" start="3748" end="3764" title="Edwin Waterhouse" label="Edwin Waterhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q488048" start="3862" end="3884" title="PriceWaterhouseCoopers" label="PriceWaterhouseCoopers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7782094" start="3900" end="3919" title="Theodore Waterhouse" label="Theodore Waterhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q5446905" start="3991" end="4018" title="Field Fisher Waterhouse LLP" label="Field Fisher Waterhouse LLP"/>
<link wikidata="Q23311" start="4026" end="4040" title="City of London" label="City of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q5611413" start="4087" end="4105" title="Grove House School" label="Grove House School"/>
<link wikidata="Q503375" start="4109" end="4118" title="Tottenham" label="Tottenham"/>
<link wikidata="Q6519777" start="4136" end="4156" title="Leighton Park School" label="Leighton Park School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7327245" start="4208" end="4220" title="Richard Lane (architect)" label="Richard Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q18125" start="4224" end="4234" title="Manchester" label="Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q5730222" start="4434" end="4454" title="Henry William Inwood" label="Henry William Inwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q455155" start="4644" end="4666" title="William Chambers (architect)" label="William Chamber&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q5497260" start="4750" end="4773" title="Frederick Apthorp Paley" label="Frederick Apthorp Paley"/>
<link wikidata="Q179126" start="4971" end="4982" title="John Ruskin" label="John Ruskin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7766650" start="4996" end="5016" title="The Stones of Venice (book)" label="The Stones of Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q313288" start="5034" end="5048" title="Augustus Pugin" label="Augustus Pugin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2224305" start="5207" end="5223" title="Frederic Shields" label="Frederic Shields"/>
<link wikidata="Q4722514" start="5228" end="5245" title="Alfred Darbyshire" label="Alfred Darbyshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3990642" start="5305" end="5319" title="Thomas Hodgkin (historian)" label="Thomas Hodgkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q179126" start="5389" end="5395" title="John Ruskin" label="Ruskin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="5490" end="5501" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q183557" start="5549" end="5555" title="Dieppe" label="Dieppe"/>
<link wikidata="Q30974" start="5573" end="5578" title="Rouen" label="Rouen"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="5585" end="5590" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q7003" start="5614" end="5619" title="Dijon" label="Dijon"/>
<link wikidata="Q187834" start="5629" end="5634" title="Saône" label="Saône"/>
<link wikidata="Q456" start="5638" end="5643" title="Lyons" label="Lyons"/>
<link wikidata="Q42807" start="5656" end="5661" title="Nîmes" label="Nîmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q48292" start="5663" end="5668" title="Arles" label="Arles"/>
<link wikidata="Q187796" start="5673" end="5679" title="Orange, Vaucluse" label="Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q180709" start="5706" end="5723" title="Grande Chartreuse" label="Grande Chartreuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216" start="5738" end="5746" title="Piedmont" label="Piedmont"/>
<link wikidata="Q10311" start="5750" end="5754" title="Susa, Piedmont" label="Susa"/>
<link wikidata="Q495" start="5759" end="5764" title="Turin" label="Turin"/>
<link wikidata="Q623424" start="5787" end="5808" title="Great St Bernard Pass" label="Great St Bernard Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="5829" end="5840" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q78" start="5845" end="5850" title="Basel" label="Basel"/>
<link wikidata="Q174054" start="6190" end="6201" title="Isola Bella (Lago Maggiore)" label="Isola Bella"/>
<link wikidata="Q654443" start="6203" end="6219" title="Certosa di Pavia" label="Certosa di Pavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q490" start="6221" end="6226" title="Milan" label="Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q628" start="6228" end="6235" title="Bergamo" label="Bergamo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6252" start="6237" end="6242" title="Monza" label="Monza"/>
<link wikidata="Q641" start="6247" end="6253" title="Venice" label="Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q189883" start="6318" end="6336" title="Doge&amp;#x27;s Palace" label="Doge&amp;#x27;s Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q172988" start="6341" end="6364" title="St Mark&amp;#x27;s Basilica" label="St Mark&amp;#x27;s Basilica"/>
<link wikidata="Q617" start="6388" end="6393" title="Padua" label="Padua"/>
<link wikidata="Q6537" start="6395" end="6402" title="Vicenza" label="Vicenza"/>
<link wikidata="Q2028" start="6407" end="6413" title="Verona" label="Verona"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044" start="6453" end="6461" title="Florence" label="Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140023" start="6497" end="6520" title="Giotto&amp;#x27;s Campanile" label="Giotto&amp;#x27;s Campanile"/>
<link wikidata="Q2751" start="6564" end="6569" title="Siena" label="Siena"/>
<link wikidata="Q82670" start="6571" end="6578" title="Fiesole" label="Fiesole"/>
<link wikidata="Q13373" start="6580" end="6585" title="Lucca" label="Lucca"/>
<link wikidata="Q13375" start="6590" end="6594" title="Pisa" label="Pisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634" start="6598" end="6604" title="Naples" label="Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="6697" end="6701" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q6602" start="6841" end="6851" title="Strasbourg" label="Strasbourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q3797591" start="7734" end="7752" title="Ince in Makerfield" label="Ince in Makerfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="7910" end="7927" title="Church of England" label="Church of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="7957" end="7971" title="Roman Catholic" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144064" start="7976" end="7990" title="Nonconformist (Protestantism)" label="Non-conformist"/>
<link wikidata="Q136693" start="7995" end="8007" title="Norman architecture" label="Norman style"/>
<link wikidata="Q189883" start="8299" end="8317" title="Doges Palace" label="Doge&amp;#x27;s Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q305076" start="8425" end="8434" title="Droylsden" label="Droylsden"/>
<link wikidata="Q6804572" start="8561" end="8586" title="Mechanics&amp;#x27; Institutes" label="Mechanics&amp;#x27; Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q863832" start="8615" end="8622" title="Bingley" label="Bingley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077003" start="9289" end="9297" title="Nantwich" label="Nantwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022733" start="9564" end="9568" title="Sale, Greater Manchester" label="Sale"/>
<link wikidata="Q11710000" start="9603" end="9619" title="Hollington, Staffordshire" label="Hollington stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062789" start="9852" end="9873" title="Congregational church" label="Congregational church"/>
<link wikidata="Q2845996" start="9875" end="9882" title="Ancoats" label="Ancoats"/>
<link wikidata="Q2356650" start="9906" end="9914" title="Rusholme" label="Rusholme"/>
<link wikidata="Q4896441" start="9942" end="9970" title="Besses o&amp;#x27; th&amp;#x27; Barn" label="Besses o&amp;#x27; th&amp;#x27; Barn"/>
<link wikidata="Q213181" start="10231" end="10241" title="Darlington" label="Darlington"/>
<link wikidata="Q4839667" start="10311" end="10332" title="Backhouse&amp;#x27;s Bank" label="Backhouse&amp;#x27;s Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q245343" start="10350" end="10363" title="Barclays Bank" label="Barclays Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q213181" start="10368" end="10378" title="Darlington" label="Darlington"/>
<link wikidata="Q9295065" start="10508" end="10524" title="Hurworth-on-Tees" label="Hurworth-on-Tees"/>
<link wikidata="Q7528199" start="10550" end="10562" title="Sir Joseph Pease, 1st Baronet" label="Joseph Pease"/>
<link wikidata="Q105038387" start="10897" end="10909" title="Victorian Turkish baths" label="Turkish bath"/>
<link wikidata="Q213181" start="10980" end="10990" title="Darlington" label="Darlington"/>
<link wikidata="Q483269" start="11080" end="11089" title="cast iron" label="cast iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048610" start="11713" end="11735" title="Edward Middleton Barry" label="Edward Middleton Barry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5196764" start="11737" end="11754" title="Cuthbert Brodrick" label="Cuthbert Brodrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374863" start="11773" end="11792" title="Richard Norman Shaw" label="Richard Norman Shaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q8008378" start="11797" end="11818" title="William Eden Nesfield" label="William Eden Nesfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q5342057" start="11820" end="11839" title="Edward Buckton Lamb" label="Edward Buckton Lamb"/>
<link wikidata="Q7795316" start="11841" end="11859" title="Thomas Worthington (architect)" label="Thomas Worthington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131981" start="11879" end="11891" title="Thomas Allom" label="Thomas Allom"/>
<link wikidata="Q176483" start="12153" end="12159" title="Gothic architecture" label="Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q179126" start="12284" end="12295" title="John Ruskin" label="John Ruskin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7919731" start="12313" end="12341" title="Venetian Gothic architecture" label="Venetian Gothic architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2655922" start="12352" end="12370" title="John Gregory Crace (designer)" label="John Gregory Crace"/>
<link wikidata="Q7071961" start="12484" end="12506" title="O&amp;#x27;Shea and Whelan" label="O&amp;#x27;Shea and Whelan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2280558" start="12858" end="12872" title="Thomas Woolner" label="Thomas Woolner"/>
<link wikidata="Q6502615" start="12984" end="13004" title="Lavers, Barraud and Westlake" label="Lavers &amp;amp; Barraud"/>
<link wikidata="Q6869688" start="13163" end="13179" title="Mintons" label="Minton &amp;amp; Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q5757358" start="13483" end="13504" title="High Victorian Gothic" label="High Victorian Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q50008" start="13552" end="13561" title="The Times" label="The Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q5077219" start="13823" end="13839" title="Charles Eastlake" label="Charles Eastlake"/>
<link wikidata="Q4986440" start="13925" end="13932" title="Building (magazine)" label="Builder"/>
<link wikidata="Q2673742" start="13973" end="13991" title="The Ecclesiologist" label="The Ecclesiologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1504639" start="14350" end="14371" title="HM Prison Pentonville" label="HM Prison Pentonville"/>
<link wikidata="Q6289944" start="14409" end="14420" title="Joshua Jebb" label="Joshua Jebb"/>
<link wikidata="Q16983391" start="15171" end="15197" title="Hart, Son, Peard and Co." label="Hart, Son, Peard &amp;amp; Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q609835" start="15720" end="15743" title="Royal Courts of Justice" label="Royal Courts of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q6235258" start="15976" end="15987" title="John Gibson (architect)" label="John Gibson"/>
<link wikidata="Q186265" start="16028" end="16042" title="William Burges" label="William Burges"/>
<link wikidata="Q681007" start="16044" end="16064" title="George Gilbert Scott" label="George Gilbert Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q6253111" start="16066" end="16085" title="John Pollard Seddon" label="John Pollard Seddon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048610" start="16087" end="16109" title="Edward Middleton Barry" label="Edward Middleton Barry"/>
<link wikidata="Q6254264" start="16185" end="16215" title="John Raphael Rodrigues Brandon" label="John Raphael Rodrigues Brandon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5721553" start="16217" end="16239" title="Henry Francis Lockwood" label="Henry Francis Lockwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q7788918" start="16241" end="16253" title="Thomas Deane" label="Thomas Deane"/>
<link wikidata="Q5538851" start="16278" end="16298" title="George Edmund Street" label="George Edmund Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q213142" start="17884" end="17892" title="shilling" label="shilling"/>
<link wikidata="Q422321" start="19421" end="19430" title="Blueprint" label="Blueprint"/>
<link wikidata="Q2067634" start="19509" end="19526" title="quantity surveyor" label="quantity surveyor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5131886" start="19679" end="19693" title="clerk of works" label="clerk of works"/>
<link wikidata="Q289612" start="19830" end="19850" title="General contractor" label="Building contractors"/>
<link wikidata="Q6502615" start="20416" end="20444" title="Lavers, Barraud and Westlake" label="Lavers, Barraud and Westlake"/>
<link wikidata="Q5130369" start="20470" end="20486" title="Clayton and Bell" label="Clayton and Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5694399" start="20548" end="20572" title="Heaton, Butler and Bayne" label="Heaton, Butler and Bayne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2224305" start="20574" end="20590" title="Frederic Shields" label="Frederic Shields"/>
<link wikidata="Q5656248" start="20709" end="20726" title="Hardman &amp;amp; Co." label="Hardman &amp;amp; Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q6869688" start="20785" end="20792" title="Mintons" label="Mintons"/>
<link wikidata="Q20746242" start="20796" end="20808" title="Maw &amp;amp; Co" label="Maw &amp;amp; Co"/>
<link wikidata="Q5182737" start="20847" end="20861" title="Craven Dunnill" label="Craven Dunnill"/>
<link wikidata="Q23891187" start="20895" end="20910" title="Maple &amp;amp; Co." label="Maple &amp;amp; Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q3237793" start="20915" end="20929" title="Liberty (department store)" label="Liberty&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q5482457" start="21035" end="21051" title="Francis Skidmore" label="Francis Skidmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q16983391" start="21160" end="21184" title="Hart, Son, Peard and Co." label="Hart, Son, Peard and Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q7789221" start="21588" end="21599" title="Thomas Earp (sculptor)" label="Thomas Earp"/>
<link wikidata="Q5435704" start="21726" end="21747" title="Farmer &amp;amp; Brindley" label="Farmer &amp;amp; Brindley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290155" start="21864" end="21885" title="West Norwood Cemetery" label="West Norwood Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q7750163" start="22486" end="22507" title="The Manchester Murals" label="The Manchester Murals"/>
<link wikidata="Q319843" start="22520" end="22536" title="Ford Madox Brown" label="Ford Madox Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067943" start="22629" end="22666" title="Royal Institute of British Architects" label="Royal Institute of British Architects"/>
<link wikidata="Q213322" start="22725" end="22751" title="Victoria and Albert Museum" label="Victoria and Albert Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q213686" start="23905" end="23911" title="Blackletter" label="Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q215194" start="25581" end="25589" title="gargoyle" label="gargoyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q942787" start="25633" end="25640" title="lunette" label="lunette"/>
<link wikidata="Q244556" start="25643" end="25651" title="spandrel" label="spandrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5558977" start="25794" end="25811" title="Gibbs and Canning" label="Gibbs and Canning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1505035" start="25961" end="25981" title="Public Record Office" label="Public Record Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q213322" start="26032" end="26058" title="Victoria and Albert Museum" label="Victoria and Albert Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q6747500" start="26102" end="26135" title="Manchester School of Architecture" label="Manchester School of Architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q805285" start="26224" end="26247" title="Balliol College, Oxford" label="Balliol College, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067943" start="26769" end="26806" title="Royal Institute of British Architects" label="Royal Institute of British Architects"/>
<link wikidata="Q60424" start="26952" end="26962" title="terracotta" label="terracotta"/>
<link wikidata="Q209671" start="26967" end="26974" title="faience" label="faience"/>
<link wikidata="Q131123" start="27050" end="27063" title="air pollution" label="air pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q17361852" start="27296" end="27308" title="Holborn Bars" label="Holborn Bars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770481" start="27371" end="27377" title="Ruabon" label="Ruabon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4999371" start="27840" end="27859" title="Burmantofts Pottery" label="Burmantofts Pottery"/>
<link wikidata="Q483269" start="28388" end="28397" title="cast iron" label="cast iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q2415397" start="28799" end="28827" title="Andrew Handyside and Company" label="Andrew Handyside and Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q860451" start="28940" end="28952" title="wrought iron" label="wrought iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q40089" start="29107" end="29112" title="brick" label="brick"/>
<link wikidata="Q4965964" start="29149" end="29158" title="Brick tax" label="Brick tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q183127" start="29268" end="29278" title="polychrome" label="polychrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q918336" start="29314" end="29323" title="diapering" label="diapering"/>
<link wikidata="Q207079" start="29547" end="29552" title="slate" label="slate"/>
<link wikidata="Q8063" start="29610" end="29615" title="stone" label="stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q270920" start="29662" end="29682" title="Royal Academy of Art" label="Royal Academy of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204575" start="29924" end="29936" title="Plenum space" label="Plenum space"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326621" start="30029" end="30043" title="electric light" label="electric light"/>
<link wikidata="Q856548" start="30055" end="30067" title="gas lighting" label="gas lighting"/>
<link wikidata="Q132911" start="30121" end="30126" title="Elevator" label="lifts"/>
<link wikidata="Q4327778" start="31391" end="31407" title="fireplace mantel" label="fireplace mantel"/>
<link wikidata="Q191709" start="32040" end="32048" title="gasolier" label="gasolier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334655" start="32194" end="32202" title="terrazzo" label="terrazzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q133067" start="32206" end="32212" title="mosaic" label="mosaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5057374" start="32312" end="32324" title="ceiling rose" label="ceiling rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q5694399" start="32952" end="32976" title="Heaton, Butler and Bayne" label="Heaton, Butler and Bayne"/>
<link wikidata="Q7592459" start="33075" end="33107" title="St Ann&amp;#x27;s Church, Manchester" label="St Ann&amp;#x27;s Church, Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q502163" start="33633" end="33665" title="Renaissance Revival architecture" label="Renaissance Revival architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q801113" start="33701" end="33738" title="Liverpool Lime Street railway station" label="Liverpool Lime Street railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q65072808" start="33985" end="33994" title="Tourelle (architecture)" label="tourelles"/>
<link wikidata="Q131491" start="34748" end="34756" title="Brighton" label="Brighton"/>
<link wikidata="Q16976236" start="36360" end="36382" title="John Warner &amp;amp; Sons" label="John Warner &amp;amp; Sons"/>
<link wikidata="Q26658900" start="36445" end="36464" title="Knutsford Town Hall" label="Knutsford Town Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q8008502" start="36511" end="36545" title="William Egerton, 1st Baron Egerton" label="William Egerton, 1st Baron Egerton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4808723" start="36624" end="36638" title="Assembly Rooms" label="Assembly Rooms"/>
<link wikidata="Q2258000" start="37182" end="37194" title="assize court" label="assize court"/>
<link wikidata="Q5297202" start="37791" end="37805" title="door furniture" label="door furniture"/>
<link wikidata="Q208143" start="37831" end="37836" title="Wigan" label="Wigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7851317" start="37895" end="37900" title="Tudor Revival architecture" label="Tudor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5598249" start="39301" end="39317" title="Gray and Davison" label="Gray and Davison"/>
<link wikidata="Q2338601" start="39500" end="39511" title="Darley Dale" label="Darley Dale"/>
<link wikidata="Q6119627" start="39530" end="39540" title="Jacobethan" label="Jacobethan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7300575" start="40241" end="40260" title="Reading Town Hall" label="Municipal Buildings"/>
<link wikidata="Q505174" start="40373" end="40381" title="carillon" label="carillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7406939" start="41557" end="41565" title="Salviati (glassmakers)" label="Salviati"/>
<link wikidata="Q326432" start="41725" end="41737" title="Henry Willis" label="Henry Willis"/>
<link wikidata="Q8011952" start="41963" end="41986" title="William Henry Crossland" label="William Henry Crossland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7789221" start="42079" end="42095" title="Thomas Earp (sculptor)" label="Earp &amp;amp; Hobbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009331" start="42273" end="42278" title="Alloa" label="Alloa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5470630" start="43189" end="43208" title="Forster and Andrews" label="Forster and Andrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q6119627" start="43622" end="43632" title="Jacobethan" label="Jacobethan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16900418" start="43875" end="43901" title="Spring Gardens, Manchester" label="Spring Gardens, Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q396851" start="44243" end="44253" title="Rustication (architecture)" label="rusticated"/>
<link wikidata="Q190996" start="44400" end="44408" title="pediment" label="pediment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2740021" start="44805" end="44829" title="NatWest" label="National Provincial Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124023" start="44833" end="44843" title="Piccadilly" label="Piccadilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q7509359" start="44948" end="44972" title="Sidney Street, Cambridge" label="Sidney Street, Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q118903855" start="45860" end="45881" title="John Moore &amp;amp; Sons" label="John Moore &amp;amp; Sons"/>
<link wikidata="Q107537014" start="47552" end="47568" title="Leonard Shuffrey" label="Leonard Shuffrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q6119627" start="47801" end="47811" title="Jacobethan" label="Jacobethan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2057955" start="48250" end="48267" title="Doulton &amp;amp; Co." label="Doulton &amp;amp; Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q529819" start="49370" end="49386" title="Queen Anne style architecture" label="Queen Anne Style"/>
<link wikidata="Q330369" start="49398" end="49419" title="Arts and Crafts movement" label="Arts and Crafts style"/>
<link wikidata="Q161491" start="49527" end="49545" title="Reading, Berkshire" label="Reading, Berkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432632" start="49792" end="49813" title="University of Reading" label="University of Reading"/>
<link wikidata="Q2338763" start="49867" end="49876" title="Yattendon" label="Yattendon"/>
<link wikidata="Q624114" start="51119" end="51133" title="kitchen garden" label="kitchen garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1293015" start="51185" end="51198" title="Edward Milner" label="Edward Milner"/>
<link wikidata="Q189393" start="51260" end="51272" title="rhododendron" label="rhododendron"/>
<link wikidata="Q291177" start="51311" end="51322" title="rose garden" label="rose garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2376216" start="51397" end="51413" title="Clifton, Bristol" label="Clifton, Bristol"/>
<link wikidata="Q6536559" start="51429" end="51438" title="Lewis Fry" label="Lewis Fry"/>
<link wikidata="Q615196" start="51548" end="51558" title="Italianate" label="Italianate"/>
<link wikidata="Q810781" start="51648" end="51658" title="Bath stone" label="Bath stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q816265" start="51686" end="51695" title="Belvedere (structure)" label="belvedere"/>
<link wikidata="Q4729143" start="52378" end="52385" title="Easneye" label="Easneye"/>
<link wikidata="Q2025612" start="52403" end="52420" title="Stanstead Abbotts" label="Stanstead Abbotts"/>
<link wikidata="Q334449" start="52467" end="52487" title="Sir Fowell Buxton, 3rd Baronet" label="Thomas Fowell Buxton"/>
<link wikidata="Q918336" start="52542" end="52553" title="Diapering" label="diaper work"/>
<link wikidata="Q1939660" start="52585" end="52603" title="crow-stepped gable" label="crow-stepped gable"/>
<link wikidata="Q7347366" start="53782" end="53796" title="Robert Marnock" label="Robert Marnock"/>
<link wikidata="Q4732138" start="53964" end="53972" title="Allerton, Liverpool" label="Allerton"/>
<link wikidata="Q65072808" start="54140" end="54148" title="Tourelle (architecture)" label="tourelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6679769" start="54347" end="54370" title="Lord Mayor of Liverpool" label="Lord Mayor of Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q18160560" start="55626" end="55657" title="Gillows of Lancaster and London" label="Gillows of Lancaster and London"/>
<link wikidata="Q4923171" start="55889" end="55909" title="Blackmoor, Hampshire" label="Blackmoor, Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q333413" start="56144" end="56159" title="Roundell Palmer, 1st Earl of Selborne" label="Roundell Palmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5646429" start="56193" end="56203" title="Hamsterley, Bishop Auckland" label="Hamsterley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3476363" start="56255" end="56285" title="Scottish baronial architecture" label="Scottish baronial architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q8012549" start="56441" end="56460" title="William Houldsworth" label="William Houldsworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025076" start="56526" end="56533" title="Keswick, Cumbria" label="Keswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q9295065" start="56575" end="56591" title="Hurworth-on-Tees" label="Hurworth-on-Tees"/>
<link wikidata="Q5726789" start="56847" end="56863" title="Henry Pease (MP)" label="Henry Pease (MP)"/>
<link wikidata="Q476988" start="57094" end="57112" title="Sharp, Stewart and Company" label="Charles P. Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q4723263" start="57643" end="57656" title="Alfred Palmer (businessman)" label="Alfred Palmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6940847" start="57672" end="57700" title="Museum of English Rural Life" label="Museum of English Rural Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q2924086" start="57958" end="57965" title="Brasted" label="Brasted"/>
<link wikidata="Q2653611" start="58298" end="58309" title="Penmaenmawr" label="Penmaenmawr"/>
<link wikidata="Q750752" start="58328" end="58348" title="Early English Period" label="Early English Period"/>
<link wikidata="Q7300559" start="58757" end="58779" title="Reading School" label="Reading Grammar School"/>
<link wikidata="Q333413" start="59029" end="59066" title="Roundell Palmer, 1st Earl of Selborne" label="Roundell Palmer, 1st Earl of Selborne"/>
<link wikidata="Q5690163" start="59361" end="59376" title="Heal&amp;#x27;s" label="Heal &amp;amp; Sons"/>
<link wikidata="Q24205846" start="59519" end="59528" title="Henry Bevington" label="Bevington"/>
<link wikidata="Q16976236" start="59598" end="59620" title="John Warner &amp;amp; Sons" label="John Warner &amp;amp; Sons"/>
<link wikidata="Q5462926" start="59896" end="59909" title="knapped flint" label="knapped flint"/>
<link wikidata="Q7789488" start="60384" end="60400" title="Thomas Fairbairn" label="Thomas Fairbairn"/>
<link wikidata="Q12067007" start="60937" end="60944" title="Reddish" label="Reddish"/>
<link wikidata="Q5116872" start="60960" end="60991" title="Church of England parish church" label="Church of England parish church"/>
<link wikidata="Q8012549" start="61013" end="61032" title="William Houldsworth" label="William Houldsworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q18350136" start="61103" end="61128" title="Houldsworth Model Village" label="Houldsworth Model Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q170463" start="61324" end="61328" title="apse" label="apse"/>
<link wikidata="Q580731" start="61760" end="61770" title="clerestory" label="clerestory"/>
<link wikidata="Q3566743" start="61973" end="61988" title="Watts &amp;amp; Co." label="Watts &amp;amp; Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q837995" start="62153" end="62164" title="rood screen" label="rood screen"/>
<link wikidata="Q472773" start="62206" end="62222" title="Four Evangelists" label="Four Evangelists"/>
<link wikidata="Q46686" start="62224" end="62231" title="reredos" label="reredos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1467789" start="62236" end="62243" title="sedilia" label="sedilia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16994056" start="62517" end="62540" title="William Hill &amp;amp; Sons" label="William Hill &amp;amp; Sons"/>
<link wikidata="Q55608178" start="62686" end="62701" title="communion-plate" label="communion-plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q572024" start="62703" end="62716" title="altar-frontal" label="altar-frontal"/>
<link wikidata="Q434614" start="62721" end="62732" title="altar cross" label="altar cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q120868582" start="62867" end="62881" title="Lyndhurst Road" label="Lyndhurst Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062789" start="62948" end="62969" title="Congregational church" label="Congregational church"/>
<link wikidata="Q83043" start="63011" end="63020" title="hexagonal" label="hexagonal"/>
<link wikidata="Q124184" start="63589" end="63596" title="Mayfair" label="Mayfair"/>
<link wikidata="Q5182737" start="63946" end="63970" title="Craven Dunnill" label="Craven Dunnill &amp;amp; Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q1149028" start="64198" end="64237" title="Lister Institute of Preventive Medicine" label="Lister Institute of Preventive Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q743535" start="64241" end="64248" title="Chelsea, London" label="Chelsea"/>
<link wikidata="Q29492129" start="64266" end="64290" title="Royal Alexandra Hospital, Rhyl" label="Royal Alexandra Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q2020203" start="64294" end="64298" title="Rhyl" label="Rhyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q7063645" start="64338" end="64365" title="Nottingham General Hospital" label="Nottingham General Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q7594497" start="64374" end="64412" title="Saint Mary&amp;#x27;s Hospital, Manchester" label="Saint Mary&amp;#x27;s Hospital, Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q466544" start="64741" end="64747" title="loggia" label="loggia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770481" start="65097" end="65103" title="Ruabon" label="Ruabon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4999371" start="65295" end="65314" title="Burmantofts Pottery" label="Burmantofts Pottery"/>
<link wikidata="Q7033837" start="65320" end="65336" title="Nightingale ward" label="Nightingale ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q193196" start="66244" end="66269" title="University College London" label="University College London"/>
<link wikidata="Q7527607" start="67569" end="67588" title="John Blundell Maple" label="John Blundell Maple"/>
<link wikidata="Q1902016" start="68257" end="68276" title="Marlborough College" label="Marlborough College"/>
<link wikidata="Q4036240" start="68442" end="68477" title="City and Guilds of London Institute" label="City and Guilds of London Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q529819" start="68569" end="68598" title="Queen Anne style architecture" label="Queen Anne style architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q7245416" start="68735" end="68782" title="Prior Pursglove and Stockton Sixth Form College" label="Prior Pursglove and Stockton Sixth Form College"/>
<link wikidata="Q6519777" start="68981" end="69001" title="Leighton Park School" label="Leighton Park School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7594123" start="69169" end="69202" title="St Margaret&amp;#x27;s School, Bushey" label="St Margaret&amp;#x27;s School, Bushey"/>
<link wikidata="Q277162" start="70158" end="70169" title="Hammersmith" label="Hammersmith"/>
<link wikidata="Q2594055" start="70214" end="70243" title="Worshipful Company of Mercers" label="Worshipful Company of Mercers"/>
<link wikidata="Q17040748" start="71641" end="71660" title="Victoria University (United Kingdom)" label="Victoria University"/>
<link wikidata="Q230899" start="71675" end="71696" title="Manchester University" label="Manchester University"/>
<link wikidata="Q712307" start="72401" end="72417" title="Joseph Whitworth" label="Joseph Whitworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q503424" start="74624" end="74640" title="Leeds University" label="Leeds University"/>
<link wikidata="Q8037015" start="74722" end="74756" title="Worshipful Company of Clothworkers" label="Worshipful Company of Clothworkers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5341716" start="74947" end="74964" title="Edward Baines (1800–1890)" label="Sir Edward Baines"/>
<link wikidata="Q499510" start="77002" end="77025" title="University of Liverpool" label="University of Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="80197" end="80217" title="University of Oxford" label="University of Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q35794" start="80226" end="80249" title="University of Cambridge" label="University of Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5025566" start="80407" end="80422" title="Cambridge Union" label="Cambridge Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q805285" start="80592" end="80615" title="Balliol College, Oxford" label="Balliol College, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q863940" start="81004" end="81041" title="Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge" label="Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q236122" start="81279" end="81290" title="Renaissance architecture" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2349908" start="81438" end="81456" title="French Renaissance" label="French Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146700" start="81579" end="81603" title="Jesus College, Cambridge" label="Jesus College, Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1244704" start="81804" end="81827" title="Trinity Hall, Cambridge" label="Trinity Hall, Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q956501" start="81925" end="81952" title="Pembroke College, Cambridge" label="Pembroke College, Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2157937" start="82348" end="82360" title="Oxford Union" label="Oxford Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748528" start="82463" end="82475" title="Emily Davies" label="Emily Davies"/>
<link wikidata="Q350" start="82587" end="82596" title="Cambridge" label="Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q18546105" start="82682" end="82697" title="Anna Richardson (abolitionist)" label="Anna Richardson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5716034" start="83207" end="83254" title="Henrietta Stanley, Baroness Stanley of Alderley" label="Henrietta Stanley, Baroness Stanley of Alderley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5539780" start="84815" end="84828" title="George Godwin" label="George Godwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5196764" start="84936" end="84953" title="Cuthbert Brodrick" label="Cuthbert Brodrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q7795316" start="84955" end="84973" title="Thomas Worthington (architect)" label="Thomas Worthington"/>
<link wikidata="Q6251206" start="84975" end="84992" title="John Oldrid Scott" label="John Oldrid Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q7790625" start="84994" end="85012" title="Thomas Henry Wyatt" label="Thomas Henry Wyatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5345203" start="85017" end="85032" title="Edward Salomons" label="Edward Salomons"/>
<link wikidata="Q851345" start="85065" end="85090" title="Thomas Leverton Donaldson" label="Thomas Leverton Donaldson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5538851" start="85120" end="85140" title="George Edmund Street" label="George Edmund Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q4666577" start="85913" end="85925" title="Abel Heywood" label="Abel Heywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q4711262" start="86015" end="86028" title="Albert Square, Manchester" label="Albert Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q36810" start="86094" end="86117" title="irregular quadrilateral" label="irregular quadrilateral"/>
<link wikidata="Q7244836" start="86131" end="86146" title="Princess Street, Manchester" label="Princess Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q4986440" start="87297" end="87304" title="Building (magazine)" label="Builder"/>
<link wikidata="Q14917025" start="87807" end="87824" title="Hopton Wood stone" label="Hopton Wood stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2415397" start="88284" end="88312" title="Andrew Handyside and Company" label="Andrew Handyside and Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q5562132" start="88514" end="88533" title="Gillett &amp;amp; Johnston" label="Gillett &amp;amp; Bland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6260315" start="88574" end="88594" title="John Taylor &amp;amp; Co" label="John Taylor &amp;amp; Co"/>
<link wikidata="Q356502" start="88637" end="88659" title="Aristide Cavaillé-Coll" label="Aristide Cavaillé-Coll"/>
<link wikidata="Q5231288" start="88713" end="88742" title="David Bellhouse" label="Edward T. Bellhouse &amp;amp; Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q5182737" start="88975" end="88998" title="Craven Dunnill" label="Craven Dunnill &amp;amp; Co"/>
<link wikidata="Q5435704" start="89079" end="89098" title="Farmer and Brindley" label="Farmer and Brindley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5694399" start="89296" end="89322" title="Heaton, Butler &amp;amp; Bayne" label="Heaton, Butler &amp;amp; Bayne"/>
<link wikidata="Q5482457" start="89477" end="89493" title="Francis Skidmore" label="Francis Skidmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q16983391" start="89509" end="89533" title="Hart, Son, Peard and Co." label="Hart, Son, Peard and Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q7374805" start="89754" end="89780" title="Royal School of Needlework" label="Royal School of Needlework"/>
<link wikidata="Q319843" start="89827" end="89843" title="Ford Madox Brown" label="Ford Madox Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045096" start="90155" end="90171" title="South Kensington" label="South Kensington"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007204" start="90194" end="90208" title="William Cowper-Temple, 1st Baron Mount Temple" label="William Cowper"/>
<link wikidata="Q3557670" start="90209" end="90236" title="First Commissioner of Works" label="First Commissioner of Works"/>
<link wikidata="Q3378439" start="90312" end="90325" title="Francis Fowke" label="Francis Fowke"/>
<link wikidata="Q275013" start="90539" end="90558" title="Austen Henry Layard" label="Austen Henry Layard"/>
<link wikidata="Q4677688" start="90674" end="90691" title="Acton Smee Ayrton" label="Acton Smee Ayrton"/>
<link wikidata="Q13109143" start="91569" end="91575" title="Mowlem" label="Mowlem"/>
<link wikidata="Q151556" start="91837" end="91849" title="Richard Owen" label="Richard Owen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4787071" start="91912" end="91936" title="architectural terracotta" label="architectural terracotta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1484569" start="92279" end="92285" title="White spirit" label="spirit"/>
<link wikidata="Q744373" start="92522" end="92553" title="Romanesque Revival architecture" label="Romanesque Revival architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q490058" start="92636" end="92645" title="Andernach" label="Andernach"/>
<link wikidata="Q701996" start="92650" end="92665" title="Worms Cathedral" label="Worms Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q2588965" start="93258" end="93266" title="Imperial staircase" label="imperial"/>
<link wikidata="Q840829" start="93557" end="93577" title="Baroque architecture" label="Baroque architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q5435704" start="94557" end="94576" title="Farmer and Brindley" label="Farmer and Brindley"/>
<link wikidata="Q274988" start="94700" end="94716" title="Plaster-of-Paris" label="Plaster-of-Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q713674" start="95155" end="95173" title="William Carruthers (botanist)" label="William Carruthers"/>
<link wikidata="Q16983391" start="95859" end="95883" title="Hart, Son, Peard and Co." label="Hart, Son, Peard and Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q4986440" start="97740" end="97747" title="Building (magazine)" label="Builder"/>
<link wikidata="Q333256" start="97939" end="97978" title="Hugh Grosvenor, 1st Duke of Westminster" label="Hugh Grosvenor, 1st Duke of Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q505174" start="98820" end="98828" title="carillon" label="carillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5331354" start="99982" end="100002" title="Eaton Hall Railway" label="narrow-gauge railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q843251" start="100046" end="100067" title="Great Western Railway" label="Great Western Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q4850413" start="100079" end="100098" title="Balderton, Cheshire" label="Balderton, Cheshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q214252" start="100168" end="100174" title="stable" label="stable"/>
<link wikidata="Q85180" start="100393" end="100411" title="Joseph Edgar Boehm" label="Joseph Edgar Boehm"/>
<link wikidata="Q517820" start="100589" end="100603" title="Carriage house" label="Carriage house"/>
<link wikidata="Q3503155" start="100727" end="100738" title="riding hall" label="riding hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q5694399" start="101407" end="101431" title="Heaton, Butler and Bayne" label="Heaton, Butler and Bayne"/>
<link wikidata="Q173869" start="101490" end="101511" title="Alfred, Lord Tennyson" label="Alfred, Lord Tennyson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2227196" start="101519" end="101537" title="Idylls of the King" label="Idylls of the King"/>
<link wikidata="Q452354" start="101539" end="101554" title="Gertrude Jekyll" label="Gertrude Jekyll"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374805" start="101615" end="101641" title="Royal School of Needlework" label="Royal School of Needlework"/>
<link wikidata="Q5728598" start="101643" end="101660" title="Henry Stacy Marks" label="Henry Stacy Marks"/>
<link wikidata="Q191663" start="101697" end="101717" title="The Canterbury Tales" label="The Canterbury Tales"/>
<link wikidata="Q3568633" start="101779" end="101796" title="William De Morgan" label="William De Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5435704" start="101798" end="101819" title="Farmer &amp;amp; Brindley" label="Farmer &amp;amp; Brindley"/>
<link wikidata="Q170463" start="102338" end="102342" title="apse" label="apse"/>
<link wikidata="Q189771" start="102358" end="102371" title="Vault (architecture)" label="stone vaulted"/>
<link wikidata="Q3286020" start="102447" end="102453" title="Manley, Cheshire" label="Manley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6864241" start="102580" end="102586" title="Minera" label="Minera"/>
<link wikidata="Q2224305" start="102594" end="102610" title="Frederic Shields" label="Frederic Shields"/>
<link wikidata="Q5694399" start="102688" end="102712" title="Heaton, Butler and Bayne" label="Heaton, Butler and Bayne"/>
<link wikidata="Q743376" start="102734" end="102741" title="Te Deum" label="Te Deum"/>
<link wikidata="Q182589" start="102837" end="102851" title="William Morris" label="William Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q5482457" start="102978" end="102994" title="Francis Skidmore" label="Francis Skidmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375325" start="103012" end="103026" title="encaustic tile" label="encaustic tile"/>
<link wikidata="Q640579" start="103050" end="103057" title="Cosmati" label="Cosmati"/>
<link wikidata="Q337238" start="103076" end="103084" title="Porphyry (geology)" label="porphyry"/>
<link wikidata="Q143447" start="103097" end="103106" title="Alabaster" label="Alabaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q46686" start="103185" end="103192" title="reredos" label="reredos"/>
<link wikidata="Q208021" start="103293" end="103299" title="walnut" label="walnut"/>
<link wikidata="Q5562132" start="103527" end="103551" title="Gillett &amp;amp; Johnston" label="Messrs Gillett &amp;amp; Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q7914384" start="103666" end="103679" title="Vanden Gheyn" label="Van Aerschodt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1267081" start="103713" end="103726" title="hundredweight" label="hundredweight"/>
<link wikidata="Q1388550" start="103728" end="103740" title="John Stainer" label="John Stainer"/>
<link wikidata="Q54111" start="104008" end="104026" title="Neoclassical architecture" label="Neoclassical style"/>
<link wikidata="Q130223" start="104199" end="104206" title="griffin" label="griffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q208120" start="104212" end="104220" title="caryatid" label="caryatid"/>
<link wikidata="Q5241744" start="104466" end="104492" title="Davies brothers of Bersham" label="Davies brothers of Bersham"/>
<link wikidata="Q5482457" start="104501" end="104510" title="Francis Skidmore" label="Skidmores"/>
<link wikidata="Q1236680" start="104999" end="105020" title="Gentlemen&amp;#x27;s club" label="Gentlemen&amp;#x27;s club"/>
<link wikidata="Q622441" start="105091" end="105104" title="Liberal Party (UK)" label="Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070409" start="105218" end="105237" title="Victoria Embankment" label="Victoria Embankment"/>
<link wikidata="Q4986440" start="105430" end="105441" title="Building (magazine)" label="The Builder"/>
<link wikidata="Q82337" start="105769" end="105783" title="Portland stone" label="Portland stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2469078" start="105809" end="105821" title="Crown Estate" label="Crown Estate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3057821" start="105941" end="105959" title="Bramante Staircase" label="Bramante Staircase"/>
<link wikidata="Q3500725" start="107062" end="107076" title="billiard table" label="billiard table"/>
<link wikidata="Q160852" start="107240" end="107249" title="William Ewart Gladstone" label="Gladstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q459506" start="107511" end="107532" title="University of Bristol" label="University of Bristol"/>
<link wikidata="Q205367" start="107665" end="107684" title="Château de Chambord" label="Château de Chambord"/>
<link wikidata="Q687155" start="108250" end="108265" title="dropped ceiling" label="dropped ceiling"/>
<link wikidata="Q209671" start="108542" end="108549" title="faience" label="faience"/>
<link wikidata="Q40861" start="108824" end="108830" title="marble" label="marble"/>
<link wikidata="Q654057" start="108855" end="108869" title="Tuscan order" label="Tuscan columns"/>
<link wikidata="Q16991655" start="109388" end="109426" title="Edison and Swan Electric Light Company" label="Edison and Swan Electric Light Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q5435704" start="109570" end="109589" title="Farmer and Brindley" label="Farmer and Brindley"/>
<link wikidata="Q4999371" start="109678" end="109695" title="Burmantofts Pottery" label="Wilcock &amp;amp; Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q16983391" start="109954" end="109978" title="Hart, Son, Peard and Co." label="Hart, Son, Peard and Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q23891187" start="110124" end="110139" title="Maple &amp;amp; Co." label="Maple &amp;amp; Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q7374293" start="110348" end="110371" title="Royal Horseguards Hotel" label="Royal Horseguards Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374135" start="110414" end="110442" title="Prudential plc" label="Prudential Assurance Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q5509689" start="110798" end="110817" title="Furnival&amp;#x27;s Inn" label="Furnival&amp;#x27;s Inn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334655" start="111275" end="111283" title="terrazzo" label="terrazzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3087183" start="112175" end="112188" title="F. W. Pomeroy" label="F. W. Pomeroy"/>
<link wikidata="Q183272" start="112257" end="112263" title="frieze" label="frieze"/>
<link wikidata="Q6252021" start="112837" end="112854" title="The Building News" label="The Building News"/>
<link wikidata="Q41177" start="113765" end="113772" title="granite" label="granite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770481" start="114353" end="114359" title="Ruabon" label="Ruabon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5210648" start="114465" end="114476" title="Dale Street" label="Dale Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q2193950" start="116779" end="116799" title="Building restoration" label="Building restoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q534286" start="116971" end="116984" title="Thomas Archer" label="Thomas Archer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4709792" start="117042" end="117056" title="Albert Brassey" label="Albert Brassey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2574110" start="117198" end="117213" title="English Baroque" label="English Baroque"/>
<link wikidata="Q333398" start="117271" end="117284" title="John Vanbrugh" label="John Vanbrugh"/>
<link wikidata="Q186637" start="117367" end="117373" title="Arcade (architecture)" label="arcade"/>
<link wikidata="Q6913576" start="117445" end="117461" title="Morris &amp;amp; Co." label="Morris &amp;amp; Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q1147007" start="117465" end="117488" title="Theological virtues" label="Faith, Hope and Charity"/>
<link wikidata="Q5880816" start="117587" end="117613" title="William Cubitt and Company" label="William Cubitt and Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q3568633" start="117799" end="117816" title="William De Morgan" label="William De Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q170463" start="118295" end="118299" title="apse" label="apse"/>
<link wikidata="Q46686" start="118351" end="118358" title="reredos" label="reredos"/>
<link wikidata="Q610462" start="118446" end="118462" title="Grinling Gibbons" label="Grinling Gibbons"/>
<link wikidata="Q173882" start="118479" end="118503" title="St Paul&amp;#x27;s Cathedral" label="St Paul&amp;#x27;s Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q654057" start="118550" end="118556" title="Tuscan order" label="Tuscan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7923504" start="118600" end="118608" title="Vestry" label="vestries"/>
<link wikidata="Q2724263" start="119451" end="119462" title="sash window" label="sash window"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031967" start="119485" end="119492" title="mullion" label="mullion"/>
<link wikidata="Q912595" start="119527" end="119538" title="Elizabethan" label="Elizabethan"/>
<link wikidata="Q834601" start="119564" end="119611" title="Society for the Protection of Ancient Buildings" label="Society for the Protection of Ancient Buildings"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407660" start="119707" end="119714" title="tie rod" label="tie rod"/>
<link wikidata="Q5880816" start="119774" end="119803" title="Holland, Hannen &amp;amp; Cubitts" label="Holland, Hannen &amp;amp; Cubitts"/>
<link wikidata="Q6239486" start="120052" end="120064" title="John Hodgkin (barrister)" label="John Hodgkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3990642" start="120093" end="120107" title="Thomas Hodgkin (historian)" label="Thomas Hodgkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q18162434" start="120435" end="120451" title="Two Rivers Press" label="Two Rivers Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q330369" start="120638" end="120662" title="Arts and Crafts movement" label="Arts and Crafts movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q7154249" start="120846" end="120861" title="Paul Waterhouse" label="Paul Waterhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q192088" start="120899" end="120911" title="Eton College" label="Eton College"/>
<link wikidata="Q841090" start="120935" end="120943" title="Classics" label="Classics"/>
<link wikidata="Q805285" start="120947" end="120970" title="Balliol College, Oxford" label="Balliol College, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q15969828" start="121101" end="121128" title="Michael Waterhouse" label="Michael Theodore Waterhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q18576762" start="121375" end="121399" title="Monica Bridges" label="(Mary) Monica Waterhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q925991" start="121424" end="121438" title="Robert Bridges" label="Robert Bridges"/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="121654" end="121671" title="Church of England" label="Church of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q217595" start="121981" end="122004" title="Oxford University Press" label="Oxford University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q637582" start="122068" end="122079" title="Fallowfield" label="Fallowfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q5477171" start="122339" end="122352" title="Foxhill House" label="Foxhill House"/>
<link wikidata="Q2338763" start="122545" end="122554" title="Yattendon" label="Yattendon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5343592" start="122654" end="122685" title="Edward Iliffe, 1st Baron Iliffe" label="Edward Iliffe, 1st Baron Iliffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4020039" start="123265" end="123281" title="Hamo Thornycroft" label="Hamo Thornycroft"/>
<link wikidata="Q742371" start="123286" end="123298" title="Edmund Gosse" label="Edmund Gosse"/>
<link wikidata="Q925991" start="123374" end="123388" title="Robert Bridges" label="Robert Bridges"/>
<link wikidata="Q684057" start="123593" end="123606" title="Frank Dicksee" label="Frank Dicksee"/>
<link wikidata="Q240526" start="123608" end="123628" title="Lawrence Alma-Tadema" label="Lawrence Alma-Tadema"/>
<link wikidata="Q319843" start="123630" end="123646" title="Ford Madox Brown" label="Ford Madox Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q952452" start="123648" end="123665" title="Mary Augusta Ward" label="Mary Augusta Ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q817565" start="123667" end="123682" title="Benjamin Jowett" label="Benjamin Jowett"/>
<link wikidata="Q336497" start="123684" end="123715" title="James Bryce, 1st Viscount Bryce" label="James Bryce, 1st Viscount Bryce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374863" start="123787" end="123806" title="Richard Norman Shaw" label="Richard Norman Shaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q186265" start="123811" end="123825" title="William Burges" label="William Burges"/>
<link wikidata="Q8008378" start="124149" end="124170" title="William Eden Nesfield" label="William Eden Nesfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q6250681" start="124172" end="124183" title="John Norton (architect)" label="John Norton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4798035" start="124185" end="124201" title="Arthur Blomfield" label="Arthur Blomfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q6245315" start="124203" end="124228" title="John Loughborough Pearson" label="John Loughborough Pearson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5538507" start="124235" end="124247" title="George Devey" label="George Devey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050483" start="124417" end="124429" title="Loire Valley" label="Loire Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286" start="124629" end="124643" title="Alps" label="Alpine holiday"/>
<link wikidata="Q12202" start="124746" end="124752" title="stroke" label="stroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q7154249" start="124861" end="124876" title="Paul Waterhouse" label="Paul Waterhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067943" start="125263" end="125300" title="Royal Institute of British Architects" label="Royal Institute of British Architects"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345539" start="125477" end="125501" title="Exposition Universelle (1867)" label="Paris Exposition of 1867"/>
<link wikidata="Q920783" start="125527" end="125543" title="Royal Gold Medal" label="Royal Gold Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q270920" start="125933" end="125946" title="Royal Academy" label="Royal Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q377066" start="126389" end="126407" title="Institut de France" label="Institut de France"/>
<link wikidata="Q867530" start="126424" end="126457" title="Victoria University of Manchester" label="Victoria University of Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q17551386" start="126507" end="126526" title="Congleton Town Hall" label="Congleton Town Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q635103" start="126609" end="126635" title="Architectural design competition" label="architectural competitions"/>
<link wikidata="Q26425990" start="126697" end="126712" title="Cartwright Hall" label="Cartwright Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q22905" start="126714" end="126722" title="Bradford" label="Bradford"/>
<link wikidata="Q6264259" start="126730" end="126750" title="John William Simpson" label="John William Simpson"/>
<link wikidata="Q26407160" start="126818" end="126836" title="Plymouth Guildhall" label="Plymouth Guildhall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294110" start="126865" end="126886" title="Edward William Godwin" label="Edward William Godwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4863855" start="126888" end="126915" title="Barrow-in-Furness Town Hall" label="Barrow-in-Furness Town Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q8012087" start="126945" end="126963" title="William Henry Lynn" label="William Henry Lynn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7926830" start="126965" end="126984" title="Victoria Law Courts" label="Victoria Law Courts"/>
<link wikidata="Q6033105" start="127026" end="127038" title="Ingress Bell" label="Ingress Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q750098" start="127043" end="127053" title="Aston Webb" label="Aston Webb"/>
<link wikidata="Q18068" start="127158" end="127173" title="Milan Cathedral" label="Milan Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q7492762" start="127183" end="127202" title="Sheffield Town Hall" label="Sheffield Town Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q5345905" start="127218" end="127242" title="Edward William Mountford" label="Edward William Mountford"/>
<link wikidata="Q213322" start="127248" end="127274" title="Victoria and Albert Museum" label="Victoria and Albert Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q750098" start="127346" end="127356" title="Aston Webb" label="Aston Webb"/>
<link wikidata="Q3351920" start="127358" end="127375" title="Belfast City Hall" label="Belfast City Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q4722378" start="127391" end="127406" title="Brumwell Thomas" label="Brumwell Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2974562" start="127411" end="127429" title="City Hall, Cardiff" label="City Hall, Cardiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q5729524" start="127438" end="127470" title="Henry Vaughan Lanchester" label="Lanchester, Rickards and Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q5545354" start="127550" end="127573" title="George Tunstal Redmayne" label="George Tunstal Redmayne"/>
<link wikidata="Q5933" start="128168" end="128185" title="Westminster Abbey" label="Westminster Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q6109362" start="128213" end="128227" title="JD Wetherspoon" label="JD Wetherspoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7244836" start="128235" end="128262" title="Princess Street, Manchester" label="Princess Street, Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q6617691" start="128523" end="128572" title="List of ecclesiastical works by Alfred Waterhouse" label="List of ecclesiastical works by Alfred Waterhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q6617162" start="128574" end="128617" title="List of domestic works by Alfred Waterhouse" label="List of domestic works by Alfred Waterhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q6617888" start="128619" end="128669" title="List of educational buildings by Alfred Waterhouse" label="List of educational buildings by Alfred Waterhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q6612010" start="128671" end="128720" title="List of commercial buildings by Alfred Waterhouse" label="List of commercial buildings by Alfred Waterhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q6635572" start="128722" end="128777" title="List of public and civic buildings by Alfred Waterhouse" label="List of public and civic buildings by Alfred Waterhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q4787071" start="128793" end="128817" title="Architectural terracotta" label="Architectural terracotta"/>
<link wikidata="Q4999371" start="128819" end="128838" title="Burmantofts Pottery" label="Burmantofts Pottery"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="308505" wikidata="Q819469" url="?curid=308505" title="Mountain pygmy possum">
<text>The mountain pygmy possum (Burramys parvus), also simply known as the burramys, is a small, mouse-sized (weighs ) nocturnal marsupial of Australia found in dense alpine rock screes and boulder fields, mainly southern Victoria and around Mount Kosciuszko in Kosciuszko National Park in New South Wales at elevations from . At almost , its prehensile tail is longer than its combined head and body length. Its diet consists of insects (such as the bogong moth), fleshy fruits, nuts, nectar and seeds. Its body is covered in a thick coat of fine grey fur except for its stomach, which is cream coloured; its tail is hairless. On the underside of the female&#x27;s body is a pouch containing four teats. This possum is the only extant species in the genus &quot;Burramys&quot;. It is also the only Australian mammal restricted to alpine habitat.

==Discovery==

The mountain pygmy possum was first discovered in the fossil record in 1895 when a portion of the jaw and skull bones were found in the Wombeyan Caves in central New South Wales. At the time, the species was believed to be extinct. It was not until 1966 that a living individual was found at a ski resort at Mount Hotham in Victoria. Since that time, the mountain pygmy possum has been located in three isolated, genetically distinct populations in the alpine regions of southern Australia.

==Description==
The mountain pygmy possum is a small rodent-like marsupial. The mountain pygmy possum has an average weight of approximately and an average head and body length of . The species is sexually dimorphic, with males being slightly larger than females. They have large, forward pointing eyes and short pointed snouts. Mountain pygmy possums exhibit diprotodont dentition, with three upper incisors and two upper premolars. On the syndactylous hind feet, they possess an opposable hallux. In addition, the mountain pygmy possum has a pouch which opens anteriorly and contains four teats. Pygmy possums are covered in a layer of fine, dense fur. Their pelage is greyish-brown on the dorsal side, with a darker stripe along the midline of the back, and a pale cream colour on the ventral side. They typically have a darker grey ring surrounding the eyes. During breeding season, males become more tawny-orange on the abdomen and flanks. The mountain pygmy possum has a long prehensile tail, averaging about in length, which is sparsely haired.

==Habitat and geographic range==
The mountain pygmy possum is endemic to the alpine regions of southern Australia. The species is currently restricted to three isolated mountain regions: (1) Mount Blue Cow in Kosciuszko National Park in New South Wales, (2) Mount Bogong and Mount Higginbotham/Loch in the Bogong High Plains in Victoria, and (3) Mount Buller in Victoria. The typical home ranges within these mountain ranges differ for males and females. Females tend to reside at higher elevations of approximately near patches of block streams and other deep boulder formations. The home range of a female mountain pygmy possum is correlated with the density of Bogong moths, the pygmy possum&#x27;s preferred food source, which varies at different elevations. Females at higher elevations have smaller home ranges due to a relatively greater abundance of Bogong moths, whereas females residing at lower elevations typically have much larger home ranges as the quantity of moths declines. Male mountain pygmy possums reside at low elevations, generally between , of these mountain ranges. Male home ranges are largest during the breeding season, between November and December, when they migrate to female nesting sites, and decline thereafter.

==Foraging habits and behaviour==
Mountain pygmy possums prefer to feed on Bogong moths which make up about a third of their diet. This moth species (&quot;Agrotis infusa&quot;) migrates to the high alpine mountainous regions during the spring and summer months. During these months, mountain pygmy possums utilise Bogong moths as their principal food source. In the autumn months, Bogong moths depart from the mountain ranges and mountain pygmy possums must supplement their diets with fruits and seeds. &quot;Burramys parvis&quot; species will supplement their diet with the mountain plum pine from the fruit-bearing conifer &quot;Podocarpus lawrencei&quot; as well as seeds from the snow beard-heaths &quot;Leucopogon&quot; spp. and blackberry &quot;Rubus&quot; spp. Upon finding food, the mountain pygmy possum will first smell the food source before picking it up with its incisors. It will then transfer the item to its forelimbs so that it may manipulate the food and tear off pieces of flesh.

==Reproduction==
Mountain pygmy possums have an annual reproductive cycle. Although females are polyestrous, the need for sufficient fat reserves during hibernation limits females to one litter per year. In order to ensure adequate fat reserves, female mountain pygmy possums will synchronise reproduction for the spring months, when Bogong moths are abundant. The breeding season typically occurs during the Austral spring months of October and November. During this time, males migrate to the higher elevation nesting sites of females to mate. Mountain pygmy possums then have an internal gestation period of 14–16 days after which the altricial young will enter the forward-facing pouch of the female. A female mountain pygmy possum has four teats, and a litter is usually three to four offspring. The young remain in the pouch for approximately 3 weeks, after which they remain at the nest for another 3–4 weeks. The offspring are then weaned at around 9–10 weeks. The mating system that occurs in &quot;Burramys parvus&quot; is resource defence polygyny. A philopatric group of females typically share a nest space within deep boulder crevices. The nest sites are generally areas of high densities of migrating Bogong moths. Shortly after mating season, females will drive the male pygmy possums from the nest. The male mountain pygmy possums do not participate in parental care. Additionally, juvenile males are driven from the nest shortly after weaning. As noted in all species of Burramyids, mountain pygmy possums become sexually mature by one year of age.

==Behaviour==

Mountain pygmy possums are nocturnal creatures, preferring to sleep during the day and forage at night. While all other members of the family Burramyidae are arboreal, the mountain pygmy possum is a terrestrial species. The preferred habitat of these pygmy possums is within deep boulderfields in alpine regions of Southern Australia. The females tend to stay in familial groups of up to 10 related individuals. Females also tend to be relatively sedentary and exhibit high nest site fidelity.

Male mountain pygmy possums, on the other hand, tend to be solitary, leaving nesting sites as juveniles to take residence in lower elevations of the mountain ranges. For this reason, male mountain pygmy possums generally suffer higher mortality than females as the boulder fields appear to offer some protection from predation. &quot;Burramys parvus&quot; is noted to be the only small mammal in Australia that hibernates seasonally for long periods of time. All other members of &quot;Burramyidae&quot; are capable of opportunistic hibernation.

Adult mountain pygmy possums enter hibernation for a period of up to seven months, whereas juveniles generally hibernate for about five months. Both males and females rely heavily on Bogong moths as an energy-rich food and for the fattening period which occurs prior to hibernation. Mountain pygmy possums are also noted to cache seeds and berries which they will feed on during periods when they awaken from torpor. During the months of hibernation, &quot;Burramys parvus&quot; is noted to awaken from torpor for periods of two to three days at a time during which the animal will feed on cached food resources. These periods of arousal typically occur when the ambient temperature is . During the hibernating period, the mountain pygmy possum is capable of reducing its temperature to . Individuals in torpid periods will curl their bodies up, tucking their heads into their chest or abdomen in order to retain body heat. In addition, females have been observed sharing nests constructed from moss and snow grass. Both males and females are noted to hibernate under an insulating layer of snow.

During the breeding season in the spring and summer months, older, heavier mountain pygmy possums typically occupy the highest quality habitats. While males are generally tolerant of one another during most of the year, they can act aggressively toward each other during the breeding season. Aggression is noted in both males and females in the form of tail biting. Females are observed to act very aggressively towards both males and females when defending nesting sites, especially when offspring are present. Additionally, females are aggressive to adult males following the breeding season as well as to juvenile males post-weaning.

==Conservation status==
Since 2008, the mountain pygmy possum has been declared by the IUCN Red List as critically endangered. Population estimates totalled fewer than 2000 individuals from the three combined isolated populations in 2000. Current population estimates indicate that these numbers have severely declined in the last decade. The most recent study conducted in 2006 at Mount Buller tallied only 30 adults. As of 2007, the number of females recorded at Mount Blue Cow had Kosciuszko National Park with a total of 60 individuals. In 2021, scientists estimated that there were still fewer than 2000 individuals.

===Threats to survival===

The biggest threats to the mountain pygmy possum populations include habitat destruction and fragmentation, climate change, predation by feral cats and red foxes, and threats to their prime food source, the bogong moth.

The construction of ski resorts in the alpine regions in which the mountain pygmy possums inhabit has been one of the greatest factors attributed to population decline. At Mount Higginbotham, a major road constructed to the Mount Hotham ski resort prevented male mountain pygmy possums from migrating to the female nesting sites during the breeding season. This physical barrier was noted to markedly increase winter mortality in the Mount Higginbotham population. In response to this, a tunnel was constructed which provided male pygmy possums with an alternative migratory route.

Climate change is another serious threat to the mountain pygmy possum. &quot;Burramys parvus&quot; is the only Australian mammal which is completely restricted to the alpine regions. The species is well adapted to the seasonal availability of Bogong moths and other food resources. Although data from New South Wales and Victoria are still pending, preliminary models suggest that reduced survival of mountain pygmy possums can be related to declining snow cover and shorter winters. Studies conducted at Kosciuszko National Park revealed that the period of snow cover was diminished by an average of 10 days and snow melt occurred approximately 15 days earlier. Linda Broome and her group of researchers determined that, while hibernation sites appeared well insulated despite lack of snow, snow cover provides additional protection to the mountain pygmy possums during the coldest months. This added layer of insulation is believed to promote prolonged torpor and decrease waking intervals which can deplete energy stores and decrease possum survival. As a suggested solution to this environmental disturbance, Broome and her colleagues proposed moving the remaining populations of mountain pygmy possums from their alpine habitats to lower elevation temperate rainforests. This solution is based on previous husbandry efforts, which showed that mountain pygmy possums did not require a period of hibernation at environmental temperatures above .

A third negative impact on the mountain pygmy possum population is high levels of predation by red foxes (&quot;Vulpes vulpes&quot;) and feral cats. In order to control the level of predation, threat abatement plans are in place. These threat abatement plans identify the necessary actions required to protect all species affected by predation of red foxes and feral cats.

Research has also extended to identify the threats impacting the survival of the Bogong moth. This moth species is the preferred food source of mountain pygmy possums. Their arrival during the spring months acts as a seasonal indicator signalling the end of hibernation for the possums. In addition, Bogong moths are rich in protein and fat and they provide mountain pygmy possums with the necessary energy reserves to sustain the seven-month hibernation period.

===Captive breeding programmes===

The Foundation for National Parks &amp; Wildlife has implemented captive breeding programmes under the support and guidance of Linda Broome and her colleagues. In addition, Zoos Victoria has also become involved in the effort to sustain the remaining populations of mountain pygmy possums. Zoos Victoria started a captive breeding programme for &quot;B. parvus&quot; in 2007 in the Healesville Sanctuary. The programme cared for a population of 45 mountain pygmy possums. Their overall goal is to down-list the mountain pygmy possum to a lower-threat category on the IUCN Redlist.

 there is a new captive breeding project under way in Lithgow, New South Wales, called Secret Creek Sanctuary. The creation of the sanctuary has been aided by a donation of from Prague Zoo, which had set up a fund-raiser during the 2019–20 bushfires in Australia. The Australian Wildlife Society also contributed much-needed funds to help save this species from the risk of extinction. About 15 animals will be live-captured from Mt Kosciusko, acclimatised in special enclosures, and released then into the sanctuary.

===2016 National Recovery Plan===

In 2016 the first national recovery plan (under the &quot;Commonwealth Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999&quot;) for this species was prepared, to counter the threats caused by habitat loss and fragmentation, predators (cats and foxes) and climate change, in particular to the tiny Mt Buller population. The plan detailed its distribution, habitat, threats, recovery objectives and actions necessary to ensure its long-term survival.

===2018–19: decline in bogong moths===
Scientists observed a catastrophic drop in bogong moth numbers in the summer of 2018–2019, due to climate-change-induced droughts in the moth&#x27;s breeding areas. With the lack of moths as a food source during the breeding season in the spring of 2018, the possums lost litters owing to inadequate nourishment. As a similar situation occurred in the spring of 2017, adult possum numbers were predicted to decline as well.

In the spring and summer seasons of 2017–18 and 2018–19, dramatic drops in numbers of the moths in the Alpine caves were observed. Millions of the moths typically line the walls of these caves over summer, but in 2017–2018, some had none. Eric Warrant of Lund University attributed the falling numbers to winter drought in their breeding areas and climate change, the lack of rain producing insufficient vegetation to feed the caterpillars.

Other biologists and ecologists have pointed to the dramatic effect on the animals which feed on the moths, which are an important source of protein for wildlife, including the mountain pygmy possum as well as other insectivorous mammals and birds. &quot;The vulnerability of the Australian Alps to climate change is the worst in the world because we&#x27;ve got these short little mountains so when it gets warmer, there is nowhere for these cold-adapted species to go&quot;, according to Deakin University wildlife ecologist Euan Ritchie.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q819469" start="4" end="25" title="Mountain pygmy possum" label="mountain pygmy possum"/>
<link wikidata="Q819469" start="70" end="78" title="Mountain pygmy possum" label="burramys"/>
<link wikidata="Q2751034" start="92" end="97" title="mouse" label="mouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q309179" start="114" end="123" title="nocturnal" label="nocturnal"/>
<link wikidata="Q25336" start="124" end="133" title="marsupial" label="marsupial"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="137" end="146" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133195" start="174" end="179" title="scree" label="scree"/>
<link wikidata="Q36687" start="217" end="225" title="Victoria (Australia)" label="Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q178167" start="237" end="253" title="Mount Kosciuszko" label="Mount Kosciuszko"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755161" start="257" end="281" title="Kosciuszko National Park" label="Kosciuszko National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224" start="285" end="300" title="New South Wales" label="New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q285592" start="446" end="457" title="bogong moth" label="bogong moth"/>
<link wikidata="Q11009" start="475" end="479" title="Nut (fruit)" label="nuts"/>
<link wikidata="Q171934" start="481" end="487" title="nectar" label="nectar"/>
<link wikidata="Q40763" start="492" end="496" title="seed" label="seed"/>
<link wikidata="Q197204" start="530" end="534" title="fur" label="coat"/>
<link wikidata="Q279198" start="705" end="711" title="Phalangeriformes" label="possum"/>
<link wikidata="Q310890" start="719" end="723" title="Monotypic taxon" label="only"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898509" start="724" end="730" title="Extant taxon" label="extant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1977533" start="758" end="766" title="Burramys" label="Burramys"/>
<link wikidata="Q859654" start="826" end="832" title="alpine climate" label="alpine"/>
<link wikidata="Q26332" start="1710" end="1721" title="diprotodont" label="diprotodont"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755161" start="2612" end="2636" title="Kosciuszko National Park" label="Kosciuszko National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q285592" start="3067" end="3079" title="Bogong moths" label="Bogong moths"/>
<link wikidata="Q163371" start="4283" end="4303" title="Podocarpus lawrencei" label="Podocarpus lawrencei"/>
<link wikidata="Q1936785" start="4360" end="4370" title="Leucopogon" label="Leucopogon"/>
<link wikidata="Q602740" start="4403" end="4408" title="Rubus" label="Rubus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4748" end="4759" title="Estrous cycle#Frequency" label="polyestrous"/>
<link wikidata="Q113636064" start="5685" end="5710" title="Resource defense polygyny" label="resource defence polygyny"/>
<link wikidata="Q23254" start="6377" end="6388" title="Burramyidae" label="Burramyidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q32059" start="9100" end="9113" title="IUCN Red List" label="IUCN Red List"/>
<link wikidata="Q219127" start="9117" end="9138" title="critically endangered" label="critically endangered"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755161" start="9497" end="9521" title="Kosciuszko National Park" label="Kosciuszko National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q552431" start="9732" end="9751" title="habitat destruction" label="habitat destruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="9771" end="9785" title="climate change" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q2404562" start="9800" end="9809" title="feral cat" label="feral cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q8332" start="9815" end="9822" title="red fox" label="red fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q285592" start="9870" end="9881" title="bogong moth" label="bogong moth"/>
<link wikidata="Q130003" start="9904" end="9914" title="ski resort" label="ski resort"/>
<link wikidata="Q1852361" start="10108" end="10120" title="Mount Hotham" label="Mount Hotham"/>
<link wikidata="Q8332" start="12012" end="12019" title="red fox" label="red fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q2404562" start="12054" end="12063" title="feral cat" label="feral cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q5474459" start="12794" end="12838" title="Foundation for National Parks &amp;amp; Wildlife" label="Foundation for National Parks &amp;amp; Wildlife"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350718" start="12855" end="12871" title="captive breeding" label="captive breeding"/>
<link wikidata="Q3047381" start="13172" end="13193" title="Healesville Sanctuary" label="Healesville Sanctuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1789805" start="13426" end="13433" title="Lithgow, New South Wales" label="Lithgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q220086" start="13550" end="13560" title="Prague Zoo" label="Prague Zoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q77924746" start="13604" end="13634" title="2019–20 Australian bushfire season" label="2019–20 bushfires in Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8001313" start="13640" end="13667" title="Australian Wildlife Society" label="Australian Wildlife Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="14193" end="14207" title="climate change" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q218506" start="15107" end="15122" title="Lund University" label="Lund University"/>
<link wikidata="Q43059" start="15164" end="15171" title="drought" label="drought"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="15200" end="15214" title="global warming" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q677088" start="15510" end="15523" title="insectivorous" label="insectivorous"/>
<link wikidata="Q1180978" start="15784" end="15801" title="Deakin University" label="Deakin University"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="308511" wikidata="Q1468706" url="?curid=308511" title="Nolan Chart">
<text>The Nolan Chart is a political spectrum diagram created by American libertarian activist David Nolan in 1969, charting political views along two axes, representing economic freedom and personal freedom. It expands political view analysis beyond the traditional one-dimensional left–right/progressive-conservative divide, positioning libertarianism outside the traditional spectrum.

== Development ==

The claim that political positions can be located on a chart with two axes: left–right (economics) and tough–tender (authoritarian-libertarian) was put forward by the British psychologist Hans Eysenck in his 1954 book &quot;The Psychology of Politics&quot; with statistical evidence based on survey data. This leads to a loose classification of political positions into four quadrants, with further detail based on exact position within the quadrant.

A similar two-dimensional chart appeared in 1970 in the publication &quot;The Floodgates of Anarchy&quot; by Stuart Christie and Albert Meltzer, but that work distinguished between the axes collectivism–capitalism on the one hand, individualism–totalitarianism on the other, with anarchism, fascism, &quot;state communism&quot; and &quot;capitalist individualism&quot; in the corners. In &quot;Radicals for Capitalism&quot; (p. 321), Brian Doherty attributes the idea for the chart to an article by Maurice Bryson and William McDill in &quot;The Rampart Journal of Individualist Thought&quot; (Summer 1968) entitled &quot;The Political Spectrum: A Bi-Dimensional Approach&quot;.

Steve Mariotti, a teenage colleague of Carl Oglesby&#x27;s in the leftist student organization Students for a Democratic Society (SDS), credits Oglesby with describing a form of the two-axis Nolan Chart during a delivery of Oglesby&#x27;s &quot;Let Us Shape the Future&quot; speech in 1965. Oglesby&#x27;s political outlook was more eclectic than that of many leftists in SDS; he was heavily influenced by libertarian economist Murray Rothbard and he dismissed socialism as &quot;a way to bury social problems under a federal bureaucracy.&quot; Oglesby even (unsuccessfully) proposed cooperation between SDS and the conservative group Young Americans for Freedom on some projects, and argued that &quot;in a strong sense, the Old Right and the New Left are morally and politically coordinate.&quot; Nolan was a member of Young Americans for Freedom at the time.

David Nolan first published his version of the chart in an article named &quot;Classifying and Analyzing Politico-Economic Systems&quot; in the January 1971 issue of &quot;The Individualist&quot;, the monthly magazine of the Society for Individual Liberty (SIL). In December 1971, he helped to start the group that would become the Libertarian Party.

Frustrated by the &quot;left-right&quot; line analysis that leaves no room for other ideologies, Nolan devised a chart with two axes which would come to be known as the Nolan Chart, and later became the centerpiece of the World&#x27;s Smallest Political Quiz. Nolan&#x27;s argument was that the major difference between various political philosophies, the real defining element in what a person believes politically, is the amount of government control over human action that is advocated. Nolan further reasoned that virtually all human political action can be divided into two broad categories: economic and personal. The &quot;economic&quot; category includes what people do as producers and consumers – what they can buy, sell and produce, where they work, who they hire and what they do with their money. Examples of economic activity include starting or operating a business, buying a home, constructing a building and working in an office. The &quot;personal&quot; category includes what people do in relationships, in self-expression and what they do with their own bodies and minds. Examples of personal activities include whom they marry; choosing what books they read and movies they watch; what foods, medicines and drugs they choose to consume; recreational activities; religious choices; organizations they join; and with whom they choose to associate.
According to Nolan, since most government activity (or government control) occurs in these two major areas, political positions can be defined by how much government control a person or political party favors in these two areas. The extremes are no government at all in either area (anarchism) or total or near-total government control of everything (various forms of totalitarianism). Most political philosophies fall somewhere in between. In broad terms:
* Those on the right, including American conservatives, tend to favor more freedom in economic matters (example: a free market), but more government intervention in personal matters (example: drug laws).
* Those on the left, including American liberals, tend to favor more freedom in personal matters (example: no military draft), but more government activism or control in economics (example: a government-mandated minimum wage).
* Libertarians favor both personal and economic freedom and oppose most (or all) government intervention in both areas. Like conservatives, libertarians believe in free markets. Like liberals, libertarians believe in personal freedom.
* Authoritarians favor a lot of government control in both the personal and economic areas. Different versions of the chart as well as Nolan&#x27;s original chart use terms such as &quot;totalitarian&quot;, &quot;statist&quot;, &quot;communitarian&quot; or &quot;populist&quot; to label this corner of the chart.
* Centrists favor a balance or mix of both freedom and government involvement in both personal and economic matters.

In order to visually express this argument, Nolan came up with a two-axis graph. One axis was for economic freedom and the other was for personal freedom, with the scale on each of the two axes ranging from zero (total state control) to 100% (no state control). 100% freedom in economics would mean an entirely free market (&quot;laissez-faire&quot;); 100% freedom in personal issues would mean no government control of private, personal life. By using the scale on each of the two axes, it was possible to graph the intersection of the amount of personal liberty and economic liberty a person, political organization, or political philosophy advocates. Therefore, instead of classifying all political opinion on a one-dimensional range from left to right, Nolan&#x27;s chart allowed two-dimensional measurement: how much (or little) government control a person favored in personal and economic matters.

Nolan said that one of the impacts of his chart is that when someone views it, it causes an irreversible change as viewers henceforth view the included orientations in two dimensions instead of one.

In 1987, Marshall Fritz, founder of Advocates for Self-Government, tweaked the chart and added ten questions – which he called the World&#x27;s Smallest Political Quiz – which enabled people to plot their political beliefs on the chart.

== Positions ==

Differing from the traditional left–right distinction and other political taxonomies, the Nolan Chart in its original form has two dimensions, with a horizontal x-axis labeled &quot;economic freedom&quot; and a vertical y-axis labeled &quot;personal freedom&quot;. It resembles a square divided into five sections, with a label assigned to each of the following sections:
* Bottom left – Statism. The opposite of libertarianism, corresponding with those supporting low economic and personal freedom.
* Top left – Left-wing political philosophies. Those supporting low economic freedom and high personal freedom.
* Bottom right – Right-wing political philosophies. Those supporting high economic freedom and low personal freedom.
* Top right – Libertarians. David Nolan&#x27;s own philosophy, corresponding with those supporting high economic and personal freedom.
* Center – Centrism. The center area defines the political middle, for those who favor a mixed system balancing both economic and personal freedom with the need for some market regulation and personal sacrifice.

== Polling ==
In August 2011, the libertarian &quot;Reason&quot; magazine worked with the Rupe organization to survey 1,200 Americans by telephone and place their views within the Nolan chart categories. The Reason-Rupe poll found that &quot;Americans cannot easily be bundled into either the &#x27;liberal&#x27; or &#x27;conservative&#x27; groups&quot;. Specifically, 28% expressed conservative views, 24% expressed libertarian views, 20% expressed communitarian views and 28% expressed liberal views. The margin of error was ±3.

== Criticism ==
Brian Patrick Mitchell, who uses a different political taxonomy, cites these points of disagreement:
* The strict separation of social and economic policy that the chart is based on, is untenable in general. In migration policy, for example, both sociocultural and economic issues are at play.
* The view that the Right can be defined by its acceptance of state intervention into the domestic sphere (little &#x27;personal freedom&#x27;) and the Left by its rejection, is false. In the U.S., the Right generally opposed gun control, while the Left argues for it.

Similar criticisms, but from a libertarian perspective, are leveled by Jacob Huebert, who adds that the separation of personal and economic liberty is untenable when one considers the rights to prostitute oneself and to deal drugs, both of which are libertarian causes: adopting either profession is a personal (moral) as well as an economic decision. Also, Huebert notes that it is unclear where in the Nolan chart libertarian opposition to war belongs.

The libertarian response to these criticisms is that the issues are presented in a specific frame of reference by the political factions consistent with the chart. Free immigration is typically viewed as a personal liberty issue, so it is favored by those on the political left. Drug legalization is framed as a personal rights issue, so it tends to be favored by the left.
War is viewed as a destruction of both society and the economy.

== Further applications ==
Some commentators have accepted Nolan&#x27;s use of two axes of personal and economic freedom, but have argued that he either didn&#x27;t go far enough or that the Nolan Chart can be used to demonstrate the validity of other ideologies. For example, Kelley L. Ross, a libertarian former philosophy professor who ran for California State Assembly in 1996, contends that a third axis of political liberty is required to make the chart more meaningful. On the other hand, Owen Prell, a founding member of Unite America, formerly The Centrist Project, contends that the Nolan Chart is a definite improvement on the more primitive single-axis left-right political continuum, but that it better serves the cause of political centrism.

Several popular online tests, where individuals can self-identify their political values, utilize the same two axes as the Nolan Chart without attribution, including The Political Compass, iSideWith.com and MapMyPolitics.org.

== See also ==

* Inglehart–Welzel cultural map of the world
* The Political Compass

== References ==
== Further reading ==

== External links ==

* A modern version of the Nolan Chart
* Nolan Chart website (404 error as of Apr 2024)
* The Nolan Chart and its variations
* Positive &amp; Negative Liberties in Three Dimensions
* The Enhanced Precision Political Quiz... IN 2D
* Political Profile Test
* Political Spectrum Quiz
* A voting index of the U.S. Congress (prepared by Prof. Clifford F. Thies for the Republican Liberty Caucus)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1468706" start="4" end="15" title="Nolan Chart" label="Nolan Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q210918" start="21" end="39" title="political spectrum" label="political spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="59" end="67" title="United States" label="American"/>
<link wikidata="Q558334" start="68" end="79" title="Libertarian Party (United States)" label="libertarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q663388" start="89" end="100" title="David Nolan (libertarian)" label="David Nolan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257" start="119" end="134" title="political views" label="political views"/>
<link wikidata="Q322996" start="164" end="180" title="economic freedom" label="economic freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q29556" start="185" end="201" title="personal freedom" label="personal freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2921172" start="277" end="287" title="Left–right political spectrum" label="left–right"/>
<link wikidata="Q8134" start="490" end="499" title="economics" label="economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q6229" start="519" end="532" title="Authoritarianism" label="authoritarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q178598" start="533" end="544" title="Libertarianism" label="libertarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q58632" start="590" end="602" title="Hans Eysenck" label="Hans Eysenck"/>
<link wikidata="Q981988" start="963" end="978" title="Stuart Christie" label="Stuart Christie"/>
<link wikidata="Q4710834" start="983" end="997" title="Albert Meltzer" label="Albert Meltzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q223178" start="1044" end="1056" title="Collectivist anarchism" label="collectivism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6206" start="1057" end="1067" title="capitalism" label="capitalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q171995" start="1085" end="1098" title="individualism" label="individualism"/>
<link wikidata="Q128135" start="1099" end="1114" title="totalitarianism" label="totalitarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6199" start="1134" end="1143" title="anarchism" label="anarchism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6223" start="1145" end="1152" title="fascism" label="fascism"/>
<link wikidata="Q849866" start="1160" end="1175" title="State Communism" label="state communism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6216" start="1192" end="1216" title="Liberalism" label="capitalist individualism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765651" start="1248" end="1271" title="Radicals for Capitalism" label="Radicals for Capitalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765651" start="1288" end="1301" title="Brian Doherty (journalist)" label="Brian Doherty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7613261" start="1534" end="1548" title="Steve Mariotti" label="Steve Mariotti"/>
<link wikidata="Q5040592" start="1573" end="1585" title="Carl Oglesby" label="Carl Oglesby"/>
<link wikidata="Q2250103" start="1629" end="1662" title="Students for a Democratic Society (1960 organization)" label="Students for a Democratic Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q178598" start="1940" end="1951" title="Libertarianism" label="libertarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q297079" start="1962" end="1977" title="Murray Rothbard" label="Murray Rothbard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="1995" end="2004" title="socialism" label="socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q72468" start="2060" end="2071" title="bureaucracy" label="bureaucracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2585032" start="2150" end="2162" title="Conservatism in the United States" label="conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q8057921" start="2169" end="2196" title="Young Americans for Freedom" label="Young Americans for Freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7084844" start="2260" end="2269" title="Old Right (United States)" label="Old Right"/>
<link wikidata="Q160637" start="2278" end="2286" title="New Left" label="New Left"/>
<link wikidata="Q8057921" start="2355" end="2382" title="Young Americans for Freedom" label="Young Americans for Freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q5479605" start="2622" end="2652" title="Society for Individual Liberty" label="Society for Individual Liberty"/>
<link wikidata="Q558334" start="2729" end="2746" title="Libertarian Party (United States)" label="Libertarian Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3270099" start="2971" end="3007" title="World&amp;#x27;s Smallest Political Quiz" label="World&amp;#x27;s Smallest Political Quiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q22855" start="3444" end="3453" title="consumers" label="consumers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6199" start="4399" end="4408" title="anarchism" label="anarchism"/>
<link wikidata="Q128135" start="4484" end="4499" title="totalitarianism" label="totalitarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q179805" start="4507" end="4529" title="Political philosophy" label="political philosophies"/>
<link wikidata="Q76074" start="4588" end="4593" title="right-wing politics" label="right"/>
<link wikidata="Q2585032" start="4605" end="4627" title="Conservatism in the United States" label="American conservatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q46607" start="4688" end="4699" title="free market" label="free market"/>
<link wikidata="Q4551312" start="4765" end="4774" title="drug laws" label="drug laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q164597" start="4792" end="4796" title="left-wing politics" label="left"/>
<link wikidata="Q721556" start="4808" end="4825" title="Liberalism in the United States" label="American liberals"/>
<link wikidata="Q580750" start="4887" end="4901" title="Conscription" label="military draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q186228" start="4989" end="5001" title="minimum wage" label="minimum wage"/>
<link wikidata="Q16153120" start="5006" end="5018" title="Libertarianism in the United States" label="Libertarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q6229" start="5241" end="5255" title="Authoritarianism" label="Authoritarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q128135" start="5426" end="5438" title="totalitarian" label="totalitarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q322294" start="5452" end="5459" title="statist" label="statist"/>
<link wikidata="Q324530" start="5473" end="5486" title="communitarian" label="communitarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q180490" start="5502" end="5510" title="populist" label="populist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6587194" start="5554" end="5563" title="Centrists" label="Centrists"/>
<link wikidata="Q3270099" start="6906" end="6942" title="World&amp;#x27;s Smallest Political Quiz" label="World&amp;#x27;s Smallest Political Quiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q322294" start="7418" end="7425" title="Statism" label="Statism"/>
<link wikidata="Q164597" start="7543" end="7575" title="Left-wing politics" label="Left-wing political philosophies"/>
<link wikidata="Q76074" start="7659" end="7692" title="Right-wing politics" label="Right-wing political philosophies"/>
<link wikidata="Q16153120" start="7773" end="7785" title="Libertarianism in the United States" label="Libertarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q6587194" start="7905" end="7913" title="Centrism" label="Centrism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454090" start="8159" end="8165" title="Reason (magazine)" label="Reason"/>
<link wikidata="Q4965009" start="8655" end="8677" title="Brian Patrick Mitchell" label="Brian Patrick Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328508" start="9175" end="9186" title="gun control" label="gun control"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9290" end="9303" title="Jacob Huebert" label="Jacob Huebert"/>
<link wikidata="Q36633" start="9413" end="9423" title="Prostitution" label="prostitute"/>
<link wikidata="Q844924" start="9439" end="9449" title="Illegal drug trade" label="deal drugs"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10391" end="10405" title="Kelley L. Ross" label="Kelley L. Ross"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10610" end="10620" title="Owen Prell" label="Owen Prell"/>
<link wikidata="Q39057819" start="10643" end="10656" title="Unite America" label="Unite America"/>
<link wikidata="Q39057819" start="10667" end="10687" title="The Centrist Project" label="The Centrist Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q6587194" start="10860" end="10868" title="centrism" label="centrism"/>
<link wikidata="Q116505645" start="11037" end="11058" title="The Political Compass" label="The Political Compass"/>
<link wikidata="Q13419532" start="11116" end="11158" title="Inglehart–Welzel cultural map of the world" label="Inglehart–Welzel cultural map of the world"/>
<link wikidata="Q116505645" start="11161" end="11182" title="The Political Compass" label="The Political Compass"/>
<link wikidata="Q3933276" start="11609" end="11634" title="Republican Liberty Caucus" label="Republican Liberty Caucus"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="308516" wikidata="Q1031538" url="?curid=308516" title="Import (disambiguation)">
<text>[[Import]] is the act of bringing goods into a country.

Import may also refer to:

*import and export of data, in computing
*import tariff, a tax on imported goods
*import quota, a type of trade restriction
*Import substitution industrialization, an economic policy
*Import scene, a subculture that centers on modifying imported brand cars
*The #Import directive in Objective-C
*The import keyword in Java

==See also==
* Export (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1031538" start="0" end="10" title="Import (disambiguation)" label="[[Import]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031538" start="57" end="63" title="Import (disambiguation)" label="Import"/>
<link wikidata="Q6007395" start="85" end="110" title="import and export of data" label="import and export of data"/>
<link wikidata="Q52389" start="126" end="139" title="import tariff" label="import tariff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1307364" start="166" end="178" title="import quota" label="import quota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1660379" start="209" end="246" title="Import substitution industrialization" label="Import substitution industrialization"/>
<link wikidata="Q3783071" start="268" end="280" title="Import scene" label="Import scene"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="346" end="353" title="Objective-C##import" label="#Import"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="384" end="390" title="List of Java keywords#import" label="import"/>
<link wikidata="Q419604" start="423" end="446" title="Export (disambiguation)" label="Export (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="308519" wikidata="Q5518129" url="?curid=308519" title="Galaxy High School">
<text>is a science fiction animated series that premiered on September 13, 1986, on CBS and ran for 13 episodes until December 6, 1986. The series was created by Chris Columbus and featured music and a theme song composed by Don Felder.

==Synopsis==
Two Earth teenagers are accepted into the intergalactic high school Galaxy High School on the fictional asteroid Flutor. The teenage boy, Doyle Cleverlobe, was a skilled athlete and popular, while the teenage girl Aimee Brighttower was shy and, as the theme song states, &quot;the smartest girl in school, not very popular, not very cool.&quot;

But once in space, their roles are somewhat reversed. The alien teenagers seem to accept the not-so-popular Aimee, while Doyle tends to rub the aliens the wrong way. Although Doyle finds himself an outcast and has difficulties adjusting, Aimee does not abandon him, and suggests he can make friends and bring glory to Galaxy High through his excellent sporting abilities, which he does by winning a championship in &quot;psych-hockey&quot;, which Galaxy High had always lost in the past. The show drops many hints of a budding romance between Doyle and Aimee, but it was never given time to grow as the show was not renewed for a second season.

The aliens in the school include Gilda Gossip, the girl with a big mouth (or rather mouths), Booey Bubblehead, an absent-minded girl with a bubble for a head, Milo de Venus, the six-armed class president, Beef (a chicken-like alien) and the Bonk Bunch who bully Doyle (and just about every student at Galaxy High), and the Creep, a small alien resembling something between a fat cherub and a yellow marshmallow who has a huge crush on Aimee, which often revealed itself as he serenaded like a Las Vegas lounge singer. The teachers are even more unusual than the students: Ms. Biddy McBrain has a light bulb attached to her head, while Coach Frogface eats flies and Professor Icenstein has to keep his classroom cold to keep him from melting.

==Cast==

===Additional English (Original) Voices===
* Gino Conforti (Ollie Oilslick, Reggie Unicycle)
* Jennifer Darling (Myrtle Blastermeier, Wendy Garbo)
* Pat Fraley (Coach Frogface, Sludge)
* Henry Gibson (Doyle&#x27;s locker)
* Howard Morris (Luigi La Bounci, Others)
* John Stephenson (Harvey Blastermeier)

==Crew==
*Howard Morris - Voice Director

==Episodes==
==Production notes==
The animated series &quot;Partridge Family 2200 A.D.&quot;, which debuted in 1974, features Keith and Laurie Partridge going to a futuristic space high school called &quot;Galaxy High,&quot; and Laurie&#x27;s friend Marion Moonglow (a Martian) bears a striking resemblance to the Wendy Garbo character from this series.

&quot;Galaxy High School&quot; was animated, distributed and owned by TMS Entertainment. TMS produced &quot;Galaxy High&quot; as an attempt to create a similar series to their hit Japanese anime show &quot;Urusei Yatsura&quot; (released 1981, based on a 1978 manga) for the American market. While &quot;Urusei Yatsura&quot; involves an alien girl attending a human high school, the school scenario in &quot;Galaxy High&quot; is reversed to be based around humans attending a high school for aliens.

John Kricfalusi was a character designer for the show and went on to create &quot;Ren &amp; Stimpy&quot; and &quot;The Ripping Friends&quot;.

Syd Iwanter, the creative director, came up with the concept and hired Kricfalusi to draw a one-sheet pitch featuring the main characters for a proposed &quot;HIGH SCHOOL 2525&quot;. When Michael Chase Walker became director of children&#x27;s programs for the CBS Television Network, he bought the show, changed the name to &quot;Galaxy High School&quot; and convinced up-and-coming screenwriter turned future filmmaker Chris Columbus to develop the show under his name. Walker was trying to develop a Saturday morning schedule that resembled an old-fashioned Saturday movie matinée with a range of horror (&quot;Teen Wolf&quot;), science fiction (&quot;Galaxy High School&quot;), comedy (&quot;Pee-wee&#x27;s Playhouse&quot;) and Western (&quot;Wildfire&quot;). 

An alternate theme song exists showing clips from various episodes. The theme was changed to an instrumental one. At the end, Aimee speaks &quot;Here we are Doyle! The only two kids from Earth at a high school in outer space! How do you feel?&quot; Doyle responds &quot;A little spaced out, Aimee!&quot;

The show features transportation tubes, which people can enter and be whisked away around the school; these are reminiscent of old-style pneumatic tubes. In &quot;Galaxy High&quot;, they are known as &quot;wooshers&quot;.

The show had been granted two time slots by CBS, for its 1986 and 1987 Saturday mornings, with the expectation of a two-season contract. When the show was not renewed for a second season, CBS elected to rerun the first season in its 1987 time slot, in order to make up for episodes that had been preempted by Saturday sporting events in 1986. Chris Columbus later remarked that CBS had been ambivalent about whether or not there would be a renewal, and had written one script in anticipation of a second season. The sole unproduced episode of &quot;Galaxy High&quot; concerned cliquish divisions in Galaxy High which start with pranks and food fights, but soon culminate into a school &quot;civil war&quot;, causing Galaxy High&#x27;s board of trustees to notice this and threaten to shut down the school.

===Film===
In 1996, Walker optioned the film rights with John H. Williams of Vanguard Films, and reteamed with Chris Columbus to develop the big screen version of &quot;Galaxy High School&quot;. After various development deals with both DreamWorks and Paramount Pictures, the movie plans remain in limbo.

===Series tie-in===
An 85-page paperback book titled &quot;Galaxy High School&quot; was published in August 1987 by Bantam-Skylark Books and written by Ann Hodgman. It is an adaptation of six episodes, &quot;Welcome to Galaxy High&quot;, &quot;Those Eyes, Those Lips&quot;, &quot;The Beef Who Would Be King&quot;, &quot;Dollars and Sense&quot;, &quot;Beach Blanket Blow-Up&quot; and &quot;Founder&#x27;s Day&quot;. In the prologue, it says that Doyle and Aimee, while on Earth, attended Presley High School and its sports team was called the Hound Dogs. It also says that Aimee didn&#x27;t know Doyle well before coming to Galaxy High, but did think he was cute, until they actually meet when first entering their new school. The paperback is out-of-print and is a highly sought collectible among fans of the show.

===Airdates===
&quot;Galaxy High School&quot; originally aired at 11:00am EST/10:00am CST after &quot;Teen Wolf&quot; and before &quot;CBS Storybreak&quot; in the 1986–1987 season on CBS. It was also given a timeslot for the 1987-1988 CBS season in the expectation of a second season, but upon the show&#x27;s retirement the 1987–1988 schedules re-ran episodes of the first season.

Later airdates: 2 January 1988 – 27 August 1988 on CBS, January 2, 1994–?, July 2, 1994–September 24, 1994, October 8, 1994–December 31, 1994–early 1995, 7 February 1996 – 23 February 1996, April 2, 1996 – April 19, 1996, May 27, 1996–June 17, 1996 on the Sci Fi Channel.

In 1996, the show aired on Nickelodeon on weekday mornings in the United Kingdom. Prior to that, in the early-to-mid 1990&#x27;s, it aired on ITV&#x27;s breakfast programmes, TV-AM and later GMTV.

==Awards==
The show was nominated for a Humanitas Prize for its anti-drug episode &quot;The Brain Blaster&quot;.

==Legacy==
*&quot;Galaxy High&quot; appears frequently in the 1980s animation magazine &quot;cereal:geek&quot;.
*The role-playing game &quot;Teenagers from Outer Space&quot; released in 1987 expanded upon this concept.
*Episode 17 of &quot;Space Dandy&quot; features a similar setting.

==Home media releases==
Four episodes of the show were re-edited into a compilation video titled &quot;Galaxy High&quot; in 1989 by Family Home Entertainment

&quot;Galaxy High School&quot; has been released in full on DVD. All 13 episodes are available uncut and as they were originally aired, across two volumes, produced and distributed by Media Blasters through their Anime Works imprint.

In the United Kingdom, during 1989, Channel 5 Video released the first two episodes of the television series on video.

==References==
==External links==
*&quot;Galaxy High School&quot; at Don Markstein&#x27;s Toonopedia. Archived from the original on August 21, 2015.
*&quot;Galaxy High&quot; at ClassicKidsTV.co.uk
*TMS Entertainment (Japanese)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q24925" start="5" end="20" title="science fiction" label="science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q581714" start="21" end="36" title="animated series" label="animated series"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="78" end="81" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q75079" start="156" end="170" title="Chris Columbus (filmmaker)" label="Chris Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q704399" start="219" end="229" title="Don Felder" label="Don Felder"/>
<link wikidata="Q2" start="249" end="254" title="Earth" label="Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q185569" start="1616" end="1622" title="cherub" label="cherub"/>
<link wikidata="Q272198" start="1636" end="1647" title="marshmallow" label="marshmallow"/>
<link wikidata="Q23768" start="1730" end="1739" title="Las Vegas" label="Las Vegas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141081" start="1740" end="1753" title="Lounge music" label="lounge singer"/>
<link wikidata="Q47616" start="1833" end="1843" title="Incandescent light bulb" label="light bulb"/>
<link wikidata="Q3106805" start="2035" end="2048" title="Gino Conforti" label="Gino Conforti"/>
<link wikidata="Q328456" start="2085" end="2101" title="Jennifer Darling" label="Jennifer Darling"/>
<link wikidata="Q2254520" start="2139" end="2149" title="Pat Fraley" label="Pat Fraley"/>
<link wikidata="Q225657" start="2177" end="2189" title="Henry Gibson" label="Henry Gibson"/>
<link wikidata="Q322266" start="2214" end="2227" title="Howard Morris" label="Howard Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182524" start="2256" end="2271" title="John Stephenson (actor)" label="John Stephenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q322266" start="2305" end="2318" title="Howard Morris" label="Howard Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q3284379" start="2397" end="2423" title="Partridge Family 2200 A.D." label="Partridge Family 2200 A.D."/>
<link wikidata="Q1054807" start="2762" end="2779" title="TMS Entertainment" label="TMS Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107" start="2881" end="2886" title="anime" label="anime"/>
<link wikidata="Q715723" start="2898" end="2912" title="Urusei Yatsura" label="Urusei Yatsura"/>
<link wikidata="Q8274" start="2951" end="2956" title="manga" label="manga"/>
<link wikidata="Q955144" start="3192" end="3207" title="John Kricfalusi" label="John Kricfalusi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361124" start="3274" end="3290" title="The Ren &amp;amp; Stimpy Show" label="Ren &amp;amp; Stimpy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2413907" start="3307" end="3326" title="The Ripping Friends" label="The Ripping Friends"/>
<link wikidata="Q75079" start="3756" end="3770" title="Chris Columbus (filmmaker)" label="Chris Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q607960" start="3949" end="3958" title="Teen Wolf (1986 TV series)" label="Teen Wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q7160103" start="4031" end="4055" title="Pee-wee&amp;#x27;s Playhouse" label="Pee-wee&amp;#x27;s Playhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q3221205" start="4082" end="4090" title="Wildfire (1986 TV series)" label="Wildfire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136075" start="4543" end="4558" title="pneumatic tubes" label="pneumatic tubes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6237144" start="5493" end="5509" title="John H. Williams (film producer)" label="John H. Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q544150" start="5513" end="5527" title="Vanguard Films &amp;amp; Animation" label="Vanguard Films"/>
<link wikidata="Q192557" start="5673" end="5683" title="DreamWorks Pictures" label="DreamWorks"/>
<link wikidata="Q159846" start="5688" end="5706" title="Paramount Pictures" label="Paramount Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q2609948" start="5858" end="5878" title="Bantam Books" label="Bantam-Skylark Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q4766457" start="5894" end="5905" title="Ann Hodgman" label="Ann Hodgman"/>
<link wikidata="Q607960" start="6660" end="6669" title="Teen Wolf (1986 TV series)" label="Teen Wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q5009276" start="6693" end="6707" title="CBS Storybreak" label="CBS Storybreak"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="6741" end="6744" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="6992" end="6995" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q276542" start="7197" end="7211" title="Syfy" label="Sci Fi Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424968" start="7452" end="7467" title="Humanitas Prize" label="Humanitas Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q160738" start="7643" end="7660" title="role-playing game" label="role-playing game"/>
<link wikidata="Q3982566" start="7667" end="7693" title="Teenagers from Outer Space (role-playing game)" label="Teenagers from Outer Space"/>
<link wikidata="Q14831173" start="7766" end="7777" title="Space Dandy" label="Space Dandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5433158" start="7945" end="7970" title="Family Home Entertainment" label="Family Home Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294" start="8032" end="8035" title="DVD" label="DVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478133" start="8156" end="8170" title="Media Blasters" label="Media Blasters"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="8214" end="8228" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1983457" start="8243" end="8258" title="PolyGram Filmed Entertainment" label="Channel 5 Video"/>
<link wikidata="Q5293067" start="8396" end="8427" title="Don Markstein&amp;#x27;s Toonopedia" label="Don Markstein&amp;#x27;s Toonopedia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="308527" wikidata="Q1530135" url="?curid=308527" title="Legio X Equestris">
<text>Legio X Equestris, a Roman legion, was one of the most trusted legions of Julius Caesar. Legio X was famous in its day and throughout history, because of its portrayal in Caesar&#x27;s Commentaries and the prominent role the Tenth played in his Gallic campaigns. Its soldiers were discharged in 45 BC. Its remnants were reconstituted, fought for Mark Antony and Octavian, disbanded, and later merged into X &quot;Gemina&quot;.

==History==

===Founding===

The Legio X was one of the four legions Caesar inherited as governor of Cisalpine Gaul in 58 BC. The legion had as its emblem the bull, which was also popular with other legions such as Legio V &quot;Alaudae&quot; (&quot;Larks&quot;), Legio XI, Legio XII &quot;Victrix&quot;, and Legio XIII &quot;Gemina&quot;. It may have been levied in 72 BC. Others believe it was formed already during the Social War (91-87 BC). Another hypothesis is that it was levied in 61 BC by Gaius Julius Caesar when he, as Governor in the province of Baetica or Hispania Ulterior (modern Andalusia), decided to subdue the west and northwest areas (modern day Portugal); according to this theory, Caesar needed for his planned campaign a third legion (in addition to the 8th and 9th legions, which had been enlisted by Pompey the Great in 65 BC) and enlisted the 10th legion, which proved successful and showed itself to be brave and loyal.

===Gallic Wars and the invasion of Britain===
The Tenth played a crucial part in the Gallic Wars, fighting under Caesar in virtually every battle.

At the beginning of the Gallic campaign, Caesar had the 10th, 7th, 8th, and 9th legions. Almost immediately, in the summer of 58 BC, the legion fought in two major actions, the battles of Arar and Bibracte. They played a central part in Caesar&#x27;s defeat of the Helvetii tribes, preventing their migration from present day Switzerland to western France.

Following the defeat of the Helvetii, the leaders of the Gallic tribes petitioned Caesar for his aid against Ariovistus, king of the German Suebi tribe. Prior to battle, Ariovistus suggested a peace conference but insisted that each side should only be accompanied by mounted troops. Ariovistus made this a condition knowing that Caesar&#x27;s cavalry was composed mainly of Aedui horsemen whose loyalty to Caesar was questionable. Caesar ordered a group of his Gallic auxiliaries to dismount and had legionaries from the 10th ride in their place to accompany him to the peace conference. This incident earned the legion its nickname &quot;Equestris&quot; (mounted). One of the legionaries jokingly said that Caesar was better than his word: he had promised to make them foot guards, but now they appeared as equestrians.

Legio X saved the day in the Battle against the Nervians in 57 BC. Together with the IXth, the Xth defeated the Atrebates, moved against the Belgae on the other side of the river and captured the enemy camp. From that position, the Tenth could see how desperate the situation was for the XII &quot;Victrix&quot; and the VII, so it quickly charged downhill, crossed the river, and attacked the Nervii from the rear, trapping them so that there was little hope of survival.

In 55 BC Legio X was one of the two legions (together with the VII) which took part in Caesar&#x27;s first invasion of Britain. It is probable that it also participated in the second invasion in 54 BC.

===Caesar&#x27;s Civil War===
During Caesar&#x27;s Civil War, at the Battle of Dyrrhachium, Caesar feared Legio X would be outflanked by reinforcements led by Gnaeus Pompeius Magnus and ordered them to retreat. The rest of Caesar&#x27;s army, seeing Legio X retreating for the first time, broke and fled to their camps. Legio X, seeing the army rout, fled too. After the defeat, Legio X&#x27;s officers demanded to be decimated for cowardice but Caesar was reluctant and demoted Legio X&#x27;s standard bearers instead.

Legio X only had one more battle to restore their reputation before they returned to Rome and mutinied for being unpaid.

===End of the legion===
In 45 BC the legion was disbanded, and the veterans obtained lands in Narbonne, southern Gaul.

During the civil war that followed Caesar&#x27;s assassination, the Legio X was reconstituted by Lepidus (winter 44/43), and fought for the triumvirs until the final Battle of Philippi. The veterans obtained lands near Cremona, and an inscription reports that the name of the legion at the time was Veneria, &quot;devoted to Venus&quot;, the mythical mother of gens Julia.

The Tenth later followed Mark Antony in Armenia, during his disastrous Parthian campaign. During Antony&#x27;s civil war, the legion fought for Mark Antony until the defeat in the Battle of Actium, after which the legion moved into Octavian&#x27;s army. The veterans settled in Patras. When the legion rebelled under Augustus, it was disbanded, stripped of its &quot;Equestris&quot; title, and, being populated with soldiers from other legions, renamed X &quot;Gemina&quot;.

==See also==

* List of Roman legions

==Notes==
==References==

===Primary sources===
*Julius Caesar, &quot;De Bello Gallico&quot;

===Secondary sources===
* Dando-Collins, Stephen (2002), &quot;Caesar&#x27;s Legion: The Epic Saga of Julius Caesar&#x27;s Elite Tenth Legion and the Armies of Rome&quot;, Wiley.
* Keppie, Lawrence (1984), &quot;The Making of the Roman Army. From Republic to Empire&quot;, University of Oklahoma Press, pp. 132–149.
* Lendering, Jona, &quot;Legio X Gemina&quot;, livius.org
* Phang, Sara Elise (2008). &quot;Roman Military Service: ideologies of discipline in the Late Republic and early Principate&quot;, Cambridge University Press.
* Soden, Ben (2015). &quot;10th Legion: Battle Born&quot;. Bellum Books.
* Ritterling&#x27;s &quot;Legio&quot; &quot;Legio X Veneria&quot; </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1530135" start="0" end="17" title="Legio X Equestris" label="Legio X Equestris"/>
<link wikidata="Q163323" start="21" end="33" title="Roman legion" label="Roman legion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048" start="74" end="87" title="Julius Caesar" label="Julius Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q106199" start="171" end="197" title="Commentarii de Bello Gallico" label="Caesar&amp;#x27;s Commentaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q51673" start="346" end="357" title="Mark Antony" label="Mark Antony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405" start="362" end="370" title="Augustus" label="Octavian"/>
<link wikidata="Q253539" start="405" end="425" title="Legio X Gemina" label="X &amp;quot;Gemina&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136322" start="643" end="670" title="Legio V Alaudae" label="Legio V &amp;quot;Alaudae&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1812766" start="692" end="700" title="Legio XI" label="Legio XI"/>
<link wikidata="Q966049" start="702" end="731" title="Legio XII Fulminata" label="Legio XII &amp;quot;Victrix&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q168553" start="737" end="766" title="Legio XIII Gemina" label="Legio XIII &amp;quot;Gemina&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q677316" start="850" end="871" title="Social War (91-87 BC)" label="Social War (91-87 BC)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048" start="926" end="945" title="Gaius Julius Caesar" label="Gaius Julius Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q219415" start="986" end="993" title="Baetica" label="Baetica"/>
<link wikidata="Q747040" start="997" end="1014" title="Hispania Ulterior" label="Hispania Ulterior"/>
<link wikidata="Q5783" start="1023" end="1032" title="Andalusia" label="Andalusia"/>
<link wikidata="Q45" start="1094" end="1102" title="Portugal" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q125414" start="1253" end="1259" title="Pompey" label="Pompey"/>
<link wikidata="Q202161" start="1461" end="1472" title="Gallic Wars" label="Gallic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274566" start="1712" end="1716" title="Battle of the Arar" label="Arar"/>
<link wikidata="Q635028" start="1721" end="1729" title="Battle of Bibracte" label="Bibracte"/>
<link wikidata="Q48616" start="1789" end="1797" title="Helvetii" label="Helvetii"/>
<link wikidata="Q316833" start="1991" end="2001" title="Ariovistus" label="Ariovistus"/>
<link wikidata="Q122166" start="2691" end="2702" title="Equites" label="equestrians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268733" start="2734" end="2761" title="Battle against the Nervians" label="Battle against the Nervians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136315" start="2790" end="2794" title="Legio IX Hispana" label="IXth"/>
<link wikidata="Q164811" start="2817" end="2826" title="Atrebates" label="Atrebates"/>
<link wikidata="Q337104" start="2846" end="2852" title="Belgae" label="Belgae"/>
<link wikidata="Q966049" start="2993" end="3016" title="Legio XII Fulminata" label="XII &amp;quot;Victrix&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324310" start="3025" end="3028" title="Legio VII Claudia" label="VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q756812" start="3098" end="3104" title="Nervii" label="Nervii"/>
<link wikidata="Q742306" start="3285" end="3304" title="Caesar&amp;#x27;s invasions of Britain" label="invasion of Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1238338" start="3418" end="3441" title="Caesar&amp;#x27;s Civil War" label="Caesar&amp;#x27;s Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q525325" start="3450" end="3471" title="Battle of Dyrrhachium (48 BC)" label="Battle of Dyrrhachium"/>
<link wikidata="Q125414" start="3540" end="3562" title="Pompey" label="Gnaeus Pompeius Magnus"/>
<link wikidata="Q465119" start="3799" end="3808" title="decimated" label="decimated"/>
<link wikidata="Q6555" start="4118" end="4126" title="Narbonne" label="Narbonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q38060" start="4137" end="4141" title="Gaul" label="Gaul"/>
<link wikidata="Q2583092" start="4155" end="4164" title="Liberators&amp;#x27; civil war" label="civil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q105452" start="4241" end="4248" title="Marcus Aemilius Lepidus (triumvir)" label="Lepidus"/>
<link wikidata="Q121637198" start="4284" end="4292" title="triumvir" label="triumvir"/>
<link wikidata="Q335330" start="4310" end="4328" title="Battle of Philippi" label="Battle of Philippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6231" start="4363" end="4370" title="Cremona" label="Cremona"/>
<link wikidata="Q47652" start="4469" end="4474" title="Venus (mythology)" label="Venus"/>
<link wikidata="Q510193" start="4505" end="4515" title="gens Julia" label="gens Julia"/>
<link wikidata="Q51673" start="4543" end="4554" title="Mark Antony" label="Mark Antony"/>
<link wikidata="Q399" start="4558" end="4565" title="Armenia" label="Armenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2334699" start="4589" end="4606" title="Antony&amp;#x27;s Parthian War" label="Parthian campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q2116320" start="4615" end="4638" title="Antony&amp;#x27;s civil war" label="Antony&amp;#x27;s civil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q160387" start="4698" end="4714" title="Battle of Actium" label="Battle of Actium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405" start="4750" end="4758" title="Augustus" label="Octavian"/>
<link wikidata="Q133123" start="4796" end="4802" title="Patras" label="Patras"/>
<link wikidata="Q253539" start="4971" end="4991" title="Legio X Gemina" label="X &amp;quot;Gemina&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334983" start="5010" end="5031" title="List of Roman legions" label="List of Roman legions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048" start="5082" end="5095" title="Julius Caesar" label="Julius Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q106199" start="5103" end="5119" title="De Bello Gallico" label="De Bello Gallico"/>
<link wikidata="Q2695034" start="5445" end="5460" title="Jona Lendering" label="Lendering, Jona"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="308528" wikidata="Q253539" url="?curid=308528" title="Legio X Gemina">
<text>Legio X Gemina (&quot;10th Twin(s) Legion&quot; in English), was a Roman legion, which was active during the late Roman Republic and later the Roman Empire as part of the Imperial Roman army. It was one of the four legions used by Julius Caesar in 58 BC, during the Roman invasion of Gaul. After being briefly disbanded, the legion was reconstituted by Augustus (also known as Octavian) and fought on the side of the Second Triumvirate during the Liberators&#x27; Civil War and later on the side of Augustus during the War of Actium which ended the Crisis of the Roman Republic. The legion remained active for centuries, with surviving records of its continued existence in Vienna as late as the 5th century AD. The legion&#x27;s symbol was a bull. Early on in its history, the legion was called X &quot;Equestris&quot; (&quot;mounted&quot;), because Caesar once used the legionaries as cavalry.

== Etymology ==
In the Latin language, &quot;gemina&quot; can refer to either &quot;female twin&quot; or &quot;neuter twins.&quot; Male twin (referring to one twin in a set of twins) would be written as &quot;geminus&quot;, and Male twins (referring to both member of a set of twins) would be written as &quot;gemini.&quot;

==In Republican Service==

===Gallic Wars===
:&quot;See also Legio X Equestris&quot;
In the Gallic Wars, X &quot;Equestris&quot; played an important role on Caesar&#x27;s military success and for this reason is sometimes said to be his favorite. In Caesar&#x27;s campaigns they were present in the battle of the Sabis, the invasions of Britain, and the battle of Gergovia. They remained faithful to Caesar in the civil war against Pompey, being present in the battles of Pharsalus (49 BC) and Munda (45 BC). In 45 BC Caesar disbanded the legion, giving the veterans farmlands near Narbonne in Gaul and in Hispania.

===Augustus===
The legion was reconstituted in 42 BC and fought for Augustus (commonly referred to by Octavian by historians), Lepidus and Mark Antony in the Battle of Philippi against the murderers of Caesar. After this, they followed Mark Antony in his campaign against Parthia and were defeated with him at Actium. Augustus then took control of the legion and settled the veterans in Patras. The legion rebelled and lost its &quot;cognomen&quot; &quot;Equestris&quot; as punishment. Replacements were added from other legions, and the Tenth was rebaptized &quot;Gemina&quot;.

==In Imperial Service==
From about 30 BC the newly formed X &quot;Gemina&quot; was relocated to Petavonium in Hispania Tarraconensis, where Augustus was preparing a campaign against the Cantabrians. Their veterans were among the first inhabitants of modern Zaragoza and Emerita Augusta, modern Mérida.

The legion was sent to Carnuntum in Pannonia in about 63 AD (or a bit earlier) after legio XV Apollinaris left and went to the east. During the brief reign of Galba (68-69), it was transferred back to Hispania.

===Under the Flavian dynasty===

However, its stay in Hispania was to be very brief. In 70, after the Batavian rebellion was suppressed by the new emperor Vespasian, X &quot;Gemina&quot; was sent to Batavia in Germania Inferior to police the lands and prevent new revolts. From 71 to 103, the legion was stationed at the base built by II &quot;Adiutrix&quot; near &quot;Oppidum Batavorum&quot;, the present day Dutch city of Nijmegen.

As part of the army of Germania Inferior, X &quot;Gemina&quot; fought against the rebellion of the governor of Germania Superior, L. Antonius Saturninus, against Emperor Domitian. For this reason, the Tenth — as well as the other legions of the army, I &quot;Minervia&quot;, VI &quot;Victrix&quot;, and XXII &quot;Primigenia&quot; — received the title &quot;Pia Fidelis Domitiana&quot;, &quot;faithful and loyal to Domitian&quot;, with the reference to the Emperor dropped at his death and subsequent &quot;damnatio memoriae&quot;.

===2nd century===
During Trajan&#x27;s first campaign in Dacia (101–102), the legion participated at the Second Battle of Tapae, fighting against the army of the Dacians led by King Decebalus.

In 103, it was moved to &quot;Aquincum&quot; and later to &quot;Vindobona&quot; (modern Vienna), in Pannonia Superior, which would be the legion&#x27;s camp until the 5th century.

&quot;Vexillationes&quot; of the X &quot;Gemina&quot; fought against the rebellion of Simon bar Kokhba in 132-135, in Iudaea, others participated in the Parthian campaign of Lucius Verus in 162. Another major campaign was the one fought against the Quadi, Marcomanni and the Lombards, in Moravia, (Dyje-Svratka Vale) under the command of Emperor Marcus Aurelius (168-180). A garrison of Legio X GPF was found in the Czech Republic in Roman fortress in Moravia (Mušov)

X &quot;Gemina&quot; supported its governor, Septimius Severus, in his bid for purple, and many men of the legion went to Rome to become part of the Praetorian Guard of the new Emperor.

===3rd century===
During the 3rd century, the legion fought for several emperors, who awarded the legion with titles showing the fidelity of the legion and the favour gained by the Emperor himself. The titles &quot;Antoniniana&quot; (awarded by Caracalla or Elagabalus), &quot;Gordiana&quot; (by Gordian III), &quot;Deciana&quot; (by Decius), &quot;Floriana&quot; (by Florianus), and &quot;Cariniana&quot; (by Carinus) were short-lived, however, and dropped after the death of the Emperor. For its support of Emperor Gallienus against Postumus, the &quot;Gemina&quot; was awarded the title Pia VI Fidelis VI, &quot;six times faithful, six times loyal&quot;.

===4th century===
At the time in which &quot;Notitia Dignitatum&quot; was written (late 4th century), the first detachment of &quot;Decima Gemina&quot; was under the command of the &quot;Magister Militum per Orientem&quot;, and was a comitatensis unit. The other detachment was still in Vindobona, under the command of the &quot;Dux Pannoniae primae et Norici ripensis&quot;.

== Attested members ==
==Epigraphic evidence==
* - Lucius Lavius Tuscus Felicitis Iulia miles legionis X Geminae Victricis- Porto (&quot;Portus&quot;), Portugal. AE 1953, 268.
* - sacrum Caius Valerius Carus miles legionis X Geminae votum solvit libens merito. Lugo (&quot;Lucus Augusti&quot;), Spain. Hisp. Epi. 19118.
* - Caius Iulius Sergia Hispali (f) Victor miles legionis X Gemina (centuria Fabi Celtiberi annorum XLII aerum / XVIII hic (...). Pontevedra, Spain. CIL II 2545.
* - Iovi Augusto Ultori sacrum Lucius Valerius Paternus miles legionis X Geminae optio centuria Censoris exs (...). Pontevedra, Spain. AE 1908, 147.
* - Gaius Iulius Primus miles veteranus legionis X Geminae / hic situs estsit tibi terra levis. Jaen, Andalucía, Spain. CIL II2/5, 5.
* - Dis Manibus Gaio Urbanio Firmino militi legionis X / Iulius Ingenuus miles legionis. Jaen, Andalucía, Spain. CIL II 1691
* - Capito Sunnae filius decurio equitum alae geminae legionis X Rustica Galli filia. Sevilla (&quot;Hispalis&quot;), Spain.CIL II2/5, 1136.
* - Publius Talius Quinti filius Papiria (tribu) legionis X hic situs est sit tibi terra (...). Beja (&quot;Pax Iulia&quot;), Portugal. Hisp. Epi. 23031.
* - Marcus Aurelius Marci filius Galeria (tribu) Abbicus miles legionis X decimae. Beja (&quot;Pax Iulia&quot;), Portugal. AE 1980, 562.
* - Lucius Octavius Luci filius Pupinia (tribu) Baeterensis Magius legionis X Geminae(...). Astorga (&quot;Asturica&quot;), Spain. AE 1928, 163.
* - Caius Pelgus Luci filius Scaptia (tribu) Clemens veteranus legionis) X Geminae vixit annos LVI hic situs est/ Caius Pelgus (...). Astorga (&quot;Asturica&quot;), Spain. CIL II 5076 = CIL II 5662 = AE 1904, 160.
* - Caius Coelius Cai filius Papiria (tribu) Valens Narniense miles legionis X Geminae (...). Astorga (&quot;Asturica&quot;), Spain. IRPLe 79.
* - Marcus Persius Marci filius Pollia (tribu) Blaesus domo Hasta miles legionis X Geminae centuria (...). Astorga (&quot;Asturica&quot;), Spain. AE 1904, 160.
* - Lucius Herennius Luci filius) Galeria (tribu) Callicus domo Ugia miles legionis X Geminae / centuria Licini Clementis annorum / (...). Zamora, Spain. CIL II 5076 = CIL II 5662 = AE 1904, 180.
* - Publius Cosconius Publi filius / Galeria Arsensis / miles legionis X Geminae (...). Zamora, Spain. AE 1928, 179.
* - Marcus Cornelius Marci filius Aniensi Foro Iulii miles legionis X Geminae (...). Zamora, Spain. Hisp. Epi. 15846.
* - Rufus miles legionis X Geminae fecit. Zamora, Spain. AE 1997, 867.
* - Marcus Volumnius Cai filius Aniensi / Cremona miles legionis X hic situs est. Zamora, Spain. CIL II 2631.
* - Dis Manibus Tito Cassio Flavino centurioni legionis X Geminae Chrysampelus patrono optimo pecunia sua fecit. Tarragona (&quot;Tarraco&quot;), Spain. CIL II 4152.
* - Severus Marci filius (...) miles legionis X Geminae centuriae (...). Burgos, Spain. Hisp. epi. 16472.

==See also==

* List of Roman legions
* Roman legion
* Asturica Augusta

==Notes==
==References==

* Lendering, Jona, &quot;Legio X Gemina&quot; from &quot;Livius&quot;, livius.org

==External links==
* Legio Decima Gemina - re-enactment group
* Legio X Gemina Pia Fidelis – re-enactment group
* Legio X - Legio X Gemina (Equites) – &quot;Viri Clarissimi&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q253539" start="0" end="14" title="Legio X Gemina" label="Legio X Gemina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="51" end="58" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q163323" start="73" end="79" title="Roman legion" label="legion"/>
<link wikidata="Q17167" start="109" end="128" title="Roman Republic" label="late Roman Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8772741" start="171" end="190" title="Imperial Roman army" label="Imperial Roman army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048" start="231" end="244" title="Julius Caesar" label="Julius Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q202161" start="266" end="288" title="Gallic Wars" label="Roman invasion of Gaul"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405" start="353" end="361" title="Augustus" label="Augustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q212079" start="417" end="435" title="Second Triumvirate" label="Second Triumvirate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2583092" start="447" end="473" title="Liberators&amp;#x27; civil war" label="Liberators&amp;#x27; Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2116320" start="519" end="532" title="War of Actium" label="War of Actium"/>
<link wikidata="Q3395322" start="549" end="577" title="Crisis of the Roman Republic" label="Crisis of the Roman Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="674" end="680" title="Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q10570" start="743" end="747" title="Taurus (constellation)" label="bull"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530135" start="796" end="819" title="Legio X Equestris" label="X &amp;quot;Equestris&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q17346959" start="872" end="883" title="legionary" label="legionaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q47315" start="887" end="894" title="cavalry" label="cavalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="920" end="925" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q159979" start="1056" end="1060" title="twin" label="twin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530135" start="1283" end="1300" title="Legio X Equestris" label="Legio X Equestris"/>
<link wikidata="Q202161" start="1314" end="1325" title="Gallic Wars" label="Gallic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268733" start="1520" end="1539" title="battle of the Sabis" label="battle of the Sabis"/>
<link wikidata="Q742306" start="1545" end="1565" title="Caesar&amp;#x27;s invasions of Britain" label="invasions of Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q280868" start="1575" end="1593" title="battle of Gergovia" label="battle of Gergovia"/>
<link wikidata="Q125414" start="1653" end="1659" title="Pompey" label="Pompey"/>
<link wikidata="Q203681" start="1693" end="1702" title="battle of Pharsalus" label="Pharsalus"/>
<link wikidata="Q516760" start="1715" end="1720" title="battle of Munda" label="Munda"/>
<link wikidata="Q6555" start="1803" end="1811" title="Narbonne" label="Narbonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405" start="1906" end="1914" title="Augustus" label="Augustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q105452" start="1965" end="1972" title="Marcus Aemilius Lepidus (triumvir)" label="Lepidus"/>
<link wikidata="Q51673" start="1977" end="1988" title="Mark Antony" label="Mark Antony"/>
<link wikidata="Q335330" start="1996" end="2014" title="Battle of Philippi" label="Battle of Philippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645483" start="2110" end="2117" title="Parthia" label="Parthia"/>
<link wikidata="Q160387" start="2148" end="2154" title="Battle of Actium" label="Actium"/>
<link wikidata="Q133123" start="2225" end="2231" title="Patras" label="Patras"/>
<link wikidata="Q777342" start="2272" end="2280" title="cognomen" label="cognomen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6073313" start="2514" end="2524" title="Petavonium" label="Petavonium"/>
<link wikidata="Q216791" start="2528" end="2550" title="Hispania Tarraconensis" label="Hispania Tarraconensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340107" start="2583" end="2615" title="Cantabrian Wars" label="campaign against the Cantabrians"/>
<link wikidata="Q10305" start="2675" end="2683" title="Zaragoza" label="Zaragoza"/>
<link wikidata="Q14323" start="2712" end="2718" title="Mérida, Spain" label="Mérida"/>
<link wikidata="Q508815" start="2744" end="2753" title="Carnuntum" label="Carnuntum"/>
<link wikidata="Q170062" start="2757" end="2765" title="Pannonia" label="Pannonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q251962" start="2806" end="2826" title="legio XV Apollinaris" label="legio XV Apollinaris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414" start="2880" end="2885" title="Galba" label="Galba"/>
<link wikidata="Q576364" start="3035" end="3053" title="Batavian rebellion" label="Batavian rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419" start="3088" end="3097" title="Vespasian" label="Vespasian"/>
<link wikidata="Q176825" start="3132" end="3139" title="Batavians" label="Batavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q152136" start="3143" end="3160" title="Germania Inferior" label="Germania Inferior"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064291" start="3268" end="3291" title="Legio II Adiutrix" label="II &amp;quot;Adiutrix&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q47887" start="3358" end="3366" title="Nijmegen" label="Nijmegen"/>
<link wikidata="Q152136" start="3392" end="3409" title="Germania Inferior" label="Germania Inferior"/>
<link wikidata="Q153553" start="3480" end="3497" title="Germania Superior" label="Germania Superior"/>
<link wikidata="Q312396" start="3499" end="3521" title="Lucius Antonius Saturninus" label="L. Antonius Saturninus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423" start="3539" end="3547" title="Domitian" label="Domitian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1263789" start="3620" end="3642" title="Legio I Minervia" label="I &amp;quot;Minervia&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434251" start="3644" end="3666" title="Legio VI Victrix" label="VI &amp;quot;Victrix&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q703896" start="3672" end="3699" title="Legio XXII Primigenia" label="XXII &amp;quot;Primigenia&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q223590" start="3876" end="3893" title="damnatio memoriae" label="damnatio memoriae"/>
<link wikidata="Q124759061" start="4007" end="4029" title="Second Battle of Tapae" label="Second Battle of Tapae"/>
<link wikidata="Q212853" start="4064" end="4071" title="Dacians" label="Dacians"/>
<link wikidata="Q28928" start="4084" end="4093" title="Decebalus" label="Decebalus"/>
<link wikidata="Q623345" start="4126" end="4134" title="Aquincum" label="Aquincum"/>
<link wikidata="Q871525" start="4160" end="4169" title="Vindobona" label="Vindobona"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="4184" end="4190" title="Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q170062" start="4196" end="4213" title="Pannonia" label="Pannonia Superior"/>
<link wikidata="Q593565" start="4283" end="4293" title="Vexillatio" label="Vexillatio"/>
<link wikidata="Q334502" start="4350" end="4359" title="Bar Kokhba&amp;#x27;s revolt" label="rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q273117" start="4363" end="4379" title="Simon bar Kokhba" label="Simon bar Kokhba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003997" start="4395" end="4401" title="Iudaea (Roman province)" label="Iudaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433" start="4451" end="4463" title="Lucius Verus" label="Lucius Verus"/>
<link wikidata="Q933963" start="4499" end="4521" title="Marcomannic Wars" label="the one fought against"/>
<link wikidata="Q308885" start="4526" end="4531" title="Quadi" label="Quadi"/>
<link wikidata="Q209851" start="4533" end="4543" title="Marcomanni" label="Marcomanni"/>
<link wikidata="Q130900" start="4552" end="4560" title="Lombards" label="Lombards"/>
<link wikidata="Q43266" start="4565" end="4572" title="Moravia" label="Moravia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1796167" start="4575" end="4592" title="Dyje-Svratka Vale" label="Dyje-Svratka Vale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430" start="4623" end="4638" title="Marcus Aurelius" label="Marcus Aurelius"/>
<link wikidata="Q3868801" start="4711" end="4744" title="Roman fortress in Moravia (Mušov)" label="Roman fortress in Moravia (Mušov)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1442" start="4791" end="4808" title="Septimius Severus" label="Septimius Severus"/>
<link wikidata="Q181733" start="4895" end="4911" title="Praetorian Guard" label="Praetorian Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1446" start="5178" end="5187" title="Caracalla" label="Caracalla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1762" start="5191" end="5201" title="Elagabalus" label="Elagabalus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1812" start="5229" end="5240" title="Gordian III" label="Gordian III"/>
<link wikidata="Q1830" start="5267" end="5273" title="Decius" label="Decius"/>
<link wikidata="Q199946" start="5301" end="5310" title="Florianus" label="Florianus"/>
<link wikidata="Q190097" start="5343" end="5350" title="Carinus" label="Carinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q104475" start="5450" end="5459" title="Gallienus" label="Gallienus"/>
<link wikidata="Q312603" start="5468" end="5476" title="Postumus" label="Postumus"/>
<link wikidata="Q641178" start="5637" end="5655" title="Notitia Dignitatum" label="Notitia Dignitatum"/>
<link wikidata="Q209122" start="5779" end="5795" title="Magister Militum" label="Magister Militum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1114814" start="5826" end="5838" title="comitatensis" label="comitatensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q829120" start="5921" end="5924" title="Dux" label="Dux"/>
<link wikidata="Q6645669" start="5925" end="5941" title="Pannonia Prima" label="Pannoniae primae"/>
<link wikidata="Q131434" start="5945" end="5960" title="Noricum Ripensis" label="Norici ripensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q36433" start="6093" end="6098" title="Porto" label="Porto"/>
<link wikidata="Q11125" start="6230" end="6234" title="Lugo" label="Lugo"/>
<link wikidata="Q12411" start="6419" end="6429" title="Pontevedra" label="Pontevedra"/>
<link wikidata="Q12411" start="6567" end="6577" title="Pontevedra" label="Pontevedra"/>
<link wikidata="Q193891" start="6630" end="6639" title="veteranus" label="veteranus"/>
<link wikidata="Q15681" start="6696" end="6700" title="Jaén, Spain" label="Jaen"/>
<link wikidata="Q8717" start="6945" end="6952" title="Sevilla" label="Sevilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q213251" start="7096" end="7100" title="Beja, Portugal" label="Beja"/>
<link wikidata="Q213251" start="7237" end="7241" title="Beja, Portugal" label="Beja"/>
<link wikidata="Q465078" start="7383" end="7390" title="Astorga, Spain" label="Astorga"/>
<link wikidata="Q465078" start="7570" end="7577" title="Astorga, Spain" label="Astorga"/>
<link wikidata="Q465078" start="7745" end="7752" title="Astorga, Spain" label="Astorga"/>
<link wikidata="Q465078" start="7901" end="7908" title="Astorga, Spain" label="Astorga"/>
<link wikidata="Q15696" start="8093" end="8106" title="Zamora, Spain" label="Zamora, Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q15696" start="8238" end="8251" title="Zamora, Spain" label="Zamora, Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q15088" start="8679" end="8688" title="Tarragona" label="Tarragona"/>
<link wikidata="Q9580" start="8805" end="8811" title="Burgos" label="Burgos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334983" start="8855" end="8876" title="List of Roman legions" label="List of Roman legions"/>
<link wikidata="Q163323" start="8879" end="8891" title="Roman legion" label="Roman legion"/>
<link wikidata="Q511481" start="8894" end="8910" title="Asturica Augusta" label="Asturica Augusta"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="308529" wikidata="Q168553" url="?curid=308529" title="Legio XIII Gemina">
<text>, in English the 13th &quot;Twin&quot; Legion was a legion of the Imperial Roman army. It was one of Julius Caesar&#x27;s key units in Gaul and in the civil war, and was the legion with which he crossed the Rubicon in January, perhaps on 10 January, in 49 BC. The legion appears to have still been in existence in the 5th century AD. Its symbol was the lion.

== History ==

=== Under the late Republic ===
Legio XIII was levied by Julius Caesar in 57 BC, before marching against the Belgae, in one of his early interventions in intra-Gallic conflicts. During the Gallic Wars (58–51 BC), Legio XIII was present at the Battle against the Nervians, the Siege of Gergovia, and while not specifically mentioned in the sources, it is reasonable to assume that Legio XIII was also present for the Battle of Alesia.

After the end of the Gallic wars, the Roman Senate refused Caesar his second consulship, ordered him to give up his commands, and demanded he return to Rome to face prosecution. Forced to choose either the end of his political career or civil war, Caesar brought &quot;Legio XIII&quot; across the Rubicon river and into Italy. The legion remained faithful to Caesar during the resulting civil war between Caesar and the conservative Optimates faction of the senate, whose legions were commanded by Pompey. Legio XIII was active throughout the entire war, fighting at Dyrrhachium (48 BC) and Pharsalus (48 BC). After the decisive victory over Pompey at Pharsalus, the legion was to be disbanded, and the legionaries &quot;pensioned off&quot; with the traditional land grants; however, the legion was recalled for the Battle of Thapsus (46 BC) and the final Battle of Munda (45 BC). After Munda, Caesar disbanded the legion, retired his veterans, and gave them farmland in their native Italy.

=== Under the Empire ===
Augustus reconstituted the legion once again in 41 BC to deal with the rebellion of Sextus Pompeius (son of Pompey) in Sicily.

Legio XIII acquired the cognomen &quot;Gemina&quot; (&quot;twin&quot;, a common appellation for legions constituted from portions of others) after being reinforced with veteran legionaries from other legions following the war against Mark Antony and the Battle of Actium. Augustus then sent the legion to Burnum (modern Knin), in Illyricum, a Roman province in the Adriatic Sea.

In 16 BC, the legion was transferred to Emona (now Ljubljana) in Pannonia, where it dealt with local rebellions.

After the disaster of the Battle of the Teutoburg Forest in AD 9, the legion was sent as reinforcements to Augusta Vindelicorum (Augsburg), and then to Vindonissa, Raetia, to prevent further attacks from the Germanic tribes.

Emperor Claudius sent them back to Pannonia around 45 and the legion built its legionary fortress at Poetovium (modern Ptuj, Slovenia).

In the year of the four emperors (69), XIII &quot;Gemina&quot; supported first Otho and then Vespasian against Vitellius, fighting in the two Battles of Bedriacum. After their defeat in the first battle, the victorious Vitellius forced the legion to build an amphitheatre in the city of Bononia.
Under Trajan the legion took part in both Dacian wars (101–102, 105–106), and it was transferred by Trajan in 106 to the newly conquered province of Dacia (in Apulum, modern Alba Iulia, Romania) to garrison it.

&quot;Vexillationes&quot; of the XIII &quot;Gemina&quot; fought under Emperor Gallienus in northern Italy. The emperor issued a legionary &quot;antoninianus&quot; celebrating the legion, and showing the legion&#x27;s lion (259–260). Another &quot;vexillatio&quot; was present in the army of the emperor of the Gallic Empire Victorinus: this emperor, in fact, issued a gold coin celebrating the legion and its emblem.

In 271, the legion was relocated when the Dacia province was evacuated, and restationed in Dacia Aureliana.

In the 5th century, according to the &quot;Notitia Dignitatum&quot;, a &quot;legio tertiadecima gemina&quot; was in Babylon in Egypt, a strategic fortress on the Nile at the traditional border between Lower Egypt and Middle Egypt, under the command of the &quot;Comes limitis Aegypti&quot;.

== Attested members ==
== Epigraphic inscriptions ==

*- Caio Iulio Galeria (tribu) Lepido Iessonensi primi pilari centurioni legionis XIII Geminae Piae Fidelis centurioni (...). Lerida (&quot;Ilerda&quot;), Spain. CIL II 4463.

== Fictional depictions ==
* A fictionalized account of the actions of Legio XIII &quot;Gemina&quot; during the struggle between Julius Caesar and the Optimates faction under Pompey can be seen in the joint HBO/BBC/RAI television production &quot;Rome&quot;, most notably two of its soldiers: Centurion Lucius Vorenus and Legionary Titus Pullo, named after real-life Centurions Lucius Vorenus and Titus Pullo of the Legio XI Claudia. The show includes a fictional incident where the legion&#x27;s eagle standard is stolen by the Gaulish brigands.

== In popular culture ==
Golfer Jon Rahm called his LIV Golf team &quot;Legion XIII&quot; after the Legio XIII Gemina.

== See also ==
* Roman legion
* List of Roman legions
* Dacia Ripensis

==Notes==

==References==

===Primary sources===

===Secondary sources===
* 

== External links ==

*LEGIO XIII GEMINA, Italian re-enactment group (in Ariminum and Bononia)
*LEG XIII GEM, Austrian re-enactment group
*LEGIO XIII GEMINA Blog (Roman reenactment group inside the virtual world of Second Life)
* Legio XIIII Gemina Martia Victrix (Roman Military Research Society)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q168553" start="0" end="0" title="Legio XIII Gemina" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q168553" start="17" end="21" title="Legio XIII Gemina" label="13th"/>
<link wikidata="Q168553" start="28" end="45" title="Legio XIII Gemina" label="Twin&amp;quot; Legion"/>
<link wikidata="Q163323" start="52" end="58" title="Roman legion" label="legion"/>
<link wikidata="Q8772741" start="66" end="85" title="Imperial Roman army" label="Imperial Roman army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048" start="101" end="114" title="Julius Caesar" label="Julius Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q38060" start="135" end="139" title="Gaul" label="Gaul"/>
<link wikidata="Q1238338" start="151" end="160" title="Caesar&amp;#x27;s Civil War" label="civil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q25238182" start="195" end="214" title="Crossing of the Rubicon" label="crossed the Rubicon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048" start="432" end="445" title="Julius Caesar" label="Julius Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q337104" start="484" end="490" title="Belgae" label="Belgae"/>
<link wikidata="Q202161" start="564" end="575" title="Gallic Wars" label="Gallic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268733" start="618" end="645" title="Battle against the Nervians" label="Battle against the Nervians"/>
<link wikidata="Q280868" start="651" end="668" title="Siege of Gergovia" label="Siege of Gergovia"/>
<link wikidata="Q131386" start="791" end="807" title="Battle of Alesia" label="Battle of Alesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q130614" start="848" end="860" title="Roman Senate" label="Roman Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="962" end="966" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q172572" start="1107" end="1114" title="Rubicon" label="Rubicon"/>
<link wikidata="Q271108" start="1243" end="1252" title="Optimates" label="Optimates"/>
<link wikidata="Q125414" start="1308" end="1314" title="Pompey" label="Pompey"/>
<link wikidata="Q525325" start="1377" end="1388" title="Battle of Dyrrhachium (48 BC)" label="Dyrrhachium"/>
<link wikidata="Q203681" start="1401" end="1410" title="Battle of Pharsalus" label="Pharsalus"/>
<link wikidata="Q17346959" start="1513" end="1524" title="legionaries" label="legionaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q849653" start="1626" end="1643" title="Battle of Thapsus" label="Battle of Thapsus"/>
<link wikidata="Q516760" start="1666" end="1681" title="Battle of Munda" label="Battle of Munda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405" start="1827" end="1835" title="Augustus" label="Augustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q295228" start="1911" end="1926" title="Sextus Pompeius" label="Sextus Pompeius"/>
<link wikidata="Q125414" start="1935" end="1941" title="Pompey" label="Pompey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="1946" end="1952" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q777342" start="1979" end="1987" title="cognomen" label="cognomen"/>
<link wikidata="Q17346959" start="2132" end="2143" title="legionary" label="legionaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q51673" start="2189" end="2200" title="Mark Antony" label="Mark Antony"/>
<link wikidata="Q160387" start="2209" end="2225" title="Battle of Actium" label="Battle of Actium"/>
<link wikidata="Q208514" start="2275" end="2279" title="Knin" label="Knin"/>
<link wikidata="Q753824" start="2285" end="2294" title="Illyricum (Roman province)" label="Illyricum"/>
<link wikidata="Q182547" start="2298" end="2312" title="Roman province" label="Roman province"/>
<link wikidata="Q148327" start="2375" end="2380" title="Emona" label="Emona"/>
<link wikidata="Q437" start="2386" end="2395" title="Ljubljana" label="Ljubljana"/>
<link wikidata="Q170062" start="2400" end="2408" title="Pannonia" label="Pannonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q87779" start="2475" end="2505" title="Battle of the Teutoburg Forest" label="Battle of the Teutoburg Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q2749" start="2578" end="2586" title="Augsburg" label="Augsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q667811" start="2601" end="2611" title="Vindonissa" label="Vindonissa"/>
<link wikidata="Q156789" start="2613" end="2619" title="Raetia" label="Raetia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411" start="2683" end="2691" title="Claudius" label="Claudius"/>
<link wikidata="Q88205" start="2754" end="2772" title="castrum" label="legionary fortress"/>
<link wikidata="Q15906" start="2776" end="2785" title="Poetovio" label="Poetovium"/>
<link wikidata="Q470596" start="2819" end="2844" title="year of the four emperors" label="year of the four emperors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416" start="2891" end="2895" title="Otho" label="Otho"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419" start="2905" end="2914" title="Vespasian" label="Vespasian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417" start="2923" end="2932" title="Vitellius" label="Vitellius"/>
<link wikidata="Q63146684" start="2954" end="2974" title="Battle of Bedriacum" label="Battles of Bedriacum"/>
<link wikidata="Q705818" start="3041" end="3047" title="forced labour" label="forced"/>
<link wikidata="Q7362268" start="3071" end="3083" title="Roman amphitheatre" label="amphitheatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891" start="3099" end="3106" title="Bologna" label="Bononia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425" start="3114" end="3120" title="Trajan" label="Trajan"/>
<link wikidata="Q723608" start="3150" end="3161" title="Trajan&amp;#x27;s Dacian Wars" label="Dacian wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q971609" start="3229" end="3262" title="Roman Dacia" label="newly conquered province of Dacia"/>
<link wikidata="Q774266" start="3267" end="3273" title="Apulum (castra)" label="Apulum"/>
<link wikidata="Q174665" start="3282" end="3292" title="Alba Iulia" label="Alba Iulia"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="3294" end="3301" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q593565" start="3326" end="3336" title="Vexillatio" label="Vexillatio"/>
<link wikidata="Q104475" start="3398" end="3407" title="Gallienus" label="Gallienus"/>
<link wikidata="Q599170" start="3464" end="3476" title="antoninianus" label="antoninianus"/>
<link wikidata="Q273025" start="3630" end="3643" title="Gallic Empire" label="Gallic Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q333770" start="3644" end="3654" title="Victorinus" label="Victorinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1223485" start="3829" end="3844" title="Dacia Aureliana" label="Dacia Aureliana"/>
<link wikidata="Q641178" start="3890" end="3908" title="Notitia Dignitatum" label="Notitia Dignitatum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2421968" start="3963" end="3979" title="Babylon (Egypt)" label="Babylon in Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q463871" start="4048" end="4059" title="Lower Egypt" label="Lower Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422037" start="4064" end="4076" title="Middle Egypt" label="Middle Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q15090" start="4318" end="4324" title="Lleida" label="Lerida"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048" start="4497" end="4510" title="Julius Caesar" label="Julius Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q271108" start="4519" end="4528" title="Optimates" label="Optimates"/>
<link wikidata="Q125414" start="4543" end="4549" title="Pompey" label="Pompey"/>
<link wikidata="Q23633" start="4575" end="4578" title="HBO" label="HBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="4579" end="4582" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q19616" start="4583" end="4586" title="RAI" label="RAI"/>
<link wikidata="Q209878" start="4609" end="4625" title="Rome (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Rome&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q26409" start="4661" end="4670" title="Centurion" label="Centurion"/>
<link wikidata="Q6595913" start="4671" end="4685" title="Lucius Vorenus (character of Rome)" label="Lucius Vorenus"/>
<link wikidata="Q17346959" start="4690" end="4699" title="Legionary" label="Legionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q6595913" start="4700" end="4711" title="Titus Pullo (character of Rome)" label="Titus Pullo"/>
<link wikidata="Q26409" start="4735" end="4744" title="Centurion" label="Centurion"/>
<link wikidata="Q55637229" start="4746" end="4760" title="Lucius Vorenus" label="Lucius Vorenus"/>
<link wikidata="Q55637229" start="4765" end="4776" title="Titus Pullo" label="Titus Pullo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1812766" start="4784" end="4800" title="Legio XI Claudia" label="Legio XI Claudia"/>
<link wikidata="Q24800169" start="4948" end="4956" title="Jon Rahm" label="Jon Rahm"/>
<link wikidata="Q111181799" start="4968" end="4976" title="LIV Golf" label="LIV Golf"/>
<link wikidata="Q163323" start="5053" end="5065" title="Roman legion" label="Roman legion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334983" start="5068" end="5089" title="List of Roman legions" label="List of Roman legions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156891" start="5092" end="5106" title="Dacia Ripensis" label="Dacia Ripensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q13369" start="5259" end="5267" title="Rimini" label="Ariminum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891" start="5272" end="5279" title="Bologna" label="Bononia"/>
<link wikidata="Q106827" start="5401" end="5412" title="Second Life" label="Second Life"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="308530" wikidata="Q4499920" url="?curid=308530" title="Mason Bogie locomotive">
<text>Mason Bogie locomotives (also known as Mason Fairlie locomotives) are a type of articulated tank locomotive suited for sharp curves and uneven track, once commonly used on narrow-gauge railways in the United States. The design is a development of the Single Fairlie locomotive.

==Concept and development==
The American licensee of the Fairlie Patent steam locomotive was the firm of William Mason, located in Taunton, Massachusetts. Mason&#x27;s first Fairlie locomotive was the &quot;Janus&quot;, an Double Fairlie built in 1871.

&quot;Janus&quot; was not commercially successful and was not repeated, so Mason experimented with a different design. In 1869, a Single Fairlie locomotive had been designed and constructed by Alexander McDonnell for the Great Southern and Western Railway in Ireland. This had a single boiler with one articulated, powered truck beneath it and a second, unpowered truck beneath the cab and bunker. Mason developed a set of standard plans based on this design with modified steam delivery systems. His first locomotive was the &quot;Onward&quot;, a gauge 0-4-4T completed 1 July 1872. &quot;Onward&quot; would enter service on the American Fork Railroad shortly afterwards before being moved to the Eureka and Palisade Railroad in 1873.

&quot;Onward&quot; was a largely successful engine, but certain design elements proved troublesome. Bolts worked loose, center castings were too light, and the steam pipes and gaskets were insufficient. Mason redesigned the faulty castings and designed a new delivery system, in which the pivot point for the leading truck became a hollow ball joint through which the live steam for the cylinders passed. Mason also developed a sliding seal for the exhaust from the moving cylinder saddle into the smoke box. Although better, Mason&#x27;s improvements took up much-needed space between the driving wheels, forcing Mason to use an outside valve gear (generally the Walschaerts valve gear). Additionally, the reversing shaft had to be mounted on top of the boiler, with a long lifting link dropping down to the radius rod, a feature unique to Mason Bogies due to the rotating truck and tight clearances.

Another problem with the early Bogies was poor tracking. Despite the drivers being articulated, excessive flange wear on the leading driver set required the use of a pilot truck. Nonetheless, these engines were in high demand, and even &quot;Onward&quot; was brought back under UP from Nevada to the Utah and Northern Railway despite the protests from Nevada Central, which owned the locomotive.

==Production and service==
148 Bogies were produced by the Mason Machine Works between 1872 and 1890, of which 96 were narrow-gauge units, the rest being standard gauge. This was about half the firm&#x27;s total output of locomotives during this period. Major buyers included the Boston, Revere Beach and Lynn Railroad, a suburban carrier which owned 32, the Denver, South Park and Pacific Railroad, a Colorado common-carrier railroad which owned 23, the New York and Manhattan Beach Railroad which owned 17, and the Wheeling and Lake Erie which was the largest standard gauge customer with 16 locomotives.

The best-known Mason Bogies were those of the Denver, South Park and Pacific, which were the largest built for narrow gauge. Most of the smaller Bogies were used on the Utah &amp; Northern where they were found in 1884 as &quot;large and powerful.&quot; Copies of the DSP&amp;P&#x27;s biggest engines were built for the Denver, Utah &amp; Pacific, which sold them to the Burlington and Northwestern Railway, a CB&amp;Q subsidiary in Iowa. The DSP&amp;P engines were hard-used in Utah and all gone by 1894 except for one, which survived through a chain of owners until 1942.

The Boston, Revere Beach and Lynn Railroad almost exclusively used Mason Bogies and continued to order bogie types after Mason ceased locomotive production in 1890. Copies were built first by the Taunton Locomotive Manufacturing Company, then by Manchester Locomotive Works and finally by the American Locomotive Company. These were taken out of service when electrification was complete in 1928, except for two engines which were retained for snowfighting and work trains.

Snowfighting was found a considerable strength for Mason Bogies. F. G. Brownell of the Burlington &amp; Lamoille found that their &quot;Mansfield&quot; could free itself from snowdrifts &quot;higher than the cab&quot; with minimal issue.

==Surviving==
Only one Mason Bogie, &quot;Torch Lake&quot;, survives, at Greenfield Village (part of The Henry Ford) in Dearborn, Michigan, a standard gauge . It was built in 1873 and still hauls passengers during the summer months.
==Similar designs==
Superficially similar to the Mason Bogie is another design, the Forney locomotive. Like the Mason Bogie, the Forney has powered axles under the boiler and a trailing truck under the rear bunker and tank behind the cab. However, the Forney&#x27;s driving wheels are fixed in the frame, rather than articulated. They were reasonably popular, particularly on elevated railroads.

==See also==

* Articulated locomotive
* Bogie
* Mason Machine Works
* Narrow gauge

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4499920" start="0" end="23" title="Mason Bogie locomotive" label="Mason Bogie locomotives"/>
<link wikidata="Q4499920" start="39" end="64" title="Mason Bogie locomotive" label="Mason Fairlie locomotives"/>
<link wikidata="Q941179" start="80" end="91" title="articulated locomotive" label="articulated"/>
<link wikidata="Q785745" start="92" end="107" title="tank locomotive" label="tank locomotive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112477" start="172" end="192" title="narrow-gauge railway" label="narrow-gauge railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="201" end="214" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011643" start="251" end="276" title="Single Fairlie locomotive" label="Single Fairlie locomotive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011643" start="336" end="343" title="Fairlie locomotive" label="Fairlie"/>
<link wikidata="Q8015210" start="384" end="397" title="William Mason (locomotive builder)" label="William Mason"/>
<link wikidata="Q127506" start="410" end="432" title="Taunton, Massachusetts" label="Taunton, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011643" start="502" end="516" title="Double Fairlie" label="Double Fairlie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011643" start="663" end="677" title="Single Fairlie" label="Single Fairlie"/>
<link wikidata="Q4719592" start="726" end="745" title="Alexander McDonnell (engineer)" label="Alexander McDonnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5600020" start="754" end="788" title="Great Southern and Western Railway" label="Great Southern and Western Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="792" end="799" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q56682397" start="1163" end="1185" title="American Fork Railroad" label="American Fork Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q5411273" start="1231" end="1259" title="Eureka and Palisade Railroad" label="Eureka and Palisade Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663400" start="1934" end="1956" title="Walschaerts valve gear" label="Walschaerts valve gear"/>
<link wikidata="Q7902530" start="2473" end="2498" title="Utah and Northern Railway" label="Utah and Northern Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q16982516" start="2525" end="2539" title="Nevada Central Railroad" label="Nevada Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112477" start="2689" end="2701" title="narrow-gauge railway" label="narrow-gauge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999572" start="2724" end="2738" title="standard gauge" label="standard gauge"/>
<link wikidata="Q894551" start="2850" end="2888" title="Boston, Revere Beach and Lynn Railroad" label="Boston, Revere Beach and Lynn Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q5259661" start="2929" end="2968" title="Denver, South Park and Pacific Railroad" label="Denver, South Park and Pacific Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q6749236" start="3025" end="3062" title="Manhattan Beach Branch" label="New York and Manhattan Beach Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567657" start="3087" end="3109" title="Wheeling and Lake Erie Railway (1916-1988)" label="Wheeling and Lake Erie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7902530" start="3347" end="3366" title="Utah and Northern Railway" label="Utah &amp;amp; Northern"/>
<link wikidata="Q96374136" start="3549" end="3584" title="Burlington and Northwestern Railway" label="Burlington and Northwestern Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071790" start="3588" end="3596" title="CB&amp;amp;Q" label="CB&amp;amp;Q"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546" start="3611" end="3615" title="Iowa" label="Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7688794" start="3949" end="3989" title="Taunton Locomotive Manufacturing Company" label="Taunton Locomotive Manufacturing Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q6747448" start="3999" end="4026" title="Manchester Locomotive Works" label="Manchester Locomotive Works"/>
<link wikidata="Q383589" start="4046" end="4073" title="American Locomotive Company" label="American Locomotive Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q3521242" start="4540" end="4558" title="Greenfield Village" label="Greenfield Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q3521242" start="4568" end="4582" title="The Henry Ford" label="The Henry Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q430464" start="4587" end="4605" title="Dearborn, Michigan" label="Dearborn, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5470380" start="4784" end="4801" title="Forney locomotive" label="Forney locomotive"/>
<link wikidata="Q941179" start="5113" end="5135" title="Articulated locomotive" label="Articulated locomotive"/>
<link wikidata="Q217421" start="5138" end="5143" title="Bogie" label="Bogie"/>
<link wikidata="Q6783598" start="5146" end="5165" title="Mason Machine Works" label="Mason Machine Works"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112477" start="5168" end="5180" title="Narrow-gauge railway" label="Narrow gauge"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="308531" wikidata="Q703896" url="?curid=308531" title="Legio XXII Primigenia">
<text>Legio XXII Primigenia (&quot;Fortune&#x27;s Twenty-Second Legion&quot;) was a legion of the Imperial Roman army dedicated to the goddess Fortuna Primigenia. Founded in AD 39 by the emperor Caligula for use in his campaigns in Germania, the XXII &quot;Primigenia&quot; spent much of their time in Mogontiacum (modern Mainz) up to the end of the 3rd century. The legion&#x27;s symbols were a Capricorn and the demigod Hercules.

==History==

XXII &quot;Primigenia&quot; was first stationed in Mogontiacum in the Roman province of Germania Superior, guarding the Rhine border as part of the limes. Along with the rest of the Germanic army, the legion supported Vitellius in the Year of the Four Emperors (69). During the Batavian rebellion, XXII &quot;Primigenia&quot;, commanded by Gaius Dillius Vocula, was the only Germanic legion that survived rebel attacks and which stayed in its camp, defending Moguntiacum. They remained in Moguntiacum until at least the 3rd century. Hadrian, prior to becoming Emperor, was &quot;tribunus militum&quot; of the XXIIth in 97–98.

Around 90 units of the XXII were garrisoned in or around the area of modern-day Butzbach, as part of the Limes Germanicus (a series of forts along the Roman frontier of Germania Superior. A stamp of the XXII Legion was found during excavations of a Roman Fort in Butzbach. The 22nd U.S. Infantry Regiment was stationed in Butzbach after World War II, and the stamp of the Legion and the emblem of the American unit were very similar.

The Rhine settlement was their main camp, but &quot;vexillationes&quot; of the legion participated in the building of the Antonine Wall in Scotland (2nd century) and in the campaigns against the Sassanid Empire (around 235).

They were still in Moguntiacum during the attack of the tribe of the Alamanni in 235, and were responsible for the assassination of Emperor Alexander Severus when he tried to negotiate with the enemy, along with the subsequent election of Maximinus Thrax as new emperor.

In 268, &quot;Primigenia&quot; probably fought under Gallienus at the Battle of Naissus, winning a victory over the Goths. The following year, the XXII Legion rebelled against Postumus, and proclaimed its commander Laelianus Emperor of the Gallic Empire.

In the beginning of the fourth century the legion was awarded the title &quot;Primigenia CV&quot; (presumably Constantiana Victrix). There is no record of it after the reign of Constantine the Great (r.306–337). One source suggests that it &quot;may have been destroyed during the Battle of Mursa.&quot;

== Attested members ==
==Epigraphic inscriptions==

*- Dis Manibus Avidiae Nice uxori rarissimi exempli Publicius Apronianus hastatus legionis XXII Primigeniae fecit. Tarragona (&quot;Tarraco&quot;), Spain. .
*- Amoena hic sita est Quintus Antonius Avitus veteranus legionis XXII Primigeniae faciendum (...). Lisboa, Portugal. .
*- (...) tribuno militum legionis XXII Primigeniae praefecto cohortium in Germania / MIL(...). Beja, Portugal. IRCP 235.

== See also ==
* List of Roman legions

==References==
== External links ==
* French Legio XXII Primigenia - you can view a large number of pictures concerning this reenactment group in France and Europe
* Official website of legio 22 reenactement group</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q703896" start="0" end="21" title="Legio XXII Primigenia" label="Legio XXII Primigenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q163323" start="78" end="84" title="Roman legion" label="legion"/>
<link wikidata="Q8772741" start="92" end="111" title="Imperial Roman army" label="Imperial Roman army"/>
<link wikidata="Q4654" start="137" end="144" title="Fortuna" label="Fortuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1409" start="189" end="197" title="Caligula" label="Caligula"/>
<link wikidata="Q62646" start="226" end="234" title="Germania" label="Germania"/>
<link wikidata="Q571790" start="296" end="307" title="Roman Mogontiacum" label="Mogontiacum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1720" start="316" end="321" title="Mainz" label="Mainz"/>
<link wikidata="Q164272" start="390" end="399" title="Capricorn (astrology)" label="Capricorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q240679" start="416" end="424" title="Hercules" label="Hercules"/>
<link wikidata="Q182547" start="510" end="524" title="Roman province" label="Roman province"/>
<link wikidata="Q153553" start="528" end="545" title="Germania Superior" label="Germania Superior"/>
<link wikidata="Q584" start="560" end="565" title="Rhine" label="Rhine"/>
<link wikidata="Q146924" start="588" end="593" title="Limes (Roman Empire)" label="limes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417" start="658" end="667" title="Vitellius" label="Vitellius"/>
<link wikidata="Q470596" start="675" end="700" title="Year of the Four Emperors" label="Year of the Four Emperors"/>
<link wikidata="Q576364" start="718" end="736" title="Batavian rebellion" label="Batavian rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q560832" start="780" end="800" title="Gaius Dillius Vocula" label="Gaius Dillius Vocula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427" start="973" end="980" title="Hadrian" label="Hadrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q849288" start="1019" end="1035" title="tribunus militum" label="tribunus militum"/>
<link wikidata="Q569680" start="1147" end="1155" title="Butzbach" label="Butzbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q707801" start="1172" end="1188" title="Limes Germanicus" label="Limes Germanicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q153553" start="1236" end="1253" title="Germania Superior" label="Germania Superior"/>
<link wikidata="Q4631381" start="1344" end="1371" title="22nd Infantry Regiment (United States)" label="22nd U.S. Infantry Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q593565" start="1554" end="1567" title="vexillationes" label="vexillationes"/>
<link wikidata="Q210957" start="1624" end="1637" title="Antonine Wall" label="Antonine Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q83891" start="1697" end="1712" title="Sassanid Empire" label="Sassanid Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q132990" start="1797" end="1805" title="Alamanni" label="Alamanni"/>
<link wikidata="Q1769" start="1868" end="1885" title="Alexander Severus" label="Alexander Severus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777" start="1967" end="1982" title="Maximinus Thrax" label="Maximinus Thrax"/>
<link wikidata="Q104475" start="2053" end="2062" title="Gallienus" label="Gallienus"/>
<link wikidata="Q929265" start="2070" end="2087" title="Battle of Naissus" label="Battle of Naissus"/>
<link wikidata="Q42193" start="2116" end="2121" title="Goths" label="Goths"/>
<link wikidata="Q312603" start="2176" end="2184" title="Postumus" label="Postumus"/>
<link wikidata="Q326560" start="2215" end="2224" title="Laelianus" label="Laelianus"/>
<link wikidata="Q273025" start="2240" end="2253" title="Gallic Empire" label="Gallic Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q8413" start="2433" end="2454" title="Constantine the Great" label="Constantine the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424076" start="2537" end="2552" title="Battle of Mursa Major" label="Battle of Mursa"/>
<link wikidata="Q15088" start="2728" end="2737" title="Tarragona" label="Tarragona"/>
<link wikidata="Q597" start="2870" end="2876" title="Lisboa" label="Lisboa"/>
<link wikidata="Q213251" start="2985" end="2999" title="Beja, Portugal" label="Beja, Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334983" start="3029" end="3050" title="List of Roman legions" label="List of Roman legions"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="308532" wikidata="Q59671" url="?curid=308532" title="Lictor">
<text>A lictor (possibly from Latin &quot;ligare&quot;, meaning &#x27;to bind&#x27;) was a Roman civil servant who was an attendant and bodyguard to a magistrate who held &quot;imperium&quot;. Roman records describe lictors as having existed since the Roman Kingdom, and may have originated with the Etruscans.

==Origin==
The lictors are said in the ancient antiquarian sources to go back to the regal period. There are two main traditions. The first is from Dionysius of Halicarnassus. He claimed that Etruscan envoys numbering twelve (one for each Etruscan city) gifted the king Lucius Tarquinius Priscus fasces – symbolising military leadership of the twelve Etruscan communities – on his accession. With the approval of the Senate, Tarquin then appointed twelve lictors to attend to him when exercising military and civil authority. The second is in Livy, which attributes the first lictors to the king Romulus. Livy also sides with an Etruscan origin, dismissing the variant story that Romulus appointed one lictor for each of the twelve birds that appeared to him in augury at the foundation of the city.

The word likely originates from their role in corporal punishment, where a victim is bound () for punishment. Ancient sources also offer two other possibilities: from the belt or apron ( and , respectively) that they wore or, less plausibly, via borrowing from a supposed Greek cognate. Modern scholars have also suggested the possibility of derivation from (&quot;to allow&quot;).

==Eligibility==
Lictors were drawn from the plebeians and, in elite literature, were generally depicted as being drawn from low status. They were, however, all citizens. 

Centurions from the legions were also automatically eligible to become lictors on retirement from the army. A lictor had to be a strongly built man, capable of physical work. Lictors were exempted from military service, received a fixed salary (of 600 &quot;sestertii&quot;, in the beginning of the Empire), and were organized in a corporation. Usually, they were personally chosen by the magistrate they were supposed to serve, but it is also possible that they were drawn by lots.

==Tasks==
A lictor&#x27;s main role was to bodyguard the imperium-posessing magistrate to which they were assigned. They also carried the magistrate&#x27;s fasces which symbolised that magistrate&#x27;s imperium. The fasces also served to intimidate a crowd since they contained all the necessary equipment to administer corporal and capital punishment. Stories going back to the origin of the republic attest to magistrates ordering their lictors to serve as executioners; their role in a magistrate&#x27;s imposition of official punishment seems to have continued through to late antiquity.

The lictors followed or preceded the magistrate wherever he went, including the Forum, his house, temples, and the baths. Lictors were organized in an ordered line before him, with the primus lictor () directly in front of him, waiting for orders. If there was a crowd, the lictors opened the way and kept their master safe, pushing all aside except for Roman matrons, who were accorded special honor. They also had to stand beside the magistrate whenever he addressed the crowd. Magistrates could only dispense with their lictors if they were visiting a free city or addressing a higher status magistrate. Lictors also had legal and penal duties; they could, at their master&#x27;s command, arrest Roman citizens and punish them. A Vestal Virgin was accorded a lictor when her presence was required at a public ceremony.

The degree of magistrate&#x27;s &quot;imperium&quot; was symbolised by the number of lictors escorting him:
*Dictator: 24 lictors
*Emperor: originally 12 lictors, after Domitian, 24 lictors
*Rex and Consul: 12 lictors
*Magister equitum: 6 lictors
*Praetor: 6 lictors, 2 within the pomerium
*Curule aediles: 2 lictors
*Quaestor: no lictors in the city of Rome, but quaestors were permitted to have fasces in the provinces.

During the late republic and the Principate, proconsuls and propraetors were assigned the same number of lictors as their urban counterparts. Proconsular governors, therefore, also had twelve lictors. However, the &quot;legati Augusti pro praetore&quot; were assigned only five.

Lictors assigned to magistrates were organized into a corporation composed of several decuries; during the late Republic, the decuries sometimes lent lictors to private citizens holding &quot;ludi publici&quot; () and traveling senators. However, these lictors probably did not carry fasces.

Lictors were also associated with &quot;comitia curiata&quot;, as in its later form, the thirty curiae were represented by a single lictor each.
==&quot;Lictor curiatus&quot;==
The &quot;lictor curiatus&quot; (: &quot;lictores curiati&quot;) was a special kind of lictor who did not carry rods or &quot;fasces&quot; and whose main tasks were religious. There were approximately thirty of them, serving at the command of the &quot;pontifex maximus&quot;, the high priest of Rome. They were present at sacrifices where they carried or guided sacrificial animals to the altars. Vestal Virgins, &quot;flamines&quot; (), and other high-ranking priests were entitled to be escorted and protected by &quot;lictores curiati&quot;. In the Empire, women of the imperial family were usually followed by two of this kind of lictor. The &quot;lictores curiati&quot; were also responsible to summon the &quot;Comitia Curiata&quot; () and to maintain order during its procedures.

==See also==
* Cursus honorum
* Praetorian Guard

==References==
== Bibliography ==

** 

* 
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q59671" start="2" end="8" title="Lictor" label="lictor"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="24" end="29" title="Latin language" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="85" end="90" title="Ancient Rome" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q851436" start="130" end="139" title="bodyguard" label="bodyguard"/>
<link wikidata="Q20778343" start="145" end="155" title="Roman magistrate" label="magistrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q499146" start="171" end="179" title="imperium" label="imperium"/>
<link wikidata="Q201038" start="246" end="259" title="Roman Kingdom" label="Roman Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q17161" start="294" end="303" title="Etruscan civilization" label="Etruscans"/>
<link wikidata="Q201038" start="391" end="403" title="regal period" label="regal period"/>
<link wikidata="Q26204" start="454" end="480" title="Dionysius of Halicarnassus" label="Dionysius of Halicarnassus"/>
<link wikidata="Q212671" start="576" end="601" title="Lucius Tarquinius Priscus" label="Lucius Tarquinius Priscus"/>
<link wikidata="Q328712" start="602" end="608" title="fasces" label="fasces"/>
<link wikidata="Q130614" start="723" end="729" title="Roman Senate" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2186" start="902" end="909" title="Romulus" label="Romulus"/>
<link wikidata="Q779777" start="1068" end="1074" title="augury" label="augury"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247524" start="1082" end="1104" title="Founding of Rome" label="foundation of the city"/>
<link wikidata="Q305" start="1153" end="1172" title="corporal punishment" label="corporal punishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q26409" start="1662" end="1671" title="Centurion" label="Centurion"/>
<link wikidata="Q163323" start="1682" end="1689" title="Roman legion" label="legions"/>
<link wikidata="Q208041" start="1920" end="1929" title="Sestertius" label="sestertii"/>
<link wikidata="Q328712" start="2302" end="2308" title="fasces" label="fasces"/>
<link wikidata="Q328712" start="2363" end="2369" title="fasces" label="fasces"/>
<link wikidata="Q16931679" start="2526" end="2548" title="overthrow of the Roman monarchy" label="origin of the republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q180212" start="2820" end="2825" title="Roman Forum" label="Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q188761" start="3473" end="3486" title="Vestal Virgin" label="Vestal Virgin"/>
<link wikidata="Q20778343" start="3577" end="3587" title="Roman magistrate" label="magistrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q236885" start="3672" end="3680" title="Roman dictator" label="Dictator"/>
<link wikidata="Q842606" start="3694" end="3701" title="Roman Emperor" label="Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q634484" start="3754" end="3757" title="Interrex" label="Rex"/>
<link wikidata="Q40779" start="3762" end="3768" title="Roman consul" label="Consul"/>
<link wikidata="Q109960" start="3782" end="3798" title="Magister equitum" label="Magister equitum"/>
<link wikidata="Q172907" start="3811" end="3818" title="Praetor" label="Praetor"/>
<link wikidata="Q205757" start="3854" end="3868" title="Aedile" label="Curule aediles"/>
<link wikidata="Q189430" start="3881" end="3889" title="Quaestor" label="Quaestor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2912782" start="4031" end="4040" title="proconsul" label="proconsul"/>
<link wikidata="Q731997" start="4046" end="4056" title="propraetor" label="propraetor"/>
<link wikidata="Q158648" start="4206" end="4233" title="legati Augusti pro praetore" label="legati Augusti pro praetore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1182125" start="4352" end="4360" title="Decury" label="decuries"/>
<link wikidata="Q17167" start="4373" end="4386" title="Roman_Republic" label="late Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q86009752" start="4427" end="4442" title="private citizen" label="private citizen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216498" start="4458" end="4470" title="Ludi" label="ludi publici"/>
<link wikidata="Q130614" start="4494" end="4502" title="Roman Senate" label="senators"/>
<link wikidata="Q2339377" start="4599" end="4614" title="comitia curiata" label="comitia curiata"/>
<link wikidata="Q212943" start="4989" end="5005" title="pontifex maximus" label="pontifex maximus"/>
<link wikidata="Q188761" start="5134" end="5147" title="Vestal Virgin" label="Vestal Virgin"/>
<link wikidata="Q585305" start="5156" end="5164" title="Flamen" label="flamines"/>
<link wikidata="Q2339377" start="5454" end="5469" title="Curiate Assembly" label="Comitia Curiata"/>
<link wikidata="Q27518" start="5540" end="5554" title="Cursus honorum" label="Cursus honorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q181733" start="5557" end="5573" title="Praetorian Guard" label="Praetorian Guard"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="308535" wikidata="Q1934769" url="?curid=308535" title="Duke of Braganza">
<text>The title Duke of Braganza () in the House of Braganza is one of the most important titles in the peerage of Portugal. Starting in 1640, when the House of Braganza acceded to the throne of Portugal, the male heir of the Portuguese Crown were known as Duke of Braganza, along with their style Prince of Beira or (from 1645 to 1816) Prince of Brazil. The tradition of the heir to the throne being titled Duke of Braganza was revived by various pretenders after the establishment of the Portuguese Republic on 5 October 1910 to signify their claims to the throne.

==History of Dukedom==

===Feudal dukes===

The Duke of Braganza holds one of the most important dukedoms in Portugal, see Duchy of Braganza (&quot;Bragança&quot;). Created in 1442 by King Afonso V of Portugal for his uncle Afonso, Count of Barcelos (natural son of King John I of Portugal), it is one of the oldest fiefdoms in Portugal.

The fifth Duke of Braganza (Teodósio I, b. 1510) is especially important to historians of international trade as when he died in 1563, the contents of the family&#x27;s main palace in Vila Vicosa, were inventoried in their entirety. Because Portugal had established a global trade network for sixty-odd years by the time of the Duke&#x27;s death, and was &quot;in the process of establishing their military, religious and commercial presence, sailors, merchants, priests and crown officials had developed sophisticated, transcontinental trading practices that involved all sorts of global commodities, the inventory is a priceless resource to art historians as it lists artefacts originating in Mozambique, the western coast of India, Malacca, China, Japan, Morocco, and Brazil. Slaves were also included in the inventory; one of the duke&#x27;s slaves, a gifted artist, ranking amongst the &quot;top 100 most expensive items in the whole inventory&quot;.
By 1640, Portugal was on the verge of rebellion against Spanish-based Habsburg rule, and a new Portuguese king had to be found. The choice fell upon John, 8th Duke of Braganza, who had a claim to the throne of Portugal both through his grandmother Catherine of Guimarães, a legitimate granddaughter of King Manuel I, and through his great-great-grandfather, the 4th duke of Braganza, a nephew of King Manuel I. John was a modest man without particular ambitions to the crown. Legend has it that his wife Luisa of Guzman urged him to accept the offer by saying, &quot;I&#x27;d rather be queen for one day than duchess for a lifetime&quot;. He accepted the leadership of the rebellion against Spain, which was successful, and was acclaimed King John IV of Portugal on 1 December 1640.

===Dukedom in the Braganza monarchy===
After the accession of the House of Braganza to the Portuguese throne in 1640 as a replacement for the Philippine Dynasty of Spanish Habsburgs, the Dukedom of Braganza became linked to the crown. &quot;Duke of Braganza&quot; became the traditional title of the heir to the Portuguese throne, together with or alternate to &quot;Prince of Beira&quot;, much as &quot;Prince of Wales&quot; is in the United Kingdom. After the 8th Duke had ascended the royal throne, he elevated his son and heir Teodósio to the newly created rank of Prince of Brazil in 1645, but granted the Duchy of Braganza to his brother, the Infante Duarte, who died in 1649 in Spanish captivity. Then it was granted to the king&#x27;s second son, the future Afonso VI of Portugal.

From this time onwards, the title &quot;Duke of Braganza&quot; was kept for the heir apparent of the throne – in its strictest sense. Although the other title for an unavoidable heir, that of &quot;Prince of Brazil&quot;, was from time to time granted even to female heirs, the Dukedom of Braganza was always reserved only for the male heir except for two extraordinary creations, in 1683 and 1711. These two creations are deemed invalid by some legalists, who accordingly number the dukes in a way that Luís Filipe, Prince Royal of Portugal, the last Duke of Braganza during the period of Portuguese monarchy, is reckoned to be the 21st Duke. The present table reflects a numbering that specifies him as the 21st Duke.

When Emperor Pedro I of Brazil abdicated his throne in 1831, he claimed the title of Duke of Braganza.

On 1 February 1908 King Charles I of Portugal was murdered along with his eldest son and heir, Luís Filipe, the last individual during the monarchy to carry that title. Carlos was succeeded by Manuel II of Portugal but for a short time: on 5 October 1910, a republic was instituted, and the king was exiled. King Manuel II then settled in England.

===Dukes in the post-monarchy era===
After the foundation of the Portuguese Republic in 1910, the tradition of the heir to the throne being titled Duke of Braganza was revived by various pretenders to signify their claims to the throne.

In the last years of the deposed king Manuel II of Portugal, the dukedom of Bragança was claimed by Miguel Januário of Braganza, son of the exiled king Miguel I of Portugal, who was living in the Austrian Empire. His branch of the Braganza family allegedly became heirs to the crown in 1932, when Manuel II died without children. These Braganzas were officially allowed to return to the country in 1950 and have lived there ever since.

Presently, the commonly acknowledged duke of Braganza and Portuguese heir is Duarte Pio of Braganza (born 1945). Unlike other European republics (such as Greece) which attempt to prevent the presence of former royal houses in their lands, republican Portugal and its claimants to the throne have long been reconciled, a fact shown when among the guests at the wedding of Duarte Pio was the President of the Portuguese Republic and the country&#x27;s prime minister.

In contrast to Duarte Pio and his family&#x27;s claim, Maria Pia of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha Braganza has made claim to the title of Duchess of Braganza and Queen of Portugal, since 1932.

==List of dukes of Braganza==
===Use of titles in the Portuguese Republic===
With the end of the Portuguese monarchy in 1910, all titles of Portuguese nobility were initially abolished. Notwithstanding, although the status of nobility has not been recognised in law since 1910, legitimate titles of nobility (those granted by a reigning monarch before 5 October 1910) have been given legal recognition and protection, including under article 26 of the Portuguese Constitution, in conjunction with articles 70 and 72 of the Civil Code, as established by decision of Portugal&#x27;s Supreme Court of Justice in 2014.

==References==
==External links==
*A full transcription of the inventory is available at www.cham.fcsh.unl.pt

==Bibliography==
*&quot;Nobreza de Portugal e Brasil&quot;, Vol. II, pages 433/449. Published by Zairol Lda., 1989, Lisbon.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1934769" start="10" end="26" title="Duke of Braganza" label="Duke of Braganza"/>
<link wikidata="Q853342" start="37" end="54" title="House of Braganza" label="House of Braganza"/>
<link wikidata="Q45" start="109" end="117" title="Portugal" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q853342" start="146" end="163" title="House of Braganza" label="House of Braganza"/>
<link wikidata="Q183426" start="220" end="236" title="Portuguese monarchs" label="Portuguese Crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q3326330" start="292" end="307" title="Prince of Beira" label="Prince of Beira"/>
<link wikidata="Q2722071" start="331" end="347" title="Prince of Brazil" label="Prince of Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q7790" start="484" end="503" title="History of Portugal" label="Portuguese Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11799544" start="659" end="679" title="List of Dukedoms in Portugal" label="dukedoms in Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q15282451" start="685" end="702" title="Duchy of Braganza" label="Duchy of Braganza"/>
<link wikidata="Q299119" start="751" end="771" title="Afonso V of Portugal" label="Afonso V of Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q964618" start="786" end="792" title="Afonso, Duke of Braganza" label="Afonso"/>
<link wikidata="Q201575" start="833" end="851" title="John I of Portugal" label="John I of Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q188063" start="878" end="882" title="fief" label="fief"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060796" start="2006" end="2032" title="John IV of Portugal" label="John, 8th Duke of Braganza"/>
<link wikidata="Q2711789" start="2105" end="2127" title="Catherine, Duchess of Braganza" label="Catherine of Guimarães"/>
<link wikidata="Q191231" start="2164" end="2172" title="Manuel I of Portugal" label="Manuel I"/>
<link wikidata="Q191231" start="2258" end="2266" title="Manuel I of Portugal" label="Manuel I"/>
<link wikidata="Q241206" start="2361" end="2376" title="Luisa of Guzman" label="Luisa of Guzman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060796" start="2600" end="2619" title="John IV of Portugal" label="John IV of Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q853342" start="2707" end="2724" title="House of Braganza" label="House of Braganza"/>
<link wikidata="Q7185044" start="2783" end="2801" title="Philippine Dynasty" label="Philippine Dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q183426" start="2953" end="2970" title="Portuguese monarchs" label="Portuguese throne"/>
<link wikidata="Q3326330" start="3008" end="3023" title="Prince of Beira" label="Prince of Beira"/>
<link wikidata="Q180729" start="3045" end="3060" title="Prince of Wales" label="Prince of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="3077" end="3091" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2574511" start="3172" end="3180" title="Teodósio, Prince of Brazil" label="Teodósio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2722071" start="3210" end="3226" title="Prince of Brazil" label="Prince of Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q691168" start="3407" end="3428" title="Afonso VI of Portugal" label="Afonso VI of Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2762318" start="3511" end="3524" title="heir apparent" label="heir apparent"/>
<link wikidata="Q372740" start="3935" end="3972" title="Luís Filipe, Prince Royal of Portugal" label="Luís Filipe, Prince Royal of Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q939" start="4165" end="4182" title="Pedro I of Brazil" label="Pedro I of Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q158874" start="4280" end="4301" title="Charles I of Portugal" label="Charles I of Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q154308" start="4449" end="4470" title="Manuel II of Portugal" label="Manuel II of Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q154308" start="4881" end="4902" title="Manuel II of Portugal" label="Manuel II of Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q464726" start="4943" end="4970" title="Miguel Januário of Braganza" label="Miguel Januário of Braganza"/>
<link wikidata="Q310790" start="4995" end="5015" title="Miguel I of Portugal" label="Miguel I of Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262756" start="5357" end="5379" title="Duarte Pio of Braganza" label="Duarte Pio of Braganza"/>
<link wikidata="Q255892" start="5802" end="5845" title="Maria Pia de Saxe-Coburgo e Bragança" label="Maria Pia of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha Braganza"/>
<link wikidata="Q183426" start="5901" end="5918" title="Queen of Portugal" label="Queen of Portugal"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="308536" wikidata="Q464726" url="?curid=308536" title="Prince Miguel, Duke of Braganza">
<text>Prince Miguel Januário of Braganza (; full name Miguel Maria Carlos Egídio Constantino Gabriel Rafael Gonzaga Francisco de Paula e de Assis Januário de Bragança; 19 September 1853 – 11 October 1927) was the Miguelist claimant to the throne of Portugal from 1866 to 1920. He used the title [[Duke of Braganza]].

==Early life==

Miguel Januário was born in Castle Kleinheubach, near Miltenberg, Kingdom of Bavaria, on 19 September 1853 during the exile in Germany of his father, former King Miguel I of Portugal and the Algarves. His mother was Princess Adelaide of Löwenstein-Wertheim-Rosenberg. He was a grandson of King John VI of Portugal, Brazil and the Algarves and his wife, Queen Carlota Joaquina.

By the Portuguese law of banishment of 1834 and the constitution of 1838, King Miguel was forbidden to enter Portugal. Therefore, he was educated in the German Confederation and in Austria-Hungary.

==Career==
He was a member of the staff of Emperor Franz Joseph I of Austria and took part in the Austro-Hungarian campaign in Bosnia and Herzegovina in 1878. His second son, Prince Francisco José of Braganza, was named after the Austrian Emperor, who was his godfather.

Miguel Januário held the rank of a colonel in the 7th Austrian Regiment of Hussars. During World War I, he held the rank of Lieutenant General (Feldmarschalleutnant) in the Austro-Hungarian Army. He resigned in 1917 when Portugal entered the conflict on the opposite side, and spent the rest of the war as a civilian in the Order of Malta. After the end of Austria-Hungary, Miguel Januário and his family were thrown into relative poverty.

On 31 July 1920, after quarrels with his eldest son (who contracted a controversial marriage to an American heiress), Miguel Januário renounced his claims as King of Portugal in favour of his third son, Duarte Nuno, who was 13 years old at the time.

==Marriages and children==
Miguel Januário was first married to Princess Elisabeth of Thurn and Taxis (May 28, 1860 – February 7, 1881), the niece of Empress Elisabeth of Austria, on 17 October, 1877 in Regensburg. They had three children:

* Dom Miguel, Duke of Viseu (1878–1923), married Anita Stewart and had issue.
* Dom Francisco José de Bragança (1879–1919), died unmarried and without issue.
* Dona Maria Teresa de Bragança (1881–1945), married Prince Karl Ludwig of Thurn und Taxis and had issue.

After the death of his first wife, he married for a second time to his first cousin Princess Maria Theresa of Löwenstein-Wertheim-Rosenberg (1870–1935), on 8 November 1893 at Kleinheubach. They had eight children:

* Dona Isabel Maria de Bragança (1894–1970), married Franz Joseph, 9th Prince of Thurn and Taxis and had issue.
* Dona Maria Benedita de Bragança (1896–1971), died unmarried and without issue.
* Dona Mafalda de Bragança (1898–1918), died unmarried and without issue. 
* Dona Maria Ana de Bragança (1899–1971), married the future Karl August, 10th Prince of Thurn and Taxis and had issue.
* Dona Maria Antónia de Bragança (1903–1973), married Sidney Ashley Chanler (son of William Astor Chanler) and had issue.
* Dona Filipa de Bragança (1905–1990), died unmarried and without issue.
* Dom Duarte Nuno, Duke of Braganza (1907–1976), married Princess Maria Francisca de Orléans e Bragança and had issue.
* Dona Maria Adelaide de Bragança (1912–2012), married Nicolaas van Uden and had issue.

Miguel Januário died in Seebenstein, on October 11, 1927. He is buried at Kloster Maria Himmelfahrt in Bronnbach.

==Honours==
* : Grand Master of the Order of St. Michael of the Wing
* : Knight of the Golden Fleece, &quot;1881&quot;
* : Knight of St. Hubert, &quot;1900&quot;

==In film==
In the 1968 film &quot;Mayerling&quot;, &quot;Michel de Bragance&quot; is a small character played by Jean-Claude Bercq.
==See also==
*Descendants of Miguel I of Portugal

==References==
==Ancestry==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q464726" start="0" end="34" title="Prince Miguel, Duke of Braganza" label="Prince Miguel Januário of Braganza"/>
<link wikidata="Q464726" start="48" end="160" title="Prince Miguel, Duke of Braganza" label="Miguel Maria Carlos Egídio Constantino Gabriel Rafael Gonzaga Francisco de Paula e de Assis Januário de Bragança"/>
<link wikidata="Q2756861" start="207" end="216" title="Miguelist" label="Miguelist"/>
<link wikidata="Q45670" start="243" end="251" title="Kingdom of Portugal" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q464726" start="289" end="309" title="Prince Miguel, Duke of Braganza" label="[[Duke of Braganza]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q508414" start="363" end="375" title="Kleinheubach" label="Kleinheubach"/>
<link wikidata="Q502681" start="382" end="392" title="Miltenberg" label="Miltenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q154195" start="394" end="412" title="Kingdom of Bavaria" label="Kingdom of Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="455" end="462" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q310790" start="485" end="527" title="Miguel I of Portugal" label="King Miguel I of Portugal and the Algarves"/>
<link wikidata="Q261811" start="544" end="594" title="Princess Adelaide of Löwenstein-Wertheim-Rosenberg" label="Princess Adelaide of Löwenstein-Wertheim-Rosenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q676301" start="617" end="666" title="John VI of Portugal" label="King John VI of Portugal, Brazil and the Algarves"/>
<link wikidata="Q233603" start="681" end="703" title="Carlota Joaquina of Spain" label="Queen Carlota Joaquina"/>
<link wikidata="Q45670" start="815" end="823" title="Kingdom of Portugal" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q151624" start="859" end="879" title="German Confederation" label="German Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="887" end="902" title="Austria-Hungary" label="Austria-Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q166877" start="948" end="955" title="Emperor of Austria" label="Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q51056" start="956" end="981" title="Franz Joseph I of Austria" label="Franz Joseph I of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q12645587" start="1003" end="1062" title="Austro-Hungarian campaign in Bosnia and Herzegovina in 1878" label="Austro-Hungarian campaign in Bosnia and Herzegovina in 1878"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="1268" end="1279" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q64909" start="1321" end="1341" title="Lieutenant field marshal" label="Feldmarschalleutnant"/>
<link wikidata="Q682645" start="1350" end="1371" title="Austro-Hungarian Army" label="Austro-Hungarian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q167360" start="1398" end="1406" title="First Portuguese Republic" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q187549" start="1501" end="1515" title="Knights Hospitaller" label="Order of Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="1534" end="1549" title="Austria-Hungary" label="Austria-Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q3617596" start="1714" end="1733" title="Anita de Braganza" label="an American heiress"/>
<link wikidata="Q183426" start="1776" end="1792" title="King of Portugal" label="King of Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2264967" start="1821" end="1832" title="Duarte Nuno, Duke of Braganza" label="Duarte Nuno"/>
<link wikidata="Q272464" start="1933" end="1970" title="Princess Elisabeth of Thurn and Taxis (1860–1881)" label="Princess Elisabeth of Thurn and Taxis"/>
<link wikidata="Q150782" start="2019" end="2047" title="Elisabeth of Bavaria" label="Empress Elisabeth of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2978" start="2072" end="2082" title="Regensburg" label="Regensburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2083842" start="2116" end="2137" title="Prince Miguel, Duke of Viseu" label="Miguel, Duke of Viseu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3617596" start="2159" end="2172" title="Anita of Braganza" label="Anita Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1895713" start="2194" end="2220" title="Prince Francis Joseph of Braganza" label="Francisco José de Bragança"/>
<link wikidata="Q4281713" start="2275" end="2299" title="Princess Maria Theresa of Braganza" label="Maria Teresa de Bragança"/>
<link wikidata="Q2116135" start="2343" end="2358" title="Thurn und Taxis" label="Thurn und Taxis"/>
<link wikidata="Q460804" start="2459" end="2514" title="Princess Maria Theresa of Löwenstein-Wertheim-Rosenberg" label="Princess Maria Theresa of Löwenstein-Wertheim-Rosenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q508414" start="2550" end="2562" title="Kleinheubach" label="Kleinheubach"/>
<link wikidata="Q3802280" start="2597" end="2621" title="Princess Isabel Maria of Braganza" label="Isabel Maria de Bragança"/>
<link wikidata="Q63016" start="2643" end="2686" title="Franz Joseph, 9th Prince of Thurn and Taxis" label="Franz Joseph, 9th Prince of Thurn and Taxis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3847122" start="2865" end="2886" title="Princess Maria Ana of Braganza" label="Maria Ana de Bragança"/>
<link wikidata="Q69446" start="2919" end="2962" title="Karl August, 10th Prince of Thurn and Taxis" label="Karl August, 10th Prince of Thurn and Taxis"/>
<link wikidata="Q76371269" start="2985" end="3010" title="Princess Maria Antónia of Bragança" label="Maria Antónia de Bragança"/>
<link wikidata="Q13219089" start="3062" end="3083" title="William A. Chanler" label="William Astor Chanler"/>
<link wikidata="Q2264967" start="3179" end="3208" title="Duarte Nuno, Duke of Braganza" label="Duarte Nuno, Duke of Braganza"/>
<link wikidata="Q2083271" start="3239" end="3276" title="Maria Francisca de Orléans e Bragança" label="Maria Francisca de Orléans e Bragança"/>
<link wikidata="Q2082794" start="3299" end="3325" title="Maria Adelaide de Bragança" label="Maria Adelaide de Bragança"/>
<link wikidata="Q16862805" start="3356" end="3364" title="Uden (surname)" label="van Uden"/>
<link wikidata="Q281225" start="3405" end="3416" title="Seebenstein" label="Seebenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q622601" start="3512" end="3524" title="Grand Master (order)" label="Grand Master"/>
<link wikidata="Q1696581" start="3532" end="3564" title="Order of Saint Michael of the Wing" label="Order of St. Michael of the Wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q465774" start="3569" end="3596" title="Order of the Golden Fleece" label="Knight of the Golden Fleece"/>
<link wikidata="Q699459" start="3619" end="3639" title="Order of St. Hubert" label="Knight of St. Hubert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1914469" start="3694" end="3703" title="Mayerling (1968 film)" label="Mayerling"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3773" end="3790" title="Jean-Claude Bercq" label="Jean-Claude Bercq"/>
<link wikidata="Q5263709" start="3806" end="3841" title="Descendants of Miguel I of Portugal" label="Descendants of Miguel I of Portugal"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="308538" wikidata="Q958736" url="?curid=308538" title="Teodósio II, Duke of Braganza">
<text>Teodósio II, 7th Duke of Braganza (28 April 1568 – 29 November 1630) was a Portuguese nobleman and father of João IV of Portugal. He is known for his allegiance to King Philip I of Portugal.

==Biography==

As a child, Teodósio was brought to the court and made page to the king Sebastian I of Portugal. The king was very fond of him and in 1578 insisted on taking him to Africa in the expedition against the king of Morocco. This military campaign was doomed. During the ill-fated battle of Alcácer Quibir, Teodósio remained at the side of his king until the situation become extremely dangerous. Then, Sebastian ordered servants to take the ten-year-old child to safety behind the lines. The young man was not happy to be set aside and ran away at the first opportunity. Teodósio mounted a horse and went to the front lines of the battle, pursued by very scared servants. Eventually, like many others, he was wounded and taken prisoner. Back in Portugal, his father João went mad with grief and offered a fortune for the ransom of his heir. He also asked king Philip II of Spain to write to the king of Morocco in order to spare young Teodósio&#x27;s life. There was no need for such alarm. Impressed by the tale of his courage in battle, the king of Morocco let the child go, safely and without ransom, in August 1579.

Meanwhile, in Portugal, the situation was one of unrest. With the disappearance of King Sebastian in the battle, the new king was Cardinal Henry I of Portugal, an old childless man. Teodósio was the son of Infanta Catarina, an ambitious woman who, with her husband the Duke of Bragança, aspired to the throne. Philip II of Spain also aspired to the Portuguese throne and used every means to keep young Teodósio (great-grandson of King Manuel I and a possible threat) out of the country. Only when he had safely secured the crown did Philip II of Spain, now Philip I of Portugal, allow the child&#x27;s return.

Teodósio became a duke in 1583 at his father&#x27;s death and grew up to be a faithful servant of the Spanish king of Portugal. He defended Lisbon from the attacks of another candidate (António of Crato) and was responsible for the kingdom&#x27;s security for many years. Acknowledging this fidelity, Philip I granted the Braganças more lands and titles.

== Marriage and Children ==

* By his wife, the Spanish Lady Ana de Velasco y Girón
** John II, 8th Duke of Bragança (1604–1656), crowned King John IV of Portugal in December 1, 1640
** Duarte of Bragança (1605–1649), Lord of Vila do Conde
** Catarina of Bragança (1606–1610)
** Alexandre of Bragança (1607–1637)

==Ancestry==
==Bibliography==
*&quot;Nobreza de Portugal e Brazil&quot;, Vol. II, page 448. Published by Zairol Lda., Lisbon, 1989.
* Genealogy of Teodósio II, 7th Duke of Braganza

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q958736" start="0" end="33" title="Teodósio II, Duke of Braganza" label="Teodósio II, 7th Duke of Braganza"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060796" start="109" end="128" title="John IV of Portugal" label="João IV of Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q34417" start="169" end="189" title="Philip II of Spain" label="Philip I of Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q272899" start="279" end="302" title="Sebastian I of Portugal" label="Sebastian I of Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="372" end="378" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028" start="417" end="424" title="Morocco" label="Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121532" start="482" end="506" title="battle of Alcácer Quibir" label="battle of Alcácer Quibir"/>
<link wikidata="Q34417" start="1062" end="1080" title="Philip II of Spain" label="Philip II of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q222123" start="1462" end="1481" title="Henry, King of Portugal" label="Henry I of Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2711789" start="1529" end="1545" title="Catherine, Duchess of Braganza" label="Infanta Catarina"/>
<link wikidata="Q191231" start="1758" end="1766" title="Manuel I of Portugal" label="Manuel I"/>
<link wikidata="Q597" start="2074" end="2080" title="Lisbon" label="Lisbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q321325" start="2120" end="2136" title="António, Prior of Crato" label="António of Crato"/>
<link wikidata="Q4750531" start="2351" end="2373" title="Ana de Velasco y Girón" label="Ana de Velasco y Girón"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060796" start="2377" end="2406" title="John IV of Portugal" label="John II, 8th Duke of Bragança"/>
<link wikidata="Q917313" start="2516" end="2529" title="Vila do Conde" label="Vila do Conde"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="308540" wikidata="Q2887822" url="?curid=308540" title="Battle of Alfarrobeira">
<text>The Battle of Alfarrobeira () took place on 20 May 1449. It was a confrontation between the forces commanded by King Afonso V of Portugal and his uncle Afonso, Duke of Braganza, against the army of the rebellious Peter, Duke of Coimbra. The place was Vialonga, near Lisbon, at the margins of the creek of Alfarrobeira. The result was the clear defeat and death of the Duke of Coimbra and the establishment of the Braganzas as the most powerful House of Portugal.

==Background==
After the death of King Fernando, the last of the First Dynasty, in 1383, power fell to the regent Queen Leonor, hated by the people, and her daughter Beatrice, married to the Castilian King Juan I. Fernando&#x27;s half-brother John, Master of Aviz, led a revolution against the Queen and the Castilian King, defeating them with a smaller army in the battle of Aljubarrota. The battle became a turning point in Portuguese and world history, and King John I and his military aide, Constable Nuno Álvares Pereira, became immortal idols.

King John I had a first illegitimate son, Afonso, and a daughter Beatrice; after marrying Philippa of Lancaster, John of Gaunt&#x27;s daughter, and establishing the House of Aviz, they had a first boy (died of young age), a girl Isabella (who became a famous duchess of Burgundy and Flanders), then five boys who were grew up under the memories of the famous battle. Edward (Duarte) was trained to become king, Peter (Pedro), Henry (Henrique, a.k.a. &quot;The Navigator&quot;), that was becoming powerful and famous with the military actions in Northern Africa against Muslims; John and Fernando, the youngest, died before Alfarrobeira. For ten years Peter lived abroad.

When King John I, and a few years later, King Edward, died, the crown fell on the boy Afonso V, under the regency of the Queen, an Aragonese; the people remembered 1383 and the civil war, and rebelled against the Queen. The old Afonso, Count of Barcelos, King John&#x27;s first son, supported the Queen. Peter (now the eldest brother) led a revolution with the help of his brothers, but Henry managed to establish peace through a tripartite regency between the Queen, Peter, and Afonso.

In the years to follow, the Queen tried a coup-d&#x27;etat with the help of her family; Peter, married to an Aragonese whose family fought for Castilian power against the Queen&#x27;s family, managed to send her back to Castile, appeased older Afonso giving him the Duchy of Braganza and secured the trust of his sons by promising them military titles, married his daughter to the young King, and assumed the Regency, establishing himself as the most powerful man in Portugal with the help of his brother Henry. But he made mistakes, for when his two brothers John and Fernando died, he gave their military titles to his sons, and not Afonso&#x27;s sons as promised. Soon enough, the intrigues nurtured by the Duke of Braganza led the king to perceive his uncle the regent as an enemy.

When young Afonso V reached his 14th birthday, he dismissed his uncle as regent, associated with Afonso&#x27;s sons, and began to uproot Peter&#x27;s men from their positions of power. Finally, for reasons that would be proven false later, the King declared the Duke of Coimbra a traitor and usurper, called his banners to war and marched against Peter. The Duke of Braganza called his own banners in support of his nephew the king and joined forces with the royal army near Lisbon, bringing their numbers close to 30 000 men. The battle, near Lisbon, to the North, was short, and Peter one of its first victims being killed by an arrow. Henry, King John&#x27;s fifth son, was now first and only surviving prince of the first generation of the House of Aviz.

==Outcome==

Mistrusted by King Afonso V and the Duke of Braganza&#x27;s sons as a member of the House of Aviz, and mistrusted by his dead brother&#x27;s friends who never accepted his betrayal (and rejected by his old sister Isabella, in Burgundy), Henry retreated to his land in Sagres, the southernmost and westernmost tip of Portugal - and Europe. There, living a secluded and religious life, he concentrated his efforts on the sailing expeditions of his men, becoming worldly renowned as discoverer of never before seen oceans and coasts (Madeira, Azores, the African coast to Guinea, and after his death Cape of Good Hope, India, Japan, Canada, Brazil, etc.).

Afonso V ignored the travels of his uncle and immersed himself in the battles of Castile, trying to take the throne for himself, but his claim was defeated in the indecisive Battle of Toro by Queen Isabella the Catholic and King Fernando of Aragon. However, he won the naval war against the Catholic monarchs during this war of the Castilian Succession (1475–79). He died leaving Portugal on the brink of bankruptcy.

Afonso&#x27;s son, John II, turned his back on Castile and saw an opportunity in the ocean discoveries and expanded them, making Portugal the first intercontinental empire and becoming the most powerful King in medieval history.

==Notes==
==References==
*M. D. D. Newitt, &quot;The First Portuguese colonial empire&quot; (1986) 
*Clayton J. Drees, &quot;The late medieval age of crisis and renewal, 1300–1500: a biographical dictionary&quot; (2001) 
*Newton de Macedo, &quot;História de Portugal: A Epopeia dos Descobrimentos – A Dinastia de Avis e a Expansão Ultramarina&quot; (2004) </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2887822" start="4" end="26" title="Battle of Alfarrobeira" label="Battle of Alfarrobeira"/>
<link wikidata="Q299119" start="117" end="137" title="Afonso V of Portugal" label="Afonso V of Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q964618" start="152" end="176" title="Afonso, Duke of Braganza" label="Afonso, Duke of Braganza"/>
<link wikidata="Q552417" start="213" end="235" title="Peter, Duke of Coimbra" label="Peter, Duke of Coimbra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340615" start="251" end="259" title="Vialonga, Portugal" label="Vialonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q597" start="266" end="272" title="Lisbon" label="Lisbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934769" start="413" end="422" title="Duke of Braganza" label="Braganzas"/>
<link wikidata="Q108442" start="503" end="511" title="Ferdinand I of Portugal" label="Fernando"/>
<link wikidata="Q237747" start="584" end="590" title="Leonor Telles de Menezes" label="Leonor"/>
<link wikidata="Q233745" start="630" end="638" title="Beatrice of Portugal" label="Beatrice"/>
<link wikidata="Q310421" start="670" end="676" title="John I of Castile" label="Juan I"/>
<link wikidata="Q201575" start="707" end="727" title="John I of Portugal" label="John, Master of Aviz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2105495" start="735" end="745" title="1383–1385 Crisis" label="revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341972" start="830" end="851" title="battle of Aljubarrota" label="battle of Aljubarrota"/>
<link wikidata="Q201575" start="929" end="935" title="John I of Portugal" label="John I"/>
<link wikidata="Q374056" start="969" end="989" title="Nuno Álvares Pereira" label="Nuno Álvares Pereira"/>
<link wikidata="Q964618" start="1057" end="1063" title="Afonso, 1st Duke of Braganza" label="Afonso"/>
<link wikidata="Q1766277" start="1080" end="1088" title="Infanta Beatrice, Countess of Arundel" label="Beatrice"/>
<link wikidata="Q236911" start="1105" end="1126" title="Philippa of Lancaster" label="Philippa of Lancaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q747516" start="1180" end="1193" title="House of Aviz" label="House of Aviz"/>
<link wikidata="Q466268" start="1244" end="1252" title="Infanta Isabel, Duchess of Burgundy" label="Isabella"/>
<link wikidata="Q294607" start="1382" end="1388" title="Edward of Portugal" label="Edward"/>
<link wikidata="Q552417" start="1426" end="1431" title="Infante Pedro, Duke of Coimbra" label="Peter"/>
<link wikidata="Q182897" start="1441" end="1446" title="Henry the Navigator" label="Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q964858" start="1593" end="1597" title="Infante João, Lord of Reguengos de Monsaraz" label="John"/>
<link wikidata="Q552022" start="1602" end="1610" title="Ferdinand the Saint Prince" label="Fernando"/>
<link wikidata="Q299119" start="1773" end="1781" title="Afonso V of Portugal" label="Afonso V"/>
<link wikidata="Q204920" start="1818" end="1827" title="Crown of Aragon" label="Aragonese"/>
<link wikidata="Q964618" start="1915" end="1940" title="Afonso, Count of Barcelos" label="Afonso, Count of Barcelos"/>
<link wikidata="Q217196" start="2395" end="2402" title="Crown of Castile" label="Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q926672" start="4003" end="4009" title="Sagres, Portugal" label="Sagres"/>
<link wikidata="Q26253" start="4266" end="4273" title="Madeira" label="Madeira"/>
<link wikidata="Q25263" start="4275" end="4281" title="Azores" label="Azores"/>
<link wikidata="Q4092" start="4332" end="4349" title="Cape of Good Hope" label="Cape of Good Hope"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="4351" end="4356" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="4358" end="4363" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="4365" end="4371" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="4373" end="4379" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q282135" start="4459" end="4477" title="War of the Castilian Succession" label="battles of Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q2734129" start="4563" end="4577" title="Battle of Toro" label="Battle of Toro"/>
<link wikidata="Q186851" start="4680" end="4697" title="Catholic monarchs" label="Catholic monarchs"/>
<link wikidata="Q282135" start="4710" end="4741" title="war of the Castilian Succession" label="war of the Castilian Succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q217637" start="4826" end="4833" title="John II of Portugal" label="John II"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="308544" wikidata="Q6214453" url="?curid=308544" title="Joey Levine">
<text>Joey Levine (born May 29, 1947) is an American singer, songwriter and record producer of pop music, who has been active since 1966.

==Career==
Levine sang lead vocals on several Top 40 singles including &quot;Run Run Run&quot; by The Third Rail (1966), &quot;Yummy Yummy Yummy&quot; (co-written with Artie Resnick), and three others by The Ohio Express (1968–1969), &quot;Quick Joey Small (Run Joey Run)&quot; by Kasenetz-Katz Singing Orchestral Circus (1968), and the record that best showcased his rapid speech delivery, &quot;Life Is a Rock (But the Radio Rolled Me)&quot; by Reunion (1974). He specialized in bubblegum pop.

Levine produced records for Super K Productions, run by Jerry Kasenetz and Jeffry Katz, who released many singles in the late 1960s by The Ohio Express, The 1910 Fruitgum Company, and The Music Explosion. Levine sang lead for various groups of studio musicians, whose songs were released under the name of actual groups of musicians, or sometimes the groups did not exist at all outside the studio.

Starting in the early 1970s, Levine began working on jingles for television commercials, as well as singing on them, with one of his most well-remembered jingles being &quot;Sometimes You Feel Like A Nut&quot; for Mounds and Almond Joy chocolate bars.

Levine founded Crushing Enterprises in New York City in 1969, and continues to write music for commercials and television. Popular campaigns from the past include: “Pepsi – The Joy of Cola&quot;, &quot;Gentlemen Prefer Hanes&quot;, &quot;Just For the Taste of It – Diet Coke&quot;, &quot;Orange you smart, (for drinking Orange Juice)&quot;, &quot;Come See the Softer Side of Sears&quot;, &quot;Heartbeat of America – Chevrolet&quot;, &quot;Dr Pepper – You Make the World Taste Better&quot;, &quot;You Asked For It, You Got It, Toyota,&quot; &quot;Who&#x27;s that Kid With the Oreo Cookie,&quot; and &quot;This Bud&#x27;s For You&quot; for Anheuser-Busch, and also the infamous &quot;Proud as a Peacock&quot; image campaign for NBC used from May 1979 to Summer 1981, Most recently he wrote the current Budweiser anthem, &quot;This Is Budweiser, This Is Beer.&quot; In addition, Levine has also contributed songs, some of them with his 1960&#x27;s bubblegum pop sound, to the PBS series &quot;Dragon Tales&quot;.

==References==
==External links==
* http://www.crushingmusic.com </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6214453" start="0" end="11" title="Joey Levine" label="Joey Levine"/>
<link wikidata="Q134556" start="186" end="193" title="single (music)" label="singles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7768830" start="231" end="245" title="The Third Rail (band)" label="The Third Rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q532709" start="260" end="277" title="Yummy Yummy Yummy" label="Yummy Yummy Yummy"/>
<link wikidata="Q17306434" start="301" end="314" title="Artie Resnick" label="Artie Resnick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760014" start="337" end="353" title="The Ohio Express" label="The Ohio Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q132294079" start="373" end="404" title="Quick Joey Small (Run Joey Run)" label="Quick Joey Small (Run Joey Run)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1734909" start="414" end="453" title="Kasenetz-Katz Singing Orchestral Circus" label="Kasenetz-Katz Singing Orchestral Circus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6544908" start="530" end="570" title="Life Is a Rock (But the Radio Rolled Me)" label="Life Is a Rock (But the Radio Rolled Me)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6544908" start="580" end="587" title="Reunion (band)" label="Reunion"/>
<link wikidata="Q997481" start="614" end="627" title="bubblegum pop" label="bubblegum pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q7642483" start="658" end="677" title="Super K Productions" label="Super K Productions"/>
<link wikidata="Q6183857" start="686" end="700" title="Jerry Kasenetz" label="Jerry Kasenetz"/>
<link wikidata="Q6174209" start="705" end="716" title="Jeffry Katz" label="Jeffry Katz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760014" start="765" end="781" title="The Ohio Express" label="The Ohio Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q206066" start="787" end="808" title="1910 Fruitgum Company" label="1910 Fruitgum Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q2412974" start="818" end="833" title="Music Explosion" label="Music Explosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q264922" start="1083" end="1090" title="jingles" label="jingles"/>
<link wikidata="Q854995" start="1106" end="1117" title="TV commercials" label="commercials"/>
<link wikidata="Q6919154" start="1244" end="1250" title="Mounds (candy)" label="Mounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q4733893" start="1255" end="1265" title="Almond Joy" label="Almond Joy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361086" start="1266" end="1279" title="chocolate bar" label="chocolate bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q47719" start="1448" end="1453" title="Pepsi" label="Pepsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815345" start="1548" end="1557" title="Diet Coke" label="Diet Coke"/>
<link wikidata="Q6499202" start="1658" end="1663" title="Sears, Roebuck and Company" label="Sears"/>
<link wikidata="Q29570" start="1700" end="1709" title="Chevrolet" label="Chevrolet"/>
<link wikidata="Q623561" start="1723" end="1732" title="Dr Pepper" label="Dr Pepper"/>
<link wikidata="Q53268" start="1810" end="1816" title="Toyota" label="Toyota"/>
<link wikidata="Q138585" start="1859" end="1863" title="Oreo" label="Oreo"/>
<link wikidata="Q125074" start="1922" end="1936" title="Anheuser-Busch" label="Anheuser-Busch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7252238" start="1966" end="1984" title="Proud as a Peacock" label="Proud as a Peacock"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="2010" end="2013" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q610672" start="2084" end="2093" title="Budweiser (Anheuser-Busch)" label="Budweiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q541947" start="2094" end="2100" title="anthem" label="anthem"/>
<link wikidata="Q215616" start="2257" end="2260" title="PBS" label="PBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1315767" start="2274" end="2286" title="Dragon Tales" label="Dragon Tales"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="308550" wikidata="Q3821447" url="?curid=308550" title="Coal Black and de Sebben Dwarfs">
<text>Coal Black and de Sebben Dwarfs is a 1943 &quot;Merrie Melodies&quot; animated cartoon directed by Bob Clampett. The short was released on January 16, 1943.

The film is an all-black parody of the Brothers Grimm fairy tale &quot;Snow White&quot;, known to audiences at the time from the popular 1937 Walt Disney animated feature &quot;Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs&quot;. The stylistic portrayal of the characters is an example of &quot;darky&quot; iconography, which was widely accepted in American society at the time. As such, it is one of the most controversial cartoons in the classic Warner Brothers library, being one of the Censored Eleven. The cartoon has been rarely seen on television since it was pulled from circulation in 1968, and has never been officially released on home video.

==History==
In this version of the story, all of the characters are black, and speak all of their dialogue in rhyme. The story is set during World War II in the United States, and the original tale&#x27;s fairy tale wholesomeness is replaced in this film by a hot jazz mentality and sexual overtones. Several scenes unique to Disney&#x27;s film version of &quot;Snow White&quot;, such as the wishing-well sequence, the forest full of staring eyes, and the awakening kiss, are directly parodied in this film. The film was intended to have been named &quot;So White and de Sebben Dwarfs&quot;, which producer Leon Schlesinger thought was too close to the original film&#x27;s actual title, and had changed to &quot;Coal Black and De Sebben Dwarfs&quot;.

Clampett intended &quot;Coal Black&quot; as both a parody of &quot;Snow White&quot; and a dedication to the all-black jazz musical films popular in the early 1940s (like &quot;Cabin in the Sky&quot; and &quot;Stormy Weather&quot;). In fact, the idea to produce &quot;Coal Black&quot; came to Clampett after he saw Duke Ellington&#x27;s 1941 musical revue &quot;Jump for Joy&quot;, and Ellington and the cast suggested Clampett make a black musical cartoon. The Clampett unit made a couple of field trips to Club Alabam, a black club in the Los Angeles area, to gain a feel for the music and the dancing, and Clampett cast popular radio actors as the voices of his three main characters. The main character, So White, is voiced by Vivian Dandridge, sister of actress Dorothy Dandridge. Danny Webb voices the Wicked Queen. Leo Watson is the voice of &quot;Prince Chawmin&#x27;&quot;. The other characters, including the Sebben Dwarfs, are voiced by veteran Warner Bros. voice artist Mel Blanc.

Originally, Clampett wanted an all-black band to score the cartoon, the same way Max and Dave Fleischer had Cab Calloway and His Orchestra score the &quot;Betty Boop&quot; cartoons &quot;Minnie the Moocher&quot;, &quot;The Old Man of the Mountain&quot;, and their own version of &quot;Snow White&quot;. However, Schlesinger refused, and the black band Clampett had hired, Eddie Beals and His Orchestra, only recorded the music for the final kiss sequence. The rest of the film was scored, as was standard for Warner Bros. cartoons, by Carl W. Stalling.

==Plot==
&quot;Coal Black&quot; opens in front of a fireplace with a red-tinted silhouette of a large woman holding a young child in her lap. The little black girl asks her &quot;mammy&quot; to tell her the story of &quot;So White an&#x27; de Sebben Dwarfs&quot;. &quot;Mammy&quot; begins:

Well, once there was a &quot;mean&quot; ol&#x27; queen. And she lived in a gorgeous castle. And was that ole&#x27; gal rich! She was just as rich as she was mean! She had &quot;everythang!&quot;

The rich, Wicked Queen then appears, depicted as a &quot;food hoarder&quot;, with a large repository of items that were on ration during World War II: rubber, sugar, gin (&quot;Eli Whitney&#x27;s Cotton Gin&quot; brand) and more. After stuffing her face with candies (from a box marked &quot;Chattanooga Chew-Chews&quot;), she asks her magic mirror to &quot;send her a prince &#x27;bout six feet tall&quot;, but when Prince Chawmin&#x27; arrives in his flashy car, he declares &quot;that mean ol&#x27; queen sho&#x27; is a fright / but her gal So White is dyn-a-mite!&quot; Finding So White hard at work doing the laundry, the prince takes her hand and the two swing out into a wild jitterbug. The queen sees this, calls, and hires &quot;Murder, Incorporated&quot; to &quot;black-out So White&quot;. She eats the phone in frustration, as the assassins immediately arrive in a panel truck that advertises, &quot;We rub out anybody for $1.00; Midgets: 1/2-price; Japs: free&quot;.

The assassins kidnap the girl, but after several unseen &quot;favors&quot; which make the would-be assassins very happy, slowly set her free in the woods unharmed. Just before they drive off, the assassins are seen covered with So White&#x27;s lipstick all over their heads, an innuendo as to exactly how she earned her freedom. Wandering through the woods by herself, So White discovers a dwarf who hoots like an owl. In fright, she immediately lights up a lighter and reveals one of the dwarfs holding a rifle. He asked, &quot;Who goes there, Friend or Foe?&quot; She then runs the answer into the Sebben Dwarfs, seven diminutive army men in uniform who marched and sing &quot;We&#x27;re in the Army Now&quot;, with two dwarfs singing &quot;it takes us cats ... to catch them rats&quot; at the end, and So White declares in a 1940s swing-style singing voice, &quot;I&#x27;m wacky over khaki now!&quot; They immediately recruit her as their squad cook, and she spends her days &quot;fryin&#x27; up eggs an&#x27; pork chops too&quot; (to the tune of &quot;Five O&#x27;Clock Whistle&quot;) for the hungry soldiers, as a sign which hangs from her outdoor antique stove reads, &quot;Keep &#x27;em frying&quot;, as a sendup of the World War II slogan, &quot;Keep &#x27;Em Flying&quot;.

Meanwhile, the queen has learned that So White is still alive, and pumps an apple full of poison (turning the red apple into a green apple) to give it to the girl and kill her. Four worms escape the apple as the queen injects it with poison, one carrying a sign that says &quot;Refoogees&quot;, and one other thinks it smells like Limburger. The queen disguises herself as an old peddler woman as she arrives at the Sebben Dwarfs&#x27; camp, reveals a Jimmy Durante reference, and gives So White the poisoned apple (who immediately forced her to eat it). She gobbled the entire apple down. One of the seven dwarfs (modeled on the &quot;Dopey&quot; dwarf in Disney&#x27;s film) sees her lying on the ground and alerts the others that the queen has caused So White to &quot;kick the bucket&quot; (with one other dwarf who immediately sticks his head out to repeat the response in a question while acting like a chicken), as the situation forced the entire squad to rush, ramming over &quot;Dopey&quot;, and hops into its vehicles (a Jeep, a &quot;Beep&quot;, and, for &quot;Dopey&quot;, a &quot;Peep&quot;). As the queen makes her escape over the hills, the dwarfs load a cannon with both a war shell and &quot;Dopey&quot;. The shell sails over to the queen, stops in front of her in mid-air, opens, and &quot;Dopey&quot; appears, knocking the crone out with a normal-sized mallet.

Even though the queen has been defeated, So White is still dead to the world. The dwarfs&#x27; note, in spoken rhyme:

&lt;poem&gt;
She&#x27;s outta this world! She&#x27;s stiff as wood!
She&#x27;s got it bad, and that ain&#x27;t good!
There&#x27;s only one thing that&#x27;ll remedy this
and dat&#x27;s Prince Chawmin&#x27; and his Dynamite Kiss!
&lt;/poem&gt;

Upon the dwarfs&#x27; invoking his name, the prince jumps into the scene in a spotlight and promises to &quot;give her a kiss / and it won&#x27;t be a dud / I&#x27;ll bring her to life with my special &#x27;Rosebud&#x27;&quot;, a nod to &quot;Citizen Kane&quot;. Wiping his lip and leaning over the girl in preparation, Prince Chawmin proceeds to give So White a succession of highly aerobic kisses, practically swallowing the girl&#x27;s face whole in trying to awaken her, but without any luck. Prince Chawmin&#x27; keeps frantically kissing So White while the dwarfs attempt to copy his actions (as his efforts are underscored by a solo from Eddie Beale&#x27;s trumpet player), and the efforts literally take the life out of him as he first turns blue in the face (same to the dwarfs), before turning into a withered old, pale-faced man, shrugging his shoulders in defeat, with the dwarfs entirely falling and tumbling to the ground in relief. The &quot;Dopey&quot; dwarf then saunters over to So White, and, to the tune of &quot;You&#x27;re in the Army Now&quot;, lays a kiss on the girl so dynamic that not only does So White wake up, but her eyes become large as saucers and her pigtails fly straight up into the air (depicted in Rod Scribner&#x27;s typically extreme animation style) as she jumps into the air.

The worn-out, tired, and aged Prince asks &quot;Dopey&quot;, &quot;Man, what you got that makes So White think &quot;you&quot; so hot?!&quot; &quot;Dopey&quot; replies, with the only non-rhyming line in the cartoon, &quot;well, dat is a military secret&quot;, and lays another kiss on So White, which sends her pigtails sailing into the air again and causes the red ribbons on them to turn into twin American flags, to several notes of &quot;Columbia, the Gem of the Ocean&quot;, and immediately after the kiss, So White and &quot;Dopey&quot; both show an obvious &quot;afterglow&quot; in their eyes and their smile. The film then fades to the standard &quot;Merrie Melodies&quot; &quot;That&#x27;s all, Folks!&quot; end title text, superimposed over a shot of the little girl and her &quot;mammy&quot; from the opening scene.

== Reaction ==
===Race controversy===
When the cartoon was released, reviews in the press were positive. &quot;Motion Picture Exhibitor&quot; said, &quot;A satire on &quot;Snow White&quot; done in blackface, set in modern swing, this is the best in a long time. It&#x27;s very funny.&quot; &quot;The Film Daily&quot; agreed, saying, &quot;Set this one down as a rather amusing satire on &quot;Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs&quot;. All the characters in the latter are replaced by darkies... The dwarfs come to the rescue in a way that makes for numerous laughs.&quot;

In April 1943, the NAACP protested the caricatures which appeared in &quot;Coal Black and de Sebben Dwarfs&quot;, and called on Warner to withdraw it.

&quot;Coal Black and de Sebben Dwarfs&quot; is one of the &quot;Censored Eleven&quot;: 11 Schlesinger/Warner Bros. cartoons produced at the height of the Golden Age of Hollywood animation based on its unflattering and stereotypical use of blackface. Because it was produced in America during World War II, there is also anti-Japanese sentiment: the firm &quot;Murder Inc.&quot; advertises that it does not charge to kill &quot;Japs&quot;.

The same basic stereotypical elements present in the earlier Censored Eleven films are also present in &quot;Coal Black&quot;, depicted with more detail and made to conform to Clampett&#x27;s &quot;wacky&quot; directorial style. In &quot;Racism in American Popular Media&quot;, Behnken and Smithers assert, &quot;The racism in &quot;Coal Black and de Sebben Dwarfs&quot; is unparalleled in cartoon history. This short throws virtually every black stereotype into the mix, beginning with the Mammy character, who, while in shadow, is clearly a large black woman with a distinct &quot;Negroid&quot; voice. The child is a big-cheeked pickanniny with a bow in her hair... The Prince is a similarly caricatured black man: he has straightened hair, wears a white zoot suit and a monocle, and has gold teeth (his two front teeth are dominoes). So White is portrayed as a hypersexual, big-bottomed younger black woman, with perky bosoms and revealing clothing. She is less representative of blackface characters and instead represents the black Jezebel or whore, voluptuous, lascivious and sexually available.&quot;

Clampett would revisit black jazz culture again in another 1943 Merrie Melodies cartoon, &quot;Tin Pan Alley Cats&quot;, which features a feline caricature of Fats Waller in a repurposing of the wacky fantasy world from &quot;Porky in Wackyland&quot; (during the opening sequence, the &quot;Fats&quot; cat is distracted by what appears to be So White). Clampett&#x27;s colleague Friz Freleng directed a cartoon titled &quot;Goldilocks and the Jivin&#x27; Bears&quot; in 1944, essentially &quot;Coal Black&quot; remade with a different fairy tale, and Warner&#x27;s director Chuck Jones directed a series of shorts starring a prepubescent African hunter named Inki from 1939 to 1950. Like &quot;Coal Black&quot;, &quot;Tin Pan Alley Cats&quot; and &quot;Goldilocks and the Jivin&#x27; Bears&quot; would also end up in the Censored Eleven.

Bob Clampett claimed in the cartoon&#x27;s defense that;

===&quot;Coal Black&quot; in later years===
The racially stereotyped portrayals of African-Americans in &quot;Coal Black&quot; and the other &quot;Censored Eleven&quot; cartoons led to their being suppressed from television broadcast. In 1968, United Artists, which then owned the rights to the pre-August 1948 Warner Bros. cartoon library, officially banned the cartoons from circulation, and they have not been officially broadcast or released on home video since - even as the rights returned to Warners.

&quot;Coal Black and De Sebben Dwarfs&quot; has been praised and defended by film scholars and animation historians. Jerry Beck&#x27;s 1994 book &quot;The 50 Greatest Cartoons&quot;, placed &quot;Coal Black&quot; at number 21, based upon votes from over 1,000 members of the American animation industry. It is often bootlegged for release on home video.

It was seen briefly in the 1989 Turner Entertainment VHS release &quot;Cartoons For Big Kids&quot;, hosted by Leonard Maltin, and in the &quot;Behind the Tunes&quot; featurette &quot;Once Upon a Looney Tune&quot;, which is included in the &quot;Looney Tunes Golden Collection: Volume 5&quot; DVD box set.

On April 24, 2010, &quot;Coal Black and De Sebben Dwarfs&quot;, along with seven other titles from the Censored Eleven, was screened at the first annual Turner Classic Movies (TCM) Film Festival as part of a special presentation hosted by film historian Donald Bogle; the eight shorts shown were restored for that release.

==Credits==

===Crew===
*Produced by Leon Schlesinger
*Directed by Robert Clampett
*Story and storyboards by Warren Foster
*Animation by Rod Scribner, Art Babbitt, Robert McKimson, Virgil Ross, and Sid Sutherland
**(note: only Scribner receives screen credit, as per a Schlesinger edict that, in the interest of saving money on title card lettering, only one animator could be credited on each cartoon)
*Musical score by Carl W. Stalling

===Voice cast===
* Vivian Dandridge as So White
* Danny Webb as Wicked Queen
** Ruby Dandridge as Wicked Queen laughing
* Leo Watson as Prince Chawmin&#x27;
** Mel Blanc as Prince Chawmin&#x27; (one line: &quot;Rosebud&quot;)
* Lillian Randolph as Mammy and Honeychile
* Mel Blanc as the Sebben Dwarfs and the Worm
** Eddie Beal and Leo Watson as the Dwarfs for a few lines

==See also==
*List of World War II short films
*Stereotypes of African Americans

==References==

===Notes===
===Bibliography===
* 
* 

==External links==
*Milt Gray on &quot;Coal Black&quot;
*Debate over &quot;Coal Black&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1750628" start="48" end="63" title="Merrie Melodies" label="Merrie Melodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q11425" start="70" end="78" title="animation" label="animated"/>
<link wikidata="Q670417" start="99" end="111" title="Bob Clampett" label="Bob Clampett"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="177" end="182" title="African American" label="black"/>
<link wikidata="Q2793" start="197" end="211" title="Brothers Grimm" label="Brothers Grimm"/>
<link wikidata="Q699" start="212" end="222" title="fairy tale" label="fairy tale"/>
<link wikidata="Q11831" start="229" end="239" title="Snow White" label="Snow White"/>
<link wikidata="Q8704" start="300" end="311" title="Walt Disney" label="Walt Disney"/>
<link wikidata="Q134430" start="335" end="366" title="Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs (1937 film)" label="Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs"/>
<link wikidata="Q880808" start="433" end="462" title="Darky iconography" label="&amp;quot;darky&amp;quot; iconography"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="493" end="501" title="United States" label="American"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053433" start="634" end="649" title="Censored Eleven" label="Censored Eleven"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="960" end="973" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q699" start="1004" end="1014" title="fairy tale" label="fairy tale"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="1063" end="1067" title="jazz" label="jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q762558" start="1406" end="1422" title="Leon Schlesinger" label="Leon Schlesinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q842256" start="1675" end="1687" title="musical film" label="musical film"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024839" start="1728" end="1744" title="Cabin in the Sky (film)" label="Cabin in the Sky"/>
<link wikidata="Q2749451" start="1761" end="1775" title="Stormy Weather (1943 film)" label="Stormy Weather"/>
<link wikidata="Q4030" start="1866" end="1880" title="Duke Ellington" label="Duke Ellington"/>
<link wikidata="Q29598370" start="1913" end="1925" title="Jump for Joy (1941 revue)" label="Jump for Joy"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="2092" end="2103" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7937695" start="2282" end="2298" title="Vivian Dandridge" label="Vivian Dandridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q229251" start="2318" end="2335" title="Dorothy Dandridge" label="Dorothy Dandridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q68763569" start="2337" end="2347" title="Danny Webb (American actor)" label="Danny Webb"/>
<link wikidata="Q611295" start="2359" end="2371" title="Queen (Snow White) in derivative works" label="Wicked Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q225629" start="2373" end="2383" title="Leo Watson" label="Leo Watson"/>
<link wikidata="Q349690" start="2533" end="2542" title="Mel Blanc" label="Mel Blanc"/>
<link wikidata="Q93788" start="2626" end="2629" title="Max Fleischer" label="Max"/>
<link wikidata="Q1173200" start="2634" end="2648" title="Dave Fleischer" label="Dave Fleischer"/>
<link wikidata="Q273079" start="2653" end="2683" title="Cab Calloway" label="Cab Calloway and His Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q583810" start="2700" end="2710" title="Betty Boop" label="Betty Boop"/>
<link wikidata="Q17479054" start="2732" end="2750" title="Minnie the Moocher (film)" label="Minnie the Moocher"/>
<link wikidata="Q2282221" start="2764" end="2791" title="The Old Man of the Mountain (film)" label="The Old Man of the Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2010734" start="2830" end="2840" title="Snow-White (1933 film)" label="Snow White"/>
<link wikidata="Q598185" start="3080" end="3096" title="Carl W. Stalling" label="Carl W. Stalling"/>
<link wikidata="Q3844185" start="3278" end="3283" title="mammy archetype" label="mammy"/>
<link wikidata="Q611295" start="3596" end="3608" title="Queen (Snow White)" label="Wicked Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="3723" end="3735" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q280930" start="3763" end="3774" title="Eli Whitney" label="Eli Whitney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136790" start="3782" end="3792" title="cotton gin" label="Cotton Gin"/>
<link wikidata="Q280512" start="3878" end="3900" title="Chattanooga Choo Choo" label="Chattanooga Chew-Chews"/>
<link wikidata="Q950354" start="4269" end="4278" title="jitterbug" label="jitterbug"/>
<link wikidata="Q980664" start="4324" end="4344" title="Murder, Inc." label="Murder, Incorporated"/>
<link wikidata="Q2419953" start="4527" end="4533" title="Midget" label="Midget"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192767" start="4547" end="4550" title="Jap" label="Jap"/>
<link wikidata="Q1499811" start="4844" end="4852" title="innuendo" label="innuendo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063245" start="5111" end="5124" title="Identification friend or foe" label="Friend or Foe"/>
<link wikidata="Q16978043" start="5245" end="5271" title="You&amp;#x27;re in the Army Now (song)" label="We&amp;#x27;re in the Army Now"/>
<link wikidata="Q650770" start="5453" end="5458" title="khaki" label="khaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q776025" start="6180" end="6189" title="Limburger" label="Limburger"/>
<link wikidata="Q471023" start="6301" end="6314" title="Jimmy Durante" label="Jimmy Durante"/>
<link wikidata="Q24962731" start="6621" end="6636" title="kick the bucket" label="kick the bucket"/>
<link wikidata="Q30113" start="6880" end="6884" title="Jeep" label="Jeep"/>
<link wikidata="Q15040919" start="7417" end="7465" title="I Got It Bad (and That Ain&amp;#x27;t Good)" label="She&amp;#x27;s got it bad, and that ain&amp;#x27;t good!"/>
<link wikidata="Q7307" start="7572" end="7576" title="Kiss" label="Kiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q24815" start="7836" end="7848" title="Citizen Kane" label="Citizen Kane"/>
<link wikidata="Q42537" start="9312" end="9325" title="Flag of the United States" label="American flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q2102417" start="9354" end="9384" title="Columbia, the Gem of the Ocean" label="Columbia, the Gem of the Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q880808" start="9937" end="9946" title="blackface" label="blackface"/>
<link wikidata="Q5448930" start="10036" end="10050" title="The Film Daily" label="The Film Daily"/>
<link wikidata="Q134430" start="10133" end="10164" title="Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs (1937 film)" label="Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10221" end="10228" title="List of ethnic slurs#D" label="darkies"/>
<link wikidata="Q502044" start="10329" end="10334" title="NAACP" label="NAACP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053433" start="10526" end="10541" title="Censored Eleven" label="Censored Eleven"/>
<link wikidata="" start="10616" end="10649" title="Hollywood Animation: The Golden Age" label="Golden Age of Hollywood animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="10754" end="10766" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q607286" start="10782" end="10805" title="anti-Japanese sentiment" label="anti-Japanese sentiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q3844185" start="11393" end="11398" title="Mammy archetype" label="Mammy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7190749" start="11533" end="11543" title="pickanniny" label="pickanniny"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566524" start="11626" end="11643" title="straightened hair" label="straightened hair"/>
<link wikidata="Q220361" start="11659" end="11668" title="zoot suit" label="zoot suit"/>
<link wikidata="Q12721" start="11675" end="11682" title="monocle" label="monocle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2894819" start="11692" end="11702" title="gold teeth" label="gold teeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q721295" start="11939" end="11946" title="Jezebel" label="Jezebel"/>
<link wikidata="Q11951910" start="12106" end="12124" title="Tin Pan Alley Cats" label="Tin Pan Alley Cats"/>
<link wikidata="Q310476" start="12170" end="12181" title="Fats Waller" label="Fats Waller"/>
<link wikidata="Q2611800" start="12237" end="12255" title="Porky in Wackyland" label="Porky in Wackyland"/>
<link wikidata="Q457864" start="12390" end="12402" title="Friz Freleng" label="Friz Freleng"/>
<link wikidata="Q5580202" start="12435" end="12471" title="Goldilocks and the Jivin&amp;#x27; Bears" label="Goldilocks and the Jivin&amp;#x27; Bears"/>
<link wikidata="Q312657" start="12585" end="12596" title="Chuck Jones" label="Chuck Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q3183734" start="12649" end="12656" title="Ethnic groups of Africa" label="African"/>
<link wikidata="Q17108817" start="12670" end="12674" title="Inki" label="Inki"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053433" start="13055" end="13070" title="Censored Eleven" label="Censored Eleven"/>
<link wikidata="Q289" start="13121" end="13131" title="television" label="television"/>
<link wikidata="Q219400" start="13152" end="13166" title="United Artists" label="United Artists"/>
<link wikidata="Q2561317" start="13357" end="13367" title="home video" label="home video"/>
<link wikidata="Q6183232" start="13534" end="13544" title="Jerry Beck" label="Jerry Beck"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981057" start="13568" end="13592" title="The 50 Greatest Cartoons" label="The 50 Greatest Cartoons"/>
<link wikidata="Q647578" start="13733" end="13743" title="copyright infringement" label="bootlegged"/>
<link wikidata="Q371400" start="13804" end="13824" title="Turner Entertainment" label="Turner Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q731195" start="13882" end="13896" title="Leonard Maltin" label="Leonard Maltin"/>
<link wikidata="" start="14017" end="14057" title="Looney Tunes Golden Collection: Volume 5" label="Looney Tunes Golden Collection: Volume 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294" start="14064" end="14067" title="DVD" label="DVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q749719" start="14231" end="14252" title="Turner Classic Movies" label="Turner Classic Movies"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294048" start="14332" end="14344" title="Donald Bogle" label="Donald Bogle"/>
<link wikidata="Q762558" start="14439" end="14455" title="Leon Schlesinger" label="Leon Schlesinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q670417" start="14469" end="14484" title="Robert Clampett" label="Robert Clampett"/>
<link wikidata="Q3566391" start="14511" end="14524" title="Warren Foster" label="Warren Foster"/>
<link wikidata="Q7356354" start="14539" end="14551" title="Rod Scribner" label="Rod Scribner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2420722" start="14553" end="14564" title="Art Babbitt" label="Art Babbitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063493" start="14566" end="14581" title="Robert McKimson" label="Robert McKimson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3560601" start="14583" end="14594" title="Virgil Ross" label="Virgil Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q3483338" start="14600" end="14614" title="Sid Sutherland" label="Sid Sutherland"/>
<link wikidata="Q598185" start="14823" end="14839" title="Carl W. Stalling" label="Carl W. Stalling"/>
<link wikidata="Q7937695" start="14860" end="14876" title="Vivian Dandridge" label="Vivian Dandridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q68763569" start="14891" end="14901" title="Danny Webb (American actor)" label="Danny Webb"/>
<link wikidata="Q3942181" start="14921" end="14935" title="Ruby Dandridge" label="Ruby Dandridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q225629" start="14963" end="14973" title="Leo Watson" label="Leo Watson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2340500" start="15069" end="15085" title="Lillian Randolph" label="Lillian Randolph"/>
<link wikidata="Q349690" start="15112" end="15121" title="Mel Blanc" label="Mel Blanc"/>
<link wikidata="Q5335844" start="15159" end="15169" title="Eddie Beal" label="Eddie Beal"/>
<link wikidata="Q14636537" start="15230" end="15262" title="List of World War II short films" label="List of World War II short films"/>
<link wikidata="Q7611285" start="15264" end="15296" title="Stereotypes of African Americans" label="Stereotypes of African Americans"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="308552" wikidata="Q2803810" url="?curid=308552" title="Violin Concerto (Schoenberg)">
<text>The Violin Concerto (Op. 36) by Arnold Schoenberg dates from Schoenberg&#x27;s time in the United States, where he had moved in 1933 to escape Nazi Germany. The piece was written in 1936, the same year as the String Quartet No. 4. At the time of its completion, Schoenberg was living in Brentwood, Los Angeles, and had just accepted a teaching position at the University of California, Los Angeles. The work is dedicated to Anton Webern.

==Style and form==
Schoenberg had made a return to tonal writing upon his move to America and, though the Violin Concerto uses twelve-tone technique, its neoclassical form demanded a mimesis of tonal melody, and hence a renunciation of the motivic technique used in his earlier work in favour of a thematic structure. The basic row of the concerto is:
&lt;score&gt; \new Staff \with { \remove &quot;Time_signature_engraver&quot; \remove &quot;Bar_engraver&quot; } \relative c&quot; { \clef treble \override Stem #&#x27;transparent = ##t a4 bes ees b e fis c cis g aes d f } &lt;/score&gt;

While the row is not necessary for understanding any good twelve-note piece, an awareness of it in this concerto is useful because the row is very much in the foreground, and is quite obviously abstracted from Schoenberg&#x27;s concrete melodic-thematic thinking.

It is in a three movement fast–slow–fast form, traditional for concertos:

#&quot;Poco allegro—Vivace&quot;. Opinion is divided about the form of the first movement. According to one authority, it is in sonata form, while another asserts it is a large ternary form, concluding with a cadenza and a coda. It employs a wide variety of row forms, often in families associated by hexachordal content.
#&quot;Andante grazioso&quot;
#&quot;Finale: Allegro&quot;. The last movement is a rondo with an unusually dynamic development. It only gradually becomes clear that the underlying character is that of a march. There is a second cadenza just before the end, which rounds off the whole work in cyclic fashion.
The concerto was first published in 1939 by G. Schirmer.

===World première===
The concerto was premiered on December 6, 1940, by the Philadelphia Orchestra conducted by Leopold Stokowski with Louis Krasner as the soloist (Krasner had previously given the premiere of the Violin Concerto by Schoenberg&#x27;s pupil, Alban Berg). Krasner later made a recording of the concerto, with Dimitri Mitropoulos and the New York Philharmonic.

===European première===
Teatro La Fenice, 6 September 1948 (XI Festival internazionale di musica contemporanea, Primo concerto sinfonico). , violin; Orchestra Sinfonica di Roma della Radio Italiana, Artur Rodziński, conductor.

==Instrumentation==

The orchestra calls for 3 flutes (3rd doubling piccolo), 3 oboes, piccolo clarinet, clarinet, bass clarinet, 3 bassoons, 4 horns, 3 trumpets, 3 trombones, tuba, timpani, glockenspiel, xylophone, bass drum, cymbals, tamtam, snare drum, triangle, tambourine, and strings.

==References==
Sources
* 
* 

==Further reading==
* Earle, Ben. 2003. &quot;Taste, Power, and Trying to Understand Op. 36: British Attempts to Popularize Schoenberg&quot;. &quot;Music &amp; Letters&quot; 84, no. 4 (November): 608–43.
* Hall, Anne C. 1975. &quot;A Comparison of Manuscript and Printed Scores of Schoenberg&#x27;s Violin Concerto&quot;. &quot;Perspectives of New Music&quot; 14, no. 1 (Autumn-Winter, 1975): 182–196.
* Klemm, Eberhardt. 1966. &quot;Zur Theorie einiger Reihen-Kombinationen&quot;. &quot;Archiv für Musikwissenschaft&quot; 23, no. 3:170–212.
* Wilker, Ulrich. 2015. &quot;Aus der Neuen Welt. Tradition und Innovation in Schönbergs &quot;Concerto for Violin and Orchestra&quot; op. 36&quot;. &quot;Journal of the Arnold Schönberg Center&quot; 12 (2015): 105–121.

==External links==
* Work details, Arnold Schönberg Center
*, Randy Schoenberg, Arnold Schoenberg&#x27;s grandson, interviews Hilary Hahn about the Violin Concerto</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2803810" start="4" end="19" title="Violin Concerto (Schoenberg)" label="Violin Concerto"/>
<link wikidata="Q385271" start="21" end="24" title="Opus number" label="Op."/>
<link wikidata="Q154770" start="32" end="49" title="Arnold Schoenberg" label="Arnold Schoenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q3413874" start="209" end="229" title="String Quartets (Schoenberg)" label="String Quartet No. 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q909975" start="287" end="309" title="Brentwood, Los Angeles" label="Brentwood, Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q174710" start="360" end="397" title="University of California, Los Angeles" label="University of California, Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q190933" start="424" end="436" title="Anton Webern" label="Anton Webern"/>
<link wikidata="Q192822" start="490" end="495" title="tonality" label="tonal"/>
<link wikidata="Q221686" start="566" end="587" title="twelve-tone technique" label="twelve-tone technique"/>
<link wikidata="Q535611" start="593" end="605" title="Neoclassicism (music)" label="neoclassical"/>
<link wikidata="Q468427" start="622" end="629" title="mimesis" label="mimesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q192822" start="633" end="638" title="tonality" label="tonal"/>
<link wikidata="Q908349" start="679" end="686" title="Motif (music)" label="motivic"/>
<link wikidata="Q929848" start="1311" end="1319" title="movement (music)" label="movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q9748" start="1357" end="1365" title="concerto" label="concerto"/>
<link wikidata="Q212044" start="1497" end="1508" title="sonata form" label="sonata form"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195015" start="1546" end="1558" title="ternary form" label="ternary form"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069389" start="1578" end="1585" title="cadenza" label="cadenza"/>
<link wikidata="Q852466" start="1592" end="1596" title="Coda (music)" label="coda"/>
<link wikidata="Q5150831" start="1670" end="1689" title="Hexachordal combinatoriality" label="hexachordal content"/>
<link wikidata="Q13323" start="1774" end="1779" title="rondo" label="rondo"/>
<link wikidata="Q952612" start="1983" end="1989" title="Cyclic form" label="cyclic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3093066" start="2043" end="2054" title="G. Schirmer" label="G. Schirmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q659181" start="2133" end="2155" title="Philadelphia Orchestra" label="Philadelphia Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q297562" start="2169" end="2186" title="Leopold Stokowski" label="Leopold Stokowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q2655660" start="2192" end="2205" title="Louis Krasner" label="Louis Krasner"/>
<link wikidata="Q25786" start="2271" end="2286" title="Violin Concerto (Berg)" label="Violin Concerto"/>
<link wikidata="Q78475" start="2315" end="2325" title="Alban Berg" label="Alban Berg"/>
<link wikidata="Q319741" start="2381" end="2400" title="Dimitri Mitropoulos" label="Dimitri Mitropoulos"/>
<link wikidata="Q471154" start="2409" end="2430" title="New York Philharmonic" label="New York Philharmonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q223942" start="2457" end="2473" title="La Fenice" label="Teatro La Fenice"/>
<link wikidata="Q7919982" start="2496" end="2543" title="Venice Festival of Contemporary Music" label="Festival internazionale di musica contemporanea"/>
<link wikidata="Q554610" start="2632" end="2647" title="Artur Rodziński" label="Artur Rodziński"/>
<link wikidata="Q209554" start="2708" end="2714" title="Western concert flute" label="flutes"/>
<link wikidata="Q83509" start="2729" end="2736" title="piccolo" label="piccolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q8377" start="2741" end="2745" title="oboe" label="oboe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5126995" start="2748" end="2764" title="piccolo clarinet" label="piccolo clarinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q8343" start="2766" end="2774" title="clarinet" label="clarinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q8345" start="2776" end="2789" title="bass clarinet" label="bass clarinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q159998" start="2793" end="2800" title="bassoon" label="bassoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q163759" start="2805" end="2810" title="French horn" label="horns"/>
<link wikidata="Q8338" start="2814" end="2821" title="trumpet" label="trumpet"/>
<link wikidata="Q8350" start="2826" end="2834" title="trombone" label="trombone"/>
<link wikidata="Q131168" start="2837" end="2841" title="tuba" label="tuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q189737" start="2843" end="2850" title="timpani" label="timpani"/>
<link wikidata="Q626035" start="2852" end="2864" title="glockenspiel" label="glockenspiel"/>
<link wikidata="Q165666" start="2866" end="2875" title="xylophone" label="xylophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q211028" start="2877" end="2886" title="bass drum" label="bass drum"/>
<link wikidata="Q190172" start="2888" end="2894" title="cymbal" label="cymbal"/>
<link wikidata="Q208320" start="2897" end="2903" title="tamtam" label="tamtam"/>
<link wikidata="Q208421" start="2905" end="2915" title="snare drum" label="snare drum"/>
<link wikidata="Q201735" start="2917" end="2925" title="triangle (instrument)" label="triangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q193666" start="2927" end="2937" title="tambourine" label="tambourine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2997126" start="2943" end="2950" title="string section" label="strings"/>
<link wikidata="Q15708875" start="3131" end="3150" title="Music &amp;amp; Letters" label="Music &amp;amp; Letters"/>
<link wikidata="Q7170760" start="3311" end="3336" title="Perspectives of New Music" label="Perspectives of New Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1279666" start="3387" end="3403" title="Eberhardt Klemm" label="Klemm, Eberhardt"/>
<link wikidata="Q15760747" start="3471" end="3499" title="Archiv für Musikwissenschaft" label="Archiv für Musikwissenschaft"/>
<link wikidata="Q696262" start="3695" end="3718" title="Arnold Schönberg Center" label="Arnold Schönberg Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q696262" start="3781" end="3804" title="Arnold Schönberg Center" label="Arnold Schönberg Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q235406" start="3872" end="3883" title="Hilary Hahn" label="Hilary Hahn"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="308553" wikidata="Q226415" url="?curid=308553" title="UDF">
<text>UDF may refer to:
==Astronomy==
* Ultra Deep Field, a view of the distant universe taken in 2004 by the Hubble space telescope
** UDF 423, a distant spiral galaxy
** UDF 2457, a red dwarf star

==Computing==
* Universal Disk Format, an operating-system-independent file system commonly used on DVD and other digital media
* Uniqueness Database File, a Windows XP Professional configuration text file
* User-defined function, a function provided by the user of a program or environment

==Organizations==
===Politics===
* United Democratic Forces (ОДС), an electoral alliance in Bulgaria
* United Democratic Forces of Belarus, a coalition of political parties participating as the main opposition group during the 2006 presidential election
* United Democratic Front (Botswana)
* United Democratic Front (Kerala), India
* United Democratic Front (Mizoram), India
* United Democratic Front (Malawi)
* United Democratic Front (Namibia)
* United Democratic Front (Pakistan)
* United Democratic Front (South Africa)
* United Democratic Front (South Sudan)
* United Democratic Forum Party, a former political party in Kenya
* &quot;Union pour la Démocratie Française&quot; (Union for French Democracy), a former centrist pro-European French political party

===Military===
* Ulster Defence Force, a paramilitary group in Northern Ireland
* Union Defence Force (South Africa), the predecessor of the South African Defence Force from 1912 to 1957
* Union Defence Force (UAE), the armed forces of the United Arab Emirates

===Other organizations===
* United Dairy Farmers, an American chain of ice cream shops

==Other uses==
* Unducted fan, another name for a propfan engine
* United Defense Force, a fictional global military in the manga &quot;All You Need Is Kill&quot; and its film adaptation &quot;Edge of Tomorrow&quot;

==See also==
* Union of Democratic Forces (disambiguation), several political parties</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q226415" start="0" end="3" title="UDF" label="UDF"/>
<link wikidata="Q429670" start="34" end="50" title="Ultra Deep Field" label="Ultra Deep Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031727" start="130" end="137" title="UDF 423" label="UDF 423"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032073" start="166" end="174" title="UDF 2457" label="UDF 2457"/>
<link wikidata="Q853645" start="210" end="231" title="Universal Disk Format" label="Universal Disk Format"/>
<link wikidata="Q7886963" start="324" end="348" title="Uniqueness Database File" label="Uniqueness Database File"/>
<link wikidata="Q599380" start="402" end="423" title="User-defined function" label="User-defined function"/>
<link wikidata="Q265322" start="521" end="545" title="United Democratic Forces" label="United Democratic Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1938040" start="589" end="624" title="United Democratic Forces of Belarus" label="United Democratic Forces of Belarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7887688" start="742" end="776" title="United Democratic Front (Botswana)" label="United Democratic Front (Botswana)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7887689" start="779" end="811" title="United Democratic Front (Kerala)" label="United Democratic Front (Kerala)"/>
<link wikidata="Q25351815" start="821" end="854" title="United Democratic Front (Mizoram)" label="United Democratic Front (Mizoram)"/>
<link wikidata="Q775844" start="864" end="896" title="United Democratic Front (Malawi)" label="United Democratic Front (Malawi)"/>
<link wikidata="Q488574" start="899" end="932" title="United Democratic Front (Namibia)" label="United Democratic Front (Namibia)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7887692" start="935" end="969" title="United Democratic Front (Pakistan)" label="United Democratic Front (Pakistan)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1529503" start="972" end="1010" title="United Democratic Front (South Africa)" label="United Democratic Front (South Africa)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3278303" start="1013" end="1050" title="United Democratic Front (South Sudan)" label="United Democratic Front (South Sudan)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7887687" start="1053" end="1082" title="United Democratic Forum Party" label="United Democratic Forum Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q827415" start="1126" end="1160" title="Union pour la Démocratie Française" label="Union pour la Démocratie Française"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330968" start="1269" end="1289" title="Ulster Defence Force" label="Ulster Defence Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q15303895" start="1334" end="1368" title="Union Defence Force (South Africa)" label="Union Defence Force (South Africa)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077671" start="1441" end="1466" title="Union Defence Force (UAE)" label="Union Defence Force (UAE)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7887677" start="1542" end="1562" title="United Dairy Farmers" label="United Dairy Farmers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634412" start="1652" end="1659" title="propfan" label="propfan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4729904" start="1738" end="1758" title="All You Need Is Kill" label="All You Need Is Kill"/>
<link wikidata="Q7886566" start="1834" end="1877" title="Union of Democratic Forces (disambiguation)" label="Union of Democratic Forces (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="308559" wikidata="Q16285" url="?curid=308559" title="Mario Benedetti">
<text>Mario Benedetti Farrugia (; 14 September 1920 – 17 May 2009), was a Uruguayan journalist, novelist, and poet and an integral member of the Generación del 45. Despite publishing more than 80 books and being published in twenty languages, he was not well known in the English-speaking world. In the Spanish-speaking world, he is considered one of Latin America&#x27;s most important writers of the latter half of the 20th century.

==Early life and education==
Benedetti was born 1920 in Paso de los Toros in the Uruguayan Tacuarembó Department to Brenno Benedetti, a pharmaceutical and chemical winemaker, and Matilde Farrugia, who were of Italian descent. Two years later, they moved to Tacuarembó, the capital city of the departamento, and shortly after that, his father tried to buy a chemist&#x27;s but was swindled and went into bankruptcy, so they moved and settled in Montevideo, the capital city of the country, where they lived in difficult economic conditions. Mario completed six years of primary school at the Deutsche Schule Montevideo, where he also learned German, which later allowed him to be the first translator of Franz Kafka in Uruguay. His father immediately removed him from the school when Nazi ideology started featuring in the classroom. For two years afterwards, he studied at Liceo Miranda, but for the rest of his high-school years he did not attend an educational institution. In those years he learned shorthand, which was his livelihood for a long time. At the age of 14 he began working, first as a stenographer and then as a seller, public officer, accountant, journalist, broadcaster and translator.

==Career==
He trained as a journalist with Carlos Quijano, on the weekly newspaper &quot;Marcha&quot;. From 1938 and 1941 he lived in Buenos Aires, Argentina. He worked in different professions on both banks of the Río de la Plata river, for example, as a stenographer. In 1946 he married Luz López Alegre.

He was a member of the &quot;Generation of 45&quot;, an Uruguayan intellectual and literary movement that included Carlos Maggi, Manuel Flores Mora, Ángel Rama, Emir Rodríguez Monegal, Idea Vilariño, Carlos Real de Azúa, José Pedro Díaz, Amanda Berenguer, Ida Vitale, Líber Falco, Juan Carlos Onetti, among others.

He wrote for the weekly Uruguayan newspaper &quot;Marcha&quot; from 1945 until it was forcibly closed by the military government in 1973, and was its literary director from 1954. In 1957, he traveled to Europe and visited nine countries as a correspondent for &quot;Marcha&quot; weekly magazine and &quot;El Diario&quot; newspaper.

===Exile, 1973–1985===
For 12 years, from 1973 to 1985, when a civic-military dictatorship ruled Uruguay, Benedetti lived in exile. He first went to Buenos Aires, Argentina, and then to Lima, Peru, where he was detained, deported and then given amnesty. He went to Cuba in 1976 and the following year to Madrid, Spain. 
His exile was made particularly trying by the fact that his wife had to remain in Uruguay to look after both of their mothers. In 1980, he moved to Palma, Majorca.

===Return to Uruguay, 1985===

Benedetti returned to Uruguay in March 1985, following the restoration of democracy, and thereafter divided his time between Montevideo and Madrid. He was granted Honoris Causa doctorates by the Universidad de la República, Uruguay, the Universidad de Alicante, Spain and the Universidad de Valladolid, Spain.

For his poetry and novels Benedetti won numerous international awards. In 1986, he was awarded Laureate Of The International Botev Prize. On 7 June 2005, he was named the recipient of the Menéndez Pelayo International Prize. &quot;La Tregua&quot;, first published in 1960, has been translated into more than 20 languages and inspired the 1974 film &quot;The Truce&quot;. His poetry was also used in the 1992 Argentine movie &quot;The Dark Side of the Heart&quot; (&quot;El lado oscuro del corazón&quot;), in which he read some of his poems in German.

In 2006, Mario Benedetti signed a petition in support of the independence of Puerto Rico from the United States.

==Personal life and death==
In the last ten years of his life, Benedetti suffered from asthma and, in order to avoid the cold, spent his winters in Madrid where it was summer, though as his health deteriorated he eventually remained in Montevideo. In 2006, his wife Luz López died, ending more than six decades of matrimony.
Before dying, he dictated to his personal secretary, Ariel Silva, what would become his last poem:

He died in Montevideo on 17 May 2009. He had suffered from respiratory and intestinal problems for more than a year. His remains are buried at the National Pantheon in the Central Cemetery of Montevideo.

==Works==

=== Short story collections ===

* &quot;Esta mañana&quot; (1949)
* &quot;Montevideanos&quot; (1959)
* &quot;La muerte y otras sorpresas&quot; (1968)
* &quot;Con y sin nostalgia&quot; (1977)
* &quot;Geografías&quot; (1984)
* &quot;Despistes y franquezas&quot; (1989)
* &quot;Buzón de tiempo&quot; (1999)
* &quot;El porvenir de mi pasado&quot; (2003)

=== Novels ===

* &quot;Quién de nosotros&quot; (1953)
* &quot;La tregua&quot; (1960). &quot;The Truce: The Diary of Martín Santomé&quot;, trans. Benjamin Graham (Harper &amp; Row, 1969); also trans. Harry Morales (Penguin, 2015)
* &quot;Gracias por el fuego&quot; (1965). Adapted as a film directed by Sergio Renán in 1984.
* &quot;El cumpleaños de Juan Ángel&quot; (1971). &quot;Juan Angel&#x27;s Birthday&quot;, trans. David Arthur McMurray (1974)
* &quot;Primavera con esquina rota&quot; (1982). &quot;Springtime in a Broken Mirror&quot;, trans. Nick Caistor (The New Press, 2018)
* &quot;La borra del café&quot; (1992)
* &quot;Andamios&quot; (1996)
===Poetry===
* 1945: &quot;La víspera indeleble&quot; (&quot;Indelible Eve&quot;), his first published book
* 1956: &quot;Poemas de oficina&quot; (&quot;Office Poems&quot;)
* 1963:
** &quot;Inventario, Poesía 1950–1958&quot; (&quot;Inventory, Poems 1950–1958&quot;)
** &quot;Poemas del hoy por hoy&quot; (&quot;Poems of Today&quot;)
* 1977: &quot;La casa y el ladrillo&quot; (&quot;The House and the Brick&quot;)
* 1981: &quot;Viento del exilio&quot; (&quot;Wind of the exile&quot;)
* 1986: &quot;Preguntas al azar&quot; (&quot;Random Questions&quot;)
* 1988: &quot;Yesterday y mañana&quot; (&quot;Yesterday and Tomorrow&quot;)
* 1991: &quot;Las soledades de Babel&quot; (&quot;The Loneliness of Babel&quot;)
* 1994: &quot;Inventario dos (1985-1994)&quot; (&quot;Inventory Two (1985-1994)&quot;), published in Madrid
* 1995: &quot;(&quot;The Exercise of Discretion: Oblivion Is Full of Memory&quot;)&quot;, published in Spain
* 1996: &quot;El amor, las mujeres y la vida. Poemas de amor.&quot;
* 1997: &quot;La vida ese paréntesis&quot;
* 2002: &quot;Insomnios y Duermevelas&quot;, 
* 2004: &quot;Defensa propia&quot;, 
* &quot;Little Stones At My Window&quot; (Bilingual edition; translation and introduction by Charles Hatfield) 
* Poemas de otros
* Noción de Patria
* Sólo mientras tanto
* Quemar las naves
* A ras de sueño
* Letras de emergencia
* 2007: Vivir adrede

===Essays===
* &quot;Peripecia y novela&quot; (1948)
* &quot;Marcel Proust y otros ensayos&quot; (Número, 1951)
* &quot;El país de la cola de paja&quot; (Arca, 1960)
* &quot;Literatura uruguaya siglo XX&quot; (1963)
* &quot;Genio y figura de José Enrique Rodó&quot; (Eudeba, 1966)
* &quot;Letras del continente mestizo&quot; (Arca, 1967)
* &quot;Sobre artes y oficios&quot; (Alfa, 1968)
* &quot;Crítica cómplice&quot; (Alianza Tres, 1971)
* &quot;El escritor latinoamericano y la revolución posible&quot; (Editorial Nueva Imagen, 1974)
* &quot;Daniel Viglietti&quot; (Ediciones Júcar, 1974)
* &quot;Notas sobre algunas formas subsidiarias de la penetración cultural&quot; (1979)
* &quot;El recurso del supremo patriarca&quot; (Editorial Nueva Imagen, 1979)
* &quot;Cultura entre dos fuegos&quot; (1986)
* &quot;Subdesarrollo y letras de osadía&quot; (Alianza Editorial, 1987)
* &quot;La cultura, ese blanco móvil&quot; (Editorial Nueva Imagen, 1989)
* &quot;La realidad y la palabra&quot; (Ediciones Destino, 1991)
* &quot;45 años de ensayos críticos&quot; (Editorial Cal y Canto, 1994)
* &quot;Poetas de cercanías&quot; (Editorial Cal y Canto, 1994)
* &quot;El ejercicio del criterio&quot; (1995)
* &quot;Poesía, alma del mundo&quot; (Editorial Visor, 1999)
* &quot;Memoria y esperanza&quot; (2004)
* &quot;Vivir adrede&quot; (prosa breve, Seix Barral, 2007)
* &quot;La colección&quot;

===Plays===
* 1958: &quot;Ida y Vuelta&quot;
* 1979: &quot;Pedro y el capitán&quot;

===Journalism===
* &quot;Mejor es meneallo&quot; (1961)
* &quot;Cuaderno cubano&quot; (Arca, 1969)
* &quot;África 69&quot; (Marcha, 1969)
* &quot;Crónicas del 71&quot; (1971)
* &quot;Los poetas comunicantes&quot; (Marcha, 1972)
* &quot;Terremoto y después&quot; (Arca, 1973)
* &quot;El desexilio y otras conjeturas&quot; (Editorial Nueva Imagen, 1984)
* &quot;Escritos políticos (1971-1973)&quot; (Arca, 1986)
* &quot;Perplejidades de fin de siglo&quot; (1993)
* &quot;Articulario desexilio y perplejidades&quot; (1994)
* &quot;Daniel Viglietti, desalambrando&quot; (2007)
===Miscellaneous===
* 1969: &quot;Book Cubano&quot;, including poems, articles and interviews about Cuba and his experiences there 
* 1984: &quot;El Desexilio y Otras Conjeturas&quot; (Dis-exile And Other Conjectures)
* 1996: &quot;Obras completas&quot; (&quot;Complete Works&quot;), in 28 volumes, published in Argentina
=== English translations ===

* &quot;La tregua&quot; (1960). &quot;The Truce: The Diary of Martín Santomé&quot;, trans. Benjamin Graham (Harper &amp; Row, 1969); also trans. Harry Morales (Penguin, 2015)
* &quot;El cumpleaños de Juan Ángel&quot; (1971). &quot;Juan Angel&#x27;s Birthday&quot;, trans. David Arthur McMurray (1974)
* &quot;Blood Pact &amp; Other Stories&quot;, ed. Claribel Alegría and Darwin J. Flakoll (Curbstone Press, 1997)
* &quot;Little Stones at My Window: Poems&quot;, trans. Charles Dean Hatfield (Curbstone Press, 2003)
* &quot;Only in the Meantime &amp; Office Poems&quot;, trans. Harry Morales (Host Publications, 2006)
* &quot;Pedro y el capitán&quot; (1979). &quot;Pedro and the Captain: A Play in Four Parts&quot;, trans. Adrianne Aron (Cadmus Editions, 2009)
* &quot;The Rest Is Jungle and Other Stories&quot;, trans. Harry Morales (Host Publications, 2010)
* &quot;Witness: The Selected Poems of Mario Benedetti&quot;, trans. Louise B. Popkin (White Pine Press, 2012)
* &quot;Primavera con una esquina rota&quot; (1982). &quot;Springtime in a Broken Mirror&quot;, trans. Nick Caistor (The New Press, 2018)

== Awards and honours ==

* 1982: Orden Félix Varela from the Consejo de Estado de Cuba
* 1987: Premio Llama de Oro, for &quot;Primavera con una esquina rota&quot;
* 1982: Medalla Haydée Santamaría from the Consejo de Estado de Cuba
* 1986: International Botev Prize
* 1995: Medalla Gabriela Mistral
* 1996: Premio Especial Bartolomé Hidalgo for his essays
* 1999: Gran Premio Nacional a la Actividad Intelectual, Ministerio de Educación y Cultura
* 1999: VIII Premio Reina Sofía de Poesía Iberoamericana
* 2005: Medalla Pablo Neruda
* 2005: Menéndez Pelayo International Prize
* 2005: Premio Alba in the category of Letras and the Orden Francisco de Miranda Primera Clase

==See also==

* List of Uruguayan writers
* Eduardo Galeano
* Juan Carlos Onetti
* Daniel Viglietti
* Sergio Renán
* Eliseo Subiela
* Nacha Guevara

==References==
==External links==

* Mario Benedetti Foundation (in Spanish)
* Excerpt from &quot;Spring with a Broken Corner&quot; in Guernica Magazine
* Poemas
* Center for Latin American studies Mario Benedetti, Universitat d&#x27;Alacant, Spain</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q16285" start="0" end="24" title="Mario Benedetti" label="Mario Benedetti Farrugia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7901501" start="68" end="77" title="Uruguayan people" label="Uruguayan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930187" start="78" end="88" title="journalist" label="journalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6625963" start="90" end="98" title="novelist" label="novelist"/>
<link wikidata="Q49757" start="104" end="108" title="poet" label="poet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5876881" start="139" end="156" title="Generación del 45" label="Generación del 45"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="266" end="282" title="English language" label="English-speaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q12585" start="345" end="358" title="Latin America" label="Latin America"/>
<link wikidata="Q664156" start="486" end="503" title="Paso de los Toros" label="Paso de los Toros"/>
<link wikidata="Q16587" start="521" end="542" title="Tacuarembó Department" label="Tacuarembó Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q833016" start="687" end="697" title="Tacuarembó" label="Tacuarembó"/>
<link wikidata="Q5804703" start="1021" end="1047" title="Deutsche Schule Montevideo" label="Deutsche Schule Montevideo"/>
<link wikidata="Q905" start="1133" end="1144" title="Franz Kafka" label="Franz Kafka"/>
<link wikidata="Q181066" start="1432" end="1441" title="shorthand" label="shorthand"/>
<link wikidata="Q94924" start="1678" end="1692" title="Carlos Quijano" label="Carlos Quijano"/>
<link wikidata="Q129889" start="1724" end="1730" title="Marcha (newspaper)" label="Marcha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1486" start="1769" end="1781" title="Buenos Aires" label="Buenos Aires"/>
<link wikidata="Q5876881" start="1972" end="1988" title="Generation of 45" label="Generation of 45"/>
<link wikidata="Q129859" start="2058" end="2070" title="Carlos Maggi" label="Carlos Maggi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3820026" start="2072" end="2090" title="Manuel Flores Mora" label="Manuel Flores Mora"/>
<link wikidata="Q211989" start="2092" end="2102" title="Ángel Rama" label="Ángel Rama"/>
<link wikidata="Q195008" start="2104" end="2126" title="Emir Rodríguez Monegal" label="Emir Rodríguez Monegal"/>
<link wikidata="Q129533" start="2128" end="2141" title="Idea Vilariño" label="Idea Vilariño"/>
<link wikidata="Q2939438" start="2143" end="2162" title="Carlos Real de Azúa" label="Carlos Real de Azúa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3186512" start="2164" end="2179" title="José Pedro Díaz" label="José Pedro Díaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q453768" start="2181" end="2197" title="Amanda Berenguer" label="Amanda Berenguer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3076374" start="2199" end="2209" title="Ida Vitale" label="Ida Vitale"/>
<link wikidata="Q5657929" start="2211" end="2222" title="Líber Falco" label="Líber Falco"/>
<link wikidata="Q16873" start="2224" end="2242" title="Juan Carlos Onetti" label="Juan Carlos Onetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q32162" start="2655" end="2696" title="Civic-military dictatorship of Uruguay" label="civic-military dictatorship ruled Uruguay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2868" start="2778" end="2782" title="Lima" label="Lima"/>
<link wikidata="Q2807" start="2896" end="2902" title="Madrid" label="Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q8826" start="3060" end="3074" title="Palma, Majorca" label="Palma, Majorca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335" start="3233" end="3243" title="Montevideo" label="Montevideo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2807" start="3248" end="3254" title="Madrid" label="Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1856423" start="3303" end="3330" title="Universidad de la República" label="Universidad de la República"/>
<link wikidata="Q2037040" start="3345" end="3368" title="Universidad de Alicante" label="Universidad de Alicante"/>
<link wikidata="Q768224" start="3384" end="3409" title="Universidad de Valladolid" label="Universidad de Valladolid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216775" start="3514" end="3555" title="Laureate Of The International Botev Prize" label="Laureate Of The International Botev Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q5550285" start="3607" end="3642" title="Menéndez Pelayo International Prize" label="Menéndez Pelayo International Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q1634612" start="3773" end="3782" title="The Truce (1974 film)" label="The Truce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183" start="4048" end="4059" title="Puerto Rico" label="Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q35869" start="4172" end="4178" title="asthma" label="asthma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335" start="4521" end="4531" title="Montevideo" label="Montevideo"/>
<link wikidata="Q190492" start="4682" end="4712" title="Central Cemetery of Montevideo" label="Central Cemetery of Montevideo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3055484" start="5380" end="5392" title="Sergio Renán" label="Sergio Renán"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7201" end="7207" title="Número (Uruguay)" label="Número"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7257" end="7261" title="Arca (editorial)" label="Arca"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7370" end="7376" title="Editorial Universitaria de Buenos Aires" label="Eudeba"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7429" end="7433" title="Arca (editorial)" label="Arca"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7478" end="7482" title="Alfa (editorial)" label="Alfa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7671" end="7686" title="Ediciones Júcar" label="Ediciones Júcar"/>
<link wikidata="Q8195536" start="7954" end="7971" title="Alianza Editorial" label="Alianza Editorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q8771933" start="8093" end="8110" title="Ediciones Destino" label="Ediciones Destino"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8444" end="8455" title="Editorial Seix Barral" label="Seix Barral"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8663" end="8667" title="Arca (editorial)" label="Arca"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8700" end="8706" title="Marcha (semanario)" label="Marcha"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8790" end="8796" title="Marcha (semanario)" label="Marcha"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8839" end="8843" title="Arca (editorial)" label="Arca"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8974" end="8978" title="Arca (editorial)" label="Arca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216775" start="10852" end="10877" title="International Botev Prize" label="International Botev Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q5550285" start="11153" end="11188" title="Menéndez Pelayo International Prize" label="Menéndez Pelayo International Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276786" start="11301" end="11326" title="List of Uruguayan writers" label="List of Uruguayan writers"/>
<link wikidata="Q44575" start="11329" end="11344" title="Eduardo Galeano" label="Eduardo Galeano"/>
<link wikidata="Q16873" start="11347" end="11365" title="Juan Carlos Onetti" label="Juan Carlos Onetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163000" start="11368" end="11384" title="Daniel Viglietti" label="Daniel Viglietti"/>
<link wikidata="Q3055484" start="11387" end="11399" title="Sergio Renán" label="Sergio Renán"/>
<link wikidata="Q951683" start="11402" end="11416" title="Eliseo Subiela" label="Eliseo Subiela"/>
<link wikidata="Q2395451" start="11419" end="11432" title="Nacha Guevara" label="Nacha Guevara"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="308567" wikidata="Q897994" url="?curid=308567" title="Lancia Delta">
<text>The Lancia Delta (stylized Lancia [[Delta (letter)|δ]]) is a small family car produced by Italian automobile manufacturer Lancia in three generations. The first generation (1979–1994) debuted at the 1979 Frankfurt Motor Show, the second generation (1993-1999) debuted at the 1993 Geneva Motor Show, and the third generation (2008–2014) debuted at 2008 Geneva Motor Show.

The first generation Delta dominated the World Rally Championship during the late 1980s and early 1990s. The homologation requirements of Group A regulations meant marketing road-going versions of these competition cars — the Lancia Delta HF 4WD and HF Integrale. A total of 44,296 Integrales were produced.

==First generation==

The first Delta (&quot;Tipo 831&quot;) was a five-door hatchback, designed by Giorgetto Giugiaro and released in 1979. Between 1980 and 1982, it was also sold in Sweden, Denmark and Norway by Saab Automobile, badged as the &quot;Saab-Lancia 600&quot; to replace the retired 96 model. The Delta was voted the 1980 European Car of the Year.

A special &quot;Delta HF Integrale&quot; version was a four-wheel drive hot hatch with a turbocharged petrol engine. Modified versions of the HF dominated the World Rally Championship, scoring 46 victories overall and winning the Constructors&#x27; Championship a record six times in a row from 1987 to 1992, in addition to Drivers&#x27; Championship titles for Juha Kankkunen (1987 and 1991) and Miki Biasion (1988 and 1989).

The Lancia Delta S4, which the works team ran immediately prior to the HF 4WD and Integrale models&#x27; world championship careers from the season-ending 1985 RAC Rally until the end of the 1986 season, while sharing the same name and appearance, was a Group B race car designed and built specifically for rallying, and was entirely different from the mass-produced consumer versions.

===History===

====Development====
The car that would become the Delta during its development went by the project codename &quot;Y 5&quot;, was conceived as an upmarket front-wheel drive small family car positioned below the larger Beta; an offering around four metres in length had been absent from Lancia&#x27;s lineup since the demise of the Fulvia Berlina in 1973. This platform, derived from the platform of the Fiat Ritmo, with different suspension and more welding points, for a stiffer chassis.

Design was by Giorgetto Giugiaro&#x27;s Italdesign. Its platform put together MacPherson suspension developed for the Beta with four-cylinder, SOHC engines derived from the Fiat Ritmo. The Fiat engines were revised by Lancia engineers with Weber twin-choke carburettors, new inlet manifolds, exhaust systems and electronic ignitions, changes that combined to produce , ten more horsepower than the same engines did in the Ritmos. To achieve its market positioning the Delta offered features uncommon in the segment, as fully independent suspension, rack and pinion steering, available air conditioning, an optional split-folding rear seat, a height-adjustable steering wheel, and a defogger. Its three-piece body-coloured bumpers made from polyester resin sheet moulding compound were claimed by Lancia to be a first in the industry. The heating and ventilation were developed with help from Saab, experts in the field, who also claimed to have had a hand in the rust proofing of the Delta. It was also thanks to Saab that the split-folding rear seats were developed and the bootlid was extended all the way down to the bumper, simplifying loading and unloading.

====Debut====
While details about the car were known since the spring, the Lancia Delta was unveiled to the public at the September 1979 Frankfurt Motor Show,
At launch three models were offered: the base Delta 1300 four-speed, with a 1,301 cc 75 PS (55 kW) engine and simplified equipment, Delta 1300 five-speed, which added more features and an overdrive fifth gear for cruising, and Delta 1500, with a 1,498 cc 85 PS (62.6 kW) engine and a five-speed gearbox.
The Delta was met with a warm reception at the Frankfurt unveiling by the Italian and German press; in December it was awarded the European Car of the Year for 1980 recognition by a jury of 53 automotive journalists from 16 European countries.
Sales started in October 1979; 43,000 were sold in 1980, and by the end of 1981 production had exceeded 100,000.
At the beginning of 1982 as an automatic transmission option was added, the &quot;1500 Automatica&quot;; its three-speed was built by Lancia in the Verrone plant and was already being installed on Betas.
In March the top-of-the-line &quot;1500 LX&quot; trim level joined the lineup; it featured extended convenience equipment, metallic paint, 14-inch alloy wheels designed by Giugiaro and wool cloth upholstery in a chequered fabric specially designed by Italian fashion house Zegna. Two months after, the trim level was extended to the 1.3-litre engine, which simultaneously increased its output to 78 PS thanks to a raised compression ratio and electronic ignition.

====1982 facelift====

November 1982 brought the first facelift for the Delta. The bumpers were changed from three-piece sheet moulded compound to one-piece thermoplastic polymer, the front one was redesigned with a more prominent lower spoiler; another aerodynamic addition was a flat body-colour spoiler applied to the rear part of the roof. Other changes included the deletion of the anodised fascia between the rear tail lights and a 40 kg weight reduction on all models. Inside there were new seats and, on the range-topping model, an optional digital trip computer.
Concurrently the &quot;Delta GT 1600&quot; was launched, the car&#x27;s first sporting variant. It was powered by a 1,585 cc, 105 PS DOHC engine with Marelli Digiplex ignition; lower profile tyres, retuned suspension and disk brakes on all four wheels completed the package. Standard equipment was the richest available and some optionals like air conditioning were exclusive to the GT; the cabin was upholstered in Zegna cloth. Outside details like a &quot;GT&quot; badge on the right side of the grille, matte black door handles and window trim distinguished it from other Deltas. As the five-speed 1500, four-speed 1300 and LX versions were dropped, the latter only to be reintroduced in April 1984 on the &quot;1300 LX&quot;, with revised equipment, the range was now composed of three models.
On 9 March 1984 the 200,000th Delta left the Chivasso factory.

====Delta HF====

The first true performance-oriented Delta was the Delta HF, which was introduced in July 1983 and went on sale in September after a first appearance at the Frankfurt Motor Show. The HF acronym—last used on the Stratos—stands for &quot;high fidelity&quot;, and had been applied to sports and racing variants of Lancia cars since 1966. It is front-wheel drive and powered by a turbocharged version of the 1.6-litre engine from the Delta GT; the system consists of a Garrett TBO-225 turbocharger with wastegate valve, an air-to-air heat exchanger, a blow-through twin-choke Weber carburetor and Marelli Microplex ignition with pre-ignition control. To withstand the additional stress deriving from turbocharging, upgrades were made to the oil system, with increased capacity and an oil cooler, and to the cylinder heads with sodium-filled valves. The gearbox is a ZF five-speed unit. Dampers, springs and steering were retuned, and the tyres are wide 175/65 Michelin TRX on R 340 alloy wheels. The exterior of the HF is relatively understated: changes were limited to silver &quot;HF&quot; badging on the grille, a deeper chin spoiler, black trim as on the GT, black roof drip rail mouldings, black side skirts with small silver &quot;turbo&quot; badges in front of the rear wheels, the 1982 roof spoiler painted in black, air intake cowls on the bonnet grilles, bronze-tinted athermic glass and eight-spoke alloy wheels.
The cabin features a leather-covered steering wheel and supplementary digital instrumentation with bar indicators; the upholstery material is the usual beige Zegna fabric, and Recaro sport seats covered in the same cloth were optional. About ten-thousand Delta HFs were made, in a two-year production period.

A special limited edition of the HF, named &quot;HF Martini&quot;, was launched at the March 1984 Geneva Motor Show. To celebrate the rally victories of the Lancia-Martini Rally 037 it was painted white with a Martini stripe on the sides below the door handles, and carried Martini-coloured badging; Recaro sport seats were standard. Only 150 were produced between 1984 and 1985.

====Delta HF turbo====
In October 1985 Lancia unveiled alongside the road-going Delta S4 a new version of the HF, renamed Delta HF turbo in view of the four-wheel-drive HF début awaited after the next summer.
To address some criticisms the car was given less subdued styling features and more generous equipment to differentiate it from the other Deltas: red &quot;HF turbo&quot; scripts on the grille, the side skirts and the rear hatch, a three-spoke sport steering wheel, dual wing mirrors, a two-colour pinstripe along the mid-bodyside character line and Pirelli P6 tyres on 14-inch Cromodora alloy wheels with a new eight-hole design. Price, technical specifications, and performance remained mostly unchanged.
The HF Turbo remained on sale alongside the more powerful four-wheel-drive HF models when they were introduced.

====1986 facelift====

The HF turbo soon lost its crown as top-of-the-range Delta, as the turbocharged 2.0-litre and four-wheel drive &quot;Delta HF 4WD&quot; was unveiled at the April 1986 Turin Motor Show.
Some of the features of the HF 4WD previewed a major mid-cycle refresh for the entire Delta range, announced in May 1986 and put on sale in June.
New enveloping bumpers—the front one with provisions for integrated fog lights—gave the car a more modern look; the entire front end was changed with a new grille and new headlight covers, which were slanted forward and protruded from the bodywork in an effort to make the car more aerodynamic. The roof spoiler introduced in 1982 was removed.
Seven models composed the 1986 range: 1.3, LX 1.3, 1.5 Automatica, GT i.e., HF turbo, HF 4WD and turbo ds.
The entry-level model was the 1.3; the 1,301 cc engine had revised intake and exhaust system, fuel cut-off, a new carburettor and breakerless ignition. It was also available on the more upscale &quot;Delta LX 1.3&quot;. Similar changes were made to the powertrain of the Delta 1.5 Automatica.
The Delta GT and HF turbo were each given Weber IAW integrated electronic ignition and fuel injection system to become the &quot;Delta GT i.e.&quot; and the &quot;Delta HF turbo i.e.&quot;, with 108 PS and 140 PS respectively. Deeper changes had been made to the GT i.e. engine: the cylinder head had been rotated 180°, bringing the exhaust side to the front for better cooling, and the whole engine was canted forward 18° to lower its centre of mass height. The Delta HF turbo was updated to HF 4WD looks and interior, from which it differed mainly for the square headlights and single exhaust.
The &quot;Delta turbo ds&quot; marked the introduction of the first diesel engine on the Delta. This was a 1,929 cc eight-valve four-cylinder from the Prisma, with an output of 80 PS; it used a KKK turbocharger with wastegate valve, an intercooler and an oil cooler. Lancia positioned the turbo ds as an elegant-sporting model like the GT i.e., giving it similar option availability, the same grey-beige chequered Zegna cloth upholstery and complete instrumentation—which included oil pressure and boost pressure gauges. If not in performance, the turbo ds surpassed its petrol sibling in equipment, with side skirts from the HF turbo and standard power steering.
In September 1987 the HF 4WD was replaced by the more capable &quot;Delta HF integrale&quot;, which in turn evolved into the 16-valve &quot;Delta HF integrale 16v&quot; in March 1989.

A new sporty trim level for the 1.3 was added in May 1990, the Delta Personalizzata, available in red or white with contrasting twin pinstripe and electric blue cloth upholstery; standard equipment comprised body-colour wing mirrors, tachometer, clock and sport steering wheel. Later that year the sport models (turbo ds, GT i.e., HF turbo and HF integrale 16v) received richer equipment and interiors in new combinations of colourful striped velour and Alcantara. The optional Recaro seats of the two HF models were now fully upholstered in perforated Alcantara, green or grey depending on the exterior colour. On the integrale only, they could be had in perforated black leather for an additional fee.

====1991 revisions====
In June 1991 the last update of the first generation Lancia Delta went on sale, almost twelve years after its 1979 début. The front-wheel drive range was reduced to three models, namely LX, GT i.e. and HF turbo. On all three of them, small touches like body-colour side skirts and dual body-colour wing mirrors created a more up to date look. The LX and GT i.e. wore white front turn indicators, a grille with chrome vertical bars, the louvered bonnet from the original HF integrale, and optional 8-spoke diamond-cut alloy wheels from the Dedra. The Delta LX had abandoned the 1.3 in favour of a revised version of the 1.5-litre engine. Updated colour and trim included green and blue &quot;Metallescente&quot; mica paint and Glen plaid cloth upholstery on lower models, while sports models continued with the interiors introduced in 1990.
The HF integrale 16v—due to be replaced at the end of 1991 by the much improved &quot;HF integrale &quot;Evoluzione&quot;&quot;—handed down its dual round headlights and domed, vented bonnet to the HF turbo, which now looked almost like an integrale. A few months later the HF turbo even replaced its traditional red model identification script on the radiator grille with a yellow HF badge, like the one found on the newly introduced Evoluzione. Concurrently the GT i.e. received new &quot;1600 i.e.&quot; badging.

A very final, minor round of updates was made when the 1992 models switched to a catalytic converter-only engine offering, in compliance with Euro 1 emission standards. The Delta GT i.e. morphed into the &quot;1600 i.e.&quot;, and together with the HF turbo was the sole front-wheel drive Delta offered. All variants acquired new, more understated upholstery: the HF turbo switched from velour to herringbone inserts on the Alcantara seats and door panels, while the 1600 abandoned Alcantara altogether for full Glen plaid cloth.
As the second generation was ready to be launched in 1993, after a career of 13 years the front-wheel drive Delta was phased out at the end of 1992, after over 478,000 had been produced. Production of the HF integrale would continue for two years more.
=== Four-wheel-drive HF variants===

====Four-wheel-drive system====
Lancia&#x27;s first four-wheel-drive car was a Delta. As early as April 1982, a turbocharged four-wheel-drive &quot;Delta Turbo 4x4&quot; prototype was shown at the Turin Motor Show to gauge public reaction, and tested by journalist at the La Mandria test track. It was based on the regular production model, but had a 128 bhp 1.6-litre turbocharged engine, four disk brakes, and a top speed of over . Its drivetrain was however not related to the more sophisticated one found on the first mass produced four-wheel-drive Lancias, which were shown at the 1986 Turin Motor Show: the Delta HF 4WD and its tamer saloon sibling, the Prisma 4WD.

The four-wheel-drive system used on the Delta HF 4WD and all the coming iterations of the HF integrale was instead based on the one developed for the 1985 Lancia Delta S4 Group B rally car, albeit in a transverse front-engine instead of a longitudinal mid-engine layout.
Both systems used three differentials, the central one being an epicyclic gearing controlled by a Ferguson viscous coupling. The epicyclic gearing split torque on the two axles according to a fixed ratio, determined by the number of teeth on its gears. Initially front biased to maximize traction according to static load distribution, the torque split became increasingly rear-biased with every successive iteration of the Delta HF. The epicyclic gearing received motion via its externally teethed ring gear, which meshed with a pinion on the five-speed gearbox lay shaft. From there it was transferred to the front differential via the sun gear, and to the rear differential via the planet carrier, a couple of 90° bevel gears and a three-piece drive shaft. The Ferguson coupling&#x27;s purpose was to transfer torque between the axles. During normal operation, i.e. when the two axles rotated at the same velocity, it did nothing, simply rotating as a unit. As soon as there was a difference in velocity between the two axles, it began transferring torque from the faster to the slower rotating axle—which is usually the one with better grip. When difference in velocity became extreme, it locked up completely, nullifying the slip between the axles and transferring the maximum amount of torque.
Finally there were the other two differentials: a conventional open one at the front and a Torsen (torque sensing) type one at the rear. Supplied by the American Gleason Corporation, the Torsen differential automatically divided the torque between the rear wheels according to the available grip, with a maximum lock-up of 70%.

====Delta HF 4WD====
The &quot;Delta HF 4WD&quot; was unveiled at the April 1986 Turin Motor Show, becoming the top of the Delta range.

The HF 4WD&#x27;s 1,995 cc, twin-cam, eight-valve engine with two counter-rotating balancing shafts was derived from the Lancia Thema i.e. turbo saloon. It was equipped with a Garrett turbocharger, a wastegate valve, an air-to-air intercooler and Weber IAW integrated electronic ignition and fuel injection; to support turbocharging it also adopted tri-metallic crankpin and main bearings, sodium-filled valves, bronze valve guides and an oil cooler.
Engine output was at 5,250 rpm, and of torque at 2,750 rpm, that could rise to for short periods of time thanks to an overboost function. On the Delta HF 4WD the torque split ratio of the central epicyclic differential stood at 56/44 front to rear.

The basic suspension layout of the Delta 4WD remained the same as in the rest of the two-wheel drive Delta range: MacPherson strut–type independent suspension on all four corners, dual-rate dampers and helicoidal springs, with the struts and springs set slightly off-centre. The suspension mounting provided more isolation by incorporating flexible rubber links. Progressive rebound bumpers were adopted, while the damper rates, front and rear toe-in and the relative angle between springs and dampers have all been altered. The steering was power assisted rack and pinion.
The alloy wheels were the 5½J×14-inch Cromodora eight-hole ones found on the HF turbo, but wore wider, lower profile 185/60 SR14 tyres. Brakes were the same all-around disks (vented fronts) used on the GT i.e. and HF turbo.

Visually the HF 4WD carried over most accoutrements of the HF turbo—such as the bonnet cowls, side skirts, and blacked-out trim—and then added more. Besides the new bumpers (the front one with integrated fog lights) that would soon be adopted by all Deltas with the 1986 facelift, there were quadruple round headlights—the inner pair smaller in diameter than the outer, red piping around the grille openings, two double pinstripes highlighting the waistline and side crease, and dual exit exhausts. Red &quot;HF 4WD&quot; scripts and badges were carried on the radiator grille, side skirts and on the matte black insert between the tail lights.
Inside seats and door panels were upholstered in a combination of grey Alcantara and multicolour &quot;Harlem&quot; wool cloth, supplied by Italian fashion house Missoni. Optional Recaro anatomic sport seats were covered in the same materials. The instrumentation had yellow scales and hands, a prerogative of all HF models to come; it added two auxiliary gauges to the six already present in the Delta&#x27;s instrument binnacle, and included a boost pressure gauge, a voltmeter, oil and water thermometers, as well as an oil manometer
Some months after the HF 4WD&#x27;s introduction, at the end of the 1986 season, Group B rallying was terminated after a string of fatal accidents, and Group A took over as the World Rally Championship class. A production of at least 5,000 examples in 12 months was required by the new homologation rules. Although not originally developed with rallying in mind, the Delta HF 4WD provided a suitable basis to build a Group A rally car.
The Group A Delta HF 4WD scored the first two places in its first outing and 1987 season starter, the Monte Carlo Rally. From there it went on to win 9 out of 13 championship races, and ultimately the 1987 World Rally Championship for Manufacturers. Juha Kankkunen also won the 1987 World Rally Championship for Drivers at the wheel of a Delta HF 4WD. Delta HF 4WDs also placed first in the two races of the 1988 season, before being replaced by the much-improved Delta HF integrale.
The match of Lancia&#x27;s three differential four-wheel-drive system and turbocharged 2.0-litre engine had proven competitive, and through continuous improvements would go on to win six consecutive World Rally Championship titles.

====Delta HF integrale &quot;8V&quot;====

The Lancia Delta HF integrale incorporated some of the features of the Delta HF 4WD into a road car. The engine was an eight-valve 2.0 L fuel injected four-cylinder, with balancing shafts. The HF version featured new valves, valve seats and water pump, larger water and oil radiators, more powerful cooling fan and bigger air cleaner. A larger capacity Garrett T3 turbocharger with improved airflow and bigger intercooler, revised settings for the electronic injection-ignition control unit and a knock sensor, boost power output to at 5,300 rpm and maximum torque of at 3,500 rpm.

The HF integrale had permanent four-wheel drive, a front transversely mounted engine and five-speed gearbox. An epicyclic centre differential normally splits the torque 56 per cent to the front axle, 44 per cent to the rear. A Ferguson viscous coupling balanced the torque split between front and rear axles depending on road conditions and tyre grip. The Torsen rear differential further divides the torque delivered to each rear wheel according to grip available. A shorter final drive ratio (3.111 instead of 2.944 on the HF 4WD) matched the larger 6.5x15 wheels to give 24 mph/1,000 rpm (39 km/h per 1,000 rpm) in fifth gear.

Braking and suspension were uprated to ventilated front discs, a larger brake master cylinder and servo, as well as revised front springs, dampers, and front struts.

The HF integrale was facelifted with bulged wheel arches for the wider section 195/55 VR tyres on 15-inch 6J alloy wheels. A new bonnet incorporated air louvres while the restyled bumpers wrapped around to meet the wheel arches at front and rear. The front bumper, now wider, incorporates air intakes and for the rectangular auxiliary driving lights. The side skirts are faired into the wheel arches at front and rear and the twin rear view mirrors are finished in body colour. There were only 50 RHD factory built cars, none of which were officially imported to the UK.

====Delta HF integrale 16v====

The 16v integrale was developed for rallying, introduced at the 1989 Geneva Motor Show, and made a winning debut on the 1989 San Remo Rally.

It featured a raised centre of the bonnet to accommodate the new 16-valve engine, as well as wider wheels and tyres and new identity badges front and rear. The torque split was changed to 47% front and 53% rear.

The turbocharged two-litre Lancia 16v engine produced at 5,500 rpm, for a maximum speed of 137 mph (220 km/h) and 0–100 km/h (0-62 mph) in 5.7 seconds. Changes included larger injectors, a more responsive Garrett T3 turbocharger, a more efficient intercooler, and the ability to run on unleaded fuel without modification.

Alongside the 16v Lancia introduced an eight-valve variant equipped with a three-way catalytic converter—which reduced output to — intended for those European markets where such emission control equipment was mandatory.

In the summer of 1990 some small updates were made to all Delta sports models, with the integrale receiving new upholstery materials. Like on the HF turbo, the combination of light grey Alcantara and multicolour stripe cloth used since 1986 was replaced by dark grey Alcantara with diagonal stripe velour. If the Recaro optional seats were ordered, the buyer could choose either full dark grey or green embossed Alcantara upholstery, or extra-cost perforated black leather.

====Delta HF integrale &quot;Evoluzione&quot;====

At the September 1991 Frankfurt Motor Show Lancia introduced an heavily revised Delta HF, once again named &quot;Delta HF integrale&quot;—but which became better known as the &quot;HF integrale Evoluzione&quot; or simply &quot;HF integrale Evo&quot;. Evoluzione cars were built from October 1991 through 1992. 
At the end of the victorious 1991 World Rally Championship season, where the HF integrale 16v had won both the drivers&#x27; and manufacturers&#x27; championships, Lancia officially retired from rallying. Despite this, racing development of the HF integrale continued, and factory-developed HF integrale Evos were fielded by independent Martini Racing-sponsored Jolly Club for the 1992 season. Thanks to the two factory-backed privateer teams, Lancia won its sixth and final consecutive Constructor&#x27;s World Rally Championship. These were to be the final homologation cars; the catalytic 1993 Evoluzione 2 was not developed by the factory into a rally car.

The Evoluzione&#x27;s engine was the same turbocharged 16-valve two-litre used on the previous model, but power had increased to at 5,750 rpm, chiefly thanks to a new, single outlet 60 mm diameter exhaust system. Maximum torque was unchanged at , but was now reached at a higher, 3,500 rpm. An eight-valve &quot;kat&quot; catalytic converter-equipped variant, with an unchanged 177 PS output, continued to be produced for countries where such equipment was mandatory. Mechanical changes included a strengthened steering rack and a power steering oil cooler. The suspension was reworked and strengthened, e.g. using box section track control arms. Front strut towers were raised, which necessitated an aluminium strut brace. The braking system featured larger diameter discs and vacuum servo, and fixed two-piston Brembo calipers at the front. No changes were made to the four-wheel-drive system.

Front and rear tracks were wider than on earlier Deltas, by respectively. The wheel arch bulges were consequently extended and made more rounded. They were now made in a single pressing, rather than welded on as they previously were. Besides the aforementioned wings, the Evoluzione bodywork included a new bonnet, front and rear bumpers, box section side skirts, rear doors, and a rear spoiler. The front end was distinguished by twin, smaller diameter round headlamps—with the outboard pair, the dipped beams, being of the novel projector type. The bonnet had a wider and taller hump, and new lateral air slats to further assist underbonnet ventilation. The roof spoiler above the tailgate was manually adjustable in three positions—lowered, raised or fully raised via two included brackets—favouring either or rear axle downforce. New five-bolt 7½Jx15-inch Speedline Montecarlo alloy wheels, with the same design of those used on the rally cars, wore 205/50 tyres. Other outside changes were new windscreen wipers with integrated spoilers, a sports-type gas cap, and new yellow HF badges, decorated with the traditional red elephant used on Lancia HF cars of the past.

Paint options included three solid colours (white, rosso Monza (red) and lord blue), and extra-cost &quot;metallescente&quot; mica colours (black, madras blue, winner red and derby green). Inside the cabin there was a new leather-covered Momo Corse sports steering wheel. Interior trim was otherwise unchanged from the 1990 model HF Integrale 16v. The standard seat interior was done in a combination of dark grey |Alcantara and grey velour with diagonal coloured stripes. If the Recaro anatomic seats (which came as standard on some markets) were ordered, upholstery was in perforated Alcantara (either green with white, grey and black exterior colours, or dark grey with all others) or, at extra cost, in black perforated leather. Notable options were a six-way Bosch anti-lock braking system, an electric metal sunroof, and air conditioning. Some of these features were standard on some markets.

Starting in late 1992 assembly of the Evoluzione was contracted to Maggiora, a body panel supplier for Fiat which became a car manufacturer. Maggiora took over part of the recently shuttered Lancia Chivasso plant and restarted production on 16 October 1992.

====Delta HF integrale &quot;Evoluzione II&quot;====

Presented in June 1993, the second Evolution version of the Delta HF Integrale featured an updated version of the two-litre 16-valve turbo engine with more power, as well as a three-way catalyst and Lambda probe. A Marelli integrated engine control system with an 8 MHz clock frequency was installed, incorporating:
* Timed sequential multipoint injection
* Self-adapting injection times
* Automatic idling control
* Engine protection strategies depending on the temperature of intaken air
* Mapped ignition with two double outlet coils
* Three-way catalyst and pre-catalyst with lambda probe (oxygen sensor) on the turbine outlet link
* Anti-evaporation system with air line for canister flushing optimised for the turbo engine
* New Garrett turbocharger: water-cooled with boost-drive management i.e. boost controlled by feedback from the central control unit on the basis of revs/throttle angle
* Knock control by engine block sensor and new signal handling software for spark park advance, fuel quantity injected, and turbocharging

The engine developed DIN (against 210 PS on the earlier non-catalytic version) and maximum torque of 32 kgf·m (314 N·m) (formerly 31 kgf·m or 300 N·m).

The 1993 Integrale received a cosmetic and functional facelift that included:
* New 16&quot; light alloy rims with 205/45 ZR 16 tyres;
* Body colour roof moulding to underline the connection between the roof and the Solar control windows;
* Aluminium fuel cap and air-intake grilles on the front mudguards;
* Red-painted cylinder head;
* New leather-covered three-spoke MOMO steering wheel.
* Standard high-back Recaro sport seats.

With ABS, fog lamps and Recaro seats now standard on all markets, the sole optional extra was air conditioning. The choice of paint finishes was reduced to just three solid colours: &quot;bianco&quot; (white), &quot;rosso&quot; Monza (red) and &quot;blu&quot; Lancia (dark blue). Interior upholstery was always done in beige Alcantara with diagonal stitching on seat centres and door panels. Additional colour and trim combinations were made available through a number of limited editions.

====Limited editions and specials====

Lancia produced several limited and numbered editions models based on the Delta HF Integrale &quot;Evoluzione&quot;, each offering unique exterior and interior colours, materials and equipment. Some were put on general sale, while others were reserved to specific markets, owners clubs or selected customers. The following table lists all of the limited editions and their main features.

A notable one-off model was the Lancia Delta Spider Integrale, a two-door convertible built for Fiat president Gianni Agnelli.

After production had finished in 1994, Bruno Maggiora tried to convince Lancia to continue the Delta with a third evolution which was realized in the Delta HF Integrale &quot;Viola&quot;, the one and only &quot;Evo 3&quot; car named by its intense violet color. The concept features a new injection system, an IAW P8 ECU and an increase in boost for the Garrett T3 turbocharger, boosting power from 215 PS to 237 PS at 6,000 rpm and of torque. It also features a GKN limited-slip differential, a new clutch for the center differential, a short shift gearchange and revised springs and dampers.

In 2018, a small Italian coachbuilder called Automobili Amos created a modern version of the Delta Integrale, named the Delta Futurista. Power was up to and the car itself weighed 1250 kg. Additionally the rear doors were removed, the car becoming a three door version. Only 20 examples were produced, each costing £270,000.

In 2021, it was announced that FIA World Rallycross Championship team GCK Motorsport were set to revive the Lancia Delta as a modern electric rallycross race car for the 2022 FIA World Rallycross Championship. The car was to be based on a retrofitted road-going electric version of the model called Lancia Delta Evo-e RX. The car made its debut at the final round of the season. For the 2023 season, GCK Motorsport committed to running the car in the championship until 2025. However, both cars were destroyed in a fire on the 21st of July 2023.
===Performance===
Data and performance of the first generation models:, 

===Rallying===
The Lancia Delta is one of the most successful rally cars ever, having won the World Rally Championship for manufacturers six times between 1987 and 1992. After the abolition of Group B Lancia was forced, as were all other manufacturers, to compete with Group A cars. The Delta HF4WD was therefore pressed into service for the 1987 season. Despite some flaws it was more suitable for rallying than its rivals and easily won the 1987 championship. The Delta&#x27;s dominance helped it out in the Italian market at least, where a 42% sales increase in the first half of 1987 was directly attributed to its rallying successes.

Competitors began to emerge during 1988, in response to whom Lancia produced first the Delta Integrale, and then in 1989 the Integrale 16v, which remained competitive until 1991 and netted the team four more world championships. The Evoluzione Delta was introduced for 1992 and won the championship for a record sixth year in succession, before Lancia withdrew from the sport at the end of an unsuccessful 1993 season. Lancia drivers won the drivers&#x27; title in 1987, 1988, 1989 and 1991. The four evolutions of the Delta won 46 world championship events between them, and their run of six successive manufacturers&#x27; championships remains a world record.
===Saab-Lancia 600===
The Saab-Lancia 600 is a rebadged Lancia Delta, sold by Saab in Northern Europe after a deal with Lancia.

The deal was a part of the 1980s co-operation between the Swedish car manufacturer Saab and the Italian Fiat Group, which includes Lancia and Alfa Romeo in addition to Fiat. The partnership also resulted in the &quot;Type 4&quot; project, which provided the common platforms for the Saab 9000, the Lancia Thema, the Fiat Croma and the Alfa Romeo 164.

The 600 was developed because Saab did not have the finances to support the production of entirely new models and looked to other companies in order to replace the compact 96 in their lineup.

The first years it was sold as GLS and the exclusive GLE, but due to poor sales because of the high price the GLE-model did not last long. The 600 was offered only with the 1.5-litre engine that had , connected to a five-speed manual gearbox.

The Saab-Lancia 600 was designed by Giorgetto Giugiaro and, in common with the company&#x27;s other models, was a front-wheel drive and a hatchback, with a rallying pedigree. The Saab-Lancia 600 version was sold only in Sweden, Finland, and Norway. The last cars were sold in early 1987; Saab then stopped importing Lancias to Sweden and the local Fiat importer took over from 1 January 1988.

Due to the harsh weather conditions of northern Europe, Saab developed their own heater and made changes to the rust protection, one of a few minor modification from the Lancia design. The 600 also received thermostatically controlled intake air preheating and a semi-automatic choke. Nonetheless, the 600 experienced severe and well publicized rust problems in Scandinavia and removed many cars from the road. Rust problems also shortened the service life of the few 600s briefly operated by the Swedish Police.

The car is very rare today. In 2012, of the 6,419 Saab-Lancias that were produced for the Swedish market, only 159 survived and only 12 were on the road.
===Lancia Hyena===

The &quot;Lancia Hyena&quot; was a two-door coupé made in small numbers by Italian coachbuilder Zagato on the basis of the Delta HF integrale &quot;Evoluzione&quot;.

The Hyena was born thanks to the initiative of Dutch classic car restorer and collector Paul V.J. Koot, who desired a coupé version of the HF integrale as a road car. He turned to Zagato, where the Hyena was designed in 1990 by Marco Pedracini. A first style model was introduced at the Brussels Motor Show in January 1992. A first prototype was shown on the Paris Motor Show in October 1993.

After the Brussels show, Koot received an order for 10 cars for the Japanese market, and 3 cars for the EU market, and sales had hardly begun. Thus, the decision was taken to put the Hyena into limited production at Zagato. Fiat approved this, but large bureaucratic barriers became apparent to supply bare HF integrale rolling chassis. This threatened to delay the whole project for years, or even to make it impossible. Koot thus decided to produce the Hyena from fully finished HF integrales, purchased through the official Dutch Lancia importer LANIM at the time. Koot&#x27;s Lusso Service Holland took care of procuring and stripping the donor cars in the Netherlands; they were then sent to Zagato in Milan to have the new body built and for final assembly. All of this made the Hyena expensive to build and they were sold for around 140,000 Swiss francs or $100,000 .

A production run of 75 examples was initially planned, but only 24 Hyenas were completed between 1992 and 1995.

===History===

====Specifications====
The Zagato bodywork made use of aluminium alloys over a lighter steel structure, and composite materials for the doors, outer sills and bumpers. The stifness of the new platform/structure combination was improved 50% when compared with the standard Delta Integrale structure. The interior featured new dashboards, consoles and door cards made entirely from carbon fibre, produced by the MOC company in France. Thanks to these weight saving measures the Hyena was lighter than the original HF integrale, about 15% of its overall weight.
The two-litre turbo engine was upgraded from 205 to , and the car could accelerate from 0–100 km/h (62 mph) in 5.4 seconds.&lt;ref name=&quot;carfolio.com/Hyena&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;


===Concept cars===

====Italdesign Orca====
The Orca was a concept car with an aerodynamic five-door fastback body by Italdesign Giugiaro, unveiled at the April 1982 Turin Motor Show; it was based on the Delta platform, with a turbocharged engine and four-wheel-drive which could be disengaged at speed.
The concept&#x27;s goal was to combine a highly aerodynamic shape () with outstanding passenger room for its size.

====Lancia HIT====
The Lancia HIT (standing for &quot;high Italian technology&quot;) was a concept car with 2+2 coupé body by Pininfarina unveiled at the April 1988 Turin Motor Show. It was based on the mechanicals of the Delta HF integrale, and bodied using cold-glued carbon fibre sandwich panels.

==Second generation==
The successor to the original Delta, the &quot;Nuova Delta&quot; (&quot;Tipo 836&quot;)—always referred to by Lancia as &quot;Lancia δ&quot; with the lower-case Greek letter—was introduced in 1993 and remained in production until 1999. It was designed at Turinese design and engineering studio I.DE.A Institute by Ercole Spada.
Based on the &quot;type two&quot; platform of the Fiat Tipo, the Nuova Delta was targeted at customers interested in comfort and convenience. Despite front-wheel drive HF performance variants with up to were offered, no four-wheel drive second generation Deltas were produced.

===History===
The first generation Delta had been given a second lease on life by its rallying successes, but by the 1990s it was over ten years old and due for replacement; its four-door saloon sibling, the Prisma, had already been replaced by the Lancia Dedra. Development and tooling work for the &quot;Tipo 836&quot; Delta lasted five years and, according to a statement by Fiat CEO Paolo Cantarella, required an investment of 700 billion Lire.
Projected sales numbers were 60,000 a year, half of them exports.

====Launch====
The second generation Delta&#x27;s world première was held at the March 1993 Geneva Motor Show, alongside that of the final &quot;Evo 2&quot; HF integrale.
Sales commenced in May.
Initially the Nuova Delta was offered with three engines and outputs varying from : an entry level SOHC 1.6-litre, and two DOHC inline fours with Lancia&#x27;s twin counter rotating balance shafts, an eight-valve 1.8 L and a 16-valve 2.0 L. Trim level were three: base and LE for the 1.6 and 1.8, base and richer LS for two-litre models. The sportier &quot;2.0 HF&quot; was also unveiled in Geneva, and went on sale in September; it used a version of the 16-valve 2.0 L equipped with a Garrett T3 turbocharger and an intercooler to produce . 
Mechanical changes from the other Deltas included upsized 205/50 tyres, stiffer suspension, standard 4-way ABS, a &quot;Viscodrive&quot; viscous coupling limited slip differential and, in the HF LS trim, electronically adjustable dampers with two settings. Visually the HF turbo was set apart by an eggcrate grille with a gunmetal surround and a yellow HF badge, a sportier front bumper complementing wider front wings, black side skirts, specific 15 inch seven-spoke alloy wheels and a spoiler at the base of the rear window. Larger disk brakes and optional Alcantara Recaro sport seats were shared with the 2.0 LS.
About a year after the launch, in June 1994, the 1.9 turbo ds turbodiesel variant was added to the range; it was powered by the usual 1,929 cc SOHC unit, pushing out . The turbo ds was given the flared fenders and bumper of the HF, and was available in base and LE trim. Presented a month later and put on sale in autumn, the Delta 2.0 GT paired the naturally aspirated two-litre engine with the looks of the HF—flared fenders, bumper and spoiler.
====HPE====
Despite a three-door had been rumoured since 1991, until 1995 only a five-door hatchback bodystyle was offered. At the 1995 Geneva Motor Show the three-door was introduced, christened &quot;HPE&quot;—a denomination that had previously been used for a shooting brake variant of the Lancia Beta, and standing for &quot;high performance executive&quot;. At first the HPE was only available with the three top engines: 2.0 16v, 1.9 turbodiesel and 2.0 16v turbo in HF guise. The three-door bodyshell had entirely redesigned body sides, but retained the roof and rear section of the five-door model; rear wheelarch flares complemented the HF-derived wide front wings and bumper, sported by all HPE versions. This meant the HPE was around wider than a standard Delta, while all other exterior dimensions remained unchanged. Styling differences from the five-door included specific side skirts and a body-colour grille, to which the HPE 2.0 HF added all the accoutrements of the five-door HF and additional air intakes under the headlights.

====1996 revisions====
At the beginning of 1996 the range was updated. All naturally aspirated engines were replaced; the 1.6 and 1.8 8-valve by 16-valve units, while the 2.0 16v was discontinued in favour of a 1.8 16v equipped with variable valve timing.
Trim levels for the five-door were now three: base LE, richer LX and GT, exclusive to the 1.8 V.V.T. engine. The three-door HF turbo remained the only one offered, as the five-door version was discontinued. In addition to the turbocharged engines, the HPE was available with 1.8 V.V.T. and also the smaller, 1.6 L, engines; the latter, entry level HPE adopted the bumper and narrow front wings of the standard Delta.
Minor styling changes were introduced, such as alloy wheels and wheel covers of a new design, chrome vertical bars to the five-door cars&#x27; grille, and body colour mirror caps.
====1997 revisions====
November 1997 brought the last revisions for the Delta. Seven models made up the updated range: five-door and HPE with a choice of 1.6, 1.8 V.V.T. or 1.9 td engines—the 2.0 16v having been phased out—and a renewed 2.0 HF, again in HPE form only. The 5-door range was reduced to a single LS trim. More of the plastic exterior details were now painted in body colour, namely bumper, bodyside and C-pillar inserts. All HPEs donned flared front wings.
The updated HPE 2.0 HF was shown at the Bologna Motor Show in November. Visually it continued the monochrome theme of the restyled cars, and it was made more distinctive by bumpers, side skirts, and spoiler of a new design, and 16 inch Speedline Montecarlo alloy wheels with 215/50 tyres; inside the seats were upholstered in black leather with contrasting colour Alcantara centres. Mechanically it received a tweaked engine, producing , which made for a 5 km/h higher top speed.

The Delta was dropped from Lancia&#x27;s lineup in 1999 with no immediate successor, after nearly 139,000 units had been produced. The related but more successful Dedra saloon was replaced at the same time by the Lybra, a compact executive car not offered with a hatchback bodystyle.

===Specifications===

Being based on Fiat&#x27;s &quot;Tipo 2&quot; architecture, the second generation Delta featured a steel unibody construction, transverse engine, and all-independent suspension. At the front these were of the MacPherson strut type—the lower arms linked to the same subframe which supported the drivetrain—with coaxial coil springs and telescopic dampers, and an anti-roll bar; at the rear there were trailing arms (also connected to the body by a subframe), an anti-roll bar, coil springs and telescopic dampers. Steering was rack and pinion with standard hydraulic power steering. Brakes were discs on all four wheels, except for base 1.6 cars which used drums at the rear. All models used a five-speed gearbox and were front-wheel drive.

====Engines====
====Performance====
==Third generation==
In September 2006, Lancia announced the revival of the Delta name, with new cars to be built on the Fiat C platform.

The world première of the new HPE concept was held at the 63rd Venice International Film Festival. The new Lancia Delta (Type 844) was unveiled at the 2008 Geneva Motor Show.

The Lancia brand was reintroduced to the Scandinavian, Russian, and Turkish markets in 2007. The new Delta was also intended for a proposed return by Lancia to the UK market during 2009. However, due to an economic downturn, plans were shelved until Fiat bought Chrysler. As the car had been engineered for RHD already, the decision was made in 2010 to bring both the new Delta and Lancia&#x27;s Ypsilon into the UK and Ireland rebranded as Chryslers and sold through the UK Chrysler dealer network.

At the 2010 North American International Auto Show, the Chrysler branded version of the Delta was unveiled as a concept car for a potential North American release.

Delta as well as being an historical name from Lancia&#x27;s past was also being interpreted this time around by Lancia as a mathematical symbol that stands for change, difference and evolution. Designed by the Lancia Style Centre, this car was aimed at the luxury end of the small family car segment. The Delta is long, wide and high, and has a wheelbase of , more than the Fiat Bravo. It has five doors and can be considered a hatchback or an estate (see Hatchback vs. Station wagon).

===Features===

The new Delta offered a number of options and equipment including a Bose Hi-Fi radio incorporating a CD player and MP3 file reader with steering-wheel mounted controls, the Blue&amp;Me system developed with Microsoft, and a new satellite navigation system developed with Magneti Marelli.

Further technical equipment included to effect the ride and handling included an advanced ESC (Electronic Stability Control) system and SDC suspension (with electronic damping control, also by Magneti Marelli).

The Delta also had a driving assistant featuring electric eye monitors that give feedback to the steering wheel to suggest corrections to the driver. The car was available also with semi-automatic parking assistant.

===2011 facelift===
The 2011 facelift of the Delta received trim level changes, a Chrysler-derived family grille, and a 1.6-litre Multijet diesel engine with lower fuel consumption and emissions.
The new version of the Delta was expected to be presented at the 2011 Geneva Motor Show.

===Engines===
Engines available at launch were and 1.4 L turbojet petrol engines and 1.6 L MultiJet diesel, 2.0 multijet with and 1.9 twinturbo multijet with . A new petrol unit was launched later: 1.8 Di turbojet with .

===Safety===
The 2008 Lancia Delta passed the Euro NCAP car safety tests with the following ratings:
==See also==
* Lancia ECV

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q897994" start="4" end="16" title="Lancia Delta" label="Lancia Delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q897994" start="27" end="54" title="Lancia Delta" label="Lancia [[Delta (letter)|δ]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q13266730" start="61" end="77" title="small family car" label="small family car"/>
<link wikidata="Q35896" start="122" end="128" title="Lancia" label="Lancia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="204" end="224" title="Frankfurt Motor Show#1979" label="Frankfurt Motor Show"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="280" end="297" title="Geneva Motor Show#1993" label="Geneva Motor Show"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="352" end="369" title="Geneva Motor Show#2008" label="Geneva Motor Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q7852" start="413" end="437" title="World Rally Championship" label="World Rally Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377204" start="481" end="493" title="homologation" label="homologation"/>
<link wikidata="Q743241" start="510" end="517" title="Group A" label="Group A"/>
<link wikidata="Q216762" start="758" end="767" title="hatchback" label="hatchback"/>
<link wikidata="Q316565" start="781" end="799" title="Giorgetto Giugiaro" label="Giorgetto Giugiaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q48957" start="895" end="910" title="Saab Automobile" label="Saab Automobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q798992" start="912" end="918" title="badge engineering" label="badged"/>
<link wikidata="Q420796" start="977" end="979" title="Saab 96" label="96"/>
<link wikidata="Q748054" start="1016" end="1040" title="European Car of the Year" label="European Car of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q214833" start="1098" end="1114" title="four-wheel drive" label="four-wheel drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780758" start="1115" end="1124" title="hot hatch" label="hot hatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q185525" start="1132" end="1144" title="turbocharger" label="turbocharged"/>
<link wikidata="Q502048" start="1145" end="1158" title="petrol engine" label="petrol engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2150696" start="1236" end="1256" title="List of World Rally Championship records" label="46 victories overall"/>
<link wikidata="Q595985" start="1273" end="1304" title="List of World Rally Championship Constructors&amp;#x27; Champions" label="Constructors&amp;#x27; Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q953904" start="1338" end="1342" title="1987 World Rally Championship season" label="1987"/>
<link wikidata="Q732163" start="1346" end="1350" title="1992 World Rally Championship season" label="1992"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050787" start="1367" end="1393" title="List of World Rally Championship Drivers&amp;#x27; Champions" label="Drivers&amp;#x27; Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q313708" start="1405" end="1419" title="Juha Kankkunen" label="Juha Kankkunen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2267910" start="1430" end="1434" title="1991 World Rally Championship season" label="1991"/>
<link wikidata="Q433162" start="1440" end="1452" title="Miki Biasion" label="Miki Biasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q587014" start="1454" end="1458" title="1988 World Rally Championship season" label="1988"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190922" start="1463" end="1467" title="1989 World Rally Championship season" label="1989"/>
<link wikidata="Q958418" start="1475" end="1490" title="Lancia Delta S4" label="Lancia Delta S4"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507135" start="1626" end="1630" title="1985 World Rally Championship season" label="1985"/>
<link wikidata="Q658888" start="1631" end="1640" title="RAC Rally" label="RAC Rally"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072044" start="1662" end="1673" title="1986 World Rally Championship season" label="1986 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q492194" start="1725" end="1732" title="Group B" label="Group B"/>
<link wikidata="Q7856" start="1778" end="1786" title="rallying" label="rallying"/>
<link wikidata="Q847962" start="2027" end="2044" title="front-wheel drive" label="front-wheel drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q13266730" start="2045" end="2061" title="small family car" label="small family car"/>
<link wikidata="Q777710" start="2090" end="2094" title="Lancia Beta" label="Beta"/>
<link wikidata="Q174104" start="2203" end="2217" title="Lancia Fulvia" label="Fulvia Berlina"/>
<link wikidata="Q316565" start="2376" end="2394" title="Giorgetto Giugiaro" label="Giorgetto Giugiaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q283754" start="2402" end="2412" title="Italdesign" label="Italdesign"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068191" start="2440" end="2461" title="MacPherson suspension" label="MacPherson suspension"/>
<link wikidata="Q5446315" start="2505" end="2509" title="Fiat 128 SOHC engine" label="SOHC"/>
<link wikidata="Q776618" start="2535" end="2545" title="Fiat Ritmo" label="Fiat Ritmo"/>
<link wikidata="Q772430" start="2602" end="2607" title="Weber carburetor" label="Weber"/>
<link wikidata="Q165435" start="2619" end="2630" title="carburettor" label="carburettor"/>
<link wikidata="Q568968" start="2637" end="2651" title="inlet manifold" label="inlet manifold"/>
<link wikidata="Q683005" start="2654" end="2668" title="exhaust system" label="exhaust system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1310203" start="2887" end="2909" title="independent suspension" label="independent suspension"/>
<link wikidata="Q130157093" start="2911" end="2926" title="rack and pinion" label="rack and pinion"/>
<link wikidata="Q173725" start="2947" end="2963" title="air conditioning" label="air conditioning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417230" start="3044" end="3052" title="defogger" label="defogger"/>
<link wikidata="Q13697" start="3084" end="3091" title="Bumper (automobile)" label="bumpers"/>
<link wikidata="Q146559" start="3102" end="3117" title="polyester resin" label="polyester resin"/>
<link wikidata="Q365651" start="3118" end="3141" title="sheet moulding compound" label="sheet moulding compound"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3658" end="3683" title="Frankfurt Motor Show#1979" label="1979 Frankfurt Motor Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545052" start="3873" end="3882" title="overdrive (mechanics)" label="overdrive"/>
<link wikidata="Q748054" start="4120" end="4144" title="European Car of the Year" label="European Car of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q843592" start="4377" end="4399" title="automatic transmission" label="automatic transmission"/>
<link wikidata="Q18188" start="4494" end="4501" title="Verrone" label="Verrone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427865" start="4673" end="4687" title="metallic paint" label="metallic paint"/>
<link wikidata="Q3269291" start="4697" end="4708" title="alloy wheel" label="alloy wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355904" start="4823" end="4828" title="Ermenegildo Zegna Group" label="Zegna"/>
<link wikidata="Q828137" start="4971" end="4988" title="compression ratio" label="compression ratio"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4993" end="5012" title="Ignition system#Electronic systems" label="electronic ignition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1941943" start="5070" end="5078" title="Facelift (automotive)" label="facelift"/>
<link wikidata="Q380677" start="5172" end="5193" title="Thermoplastic" label="thermoplastic polymer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501625" start="5252" end="5259" title="Spoiler (automotive)" label="spoiler"/>
<link wikidata="Q567502" start="5402" end="5410" title="Anodizing" label="anodised"/>
<link wikidata="Q893388" start="5572" end="5585" title="trip computer" label="trip computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410666" start="5720" end="5731" title="Fiat Twin Cam engine" label="DOHC engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1884343" start="5737" end="5744" title="Magneti Marelli" label="Marelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q169545" start="5778" end="5782" title="Tire" label="tyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q755174" start="5808" end="5818" title="disk brake" label="disk brake"/>
<link wikidata="Q173725" start="5931" end="5947" title="air conditioning" label="air conditioning"/>
<link wikidata="Q9275" start="6430" end="6438" title="Chivasso" label="Chivasso"/>
<link wikidata="Q57583" start="6623" end="6643" title="Frankfurt Motor Show" label="Frankfurt Motor Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q931380" start="6677" end="6684" title="Lancia Stratos HF" label="Stratos"/>
<link wikidata="Q847962" start="6807" end="6824" title="front-wheel drive" label="front-wheel drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q16995812" start="6931" end="6938" title="Garrett Advancing Motion" label="Garrett"/>
<link wikidata="Q185525" start="6947" end="6959" title="turbocharger" label="turbocharger"/>
<link wikidata="Q2590813" start="6965" end="6974" title="wastegate" label="wastegate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127694" start="6985" end="7010" title="Intercooler" label="air-to-air heat exchanger"/>
<link wikidata="Q772430" start="7038" end="7054" title="Weber carburetor" label="Weber carburetor"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7091" end="7103" title="Engine knocking#Pre-ignition" label="pre-ignition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163026" start="7246" end="7256" title="Radiator (engine cooling)" label="oil cooler"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224368" start="7303" end="7309" title="Poppet valve" label="valves"/>
<link wikidata="Q136119" start="7328" end="7330" title="ZF Friedrichshafen" label="ZF"/>
<link wikidata="Q211251" start="7348" end="7355" title="Shock absorber" label="Dampers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1279860" start="7422" end="7434" title="Michelin TRX" label="Michelin TRX"/>
<link wikidata="Q109239180" start="7663" end="7673" title="side skirt" label="side skirt"/>
<link wikidata="Q27206" start="7811" end="7817" title="Hood (vehicle)" label="bonnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q679300" start="7923" end="7937" title="steering wheel" label="steering wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q571221" start="8062" end="8068" title="Recaro" label="Recaro"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8289" end="8311" title="Geneva Motor Show#1984" label="1984 Geneva Motor Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q979055" start="8368" end="8377" title="Lancia Rally 037" label="Rally 037"/>
<link wikidata="Q680184" start="8406" end="8413" title="Martini (automobile company)" label="Martini"/>
<link wikidata="Q571221" start="8496" end="8502" title="Recaro" label="Recaro"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8646" end="8665" title="Lancia Delta S4#Stradale" label="road-going Delta S4"/>
<link wikidata="Q3271736" start="9057" end="9068" title="wing mirror" label="wing mirror"/>
<link wikidata="Q207770" start="9136" end="9143" title="Pirelli" label="Pirelli"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9164" end="9173" title="Cromodora" label="Cromodora"/>
<link wikidata="Q3269291" start="9174" end="9185" title="alloy wheel" label="alloy wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q214833" start="9523" end="9539" title="four-wheel drive" label="four-wheel drive"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9591" end="9612" title="Turin Motor Show#1986" label="1986 Turin Motor Show"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9828" end="9837" title="Automotive lighting#Front fog lights" label="fog light"/>
<link wikidata="Q217312" start="10787" end="10800" title="cylinder head" label="cylinder head"/>
<link wikidata="Q2945123" start="10940" end="10954" title="centre of mass" label="centre of mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q174174" start="11168" end="11181" title="diesel engine" label="diesel engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q287526" start="11251" end="11257" title="Lancia Prisma" label="Prisma"/>
<link wikidata="Q873015" start="11294" end="11297" title="Kühnle, Kopp &amp;amp; Kausch" label="KKK"/>
<link wikidata="Q2590813" start="11316" end="11325" title="wastegate" label="wastegate"/>
<link wikidata="Q621044" start="12392" end="12398" title="velour" label="velour"/>
<link wikidata="Q276832" start="13216" end="13221" title="Lancia Dedra" label="Dedra"/>
<link wikidata="Q114675" start="13388" end="13392" title="mica" label="mica"/>
<link wikidata="Q154306" start="13403" end="13413" title="Glen plaid" label="Glen plaid"/>
<link wikidata="Q653807" start="14115" end="14134" title="catalytic converter" label="catalytic converter"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14176" end="14201" title="European emission standards#Emission standards for passenger cars" label="Euro 1 emission standards"/>
<link wikidata="Q3895633" start="15126" end="15136" title="La Mandria" label="La Mandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q287526" start="15514" end="15524" title="Lancia Prisma" label="Prisma 4WD"/>
<link wikidata="Q958418" start="15682" end="15697" title="Lancia Delta S4" label="Lancia Delta S4"/>
<link wikidata="Q492194" start="15698" end="15705" title="Group B" label="Group B"/>
<link wikidata="Q193137" start="15822" end="15834" title="Differential (mechanical device)" label="differential"/>
<link wikidata="Q82412" start="15862" end="15879" title="epicyclic gearing" label="epicyclic gearing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1521100" start="15896" end="15921" title="Viscous coupling" label="Ferguson viscous coupling"/>
<link wikidata="Q3711790" start="16115" end="16132" title="Weight distribution" label="load distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2144215" start="16515" end="16525" title="bevel gear" label="bevel gear"/>
<link wikidata="Q6304756" start="16545" end="16556" title="drive shaft" label="drive shaft"/>
<link wikidata="Q676061" start="17189" end="17195" title="Torsen" label="Torsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5567406" start="17260" end="17279" title="Gleason Corporation" label="Gleason Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17508" end="17524" title="Turin Motor Show#1986" label="Turin Motor Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q1970439" start="17647" end="17662" title="balancing shaft" label="balancing shaft"/>
<link wikidata="Q578833" start="17685" end="17708" title="Lancia Thema" label="Lancia Thema i.e. turbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q16995812" start="17740" end="17747" title="Garrett Advancing Motion" label="Garrett"/>
<link wikidata="Q2590813" start="17764" end="17773" title="wastegate" label="wastegate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127694" start="17795" end="17806" title="intercooler" label="intercooler"/>
<link wikidata="Q308881" start="17856" end="17870" title="fuel injection" label="fuel injection"/>
<link wikidata="Q49718" start="17926" end="17934" title="Crankshaft" label="crankpin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6736207" start="17939" end="17951" title="main bearing" label="main bearing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3119367" start="17983" end="17994" title="valve guide" label="valve guide"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18133" end="18142" title="overboost" label="overboost"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054734" start="18807" end="18821" title="Power steering" label="power assisted"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400977" start="19871" end="19878" title="Missoni" label="Missoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q743241" start="20398" end="20405" title="Group A" label="Group A"/>
<link wikidata="Q7852" start="20423" end="20447" title="World Rally Championship" label="World Rally Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377204" start="20532" end="20544" title="homologation" label="homologation"/>
<link wikidata="Q725531" start="20784" end="20801" title="Monte Carlo Rally" label="Monte Carlo Rally"/>
<link wikidata="Q953904" start="20883" end="20930" title="1987 World Rally Championship" label="1987 World Rally Championship for Manufacturers"/>
<link wikidata="Q313708" start="20932" end="20946" title="Juha Kankkunen" label="Juha Kankkunen"/>
<link wikidata="Q16995812" start="21795" end="21805" title="Garrett Advancing Motion" label="Garrett T3"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23491" end="23513" title="Geneva Motor Show#1989" label="1989 Geneva Motor Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088759" start="23552" end="23566" title="San Remo Rally" label="San Remo Rally"/>
<link wikidata="Q2267910" start="25192" end="25228" title="1991 World Rally Championship season" label="1991 World Rally Championship season"/>
<link wikidata="Q2261539" start="25500" end="25514" title="Martini Racing" label="Martini Racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3809839" start="25525" end="25535" title="Jolly Club" label="Jolly Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q732163" start="25544" end="25555" title="1992 World Rally Championship season" label="1992 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377204" start="25722" end="25734" title="homologation" label="homologation"/>
<link wikidata="Q683005" start="26022" end="26036" title="exhaust system" label="exhaust system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1238737" start="26536" end="26547" title="strut brace" label="strut brace"/>
<link wikidata="Q908409" start="26603" end="26615" title="vacuum servo" label="vacuum servo"/>
<link wikidata="Q907265" start="26638" end="26644" title="Brembo" label="Brembo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27253" end="27267" title="Headlamp#Projector (polyellipsoidal) lamps" label="projector type"/>
<link wikidata="Q568491" start="27545" end="27554" title="downforce" label="downforce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074335" start="28133" end="28143" title="Momo (company)" label="Momo Corse"/>
<link wikidata="Q234021" start="28659" end="28664" title="Robert Bosch GmbH" label="Bosch"/>
<link wikidata="Q190660" start="28665" end="28689" title="anti-lock braking system" label="anti-lock braking system"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165438" start="28709" end="28716" title="sunroof" label="sunroof"/>
<link wikidata="Q951673" start="28862" end="28870" title="Maggiora (manufacturer)" label="Maggiora"/>
<link wikidata="Q9275" start="28993" end="29001" title="Chivasso" label="Chivasso"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196635" start="29342" end="29363" title="Engine control unit" label="engine control system"/>
<link wikidata="Q286588" start="29702" end="29715" title="oxygen sensor" label="oxygen sensor"/>
<link wikidata="Q16995812" start="29843" end="29850" title="Garrett Advancing Motion" label="Garrett"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074335" start="30668" end="30672" title="Momo (company)" label="MOMO"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31203" end="31219" title="#Limited editions" label="limited editions"/>
<link wikidata="Q3882470" start="31660" end="31667" title="one-off" label="one-off"/>
<link wikidata="Q55989" start="31724" end="31735" title="convertible" label="convertible"/>
<link wikidata="Q356351" start="31761" end="31775" title="Gianni Agnelli" label="Gianni Agnelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q16995812" start="32132" end="32139" title="Garrett Advancing Motion" label="Garrett"/>
<link wikidata="Q15620332" start="32730" end="32763" title="FIA World Rallycross Championship" label="FIA World Rallycross Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q115973184" start="32769" end="32783" title="GCK Motorsport" label="GCK Motorsport"/>
<link wikidata="Q109255378" start="32869" end="32907" title="2022 FIA World Rallycross Championship" label="2022 FIA World Rallycross Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q115819375" start="33051" end="33062" title="2022 World RX of Germany" label="final round"/>
<link wikidata="Q115959762" start="33086" end="33097" title="2023 FIA World Rallycross Championship" label="2023 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q7852" start="33413" end="33437" title="World Rally Championship" label="World Rally Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q492194" start="33512" end="33519" title="Group B" label="Group B"/>
<link wikidata="Q743241" start="33588" end="33595" title="Group A" label="Group A"/>
<link wikidata="Q798992" start="34668" end="34676" title="rebadged" label="rebadged"/>
<link wikidata="Q3744458" start="34854" end="34864" title="Fiat Group" label="Fiat Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q26921" start="34892" end="34902" title="Alfa Romeo" label="Alfa Romeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4992459" start="34967" end="34973" title="Type Four platform" label="Type 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q169116" start="35033" end="35042" title="Saab 9000" label="Saab 9000"/>
<link wikidata="Q578833" start="35048" end="35060" title="Lancia Thema" label="Lancia Thema"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132608" start="35066" end="35076" title="Fiat Croma" label="Fiat Croma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124136" start="35085" end="35099" title="Alfa Romeo 164" label="Alfa Romeo 164"/>
<link wikidata="Q420796" start="35274" end="35276" title="Saab 96" label="96"/>
<link wikidata="Q316565" start="35575" end="35593" title="Giorgetto Giugiaro" label="Giorgetto Giugiaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q847962" start="35653" end="35670" title="front-wheel drive" label="front-wheel drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q216762" start="35677" end="35686" title="hatchback" label="hatchback"/>
<link wikidata="Q7856" start="35695" end="35703" title="rallying" label="rallying"/>
<link wikidata="Q11995938" start="36430" end="36444" title="Swedish Police Authority" label="Swedish Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q213853" start="36665" end="36670" title="coupé" label="coupé"/>
<link wikidata="Q1734300" start="36704" end="36716" title="coachbuilder" label="coachbuilder"/>
<link wikidata="Q140266" start="36717" end="36723" title="Zagato" label="Zagato"/>
<link wikidata="Q447725" start="38241" end="38256" title="aluminium alloy" label="aluminium alloy"/>
<link wikidata="Q181790" start="38294" end="38312" title="composite material" label="composite material"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417134" start="38511" end="38520" title="dashboard" label="dashboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q652517" start="38523" end="38530" title="Center console (automobile)" label="console"/>
<link wikidata="Q5297201" start="38536" end="38545" title="door card" label="door card"/>
<link wikidata="Q910977" start="38566" end="38578" title="Carbon-fiber-reinforced polymer" label="carbon fibre"/>
<link wikidata="Q850270" start="38989" end="39000" title="concept car" label="concept car"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145550" start="39031" end="39039" title="fastback" label="fastback"/>
<link wikidata="Q283754" start="39048" end="39067" title="Italdesign Giugiaro" label="Italdesign Giugiaro"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="39091" end="39112" title="Turin Motor Show#1982" label="1982 Turin Motor Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q850270" start="39441" end="39452" title="concept car" label="concept car"/>
<link wikidata="Q3658098" start="39458" end="39461" title="2+2 (car body style)" label="2+2"/>
<link wikidata="Q40987" start="39476" end="39487" title="Pininfarina" label="Pininfarina"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="39510" end="39531" title="Turin Motor Show#1988" label="1988 Turin Motor Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q14390" start="39834" end="39846" title="Delta (letter)" label="Greek letter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2605526" start="39967" end="39983" title="I.DE.A Institute" label="I.DE.A Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q181343" start="39987" end="39999" title="Ercole Spada" label="Ercole Spada"/>
<link wikidata="Q750528" start="40051" end="40060" title="Fiat Tipo (Type 160)" label="Fiat Tipo"/>
<link wikidata="Q190578" start="40467" end="40473" title="Sedan (car)" label="saloon"/>
<link wikidata="Q484876" start="40662" end="40665" title="Chief executive officer" label="CEO"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="40666" end="40682" title="Paolo Cantarella" label="Paolo Cantarella"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="40882" end="40904" title="Geneva Motor Show#1993" label="1993 Geneva Motor Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163122" start="41089" end="41093" title="SOHC" label="SOHC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163122" start="41113" end="41117" title="DOHC" label="DOHC"/>
<link wikidata="Q190660" start="41640" end="41643" title="Anti-lock braking system" label="ABS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1521100" start="41670" end="41686" title="viscous coupling" label="viscous coupling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571585" start="41687" end="41712" title="limited slip differential" label="limited slip differential"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500340" start="41940" end="41951" title="Fender (vehicle)" label="front wings"/>
<link wikidata="Q755174" start="42067" end="42077" title="disk brake" label="disk brake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929048" start="42212" end="42223" title="turbodiesel" label="turbodiesel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163122" start="42293" end="42297" title="SOHC" label="SOHC"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42729" end="42751" title="Geneva Motor Show#1995" label="1995 Geneva Motor Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q862376" start="42861" end="42875" title="shooting brake" label="shooting brake"/>
<link wikidata="Q777710" start="42891" end="42902" title="Lancia Beta" label="Lancia Beta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077779" start="43878" end="43899" title="variable valve timing" label="variable valve timing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930094" start="44915" end="44923" title="Pillar (automobile)" label="C-pillar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187361" start="45009" end="45027" title="Bologna Motor Show" label="Bologna Motor Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q30686533" start="45205" end="45214" title="Magnesium wheels" label="Speedline"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130692" start="45663" end="45668" title="Lancia Lybra" label="Lybra"/>
<link wikidata="Q5155305" start="45672" end="45693" title="compact executive car" label="compact executive car"/>
<link wikidata="Q10709419" start="45862" end="45869" title="unibody" label="unibody"/>
<link wikidata="Q611714" start="45884" end="45901" title="transverse engine" label="transverse engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1310203" start="45911" end="45933" title="independent suspension" label="independent suspension"/>
<link wikidata="Q7631141" start="46022" end="46030" title="subframe" label="subframe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3175877" start="46075" end="46086" title="coil spring" label="coil spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q211251" start="46103" end="46110" title="Shock absorber" label="dampers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500099" start="46119" end="46132" title="anti-roll bar" label="anti-roll bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1879237" start="46157" end="46169" title="trailing arm" label="trailing arm"/>
<link wikidata="Q130157093" start="46283" end="46298" title="rack and pinion" label="rack and pinion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054734" start="46323" end="46337" title="power steering" label="power steering"/>
<link wikidata="Q854852" start="46413" end="46418" title="Drum brake" label="drums"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208529" start="46461" end="46468" title="Manual transmission" label="gearbox"/>
<link wikidata="Q847962" start="46478" end="46495" title="front-wheel drive" label="front-wheel drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q3901921" start="46655" end="46670" title="Fiat C platform" label="Fiat C platform"/>
<link wikidata="Q49024" start="46736" end="46770" title="Venice International Film Festival" label="Venice International Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="46824" end="46846" title="Geneva Motor Show#2008" label="2008 Geneva Motor Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q1801874" start="47245" end="47252" title="Lancia Ypsilon" label="Ypsilon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="47357" end="47400" title="North American International Auto Show#2010" label="2010 North American International Auto Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q181114" start="47406" end="47414" title="Chrysler" label="Chrysler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132226" start="47890" end="47900" title="Fiat Bravo (2007)" label="Fiat Bravo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="47972" end="47999" title="Hatchback#Hatchback vs. station wagon" label="Hatchback vs. Station wagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q328568" start="48087" end="48091" title="Bose Corporation" label="Bose"/>
<link wikidata="Q42591" start="48134" end="48137" title="MP3" label="MP3"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634659" start="48192" end="48203" title="Blue&amp;amp;Me" label="Blue&amp;amp;Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283" start="48226" end="48235" title="Microsoft" label="Microsoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1884343" start="48290" end="48305" title="Magneti Marelli" label="Magneti Marelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q173613" start="48465" end="48491" title="semi-active suspension" label="electronic damping control"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="48998" end="49020" title="Geneva Motor Show#2011" label="2011 Geneva Motor Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q2755200" start="49167" end="49175" title="JTD" label="multijet"/>
<link wikidata="Q223400" start="49291" end="49300" title="Euro NCAP" label="Euro NCAP"/>
<link wikidata="Q372387" start="49361" end="49371" title="Lancia ECV" label="Lancia ECV"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="308568" wikidata="Q4700960" url="?curid=308568" title="United States Motor Company">
<text>The United States Motor Company (USMC) was organized by Benjamin Briscoe in 1910 as a selling company, to represent various manufacturers. It had begun life as the International Motor Company in 1908 in an attempt to create a major consolidation within the industry with Maxwell-Briscoe and Buick, which did not succeed. International Motor was renamed USMC in December 1909. By the end of 1910, there were 11 constituent companies, each still headed by the individual who had built each company originally. In 1910, rumors surfaced that United States Motor Company was going to merge with General Motors, but Briscoe scotched the rumors by stating that any attempt to integrate General Motors into USMC would create chaos.

This was an effort to try to save several independent automotive manufacturing companies who were having great difficulty in getting the necessary financial backing. Those companies included: Maxwell, Stoddard-Dayton, Grabowsky Motor Vehicle Company, Briscoe Manufacturing, Courier Car Co, Columbia Automobile Company, Brush Motor Car Company, Alden Sampson Trucks, Riker, Gray Marine, and Providence Engineering Works, with the Thomas and other lines coming aboard later.

1910 production announced in mid-year included 15,000 Maxwells, 10,000 Brush Runabouts, and 10,000 of the Stoddard-Dayton, Columbia, and Alden Sampson Trucks. Later in 1910, Briscoe formed United Motors International, Ltd. to handle international sales of the United States Motor Company, focused mainly on England.

Announcing some price reductions for 1911 models, the company stated that it had 18 plants with a combined floor space of with 14,000 employees capable of producing 52,000 vehicles. There were 52 models offered in 1911. It was claimed that there was no leftover stock of unsold cars from the 1910 model year and that business was up fifty-seven percent from the year-earlier period.

Briscoe several times complained that the antipathy of bankers to the automobile industry was hampering growth. In early 1912, the company suspended dividend payments on its preferred stock and in September 1912 year went into receivership. The bankers attributed the failure to bad management. A conflict between two of its backers, who also had a financial interest in General Motors, led to the downfall. Briscoe retired in late 1912 and was replaced by Walter E. Flanders as manager for the receivers committee. The assets of the United States Motor Company and constituent companies were sold for $7,080,000 at a public foreclosure sale in January 1913.

The USMC assets were purchased by Walter Flanders, who reorganized the company as the Maxwell Motor Company, Inc. This was the only surviving member of the group. In the early 1920s, this company was reorganized and became Chrysler.

==Marques==

* Brush
*Dayton
*Alden-Sampson
*Columbia
*Riker
*Briscoe
*Detroit
*Thomas
*Sampson
*Stoddard
*Courier
*Maxwell
*Providence
*Gray Marine

==See also==

*Chrysler Corporation
*Maxwell automobile
*Chalmers Automobile

==References==

* &quot;AUTO NOTES AND GOSSIP.&quot; &quot;New York Times&quot;, Apr 17, 1910. p. S4. (Alden Sampson integrates with USMC)
* &quot;UNITED STATES MOTOR CO.; Aim Said to be to Control Only a Few Concerns.&quot; &quot;Wall Street Journal&quot;: May 11, 1910. p. 5. 
* &quot;UNITED STATES MOTOR CO. TO GAIN ANOTHER PLANT; Negotiations for the Dayton Motor Co. About Completed.&quot; &quot;Wall Street Journal&quot;: Jun 10, 1910. p. 8.
* &quot;More Firms Join U. S. Motor Co.&quot;, &quot;New York Times&quot;, 16 June 1910, p. 11.
* &quot;AUTO&#x27;S ECONOMIC VALUE.; President Briscoe Takes Issue with Chancellor Day on Attack.&quot; &quot;New York Times&quot;: Jun 26, 1910. p. X9. 
* &quot;PRES. BRISCOE OF U.S. MOTOR CO. DENIES AUTOMOBILE COMBINE; Declares Emphatically That Reports of Consolidation of His and General Motors Co. Are Without Foundation.&quot; &quot;Wall Street Journal&quot;: Sep 14, 1910. p. 5.
* &quot;UNITED STATES MOTOR CO.; INTERESTING FACTS OF THE $30,000,000 CONSOLIDATION ARE BEING DISCLOSED.&quot; &quot;Wall Street Journal&quot;: Sep 15, 1910. p. 6.
* &quot;AMERICAN MAKERS TO INVADE ENGLAND; Benjamin Briscoe Forms the United International Motors, Ltd., for Foreign Trade.&quot; &quot;New York Times&quot;: Nov 27, 1910. p. C8.
* &quot;UNITED STATES MOTOR CO.; President Says Business for Last Three Months Was 57½ Per Cent Larger Than in Same Time 1909.&quot; &quot;Wall Street Journal&quot;: Dec 1, 1910. p. 7.
* &quot;The Automobile Industry.; Benjamin Briscoe, President of the United States Motor Company, Tells of Conditions in the Trade and Its Prospects for 1911.&quot; BENJAMIN BRISCOE. &quot;New York Times&quot;: Jan 8, 1911. p. AFR47.
* Display Ad for U. S. Motor Co. &quot;New York Times&quot;: Jan 11, 1911. p. 15.
* &quot;ELEVEN COMPANIES BAR AUTO RACING; United States Motor Combination Announces Withdrawal from Speed Contests.&quot; &quot;New York Times&quot;: Mar 25, 1911. p. 12.
* &quot;BRISCOE PREDICTS A RECORD OUTPUT; Says 212,000 Cars Will Be Made Next Year -- Interesting Outlook for the Commercial Vehicle.&quot; &quot;New York Times&quot;: Aug 20, 1911. p. C8.
* &quot;WHY AUTOMOBILES DIFFER IN PRICE; Know Foundry Practice Aids Designers and Reduces Manufacturing Cost.&quot; BY FRANK BRISCOE. &quot;New York Times&quot;: Jan 7, 1912. p. XX9.
* &quot;UNITED STATES MOTOR COMPANY PASSES DIVIDEND ON PREFERRED.; Increasing Demand for Labor and Materials the Explanation--Business Heaviest on Record.&quot; &quot;Wall Street Journal&quot;: Feb 9, 1912. p. 8.
* &quot;U.S. MOTOR CO.&#x27;S SHOWING OF DECREASED EARNINGS IN 1911.&quot; &quot;Wall Street Journal&quot;: Feb 20, 1912. p. 8.
* &quot;UNITED STATES MOTOR CO. SHOWING INCREASED SALES.; GROSS EARNINGS FOR SIX MONTHS TO JAN. 31, WERE $10,332,087 AGAINST $7,813,886 FOR CORRESPONDING PERIOD 1911.&quot; &quot;Wall Street Journal&quot;: Mar 25, 1912. p. 7.
* &quot;UNITED STATES MOTOR CO.; Audit for Bankers Committee Shows Company in Good Shapes But Needing Working Capital.&quot; &quot;Wall Street Journal&quot;: Jul 8, 1912. p. 6.
* &quot;UNITED STATES MOTOR CO.; Company&#x27;s Financial Affairs Working Out Satisfactorily -- Sales Running at High Rate.&quot; &quot;Wall Street Journal&quot;: Jul 19, 1912. p. 5.
* &quot;CONDITION OF U.S. MOTOR CO. HAS IMPROVED OF LATE; No Reorganization Plan Formulated But Funds Still Needed and Some Arrangements Will be Made When Exact State of Affairs is Known.&quot; &quot;Wall Street Journal&quot;: Aug 16, 1912. p. 6.
* &quot;UNITED STATES MOTOR CO. SEEKING A READJUSTMENT; Banking Interstate Say Nearly $5,000,000 is Needed to Put the Concern on a Good Basis.&quot; &quot;Wall Street Journal&quot;: Aug 31, 1912. p. 6.
* &quot;UNITED STATES MOTOR CO. PUT IN THE HANDS OF RECEIVERS; COURT NAMES W.E.S. STRONG AND ROBERTS WALKER TO TAKE CHARGE, INDICATING A FRIENDLY REORGANIZATION.&quot; &quot;Wall Street Journal&quot;: Sep 13, 1912. p. 7.
* &quot;UNITED STATES MOTOR CO.&#x27;S REORGANIZATION PLAN.&quot; &quot;Wall Street Journal&quot;: Sep 17, 1912. p. 5.
* &quot;U.S. MOTOR.; Walter E. Flanders May be Elected President in Place of Benjamin Briscoe.&quot; &quot;Wall Street Journal&quot;: Oct 25, 1912. p. 2.
* &quot;U.S. MOTOR COMPANY HAS A SHAKE-UP; Changes Affect Whole Departments and Their Heads.&quot; &quot;New York Times&quot;: Dec 12, 1912. p. 16.
* &quot;U.S. MOTOR ASSETS GO FOR $7,080,000.&quot; &quot;New York Times&quot;: Jan 9, 1913. p. 11.
* &quot;UNITED STATES MOTOR CO.; Reorganized Concern to be Called the Maxwell Motor Co.&quot; &quot;Wall Street Journal&quot;: Jan 14, 1913. p. 3.
* &quot;UNITED STATES MOTOR COMPANY AND REASONS FOR ITS FAILURE.; ORGANIZERS OF SUCCESSOR, THE MAXWELL MOTOR CO., MAKE INTERESTING COMMENT ON THE AUTOMOBILE BUSINESS.&quot; Wall Street Journal. Apr 10, 1913. p. 8.

==External links==
*http://classiccarbug.web.aplus.net/featurecar1003.php
*https://www.allpar.com/ed/chrysler-founding-date.html</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4700960" start="4" end="31" title="United States Motor Company" label="United States Motor Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q4700960" start="33" end="37" title="United States Motor Company" label="USMC"/>
<link wikidata="Q4888333" start="56" end="72" title="Benjamin Briscoe" label="Benjamin Briscoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q27415" start="291" end="296" title="Buick" label="Buick"/>
<link wikidata="Q81965" start="590" end="604" title="General Motors" label="General Motors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476861" start="917" end="924" title="Maxwell automobile" label="Maxwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2350904" start="926" end="941" title="Stoddard-Dayton" label="Stoddard-Dayton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137676" start="999" end="1013" title="Courier Car Co" label="Courier Car Co"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112388" start="1015" end="1042" title="Columbia Automobile Company" label="Columbia Automobile Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q994313" start="1044" end="1067" title="Brush Motor Car Company" label="Brush Motor Car Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q152074" start="2127" end="2139" title="bankruptcy" label="receivership"/>
<link wikidata="Q81965" start="2271" end="2285" title="General Motors Corporation" label="General Motors"/>
<link wikidata="Q4017920" start="2594" end="2609" title="Walter Flanders" label="Walter Flanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q181114" start="2783" end="2791" title="Chrysler Corporation" label="Chrysler"/>
<link wikidata="Q994313" start="2809" end="2814" title="Brush (automobile)" label="Brush"/>
<link wikidata="Q2350904" start="2816" end="2822" title="Stoddard-Dayton" label="Dayton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112388" start="2839" end="2847" title="Columbia (automobile brand)" label="Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4968649" start="2856" end="2863" title="Briscoe (automobile company)" label="Briscoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q28458699" start="2865" end="2872" title="Thomas-Detroit (automobile)" label="Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1622656" start="2874" end="2880" title="Thomas Motor Company" label="Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7410207" start="2882" end="2889" title="Sampson (automobile)" label="Sampson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2350904" start="2891" end="2899" title="Stoddard-Dayton" label="Stoddard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137676" start="2901" end="2908" title="Courier Car Co" label="Courier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476861" start="2910" end="2917" title="Maxwell Motor Company" label="Maxwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5598206" start="2931" end="2942" title="Gray Marine Motor Company" label="Gray Marine"/>
<link wikidata="Q181114" start="2959" end="2979" title="Chrysler Corporation" label="Chrysler Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476861" start="2981" end="2999" title="Maxwell automobile" label="Maxwell automobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060176" start="3001" end="3020" title="Chalmers Automobile" label="Chalmers Automobile"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="308573" wikidata="Q1044327" url="?curid=308573" title="Caroli disease">
<text>Caroli disease (communicating cavernous ectasia, or congenital cystic dilatation of the intrahepatic biliary tree) is a rare inherited disorder characterized by cystic dilatation (or ectasia) of the bile ducts within the liver. There are two patterns of Caroli disease: focal or simple Caroli disease consists of abnormally widened bile ducts affecting an isolated portion of liver. The second form is more diffuse, and when associated with portal hypertension and congenital hepatic fibrosis, is often referred to as &quot;Caroli syndrome&quot;. The underlying differences between the two types are not well understood. Caroli disease is also associated with liver failure and polycystic kidney disease. The disease affects about one in 1,000,000 people, with more reported cases of Caroli syndrome than of Caroli disease.

Caroli disease is distinct from other diseases that cause ductal dilatation caused by obstruction, in that it is not one of the many choledochal cyst derivatives.

== Signs and symptoms ==
The first symptoms typically include fever, intermittent abdominal pain, and an enlarged liver. Occasionally, yellow discoloration of the skin occurs. Caroli disease usually occurs in the presence of other diseases, such as autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease, cholangitis, gallstones, biliary abscess, sepsis, liver cirrhosis, kidney failure, and cholangiocarcinoma (7% affected). People with Caroli disease are 100 times more at risk for cholangiocarcinoma than the general population. After recognizing symptoms of related diseases, Caroli disease can be diagnosed.

Morbidity is common and is caused by complications of cholangitis, sepsis, choledocholithiasis, and cholangiocarcinoma. These morbid conditions often prompt the diagnosis. Portal hypertension may be present, resulting in other conditions including enlarged spleen, hematemesis, and melena. These problems can severely affect the patient&#x27;s quality of life. In a 10-year period between 1995 and 2005, only 10 patients were surgically treated for Caroli disease, with an average patient age of 45.8 years.

After reviewing 46 cases of Caroli disease before 1990, 21.7% of the cases were the result of an intrahepatic cyst or nonobstructive biliary tree dilation, 34.7% were linked with congenital hepatic fibrosis, 13% were isolated choledochal cystic dilation, and the remaining 24.6% had a combination of all three.

== Causes ==
The cause appears to be genetic; the simple form is an autosomal dominant trait, while the complex form is an autosomal recessive trait. Females are more prone to Caroli disease than males. Family history may include kidney and liver disease due to the link between Caroli disease and ARPKD. &quot;PKHD1&quot;, the gene linked to ARPKD, has been found mutated in patients with Caroli syndrome. &quot;PKHD1&quot; is expressed primarily in the kidneys with lower levels in the liver, pancreas, and lungs, a pattern consistent with phenotype of the disease, which primarily affects the liver and kidneys. The genetic basis for the difference between Caroli disease and Caroli syndrome has not been defined.

== Diagnosis ==

Modern imaging techniques allow the diagnosis to be made more easily and without invasive imaging of the biliary tree. Commonly, the disease is limited to the left lobe of the liver. Images taken by CT scan, X-ray, or MRI show enlarged intrahepatic (in the liver) bile ducts due to ectasia. Using an ultrasound, tubular dilation of the bile ducts can be seen. On a CT scan, Caroli disease can be observed by noting the many fluid-filled, tubular structures extending to the liver. A high-contrast CT must be used to distinguish the difference between stones and widened ducts. Bowel gas and digestive habits make it difficult to obtain a clear sonogram, so a CT scan is a good substitution. When the intrahepatic bile duct wall has protrusions, it is clearly seen as central dots or a linear streak. Caroli disease is commonly diagnosed after this “central dot sign” is detected on a CT scan or ultrasound. However, cholangiography is the best, and final, approach to show the enlarged bile ducts as a result of Caroli disease.

==Treatment==
The treatment depends on clinical features and the location of the biliary abnormality. When the disease is localized to one hepatic lobe, hepatectomy relieves symptoms and appears to remove the risk of malignancy. Good evidence suggests that malignancy complicates Caroli disease in roughly 7% of cases.

Antibiotics are used to treat the inflammation of the bile duct, and ursodeoxycholic acid is used for hepatolithiasis. Ursodiol is given to treat cholelithiasis. In diffuse cases of Caroli disease, treatment options include conservative or endoscopic therapy, internal biliary bypass procedures, and liver transplantation in carefully selected cases. Surgical resection has been used successfully in patients with monolobar disease. An orthotopic liver transplant is another option, used only when antibiotics have no effect, in combination with recurring cholangitis. With a liver transplant, cholangiocarcinoma is usually avoided in the long run.

Family studies are necessary to determine if Caroli disease is due to inheritable causes. Regular follow-ups, including ultrasounds and liver biopsies, are performed.

== Prognosis ==
Mortality is indirect and caused by complications. After cholangitis occurs, patients typically die within 5–10 years.

== Epidemiology ==
Caroli disease is typically found in Asia, and diagnosed in persons under the age of 22. Cases have also been found in infants and adults. As medical imaging technology improves, diagnostic age decreases.

== History ==
Jacques Caroli, a gastroenterologist, first described a rare congenital condition in 1958 in Paris, France.
He described it as &quot;nonobstructive saccular or fusiform multifocal segmental dilatation of the intrahepatic bile ducts&quot;; basically, he observed cavernous ectasia in the biliary tree causing a chronic, often life-threatening hepatobiliary disease.
 Caroli, born in France in 1902, learned and practiced medicine in Angers. After World War II, he was chief of service for 30 years at Saint-Antoine in Paris. Before dying in 1979, he was honored with the rank of commander in the Legion of Honour in 1976.

==References==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1044327" start="0" end="14" title="Caroli disease" label="Caroli disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044327" start="16" end="47" title="Caroli disease" label="communicating cavernous ectasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044327" start="52" end="113" title="Caroli disease" label="congenital cystic dilatation of the intrahepatic biliary tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323709" start="183" end="190" title="ectasia" label="ectasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q124604" start="441" end="460" title="portal hypertension" label="portal hypertension"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395683" start="465" end="492" title="congenital hepatic fibrosis" label="congenital hepatic fibrosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q970208" start="660" end="673" title="liver failure" label="liver failure"/>
<link wikidata="Q15443105" start="678" end="703" title="polycystic kidney disease" label="polycystic kidney disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q2027937" start="958" end="974" title="choledochal cyst" label="choledochal cyst"/>
<link wikidata="Q38933" start="1051" end="1056" title="fever" label="fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q183425" start="1071" end="1085" title="abdominal pain" label="abdominal pain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362864" start="1094" end="1108" title="hepatomegaly" label="enlarged liver"/>
<link wikidata="Q133244" start="1124" end="1156" title="jaundice" label="yellow discoloration of the skin"/>
<link wikidata="Q15443105" start="1258" end="1283" title="polycystic kidney disease" label="polycystic kidney disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q603644" start="1285" end="1296" title="cholangitis" label="cholangitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q272714" start="1298" end="1308" title="gallstones" label="gallstones"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1310" end="1325" title="biliary abscess" label="biliary abscess"/>
<link wikidata="Q183134" start="1327" end="1333" title="sepsis" label="sepsis"/>
<link wikidata="Q147778" start="1341" end="1350" title="cirrhosis" label="cirrhosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q476921" start="1352" end="1366" title="kidney failure" label="kidney failure"/>
<link wikidata="Q124292" start="1372" end="1390" title="cholangiocarcinoma" label="cholangiocarcinoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q9290860" start="1669" end="1688" title="choledocholithiasis" label="choledocholithiasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129121" start="1842" end="1857" title="splenomegaly" label="enlarged spleen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570161" start="1859" end="1870" title="hematemesis" label="hematemesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163908" start="1876" end="1882" title="melena" label="melena"/>
<link wikidata="Q3562150" start="2236" end="2248" title="biliary tree" label="biliary tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395683" start="2282" end="2309" title="congenital hepatic fibrosis" label="congenital hepatic fibrosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q131896729" start="2483" end="2501" title="autosomal dominant" label="autosomal dominant"/>
<link wikidata="Q131896729" start="2538" end="2557" title="autosomal recessive" label="autosomal recessive"/>
<link wikidata="Q3395618" start="2713" end="2718" title="ARPKD" label="ARPKD"/>
<link wikidata="Q905111" start="2726" end="2731" title="PKHD1" label="PKHD1"/>
<link wikidata="Q9368" start="2903" end="2908" title="liver" label="liver"/>
<link wikidata="Q9618" start="2910" end="2918" title="pancreas" label="pancreas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7886" start="2924" end="2929" title="lungs" label="lungs"/>
<link wikidata="Q9377" start="3021" end="3028" title="kidneys" label="kidneys"/>
<link wikidata="Q32566" start="3349" end="3356" title="CT scan" label="CT scan"/>
<link wikidata="Q34777" start="3358" end="3363" title="X-ray" label="X-ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q161238" start="3368" end="3371" title="MRI" label="MRI"/>
<link wikidata="Q162564" start="3450" end="3460" title="ultrasound" label="ultrasound"/>
<link wikidata="Q234904" start="3794" end="3802" title="Medical ultrasonography" label="sonogram"/>
<link wikidata="Q5104282" start="4066" end="4081" title="cholangiography" label="cholangiography"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514021" start="4332" end="4343" title="hepatectomy" label="hepatectomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1483951" start="4396" end="4406" title="malignancy" label="malignancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q241374" start="4618" end="4626" title="Ursodiol" label="Ursodiol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368191" start="4935" end="4962" title="orthotopic liver transplant" label="orthotopic liver transplant"/>
<link wikidata="Q603644" start="5390" end="5401" title="cholangitis" label="cholangitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q120569" start="5710" end="5728" title="gastroenterologist" label="gastroenterologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="5785" end="5790" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="5792" end="5798" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q3562150" start="6034" end="6047" title="hepatobiliary" label="hepatobiliary"/>
<link wikidata="Q38380" start="6124" end="6130" title="Angers" label="Angers"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="6138" end="6150" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144549" start="6192" end="6205" title="Pierre-and-Marie-Curie University" label="Saint-Antoine"/>
<link wikidata="Q163700" start="6287" end="6303" title="Legion of Honour" label="Legion of Honour"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="308577" wikidata="Q244234" url="?curid=308577" title="John Turturro">
<text>John Michael Turturro ( ; born February 28, 1957) is an American actor and filmmaker. He is known for his varied roles in independent films, and has worked frequently with the Coen brothers, Adam Sandler, and Spike Lee. He has received a Primetime Emmy Award and nominations for three Golden Globe Awards.

He achieved his career breakthrough with &quot;Five Corners&quot; (1987). He acted in Spike Lee&#x27;s &quot;Do the Right Thing&quot; (1989), &quot;Mo&#x27; Better Blues&quot; (1990), &quot;Jungle Fever&quot; (1991), and &quot;Clockers&quot; (1995). He also starred in Coens&#x27; &quot;Miller&#x27;s Crossing&quot; (1990), &quot;Barton Fink&quot; (1991), for which he won the Cannes Film Festival Award for Best Actor, &quot;The Big Lebowski&quot; (1998), and &quot;O Brother, Where Art Thou?&quot; (2000). He also starred in &quot;Fearless&quot; (1993), &quot;Quiz Show&quot; (1994), and &quot;Gloria Bell&quot; (2018); and portrayed Seymour Simmons in the &quot;Transformers&quot; film series (2007–2017) and Carmine Falcone in &quot;The Batman&quot; (2022).

For his guest role in the USA Network comedy series &quot;Monk&quot;, Turturro received a Primetime Emmy Award. He has also starred in the HBO thriller miniseries &quot;The Night Of&quot; (2016), the HBO miniseries &quot;The Plot Against America&quot; (2020), and the Apple TV+ thriller series &quot;Severance&quot; (2022–present).

He has directed five films, &quot;Mac&quot; (1992), &quot;Illuminata&quot; (1998), &quot;Romance and Cigarettes&quot; (2005), &quot;Fading Gigolo&quot; (2013), and &quot;The Jesus Rolls&quot; (2020).

==Early life and education==
John Turturro was born on February 28, 1957, in the Brooklyn borough of New York City, New York, the son of Katherine Florence (Incerella) and Nicholas Turturro. His mother was born in the U.S. to parents with roots in Sicily, and was an amateur jazz singer who had worked in a naval yard during World War II. His maternal grandmother died of a botched home abortion when his mother was six, leaving his mother in an orphanage, as his grandfather was unable to provide for the children on his own. His father had emigrated at age six from Giovinazzo, Italy to the United States, and later worked as a carpenter and construction worker before joining the U.S. Navy.

Turturro was raised as a Catholic and moved to the Rosedale section of Queens, New York, with his family when he was 6. He graduated from the State University of New York at New Paltz in 1979 with a Bachelor of Arts in theater studies. He later did graduate study at the Yale School of Drama, receiving a Master of Fine Arts degree in 1983.

==Career==

Turturro&#x27;s first film appearance was a non-speaking extra role in &quot;Raging Bull&quot; (1980). He created the title role of John Patrick Shanley&#x27;s &quot;Danny and the Deep Blue Sea&quot; at the Playwrights Conference at the Eugene O&#x27;Neill Theatre Center in 1983. He repeated it the following year Off-Broadway and won an Obie Award. Turturro had a notable supporting role in William Friedkin&#x27;s action film &quot;To Live and Die in L.A.&quot; (1985), as the henchman of the villainous counterfeiter played by Willem Dafoe.

Spike Lee liked Turturro&#x27;s performance in &quot;Five Corners&quot; (1987) so much that he cast him in &quot;Do the Right Thing&quot; (1989). This movie was the first of a long-standing collaboration between the director and Turturro, which includes work together on a total of nine filmsmore than any other actor in the Lee oeuvreincluding &quot;Mo&#x27; Better Blues&quot; (1990), &quot;Jungle Fever&quot; (1991), &quot;Clockers&quot; (1995), &quot;Girl 6&quot; (1996), &quot;He Got Game&quot; (1998), &quot;Summer of Sam&quot; (1999), &quot;She Hate Me&quot; (2004), and &quot;Miracle at St. Anna&quot; (2008).

Turturro has appeared in both comedy and drama films, and engaged in an extended collaboration with the Coen Brothershe appeared in their films &quot;Miller&#x27;s Crossing&quot; (1990), &quot;Barton Fink&quot; (1991, in the lead role), &quot;The Big Lebowski&quot; (1998), and &quot;O Brother, Where Art Thou?&quot; (2000). Turturro has also appeared in several of Adam Sandler&#x27;s movies, such as &quot;Mr. Deeds&quot; (2002) and &quot;You Don&#x27;t Mess with the Zohan&quot; (2008). He played a severely disturbed patient of Jack Nicholson&#x27;s character in the comedy &quot;Anger Management&quot; and played Johnny Depp&#x27;s character&#x27;s antagonist in &quot;Secret Window&quot;.

Turturro hosted &quot;Saturday Night Live&quot; in 1994, where he spoofed his then-recently made film, &quot;Quiz Show&quot;, being told he was ineligible to host unless he answered questions in a booth and if he failed, the honor of hosting would go to Joey Buttafuoco, who witnessed Turturro&#x27;s test. He won an Emmy Award for his portrayal of Adrian Monk&#x27;s brother Ambrose in the USA Network series &quot;Monk&quot;, and reprised the role on numerous occasions. He has also been nominated and won many awards from film organizations such as Screen Actors Guild, Cannes Film Festival, Golden Globes and others.

Turturro produced and directed, as well as acted in, the film &quot;Illuminata&quot; (1999), which also starred his wife, actress Katherine Borowitz. He wrote and directed the film &quot;Romance and Cigarettes&quot; (2005). In 2006 he appeared in Robert De Niro&#x27;s &quot;The Good Shepherd&quot;, and as the Sector 7 agent Seymour Simmons in four films of the &quot;Transformers&quot; live-action series. In 2010, he directed (and had cameo on-screen appearances in) &quot;Passione&quot;, which chronicles the rich musical heritage of Naples, Italy. His stage directorial debut was in October 2011, with the Broadway play &quot;Relatively Speaking&quot;, in which he guided an ensemble of veteran actors in a production of three comedic one-act plays, written by Elaine May, Woody Allen, and Ethan Coen. The cast included Julie Kavner, Marlo Thomas, Mark Linn-Baker, and Steve Guttenberg.

Turturro&#x27;s fifth directorial film &quot;Fading Gigolo&quot; premiered at the Toronto International Film Festival (TIFF) in mid-September 2013. Turturro also acts in the film alongside Woody Allen, who plays a novice pimp overseeing the sex work of Turturro&#x27;s character. During a September 2013 interview, Turturro expressed his intention to draw parallels between sex work and acting, explaining that the latter is a &quot;service business&quot; in which actors are &quot;acting out people&#x27;s wishes or fantasies&quot;. In March 2014, Turturro received the Career Achievement tribute and award at the 31st Edition of the Miami International Film Festival at the Olympia Theater in downtown Miami. Turturro starred in the 2016 miniseries &quot;The Night Of&quot; and received a Primetime Emmy Award nomination. In 2019 Turturro played William of Baskerville in a television adaptation of Umberto Eco&#x27;s &quot;The Name of the Rose&quot;.

In 2022, he appeared in Matt Reeves&#x27; film &quot;The Batman&quot; based on the DC Comics character of the same name as Carmine Falcone. In 2023 he starred as Mickey Sabbath in the off-Broadway adaptation of Philip Roth&#x27;s novel &quot;Sabbath&#x27;s Theater&quot; by The New Group at the Pershing Square Signature Center. Since 2022, Turturro has portrayed Irving Bailiff on the television series &quot;Severance&quot;.

==Personal life==
Turturro&#x27;s brother is actor Nicholas Turturro. Composer and film director Richard Termini and actress Aida Turturro are his cousins. He has two children with his wife, actress Katherine Borowitz, who moved on to a social work career in 2016.

John Turturro participates as a member of the Jury for the New York International Children&#x27;s Film Festival (NYICFF), which is dedicated to screening films for children between the ages of 3 and 18. Turturro holds dual Italian and American citizenship as of January 2011.

He has lived in Park Slope in Brooklyn, New York since 1988.

==Filmography==
===Film===
===Television===
===Video games===
===Audiobooks===
=== Theatre ===
== Awards and nominations ==

==References==
==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q244234" start="0" end="21" title="John Turturro" label="John Michael Turturro"/>
<link wikidata="Q459290" start="122" end="138" title="independent film" label="independent film"/>
<link wikidata="Q56095" start="176" end="189" title="Coen brothers" label="Coen brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q132952" start="191" end="203" title="Adam Sandler" label="Adam Sandler"/>
<link wikidata="Q51566" start="209" end="218" title="Spike Lee" label="Spike Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044427" start="238" end="258" title="Primetime Emmy Awards" label="Primetime Emmy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011547" start="285" end="304" title="Golden Globe Awards" label="Golden Globe Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425483" start="354" end="366" title="Five Corners (film)" label="Five Corners"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141252" start="416" end="434" title="Do the Right Thing" label="Do the Right Thing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1703991" start="455" end="476" title="Mo&amp;#x27; Better Blues" label="Mo&amp;#x27; Better Blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234074" start="497" end="509" title="Jungle Fever" label="Jungle Fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q2268296" start="534" end="542" title="Clockers (film)" label="Clockers"/>
<link wikidata="Q130142" start="594" end="616" title="Miller&amp;#x27;s Crossing" label="Miller&amp;#x27;s Crossing"/>
<link wikidata="Q237215" start="637" end="648" title="Barton Fink" label="Barton Fink"/>
<link wikidata="Q586140" start="684" end="725" title="Cannes Film Festival Award for Best Actor" label="Cannes Film Festival Award for Best Actor"/>
<link wikidata="Q337078" start="733" end="749" title="The Big Lebowski" label="The Big Lebowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q501874" start="774" end="800" title="O Brother, Where Art Thou?" label="O Brother, Where Art Thou?"/>
<link wikidata="Q255742" start="840" end="848" title="Fearless (1993 film)" label="Fearless"/>
<link wikidata="Q651722" start="869" end="878" title="Quiz Show (film)" label="Quiz Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q44727126" start="903" end="914" title="Gloria Bell" label="Gloria Bell"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="943" end="958" title="List of Transformers film series cast and characters#Humans" label="Seymour Simmons"/>
<link wikidata="Q2073466" start="966" end="1002" title="Transformers (film series)" label="&amp;quot;Transformers&amp;quot; film series"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663956" start="1019" end="1034" title="Carmine Falcone" label="Carmine Falcone"/>
<link wikidata="Q61117344" start="1044" end="1054" title="The Batman (film)" label="The Batman"/>
<link wikidata="Q248713" start="1096" end="1107" title="USA Network" label="USA Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q189068" start="1128" end="1132" title="Monk (TV series)" label="Monk"/>
<link wikidata="Q530923" start="1160" end="1180" title="Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Guest Actor in a Comedy Series" label="Primetime Emmy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q23633" start="1209" end="1212" title="HBO" label="HBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q17986725" start="1239" end="1251" title="The Night Of" label="The Night Of"/>
<link wikidata="Q23633" start="1270" end="1273" title="HBO" label="HBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q60752460" start="1291" end="1315" title="The Plot Against America (miniseries)" label="The Plot Against America"/>
<link wikidata="Q62446736" start="1338" end="1347" title="Apple TV+" label="Apple TV+"/>
<link wikidata="Q101096725" start="1370" end="1379" title="Severance (TV series)" label="Severance"/>
<link wikidata="Q4275209" start="1437" end="1440" title="Mac (film)" label="Mac"/>
<link wikidata="Q3796466" start="1461" end="1471" title="Illuminata (film)" label="Illuminata"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092126" start="1492" end="1514" title="Romance and Cigarettes" label="Romance and Cigarettes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5429259" start="1535" end="1548" title="Fading Gigolo" label="Fading Gigolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q26714982" start="1573" end="1588" title="The Jesus Rolls" label="The Jesus Rolls"/>
<link wikidata="Q18419" start="1685" end="1693" title="Brooklyn" label="Brooklyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="1705" end="1728" title="New York City, New York" label="New York City, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="1852" end="1858" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="1879" end="1883" title="jazz" label="jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1929" end="1941" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q51828" start="2172" end="2182" title="Giovinazzo" label="Giovinazzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="2287" end="2296" title="U.S. Navy" label="U.S. Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="2324" end="2332" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q62292" start="2350" end="2358" title="Rosedale, Queens" label="Rosedale"/>
<link wikidata="Q18424" start="2370" end="2386" title="Queens, New York" label="Queens, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603625" start="2441" end="2482" title="State University of New York at New Paltz" label="State University of New York at New Paltz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765120" start="2498" end="2514" title="Bachelor of Arts" label="Bachelor of Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047423" start="2570" end="2590" title="David Geffen School of Drama at Yale University" label="Yale School of Drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q4175466" start="2604" end="2623" title="Master of Fine Arts" label="Master of Fine Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q658371" start="2710" end="2715" title="extra (actor)" label="extra"/>
<link wikidata="Q220780" start="2730" end="2741" title="Raging Bull" label="Raging Bull"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349456" start="2785" end="2805" title="John Patrick Shanley" label="John Patrick Shanley"/>
<link wikidata="Q93157" start="2890" end="2909" title="Eugene O&amp;#x27;Neill" label="Eugene O&amp;#x27;Neill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058828" start="2968" end="2980" title="Off-Broadway" label="Off-Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813995" start="2992" end="3002" title="Obie Award" label="Obie Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q51582" start="3046" end="3062" title="William Friedkin" label="William Friedkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q188473" start="3070" end="3081" title="action film" label="action film"/>
<link wikidata="Q613485" start="3088" end="3111" title="To Live and Die in L.A. (film)" label="To Live and Die in L.A."/>
<link wikidata="Q188772" start="3184" end="3196" title="Willem Dafoe" label="Willem Dafoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q51566" start="3199" end="3208" title="Spike Lee" label="Spike Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425483" start="3252" end="3264" title="Five Corners (film)" label="Five Corners"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141252" start="3312" end="3330" title="Do the Right Thing" label="Do the Right Thing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2526255" start="3415" end="3423" title="film director" label="director"/>
<link wikidata="Q838948" start="3528" end="3534" title="Work of art" label="oeuvre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1703991" start="3550" end="3571" title="Mo&amp;#x27; Better Blues" label="Mo&amp;#x27; Better Blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234074" start="3592" end="3604" title="Jungle Fever" label="Jungle Fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q2268296" start="3625" end="3633" title="Clockers (film)" label="Clockers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2517431" start="3654" end="3660" title="Girl 6 (film)" label="Girl 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q508410" start="3681" end="3692" title="He Got Game" label="He Got Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150713" start="3713" end="3726" title="Summer of Sam" label="Summer of Sam"/>
<link wikidata="Q519592" start="3747" end="3758" title="She Hate Me" label="She Hate Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002100" start="3783" end="3802" title="Miracle at St. Anna" label="Miracle at St. Anna"/>
<link wikidata="Q56095" start="3922" end="3935" title="Coen Brothers" label="Coen Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q130142" start="3968" end="3990" title="Miller&amp;#x27;s Crossing" label="Miller&amp;#x27;s Crossing"/>
<link wikidata="Q237215" start="4011" end="4022" title="Barton Fink" label="Barton Fink"/>
<link wikidata="Q337078" start="4061" end="4077" title="The Big Lebowski" label="The Big Lebowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q501874" start="4102" end="4128" title="O Brother, Where Art Thou?" label="O Brother, Where Art Thou?"/>
<link wikidata="Q132952" start="4184" end="4196" title="Adam Sandler" label="Adam Sandler"/>
<link wikidata="Q59595" start="4226" end="4235" title="Mr. Deeds" label="Mr. Deeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q958417" start="4259" end="4293" title="You Don&amp;#x27;t Mess with the Zohan" label="You Don&amp;#x27;t Mess with the Zohan"/>
<link wikidata="Q39792" start="4350" end="4364" title="Jack Nicholson" label="Jack Nicholson"/>
<link wikidata="Q591556" start="4402" end="4418" title="Anger Management (film)" label="Anger Management"/>
<link wikidata="Q37175" start="4436" end="4447" title="Johnny Depp" label="Johnny Depp"/>
<link wikidata="Q472165" start="4492" end="4505" title="Secret Window" label="Secret Window"/>
<link wikidata="Q651722" start="4623" end="4632" title="Quiz Show (film)" label="Quiz Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q6214300" start="4768" end="4783" title="Joey Buttafuoco" label="Joey Buttafuoco"/>
<link wikidata="Q367237" start="4890" end="4897" title="Ambrose Monk" label="Ambrose"/>
<link wikidata="Q248713" start="4905" end="4916" title="USA Network" label="USA Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q189068" start="4930" end="4934" title="Monk (TV series)" label="Monk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141037" start="5066" end="5085" title="Screen Actors Guild" label="Screen Actors Guild"/>
<link wikidata="Q42369" start="5087" end="5107" title="Cannes Film Festival" label="Cannes Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011547" start="5109" end="5122" title="Golden Globes" label="Golden Globes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3796466" start="5204" end="5214" title="Illuminata (film)" label="Illuminata"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092126" start="5323" end="5345" title="Romance and Cigarettes" label="Romance and Cigarettes"/>
<link wikidata="Q36949" start="5383" end="5397" title="Robert De Niro" label="Robert De Niro"/>
<link wikidata="Q786562" start="5411" end="5428" title="The Good Shepherd (film)" label="The Good Shepherd"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5462" end="5477" title="List of Transformers film series cast and characters#Humans" label="Seymour Simmons"/>
<link wikidata="Q2073466" start="5499" end="5542" title="Transformers (film series)" label="&amp;quot;Transformers&amp;quot; live-action series"/>
<link wikidata="Q3897298" start="5612" end="5620" title="Passione (2010 film)" label="Passione"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634" start="5674" end="5687" title="Naples" label="Naples, Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310814" start="5767" end="5786" title="Relatively Speaking (play anthology)" label="Relatively Speaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q454156" start="5902" end="5912" title="Elaine May" label="Elaine May"/>
<link wikidata="Q25089" start="5914" end="5925" title="Woody Allen" label="Woody Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q56095" start="5931" end="5941" title="Ethan Coen" label="Ethan Coen"/>
<link wikidata="Q228893" start="5961" end="5973" title="Julie Kavner" label="Julie Kavner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1614313" start="5975" end="5987" title="Marlo Thomas" label="Marlo Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366440" start="5989" end="6004" title="Mark Linn-Baker" label="Mark Linn-Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q318685" start="6010" end="6026" title="Steve Guttenberg" label="Steve Guttenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5429259" start="6074" end="6087" title="Fading Gigolo" label="Fading Gigolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q390018" start="6111" end="6153" title="Toronto International Film Festival" label="Toronto International Film Festival (TIFF)"/>
<link wikidata="Q25089" start="6218" end="6229" title="Woody Allen" label="Woody Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q43437" start="6250" end="6254" title="Procuring (prostitution)" label="pimp"/>
<link wikidata="Q3070654" start="6664" end="6697" title="Miami International Film Festival" label="Miami International Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q8652" start="6733" end="6738" title="Miami" label="Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q17986725" start="6786" end="6798" title="The Night Of" label="The Night Of"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044427" start="6820" end="6840" title="Primetime Emmy Award" label="Primetime Emmy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q48967415" start="6903" end="6926" title="The Name of the Rose (miniseries)" label="a television adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q12807" start="6930" end="6941" title="Umberto Eco" label="Umberto Eco"/>
<link wikidata="Q172850" start="6955" end="6975" title="The Name of the Rose" label="The Name of the Rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q931613" start="7008" end="7019" title="Matt Reeves" label="Matt Reeves"/>
<link wikidata="Q61117344" start="7037" end="7047" title="The Batman (film)" label="The Batman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2924461" start="7067" end="7076" title="DC Comics" label="DC Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2695156" start="7077" end="7103" title="Batman" label="character of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663956" start="7107" end="7122" title="Carmine Falcone" label="Carmine Falcone"/>
<link wikidata="Q187019" start="7195" end="7206" title="Philip Roth" label="Philip Roth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3795983" start="7226" end="7248" title="Sabbath&amp;#x27;s Theater" label="Sabbath&amp;#x27;s Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q7753621" start="7258" end="7271" title="The New Group" label="The New Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q54933032" start="7279" end="7311" title="Pershing Square Signature Center" label="Pershing Square Signature Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q101096725" start="7394" end="7403" title="Severance (TV series)" label="Severance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2342292" start="7463" end="7480" title="Nicholas Turturro" label="Nicholas Turturro"/>
<link wikidata="Q7329425" start="7509" end="7524" title="Richard Termini" label="Richard Termini"/>
<link wikidata="Q115134" start="7537" end="7550" title="Aida Turturro" label="Aida Turturro"/>
<link wikidata="Q7013632" start="7737" end="7789" title="New York International Children&amp;#x27;s Film Festival" label="New York International Children&amp;#x27;s Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q2607610" start="7971" end="7981" title="Park Slope" label="Park Slope"/>
<link wikidata="Q18419" start="7985" end="7993" title="Brooklyn" label="Brooklyn"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="308581" wikidata="Q372907" url="?curid=308581" title="Violin Concerto (Tchaikovsky)">
<text>The Violin Concerto in D major, Op. 35 was the only concerto for violin composed by Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky. Composed in 1878, it is one of the best-known violin concertos.

The concerto was composed in Clarens, Switzerland, where Tchaikovsky was recovering from the fallout of his ill-fated marriage. The concerto was influenced by Édouard Lalo&#x27;s &quot;Symphonie espagnole&quot; and was composed with the help of Tchaikovsky&#x27;s pupil and probable former lover, Iosif Kotek. Despite Tchaikovsky&#x27;s original intention to dedicate the work to Kotek, he instead dedicated it to Leopold Auer due to societal pressures. Auer, however, refused to perform it, and the premiere was given by Adolph Brodsky in 1881 to mixed reviews. The piece, which Tchaikovsky later rededicated to Brodsky, has since become a staple of the violin repertoire. The concerto has three movements, is scored for solo violin and orchestra, and typically runs for about 35 minutes.

==History==
The piece was written in Clarens, Switzerland, a resort on the shores of Lake Geneva, where Tchaikovsky had gone to recover from the depression brought on by his disastrous marriage to Antonina Miliukova. He was working on his Piano Sonata in G major but finding it heavy going. Presently he was joined there by his composition pupil, the violinist Iosif Kotek, who had been in Berlin for violin studies with Joseph Joachim. The two played works for violin and piano together, including a violin-and-piano arrangement of Édouard Lalo&#x27;s &quot;Symphonie espagnole&quot;, which they may have played through the day after Kotek&#x27;s arrival. This work may have been the catalyst for the composition of the concerto. Tchaikovsky wrote to his patroness Nadezhda von Meck, &quot;It [the &quot;Symphonie espagnole&quot;] has a lot of freshness, lightness, of piquant rhythms, of beautiful and excellently harmonized melodies... He [Lalo], in the same way as Léo Delibes and Bizet, does not strive after profundity, but he carefully avoids routine, seeks out new forms, and thinks more about &quot;musical beauty&quot; than about observing established traditions, as do the Germans.&quot; Tchaikovsky authority David Brown writes that Tchaikovsky &quot;might almost have been writing the prescription for the violin concerto he himself was about to compose&quot;.

Tchaikovsky made swift, steady progress on the concerto, as by this point in his rest cure he had regained his inspiration, and the work was completed within a month despite the middle movement getting a complete rewrite (a version of the original movement was preserved as the first of the three pieces for violin and piano, &quot;Souvenir d&#x27;un lieu cher&quot;). Since Tchaikovsky was not a violinist, he sought the advice of Kotek on the completion of the solo part. &quot;How lovingly he&#x27;s busying himself with my concerto!&quot; Tchaikovsky wrote to his brother Anatoly on the day he completed the new slow movement. &quot;It goes without saying that I would have been able to do nothing without him. He plays it marvelously.&quot;

=== Dedication ===
Tchaikovsky wanted to dedicate the concerto to Iosif Kotek, but felt constrained by the gossip this would undoubtedly cause about the true nature of his relationship with the younger man. (They were almost certainly lovers at one point, and Tchaikovsky was always at pains to disguise his homosexuality from the general public.) In 1881, he broke with Kotek after the latter refused to play the Violin Concerto, believing it was poorly received and would do damage to his budding career. However, he did dedicate to Kotek the &quot;Valse-Scherzo&quot; for violin and orchestra, written in 1877, on its publication in 1878.

Tchaikovsky intended the first performance to be given by Leopold Auer, for whom he had written his &quot;Sérénade mélancolique&quot; for violin and orchestra, and accordingly dedicated the work to him. Auer refused, however, meaning that the planned premiere for March 1879 had to be cancelled and a new soloist found. In 1912, Auer told his version of the story to the New York magazine &quot;Musical Courier&quot;:

When Tchaikovsky came to me one evening, about thirty years ago [actually thirty-four], and presented me with a roll of music, great was my astonishment on finding this proved to be the Violin Concerto, dedicated to me, completed and already in print. [This was the reduction for violin and piano, printed in 1878; the publication of the full score did not take place until 1888.] My first feeling was one of gratitude for this proof of his sympathy toward me, which honored me as an artist. On closer acquaintance with the composition, I regretted that the great composer had not shown it to me before committing it to print. Much unpleasantness might then have been spared us both...

Warmly as I had championed the symphonic works of the young composer (who was at that time not universally recognized), I could not feel the same enthusiasm for the Violin Concerto, with the exception of the first movement; still less could I place it on the same level as his purely orchestral compositions. I am still of the same opinion. My delay in bringing the concerto before the public was partly due to this doubt in my mind as to its intrinsic worth, and partly that I would have found it necessary, for purely technical reasons, to make some slight alterations in the passages of the solo part. This delicate and difficult task I subsequently undertook, and re-edited the violin solo part, and it is this edition which has been played by me, and also by my pupils, up to the present day. It is incorrect to state that I had declared the concerto in its original form unplayable. What I did say was that some of the passages were not suited to the character of the instrument, and that, however perfectly rendered, they would not sound as well as the composer had imagined. From this purely aesthetic point of view only I found some of it impracticable, and for this reason I re-edited the solo part.

Tchaikovsky, hurt at my delay in playing the concerto in public and quite rightly too (I have often deeply regretted it, and before his death received absolution from him), now proceeded to have a second edition published, and dedicated the concerto this time to Adolf Brodsky, who brought it out in Vienna, where it met with much adverse criticism, especially from Hanslick. The only explanation I can give of the orchestral score still bearing my name is that when the original publisher, P. Jurgenson, of Moscow, to suit the composer, republished the concerto, he brought out the piano score in the new edition, but waited to republish the orchestral score until the first edition of it should be exhausted. This is the only way I can solve the problem of the double dedication.

... The concerto has made its way in the world, and after all, that is the most important thing. It is impossible to please everybody.

=== Premiere ===
The first performance was eventually given by Adolph Brodsky on 4 December 1881 in Vienna, conducted by Hans Richter. Tchaikovsky changed the dedication to Brodsky. Critical reaction was mixed. The influential critic Eduard Hanslick called it &quot;long and pretentious&quot; and said that it &quot;brought us face to face with the revolting thought that music can exist which stinks to the ear&quot;, labeling the last movement &quot;odorously Russian&quot;. Hanslick also wrote that &quot;the violin was not played but beaten black and blue&quot;.

The violinist who did much early work to make the work popular with the public and win a place for it in the repertoire was Karel Halíř (who in 1905 was to premiere the revised version of the Sibelius Violin Concerto). When Tchaikovsky attended a Leipzig performance of the work in 1888, with Haliř as soloist, he called the event &quot;a memorable day&quot;.

The Polish premiere of the concerto was given in Warsaw on 14 January 1892, with Stanisław Barcewicz on violin and the composer conducting. They also played the &quot;Sérénade mélancolique&quot; for the first time in Poland on that occasion.

==Instrumentation==
The concerto is scored for solo violin, two flutes, two oboes, two clarinets in A and B-flat, two bassoons, four horns in F, two trumpets in D, optional trombone, timpani and strings.

==Form==
The piece is in three movements:

The second and third movements are played &quot;attacca&quot;, with no break between them. A typical performance runs approximately 35 minutes.

=== Allegro moderato ===
The first movement is in sonata form with elements of a theme and variations and can be divided into an introduction, exposition, development, recapitulation and coda. The brief introduction is given by the orchestra in D major; as with the first piano concerto, its theme never appears again. The soloist responds with a cadenza-like entrance, and begins the exposition with the introduction of the &quot;cantabile&quot; main theme. After virtuosic passagework including fast-running scales and triads, a calm second theme is introduced in A major. The mood gradually intensifies and builds up to a majestic climax, with the main theme being played by the full orchestra, which has been ranked among the most satisfying &quot;arrivals&quot; in literature.

The development section begins with a series of seemingly random chromatic shifts, ending in C major, where the solo violin processes a delicate variation of the main theme. A heroic orchestral tutti of the main theme in F major follows, building up to Tchaikovsky&#x27;s own, technically demanding cadenza that makes use of some of the violin&#x27;s highest notes. After the cadenza, which ends in a trill, the orchestra re-enters and the recapitulation begins with the main theme once again in D major. After a reprise of the second theme, also in D major, &quot;orchestra and soloist race to the end&quot; in a fast-paced coda.

=== &quot;Canzonetta&quot;: Andante ===
The second movement is in a relatively slow triple meter and somber in tone. It begins with a short chorale-like introduction in the woodwinds, followed by the introduction of the first theme in G minor in the solo violin; a simple &quot;cantabile&quot; melody that is &quot;sweet yet melancholy&quot;. A brief orchestral interlude leads to a brighter section in E major. A reprise of the first theme leads to the transition, a series of orchestral chords that fade into the third movement, which follows without pause (&quot;attacca subito&quot;).

=== &quot;Finale&quot;: Allegro vivacissimo ===
The final movement uses distinctly Russian elements: a drone-like accompaniment, the initial theme on the G-string that gives the music a &quot;deep, resonant, and slightly gritty sound&quot;, a tempo that gets faster and faster, a &quot;lyric folk-like melody&quot; inspired by Russian folk themes, and repetitive thematic loops. It begins with a lively orchestral intro, after which the solo violin leads into the dancing main theme in D major. A slightly calmer section (&quot;Poco meno mosso&quot;) in A major introduces the second theme, which is processed in a series of variations. The soloist accelerates (&quot;Poco a poco stringendo&quot;) to return to the main theme in F major, followed by a reprise of the second theme in G major. The main theme appears once more, and leads to a highly virtuosic coda in D major that concludes the work in a grand fashion.

==Notes==
===Sources===
* 
* 

==External links==
* 
* Tchaikovsky Research
* Listening guide to the Tchaikovsky Violin Concerto, ABC Classic FM</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q372907" start="4" end="19" title="Violin Concerto (Tchaikovsky)" label="Violin Concerto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124006" start="23" end="30" title="D major" label="D major"/>
<link wikidata="Q385271" start="32" end="35" title="Opus number" label="Op."/>
<link wikidata="Q7315" start="84" end="108" title="Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky" label="Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q2810562" start="122" end="126" title="1878 in music" label="1878"/>
<link wikidata="Q633441" start="156" end="171" title="violin concerto" label="violin concerto"/>
<link wikidata="Q178508" start="204" end="211" title="Clarens, Switzerland" label="Clarens"/>
<link wikidata="Q224002" start="334" end="346" title="Édouard Lalo" label="Édouard Lalo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071972" start="360" end="379" title="Symphonie espagnole" label="Symphonie espagnole"/>
<link wikidata="Q471989" start="472" end="483" title="Iosif Kotek" label="Iosif Kotek"/>
<link wikidata="Q368583" start="589" end="601" title="Leopold Auer" label="Leopold Auer"/>
<link wikidata="Q365287" start="697" end="711" title="Adolph Brodsky" label="Adolph Brodsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q929848" start="872" end="881" title="Movement (music)" label="movements"/>
<link wikidata="Q178508" start="1003" end="1023" title="Clarens, Switzerland" label="Clarens, Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6403" start="1051" end="1062" title="Lake Geneva" label="Lake Geneva"/>
<link wikidata="Q4776343" start="1163" end="1181" title="Antonina Miliukova" label="Antonina Miliukova"/>
<link wikidata="Q3115026" start="1205" end="1228" title="Piano Sonata in G major (Tchaikovsky)" label="Piano Sonata in G major"/>
<link wikidata="Q471989" start="1327" end="1338" title="Iosif Kotek" label="Iosif Kotek"/>
<link wikidata="Q159976" start="1387" end="1401" title="Joseph Joachim" label="Joseph Joachim"/>
<link wikidata="Q224002" start="1499" end="1511" title="Édouard Lalo" label="Édouard Lalo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071972" start="1525" end="1544" title="Symphonie espagnole" label="Symphonie espagnole"/>
<link wikidata="Q234041" start="1732" end="1749" title="Nadezhda von Meck" label="Nadezhda von Meck"/>
<link wikidata="Q207951" start="1935" end="1946" title="Léo Delibes" label="Léo Delibes"/>
<link wikidata="Q56158" start="1951" end="1956" title="Georges Bizet" label="Bizet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5231817" start="2187" end="2198" title="David Brown (musicologist)" label="David Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492389" start="2673" end="2701" title="Souvenir d&amp;#x27;un lieu cher" label="Souvenir d&amp;#x27;un lieu cher"/>
<link wikidata="Q3554141" start="3639" end="3652" title="Valse-Scherzo (Tchaikovsky)" label="Valse-Scherzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q368583" start="3789" end="3801" title="Leopold Auer" label="Leopold Auer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3511386" start="3837" end="3858" title="Sérénade mélancolique" label="Sérénade mélancolique"/>
<link wikidata="Q6942504" start="4126" end="4141" title="Musical Courier" label="Musical Courier"/>
<link wikidata="Q7117345" start="6539" end="6551" title="P. Jurgenson" label="P. Jurgenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q365287" start="7030" end="7044" title="Adolph Brodsky" label="Adolph Brodsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q366147" start="7088" end="7100" title="Hans Richter (conductor)" label="Hans Richter"/>
<link wikidata="Q84246" start="7201" end="7216" title="Eduard Hanslick" label="Eduard Hanslick"/>
<link wikidata="Q515310" start="7659" end="7670" title="Karel Halíř" label="Karel Halíř"/>
<link wikidata="Q45682" start="7727" end="7735" title="Jean Sibelius" label="Sibelius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1468572" start="7736" end="7751" title="Violin Concerto (Sibelius)" label="Violin Concerto"/>
<link wikidata="Q2276808" start="7977" end="7996" title="Stanisław Barcewicz" label="Stanisław Barcewicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q3511386" start="8063" end="8084" title="Sérénade mélancolique" label="Sérénade mélancolique"/>
<link wikidata="Q209554" start="8203" end="8209" title="Western concert flute" label="flutes"/>
<link wikidata="Q8377" start="8215" end="8219" title="oboe" label="oboe"/>
<link wikidata="Q8343" start="8226" end="8234" title="clarinet" label="clarinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q159998" start="8257" end="8264" title="bassoon" label="bassoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q163759" start="8272" end="8277" title="French horn" label="horns"/>
<link wikidata="Q8338" start="8288" end="8296" title="trumpets" label="trumpets"/>
<link wikidata="Q8350" start="8312" end="8320" title="trombone" label="trombone"/>
<link wikidata="Q189737" start="8322" end="8329" title="timpani" label="timpani"/>
<link wikidata="Q2997126" start="8334" end="8341" title="string section" label="strings"/>
<link wikidata="Q929848" start="8375" end="8384" title="Movement (music)" label="movements"/>
<link wikidata="Q3255006" start="8435" end="8442" title="attacca" label="attacca"/>
<link wikidata="Q212044" start="8582" end="8593" title="sonata form" label="sonata form"/>
<link wikidata="Q214981" start="8613" end="8633" title="theme and variations" label="theme and variations"/>
<link wikidata="Q3800792" start="8661" end="8673" title="Introduction (music)" label="introduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384742" start="8675" end="8685" title="Exposition (music)" label="exposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266967" start="8687" end="8698" title="Musical development" label="development"/>
<link wikidata="Q4393508" start="8700" end="8714" title="Recapitulation (music)" label="recapitulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q852466" start="8719" end="8723" title="Coda (music)" label="coda"/>
<link wikidata="Q162935" start="8798" end="8818" title="Piano Concerto No. 1 (Tchaikovsky)" label="first piano concerto"/>
<link wikidata="Q913079" start="8963" end="8972" title="cantabile" label="cantabile"/>
<link wikidata="Q179651" start="9042" end="9048" title="Scale (music)" label="scales"/>
<link wikidata="Q944899" start="9053" end="9059" title="Triad (music)" label="triads"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069389" start="9614" end="9621" title="cadenza" label="cadenza"/>
<link wikidata="Q75859" start="9716" end="9721" title="Trill (music)" label="trill"/>
<link wikidata="Q724473" start="10087" end="10094" title="chorale" label="chorale"/>
<link wikidata="Q893474" start="10640" end="10645" title="Drone (music)" label="drone"/>
<link wikidata="Q214981" start="11162" end="11172" title="Variation (music)" label="variations"/>
<link wikidata="Q2818999" start="11586" end="11600" title="ABC Classic FM" label="ABC Classic FM"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="308585" wikidata="Q936076" url="?curid=308585" title="W Virginis variable">
<text>W Virginis variables are a subclass of Type II Cepheids which exhibit pulsation periods between 10–20 days, and are of spectral class F6 – K2.

They were first recognized as being distinct from classical Cepheids by Walter Baade in 1942, in a study of Cepheids in the Andromeda Galaxy that proposed that stars in that galaxy were of two populations.

==See also==
*Low-dimensional chaos in stellar pulsations

==References==
==External links==
* AAVSO Variable Star of the Month. W Virginis: Spring 2003 PDF / HTML
* OGLE Atlas of Variable Star Light Curves - W Virginis stars</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q936076" start="0" end="20" title="W Virginis variable" label="W Virginis variables"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393939" start="39" end="54" title="Type II Cepheid" label="Type II Cepheid"/>
<link wikidata="Q25377588" start="119" end="133" title="spectral classification" label="spectral class"/>
<link wikidata="Q57299" start="216" end="228" title="Wilhelm Heinrich Walter Baade" label="Walter Baade"/>
<link wikidata="Q2469" start="268" end="284" title="Andromeda Galaxy" label="Andromeda Galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q353834" start="365" end="408" title="Low-dimensional chaos in stellar pulsations" label="Low-dimensional chaos in stellar pulsations"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="308589" wikidata="Q13418271" url="?curid=308589" title="Shadowman">
<text>Shadowman or Shadow Man may refer to:
==Film==
* &quot;Streets of Shadows&quot; (1953 film), released as &quot;Shadow Man&quot; in the U.S.
* &quot;Shadow Man&quot; (1988 film), a Dutch-British film with Tom Hulce
* &quot;Shadow Man&quot; (2006 film), a 2006 Steven Seagal film
* &quot;Shadow Man&quot; (2014 film), an Indian film
* &quot;Shadowman&quot; (2017 film), a 2017 documentary about street artist Richard Hambleton
*&quot;Nuits Rouges&quot; or &quot;Shadowman&quot;, a 1974 film by Georges Franju

==Television==
*&quot;The Shadow Man&quot;, a 1985 episode of &quot;The Twilight Zone&quot; directed by Joe Dante
*&quot;Shadowmen&quot;, a 1992 episode of &quot;The Young Riders&quot;

==Video games==
*&quot;Shadow Man&quot; (video game), a 1999 video game by Acclaim Entertainment loosely based on the comic book
*&quot;Shadow Man: 2econd Coming&quot;, a 2002 sequel
*Shadow Man, a boss in &quot;Mega Man 3&quot;

==Music==
*&quot;Shadowman&quot; (Steve Walsh album), 2005
*&quot;Shadowman&quot; (Link Wray album)
*&quot;Shadow Man&quot; (Johnny Clegg &amp; Savuka album), 1988
* Shadow Man (Tim Berne album)
*&quot;Shadow Man&quot; (song), a song written by David Bowie in 1971
*&quot;Shadow Man&quot;, a song by the Afro Celt Sound System from &quot;Volume 3: Further in Time&quot;

==Literature==
*&quot;Shadowman&quot; (comics), a comic book series and character from Valiant Comics
*&quot;Shadowman&quot;, a 1993 horror novel by Dennis Etchison
*&quot;Shadow Man&quot;, a 1996 science fiction novel by Melissa Scott

==Other==
*Shadowman paintings, street art shadow paintings made by Richard Hambleton in New York City in the early 1980s

==See also==
*Shadow people, creatures of both modern folklore and paranormal popular culture </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q13418271" start="0" end="9" title="Shadowman" label="Shadowman"/>
<link wikidata="Q13418271" start="13" end="23" title="Shadowman" label="Shadow Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197781" start="49" end="91" title="Street of Shadows (1953 film)" label="&amp;quot;Streets of Shadows&amp;quot; (1953 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7460549" start="142" end="176" title="Shadow Man (1988 film)" label="&amp;quot;Shadow Man&amp;quot; (1988 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033263" start="216" end="250" title="Shadow Man (2006 film)" label="&amp;quot;Shadow Man&amp;quot; (2006 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16254071" start="280" end="314" title="Shadow Man (2014 film)" label="&amp;quot;Shadow Man&amp;quot; (2014 film)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="333" end="366" title="Shadowman (2017 film)" label="&amp;quot;Shadowman&amp;quot; (2017 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q765921" start="432" end="444" title="Nuits Rouges" label="Nuits Rouges"/>
<link wikidata="Q3255565" start="530" end="544" title="The Shadow Man" label="The Shadow Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q2118405" start="670" end="686" title="The Young Riders" label="The Young Riders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274056" start="711" end="746" title="Shadow Man (video game)" label="&amp;quot;Shadow Man&amp;quot; (video game)"/>
<link wikidata="" start="830" end="855" title="Shadow Man: 2econd Coming" label="Shadow Man: 2econd Coming"/>
<link wikidata="Q2014874" start="906" end="916" title="Mega Man 3" label="Mega Man 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q7460749" start="935" end="976" title="Shadowman (Steve Walsh album)" label="&amp;quot;Shadowman&amp;quot; (Steve Walsh album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q60790941" start="984" end="1023" title="Shadowman (Link Wray album)" label="&amp;quot;Shadowman&amp;quot; (Link Wray album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3481161" start="1025" end="1081" title="Shadow Man (Johnny Clegg &amp;amp; Savuka album)" label="&amp;quot;Shadow Man&amp;quot; (Johnny Clegg &amp;amp; Savuka album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q17032715" start="1090" end="1118" title="Shadow Man (Tim Berne album)" label="Shadow Man (Tim Berne album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7460552" start="1120" end="1149" title="Shadow Man (song)" label="&amp;quot;Shadow Man&amp;quot; (song)"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1262" end="1287" title="Volume 3: Further in Time" label="Volume 3: Further in Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q3481176" start="1311" end="1341" title="Shadowman (comics)" label="&amp;quot;Shadowman&amp;quot; (comics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5258392" start="1444" end="1459" title="Dennis Etchison" label="Dennis Etchison"/>
<link wikidata="Q1919410" start="1517" end="1530" title="Melissa Scott" label="Melissa Scott"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1600" end="1617" title="Richard Hambleton#Shadowman paintings" label="Richard Hambleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2566867" start="1669" end="1682" title="Shadow people" label="Shadow people"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="308590" wikidata="Q1049502" url="?curid=308590" title="Hudson Soft">
<text>was a Japanese video game company that released numerous games for video game consoles, home computers and mobile phones, mainly from the 1980s to the 2000s. It was headquartered in the Midtown Tower in Tokyo, with an additional office in the Hudson Building in Sapporo. Hudson Soft&#x27;s mascot is a bee named Hachisuke.

Hudson Soft was founded on May 18, 1973. Initially, it dealt with personal computer products, but later expanded to the development and publishing of video games, mobile content, video game peripherals and music recording. Primarily a video game publisher, it internally developed many of the video games it released while outsourcing others to external companies. It is known for series such as &quot;Bomberman&quot;, &quot;Adventure Island&quot;, &quot;Star Soldier&quot;, &quot;Bonk&quot; and &quot;Bloody Roar&quot;. Hudson also developed video games released by other publishers such as the &quot;Mario Party&quot; series from Nintendo.

Hudson Soft made the TurboGrafx-16 in association with NEC, to compete against Nintendo, Sega, and SNK, while continuing making games on other platforms, as a third-party developer.

Hudson Soft was acquired by Konami on April 1, 2011, becoming a sister company to flagship Konami subsidiary Konami Digital Entertainment. On March 1, 2012, Hudson Soft merged with Konami Digital Entertainment, which ended up as the surviving entity. Konami owns the assets of Hudson and has since rereleased its video game back catalogue on different occasions.

==History==
Hudson Soft Ltd. was founded in Toyohira-ku, Sapporo, Japan on May 18, 1973, by brothers Yuji and Hiroshi Kudo. The founders grew up admiring trains, and named the business after their favourite, the Hudson locomotives (called the &quot;4-6-4&quot;, and especially Japanese C62).

Hudson began as an amateur radio shop called CQ Hudson (CQハドソン), selling radio telecommunications devices and art photographs. Yuji Kudo had originally planned to start a coffee shop, but there was already one in the same building, resulting in the decision to change to a wireless radio shop at the eleventh hour. Although the Kudo brothers had university education, neither had studied in business management. That factor, combined with the difficulty to find trustworthy people to accompany the Kudos in their venture, meant that Hudson was almost always in the red each month during its era exclusively as a radio shop.

In September 1975, Hudson began selling personal computer-related products and in March 1978 started developing and selling video game packages. At that time, many amateur radio shops were switching to the sales of personal computers because they deal with the same electronic equipment. CQ Hudson would continue to operate for decades in Sapporo until Hudson Soft closed the shop in May 2001.

In the late 1970s and early 1980s, Hudson Soft favoured a quantity-over-quality approach for the marketing of video games. At one point, the company released up to 30 different computer software titles per month; none of which were hugely successful. Things changed in late 1983, when Hudson started to prioritise quality-over-quantity. Hudson became Nintendo&#x27;s first third-party software vendor for the Family Computer and its title for this console, &quot;Lode Runner&quot;, sold 1.2 million units after its 1984 release.

The business continued developing video games on the Famicom and computer platforms (MSX, NEC PC-8801 and ZX Spectrum, among others). &quot;Bomberman&quot; was released in December of this year on the Famicom and was considered a &quot;big hit&quot; by Hudson Soft.

In July 1987, Hudson developed the &quot;C62 System&quot; and collaborated with NEC to develop the PC Engine video game console. It achieved a second-best success to Famicom in Japan, but its release as the TurboGrafx-16 in North America had less market share than Nintendo&#x27;s new Super NES or Sega&#x27;s new Genesis. In 1990, Hudson Soft developed and published video games for an array of systems. In 1994, the 32-bit semiconductor chip &quot;HuC62&quot; was independently developed by Hudson and used in NEC&#x27;s PC-FX video game console.

In 2004, Hudson started a joint venture with Flying Tiger Entertainment for 25 titles.
Hudson Soft relocated its main office to Tokyo in 2005, although the Sapporo headquarters remained in operation as a secondary office.

Hudson Soft lost several key people starting in the mid-2000s. Co-founder Hiroshi Kudo left the company in November 2004 following financial losses. Shinichi Nakamoto, who was with the company since 1978 and creator of the &quot;Bomberman&quot; series, followed suit in 2006. Veteran Takahashi Meijin resigned in May 2011; he had joined Hudson Soft in 1982. Around 2010–2011, many employees migrated to Nintendo&#x27;s restructured NDcube subsidiary which was headed by Hidetoshi Endo, himself a former Hudson Soft president.

===Relationship with Konami===
The relation between Hudson Soft and Konami can be traced to at least as early as 1985, when Hudson ported Konami&#x27;s arcade game &quot;Pooyan&quot; to the MSX and Famicom. But the acquisition process of Hudson Soft by Konami would only begin in 2001.

Hudson Soft was severely hit by the collapse of its main bank Hokkaido Takushoku. Seeking new financing alternatives, Hudson Soft entered the stock market for the first time in December 2000, listing on the NASDAQ Japan Exchange. This led to Konami purchasing a stock allocation of 5.6 million shares in August 2001, becoming the company&#x27;s largest shareholder. Within the terms of this purchase, Hudson acquired the Sapporo division of Konami Computer Entertainment Studio, renaming it Hudson Studio.

In April 2005, capital was increased via an allocation of 3 million shares from a third party. Konami Corporation, holding 53.99% of all Hudson stock, became Hudson&#x27;s majority shareholder and parent company. Hudson Soft continued to publish video games while working closely with Konami, who became Hudson&#x27;s distributor in Japan.

On April 1, 2011, Hudson Soft became a wholly owned subsidiary of Konami. Its American division, Hudson Entertainment, was liquidated in the process.
On March 1, 2012, Hudson Soft merged with Konami Digital Entertainment, with its music business absorbed into KME Corporation. The move was not a unilateral decision from Konami, but rather a voluntary merger agreed by the two companies during a board meeting held on January 12, 2012. The main reason for the dissolution of Hudson Soft was the consolidation of the operations of Hudson and Konami into a single company.

Despite the demise of Hudson Soft, Konami had planned for products to continue being developed and offered under the Hudson brand. The Hudson website was even initially retained and maintained by Konami. By early 2014, however, Konami had retired the website. The pre-2005 headquarters of Hudson Soft in Sapporo continued to operate as a branch of Konami well after the absorption until it closed in 2014. In 2015, Konami sold the Sapporo building that had long been the headquarters of Hudson Soft.

==Caravan competitions==
On a yearly basis from 1985 to 2000, and sporadically since, Hudson Soft has held a games competition across Japan known as the &quot;Hudson All-Japan Caravan Festival&quot;. Most years the competition focused around a single game, with all of the initial years of 1985 to 1992 except 1988 being &quot;shoot &#x27;em ups&quot;. During these years, the Caravan can be seen as a hallmark of Hudson&#x27;s popularity. Later Caravans were less popular and featured less punishing games. Several of these later Caravans focused on Hudson Soft&#x27;s popular &quot;Bomberman&quot; series.

Many of the early shoot &#x27;em up games used for the Caravan competition included two-minute and five-minute modes built into the cartridges, to allow potential competitors to practice prior to the competitions.

*1985 - &quot;Star Force&quot; for the Famicom became the first game featured for the summer competitions held within Japan.
*1986 - &quot;Star Soldier&quot; for the Famicom became the second competition game.
*1987 - &quot;Starship Hector&quot; (In Japan, simply &quot;Hector &#x27;87&quot;) was the third and last Famicom game featured as the Hudson Caravan moved onto the newer PC Engine. The first three were reproduced in &quot;Hudson Caravan Collection&quot; for the Super Famicom and &quot;Hudson Best Collection&quot; for the Game Boy Advance
*1988 - &quot;Power League&quot; (&quot;World Class Baseball&quot; in the USA) became the first PC Engine competition game, unusual for the competition being a sports game rather than a shooter.
*1989 - &quot;Gunhed&quot; (&quot;Blazing Lazers&quot;) for the PC Engine was the competition game. A small number of cartridges were produced for the competition under the name &quot;Gunhed Taikai (Special Edition)&quot; and are very rare and expensive for the most hardcore of collectors to find.
*1990 - &quot;Super Star Soldier&quot; for the PC Engine
*1991 - &quot;Final Soldier&quot; for the PC Engine
*1992 - &quot;Soldier Blade&quot; for the PC Engine would be the last of the popular caravan competitions as later events were held using the more casual &quot;Bomberman&quot; and other games fittingly popular at the time. The PC Engine games from &#x27;90, &#x27;91, and &#x27;92 were re-released as the &quot;PC Engine Best Collection - Soldier Collection&quot; for the PSP.

==Subsidiaries==
===Hudson Studio===
A division located in Sapporo. Originally formed as a division of Konami Computer Entertainment Studio, it was acquired by Hudson on July 26, 2001.

===Hudson Soft USA===
Hudson Soft&#x27;s first North American publishing division, formed in 1988 and originally headquartered in South San Francisco. It had published video games for the Nintendo Entertainment System, Super NES and Game Boy.

In late 1995, Hudson Soft USA sold off the rights for all of its yet-to-be-released games to Acclaim Entertainment and moved its headquarters to Seattle, Washington, before closing down by the end of the year.

===Hudson Entertainment, Inc.===
Hudson Soft&#x27;s second North American publishing division, reestablished by John Brandstetter of Flying Tiger and formed in November 2003 as the successor to Hudson Soft USA and headquartered in Brea California at Flying Tiger&#x27;s Headquarters. Then it was moved to San Mateo, California. Starting out as a video game publisher for mobile content, it expanded into console video games in 2007.

On July 23, 2003, Hudson Soft announced the start of its North American mobile phone Java game service, GameMaster, which was created by Flying Tiger for AT&amp;T&#x27;s mMode, and NTT DoCoMo effective on July 28, 2003.

Hudson Entertainment ceased operations on March 31, 2011, after Konami&#x27;s acquisition of the parent company.

===Hudson Music Entertainment===
Hudson Soft&#x27;s music recording label unit. Absorbed on March 1, 2012, into KME Corporation, the music subsidiary of Konami Digital Entertainment.

==Video game releases==

Hudson Soft is responsible for series such as &quot;Bomberman&quot;, &quot;Bonk&quot;, &quot;Star Soldier&quot;, and &quot;Adventure Island&quot;.

Hudson also released a long-running and popular video game series in Japan. &quot;Far East of Eden&quot; was a classic RPG set in a fictionalized feudal Japan. The series was up to its fourth main entry when Hudson was absorbed into Konami. The second entry in the series was widely regarded as one of the best RPGs ever released, ranked 12th by &quot;Famitsu&quot; among all games released in Japan. Hudson Soft also created the long-running and critically acclaimed &quot;Momotaro Dentetsu&quot; series, a board game-style video game centered around business transactions. 16 games in the series released in Japan. Before its absorption, Hudson had re-released some of its first hit games for the GameCube in Japan, including &quot;Adventure Island&quot;, &quot;Star Soldier&quot;, and &quot;Lode Runner&quot;.

Hudson had a long history of creating games for other companies. The most notable of these were the &quot;Mario Party&quot; games, which they developed for Nintendo. They developed the first eight console installments and two handheld spin-offs; however, due to Hudson being acquired by Konami, &quot;Mario Party 9&quot; and all games after that have been developed by Nintendo subsidiary NDcube, which consists of many former Hudson employees. Hudson also developed &quot;Fuzion Frenzy 2&quot; for Microsoft, which was released for the Xbox 360 in January 2007. &quot;Bomberman 64: The Second Attack&quot; was published by Vatical Entertainment, unlike the former two games on the Nintendo 64 which were both published by Nintendo.

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==
*Official website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1150357" start="186" end="199" title="Midtown Tower" label="Midtown Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q1490" start="203" end="208" title="Tokyo" label="Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q37951" start="262" end="269" title="Sapporo" label="Sapporo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3444160" start="726" end="735" title="Bomberman" label="Bomberman"/>
<link wikidata="Q568489" start="749" end="765" title="Adventure Island (video game)" label="Adventure Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q7687056" start="779" end="791" title="Star Soldier" label="Star Soldier"/>
<link wikidata="Q7678170" start="805" end="809" title="Bonk (series)" label="Bonk"/>
<link wikidata="Q261446" start="826" end="837" title="Bloody Roar" label="Bloody Roar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196737" start="926" end="937" title="Mario Party" label="Mario Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057377" start="988" end="1001" title="TurboGrafx-16" label="TurboGrafx-16"/>
<link wikidata="Q219203" start="1022" end="1025" title="NEC" label="NEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q8093" start="1046" end="1054" title="Nintendo" label="Nintendo"/>
<link wikidata="Q122741" start="1056" end="1060" title="Sega" label="Sega"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073880" start="1066" end="1069" title="SNK" label="SNK"/>
<link wikidata="Q210167" start="1126" end="1147" title="Video game developer" label="third-party developer"/>
<link wikidata="Q45700" start="1178" end="1184" title="Konami" label="Konami"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1259" end="1287" title="Konami#Konami Digital Entertainment" label="Konami Digital Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134225" start="1558" end="1578" title="Toyohira-ku, Sapporo" label="Toyohira-ku, Sapporo"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="1580" end="1585" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2815074" start="1763" end="1768" title="4-6-4" label="4-6-4"/>
<link wikidata="Q1037997" start="1800" end="1803" title="JNR Class C62" label="C62"/>
<link wikidata="Q185727" start="1826" end="1839" title="amateur radio" label="amateur radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q418" start="1886" end="1904" title="telecommunications" label="telecommunications"/>
<link wikidata="Q735" start="1917" end="1920" title="art" label="art"/>
<link wikidata="Q125191" start="1921" end="1931" title="photograph" label="photograph"/>
<link wikidata="Q16338" start="2472" end="2489" title="personal computer" label="personal computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889" start="2556" end="2566" title="video game" label="video game"/>
<link wikidata="Q8093" start="3178" end="3186" title="Nintendo" label="Nintendo"/>
<link wikidata="Q172742" start="3236" end="3251" title="Nintendo Entertainment System" label="Family Computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197566" start="3290" end="3301" title="Lode Runner" label="Lode Runner"/>
<link wikidata="Q853547" start="3442" end="3445" title="MSX" label="MSX"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338888" start="3447" end="3458" title="NEC PC-8801" label="NEC PC-8801"/>
<link wikidata="Q23882" start="3463" end="3474" title="ZX Spectrum" label="ZX Spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q923826" start="3497" end="3506" title="Bomberman (1983 video game)" label="Bomberman"/>
<link wikidata="Q219203" start="3704" end="3707" title="NEC" label="NEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057377" start="3723" end="3732" title="TurboGrafx-16" label="PC Engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q828814" start="3871" end="3883" title="market share" label="market share"/>
<link wikidata="Q183259" start="3909" end="3918" title="Super Nintendo Entertainment System" label="Super NES"/>
<link wikidata="Q122741" start="3922" end="3926" title="Sega" label="Sega"/>
<link wikidata="Q10676" start="3938" end="3945" title="Sega Genesis" label="Genesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q80831" start="4049" end="4067" title="Integrated circuit" label="semiconductor chip"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136902" start="4147" end="4152" title="PC-FX" label="PC-FX"/>
<link wikidata="Q3444160" start="4626" end="4635" title="Bomberman" label="Bomberman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7677033" start="4681" end="4697" title="Takahashi Meijin" label="Takahashi Meijin"/>
<link wikidata="Q8093" start="4800" end="4808" title="Nintendo" label="Nintendo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3337438" start="4829" end="4835" title="Nintendo Cube" label="NDcube"/>
<link wikidata="Q851989" start="5055" end="5061" title="Porting of video games" label="ported"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199765" start="5094" end="5100" title="Pooyan" label="Pooyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q853547" start="5114" end="5117" title="MSX" label="MSX"/>
<link wikidata="Q172742" start="5122" end="5129" title="Nintendo Entertainment System" label="Famicom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3139207" start="5273" end="5291" title="Hokkaido Takushoku Bank" label="Hokkaido Takushoku"/>
<link wikidata="Q475000" start="5353" end="5365" title="stock market" label="stock market"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320224" start="5418" end="5439" title="Osaka Securities Exchange" label="NASDAQ Japan Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044478" start="7459" end="7477" title="shoot &amp;#x27;em ups" label="shoot &amp;#x27;em ups"/>
<link wikidata="Q3444160" start="7716" end="7725" title="Bomberman" label="Bomberman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7600719" start="7970" end="7980" title="Star Force" label="Star Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q7687056" start="8095" end="8107" title="Star Soldier" label="Star Soldier"/>
<link wikidata="Q7602422" start="8180" end="8195" title="Starship Hector" label="Starship Hector"/>
<link wikidata="Q8035526" start="8547" end="8567" title="World Class Baseball" label="World Class Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q388566" start="8736" end="8750" title="Blazing Lazers" label="Blazing Lazers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6148172" start="9015" end="9033" title="Super Star Soldier" label="Super Star Soldier"/>
<link wikidata="Q5232709" start="9072" end="9085" title="Final Soldier" label="Final Soldier"/>
<link wikidata="Q5959139" start="9124" end="9137" title="Soldier Blade" label="Soldier Blade"/>
<link wikidata="Q927122" start="9804" end="9823" title="South San Francisco, California" label="South San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q172742" start="9862" end="9891" title="Nintendo Entertainment System" label="Nintendo Entertainment System"/>
<link wikidata="Q183259" start="9893" end="9902" title="Super Nintendo Entertainment System" label="Super NES"/>
<link wikidata="Q186437" start="9907" end="9915" title="Game Boy" label="Game Boy"/>
<link wikidata="Q339228" start="10011" end="10032" title="Acclaim Entertainment" label="Acclaim Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083" start="10063" end="10082" title="Seattle, Washington" label="Seattle, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q169943" start="10434" end="10455" title="San Mateo, California" label="San Mateo, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q6716878" start="10733" end="10738" title="mMode" label="mMode"/>
<link wikidata="Q3444160" start="11159" end="11168" title="Bomberman" label="Bomberman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7678170" start="11182" end="11186" title="Bonk (series)" label="Bonk"/>
<link wikidata="Q7687056" start="11200" end="11212" title="Star Soldier" label="Star Soldier"/>
<link wikidata="Q568489" start="11230" end="11246" title="Adventure Island (video game)" label="Adventure Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q7699751" start="11337" end="11353" title="Far East of Eden" label="Far East of Eden"/>
<link wikidata="Q591573" start="11607" end="11614" title="Famitsu" label="Famitsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2908746" start="11729" end="11746" title="Momotaro Dentetsu" label="Momotaro Dentetsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q182172" start="11954" end="11962" title="GameCube" label="GameCube"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196737" start="12175" end="12186" title="Mario Party" label="Mario Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q608920" start="12370" end="12383" title="Mario Party 9" label="Mario Party 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q3337438" start="12458" end="12464" title="NDcube" label="NDcube"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475366" start="12542" end="12557" title="Fuzion Frenzy 2" label="Fuzion Frenzy 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q48263" start="12606" end="12614" title="Xbox 360" label="Xbox 360"/>
<link wikidata="" start="12638" end="12669" title="Bomberman 64: The Second Attack" label="Bomberman 64: The Second Attack"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="308591" wikidata="Q1954808" url="?curid=308591" title="Barbour's day gecko">
<text>Barbour&#x27;s day gecko (&quot;Phelsuma barbouri)&quot; is a species of lizard in the family Gekkonidae. The species is endemic to central Madagascar. It is diurnal and typically dwells on rocks. Barbour&#x27;s day gecko feeds on insects and nectar.

==Etymology==
The specific name, &quot;barbouri&quot;, as well as the common name, Barbour&#x27;s day gecko, are in honor of American herpetologist Thomas Barbour.

==Description==
&quot;P. barbouri&quot; is a middle-sized day gecko. It can reach a total length (including tail) of about . The body colour is brownish green or dark green. Both a dark brown dorso-lateral stripe and a dark brown lateral stripe extend from head to tail. The extremities are normally brown. The tail is unicoloured green and slightly flattened.

==Geographic range==
&quot;P. barbouri&quot; inhabits the highlands of central Madagascar in the Ankaratra Mountains, at altitudes of .

==Habitat==
In contrast to other lizards of the genus &quot;Phelsuma&quot;, &quot;P. barbouri&quot; is terrestrial and typically lives on stones on the ground or on rocks in savanna habitat. The climate of its habitat is extremely harsh. There is a huge difference in temperature between night and day, and between different seasons. The maximum day temperature is . At night, it is cool and foggy.

==Diet==
&quot;P. barbouri&quot; feeds on various insects and other invertebrates.

==Behaviour==
&quot;P. barbouri&quot; often lives in small groups. During the day, it flattens its body to catch as much sun as possible. This way it can reach its preferred body temperature. During the night and in the early morning, &quot;P. barbouri&quot; has a dark colour. However, when it is basking, the body colour becomes brighter.

==Reproduction==
Adult females of &quot;P. barbouri&quot; glue their eggs under stones. Since additional females may deposit their eggs at the same location, as many as 50 eggs may be found together. At a temperature of , the young will hatch after approximately 55 days. The neonates measure .

==Care and maintenance in captivity==
&quot;P. barbouri&quot; should be housed in pairs and needs a large terrarium which should provide many places to hide. Group breeding, however, is possible. The terrarium should be earth-based with a number of flat rocks present. It is important that there be some spot lights for basking. The daytime temperature should be around , while at night the temperature should drop to . In captivity, it can be fed crickets, wax moths, fruit flies, mealworms, and houseflies.

==References==
==Further reading==
* 194 pp. (&quot;Phelsuma barbouri&quot;, p. 115).
*Glaw F, Vences M (2006). &quot;A Field Guide to the Amphibians and Reptiles of Madagascar, Third Edition&quot;. Cologne, Germany: Vences &amp; Glaw Verlag. 496 pp. .
*, (1995). &quot;Amphibien und Reptilien Madagaskars, der Maskarenen, Seychellen und Komoren&quot;. Stuttgart: Ulmer. . (in German).
*Loveridge A (1942). &quot;Revision of the Afro-Oriental Geckos of the Genus &quot;Phelsuma&quot; &quot;. &quot;Bulletin of the Museum of Comparative Zoölogy at Harvard College&quot; 89 (10): 438-481. (&quot;&quot;Phelsuma barbouri&quot;, new species, pp. 439, 458-459).
*McKeown, Sean (1993). &quot;The General Care and Maintenance of Day Geckos&quot;. Lakeside, California: Advanced Vivarium Systems.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1954808" start="0" end="24" title="Barbour&amp;#x27;s day gecko" label="Barbour&amp;#x27;s day gecko"/>
<link wikidata="Q1954808" start="26" end="49" title="Barbour&amp;#x27;s day gecko" label="&amp;quot;Phelsuma barbouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="62" end="69" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q15879" start="73" end="79" title="lizard" label="lizard"/>
<link wikidata="Q35409" start="87" end="93" title="Family (biology)" label="family"/>
<link wikidata="Q15872" start="94" end="104" title="Gekkonidae" label="Gekkonidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q123452" start="121" end="128" title="Endemism" label="endemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019" start="140" end="150" title="Madagascar" label="Madagascar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4284186" start="158" end="165" title="diurnal animal" label="diurnal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390" start="231" end="237" title="insect" label="insect"/>
<link wikidata="Q171934" start="243" end="249" title="nectar" label="nectar"/>
<link wikidata="Q908437" start="270" end="283" title="Specific name (zoology)" label="specific name"/>
<link wikidata="Q846570" start="377" end="385" title="American people" label="American"/>
<link wikidata="Q174416" start="386" end="399" title="Herpetology" label="herpetologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1682880" start="400" end="414" title="Thomas Barbour" label="Thomas Barbour"/>
<link wikidata="Q878223" start="837" end="845" title="highland" label="highland"/>
<link wikidata="Q556594" start="876" end="885" title="Ankaratra" label="Ankaratra"/>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="964" end="969" title="genus" label="genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q42320" start="1090" end="1097" title="savanna" label="savanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q52105" start="1098" end="1105" title="habitat" label="habitat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7937" start="1111" end="1118" title="climate" label="climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q52105" start="1126" end="1133" title="habitat" label="habitat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390" start="1366" end="1372" title="insect" label="insect"/>
<link wikidata="Q43806" start="1384" end="1396" title="invertebrate" label="invertebrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3776776" start="2486" end="2493" title="Cricket (insect)" label="cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q7975733" start="2496" end="2505" title="Waxworm" label="wax moths"/>
<link wikidata="Q130888" start="2507" end="2518" title="Drosophila melanogaster" label="fruit flies"/>
<link wikidata="Q225965" start="2520" end="2528" title="mealworm" label="mealworm"/>
<link wikidata="Q166111" start="2535" end="2545" title="Housefly" label="houseflies"/>
<link wikidata="Q95599" start="2635" end="2641" title="Frank Glaw" label="Glaw F"/>
<link wikidata="Q96032" start="2643" end="2651" title="Miguel Vences" label="Vences M"/>
<link wikidata="Q710460" start="2935" end="2946" title="Arthur Loveridge" label="Loveridge A"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="308598" wikidata="Q408726" url="?curid=308598" title="FCI">
<text>FCI may refer to:
==Companies and organizations==
* Falling Creek Ironworks, the first iron production facility in North America
* Family Carers Ireland, Irish lobbying group
*Fédération cynologique internationale, the Fédération cynologique internationale (International Canine Federation)
* Federal Correctional Institution, part of the United States Bureau of Prisons
* Fédération Cynologique Internationale, the World Canine Federation
* Fertilizer Corporation of India, an Indian government-owned corporation
* Fluid Components International, an American manufacturing company
* Food Corporation of India, an Indian government-owned corporation
* Francis Crick Institute, a British biomedical research centre
* Fujisankei Communications International, an American media company

== Sports ==
* F.C. Indiana, an American soccer team
* FC Ingolstadt 04, a German football club
* FCI Tallinn, an Estonian football club
* Food Corporation of India F.C., an Indian football club
* Italian Cycling Federation (Italian: )

==Standards and measures==
* Facility condition index, in building management
* fCi, the symbol for the femtocurie, a unit of radioactivity
* Foraminiferal Colouration Index, in geology
* Force Concept Inventory, in physics education
* Full configuration interaction, in chemistry
* Functional Capacity Index, in medicine

==Other==
* Farm Cove Intermediate, an intermediate school in Pakuranga, Auckland
* FCC Computer Inquiries, a trio of interrelated FCC Inquiries
* French Culinary Institute, now the International Culinary Center, in New York City
* Chesterfield County Airport, in Virginia, United States
* Interoceanic Railway of Mexico (Spanish: ), a defunct Mexican railroad company</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q408726" start="0" end="3" title="FCI" label="FCI"/>
<link wikidata="Q5432312" start="52" end="75" title="Falling Creek Ironworks" label="Falling Creek Ironworks"/>
<link wikidata="Q5039047" start="131" end="152" title="Family Carers Ireland" label="Family Carers Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q38603" start="176" end="213" title="Fédération cynologique internationale" label="Fédération cynologique internationale"/>
<link wikidata="Q6600935" start="293" end="325" title="Federal Correctional Institution" label="Federal Correctional Institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q38603" start="373" end="410" title="Fédération Cynologique Internationale" label="Fédération Cynologique Internationale"/>
<link wikidata="Q5445585" start="442" end="473" title="Fertilizer Corporation of India" label="Fertilizer Corporation of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q5462702" start="516" end="546" title="Fluid Components International" label="Fluid Components International"/>
<link wikidata="Q3530263" start="584" end="609" title="Food Corporation of India" label="Food Corporation of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q326044" start="652" end="675" title="Francis Crick Institute" label="Francis Crick Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q5507476" start="716" end="755" title="Fujisankei Communications International" label="Fujisankei Communications International"/>
<link wikidata="Q5423694" start="799" end="811" title="F.C. Indiana" label="F.C. Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q170117" start="839" end="855" title="FC Ingolstadt 04" label="FC Ingolstadt 04"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387188" start="882" end="893" title="FCI Tallinn" label="FCI Tallinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q21181134" start="923" end="953" title="Food Corporation of India F.C." label="Food Corporation of India F.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q1107965" start="981" end="1007" title="Italian Cycling Federation" label="Italian Cycling Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5428600" start="1050" end="1074" title="Facility condition index" label="Facility condition index"/>
<link wikidata="Q229354" start="1125" end="1135" title="Curie (unit)" label="femtocurie"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467191" start="1163" end="1194" title="Foraminiferal Colouration Index" label="Foraminiferal Colouration Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q17090123" start="1209" end="1232" title="Force Concept Inventory" label="Force Concept Inventory"/>
<link wikidata="Q3754227" start="1257" end="1287" title="Full configuration interaction" label="Full configuration interaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474045" start="1304" end="1329" title="Functional Capacity Index" label="Functional Capacity Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q5435478" start="1356" end="1378" title="Farm Cove Intermediate" label="Farm Cove Intermediate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5424712" start="1428" end="1450" title="FCC Computer Inquiries" label="FCC Computer Inquiries"/>
<link wikidata="Q6050037" start="1491" end="1516" title="French Culinary Institute" label="French Culinary Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1708040" start="1576" end="1603" title="Chesterfield County Airport" label="Chesterfield County Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1407937" start="1634" end="1664" title="Interoceanic Railway of Mexico" label="Interoceanic Railway of Mexico"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="308600" wikidata="Q2613121" url="?curid=308600" title="Nils Bejerot">
<text>Nils Johan Artur Bejerot (September 21, 1921 – November 29, 1988) was a Swedish psychiatrist and criminologist best known for his work on drug abuse and for coining the phrase &quot;Stockholm syndrome&quot;. Bejerot was one of the top drug abuse researchers in Sweden. His view that drug abuse was a criminal matter and that drug use should have severe penalties was highly influential in Sweden and in other countries. He believed that the cure for drug addiction was to make drugs unavailable and socially unacceptable. He also advocated the idea that drug abuse could transition from being a symptom to a disease in itself.

==Early life==

Nils Bejerot was born 1921 in Norrtälje, Stockholm. His father worked as a bank teller at the local &quot;Upland Bank&quot; office. Not an avid student, he was more interested in scouting. In 1936 the family moved to Östhammar after his father was assigned to another bank office. At the age of 15, Bejerot was found to have bleeding in the lungs due to tuberculosis and was admitted to a sanatorium for a total of three years. However, Bejerot described this time as a happy period in his life. The mood among the patients was good, despite the fact that approximately one third of them died.

On his first vacation he met English nurse Carol Maurice in the 320 km railway between Samac and Sarajevo in then-Yugoslavia, and they later married.

==Psychiatry==
In 1952–54, Bejerot served as assistant at the Karolinska Institute hygienic institution after finishing basic medical education at Karolinska Institute. In the same period he wrote his book against the violence in comic books.

In 1954, while serving as deputy social medical officer at the Child and Youth Welfare Board of the City of Stockholm, Bejerot became, by coincidence, the first to diagnose and report a case of juvenile intravenous drug abuse by any public authority in Europe.

In 1957, Bejerot received a medical degree from the Karolinska Institute in Stockholm. From 1957 to 1962, Bejerot was trained in psychiatry at the Södersjukhuset and the Saint Göran Hospital in Stockholm.

From 1958 onwards, Bejerot worked as consulting psychiatrist to the Stockholm Police Department, and from 1965 as consulting physician to the Stockholm Remand Prison. His patients were people in police custody, many of them local alcoholics or drug addicts. Later he became Research Fellow in drug dependence at the Swedish National Medical Research Council, and then a reader in Social Medicine at the Karolinska Institute.

In 1963, Bejerot studied epidemiology and medical statistics at the London School of Hygiene &amp; Tropical Medicine, on a grant from the World Health Organization.

In 1973, he served as a psychiatric advisor during the Norrmalmstorg robbery, and coined the term &quot;Stockholm syndrome&quot; to refer to the way in which the hostages apparently become grateful to the hostage-takers and critical against the police&#x27;s handling of the situation. The term has since become heavily used.

In 1975, Bejerot became an associate professor on a doctoral thesis about drug abuse and drug policy at the Karolinska Institute. In 1979 Bejerot received an honorary title of professor, an honor that the Swedish government usually awards to only a few people a year.

His research covered such wide areas as the epidemiology of drug abuse, the dynamics of drug dependence and the anomalies of public welfare policy. Bejerot gave an extensive number of lectures in many parts of Sweden. For 30 years he lobbied intensively for zero tolerance, including possession and use of cannabis. He published about 600 papers and debate articles in different media, and published more than 10 books about the subject. In total he had about 100,000 participants of his 2-day courses. For many years he held lectures at ‘’Polishögskolan’’ (The Swedish Police College) about drug abuse, mental problems and negotiation skills. He was teacher for almost every Swedish police officer, which gave him the epithet &quot;polisdoktorn&quot; (The police doctor).

==Politics==
During his time in sanatoriums while suffering tuberculosis, he met people of different ages with different experiences, and the discussions they had he later claimed encouraged him to study and become involved in political activity, becoming a member of the Communist Party and other Socialist-affiliated organizations. When he started to study medicine in 1947 his social and political commitments made him a slow student. However, Nikita Khrushchev&#x27;s secret speech in 1956 at the 20th Party Congress led Bejerot to question the whole communist system; the illusion of the glorious future of communism was definitely shattered when the Soviet Union invaded Hungary, causing Bejerot to quit all activities in politics and focus on the study of medicine.

Bejerot also advocated against violence in comic books. While working at the Karolinska Institute between 1952 and 1954, he wrote his 1954 book &quot;Barn, serie, samhälle&quot; (Children, Comics, Society), itself largely an adaptation of Fredric Wertham&#x27;s book &quot;Seduction of the Innocent&quot;, also published in 1954. He did not come back to this topic in his later books.

Bejerot also strongly advocated for strict anti-drug laws. In 1965, Bejerot started to engage in the Swedish debate on drug abuse, encouraging tough action against the new and rapidly growing problem. He followed closely a rather clumsy experiment with legal prescription of heroin, amphetamine, etc. to drug addicts, studies that formed the basis for his thesis on the epidemic drug spread. Bejerot claimed that the program would increase the number of drug addicts and showed through counting of injection marks that the number of drug addicts in Stockholm continued to grow fast during the experiment. The program was stopped in 1968. From 1968 and onward, the difference between the epidemic type, the therapeutic type and the endemic type of drug abuse was a repeated issue in Bejerot&#x27;s writing and lectures.

In 1969, Bejerot became one of the founders of the Association for a Drug-Free Society (RNS), which played - and still plays - an important role in shaping Swedish drug policies. RNS don&#x27;t accept any of the state grants which are available. Bejerot warned of the consequences of an ‘epidemic addiction’, prompted by young, psychologically and socially unstable persons who, usually after direct personal initiation from another drug abuser, begin to use socially nonaccepted, intoxicating drugs to gain euphoria. In 1972, Bejerots&#x27; reports were used as one of the reasons for increasing the maximum penalty for grave drug offences in Sweden to 10 years in prison. In 1974 he was called to testify as one of 21 scientific experts on marijuana for a subcommittee of the United States Senate on the marijuana-hashish epidemic and its impact on United States security.

He advocated zero tolerance for illegal use and possession of drugs, including all drugs not covered by prescription, something that today is law in Sweden. In the early 1980s, he became one of the &quot;Top 10 opinion molders&quot; in Sweden for this. Bejerot is by UNODC and many others recognized as founder of the Swedish strategy against recreational use of drugs. His demand for zero tolerance as a drug policy was for a long time seen as extreme, but during the late 1970s opinion changed. He is without doubt the person most responsible for changing the Swedish drug policy in a restrictive direction something that made him a controversial person, both before and after his death. Many people considered Bejerot as a good humanist advocating a viable policy against narcotics and Robert DuPont considers him &quot;the hero of the Swedish drug abuse story.&quot; Others view this as a reactionary hindering of new treatment practices against drug abuse.

Bejerot&#x27;s theories about spread of drug abuse and proposals for an anti-drug policy have still a significant influence on the drug policy of Sweden. When R. Gil Kerlikowske the Director of National Drug Control Policy in May 2012, announced an updated version of U.S. President Barack Obama&#x27;s administration&#x27;s drug policy he referred to what happened in the experiment with legal prescription of drugs in 1965 that was studied by Bejerot in his doctoral thesis.

==Research==
Before Bejerot began to participate in the debate on drugs in 1965, it was the dominant view in Sweden that drug abuse was a private health problem and that law enforcement measures should be aimed at drug dealers. Before 1968, the maximum offence for a grave drug crime was one year in prison. Bejerot objected to this and stressed the importance of measures against the demand for drugs, against users, and their importance in the spread of addiction to new addicts.

Bejerot did not accept unemployment and poor private economy as explanations for increased use of illegal drugs. He pointed out that alcohol abuse in the 1930s was comparatively limited in Sweden, despite high unemployment and economic depression.

Nils Bejerot stressed five main factors that cause increased risk of an individual of becoming a drug abuser:

* availability of the addictive substance
* money to acquire the substance
* time to use the substance
* example of use of the substance in the immediate environment
* a permissive ideology in relation to the use of the substance

Bejerot advanced the hypothesis that when addiction supervenes it is no longer a symptom but a morbid condition of its own. In the abuse stage one can willfully control their consumption and intoxicating themselves at will, but eventually - depending on the product&#x27;s addictive qualities, the dosage, the intensity of the abuse, individual factors etc. - the drug abuse can turn into drug dependency, receiving the strength of an instinct. Therefore, its development will not be affected by removal of the initiating factors, and the drug dependency has developed the strength and character of a natural drive, even though it was artificially-induced.

He compared addiction with a very deep love, writing that addiction is &quot;an emotional fixation (sentiment) acquired through learning, which intermittently or continually expresses itself in purposeful, stereotyped behavior with the character and force of a natural drive, aiming at a specific pleasure or the avoidance of a specific discomfort.&quot;

This would however not mean that drug addiction was impossible to treat. The abuse was learned, hence it is also possible to relearn, how to live without drugs, and treatment of drug addicts should have a drug-free goal, differing with others who aimed at reduction of adverse effects, also known as harm reduction. Bejerot thus criticized programs of long methadone treatment of opiate users in programs that were not aimed at drug freedom.

==See also==
* Alfred R. Lindesmith
* War on drugs
* Harm reduction

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==
* http://www.nilsbejerot.se/om.htm – official webpage, including full text of many of his books</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2613121" start="0" end="24" title="Nils Bejerot" label="Nils Johan Artur Bejerot"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867" start="80" end="92" title="psychiatry" label="psychiatrist"/>
<link wikidata="Q161733" start="97" end="110" title="criminology" label="criminologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3184856" start="138" end="148" title="drug abuse" label="drug abuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q180242" start="182" end="200" title="Stockholm syndrome" label="Stockholm syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q3588743" start="674" end="683" title="Norrtälje" label="Norrtälje"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754" start="685" end="694" title="Stockholm" label="Stockholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q59088" start="861" end="870" title="Östhammar" label="Östhammar"/>
<link wikidata="Q12204" start="998" end="1010" title="tuberculosis" label="tuberculosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q46124" start="1033" end="1043" title="sanatorium" label="sanatorium"/>
<link wikidata="Q391033" start="1326" end="1331" title="Šamac, Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Samac"/>
<link wikidata="Q11194" start="1336" end="1344" title="Sarajevo" label="Sarajevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q36704" start="1353" end="1363" title="Yugoslavia" label="Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q219564" start="1452" end="1472" title="Karolinska Institute" label="Karolinska Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509325" start="2043" end="2057" title="Södersjukhuset" label="Södersjukhuset"/>
<link wikidata="Q7401336" start="2066" end="2086" title="Saint Göran Hospital" label="Saint Göran Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126189" start="2596" end="2644" title="London School of Hygiene &amp;amp; Tropical Medicine" label="London School of Hygiene &amp;amp; Tropical Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1498881" start="2749" end="2770" title="Norrmalmstorg robbery" label="Norrmalmstorg robbery"/>
<link wikidata="Q180242" start="2798" end="2816" title="Stockholm syndrome" label="Stockholm syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266946" start="3073" end="3088" title="doctoral thesis" label="doctoral thesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156955" start="3548" end="3562" title="zero tolerance" label="zero tolerance"/>
<link wikidata="Q46124" start="4096" end="4106" title="sanatorium" label="sanatorium"/>
<link wikidata="Q35314" start="4511" end="4528" title="Nikita Khrushchev" label="Nikita Khrushchev"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="4720" end="4732" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q529939" start="5077" end="5092" title="Fredric Wertham" label="Fredric Wertham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617734" start="5111" end="5136" title="Seduction of the Innocent" label="Seduction of the Innocent"/>
<link wikidata="Q44512" start="5911" end="5919" title="epidemic" label="epidemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q506680" start="5955" end="5967" title="Endemic (epidemiology)" label="endemic type"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="6822" end="6842" title="United States Senate" label="United States Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156955" start="6933" end="6947" title="zero tolerance" label="zero tolerance"/>
<link wikidata="Q636107" start="7187" end="7192" title="UNODC" label="UNODC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1260003" start="7325" end="7336" title="drug policy" label="drug policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q46158" start="7651" end="7659" title="humanism" label="humanist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7343658" start="7709" end="7722" title="Robert DuPont" label="Robert DuPont"/>
<link wikidata="Q192957" start="7813" end="7824" title="reactionary" label="reactionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q17073923" start="8014" end="8035" title="drug policy of Sweden" label="drug policy of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q5560545" start="8042" end="8060" title="R. Gil Kerlikowske" label="R. Gil Kerlikowske"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="8166" end="8178" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q3378593" start="9824" end="9839" title="drug dependency" label="drug dependency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458711" start="10749" end="10763" title="harm reduction" label="harm reduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q4723323" start="10907" end="10927" title="Alfred R. Lindesmith" label="Alfred R. Lindesmith"/>
<link wikidata="Q185517" start="10930" end="10942" title="War on drugs" label="War on drugs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458711" start="10945" end="10959" title="Harm reduction" label="Harm reduction"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="308602" wikidata="Q13664859" url="?curid=308602" title="Princeps senatus">
<text>The princeps senatus ( &quot;principes senatus&quot;), in English the leader of the senate, was the first member by precedence on the membership rolls of the Roman Senate. Although officially out of the &quot;cursus honorum&quot; and possessing no &quot;imperium&quot;, this office conferred prestige on the senator holding it. 

The position was created in the first half of the third century BC and retained its prominence for two centuries. The &quot;principes&quot; were often the most famous Roman politicians of the period, such Marcus Aemilius Lepidus, Scipio Africanus, and Marcus Aemilius Scaurus. It lost its importance after the reforms of the dictator Sulla in 82–80 BC, but might have been temporarily restored for Cicero, its possible last incumbent during the struggle between Mark Antony and the Senate in 43 BC. The Roman emperors merged the &quot;princeps senatus&quot;&#x27; prerogatives with their own, although there are occasional mentions of distinctive principes during the later Empire.

== History ==

The &quot;princeps senatus&quot; was chosen by the pair of censors (that is, every 5 years on average) whenever there was a vacancy on the seat during their tenure. The &quot;princeps senatus&quot; was not a lifetime appointment. However, in practice, the incumbent &quot;princeps senatus&quot; was always re-appointed by the censors.

Traditionally, the &quot;princeps senatus&quot; had the honour of speaking first on any motion or topic presented by the presiding magistrate. By the middle republic, the &quot;princeps senatus&quot; was the most prestigious position in Rome and had adduced further privileges: he moved all routine senate business, having power to have his input directly moulded into them by choosing their wording. He also set out the possible options on controversial proposals. Some notable principes of this period were the famous Scipio Africanus (appointed in 199, 194, and 189) and Marcus Aemilius Lepidus, who was appointed a record six times between 179 and 154 and combined his position with that of pontifex maximus – the Roman chief priesthood.

=== Appointment ===
The position of &quot;princeps senatus&quot; was not defined by law (&quot;lex&quot;), but by tradition (&quot;mos&quot;), which makes it more difficult to follow its evolution. For a long time, modern historians were influenced by the works of Theodor Mommsen, who thought that the &quot;principes senatus&quot; could only be patricians of the &quot;gentes maiores&quot; – the most illustrious patrician families (Cornelia, Valeria, Fabia, Aemilia, Manlia, and Claudia). However, Francis Ryan showed that Mommsen&#x27;s argument was circular: he first asserted that the princeps must be from a &quot;gens maior&quot;, and later said the list of &quot;gentes maiores&quot; can be drawn from the principes – while ancient sources are silent on many principes and do not give the list of the &quot;gentes maiores&quot;. Ryan has argued instead that the princeps could be a plebeian: first, ancient sources never mention Mommsen&#x27;s patrician requirement; second, because the post was established after the end of the Conflict of the Orders, the plebeians would not have allowed the patricians to create an office barred to them.

The &quot;princeps senatus&quot; appeared in the beginning of the third century BC, possibly in 275. It finds its origin in the &quot;lex Ovinia&quot; of , which considerably changed the composition of the Senate. Before this law, senators were about a hundred and appointed by the consuls from among their supporters; membership of the Senate therefore changed every year. The &quot;lex Ovinia&quot; transferred the power to appoint senators to the censors, who could only remove senators in case of misconduct, thus making them appointed for life. The law also increased their number to 300. These changes led the censors to make an official list of senators, recording their right to sit in the Senate. The first censor to make this list was likely Appius Claudius Caecus, who was said to have invented the rhotacism in Latin, perhaps in the process of writing this list, since several Latin names changed in these years. Another reform of the Senate followed a few decades later: senators were by now picked from among former magistrates. As a result, senators were ordered by the censors in several ranks according to their past magistracies. This ordering by seniority led to the creation of the princeps senatus: the first name on the list of senators, who was always the most senior ex-censor, patrician or plebeian; the censors could not make a choice between candidates. Caecus was almost certainly not the first princeps, because the extensive tradition about him would not have failed to mention this fact. He is also described as an old man speaking in the Senate against Pyrrhus . Since he was the most senior former censor at that date, the first princeps was necessarily appointed after his death. The most probable candidate is therefore Quintus Fabius Maximus Rullianus, chosen by the censors of 275, whose &quot;lectio&quot; left a mark in ancient sources.

In 209 BC, the censor Publius Sempronius Tuditanus went against the tradition and appointed Quintus Fabius Maximus Verrucosus instead of Titus Manlius Torquatus, the senior ex-censor. Tuditanus justified his choice by saying that Fabius was the foremost of all the Romans (&quot;princeps Romanae civitatis&quot;). After this date, the princeps was the most important politician of the day, chosen among the ex-consuls, and often one of the sitting censors, appointed by the other censor. When the censors could not agree on a candidate, the choice was solved by lot, as in 209 BC.

=== Decline after Sulla&#x27;s reforms ===
The status and function of &quot;princeps senatus&quot; ceased to be relevant after the reforms of Sulla in 82–80 BC. As dictator, Sulla established a strict oligarchic order in order to prevent any man from rising above the rest (for example, iteration of the consulship was banned). Several scholars, such as Theodor Mommsen and Ernst Badian, believe that Sulla even abolished the office. However, Sulla would probably not have demoted his close ally, the princeps Lucius Valerius Flaccus, who had enabled his appointment as dictator though the &quot;lex Valeria&quot;. Although the position probably continued – there was still a list of senators and someone had to be listed first – the prerogatives of the office fell away. In particular, consuls designate assumed the honour of speaking first. This may be because, through the 80s and 70s, the senior living ex-censors – the most senior members of the senate, in the absence of a formal &quot;princeps senatus&quot; due to the paucity of censorial &quot;lectiones&quot;, – were largely uninfluential and unimportant men. Even when named first in the list of senators, they were largely so named by default or custom and were unable to assert speaking privilege before more influential, but junior, consulars.
Pierre Willems and Francis Ryan have suggested that Cicero may have been the last princeps senatus of the Republic, appointed after April 43 by his fellow senators. Such restoration of this ancient office was part of &quot;diehard republicans&quot;&#x27; propaganda against Mark Antony, whom Cicero had violently attacked in his &quot;Philippicae&quot;. Cicero&#x27;s ascribed leadership of the senate, however, may not necessarily correspond to the traditional &quot;princeps senatus&quot;&#x27; office.

=== During the Empire ===
The position was revived by Augustus in 28 BC; he, irregularly, appointed himself. If the post was limited to certain &quot;gentes&quot;, the &quot;Julii&quot; were possibly ineligible, and Augustus was not yet then one of the customary candidates (senior ex-censors). Regardless, Augustus held the office until his death; it then absorbed into the emperor&#x27;s offices and powers.

In the emperor&#x27;s absence, it is possible that a senator was granted the privilege of holding this role when the Senate met; the notoriously unreliable &quot;Historia Augusta&quot; claimed that during the Crisis of the Third Century, some others held the position; in particular, it stated that the future emperor Valerian held the office in AD 238, during the reigns of Maximinus Thrax and Gordian I, and he continued to hold it through to the reign of Decius. The same source also makes the same claim about Tacitus when the Senate acclaimed him emperor in AD 275.

== List of &quot;principes senatus&quot; ==
==Citations==
== General and cited references ==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
== External links ==
*The Roman Law Library by Professor Yves Lassard and Alexandr Koptev.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q13664859" start="70" end="90" title="Princeps senatus" label="leader of the senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q130614" start="158" end="170" title="Roman Senate" label="Roman Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q27518" start="209" end="223" title="cursus honorum" label="cursus honorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q499146" start="254" end="262" title="imperium" label="imperium"/>
<link wikidata="Q319561" start="535" end="558" title="Marcus Aemilius Lepidus (consul 187 BC)" label="Marcus Aemilius Lepidus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2253" start="560" end="576" title="Scipio Africanus" label="Scipio Africanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q365148" start="582" end="605" title="Marcus Aemilius Scaurus (consul 115 BC)" label="Marcus Aemilius Scaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1812526" start="640" end="647" title="Constitutional reforms of Sulla" label="reforms"/>
<link wikidata="Q483783" start="664" end="669" title="Sulla" label="Sulla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541" start="728" end="734" title="Cicero" label="Cicero"/>
<link wikidata="Q51673" start="792" end="803" title="Mark Antony" label="Mark Antony"/>
<link wikidata="Q842606" start="833" end="847" title="Roman emperor" label="Roman emperors"/>
<link wikidata="Q189851" start="1087" end="1094" title="Roman censor" label="censors"/>
<link wikidata="Q20778343" start="1495" end="1505" title="Roman magistrate" label="magistrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2253" start="1884" end="1900" title="Scipio Africanus" label="Scipio Africanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q319561" start="1938" end="1961" title="Marcus Aemilius Lepidus (consul 187 BC)" label="Marcus Aemilius Lepidus"/>
<link wikidata="Q212943" start="2059" end="2075" title="pontifex maximus" label="pontifex maximus"/>
<link wikidata="Q162314" start="2202" end="2205" title="Roman law" label="lex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1887031" start="2238" end="2241" title="Mos maiorum" label="mos"/>
<link wikidata="Q25351" start="2372" end="2387" title="Theodor Mommsen" label="Theodor Mommsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q154668" start="2454" end="2464" title="Patrician (ancient Rome)" label="patricians"/>
<link wikidata="Q899409" start="2478" end="2492" title="gentes maiores" label="gentes maiores"/>
<link wikidata="Q221312" start="2542" end="2550" title="Cornelia (gens)" label="Cornelia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429412" start="2552" end="2559" title="Valeria (gens)" label="Valeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390471" start="2561" end="2566" title="Fabia (gens)" label="Fabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q380886" start="2568" end="2575" title="Aemilia (gens)" label="Aemilia"/>
<link wikidata="Q409825" start="2577" end="2583" title="Manlia (gens)" label="Manlia"/>
<link wikidata="Q385338" start="2589" end="2596" title="Claudia (gens)" label="Claudia"/>
<link wikidata="Q747480" start="3145" end="3167" title="Conflict of the Orders" label="Conflict of the Orders"/>
<link wikidata="Q3237329" start="3392" end="3402" title="Plebiscitum Ovinium" label="lex Ovinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q189851" start="3708" end="3715" title="Roman censor" label="censors"/>
<link wikidata="Q297783" start="4010" end="4032" title="Appius Claudius Caecus" label="Appius Claudius Caecus"/>
<link wikidata="Q27794621" start="4068" end="4077" title="Rhotacism (sound change)" label="rhotacism"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="4081" end="4086" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q172353" start="4843" end="4850" title="Pyrrhus of Epirus" label="Pyrrhus"/>
<link wikidata="Q435352" start="5013" end="5045" title="Quintus Fabius Maximus Rullianus" label="Quintus Fabius Maximus Rullianus"/>
<link wikidata="Q935520" start="5157" end="5185" title="Publius Sempronius Tuditanus" label="Publius Sempronius Tuditanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q274545" start="5227" end="5260" title="Quintus Fabius Maximus Verrucosus" label="Quintus Fabius Maximus Verrucosus"/>
<link wikidata="Q718133" start="5272" end="5295" title="Titus Manlius Torquatus (consul 235 BC)" label="Titus Manlius Torquatus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1812526" start="5848" end="5864" title="Constitutional reforms of Sulla" label="reforms of Sulla"/>
<link wikidata="Q236885" start="5881" end="5889" title="Roman dictator" label="dictator"/>
<link wikidata="Q483783" start="5891" end="5896" title="Sulla" label="Sulla"/>
<link wikidata="Q79751" start="5918" end="5928" title="Oligarchy" label="oligarchic"/>
<link wikidata="Q78996" start="6091" end="6103" title="Ernst Badian" label="Ernst Badian"/>
<link wikidata="Q267534" start="6227" end="6250" title="Lucius Valerius Flaccus (consul 86 BC)" label="Lucius Valerius Flaccus"/>
<link wikidata="Q22284656" start="6313" end="6324" title="Lex Valeria (82 BC)" label="lex Valeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q6242432" start="7025" end="7039" title="Pierre Willems" label="Pierre Willems"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541" start="7077" end="7083" title="Cicero" label="Cicero"/>
<link wikidata="Q51673" start="7299" end="7310" title="Mark Antony" label="Mark Antony"/>
<link wikidata="Q604091" start="7360" end="7371" title="Philippicae" label="Philippicae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405" start="7585" end="7593" title="Augustus" label="Augustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q842606" start="7906" end="7913" title="Roman emperor" label="emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q722678" start="8104" end="8120" title="Historia Augusta" label="Historia Augusta"/>
<link wikidata="Q329838" start="8151" end="8178" title="Crisis of the Third Century" label="Crisis of the Third Century"/>
<link wikidata="Q46750" start="8260" end="8268" title="Valerian (emperor)" label="Valerian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777" start="8317" end="8332" title="Maximinus Thrax" label="Maximinus Thrax"/>
<link wikidata="Q1782" start="8337" end="8346" title="Gordian I" label="Gordian I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1830" start="8400" end="8406" title="Decius" label="Decius"/>
<link wikidata="Q177988" start="8456" end="8463" title="Tacitus (emperor)" label="Tacitus"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="308605" wikidata="Q226728" url="?curid=308605" title="Athena (disambiguation)">
<text>In Greek mythology, [[Athena]] () is a goddess of wisdom, strategic-war and weaving.

Athena may also refer to:
* Athena (given name), for people and fictional characters

==Places==
* Athena, Oregon, United States
* Athena (Olympic Mountains), a summit in Olympic National Park, United States
* Leicester Athena, venue and landmark in the English Midlands

==Companies==
* Athena (game developer), Japan
* Athena Computer &amp; Electronic Systems, a defunct American laptop pioneer
* Athena Eizou, a Japanese adult video company
* Athena (retailer), a British art retailer famous for its posters
* Athena Scientific, a science and engineering publishing company co-founded by MIT professor Dimitri Bertsekas
* Athena Technologies, a Virginia-based company specializing in navigation and control systems for unmanned aerial vehicles
* athenahealth, a Massachusetts-based Healthcare technology company

==Arts and entertainment==

===Music===
* Athena (band), a Turkish ska punk band
* &quot;Athena (song)&quot;, the first track on The Who&#x27;s 1982 studio album, &quot;It&#x27;s Hard&quot;
* &quot;Athena&quot;, a song by Tiësto from the album &quot;Parade of the Athletes&quot;
* &quot;Athena&quot;, a song by Greyson Chance from the album &quot;Palladium&quot;
* Athenas, Argentine Catholic music singer

===Video games===
* &quot;Athena&quot; (arcade game), a 1986 arcade game made by SNK, whose main character is &quot;Princess Athena&quot;
** &quot;Psycho Soldier&quot;, the 1987 sequel to the arcade game, sometimes referred to as &quot;Athena 2&quot;
** &quot;&quot;, a 2006 sequel to the arcade game
* Athena (game developer), Japan

===Other uses in arts and entertainment===
* &quot;Athena&quot; (1954 film), an MGM musical
* &quot;Athena&quot; (2022 film), a French film
* &quot;Athena&quot; (novel), a 1995 novel by John Banville
* &quot;&quot;, a 2010 South Korean television drama series
* Mourning Athena, a Greek relief sculpture dating around c.470 BC
* Athena Parthenos, a Greek statue in the Parthenos

==Ships==
* &quot;Athena&quot; (yacht), formerly the largest private sailing yacht in the world
* MV &quot;Astoria&quot;, cruiseliner formerly &quot;MS &quot;Athena&quot;&quot;, former transatlantic liner &quot;Stockholm&quot;
* MS &quot;Pearl Seaways&quot;, cruise-ferry formerly &quot;M/S &quot;Athena&quot;&quot; 
* MS &quot;Athina B&quot;, coaster that beached at Brighton in 1980, sometimes mis-reported as &quot;Athena B&quot;
* FV &quot;Athena&quot;, a supertrawler and factory ship that caught fire in October 2010
* SS &quot;Athena&quot;, a 1893 Greek steamship

==Science and technology==
===Equipment in outer space===
* Athena (spacecraft), a small proposed probe to visit Pallas, the asteroid
* Athena (rocket family), Lockheed Martin&#x27;s series of light rocket boosters 
**Athena I
**Athena II
* Advanced Telescope for High Energy Astrophysics, a planned space telescope by the ESA
* Athena-Fidus, a French-Italian, military communications satellite
* Athena, the scientific payload on the Mars Exploration Rovers

===Other uses in science and technology===
* ATHENA, a CERN antimatter research project
* the ATHENA missile guidance computer for the HGM-25A Titan I intercontinental ballistic missile
* Athena 1, an early laptop
* Project Athena, a project to produce a computing environment for educational use
* Project Athena (Intel), a laptop certification program
* X Athena Widgets, X Window System&#x27;s widget toolkit
* Advanced Test High Energy Asset, a directed-energy weapon
* Amazon Athena, a database system

==Other uses==
* ATHENA (European cultural heritage project) an EU-funded project
* November 2012 nor&#x27;easter, referred to by The Weather Channel as &quot;Winter Storm Athena&quot;
* Operation ATHENA, Canada&#x27;s involvement in the 2001 War in Afghanistan
* Ulmus parvifolia &#x27;Emer I&#x27;, an elm cultivar, sold as &quot;Athena&quot;

==See also==

*Atena (disambiguation)
*Athene (disambiguation)
*Athens (disambiguation)
*Athina (disambiguation)
*Altena (disambiguation)
*SS &quot;Athenia&quot;
*&quot;Aethina&quot;, a genus of beetle including the small hive beetle (&quot;Aethina tumida&quot;)
*Pallas Athena (disambiguation)
*Temple of Athena (disambiguation)
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q226728" start="20" end="30" title="Athena (disambiguation)" label="[[Athena]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q226728" start="86" end="92" title="Athena (disambiguation)" label="Athena"/>
<link wikidata="Q16419987" start="114" end="133" title="Athena (given name)" label="Athena (given name)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2596206" start="185" end="199" title="Athena, Oregon" label="Athena, Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q108672940" start="217" end="243" title="Athena (Olympic Mountains)" label="Athena (Olympic Mountains)"/>
<link wikidata="Q15242218" start="296" end="312" title="Leicester Athena" label="Leicester Athena"/>
<link wikidata="Q4813366" start="374" end="397" title="Athena (game developer)" label="Athena (game developer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q116777422" start="407" end="447" title="Athena Computer &amp;amp; Electronic Systems" label="Athena Computer &amp;amp; Electronic Systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q4813375" start="485" end="497" title="Athena Eizou" label="Athena Eizou"/>
<link wikidata="Q4813361" start="532" end="549" title="Athena (retailer)" label="Athena (retailer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5277478" start="691" end="708" title="Dimitri Bertsekas" label="Dimitri Bertsekas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4813384" start="711" end="730" title="Athena Technologies" label="Athena Technologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q4813401" start="835" end="847" title="athenahealth" label="athenahealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q755196" start="944" end="957" title="Athena (band)" label="Athena (band)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2869017" start="991" end="1004" title="Athena (song)" label="Athena (song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q93346" start="1031" end="1038" title="The Who" label="The Who"/>
<link wikidata="Q183508" start="1124" end="1130" title="Tiësto" label="Tiësto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194068" start="1152" end="1174" title="Parade of the Athletes" label="Parade of the Athletes"/>
<link wikidata="Q298360" start="1213" end="1227" title="Greyson Chance" label="Greyson Chance"/>
<link wikidata="Q783326" start="1249" end="1258" title="Palladium (album)" label="Palladium"/>
<link wikidata="Q106272386" start="1267" end="1274" title="Athenas" label="Athenas"/>
<link wikidata="Q55610" start="1329" end="1361" title="Athena (video game)" label="&amp;quot;Athena&amp;quot; (arcade game)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3041940" start="1456" end="1470" title="Psycho Soldier" label="Psycho Soldier"/>
<link wikidata="Q4813366" start="1612" end="1635" title="Athena (game developer)" label="Athena (game developer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4813367" start="1689" end="1719" title="Athena (1954 film)" label="&amp;quot;Athena&amp;quot; (1954 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q111293909" start="1738" end="1768" title="Athena (2022 film)" label="&amp;quot;Athena&amp;quot; (2022 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16385075" start="1786" end="1812" title="Athena (novel)" label="&amp;quot;Athena&amp;quot; (novel)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3558923" start="1906" end="1921" title="Mourning Athena" label="Mourning Athena"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070605" start="1973" end="1989" title="Athena Parthenos" label="Athena Parthenos"/>
<link wikidata="Q8256" start="2036" end="2062" title="Athena (yacht)" label="&amp;quot;Athena&amp;quot; (yacht)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934435" start="2122" end="2144" title="MV Astoria" label="MV &amp;quot;Astoria&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3353494" start="2253" end="2281" title="MS Pearl Seaways" label="MS &amp;quot;Pearl Seaways&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q6717988" start="2343" end="2366" title="MS Athina B" label="MS &amp;quot;Athina B&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q755207" start="2459" end="2480" title="FV Athena" label="FV &amp;quot;Athena&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q755205" start="2549" end="2570" title="SS Athena" label="SS &amp;quot;Athena&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q65081718" start="2656" end="2675" title="Athena (spacecraft)" label="Athena (spacecraft)"/>
<link wikidata="Q22770" start="2732" end="2754" title="Athena (rocket family)" label="Athena (rocket family)"/>
<link wikidata="Q22786" start="2814" end="2822" title="Athena I" label="Athena I"/>
<link wikidata="Q22791" start="2825" end="2834" title="Athena II" label="Athena II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2825379" start="2837" end="2884" title="Advanced Telescope for High Energy Astrophysics" label="Advanced Telescope for High Energy Astrophysics"/>
<link wikidata="Q755203" start="2925" end="2937" title="Athena-Fidus" label="Athena-Fidus"/>
<link wikidata="Q220827" start="3031" end="3053" title="Mars Exploration Rover" label="Mars Exploration Rover"/>
<link wikidata="Q18288814" start="3101" end="3107" title="ATHENA" label="ATHENA"/>
<link wikidata="Q931050" start="3191" end="3206" title="HGM-25A Titan I" label="HGM-25A Titan I"/>
<link wikidata="Q116777422" start="3244" end="3252" title="Athena 1" label="Athena 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q740602" start="3272" end="3286" title="Project Athena" label="Project Athena"/>
<link wikidata="Q123509348" start="3355" end="3377" title="Project Athena (Intel)" label="Project Athena (Intel)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2499296" start="3412" end="3428" title="X Athena Widgets" label="X Athena Widgets"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3503" end="3527" title="Directed-energy weapon#Laser" label="a directed-energy weapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q17087052" start="3530" end="3543" title="Amazon Athena" label="Amazon Athena"/>
<link wikidata="Q4654676" start="3581" end="3624" title="ATHENA (European cultural heritage project)" label="ATHENA (European cultural heritage project)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7064737" start="3648" end="3677" title="November 2012 nor&amp;#x27;easter" label="November 2012 nor&amp;#x27;easter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3354638" start="3751" end="3767" title="Operation ATHENA" label="Operation ATHENA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7879571" start="3828" end="3863" title="Ulmus parvifolia &amp;#x27;Emer I&amp;#x27;" label="Ulmus parvifolia &amp;#x27;Emer I&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q4813062" start="3925" end="3947" title="Atena (disambiguation)" label="Atena (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q254453" start="3949" end="3972" title="Athene (disambiguation)" label="Athene (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325934" start="3974" end="3997" title="Athens (disambiguation)" label="Athens (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1182578" start="3999" end="4022" title="Athina (disambiguation)" label="Athina (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q436559" start="4024" end="4047" title="Altena (disambiguation)" label="Altena (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q755351" start="4049" end="4071" title="SS Athenia" label="SS &amp;quot;Athenia&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q698040" start="4151" end="4165" title="Aethina tumida" label="Aethina tumida"/>
<link wikidata="Q7127746" start="4174" end="4204" title="Pallas Athena (disambiguation)" label="Pallas Athena (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q19929564" start="4206" end="4239" title="Temple of Athena (disambiguation)" label="Temple of Athena (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="308606" wikidata="Q207068" url="?curid=308606" title="Chonburi province">
<text>Chonburi (, , ) is a province of Thailand (&quot;changwat&quot;) located in eastern Thailand. Its capital is also named Chonburi. Neighbouring provinces are (clockwise from north) Chachoengsao, Chanthaburi, and Rayong, while the Bay of Bangkok is to the west. Pattaya, a major tourism destination in Thailand, is located in Chonburi, along with Laem Chabang, the country&#x27;s primary seaport. The population of the province has grown rapidly and now totals 1.7 million residents, although a large portion of the population is floating or unregistered. The registered population as of 31 December 2024 was 1.635 million.

==Toponymy==
The Thai word &quot;chon&quot; ( //) originates from the Sanskrit word &#x27; () meaning &quot;water&quot;, and the word &quot;buri&quot; ( //) from Sanskrit &#x27; (); meaning &quot;town&quot; or &quot;city&quot;; hence the name of the province means &quot;city of water&quot;. The local Chinese name for the province is , which is a rendering of &quot;Bang Pla Soi&quot; () the former name of Mueang Chonburi district, the capital district of Chonburi province (this name is retained for one of Mueang Chonburi&#x27;s subdistricts.) The standard Chinese name for the province is a phonetic rendering of &quot;Chonburi&quot;, .

== History ==
Human habitation of the province dates back to the Neolithic era, when early inhabitants lived in the area along the Panthong river in modern day Phan Thong district. 

During the Dvaravati period, the city of Mueang Phra Rot (Phra That Noen That) was established close to the mouth of the Bang Pakong river in modern-day Phanat Nikhom District. The city was in the shape of an irregular rectangle and was surrounded by a moat. Mueang Phra Rot was established from the 600s to the 1000s and had goods imported from the Tang and Song dynasties and from either Persia or lower Mesopotamia. 

To the east of Phra Rot was Mueang Sri Phalo in modern-day Nong Mai Daeng, which was established near the end of Phra Rot in the 1000s. Located near the mouth of the Bang Pakong river, it became a wealthy port and fishing town, serving as a stopping point for Khmer, Vietnamese and Chinese barques before they ventured into the Chao Phraya river. However, it lost prominence in the 1300s when the mouth of the river became shallower due to sedimentation. As a result in the town&#x27;s economy declining, its inhabitants moved south to Bang Pla Soi. Construction of Sukhimvit road erased the town&#x27;s eastern wall.

=== Late 19th century to present ===
In the reign of King Nangklao, Rama III, Phra Intha-asa, The Governor of Phanat Nikhom I (Princely member of Nakhon Phanom royal family) took many immigrants (Nakhon Phanom Laotians, Named Lao Asa Pak Nam) from Samut Prakan and New Nakhon Phanom Laotians to Phanat Nikhom. The Siamese King at the time allowed them to establish a habitat between Chonburi and Chachoengsao (Named Phanat Nikhom in the present).

In 1892, Ko Sichang, an island off the mainland, served as a holiday point for King Chulalongkorn and his wife Queen Saovabha Phongsri. Chulalongkorn later built a summer palace called &quot;Phra Chuthathut Palace&quot; named after his son, Prince Chudadhuj Dharadilok, who was born on Ko Sichang. During the Franco-Siamese crisis of 1893, the island was occupied by the French. During this time, the island was a part of Samut Prakan province before being transferred to Chonburi province on 1 January 1943 as a minor district (&quot;king amphoe&quot;) in Si Racha district. Ko Sichang became its own district on 4 July 1994.

Following the end of World War II, coastal towns particularly Ang Sila witnessed an influx of Teochew Chinese migrants. The Vietnam War would also cause an influx of American G.I.s to arrive, particularly in Pattaya. This would go on to lead Chonburi province to become popular among foreign tourists.

== Symbols ==
The provincial seal shows the hill Khao Sam Muk, on which there is a &quot;sala&quot; with a statue of the goddess Chao Mae Sahm Muk, who, it is believed, protects seafarers and the local population.

The provincial tree and flower is the New Guinea rosewood (&quot;Pterocarpus indicus&quot;, called &quot;Mai Pradu&quot; in Thai). The provincial aquatic life is bamboo shark &quot;Chiloscyllium punctatum&quot;.

The provincial motto is &quot;Beautiful seas. Delicious Khao Lam. Sweet sugar cane. Fine weaving. The buffalo racing festival.&quot;

==Geography==
The province is on the Bay of Bangkok, the northern end of the Gulf of Thailand. The Khao Khiao mountain range stretches from the northwest to the southeast of the province. The plains of the north were long used for farming. Laem Chabang, between Chonburi and Pattaya, is one of the few deep-water harbours of Thailand. The total forest area is or 12.2 percent of provincial area.
===Wildlife sanctuary===
There is one wildlife sanctuary, along with three other wildlife sanctuaries, make up region 2 (Si Racha) of Thailand&#x27;s protected areas. 
* Khao Khio–Khao Chomphu Wildlife Sanctuary, 

The provincial permanent legal population rose at nearly four per cent annually, from 1,040,865 in 2000 to 1,554,365 in 2010. There is a large floating population of long-term non-Thai residents without permanent status, on a perpetual tourist visa and/or migrant workers (legal or not), as well as heavy, short-term tourist influxes.

==Demographics==
===Religion===
According to a 2015 survey, around 97.87% of the population of Chonburi practices Buddhism, followed by Islam with 1.56% and Christianity with 0.60%.



== Administrative divisions ==
=== Provincial government ===
Chonburi province consists of 11 districts (&quot;amphoe&quot;). These are further subdivided into 92 subdistricts (&quot;tambon&quot;) and 710 villages (&quot;muban&quot;).
* Pattaya is a special governed city in Bang Lamung district.
* Laem Chabang is a port city municipality in Si Racha and Bang Lamung districts.

=== Local government ===
The local governments are overseen by the Pattaya City Special Local Government in Pattaya and the Chonburi Provincial Administrative Organisation (CPOA, &quot; chonburi&quot;) throughout Chonburi. The 47 municipalities are split up into two city municipalities (&quot;thesaban nakhon&quot;), 10 town municipalities (&quot;thesaban mueang&quot;), and 35 subdistrict municipalities (&quot;thesaban tambon&quot;). Local communities are also overseen by 50 subdistrict administrative organisations (SAO, &quot;ongkan borihan suan tambon&quot;).

==Transport==
===Road===
The Bangkok-Chonburi-Pattaya Motorway (Hwy 7) is linked with Bangkok&#x27;s Outer Ring Road (Hwy 9) with another intersection at Si Nakharin and Rama IX Junction.

The Bang Na-Trat Highway (Hwy 34) from Bang Na travels through Bang Phli and crosses the Bang Pakong River into Chonburi. There is a Chonburi bypass that meets Sukhumvit Road (Hwy 3), passing Bang Saen Beach, Bang Phra, Pattaya and Sattahip.

===Airports===
Chonburi is about by road from Suvarnabhumi Airport (BKK), the country&#x27;s largest international airport. By road, it is accessed from Sukhumvit Road and Motorway 7 from Bangkok. Chonburi is also served by scheduled flights via U-Tapao International Airport (UTP), which is a 45-minute drive south of the city.

===Highways===
The main road through Chonburi is Thailand Route 3, also known as Sukhumvit Road. To the northeast, it connects to Bangkok, and to the south, it connects to Rayong province, Chanthaburi province and Trat province. Route 344 leads east to Klaeng (which is also on Route 3). Route 7 runs parallel to Route 3 but bypasses the densely populated coastal area, connecting to the beach resort city of Pattaya.

===Rail===
The State Railway of Thailand, the national passenger rail system, provides service in the province, with the main station being Chon Buri Railway Station.

== Health ==
Many hospitals exist in Chonburi, both public and private. Chonburi has one university hospital, Burapha University Hospital. Its main hospital operated by the Ministry of Public Health is Chonburi Hospital. Hospitals operated by other organisations, such as the Thai Red Cross Society&#x27;s Queen Savang Vadhana Memorial Hospital and the Queen Sirikit Naval Hospital run by the Royal Thai Navy, are also found in the province.

== Educational facilities ==
===Universities===
*Burapha University (BUU)
*Kasetsart University Si Racha Campus (KU SRC)
*Rajamangala University of Technology Tawan-ok (RMUTTO)
*Sripatum University Chonburi Campus (SPU)
*Thailand National Sports University (TNSU)
*Thammasat University Pattaya Campus (TU)

===Colleges===
*Graduate School of Public Administration, National Institute of Development Administration (GSPA NIDA)
*Interior College (IC)
*Panyapiwat Institute of Management (PIM)

== Human achievement index 2022 ==

Since 2003, the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) in Thailand has tracked progress on human development at a sub-national level using the Human achievement index (HAI), a composite index covering all eight key areas of human development. The National Economic and Social Development Board (NESDB) has taken over this task since 2017.


== Tourism ==

Some nine million visitors to the province were recorded in 2012, of which 6.1 million were from abroad, 2.2 million of these being Russian.

One major tourist attraction is the Chonburi Buffalo Race (งานประเพณีวิ่งควาย), which takes place in the districts of Ban Bueng and Nong Yai. The animals are dressed outrageously or creatively by owners. Assembled in the courtyard in front of the town hall, the buffaloes partake in racing or physical fitness and fashion contests. The Chonburi Buffalo Race festival started over 100 years ago. Usually, the races will be complemented with booths selling locally-made items, stage performances, games, and beauty contests. The annual Buffalo Race is held around the 11th lunar month, normally in October. It takes seven days and takes place on the field in front of the city and provincial government offices. The highlight of the festival is the buffalo race, which takes place on the last two days. This race is long. The prize for the first nose past the finish line is a trophy and some money.

Songkran day in Bangsaen (&quot;Ko Phra Sai Wan Lai Bangsaen&quot;) is a tradition that has been held continuously for over ten years at Bang Saen Beach and Laem Thaen. The event takes place between April 16–17 of each year. The highlight of this event is a contest in which the contestants build a sand Buddha at Bangsaen Beach. In each Buddha sand arch is a decoration. The combination of the sea atmosphere and Thai decorations has helped this become one of the most popular Songkran festivals in Thailand. Other activities also take place, such as meriting alms to monks, bathing Buddha images, pouring water on the elders, traditional sporting events, sea boxing competitions, and oyster sheep competitions. Seafood and local food are often sold, along with other local products as part of One Tambon One Product (OTOP). Well-known artists have also given concerts at the event.

== See also ==
* Chonburi F.C.
* Sriracha F.C.
* Pattaya United F.C.
* Supreme Chonburi VC

== References ==
== External links ==
* Provincial administration (Thai)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q207068" start="0" end="8" title="Chonburi province" label="Chonburi"/>
<link wikidata="Q50198" start="21" end="41" title="Provinces of Thailand" label="province of Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="76" end="92" title="Eastern Thailand#Administrative divisions" label="eastern Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q138589" start="120" end="128" title="Chonburi" label="Chonburi"/>
<link wikidata="Q334906" start="180" end="192" title="Chachoengsao province" label="Chachoengsao"/>
<link wikidata="Q327730" start="194" end="205" title="Chanthaburi province" label="Chanthaburi"/>
<link wikidata="Q335221" start="211" end="217" title="Rayong province" label="Rayong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359524" start="229" end="243" title="Bay of Bangkok" label="Bay of Bangkok"/>
<link wikidata="Q170919" start="260" end="267" title="Pattaya" label="Pattaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025958" start="345" end="357" title="Laem Chabang" label="Laem Chabang"/>
<link wikidata="Q11059" start="693" end="701" title="Sanskrit" label="Sanskrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q476013" start="1031" end="1055" title="Mueang Chonburi district" label="Mueang Chonburi district"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268307" start="1460" end="1469" title="Dvaravati" label="Dvaravati"/>
<link wikidata="Q9683" start="1799" end="1803" title="Tang dynasty" label="Tang"/>
<link wikidata="Q7462" start="1808" end="1822" title="Song dynasty" label="Song dynasties"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="1839" end="1845" title="Persia" label="Persia"/>
<link wikidata="Q14223170" start="1849" end="1866" title="lower Mesopotamia" label="lower Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q806449" start="2036" end="2053" title="Bang Pakong River" label="Bang Pakong river"/>
<link wikidata="Q216057" start="2160" end="2167" title="Barque" label="barques"/>
<link wikidata="Q118850" start="2198" end="2215" title="Chao Phraya River" label="Chao Phraya river"/>
<link wikidata="Q319669" start="2557" end="2565" title="Rama III" label="Rama III"/>
<link wikidata="Q475806" start="2946" end="2956" title="Ko Sichang district" label="Ko Sichang"/>
<link wikidata="Q158861" start="3016" end="3034" title="Chulalongkorn" label="King Chulalongkorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q467882" start="3048" end="3071" title="Saovabha Phongsri" label="Queen Saovabha Phongsri"/>
<link wikidata="Q13017342" start="3128" end="3150" title="Phra Chuthathut Palace" label="Phra Chuthathut Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q5115901" start="3178" end="3205" title="Chudadhuj Dharadilok" label="Prince Chudadhuj Dharadilok"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359846" start="3246" end="3275" title="Franco-Siamese crisis of 1893" label="Franco-Siamese crisis of 1893"/>
<link wikidata="Q271529" start="3359" end="3380" title="Samut Prakan province" label="Samut Prakan province"/>
<link wikidata="Q475061" start="3472" end="3483" title="king amphoe" label="king amphoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1819245" start="3886" end="3901" title="Seals of the provinces of Thailand" label="provincial seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q8536211" start="3917" end="3929" title="Khao Sam Muk" label="Khao Sam Muk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2141912" start="3957" end="3961" title="Sala (Thai architecture)" label="sala"/>
<link wikidata="Q13019783" start="4087" end="4102" title="list of Thai provincial trees" label="provincial tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q979014" start="4148" end="4167" title="Pterocarpus indicus" label="Pterocarpus indicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q805999" start="4245" end="4257" title="bamboo shark" label="bamboo shark"/>
<link wikidata="Q29227" start="4264" end="4287" title="Chiloscyllium punctatum" label="Chiloscyllium punctatum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359524" start="4467" end="4481" title="Bay of Bangkok" label="Bay of Bangkok"/>
<link wikidata="Q17061593" start="4529" end="4539" title="Khao Khiao Massif" label="Khao Khiao"/>
<link wikidata="Q105773345" start="4937" end="4956" title="Protected Areas Regional Offices of Thailand" label="region 2 (Si Racha)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4996" end="5037" title="Khao Khio–Khao Chomphu Wildlife Sanctuary" label="Khao Khio–Khao Chomphu Wildlife Sanctuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q170404" start="5277" end="5289" title="tourist visa" label="tourist visa"/>
<link wikidata="Q15320003" start="5297" end="5311" title="migrant worker" label="migrant worker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209722" start="5491" end="5499" title="Buddhism in Thailand" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q74323" start="5513" end="5518" title="Islam in Thailand" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q4501470" start="5534" end="5546" title="Christianity in Thailand" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q475061" start="5673" end="5679" title="districts of Thailand" label="amphoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3491994" start="5725" end="5736" title="subdistrict" label="subdistrict"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077097" start="5745" end="5751" title="tambon" label="tambon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368879" start="5783" end="5788" title="muban" label="muban"/>
<link wikidata="Q170919" start="5799" end="5806" title="Pattaya" label="Pattaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025958" start="5861" end="5873" title="Laem Chabang" label="Laem Chabang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155688" start="6236" end="6251" title="thesaban nakhon" label="thesaban nakhon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155688" start="6284" end="6311" title="Thesaban Mueang" label="&amp;quot;thesaban mueang&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155688" start="6355" end="6370" title="Thesaban Tambon" label="thesaban tambon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1861" start="6596" end="6603" title="Bangkok" label="Bangkok"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972305" start="6859" end="6873" title="Sukhumvit Road" label="Sukhumvit Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q806451" start="6891" end="6906" title="Bang Saen Beach" label="Bang Saen Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q194316" start="6988" end="7008" title="Suvarnabhumi Airport" label="Suvarnabhumi Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972305" start="7095" end="7109" title="Sukhumvit Road" label="Sukhumvit Road"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7114" end="7124" title="Thai motorway network#Motorway route 7" label="Motorway 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371432" start="7188" end="7217" title="U-Tapao International Airport" label="U-Tapao International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972305" start="7321" end="7337" title="Thailand Route 3" label="Thailand Route 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q1861" start="7402" end="7409" title="Bangkok" label="Bangkok"/>
<link wikidata="Q241884" start="7486" end="7499" title="Trat province" label="Trat province"/>
<link wikidata="Q6578651" start="7501" end="7510" title="Thailand Route 44" label="Route 344"/>
<link wikidata="Q475775" start="7525" end="7531" title="Klaeng" label="Klaeng"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165702" start="7706" end="7731" title="State Railway of Thailand" label="State Railway of Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q6633295" start="7831" end="7856" title="Chon Buri Railway Station" label="Chon Buri Railway Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q55639381" start="7969" end="7996" title="Burapha University Hospital" label="Burapha University Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q5970641" start="8032" end="8057" title="Ministry of Public Health (Thailand)" label="Ministry of Public Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q30279968" start="8061" end="8078" title="Chonburi Hospital" label="Chonburi Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q4922087" start="8135" end="8157" title="Thai Red Cross" label="Thai Red Cross Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q27671281" start="8165" end="8203" title="Queen Savang Vadhana Memorial Hospital" label="Queen Savang Vadhana Memorial Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q85847017" start="8212" end="8240" title="Queen Sirikit Naval Hospital" label="Queen Sirikit Naval Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q2427907" start="8252" end="8267" title="Royal Thai Navy" label="Royal Thai Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q458530" start="8351" end="8369" title="Burapha University" label="Burapha University"/>
<link wikidata="Q452406" start="8377" end="8413" title="Kasetsart University" label="Kasetsart University Si Racha Campus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1627659" start="8480" end="8515" title="Sripatum University" label="Sripatum University Chonburi Campus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209733" start="8567" end="8602" title="Thammasat University" label="Thammasat University Pattaya Campus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1528410" start="8667" end="8715" title="National Institute of Development Administration" label="National Institute of Development Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q161718" start="8846" end="8882" title="United Nations Development Programme" label="United Nations Development Programme"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8978" end="9001" title="Human achievement index" label="Human achievement index"/>
<link wikidata="Q6640015" start="9082" end="9128" title="National Economic and Social Development Board" label="National Economic and Social Development Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q591259" start="9904" end="9915" title="lunar month" label="lunar month"/>
<link wikidata="Q215014" start="10232" end="10240" title="Songkran (Thailand)" label="Songkran"/>
<link wikidata="Q806451" start="10248" end="10256" title="Bangsaen" label="Bangsaen"/>
<link wikidata="Q931406" start="10793" end="10797" title="alms" label="alms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799508" start="11027" end="11049" title="One Tambon One Product" label="One Tambon One Product"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387004" start="11134" end="11147" title="Chonburi F.C." label="Chonburi F.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q20584526" start="11150" end="11163" title="Sriracha F.C." label="Sriracha F.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q30644467" start="11166" end="11185" title="Pattaya United F.C. (2023)" label="Pattaya United F.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q17064340" start="11188" end="11207" title="Supreme Chonburi VC" label="Supreme Chonburi VC"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="308616" wikidata="Q7181285" url="?curid=308616" title="Phelsuma astriata semicarinata">
<text>Phelsuma astriata semicarinata is a subspecies of Seychelles day gecko. It is a small, slender gecko, has a bright green colour and feeds on insects. It is found on different islands of the Seychelles, where it often lives near human dwellings.

== Description ==
The body of this smallish day gecko is lime green with rost-coloured dots and bars on the back which are irregularly shaped. Those reddish dots form a thin mid-dorsdal stripe, which may be broken and may have some bars extending from it. There is a rust-coloured stripe between the nostril and the eye. On the head there is a rust-coloured, v-shaped marking with two transverse bars. Males often have a bluish or turquoise coloured tail and lower back. On both sides of the snout, a reddish-brown stripe is extending from the nostrils to the eye. The undersurface of the body is white. These lizards reach a total length of about 12.5 cm.
== Distribution ==
This gecko is endemic to the Seychelles island Praslin but it has also been introduced to La Réunion, where it had been recorded first in 2004.

== Habitat ==
This species is typically found on coconut palms and banana trees. It often lives near human settlements.

== Diet ==
These day geckos feed on insects, small spiders, fruit, nectar and pollen.

== Reproduction ==
&quot;Phelsuma astriata semicarinata&quot; normally lays two 10 mm large eggs. The eggs are not glued to leaves, as this species is among the &quot;non-gluer&quot; variety. Eggs should generally hatch in 70 – 75 days and should be incubated at approximately 25 degrees Celsius.

== Care and maintenance in captivity ==
&quot;Phelsuma astriata semicarinata&quot; should be housen in pairs. They need a vertically oriented and well planted terrarium with vertically oriented and horizontally oriented bambus sticks as thick as a thumb.

== Bibliography ==
*Henkel, F.-W. and W. Schmidt (1995) &quot;Amphibien und Reptilien Madagaskars, der Maskarenen, Seychellen und Komoren&quot;. Ulmer Stuttgart. 
*McKeown, Sean (1993) &quot;The general care and maintenance of day geckos&quot;. Advanced Vivarium Systems, Lakeside CA.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q68947" start="36" end="46" title="subspecies" label="subspecies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2711366" start="50" end="70" title="Seychelles day gecko" label="Seychelles day gecko"/>
<link wikidata="Q16546828" start="95" end="100" title="gecko" label="gecko"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042" start="190" end="200" title="Seychelles" label="Seychelles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429208" start="290" end="299" title="day gecko" label="day gecko"/>
<link wikidata="Q17070" start="1012" end="1022" title="La Réunion" label="La Réunion"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="308619" wikidata="Q285214" url="?curid=308619" title="Lesser bushbaby">
<text>Lesser bushbabies, or lesser galagos, are strepsirrhine primates of the genus Galago. They are classified, along with the other bushbaby and galago genera in the family Galagidae. They are probably the most numerous primate in Africa, and can be found in every large forest on the continent, inhabiting forested areas, savannas, riverine bush and open woodlands.

They mark their territory by urinating on their hands and leaving traces on the trees they climb across, and they follow these detectable paths through the trees night after night. Males will also urinate on females to mark them. They are related to lorises, and have similar behavior and anatomy. They are much faster, however, and typically hunt by speed rather than by stealth. Primitive bushbabies are thought to have been the ancestors of all lemurs.

==Appearance==
Lesser bushbabies are small, woolly primates with long tails and oversized, naked ears. Different species are sometimes indistinguishable even when compared side by side. Additionally, there is often notable variation in coloration and body size even within species and populations. Their coat varies across body regions as well as between species, typically ranging from black, brown, and grey to white, with many showing a greenish, reddish, and orangeish tint to the sides and limbs. Some species have a nasal strip while others have distinct dark rings around the eyes.

Their neck is very flexible, so that the head can turn 180 degrees, which gives them a broad field of vision which is helpful in locating prey; they also have highly mobile ears that allow them to track insects as they hunt. Round flat pads on their fingertips, between their fingers, and on their palms at the base of their thumbs enable them to firmly grip the branches. They also have pointed, keeled nails that give them stability as they cling to smooth tree surfaces and reach for insects into crevices, using their rough narrow tongue.

==Distribution and habitat==
Lesser bushbabies are distributed through most of Sub-Saharan Africa, ranging from Senegal east to Somalia and down to South Africa (excepting its southern extreme) and are present in almost every country in between. However, there are great differences in their extent and distribution by species. &quot;G. senegalensis&quot; is the most widespread species, extending from Senegal in the west across central Africa to eastern Africa. &quot;G. moholi&quot; has a broad distribution over much of southern Africa. &quot;G. gallarum&quot; has more restricted distributions in eastern Africa, and &quot;G. matschiei&quot; is restricted to Uganda.

Lesser bushbabies are found in a variety of habitats, such as woodland, bushland, savanna, montane forest, riverine habitats; favouring trees with little grass around them.

==Diet==
Bushbabies generally consume three types of food in various proportions and combinations: animal prey, fruit, and gum. Although their diet consists mainly on small invertebrates (mostly insects), some species also eat frogs and possibly other small animals.

==Behavior==
Galagos are tree dwelling primates and are capable of leaping significant distances, up to and sometimes greater than , using flattened disks on their feet and hands as a way of grasping branches. However they do walk on the ground sometimes, either bipedally or on all fours.

Galagos are nocturnal animals, foraging at night and sleeping in trees during the day. Adults are mainly solitary and maintain social contact mainly through vocal communication. There are up to 18 distinct calls, used mainly for territorial advertisement and long-distance spacing. All these calls are part of three categories, defensive and aggressive, social contact, and annunciatory. They also have very highly developed hearing.

Bushbabies are solitary foragers, however they do meet up at night in groups. Some species, such as &quot;G. moholi&quot;, can be found sleeping in groups of 2 to 7 during the day. These groups are typically composed of a female and several of her young. At night the groups separate to forage independently. Males are mostly aggressive to each other; dominant males are the only ones that defend territories and are often the largest and most aggressive.

==Breeding==

Lesser bushbabies usually give birth during the rainy season. The offspring are usually twins. After the birth there is usually a second period of heat. A female’s gestation period is between 111–142 days and will usually consist of the female mating with up to 6 different males.

Lesser bushbaby mothers initially shelter their offspring in a nest or tree hollow, later on concealing the infants in foliage while they forage at night.

==Taxonomy==



==References==
==External links==
* Primate Info Net &quot;Galago&quot; Factsheet</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q285214" start="0" end="17" title="Lesser bushbaby" label="Lesser bushbabies"/>
<link wikidata="Q285214" start="22" end="36" title="Lesser bushbaby" label="lesser galagos"/>
<link wikidata="Q82265" start="42" end="55" title="strepsirrhine" label="strepsirrhine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7380" start="56" end="63" title="primate" label="primate"/>
<link wikidata="Q185239" start="141" end="147" title="galago" label="galago"/>
<link wikidata="Q185239" start="169" end="178" title="Galagidae" label="Galagidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q3428868" start="614" end="619" title="loris" label="loris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192405" start="812" end="817" title="lemur" label="lemur"/>
<link wikidata="Q132959" start="2034" end="2052" title="Sub-Saharan Africa" label="Sub-Saharan Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041" start="2067" end="2074" title="Senegal" label="Senegal"/>
<link wikidata="Q77332" start="2289" end="2304" title="Galago senegalensis" label="G. senegalensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143192" start="2425" end="2434" title="Galago moholi" label="G. moholi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206221" start="2502" end="2513" title="Galago gallarum" label="G. gallarum"/>
<link wikidata="Q917099" start="2583" end="2595" title="Galago matschiei" label="G. matschiei"/>
<link wikidata="Q52105" start="2672" end="2679" title="habitat" label="habitat"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241565" start="2690" end="2698" title="woodland" label="woodland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5001522" start="2700" end="2708" title="bushland" label="bushland"/>
<link wikidata="Q42320" start="2710" end="2717" title="savanna" label="savanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141462" start="2719" end="2733" title="montane forest" label="montane forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q3314483" start="2914" end="2919" title="fruit" label="fruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q903081" start="2925" end="2928" title="Natural gum" label="gum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390" start="2997" end="3004" title="insects" label="insects"/>
<link wikidata="Q53636" start="3029" end="3033" title="frog" label="frog"/>
<link wikidata="Q372949" start="3333" end="3338" title="biped" label="biped"/>
<link wikidata="Q309179" start="3373" end="3389" title="nocturnal animal" label="nocturnal animal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143192" start="3902" end="3911" title="Galago moholi" label="G. moholi"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="308623" wikidata="Q55610" url="?curid=308623" title="Athena (video game)">
<text>is a 1986 platform arcade video game developed and published by SNK. Conversions were later released for the NES console and ZX Spectrum and Commodore 64 home computers.

The game&#x27;s protagonist, Princess Athena, has gone on to appear in later fighting games by SNK as a secret character or assistant to her descendant Athena Asamiya, a frequent main character in these games.

==Plot==
Athena was the young, headstrong princess of the heavenly Kingdom of Victory. She was bored of the monotonous daily life in the palace and desired exciting adventures. One day, she opened the &quot;Door Which Shouldn&#x27;t Be Opened&quot; in the basement of Castle Victory, said to lead to a savage and deadly place. As she dared cross the doorway, it caused her to fall from the skies and to another realm called Fantasy World, which was dominated by the evil Emperor Dante. After her flowing dress was lost while catching the wind for her fall, the perilous adventures of Princess Athena began as she landed in a wilderness overrun by beast-like warriors and more dangers than she could ever wish for. She readied to fight for her life and arm herself, with no other choice than to face the ruthless Dante and every obstacle on her way, to free this kingdom and make it back alive to her own.

After Athena defeats Dante, it all begins anew in the sequel, &quot;Athena: Full Throttle&quot;, in which the princess, again bored, opens the &quot;Door Which Shouldn&#x27;t Be Opened B&quot;, disregarding her loyal maid Helene&#x27;s advice, and they both fall to Elysium World, where they face off against other villains.

Many of the game&#x27;s elements are inspired by Greek mythology or ancient Roman culture such as weapons, equipment, items and enemy designs, while Princess Athena herself is named after the Greek goddess Athena.

==Gameplay==
Upon landing, unarmed and nearly nude, the princess only has her kicks to fend off the approaching monsters, but she may collect the dead enemies&#x27;s various weapons and also has the chance to find shields, headgear and armor to cover her body, although these will be lost after withstanding some attacks. Her journey requires leaping and climbing as well as fighting through the land&#x27;s eight hazardous worlds, each leading up to an oversized enemy that must be dealt with before proceeding to the next area. The use of certain weapons such as a hammer allows Athena to break through stone blocks, sometimes revealing not only armor but magic items such as Mercury&#x27;s sandals that, when worn, allow her to make great leaps.

The game features certain role-playing video game elements to complement the platform action. Princess Athena has to defeat enemies such as the final boss by using various mythological weapons, items and equipment. Without some items, she cannot make it through the adventure.

== Ports ==
&quot;Athena&quot; was later converted for the NES by Micronics. Conversions were also done for the ZX Spectrum and Commodore 64 in 1987 by Ocean Software and released under their Imagine label.

The NES version was only released for North American homes until the PlayStation Network saw a release of the arcade original in 2011. Both the arcade and NES versions of &quot;Athena&quot; are eventually included in &quot;SNK 40th Anniversary Collection&quot;, released for the Nintendo Switch in 2018, and then in 2019 for the PlayStation 4, Windows, and Xbox One.

The game was released on the Nintendo Switch via the Nintendo eShop on December 13, 2018, by Hamster Corporation as part of their &quot;Arcade Archives&quot; series, and also on the PlayStation 4 via the PlayStation Network on December 19 as part of the same series.

== Reception ==
In Japan, &quot;Game Machine&quot; listed &quot;Athena&quot; on their September 1, 1986, issue as being the ninth most-successful table arcade unit of the month.

== Analysis ==
The game has been described as one of the first cases where a video game received a playable female character.

==Legacy==
===Sequels===
A sequel, &quot;Psycho Soldier&quot;, was released in the arcades in 1987. Another sequel, &quot;&quot;, was released for the PlayStation in 1999. Two mobile games were released in 2006: &quot;Athena: Full Throttle&quot; and &quot;Athena On Stage&quot;.

==See also==

* SNK vs. Capcom (series)

==References==
==External links==
* 
* &quot;Athena&quot; at Arcade History
* &quot;Athena&quot; video game at Neo Geo Battle Coliseum official website </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q828322" start="10" end="18" title="Platform game" label="platform"/>
<link wikidata="Q192851" start="19" end="36" title="arcade video game" label="arcade video game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073880" start="64" end="67" title="SNK" label="SNK"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="69" end="100" title="#Ports" label="Conversions were later released"/>
<link wikidata="Q172742" start="109" end="112" title="Nintendo Entertainment System" label="NES"/>
<link wikidata="Q23882" start="125" end="136" title="ZX Spectrum" label="ZX Spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q99775" start="141" end="153" title="Commodore 64" label="Commodore 64"/>
<link wikidata="Q846224" start="248" end="261" title="fighting game" label="fighting game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062345" start="275" end="291" title="Secret character (video games)" label="secret character"/>
<link wikidata="Q768064" start="323" end="337" title="Athena Asamiya" label="Athena Asamiya"/>
<link wikidata="Q863048" start="424" end="432" title="princess" label="princess"/>
<link wikidata="Q16560" start="519" end="525" title="palace" label="palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q911871" start="1007" end="1017" title="wilderness" label="wilderness"/>
<link wikidata="Q34726" start="1663" end="1678" title="Greek mythology" label="Greek mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="1682" end="1703" title="Ancient Rome" label="ancient Roman culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q37122" start="1820" end="1826" title="Athena" label="Athena"/>
<link wikidata="Q10791" start="1875" end="1879" title="nudity" label="nude"/>
<link wikidata="Q276453" start="1941" end="1948" title="monster" label="monster"/>
<link wikidata="Q131559" start="2043" end="2049" title="shield" label="shield"/>
<link wikidata="Q485027" start="2065" end="2070" title="body armor" label="armor"/>
<link wikidata="Q25294" start="2396" end="2402" title="hammer" label="hammer"/>
<link wikidata="Q81741" start="2487" end="2492" title="magic (paranormal)" label="magic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150" start="2507" end="2514" title="Mercury (mythology)" label="Mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q744038" start="2605" end="2628" title="role-playing video game" label="role-playing video game"/>
<link wikidata="Q468388" start="2729" end="2733" title="boss (video gaming)" label="boss"/>
<link wikidata="Q851989" start="2898" end="2907" title="Conversion (software)" label="converted"/>
<link wikidata="Q172742" start="2916" end="2919" title="Nintendo Entertainment System" label="NES"/>
<link wikidata="Q23882" start="2969" end="2980" title="ZX Spectrum" label="ZX Spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q99775" start="2985" end="2997" title="Commodore 64" label="Commodore 64"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408498" start="3009" end="3023" title="Ocean Software" label="Ocean Software"/>
<link wikidata="Q3148930" start="3049" end="3056" title="Imagine Software" label="Imagine"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="3103" end="3116" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q719629" start="3134" end="3153" title="PlayStation Network" label="PlayStation Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q65040546" start="3288" end="3319" title="SNK 40th Anniversary Collection" label="SNK 40th Anniversary Collection"/>
<link wikidata="Q19610114" start="3344" end="3359" title="Nintendo Switch" label="Nintendo Switch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5014725" start="3394" end="3407" title="PlayStation 4" label="PlayStation 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="3409" end="3416" title="Windows" label="Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q13361286" start="3422" end="3430" title="Xbox One" label="Xbox One"/>
<link wikidata="Q3070866" start="3486" end="3500" title="Nintendo eShop" label="Nintendo eShop"/>
<link wikidata="Q11326720" start="3526" end="3545" title="Hamster Corporation" label="Hamster Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q16485509" start="3569" end="3584" title="Arcade Archives" label="Arcade Archives"/>
<link wikidata="Q719629" start="3637" end="3656" title="PlayStation Network" label="PlayStation Network"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3977" end="4004" title="Gender representation in video games#Portrayal of women" label="a playable female character"/>
<link wikidata="Q3041940" start="4048" end="4062" title="Psycho Soldier" label="Psycho Soldier"/>
<link wikidata="Q10677" start="4158" end="4169" title="PlayStation (console)" label="PlayStation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1039472" start="4303" end="4326" title="SNK vs. Capcom (series)" label="SNK vs. Capcom (series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3275594" start="4439" end="4462" title="Neo Geo Battle Coliseum" label="Neo Geo Battle Coliseum"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="308628" wikidata="Q712519" url="?curid=308628" title="50 (number)">
<text>50 (fifty) is the natural number following 49 and preceding 51.

==In mathematics==

Fifty is the smallest number that is the sum of two non-zero square numbers in two distinct ways. 50 is a Stirling number of the first kind and a Narayana number.

==In science==
* The fifth magic number in nuclear physics

==In religion==
* The traditional number of years in a jubilee period.
* In Hindu tantric tradition, the number 50 holds significance as the 50 Rudras in the Malinīvijayottara correlate with the 50 phonemes of Sanskrit, as well as with the 50 severed heads worn around goddess Kali&#x27;s head. The mantra &quot;Aham&quot; (&quot;I am&quot;), as laid out in the Vijñāna Bhairava represents the first अ(a) and last ह(ha) phonemes of the Sanskrit alphabet and is believed to represent ultimate reality, in accordance with its non-dual philosophy.

==In other fields==
* The percentage (50%) equivalent to one half, so that the phrase &quot;fifty-fifty&quot; commonly expresses something divided equally in two; in business this is often denoted as being the ultimate in equal partnership
* In years of marriage, the gold or &quot;golden&quot; wedding anniversary

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q712519" start="0" end="2" title="50 (number)" label="50"/>
<link wikidata="Q712519" start="4" end="9" title="50 (number)" label="fifty"/>
<link wikidata="Q21199" start="18" end="32" title="natural number" label="natural number"/>
<link wikidata="Q712758" start="43" end="45" title="49 (number)" label="49"/>
<link wikidata="Q895860" start="60" end="62" title="51 (number)" label="51"/>
<link wikidata="Q50705" start="146" end="160" title="square numbers" label="square numbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2657556" start="191" end="224" title="Stirling number of the first kind" label="Stirling number of the first kind"/>
<link wikidata="Q6965520" start="231" end="246" title="Narayana number" label="Narayana number"/>
<link wikidata="Q11606" start="276" end="288" title="magic number (physics)" label="magic number"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194545" start="364" end="371" title="Jubilee (biblical)" label="jubilee"/>
<link wikidata="Q181510" start="391" end="408" title="Tantra" label="tantric tradition"/>
<link wikidata="Q7377524" start="453" end="459" title="Rudras" label="Rudras"/>
<link wikidata="Q1734884" start="467" end="484" title="Kashmir Shaivism" label="Malinīvijayottara"/>
<link wikidata="Q8183" start="507" end="514" title="phoneme" label="phoneme"/>
<link wikidata="Q11059" start="519" end="527" title="Sanskrit" label="Sanskrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q132127" start="586" end="596" title="Kali" label="Kali&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q131510" start="608" end="614" title="mantra" label="mantra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2005649" start="671" end="687" title="Vijñāna Bhairava Tantra" label="Vijñāna Bhairava"/>
<link wikidata="Q65088854" start="792" end="808" title="ultimate reality" label="ultimate reality"/>
<link wikidata="Q2505322" start="833" end="841" title="Nonduality (spirituality)" label="non-dual"/>
<link wikidata="Q11229" start="881" end="891" title="percentage" label="percentage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136848" start="1150" end="1169" title="wedding anniversary" label="wedding anniversary"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="308629" wikidata="Q1351052" url="?curid=308629" title="James Augustus Grant">
<text>Lieutenant-Colonel James Augustus Grant (11 April 1827 – 11 February 1892) was a Scottish explorer of eastern equatorial Africa. He made contributions to the journals of various learned societies, the most notable being the &quot;Botany of the Speke and Grant Expedition&quot; in vol. xxix of the &quot;Transactions of the Linnean Society&quot;. He married in 1865 and settled down at Nairn, where he died in 1892. He was buried in the crypt of St Paul&#x27;s Cathedral. Grant&#x27;s gazelle, one of the largest gazelles in Africa, was named after him.

==Early life==
Grant was born at Nairn in the Scottish Highlands, where his father was the parish minister, and educated at Nairn Academy, Aberdeen Grammar School and Marischal College, Aberdeen. In 1846 he joined the Indian army. He saw active service in the Sikh War (1848–49), served throughout the Indian Mutiny of 1857, and was wounded in the operations for the relief of Lucknow.

==African expeditions==
He returned to England in 1858, and in 1860 joined John Hanning Speke in the memorable expedition which solved the problem of the Nile sources. The expedition left Zanzibar in October 1860 and reached Gondokoro, where the travellers were again in touch with what they regarded as civilization, in February 1863. Speke was the leader, but Grant carried out several investigations independently and made valuable botanical collections. He acted throughout in absolute loyalty to his comrade. 

In 1864 he published, as supplementary to Speke&#x27;s account of their journey, &quot;A Walk across Africa&quot;, in which he dealt particularly with &quot;the ordinary life and pursuits, the habits and feelings of the natives&quot; and the economic value of the countries traversed. In 1864 he was awarded the Patron&#x27;s Medal of the Royal Geographical Society, and in 1866 given the Companionship of the Bath in recognition of his services in the expedition.

Grant served in the intelligence department of the Abyssinian expedition of 1868; for this he was made a Companion of the Order of the Star of India and received the Abyssinian War Medal. At the close of the war he retired from the army with the rank of lieutenant-colonel.

==Grant&#x27;s illness in Africa==

In his book, &quot;A Walk across Africa&quot;, Grant gives the following description of his illness, which broke out when they reached the native kingdom of Karague, on the western side of Lake Victoria in December 1861.

:(page 151): &quot;The following account of my own ailments I give, not with a wish to parade them, but in order to convey information:- Having had fevers twice a month, in December my usual complaint assumed a new form. The right leg, from above the knee, became deformed with inflammation, and remained for a month in this unaccountable state, giving intense pain, which was relieved temporarily by a deep incision and copious discharge. For three months abscesses formed, and other incisions were made; my strength was prostrated; the knee stiff and alarmingly bent, and walking was impracticable. Many cures were sought out and attempted by the natives, who all may have sympathized with me in my sufferings, which they saw were scarcely endurable; but I had great faith – was all along cheerful and happy, except at the crises of this helpless state, when I felt it would have been preferable to be nearer home. The disease ran its course, and daily, to bring out the accumulated discharge, I stripped my leg like a leech. Bombay (Sidi Mubarak Bombay) (an Interpreter, a Guide and Explorer) had heard of a poultice made of cow-dung, salt, and mud from the lake; this was placed on hot, but merely produced the effect of a tight bandage. Baraka (another interpreter) was certain a serpent had spat upon my leg- &quot;it could not have been a bite&quot;. Dr. M&#x27;nanagee, the sultan&#x27;s brother, knew the disease perfectly; he could send me a cure for it – and a mild gentle peasant of the Wanyambo race came with his wife, a young pleasing like person, to attend me. With the soft touch of a woman he examined the limb, made cuts over the skin with a penknife, ordered all lookers-on outside the hut, when his wife produced a scroll of plantain-leaf, in which was a black paste. This was moistened from the mouth and rubbed into the bleeding cuts, making them smart; afterwards a small piece of lava was dangled against my leg and tied as a charm round the ankle. ...

:These cures had no apparent effect, but the disease did improve. By the fifth month the complaint had exhausted itself; at last I was able to be out of the hut inhaling the sweet air, and once more permitted to behold the works of God&#x27;s creation in the beautiful lake and hills below me. 

:(page 187): By the end of March 1862 there were some hopes of my leaving Karague to join Speke in Buganda, Uganda. The king (Muteesa I of Buganda) had sent an officer and forty of his men to convey me up to the (Buganda) kingdom I so long wished to see. ... ... Being unable to walk, I was placed in a wicker stretcher (14 April 1862), and trotted off on the heads of four Waganda (Baganda, tribesmen of the area).

:(pages 189–90): On our journey, the stretcher was changed from head to the shoulder of the Waganda, who went at the rate of six miles an hour, jostling and paining my limb unmercifully. The coach and four, as I may term it, was put down every mile, or less, that the bearers might rest, laugh, joke, ... One great difficulty was to make them carry the conveyance so that the country in front could be seen in travelling; this they, for some reason, refused to do, and persisted in carrying me head first, instead of feet (fig 1-10).

:(page 210): The stretcher which had carried me part of the way from Karague had been discarded, as the Waganda saw my only ailment was lameness and a stiff knee joint.

:(page 246-7): (July 1862). Speke asked me whether I was able to make a flying march of it with him, while the baggage might be sent on towards Unyoro. At that time I was positively unable to walk twenty miles a day, especially miles of Uganda marching, through bogs and over rough ground. I therefore yielded reluctantly to the necessity of our parting; and I am anxious to be explicit on this point, as some have hastily inferred that my companion did not wish me to share in the gratification of seeing the river. Nothing could be more contrary to the fact. My state of health alone prevented me from accompanying Speke to set at rest for geographers the latitude of the interesting locality, as to which we were perfectly satisfied from native reports.

Grant&#x27;s illness prevented him from being with Speke when Speke became the first white man to see the outpouring of the White Nile from Lake Victoria. It may be the first recorded case and first description of &quot;Mycobacterium ulcerans&quot; infection (Buruli ulcer). The print in his book shows Grant being carried on a wicker stretcher, leaving Karague.

==Family==
Grant married in 1865 Margaret Thompson Laurie, daughter of Andrew Laurie of Edinburgh, and an heiress of Sir Peter Laurie, her great-uncle. Their two sons became involved in Africa, James Augustus Grant as a surveyor and explorer, and Alister Grant (died 1900) killed in the Second Anglo-Boer War. There were three daughters, Mary, Christian and Margaret. Their eldest daughter married in 1905 Thomas Mackay as his second wife, dying in 1907. Christian married Harry Goschen in 1893.

==References==
===Attribution===

==External links==

* A Walk Across Africa @ the Internet Archive</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4368198" start="0" end="18" title="Lieutenant colonel (United Kingdom)" label="Lieutenant-Colonel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351052" start="19" end="39" title="James Augustus Grant" label="James Augustus Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="81" end="89" title="Scotland" label="Scottish"/>
<link wikidata="Q176649" start="90" end="98" title="List of explorers" label="explorer"/>
<link wikidata="Q980084" start="385" end="390" title="Nairn" label="Nairn"/>
<link wikidata="Q735222" start="471" end="491" title="Grant&amp;#x27;s Gazelle" label="Grant&amp;#x27;s gazelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q980084" start="587" end="592" title="Nairn" label="Nairn"/>
<link wikidata="Q106652" start="600" end="618" title="Scottish highlands" label="Scottish Highlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q6959753" start="678" end="691" title="Nairn Academy" label="Nairn Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4666924" start="693" end="716" title="Aberdeen Grammar School" label="Aberdeen Grammar School"/>
<link wikidata="Q11838975" start="721" end="738" title="Marischal College" label="Marischal College"/>
<link wikidata="Q36405" start="740" end="748" title="Aberdeen, Scotland" label="Aberdeen"/>
<link wikidata="Q243590" start="814" end="822" title="Second Anglo-Sikh War" label="Sikh War"/>
<link wikidata="Q129864" start="856" end="869" title="Indian Mutiny" label="Indian Mutiny"/>
<link wikidata="Q47916" start="931" end="938" title="Lucknow" label="Lucknow"/>
<link wikidata="Q125084" start="1016" end="1034" title="John Hanning Speke" label="John Hanning Speke"/>
<link wikidata="Q3392" start="1095" end="1099" title="Nile" label="Nile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774" start="1129" end="1137" title="Zanzibar" label="Zanzibar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391631" start="1166" end="1175" title="Gondokoro" label="Gondokoro"/>
<link wikidata="Q103817" start="1677" end="1683" title="Indigenous people" label="native"/>
<link wikidata="Q3254189" start="1769" end="1788" title="Patron&amp;#x27;s Medal" label="Patron&amp;#x27;s Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q691152" start="1796" end="1822" title="Royal Geographical Society" label="Royal Geographical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q506369" start="1846" end="1871" title="Order of the Bath" label="Companionship of the Bath"/>
<link wikidata="Q115" start="1974" end="1984" title="Ethiopia" label="Abyssinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330936" start="2045" end="2071" title="Order of the Star of India" label="Order of the Star of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q3603883" start="2089" end="2109" title="Abyssinian War Medal" label="Abyssinian War Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5505" start="2423" end="2436" title="Lake Victoria" label="Lake Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q484199" start="3492" end="3511" title="Sidi Mubarak Bombay" label="Sidi Mubarak Bombay"/>
<link wikidata="Q210439" start="3517" end="3528" title="Interpreter" label="Interpreter"/>
<link wikidata="Q14290559" start="3532" end="3537" title="Guide" label="Guide"/>
<link wikidata="Q116967296" start="3542" end="3550" title="Explorer" label="Explorer"/>
<link wikidata="Q473748" start="4830" end="4837" title="Buganda" label="Buganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036" start="4839" end="4845" title="Uganda" label="Uganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q889311" start="4857" end="4877" title="Muteesa I of Buganda" label="Muteesa I of Buganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q403656" start="5114" end="5121" title="Baganda" label="Baganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q889897" start="5997" end="6003" title="Bunyoro" label="Unyoro"/>
<link wikidata="Q4814791" start="6735" end="6745" title="White Nile" label="White Nile"/>
<link wikidata="Q141154" start="6831" end="6853" title="Mycobacterium ulcerans" label="Mycobacterium ulcerans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017169" start="6871" end="6883" title="Buruli ulcer" label="Buruli ulcer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7175372" start="7092" end="7108" title="Sir Peter Laurie" label="Sir Peter Laurie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7527372" start="7169" end="7189" title="Sir James Augustus Grant, 1st Baronet" label="James Augustus Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q215112" start="7262" end="7283" title="Second Anglo-Boer War" label="Second Anglo-Boer War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7792095" start="7381" end="7394" title="Thomas Mackay" label="Thomas Mackay"/>
<link wikidata="Q28026849" start="7448" end="7461" title="Harry Goschen" label="Harry Goschen"/>
<link wikidata="Q461" start="7555" end="7571" title="Internet Archive" label="Internet Archive"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="308632" wikidata="Q1199598" url="?curid=308632" title="The Black Obelisk">
<text>The Black Obelisk () is a novel written in 1956 by the German author Erich Maria Remarque. This novel paints a portrait of Germany in the early 1920s, a period marked by hyperinflation and rising nationalism.

Ludwig, the protagonist, is in his mid twenties; just like most of his friends, he is a World War I veteran. Although aspiring to be a poet, he works for a friend, Georg, managing the office of a small tombstone company. He tries to earn some extra money as a private tutor to a son of a bookstore owner, and by playing the organ at the chapel of a local insane asylum.

Thanks to this diversity of activities, Ludwig interacts with a wide cross-section of the German population of his town and the surrounding villages and we are allowed to witness those interactions. We see, for example, businessmen – some trying to stick to the old principles and going bankrupt, others speculating on stocks, exploiting the system and becoming rich in morally ambiguous ways. We see war veterans – some highly critical of the old ways that led them to a failed war, others longing for the old days of military discipline and turning into inflexible nationalists hailing the virtues of their rising leader, Adolf Hitler.

A lot of events are connected to women. Two of them leave Ludwig, just because he cannot float in the contemporary world of greed and money. He chose to stay &quot;clean&quot;, maybe not by himself, but he cannot be anything other than be true to his ideals and now he has to live with that choice. A third woman, probably the most important to him, is Genevieve Terhoven, whom he meets at the insane asylum. She is there for being schizophrenic and considers herself to be &quot;Isabelle&quot; most of the time. Ludwig gets more and more attached to her, feeling a &quot;pure&quot; love for her because she sees the world so differently.

The line &quot;The death of one man is a tragedy, the death of millions is a statistic&quot; (&quot;Aber das ist wohl so, weil ein einzelner immer der Tod ist — und zwei Millionen immer nur eine Statistik.&quot;) is often not credited to the book but attributed to Soviet leader Joseph Stalin.

==In popular culture==

The 1998 Emir Kusturica movie &quot;Black Cat, White Cat&quot; contains a scene where a lady nicknamed Black Obelisk pulls a nail from a wooden beam using her behind — a direct reference to the Remarque novel where a certain Frau Beckmann is said to pull off the same feat.

==Sources==
Adapted with permission from </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q8261" start="26" end="31" title="novel" label="novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="55" end="61" title="Germany" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q47293" start="69" end="89" title="Erich Maria Remarque" label="Erich Maria Remarque"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="123" end="130" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q695052" start="170" end="184" title="Inflation in the Weimar Republic" label="hyperinflation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6235" start="196" end="207" title="nationalism" label="nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q215972" start="222" end="233" title="protagonist" label="protagonist"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="298" end="309" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q855" start="2139" end="2152" title="Joseph Stalin" label="Joseph Stalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q94882" start="2188" end="2202" title="Emir Kusturica" label="Emir Kusturica"/>
<link wikidata="Q159808" start="2215" end="2235" title="Black Cat, White Cat" label="Black Cat, White Cat"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="308634" wikidata="Q38888" url="?curid=308634" title="Olympia, Greece">
<text>Olympia ( ; ), officially Archaia Olympia ( ), is a small town in Elis on the Peloponnese peninsula in Greece, famous for the nearby archaeological site of the same name. The site was a major Panhellenic religious sanctuary of ancient Greece, where the ancient Olympic Games were held every four years throughout classical antiquity, from the 8th century BC to the 4th century AD. They were restored on a global basis in 1894 in honor of the ideal of peaceful international contention for excellence.

The sacred precinct, named the Altis, was primarily dedicated to Zeus, although other gods were worshipped there. The games conducted in his name drew visitors from all over the Greek world as one of a group of such &quot;Panhellenic&quot; centres, which helped to build the identity of the ancient Greeks as a nation. Despite the name, it is nowhere near Mount Olympus in northern Greece, where the twelve Olympians, the major deities of ancient Greek religion, were believed to live.

Ancient history records that Pisa and Elis, other villages in the region, contended with Olympia for management of the precinct, and that Olympia won, implying that the village was not identical to the precinct. The putative location of the ancient village is the modern village, which appears to have been inhabited continuously since ancient times.

The archaeological site held over 760 significant buildings, and ruins of many of these survive.

Of special interest to Greeks is the Pelopion, tomb of the quasi-mythical king Pelops, who gives his name to the Peloponnese and was ancestor of Agamemnon and Menelaus, the Greek kings of the Trojan War. The tomb suggests that he may not have been entirely mythical.

Another location that has a special interest to both ancients and moderns is the stadium. It is basically a field with start and end lines marked off by transverse curbing. The athletes entered under an archway of a vaulted corridor at the start. Spectators sat mainly on the field&#x27;s sloping flanks. The length of this field became the standard stadion, an ancient Greek unit of distance, which appears in all the geographers. The stadium has been resurrected for Olympic use with no intentional alteration of the ancient topography. Transient stands are easily thrown up and removed.

The first major games to have been played at the Olympia stadium were said to have first begun in the 720s. These prestigious ancient games took place during the festival of Zeus at Olympia. Olympia was a sanctuary, but it was within the independent state of Elis, and since the Eleans managed the games, there was sometimes bias. The famous Olympic truce only mandated safe passage for visitors and did not stop all wars in Greece or even at Olympia.

The village services the adjacent archaeological site to the southeast. The Kladeos River forms the site&#x27;s western border. Visitors walk over the bridge to find themselves in front of the main gate. Full visitation is an extensive walking event. Some excavation is in progress there frequently. Moveable artifacts for the most part have found a home in one of the site&#x27;s three museums.

==Ancient site==
===Architectural summary===
Olympia lies in the valley of the Alfeiós River (also Anglicized as Alpheus or Alpheios) in the western part of the Peloponnese, today around from the Gulf of Kyparissia in the Ionian Sea, but in antiquity perhaps half that distance.

According to Pausanias, there were over 70 temples in total, as well as treasuries, altars, statues, and other structures dedicated to many deities. Somewhat in contrast to Delphi, where a similar large collection of monuments were tightly packed within the temenos boundary, Olympia sprawled beyond the boundary wall, especially in the areas devoted to the games.

To the north of the sanctuary can be found the Prytaneion and the Philippeion, as well as the array of treasuries representing the various city-states. The Metroon lies to the south of these treasuries, with the Echo Stoa to the east. The hippodrome and later stadium were located east of the Echo Stoa. To the south of the sanctuary is the South Stoa and the bouleuterion, whereas the palaestra, the workshop of Pheidias, the gymnasion, and the Leonidaion lie to the west.

Olympia was also known for the gigantic chryselephantine (ivory and gold on a wooden frame) statue of Zeus that was the cult image in his temple, sculpted by Pheidias, which was named one of the Seven Wonders of the Ancient World by Antipater of Sidon. Very close to the Temple of Zeus which housed this statue, the studio of Pheidias was excavated in the 1950s. Evidence found there, such as sculptor&#x27;s tools, corroborates this opinion. The ancient ruins sit north of the Alpheios River and south of Mount Kronos (named after the Greek deity Kronos). The Kladeos, a tributary of the Alpheios, borders the west.

===Site plan===


===The Altis===

The Altis was an irregular quadrangular area more than on each side and walled except to the North where it was bounded by the Kronion (Mount Kronos). It consisted of an arrangement of buildings, the most important of which are the Temple of Hera (or Heraion/Heraeum), the Temple of Zeus, the Pelopion, and open sites used for traditional activities, such as the area of the great altar of Zeus, where the largest sacrifices were made.

====The Herakleian sanctuary====
Pindar, the 5th-century-BC Theban poet, says that Heracles founded the &quot;sacred precinct&quot; (zatheon alsos) next to the tomb of Pelops in honor of Zeus, his own father, referring to the precinct founded as the Altis, and made the &quot;encircling area a resting-place for feasting,&quot; honoring the river Alfeios and the 12 Olympian gods. He assigned the name &quot;Hill of Cronus&quot; to the previously unnamed hill, and then instituted the Olympic games. Pindar creates in a single, compact sentence, what has been called &quot;Olympic space&quot;. The space is a work of man created by a sequence of operations: first, Herakles lays out (&quot;stathmato&quot;) the sacred grove (&quot;alsos&quot;) with a surveying instrument called a &quot;stathme&quot;. Second, he &quot;fixes&quot; the border of the &quot;Altis&quot; (&quot;paxais Altin&quot;), and third clears the space around it (&quot;en katharo diekrine&quot;). Fourth, he &quot;made&quot; (&quot;etheke&quot;) ground (&quot;pedon&quot;) as an entertainment space (&quot;lusin&quot;) for festivals (&quot;dorpou&quot;). Then he goes on to &quot;honor&quot; the ford of the Alfeios (necessarily to the south), the twelve gods, and to name the unnamed hill for Kronos. He then can hold the first games.

Today trees have been allowed to grow over the site quasi-grove. These are primarily Cercis siliquastrum, colloquially &quot;Judas-tree&quot; (nothing to do with Judas), a pink-flowering low tree. If they are natural to the site now, they probably were in antiquity. Olea europaea, olive, is of course ubiquitous in the region, usually growing in planted groves, but sometimes wild. Platanus orientalis, the plane tree, is common in the area, and Pinus halepensis. Aleppo pine, also covered Kronion until the fires of 2007-2009.

There is not much indication of what structures were in the Altis, except the games must have been part of the &quot;feasting&quot; and therefore were held in the &quot;resting-place&quot;. The size of the precinct must have varied as the site developed, as the original stadium is known to have extended well within the later east wall. That the temple of Zeus was built within the precinct is a reasonable assumption. As there is no trace of a succession of walls, the wall might reasonably be presumed to have been a late feature, but no later than Pindar.

====The Pelopian sanctuary====

The classical Pelopion was a separate sanctuary defined by a peribolos wall dating to the 6th century BC, long after the conventional start of the Olympic games, 776 BC (which cannot be disrespected without tampering with the entire ancient Greek dating system). This was certainly a remodeling of a previously existing sanctuary of Pelops. A 1987-plus excavation of the Pelopion established &quot;a continuous ceramic sequence for the 11th century onward&quot; including submycenaean (1100-1000 BC) and protogeometric (1000-900 BC). There was a good sprinkling of &quot;cultic&quot; material (votive figurines and vases).

====Etymologies====
The name Altis was derived from a corruption of the Elean word also meaning &quot;the grove&quot; because the area was wooded, olive and plane trees in particular.

==History==

===Prehistory===

It used to be thought that the site had been occupied since about 1500 BC, with a religious cult of Zeus developing around 1000 BC. It may be that instead there was only a sanctuary from the 9th or 8th centuries, though the question remains in debate. Others believe that remains of food and burnt offerings dating back to the 10th century BC give evidence of a long history of religious activity at the site. No buildings have survived from this earliest period of use.

===Geometric and Archaic periods===

The first Olympic festival was organized on the site by the authorities of Elis in the 8th century BC – with tradition dating the first games at 776 BC. Major changes were made to the site around 700 BC, including levelling land and digging new wells. Elis&#x27; power diminished and the sanctuary fell into the hands of the Pisatans in 676 BC. The Pisatans organized the games until the late 7th century BC.

The earliest evidence of building activity on the site dates from around 600 BC. At this time, the Skiloudians, allies of the Pisatans, built the Temple of Hera. The Treasuries and the Pelopion were built during the course of the 6th century BC. The secular structures and athletic arenas were also under construction during this period, including the Bouleuterion. The first stadium was constructed around 560 BC and it consisted of just a simple track. The stadium was remodelled around 500 BC with sloping sides for spectators and shifted slightly eastward. Over the course of the 6th century BC a range of sports were added to the Olympic festival. In 580 BC, Elis, in alliance with Sparta, occupied Pisa and regained the control over the sanctuary.

===Classical period===
The classical period, between the 5th and 4th centuries BC, was the golden age of the site at Olympia. A wide range of new religious and secular buildings as well as structures were made.

The Temple of Zeus was built mid 5th century BC. Its size, scale and ornaments were beyond anything previously constructed on the site. The Greek Baths and further sporting facilities, including the final iteration of the stadium, and the hippodrome (for chariot-racing) were constructed. The Prytaneion was built at the northwest side of the site in 470 BC.

In the late classical period, further structures were added to the site. The Metroon was constructed near the Treasuries around 400 BC. The erection of the Echo Stoa, around 350 BC, separated the sanctuary from the area of the games and stadium. The South Stoa was built at the southern edge of the sanctuary at approximately the same time.

===Hellenistic period===


The late 4th century BC saw the erection of the Philippeion. Around 300 BC the largest building on the site, the Leonidaion, was constructed to house important visitors. Due to the increasing significance of the games, further athletic buildings were constructed including the Palaestra (3rd century BC), Gymnasion (2nd century BC) and bath houses (c.300 BC). Finally, in 200 BC, a vaulted archway was erected linking the entrance of the stadium to the sanctuary.

===Roman period===
During the Roman period, the games were opened up to all citizens of the Roman Empire. A programme of new buildings and extensive repairs, including to the Temple of Zeus, took place. In 150 AD, the Nympheum (or Exedra) was built. New baths replaced the older Greek examples in 100 AD and an aqueduct was constructed in 160 AD.

The 3rd century saw the site suffer heavy damage from a series of earthquakes. Invading tribes in 267 AD led to the centre of the site being fortified with material robbed from its monuments. Despite the destruction, the Olympic festival continued to be held at the site until the last Olympiad in 393 AD, after which the Christian emperor Theodosius I implemented a ban. The Temple of Zeus was apparently destroyed around 426 AD, during the persecution of pagans in the late Roman Empire, following an edict by Theodosius II enforcing the ban on pagan festivals. The workshop of Pheidias was turned into a Basilica and the site was inhabited by a Christian community. Archaeological evidence suggests that small scale Olympic events (perhaps in Christian guise) were still being held secretly until Justinian&#x27;s plague and two earthquakes devastated the place mid 6th century. Repeated floods ensured that the settlement was finally abandoned altogether in the early 7th Century.

==Archaeology==

===Discovery and early excavations===

Over time the site was buried under alluvial deposits, up to 8 metres deep, long thought to be the result of river flooding. Modern research hypothesizes instead—based on the presence of mollusc and gastropod shells and foraminifera— that the site was buried by sea waters resulting from repeated tsunamis. The exact site was re-discovered in 1766 by the English antiquarian Richard Chandler. Since then, the site had been visited by several other antiquarian-travellers such as Louis-François-Sébastien Fauvel, François Pouqueville, William Gell, Charles Robert Cockerell and William Martin Leake.

The first excavation was not carried out until 1829, when the French archaeologists of the &quot;Expedition Scientifique de Morée&quot; arrived on the site of the sanctuary at Olympia on 10 May 1829. As most of the buildings were invisible, the general identification was made possible thanks to the more precise descriptions of Edward Dodwell and John Spencer Stanhope. The French archaeologists spent six weeks on the site. Léon-Jean-Joseph Dubois (director of the section of Archaeology) and Abel Blouet (director of the section of Architecture and Sculpture) undertook the first excavations, accompanied by the painters Pierre Achille Poirot, Pierre Félix Trézel and Amaury-Duval. The site was divided topographically into squares, trenches were dug, excavations were undertaken in straight lines, and models for restoration were proposed: archaeology was becoming rationalized, and it was in this way that the location and identity of the Temple of Zeus were determined for the first time.

===1875–1881===

Since the 1870s, the excavation and preservation of Ancient Olympia has been the responsibility of the German Archaeological Institute at Athens. The first major excavation of Olympia began in 1875, funded by the German government after negotiation of exclusive access by Ernst Curtius. Other archaeologists responsible for the dig were Gustav Hirschfeld, George Treu, Adolf Furtwängler (who worked alongside architects), A. Boetticher, Wilhelm Dörpfeld, and Richard Borrmann. They excavated the central part of the sanctuary including the Temple of Zeus, Temple of Hera, Metroon, Bouleuterion, Philipeion, Echo Stoa, Treasuries and Palaestra. Important finds included sculptures from the Temple of Zeus, the Nike of Paeonius, the Hermes of Praxiteles and many bronzes. In total 14,000 objects were recorded. The finds were displayed in a museum on the site.

===1900–1950===
Excavation continued in a more limited way by Dörpfeld between 1908 and 1929 but a new systematic excavation began in 1936 on the occasion of the 1936 Summer Olympics in Berlin under Emil Kunze and Hans Schleif. Their excavation focus was on the area to the south of the stadium, the South Stoa, bath complex and gymnasion.

===1950 to present===
Between 1952 and 1966, Kunze continued the excavation joined by architect Alfred Mallwitz. They excavated Pheidias&#x27; workshop, the Leonidaion and the north wall of the stadium. They also excavated the southeast section of the sanctuary and out of approximately 140 debris pits found many bronze and ceramic objects along with terracotta roof tiles.

Mallwitz took charge of the excavations between 1972 and 1984 revealing important dating evidence for the stadium, graves, and the location of the Prytaneion. From 1984 to 1996, Helmut Kyrieleis took over the site and the focus shifted to the earlier history of the sanctuary with excavation of the Prytaneion and Pelopion.

In March 2021, archaeologists announced the discovery of a 2.500 year-old unbroken bronze bull idol near to the temple of Greek deity Zeus. According to archaeologist Zaharaoula Leventouri, one of the statue&#x27;s horns stuck to the ground after a heavy rainfall and was carefully removed from the area. Researchers also revealed fine pottery remains dated back to Greece&#x27;s Geometric art period.

==Modern Olympia==
===The municipality===
The ancient site of the games had been included during all the intervening centuries within a community yet called Olympia. In modern terms it became Archaia Olympia, &quot;Ancient Olympia,&quot; and was a deme, or municipality, of its own. In 2011 it was combined for reasons of economy of government with three other former demes within which union the four became municipal units. The terminology can be confusing, as &quot;ancient Olympia&quot; can be either the modern municipal unit, or only the site of the ruins.

The town has a railway station and is the easternmost terminus of the line of Olympia-Pyrgos (Ilia). The train station with the freight yard to its west is located about 300 m east of the town centre. It is linked by GR-74, and the new road was opened in the 1980s. The next stretch N and NE of Olympia opened in 2005. The distance from Pyrgos is , about SW of Lampeia, W of Tripoli and Arcadia and north of Krestena and N of Kyparissia and Messenia. The highway passes north of the ancient ruins. A reservoir is located a few kilometres to the west, impounding the Alfeios River for hydroelectric purposes. The catchment up to Olympia is flat or rolling and is agricultural; upstream from Olympia the river drains the foothills of the mountains. Much of the land around the archaeological site is given to dendriculture; that is, symmetric rows of olive trees.

The site and town of Olympia were threatened by the 2007 forest fires, but no damage was reported.

===Municipal units===

The name of Archaia Olympia (&quot;Ancient Olympia&quot;) was extended to the new municipality of 2011. Four former municipalities became municipal units:
* Archaia Olympia
* Foloi
* Lampeia
* Lasiona

Archaia Olympia now applied to both a municipality and a unit. The municipality has an area of 545.121 km2, the municipal unit 178.944 km2.

For the subdivisions of the municipal units of Foloi, Lampeia, and Lasiona, see under those topics. The municipal unit of Archaia Olympia is divided into the following communities (villages within the communities given in brackets):
===Historical population===
==Notable people==
*Vyronas Davos, historian and poet
*Panagiotis Kondylis, one of the most prominent modern Greek thinkers and philosophers
*Nikos Konstantopoulos, politician

When Pierre de Coubertin, the founder of the International Olympic Committee, died in 1937, a monument to him was erected at ancient Olympia and, emulating Evangelis Zappas, whose head is buried under a statue in front of the Zappeion, his heart was buried at the monument.

==Reinstitution of the games==
After suppression of the ancient Olympic Games in 394 AD by Theodosius I, the spirit of the games, international peaceful competition by individuals for excellence, continued. The games were resurrected in 1894 based on the ancient model, but more international than ever. The ideology of the new games turned to the site of ancient Olympia for its inspiration, where even the ruins assumed a symbolic significance. The Olympic flame of the modern-day Olympic Games is lit by reflection of sunlight in a parabolic mirror in front of the Temple of Hera and then transported by a torch to the place where the Games are held. When the 2004 Summer Olympics was hosted by Athens, the men&#x27;s and women&#x27;s shot put competitions were held at the Olympia stadium. Although the shot put is not among the modern athletics events with a lineage dating back to the ancient Olympics, it was chosen as requiring least disruption at a sensitive archeological site.

Buildings and monuments in Olympia have been selected numerous times as main motif of collectors&#x27; coins. One of the recent samples is the €100 Greek Crypt of Olympia commemorative coin, minted in 2003 to commemorate the 2004 Olympics. In the obverse of the coin, the Crypt of Olympia is depicted. The crypt is a long and narrow vaulted passage through which the athletes and judges entered the Stadium, signifying the opening of the games.
==See also==
* List of settlements in Elis
* Archaeological Museum of Olympia
* German Archaeological Institute at Athens
* Museum of Ancient Greek Technology in Katakolo

==Notes==
==Citations==
==Bibliography==
* 
* Blouet, A., Ravoisié, A., Poirot, A., Trézel, F., and de Gournay, F. (1831, 1833, 1838). &quot;Expedition scientifique de Morée ordonnée par le Gouvernement Français; Architecture, Sculptures, Inscriptions et Vues du Péloponèse, des Cyclades et de l&#x27;Attique&quot;, 3 Volumes, Firmin Didot, Paris.
* Gates, C. (2003). &quot;Ancient cities: the archaeology of urban life in the Ancient Near East and Egypt, Greece and Rome&quot;. Psychology Press, 2003. p. 234
* Saïtas, I. et al. (2011, 2017). &quot;The work of the Morea scientific expedition 1829–1838&quot;, 2 Parts, edited by Yiannis Saïtas, editions Melissa, Athens.
* Wilson, N. (2013). &quot;Encyclopedia of Ancient Greece&quot;. Routledge, 2013. p. 513, 
* Young, D. C. (1996). &quot;The Modern Olympics – A Struggle for Revival&quot;. The Johns Hopkins University Press, 1996. 

==External links==

* Publications of the German excavation in the 19th century digitised by the library of the University of Heidelberg
* Extensive black-and-white photo-essays of the site and related artifacts</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q38888" start="0" end="7" title="Olympia, Greece" label="Olympia"/>
<link wikidata="Q38888" start="26" end="41" title="Olympia, Greece" label="Archaia Olympia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063649" start="66" end="70" title="Elis (regional unit)" label="Elis"/>
<link wikidata="Q78967" start="78" end="89" title="Peloponnese" label="Peloponnese"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="103" end="109" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q96241391" start="192" end="223" title="Panhellenic sanctuary" label="Panhellenic religious sanctuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="227" end="241" title="ancient Greece" label="ancient Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q188468" start="253" end="274" title="ancient Olympic Games" label="ancient Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q221956" start="291" end="301" title="Olympiad" label="four years"/>
<link wikidata="Q486761" start="313" end="332" title="classical antiquity" label="classical antiquity"/>
<link wikidata="Q5389" start="391" end="417" title="Olympic Games" label="restored on a global basis"/>
<link wikidata="Q34201" start="567" end="571" title="Zeus" label="Zeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q80344" start="858" end="871" title="Mount Olympus" label="Mount Olympus"/>
<link wikidata="Q101609" start="902" end="918" title="twelve Olympians" label="twelve Olympians"/>
<link wikidata="Q855270" start="941" end="963" title="ancient Greek religion" label="ancient Greek religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q922329" start="1018" end="1022" title="Pisa, Greece" label="Pisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q217667" start="1027" end="1031" title="Elis (city)" label="Elis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7161678" start="1476" end="1484" title="Pelopion" label="Pelopion"/>
<link wikidata="Q192485" start="1518" end="1524" title="Pelops" label="Pelops"/>
<link wikidata="Q128176" start="1584" end="1593" title="Agamemnon" label="Agamemnon"/>
<link wikidata="Q171839" start="1598" end="1606" title="Menelaus" label="Menelaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q42937" start="1631" end="1641" title="Trojan War" label="Trojan War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4357227" start="1784" end="1795" title="Stadium at Olympia" label="the stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645966" start="2057" end="2064" title="Stadion (unit)" label="stadion"/>
<link wikidata="Q647970" start="2827" end="2834" title="Kladeos" label="Kladeos"/>
<link wikidata="Q941745" start="3227" end="3240" title="Alfeios" label="Alfeiós River"/>
<link wikidata="Q78967" start="3309" end="3320" title="Peloponnese" label="Peloponnese"/>
<link wikidata="Q100007" start="3344" end="3362" title="Gulf of Kyparissia" label="Gulf of Kyparissia"/>
<link wikidata="Q37495" start="3370" end="3380" title="Ionian Sea" label="Ionian Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q192931" start="3441" end="3450" title="Pausanias (geographer)" label="Pausanias"/>
<link wikidata="Q75459" start="3601" end="3607" title="Delphi" label="Delphi"/>
<link wikidata="Q740625" start="3686" end="3693" title="temenos" label="temenos"/>
<link wikidata="Q745156" start="3841" end="3851" title="Prytaneion" label="Prytaneion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3396766" start="3860" end="3871" title="Philippeion" label="Philippeion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7836783" start="3897" end="3907" title="Treasuries at Olympia" label="treasuries"/>
<link wikidata="Q739798" start="3950" end="3957" title="Metroon" label="Metroon"/>
<link wikidata="Q184949" start="4033" end="4043" title="hippodrome" label="hippodrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q483110" start="4054" end="4061" title="stadium" label="stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q751024" start="4154" end="4166" title="bouleuterion" label="bouleuterion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7126543" start="4180" end="4189" title="Palaestra at Olympia" label="palaestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q177302" start="4207" end="4215" title="Pheidias" label="Pheidias"/>
<link wikidata="Q504400" start="4221" end="4230" title="Gymnasium (ancient Greece)" label="gymnasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3271682" start="4240" end="4250" title="Leonidaion" label="Leonidaion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088535" start="4309" end="4325" title="chryselephantine statue" label="chryselephantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q82001" start="4327" end="4332" title="ivory" label="ivory"/>
<link wikidata="Q897" start="4337" end="4341" title="gold" label="gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q46239" start="4361" end="4375" title="Statue of Zeus at Olympia" label="statue of Zeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2820111" start="4389" end="4399" title="cult image" label="cult image"/>
<link wikidata="Q177302" start="4427" end="4435" title="Pheidias" label="Pheidias"/>
<link wikidata="Q489772" start="4464" end="4498" title="Seven Wonders of the Ancient World" label="Seven Wonders of the Ancient World"/>
<link wikidata="Q114280" start="4502" end="4520" title="Antipater of Sidon" label="Antipater of Sidon"/>
<link wikidata="Q197019" start="4540" end="4554" title="Temple of Zeus, Olympia" label="Temple of Zeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q44204" start="4817" end="4823" title="Cronus" label="Kronos"/>
<link wikidata="Q647970" start="4830" end="4837" title="Kladeos" label="Kladeos"/>
<link wikidata="Q633572" start="5154" end="5168" title="Temple of Hera, Olympia" label="Temple of Hera"/>
<link wikidata="Q197019" start="5195" end="5209" title="Temple of Zeus, Olympia" label="Temple of Zeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7161678" start="5215" end="5223" title="Pelopion" label="Pelopion"/>
<link wikidata="Q134929" start="5392" end="5398" title="Pindar" label="Pindar"/>
<link wikidata="Q122248" start="5442" end="5450" title="Heracles" label="Heracles"/>
<link wikidata="Q192485" start="5527" end="5533" title="Pelops" label="Pelops"/>
<link wikidata="Q34201" start="5546" end="5550" title="Zeus" label="Zeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q941745" start="5706" end="5713" title="Alfeios" label="Alfeios"/>
<link wikidata="Q29488" start="6751" end="6770" title="Cercis siliquastrum" label="Cercis siliquastrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q37083" start="6948" end="6953" title="olive" label="olive"/>
<link wikidata="Q161105" start="7049" end="7068" title="Platanus orientalis" label="Platanus orientalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q211457" start="7113" end="7129" title="Pinus halepensis" label="Pinus halepensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q211457" start="7131" end="7142" title="Aleppo pine" label="Aleppo pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7161678" start="7803" end="7811" title="Pelopion" label="Pelopion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002633" start="7850" end="7859" title="peribolos" label="peribolos"/>
<link wikidata="Q192485" start="8122" end="8128" title="Pelops" label="Pelops"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515819" start="8261" end="8273" title="Sub-Mycenaean pottery" label="submycenaean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1407673" start="8293" end="8307" title="Protogeometric style" label="protogeometric"/>
<link wikidata="Q6536845" start="8485" end="8490" title="ancient Elis" label="Elean"/>
<link wikidata="Q6536845" start="9213" end="9217" title="ancient Elis" label="Elis"/>
<link wikidata="Q922329" start="9463" end="9471" title="Pisa (Greece)" label="Pisatans"/>
<link wikidata="Q633572" start="9694" end="9708" title="Temple of Hera (Olympia)" label="Temple of Hera"/>
<link wikidata="Q7836783" start="9714" end="9724" title="Treasuries at Olympia" label="Treasuries"/>
<link wikidata="Q7161678" start="9733" end="9741" title="Pelopion" label="Pelopion"/>
<link wikidata="Q751024" start="9900" end="9912" title="Bouleuterion" label="Bouleuterion"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="10330" end="10346" title="Ancient Greece" label="classical period"/>
<link wikidata="Q197019" start="10519" end="10533" title="Temple of Zeus, Olympia" label="Temple of Zeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q19598815" start="10655" end="10666" title="Greek Baths in ancient Olympia" label="Greek Baths"/>
<link wikidata="Q184949" start="10754" end="10764" title="hippodrome" label="hippodrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q745156" start="10808" end="10818" title="Prytaneion" label="Prytaneion"/>
<link wikidata="Q739798" start="10952" end="10959" title="Metroon" label="Metroon"/>
<link wikidata="Q19611482" start="11031" end="11040" title="Echo Stoa" label="Echo Stoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3396766" start="11292" end="11303" title="Philippeion" label="Philippeion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3271682" start="11357" end="11367" title="Leonidaion" label="Leonidaion"/>
<link wikidata="Q647160" start="11521" end="11530" title="Palaestra" label="Palaestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q504400" start="11549" end="11558" title="Gymnasion" label="Gymnasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="11801" end="11813" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q731966" start="11927" end="11935" title="Nympheum" label="Nympheum"/>
<link wikidata="Q594648" start="11940" end="11946" title="Exedra" label="Exedra"/>
<link wikidata="Q46696" start="12397" end="12409" title="Theodosius I" label="Theodosius I"/>
<link wikidata="Q7170074" start="12499" end="12545" title="persecution of pagans in the late Roman Empire" label="persecution of pagans in the late Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q160353" start="12569" end="12582" title="Theodosius II" label="Theodosius II"/>
<link wikidata="Q163687" start="12664" end="12672" title="Basilica" label="Basilica"/>
<link wikidata="Q821711" start="12857" end="12880" title="Justinian&amp;#x27;s plague" label="Justinian&amp;#x27;s plague"/>
<link wikidata="Q8070" start="13396" end="13404" title="tsunamis" label="tsunamis"/>
<link wikidata="Q323506" start="13474" end="13490" title="Richard Chandler (antiquary)" label="Richard Chandler"/>
<link wikidata="Q18116180" start="13578" end="13609" title="Louis-François-Sébastien Fauvel" label="Louis-François-Sébastien Fauvel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665768" start="13611" end="13631" title="François Pouqueville" label="François Pouqueville"/>
<link wikidata="Q506472" start="13633" end="13645" title="William Gell" label="William Gell"/>
<link wikidata="Q567735" start="13647" end="13671" title="Charles Robert Cockerell" label="Charles Robert Cockerell"/>
<link wikidata="Q687153" start="13676" end="13696" title="William Martin Leake" label="William Martin Leake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147833" start="13796" end="13828" title="Morea expedition" label="Expedition Scientifique de Morée"/>
<link wikidata="Q536003" start="14028" end="14042" title="Edward Dodwell" label="Edward Dodwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q20965912" start="14047" end="14068" title="John Spencer Stanhope" label="John Spencer Stanhope"/>
<link wikidata="Q19544314" start="14125" end="14148" title="Léon-Jean-Joseph Dubois" label="Léon-Jean-Joseph Dubois"/>
<link wikidata="Q3119629" start="14194" end="14205" title="Guillaume-Abel Blouet" label="Abel Blouet"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14323" end="14344" title="Pierre Achille Poirot" label="Pierre Achille Poirot"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14346" end="14365" title="Pierre Félix Trezel" label="Pierre Félix Trézel"/>
<link wikidata="Q737294" start="14370" end="14382" title="Eugène Emmanuel Amaury Duval" label="Amaury-Duval"/>
<link wikidata="Q197019" start="14643" end="14657" title="Temple of Zeus, Olympia" label="Temple of Zeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q833782" start="14815" end="14856" title="German Archaeological Institute at Athens" label="German Archaeological Institute at Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q61407" start="14984" end="14997" title="Ernst Curtius" label="Ernst Curtius"/>
<link wikidata="Q72860" start="15049" end="15066" title="Gustav Hirschfeld" label="Gustav Hirschfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q97950" start="15068" end="15079" title="George Treu" label="George Treu"/>
<link wikidata="Q61423" start="15081" end="15098" title="Adolf Furtwängler" label="Adolf Furtwängler"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15134" end="15147" title="A. Boetticher" label="A. Boetticher"/>
<link wikidata="Q60239" start="15149" end="15165" title="Wilhelm Dörpfeld" label="Wilhelm Dörpfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q113072" start="15171" end="15187" title="Richard Borrmann" label="Richard Borrmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q37122" start="15421" end="15425" title="Athena" label="Nike"/>
<link wikidata="Q545845" start="15429" end="15437" title="Paeonius of Mende" label="Paeonius"/>
<link wikidata="Q41484" start="15443" end="15449" title="Hermes" label="Hermes"/>
<link wikidata="Q105290" start="15453" end="15463" title="Praxiteles" label="Praxiteles"/>
<link wikidata="Q8150" start="15734" end="15754" title="1936 Summer Olympics" label="1936 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="15758" end="15764" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q99038" start="15771" end="15781" title="Emil Kunze" label="Emil Kunze"/>
<link wikidata="Q87808" start="15786" end="15798" title="Hans Schleif" label="Hans Schleif"/>
<link wikidata="Q102370" start="16009" end="16024" title="Alfred Mallwitz" label="Alfred Mallwitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q34201" start="16748" end="16752" title="Zeus" label="Zeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q852337" start="16994" end="17007" title="Geometric art" label="Geometric art"/>
<link wikidata="Q3095823" start="17596" end="17611" title="Olympia railway station" label="railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q216307" start="17667" end="17680" title="Pyrgos (Ilia)" label="Pyrgos (Ilia)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5601829" start="17798" end="17803" title="Greece Interstate 74" label="GR-74"/>
<link wikidata="Q216307" start="17918" end="17924" title="Pyrgos (Ilia)" label="Pyrgos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021692" start="17942" end="17949" title="Lampeia" label="Lampeia"/>
<link wikidata="Q193409" start="17956" end="17963" title="Tripoli, Greece" label="Tripoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q170054" start="17968" end="17975" title="Arcadia (regional unit)" label="Arcadia"/>
<link wikidata="Q13407147" start="17989" end="17997" title="Krestena" label="Krestena"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026705" start="18007" end="18017" title="Kyparissia" label="Kyparissia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11723843" start="18022" end="18030" title="Messenia" label="Messenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q225475" start="18496" end="18513" title="2007 Greek forest fires" label="2007 forest fires"/>
<link wikidata="Q2696852" start="18742" end="18747" title="Foloi" label="Foloi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021692" start="18750" end="18757" title="Lampeia" label="Lampeia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2470583" start="18760" end="18767" title="Lasiona, Elis" label="Lasiona"/>
<link wikidata="Q14479436" start="19191" end="19204" title="Vyronas Davos" label="Vyronas Davos"/>
<link wikidata="Q715458" start="19226" end="19245" title="Panagiotis Kondylis" label="Panagiotis Kondylis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3347276" start="19313" end="19334" title="Nikos Konstantopoulos" label="Nikos Konstantopoulos"/>
<link wikidata="Q82984" start="19353" end="19372" title="Pierre de Coubertin" label="Pierre de Coubertin"/>
<link wikidata="Q463901" start="19504" end="19520" title="Evangelis Zappas" label="Evangelis Zappas"/>
<link wikidata="Q147478" start="19574" end="19582" title="Zappeion" label="Zappeion"/>
<link wikidata="Q46696" start="19714" end="19726" title="Theodosius I" label="Theodosius I"/>
<link wikidata="Q170320" start="20074" end="20087" title="Olympic flame" label="Olympic flame"/>
<link wikidata="Q5389" start="20106" end="20119" title="Olympic Games" label="Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087850" start="20158" end="20174" title="parabolic mirror" label="parabolic mirror"/>
<link wikidata="Q633572" start="20191" end="20205" title="Temple of Hera, Olympia" label="Temple of Hera"/>
<link wikidata="Q8558" start="20286" end="20306" title="2004 Summer Olympics" label="2004 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="20321" end="20327" title="Athens" label="Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433101" start="20333" end="20343" title="Athletics at the 2004 Summer Olympics – Men&amp;#x27;s shot put" label="men&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q613746" start="20348" end="20369" title="Athletics at the 2004 Summer Olympics – Women&amp;#x27;s shot put" label="women&amp;#x27;s shot put"/>
<link wikidata="Q4357227" start="20400" end="20415" title="Stadium at Olympia" label="Olympia stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q180935" start="20430" end="20438" title="shot put" label="shot put"/>
<link wikidata="Q6606345" start="20456" end="20479" title="Athletics events" label="modern athletics events"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20766" end="20801" title="Euro gold and silver commemorative coins (Greece)#2003 coinage" label="Crypt of Olympia commemorative coin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6638200" start="21072" end="21099" title="List of settlements in Elis" label="List of settlements in Elis"/>
<link wikidata="Q637038" start="21102" end="21134" title="Archaeological Museum of Olympia" label="Archaeological Museum of Olympia"/>
<link wikidata="Q833782" start="21137" end="21178" title="German Archaeological Institute at Athens" label="German Archaeological Institute at Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q15260365" start="21181" end="21215" title="Museum of Ancient Greek Technology" label="Museum of Ancient Greek Technology"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="308643" wikidata="Q1149018" url="?curid=308643" title="Moto Guzzi">
<text>Moto Guzzi () is an Italian motorcycle manufacturer and the oldest European manufacturer in continuous motorcycle production.

Established in 1921 in Mandello del Lario, Italy, the company is noted for its historic role in Italy&#x27;s motorcycling manufacture, its prominence worldwide in motorcycle racing, and industry innovations—including the first motorcycle centre stand, wind tunnel and eight-cylinder engine.

Since 2004, Moto Guzzi has been an &quot;unico azionista&quot;, a wholly owned subsidiary, and one of seven brands owned by Piaggio Group,
Europe&#x27;s largest motorcycle manufacturer and the world&#x27;s fourth largest motorcycle manufacturer by unit sales.

The company&#x27;s motorcycles are noted for their air-cooled 90° V-twin engines with a longitudinal crankshaft orientation where the engines&#x27; transverse cylinder heads project prominently on either side of the motorcycle.

==History==
Similar to other storied motorcycle manufacturers that have survived for decades, Moto Guzzi has experienced a series of business cycles and a series of ownership arrangements—some complex, some brief, some that have endured.

===1921–1966: Origins===
Moto Guzzi was conceived by two aircraft pilots and their mechanic serving in the Corpo Aeronautico Militare (the Italian Air Corp, &quot;CAM&quot;) during World War I: Giorgio Parodi, Giovanni Ravelli and Carlo Guzzi. Assigned to the same Miraglia Squadron based outside Venice, the three became close, despite coming from different socio-economic backgrounds. They envisaged creating a motorcycle company after the war. Parodi (the son of wealthy Genovese ship-owners) would finance the venture, Ravelli (already a famous pilot and motorcycle racer) would promote the bikes with his racing prowess and Guzzi would engineer the motorcycles. Ravelli died just days after the war&#x27;s end in an aircraft crash and is commemorated by the eagle&#x27;s wings that form the Moto Guzzi logo.


Giorgio Parodi, his brother Angelo, and Carlo Guzzi created a privately held silent partnership &quot;Società Anonima Moto Guzzi&quot; on 15 March 1921, for the purpose of (according to the original articles of incorporation) &quot;the manufacture and the sale of motor cycles and any other activity in relation to or connected to metallurgical and mechanical industry&quot;.

The company was legally based in Genoa, Italy, with its headquarters in Mandello. The very earliest motorcycles bore the name &quot;G.P.&quot; (Guzzi-Parodi), though the marque quickly changed to &quot;Moto Guzzi&quot;. As the only shareholders, the Parodis wanted to shield their shipping fortunes by avoiding confusion of the name &quot;G.P.&quot; with Giorgio Parodi&#x27;s initials. Carlo Guzzi initially received royalties for each motorcycle produced, holding no ownership in the company that bore his name. In 1946 Moto Guzzi formally incorporated as &quot;Moto Guzzi S.p.A.&quot; with Giorgio Parodi as chairman.

Carlo Guzzi&#x27;s first engine design was a horizontal single-cylinder engine that dominated the first 45 years of the company&#x27;s history in various configurations. Through 1934, each engine bore the signature of the mechanic who built it. As originally envisioned, the company used racing to promote the brand. In the 1935 Isle of Man TT, Moto Guzzi factory rider Stanley Woods scored an impressive double victory with wins in the Lightweight TT as well as the Senior TT.

Until the mid-1940s, the traditional horizontal four-stroke single-cylinder 500 cc engines were fitted with one overhead and one side valve but contrary to the usual practice of having inlet over exhaust (IOE), this employed the side valve for induction and the overhead valve for exhaust. Also unusual was the adoption of only one hairspring (type of valve spring) to close the exhaust valve. These were the highest performance engines Moto Guzzi sold to the general public. By contrast, the company supplied the official racing team and private racers with higher performance racing machines with varying overhead cam, multi-valve configurations and cylinder designs.
In the 1950s, Moto Guzzi, along with the Italian factories of Gilera and Mondial, led the world of Grand Prix motorcycle racing. With durable and lightweight 250 cc and 350 cc bikes designed by Giulio Carcano, the firm dominated the middleweight classes. The factory won five consecutive 350 cc world championships between 1953 and 1957. Realizing that low weight alone might not continue to win races for the company, Carcano designed the V8 500 cc GP race bike: its engine was one of the most complex of its time. Despite leading many races and frequently posting the fastest lap time, the V8 often failed to complete races because of mechanical problems. Its development ended when Moto Guzzi (together with its main competitors Gilera and Mondial) withdrew from racing after the 1957 season citing rising costs and falling motorcycle sales. By the time of its pull out from Grand Prix racing, Moto Guzzi had won 3,329 official races, 8 World Championships, 6 Constructor&#x27;s Championships and 11 Isle of Man TT victories.

The period after World War II was as difficult in Mandello del Lario as it was elsewhere in post-war Europe. The solution was production of inexpensive, lighter cycles. The 1946 &quot;Motoleggera&quot;, a 65 cc lightweight motorcycle originally—and still regularly—called the &quot;Guzzino,&quot; became very popular in post-war Italy. It was produced until 1954. One reason for its success was that, even though it had a somewhat bicycle-like appearance, it still looked and felt more like a motorcycle than other low-end motorized two wheelers in the Italian market at the time. The Guzzinio was so popular that on 5 June 1949 Moto Guzzi held a rally for Guzzino owners at Mandello del Lario, attended by 14,000 people with 12,500 Guzzinos. A four-stroke 175 cc scooter known as the &quot;Galletto&quot; also sold well. Though modest cycles for the company, the lighter cycles continue to feature Guzzi&#x27;s innovation and commitment to quality. The step-through Galletto initially featured a manual, foot-shifted three-speed (160 cc) configuration then later a four-speed (175 cc) set-up by the end of 1952. The displacement was increased to 192 cc in 1954 and electric start was added in 1961.

Moto Guzzi was limited in its endeavors to penetrate the important scooter market as motorcycle popularity waned after WWII. Italian scooter competitors would not tolerate an incursion from Moto Guzzi. By innovating the first large-wheeled scooter, Guzzi competed less directly with manufacturers of small-wheeled scooters such as Piaggio (Vespa) and Lambretta. To illustrate the delicate balance within the Italian post-war motorcycle and scooter markets, when Guzzi developed their own prototype for a small-wheeled scooter, Lambretta retaliated with a prototype for a small V-twin &quot;motorcycle&quot; threatening to directly compete on Moto Guzzi&#x27;s turf. The two companies compromised: Guzzi never produced their small-wheeled scooter and Lambretta never manufactured the motorcycle. The drive train that Lambretta made in their 1953 motorcycle prototype remarkably resembles the &quot;V-twin + drive shaft&quot; arrangement that Guzzi developed more than ten years later, ultimately to become iconic of the company.

By 1964, the company was in full financial crisis. Emanuele Parodi and his son Giorgio had died, Carlo Guzzi had retired to private life, and direction passed to Enrico Parodi, Giorgio&#x27;s brother. Carlo Guzzi died on 3 November 1964, in Mandello, after a brief hospital stay in Davos.

===1967–1973: SEIMM years===


In February 1967, SEIMM (Società Esercizio Industrie Moto Meccaniche), a state-controlled receiver, took ownership of Moto Guzzi. The SEIMM oversight saw Moto Guzzi adapting to a cultural shift away from motorcycles to automobiles. The company focused on popular lightweight mopeds including the Dingo and Trotter – and the 125 cc Stornello motorcycle. Also during the SEIMM years, Guzzi developed the 90° V twin engine, designed by Giulio Cesare Carcano, which would become iconic of Moto Guzzi.

Though Moto Guzzi has employed engines of myriad configurations, none has come to symbolize the company more than the air-cooled 90° V-twin with a longitudinal crankshaft orientation and the engine&#x27;s transverse cylinder heads projecting prominently on either side of the bike. The original V-twin was designed in the early 1960s by engineer Giulio Cesare Carcano, designer of the DOHC V8 Grand Prix racer. The air-cooled, longitudinal crankshaft, transverse cylinder, pushrod V-twin began life with 700 cc displacement and – designed to win a competition sponsored by the Italian government for a new police bike. The sturdy shaft-drive, air-cooled V-twin won, giving Moto Guzzi renewed competitiveness. This 1967 Moto Guzzi V7 with the original Carcano engine has been continuously developed into the 1,200 cc, versions. Lino Tonti redesigned the motor for the 1971 Moto Guzzi V7 Sport. This engine is the basis of the 750 cc, 1,100 cc and 1,200 cc Guzzi engines. As is the case in any other vehicle with longitudinal crankshaft and orientation of the engine there is a slight gyroscope effect, with a slightly asymmetrical behavior in turns.

===1973–2000: De Tomaso years===
After experiencing financial difficulties in the late 1960s, De Tomaso Industries Inc. (D.T.I. Group or DTI), manufacturer of the De Tomaso sports and luxury cars, owned by Argentinian industrialist Alejandro de Tomaso, purchased SEIMM (and thereby Moto Guzzi) along with Benelli and Maserati in 1973. Under Tomaso&#x27;s stewardship, Moto Guzzi returned to profitability,
though other reports suggest a period of limited investment in Moto Guzzi followed attributed to DTI using Moto Guzzi financially prioritizing their automotive ventures.
In November 1975 Guzzi first showed the 850 Le Mans at the Milan Show that was much later described as a &quot;remarkably aggressive and attractive motorcycle&quot;. Today the early versions, the Series I especially, are considered one of the most iconic and collectible of all V-twin Moto Guzzis. A marketing success that would compete with other Italian superbikes, it spawned four later models from Mark II to its culmination in the 1990s, the Le Mans 1000 or Mark V. The initial model is known widely but incorrectly as the Mark I. Technically, it is simply the 850 Le Mans. It was named in homage to the 24-hour endurance race and circuit in France. The Mark I had two production runs with slight modifications. The first run, known as Series 1, used the roundish CEV stop/taillight used on many Italian bikes of the decade. Although it is often stated that fewer than 2,000 of these were made, Ian Falloon claims 219 were made in 1975 and a further 2,532 in 1976 although it is possible some of these were Series 2 bikes built at the end of the year. The Series 2 run totaled some 4,000 (2,548 in 1977, 1,737 in 1978). Falloon gives total Mark I production as 7,036. Series 2 used a De Tomaso-designed rectangular taillight/reflector and modified rear guard. This was also used on the Mark II and SP models. The taillight and guard was the biggest change between Series 1 and 2 but other modifications included later inclusion of a tripmeter, black fork lowers, a more generous dual seat that replaced the split-prone original seat, exhaust pipe heel guards and inferior fuel taps. The extra cost compared to the &quot;cooking&quot; T3 model paid for performance items such as high-compression domed pistons, larger inlet and exhaust valves and Dell&#x27;Orto 36 mm pumper carbs with filterless grey plastic velocity stacks. Most Mk I bikes were brilliant red although a very small number were painted in metallic ice blue. An exceedingly small number of Series 2 bikes were white.
In 1979, a small-block version of the air-cooled V-twin designed by engineer Lino Tonti was introduced as the V35. Radical when introduced, the design featured horizontally split crankcases and Heron heads. The former was a common feature of contemporary Japanese motorcycle design, whilst the latter was widely used in car engines. Both features allow more efficient mass production and also the design of the engine and associated components cut the weight from of the contemporary 850 T3 to the of the V35. The power of the original V35 at was competitive with engines of comparable displacement of the period – later, larger versions (V50, V65, V75) were rapidly outclassed by competing water-cooled engines. The Breva and Nevada today feature a descendant of Tonti&#x27;s V35 engine: the 750 cc V-twin, rated at . With its ease of maintenance, durability and even, flat torque curve, the engine design remains suitable to everyday, real-world situations. Two other Guzzi roadsters were the Strada 750 and Strada 1000.

As Guzzi continued to develop the V-twin, power was increased in the mid-1980s when Guzzi created four-valve versions of the &quot;small block&quot; series. Of these, the 650 and the 750 were rated at and respectively. The production of the four-valve &quot;small block&quot; engines ended in the later 1980s.
Moto Guzzis have used a hydraulic integrated brake system, where the right front disc works off the handlebar lever, while the left front and the rear disc work off the foot brake. The first models were the 1975 &quot;750 S3&quot;, &quot;850 T3&quot; and &quot;V1000 I Convert&quot;. From the end of the 1970s, it was standard on most &quot;big block&quot; models. The last one was the &quot;California 1100&quot; built until 2012.

The cartridge front fork used in Guzzi&#x27;s motorcycles of the later 1970s and 1980s is a Guzzi invention. Instead of containing the damping oil in the fork, it is in a cartridge. Oil in the fork is purely for lubrication.

Still under the De Tomaso umbrella, in 1988, Benelli and SEIMM merged to create Guzzi Benelli Moto (G.B.M. S.p.A.). During this period, Moto Guzzi existed as an entity within the De Tomaso owned G.B.M., but in 1996 celebrated its 75th birthday and the return of its name to Moto Guzzi S.p.A. In 1996, De Tomaso became Trident Rowan Group, also known as TRG.

===2000–2004: Aprilia years===
Under the helm of Ivano Beggio, Aprilia acquired Moto Guzzi S.p.A. on 14 April 2000 for $65 million. According to the original press release, the intention had been that Moto Guzzi would remain headquartered in Mandello del Lario and would share Aprilia&#x27;s technological, R&amp;D capabilities and financial resources as well. The arrangement would remain short-lived, as Aprilia itself stumbled financially. At the same time Aprilia attempted to diversify in other areas of manufacturing, new Italian laws required helmets for motorcyclists and raising insurance rates for teenage motorcyclists, severely affected the company&#x27;s profitability. Nonetheless, Aprilia had committed large sums to renovating the Mandello Moto Guzzi factory – renovations that were ultimately completed. Ducati again made an offer for Moto Guzzi during Aprilia&#x27;s financial difficulties, as it had before when Aprilia had purchased Moto Guzzi in 2000. Other potential buyers included Kymco and the BRP subsidiary Rotax, Kymco reportedly making the highest offer. The Moto Guzzi assembly line closed for a short period in March 2004, due to the financial difficulties.

===2004–present: Piaggio years===
On 30 December 2004, Piaggio Group acquired Aprilia.
Moto Guzzi S.p.A. officially becomes a &quot;Unico Azionista&quot; of Piaggio, part of Immsi S.p.A. Investments have allowed the introduction of a series of competitive new models in rapid succession.

In November 2007, Moto Guzzi unveiled the retro-themed 2008 V7 Classic at the Motorcycle and Bicycle Manufacturers show in Milan, Italy. It was available in Europe in mid-2008, and Moto Guzzi announced plans in late-2008 to make it available to US buyers. The company has begun making limited collectors&#x27; editions of Guzzi originals.

===Key people===
Key people associated with Moto Guzzi since its launch include:

Founders:
* Carlo Guzzi (1889–1964): conceived the marque with Giovani Ravelli and Giorgio Parodi – each members of the mechanics Italian Air Corp. He died in November 1964 aged 75.
* Giorgio Parodi (1897–1955): aircraft pilot, whose father financed the original company.
* Giovanni Ravelli (d. 1918): one of the original three friends who envisioned a company that would engineer and sell motorcycles—what was later to become Moto Guzzi—was not present at the formal birth of Moto Guzzi in 1921, having perished in a 1918 air crash. At the time he met Guzzi and Parodi, he had already established himself as an accomplished motorcycle racer, having raced in the 1913 Tourist Trophy on a Premier 500.

Engineers:
* Giulio Cesare Carcano: engineer with Guzzi from 1936 to 1966, inventor of the DOHC V8 engine and the air-cooled V-twin that became synonymous with Moto Guzzi. He died in September 2005 after a second career as a Naval Architect but remained in service to Moto Guzzi into his retirement.
* Umberto Todero: Joining Moto Guzzi in 1939, his career spanned from the days of the original founders, through the SEIMM, de Tomaso, and Aprilia years, into the ownership of Piaggio. He died while still in service to the company in February 2005.
* Lino Tonti: engineer, joined the company in 1967 to replace Carcano, developed the V7 Sport, the small block V50, and the Tonti Frame.

Racers:
* Giuseppe Guzzi (14 August 1882 – 6 June 1962): Carlo&#x27;s brother, rode the famed GT Norge on the 1928 Arctic Circle raid to test the first motorcycle rear swingarm suspension.
* Stanley Woods: esteemed motorcycle racer who captained Moto Guzzi&#x27;s to numerable Isle of Man TT wins.
* Omobono Tenni: celebrated 47 victories racing for Moto Guzzi in the period between 1933 and 1948.
* Bill Lomas: won the 1955 and 1956 350 cc world championship for Moto Guzzi, defeating multi-cylinder machines on his and aerodynamic single-cylinder bike. The Mandello Guzzi Museum has a section devoted to Lomas&#x27; two world title wins and also his outings on the legendary Moto Guzzi Grand Prix 500 cc V8.
* John Wittner: American dentist, highly skilled pilot and mechanic, craftsman of the 1000 Daytona, with engineer Umberto Todero.

==Production figures==
*1929: 2,500 units
*1971: 46,487 units (historic high)
*1993: 3,274 units (historical low)
*1994: 4,300 units (approx)
*1997: 5,600 units (approx)
*1998: 5,647 units
*1999: 6,275 units
*2004: fewer than 4,000 units
*2005: fewer than 5,000 units
*2006: greater than 10,000 units
*2011: 5,763
*2012: 6,664
*2013: 6,800

==Technical innovations==
===CARC===

&quot;(Cardano Reattivo Compatto)&quot;: Above a certain power level the competing forces of drive-shaft arrangements can severely disrupt the suspension of a motorcycle (especially at application of throttle), a phenomenon called &quot;shaft jacking&quot;. Moto Guzzi introduced its first anti-jacking system with the Daytona in 1993 and evolved that design though the 2005 V11 Sport. Guzzi later introduced their CARC system, emulating the BMW Paralever design and serving the same function. Kawasaki introduced its Tetra-lever system for similar reasons on the Kawasaki Concours 14 (also known as the 1400 GTR). Arturo Magni (1925–2015) had sold &quot;parallelogrammo&quot; rear suspension kit in the early 1980s to resolve similar anti-torque issues.

Moto Guzzi&#x27;s Breva 750, Nevada 750, and California Vintage fall below the threshold that requires an anti-jacking drive-shaft system.

The Breva 1100, Griso, Norge, Bellagio, Stelvio and 1200 Sport feature Guzzi&#x27;s recently patented swingarm system, marketed as &quot;Compact Reactive Shaft Drive&quot; – also known as Ca. R.C. or CARC – introduced with the Breva 1100 in 2005. The system separates the shaft final drive&#x27;s torque reaction from the suspension via floating torque arms and thereby eliminates the abruptness typical of shaft drive systems on acceleration or throttle-release – still providing a quiet, reliable and low maintenance drive system. Reviewers have observed excellent braking performance and drive train smoothness attributable to the CARC system.

===Rear swingarm suspension===
By 1928, long-distance motorcycle travel was limited by the lack of effective rear suspension design. Until then, alternative designs sacrificed torsional rigidity – gaining comfort but severely compromising handling. Carlo Guzzi and his brother Giuseppe designed an &quot;elastic frame&quot; using a sheet-steel box enclosing four springs, together with a swingarm in tubes and sheet metal. The first Moto Guzzi bike to employ the suspension was named the G.T. (for Gran Turismo, &quot;Grand Touring&quot;), and to prove the suspension – and gain publicity for Moto Guzzi – the brothers conceived a challenging journey from Mandello del Lario to Capo Nord in northern Norway. Despite the very poor condition of European roads at that time, Giuseppe Guzzi reached the Arctic Circle in four weeks. The elastic frame rear suspension was immediately introduced to production machines, transforming the usability of the motorcycle as an everyday form of transportation. In 2006, Moto Guzzi retraced the &#x27;raid&#x27; of 1928 to introduce the Norge 1200. The word &quot;Norge&quot; is Norwegian for &quot;Norway&quot;.

===First DOHC V8 motorcycle engine===
The Moto Guzzi Grand Prix V8, introduced in 1955, was a 500 cc racing motorcycle fitted with a V8 engine using dual overhead camshafts (DOHC). The engine was conceived by Giulio Carcano, Enrico Cantoni, Umberto Todero, Ken Kavanagh and Fergus Anderson just after the 1954 Monza Grand Prix and designed by Dr. Carcano. The bore and stroke of the engine were : there were two valves per cylinder. Power was in the region of at 12,000 rpm, approximately more than the rival 4-cylinder MV Agustas and Gileras.

The engine and the bike were unprecedented. The motorcycle proved capable of achieving —thirty years before the speed was reached again in Grand Prix motorcycle racing. However, the &quot;Otto Cilindri&quot; proved difficult to ride, as well as complex and expensive to build and maintain—bikes suffered broken crankshafts, overheating and seizing—all in addition to the danger the bike posed to the racers themselves. By 1957, there were two bikes available and no one willing to race the bike without further development and the bike was withdrawn.

===Motorcycle wind tunnel===
In 1950 Moto Guzzi created the first motorcycle wind tunnel, &quot;La Galleria del Vento&quot;, capable of testing 1:1 prototypes at the Mandello del Lario works, thereby allowing the company to market an integral fairing. The wind tunnel enabled racers to mimic real-life riding conditions and optimize their seating and body position at varying racing speeds – an unprecedented advantage for racing and production motorcycles. In motorcycle prototyping, Moto Guzzi could refine the air stream around the motorcycle itself, develop an envelope of still air around the rider, reduce frontal area, optimize air penetration, and maximize fuel economy.

The wind tunnel design is a modification of the open-circuit Eiffel type (after Gustave Eiffel, designer of the Eiffel Tower in Paris), consisting of three sections. Air is drawn into the &quot;Air Duct&quot; with an aperture of , airspeed increases as it is passed through smaller and smaller diameters reaching max wind speed in the &quot;Test Chamber&quot; with a diameter of , and finally is exhausted through the &quot;Outlet/Discharge&quot; duct containing the fan mechanism – a three-bladed variable speed propeller driven by a electric motor.

Located outside of the testing chamber adjacent to the central section, a control room houses fan mechanism controls and the measuring instruments. Outside of the chamber is a large dial &quot;Scala Convenzionale&quot; or &quot;Conventional Scale&quot; to indicate the varying degree of resistance offered by the motorcycle (and rider) to the passing air. Around the circumference of the dial, red lights at each degree provide a visual indicator to the rider and test personnel. This large scale remains visible to the rider in the tunnel during testing and by repositioning himself on the bike he can determine the changing and optimal resistance. A second measurement tool was an alcohol-filled micro-manometer connected to a Pitot tube placed at a 90–degree angle to the airflow in the tunnel.

It is unknown to what extent the wind tunnel is used currently. The December 2005 press release for the Norge 1200 states that the bike was &quot;thoroughly tested&quot; in the Mandello wind tunnel.
Aprilia, a company in the same group as Moto Guzzi, maintains a relationship with the aerodynamics program at the University of Perugia, where computer simulations combined with practical tests (done in smaller tunnels using scale models) can more effectively and economically provide accurate testing and feedback.

===Truck-motorcycle hybrid===
The Ercole (Hercules), produced in 1928, was capable of carrying an 800 lb (363 kg) load.
Guzzi built a range of &quot;goods vehicles&quot;, from 50 cc to 500 cc, between 1928 and 1980.

===Large-wheel scooter===

Though the design criteria of a scooter have grown increasingly fluid, historically a scooter featured small wheels – especially in post-war Italy (due to huge stockpiles of landing-gear tyres for fighter planes, made redundant with the ending of the war and sold off as surplus). The configuration, along with a compact engine, allowed the scooter its trademark step-through design. With the 1950 introduction of the Galletto 160, Moto Guzzi developed a large-wheel scooter. The larger and heavier wheels afforded greater gyroscopic force and thereby greater balance. Large-wheeled scooters also reduced vulnerability to pot-holes. The Galletto not only offered larger wheels, it carried its own spare.

==Motorcycle models==
Moto Guzzi models currently in production include the V7 850, V9 bobber. In 2019, Guzzi released the V85 TT Adventure which comes in two varieties; a streetwise version for urban commutes and road trips, and a rally-style package with a more off-road focus.
Guzzis has announced the release of their first water cooled motorcycle; the 1050cc v100 Mandello. This will be an upscale sport tourer with 115 hp and 77ftlbs of torque.see moto guzzis website.

Guzzi has made a number of historic racing and military motorcycles. The historic racing heritage is best epitomized in the Le Mans model range, still held today to be a styling masterpiece and motorcycle design as an art form.

Through various periods of its history, Moto Guzzi has produced models specifically for military and police forces. The Italian police and military and various US police departments (e.g. LAPD) have used Moto Guzzi bikes in their fleets. Guzzi currently markets police versions of model range – the Breva (all three models) most commonly, as well as the Norge, adopted by Berlin police.&lt;ref name=&quot;piaggiogroup.com/news&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;

==Factory, company headquarters and museum==
Since 1921, Moto Guzzi headquarters have been located in Mandello del Lario on the Lecco branch of Lake Como. The facility began at a size of , and by the early 1950s Moto Guzzi covered with a workforce of over 1,500. As of 1999, the complex included one, two and three story buildings of over , operating at approximately 50% of production capacity.

During its ownership tenure, Aprilia considered moving the entire operation to Monza, under protest from the Guzzisti and Mandello factory workers. Instead, Aprilia renovated the factory in 2004 at a cost of $45 million.

The original Mandello site remains home to the company&#x27;s headquarters, the production facility, the historic wind tunnel, the company library, and the museum. The Moto Guzzi Museum displays models from the company&#x27;s history, engines that retrace Guzzi&#x27;s engineering history, and a series of important prototypes. The museum is open to the public and includes a gift shop featuring books, clothing and accessories. Moto Guzzi currently employs roughly 250 to 300 employees, making over 10,000 bikes per year.

For decades, the Moto Guzzi factory carried a set of internally lit block letters along the rooftop (and also over the entry gate) spelling &quot;Moto Guzzi&quot;. In May 2007, the original roof sign, old and worn, was replaced with a new brighter sign carrying the current official logo and script. At the same time, the factory entrance gate received a new rectangular version of the sign.

== Customer engagement ==

Since 2001, Moto Guzzi has annually hosted &quot;Giornate Mondiali Guzzi&quot;, also known as GMG or World Guzzi Days, inviting fans to Mandello. In 2006 over 15,000 Guzzi fans from over 20 countries traveled to Mandello for the event.

==See also==

*List of Italian companies
*List of motorcycle manufacturers
*List of Moto Guzzi motorcycles

==References==
==External links==
* Moto Guzzi International official website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1149018" start="0" end="10" title="Moto Guzzi" label="Moto Guzzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q34493" start="28" end="38" title="motorcycle" label="motorcycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q187939" start="39" end="51" title="Manufacturing" label="manufacturer"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="67" end="73" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q42935" start="150" end="168" title="Mandello del Lario" label="Mandello del Lario"/>
<link wikidata="Q17163326" start="290" end="307" title="motorcycle racing" label="motorcycle racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q174165" start="322" end="332" title="innovation" label="innovation"/>
<link wikidata="Q193010" start="379" end="390" title="wind tunnel" label="wind tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q841263" start="543" end="556" title="Piaggio" label="Piaggio Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q15125432" start="1255" end="1281" title="Corpo Aeronautico Militare" label="Corpo Aeronautico Militare"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="1329" end="1340" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1940" end="1959" title="#Logo" label="the Moto Guzzi logo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1310369" start="3018" end="3040" title="single-cylinder engine" label="single-cylinder engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4563599" start="3286" end="3305" title="1935 Isle of Man TT" label="1935 Isle of Man TT"/>
<link wikidata="Q5690108" start="3332" end="3345" title="Stanley Woods" label="Stanley Woods"/>
<link wikidata="Q2488462" start="3399" end="3413" title="Lightweight TT" label="Lightweight TT"/>
<link wikidata="Q3955321" start="3429" end="3438" title="Senior TT" label="Senior TT"/>
<link wikidata="Q191801" start="3489" end="3500" title="Four-stroke engine" label="four-stroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413600" start="3626" end="3644" title="IOE engine" label="inlet over exhaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q745394" start="4173" end="4179" title="Gilera" label="Gilera"/>
<link wikidata="Q2248270" start="4184" end="4191" title="Mondial (motorcycle manufacturer)" label="Mondial"/>
<link wikidata="Q850292" start="4210" end="4238" title="Grand Prix motorcycle racing" label="Grand Prix motorcycle racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q16225427" start="4399" end="4425" title="List of Grand Prix motorcycle racing World Riders&amp;#x27; Champions by year" label="350 cc world championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q1628420" start="4551" end="4573" title="Moto Guzzi V8" label="V8 500 cc GP race bike"/>
<link wikidata="Q585000" start="4894" end="4905" title="1957 Grand Prix motorcycle racing season" label="1957 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q845091" start="5051" end="5070" title="List of Grand Prix motorcycle racing World Riders&amp;#x27; Champions" label="World Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q845091" start="5074" end="5106" title="List of Grand Prix motorcycle racing World Riders&amp;#x27; Champions" label="Constructor&amp;#x27;s Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q522661" start="5114" end="5128" title="Isle of Man TT" label="Isle of Man TT"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="5158" end="5170" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6562" end="6589" title="#Large-wheel scooter" label="first large-wheeled scooter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412490" start="6693" end="6702" title="Lambretta" label="Lambretta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1861637" start="8323" end="8329" title="V-twin engine" label="V-twin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2693600" start="9017" end="9027" title="Lino Tonti" label="Lino Tonti"/>
<link wikidata="Q173085" start="9503" end="9512" title="De Tomaso" label="De Tomaso"/>
<link wikidata="Q172234" start="9572" end="9591" title="Alejandro de Tomaso" label="Alejandro de Tomaso"/>
<link wikidata="Q817107" start="9645" end="9652" title="Benelli (motorcycles)" label="Benelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q35962" start="9657" end="9665" title="Maserati" label="Maserati"/>
<link wikidata="Q2135086" start="9956" end="9967" title="Moto Guzzi Le Mans" label="850 Le Mans"/>
<link wikidata="Q2144090" start="12083" end="12092" title="crankcase" label="crankcase"/>
<link wikidata="Q17023300" start="12098" end="12108" title="Heron cylinder head" label="Heron head"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12209" end="12235" title="Heron cylinder head#Applications" label="widely used in car engines"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12880" end="12888" title="Types of motorcycles#standard" label="roadster"/>
<link wikidata="Q30880985" start="12899" end="12909" title="Moto Guzzi 750 Strada" label="Strada 750"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12914" end="12925" title="Moto Guzzi 1000 Strada" label="Strada 1000"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13456" end="13462" title="Moto Guzzi 750 S" label="750 S3"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13476" end="13482" title="Moto Guzzi 850 T" label="850 T3"/>
<link wikidata="Q6917964" start="13499" end="13514" title="Moto Guzzi V1000 Convert" label="V1000 I Convert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952232" start="13630" end="13645" title="Moto Guzzi California" label="California 1100"/>
<link wikidata="Q817107" start="13942" end="13949" title="Benelli (motorcycles)" label="Benelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1675666" start="14305" end="14317" title="Ivano Beggio" label="Ivano Beggio"/>
<link wikidata="Q622062" start="14319" end="14326" title="Aprilia" label="Aprilia"/>
<link wikidata="Q271812" start="15077" end="15083" title="Ducati" label="Ducati"/>
<link wikidata="Q696338" start="15261" end="15266" title="Kymco" label="Kymco"/>
<link wikidata="Q891797" start="15275" end="15278" title="Bombardier Recreational Products" label="BRP"/>
<link wikidata="Q696808" start="15290" end="15295" title="Rotax" label="Rotax"/>
<link wikidata="Q841263" start="15501" end="15514" title="Piaggio" label="Piaggio Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1628420" start="16950" end="16964" title="Moto Guzzi V8" label="DOHC V8 engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2693600" start="17410" end="17420" title="Lino Tonti" label="Lino Tonti"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17528" end="17543" title="#Engineering, design and styling" label="the Tonti Frame"/>
<link wikidata="Q5690108" start="17737" end="17750" title="Stanley Woods" label="Stanley Woods"/>
<link wikidata="Q462357" start="17846" end="17859" title="Omobono Tenni" label="Omobono Tenni"/>
<link wikidata="Q862275" start="17946" end="17956" title="Bill Lomas" label="Bill Lomas"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18258" end="18270" title="John Wittner" label="John Wittner"/>
<link wikidata="Q7461099" start="19003" end="19016" title="shaft effect" label="shaft jacking"/>
<link wikidata="Q30049871" start="19381" end="19393" title="Arturo Magni" label="Arturo Magni"/>
<link wikidata="Q1970197" start="19764" end="19772" title="swingarm" label="swingarm"/>
<link wikidata="Q4069" start="20988" end="20997" title="North Cape (Norway)" label="Capo Nord"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="21010" end="21016" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q176609" start="21109" end="21122" title="Arctic Circle" label="Arctic Circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q341174" start="21592" end="21601" title="V8 engine" label="V8 engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163122" start="21608" end="21631" title="Overhead camshaft engine" label="dual overhead camshafts"/>
<link wikidata="Q773871" start="21716" end="21728" title="Ken Kavanagh" label="Ken Kavanagh"/>
<link wikidata="Q193010" start="22633" end="22644" title="wind tunnel" label="wind tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q20882" start="23316" end="23330" title="Gustave Eiffel" label="Gustave Eiffel"/>
<link wikidata="Q243" start="23348" end="23360" title="Eiffel Tower" label="Eiffel Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q56218" start="24517" end="24527" title="Pitot tube" label="Pitot tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q748085" start="24900" end="24921" title="University of Perugia" label="University of Perugia"/>
<link wikidata="Q193234" start="25379" end="25386" title="scooter (motorcycle)" label="scooter"/>
<link wikidata="Q214126" start="26945" end="26949" title="Los Angeles Police Department" label="LAPD"/>
<link wikidata="Q328480" start="27129" end="27142" title="Berlin Police" label="Berlin police"/>
<link wikidata="Q42935" start="27309" end="27327" title="Mandello del Lario" label="Mandello del Lario"/>
<link wikidata="Q15523" start="27351" end="27360" title="Lake Como" label="Lake Como"/>
<link wikidata="Q622062" start="27633" end="27640" title="Aprilia" label="Aprilia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6252" start="27683" end="27688" title="Monza" label="Monza"/>
<link wikidata="Q3867622" start="27994" end="28011" title="Moto Guzzi Museum" label="Moto Guzzi Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860718" start="29022" end="29047" title="List of companies of Italy" label="List of Italian companies"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29049" end="29081" title="List of motorcycle manufacturers#.C2.A0Italy" label="List of motorcycle manufacturers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2676157" start="29083" end="29113" title="List of Moto Guzzi motorcycles" label="List of Moto Guzzi motorcycles"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="308647" wikidata="Q488523" url="?curid=308647" title="Conservative Party of Canada">
<text>The Conservative Party of Canada (CPC; , PCC), colloquially known as the Tories or simply the Conservatives, is a federal political party in Canada. It was formed in 2003 by the merger of the two main right-leaning parties, the Progressive Conservative Party (PC Party) and the Canadian Alliance, the latter being the successor of the Western Canadian–based Reform Party. The party sits at the centre-right to the right of the Canadian political spectrum, with their federal rival, the centre-left Liberal Party of Canada, positioned to their left. The Conservatives are defined as a &quot;big tent&quot; party, practising &quot;brokerage politics&quot; and welcoming a broad variety of members, including &quot;Red Tories&quot; and &quot;Blue Tories&quot;.

From Canadian Confederation in 1867 until 1942, the original Conservative Party of Canada formed numerous governments and had multiple names. However, by 1942, the main right-wing Canadian force became known as the Progressive Conservative Party. In the 1993 federal election, the PC Party&#x27;s Western Canadian support transferred to the Reform Party. When it became clear that neither the PC Party nor the Reform Party or Canadian Alliance (the latter being the successor to the Reform Party) could beat the incumbent Liberals that had governed since the 1993 election, an effort to unite the right-of-centre parties emerged. In 2003, the Canadian Alliance and the PCs merged, forming the Conservative Party of Canada.

During the Conservative Party&#x27;s governance of Canada from 2006 to 2015, its economic policies included reducing sales tax, reducing income taxes, reducing business taxes, balancing the national budget, creating the tax-free savings account (TFSA), and creating the Universal Child Care Benefit. In social policy, the government eliminated the long-gun registry, introduced mandatory minimum sentences for violent crimes, raised the age of consent to 16 years of age, permitted the construction of several pipelines, and withdrew Canada from the Kyoto Protocol. The government also supported the State of Israel, negotiated the Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement (CETA), and negotiated the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP).

Under its first leader, Stephen Harper, the party governed with two minority governments after the federal elections of 2006 and 2008. It then won a majority government in the 2011 federal election before being defeated in the 2015 federal election by a majority Liberal government led by Justin Trudeau. Despite winning a plurality of the vote in each election, the party remained in opposition after losing the 2019 and 2021 elections under its second and third leaders, Andrew Scheer and Erin O&#x27;Toole respectively. Pierre Poilievre was elected leader in the 2022 leadership election.

==History==
===Predecessors===
The Conservative Party is political heir to a series of right-of-centre parties that have existed in Canada, beginning with the Upper Canada Tories of the nineteenth century. John A. Macdonald and George-Étienne Cartier later founded the Liberal-Conservative Party. The party became known simply as the Conservative Party after 1873, and the Progressive Conservative Party after 1942. Like its historical predecessors and conservative parties in some other Commonwealth nations (such as the Conservative Party of the United Kingdom), members of the present-day Conservative Party of Canada are sometimes referred to as &quot;Tories&quot;. The modern Conservative Party of Canada is also legal heir to the heritage of the historical conservative parties by virtue of assuming the assets and liabilities of the former Progressive Conservative Party upon the merger of 2003.

In 1984, the Progressive Conservative Party&#x27;s electoral fortunes made a massive upturn under its new leader, Brian Mulroney, who mustered a large coalition of westerners irritated over the Liberal government&#x27;s National Energy Program, suburban and small-town Ontarians, and Quebec nationalists who were angered over Quebec not having distinct status in the Constitution of Canada signed in 1982. This led to a huge landslide victory for the Progressive Conservative Party.

In the late 1980s and 1990s, federal conservative politics became split by the creation of a new western-based protest party, the populist and social conservative Reform Party of Canada created by Preston Manning, the son of an Alberta Social Credit premier, Ernest Manning. Westerners reportedly felt betrayed by the federal Progressive Conservative Party, seeing it as catering to Quebec and urban Ontario interests over theirs. In 1989, Reform made headlines in the political scene when its first member of Parliament (MP), Deborah Grey, was elected in a by-election in Alberta, which was a shock to the PCs, who had almost complete electoral dominance over the province for years. Another defining event for western conservatives was when Mulroney accepted the results of an unofficial Senate election held in Alberta, which resulted in the appointment of a Reformer, Stanley Waters, to the Senate. 

In the 1993 election, support for the Progressive Conservative Party collapsed, and the party&#x27;s representation in the House of Commons dropped from an absolute majority of seats to only two. Meanwhile, the Reform Party took Western Canada and became the dominant conservative party in Canada. The PC Party rebounded slightly with 20 seats in 1997 and 12 in 2000, but was unable to challenge Reform in Western Canada; meanwhile, Reform dominated the western provinces but struggled to win seats east of Manitoba. Their electoral problems were accentuated by Canada&#x27;s single member plurality electoral system, which resulted in numerous seats being won by the Liberal Party, even when the total number of votes cast for PC and Reform Party candidates was substantially in excess of the total number of votes cast for the Liberal candidate. This led to calls for the two parties to merge.

===Foundation and early history===
On October 15, 2003, after months of talks between the Canadian Alliance (formerly the Reform Party) and Progressive Conservative Party, Stephen Harper (then the leader of the Canadian Alliance) and Peter MacKay (then the leader of the Progressive Conservatives) announced the &quot;&#x27;Conservative Party Agreement-in-Principle&quot;, that would merge their parties to create the new Conservative Party of Canada. After the agreement-in-principle was ratified by the membership of both parties, the new party was officially registered with Elections Canada on December 7. Senator John Lynch-Staunton, a PC, was named interim leader, pending the outcome of the party&#x27;s inaugural leadership election.

The merger was opposed by some elements in both parties. In the PCs in particular, the merger process resulted in organized opposition, and in a substantial number of prominent members refusing to join the new party. Former leadership candidate David Orchard argued that his written agreement with MacKay, which had been signed a few months earlier at the 2003 Progressive Conservative Leadership convention, excluded any such merger. Orchard announced his opposition to the merger before negotiations with the Canadian Alliance had been completed. Over the course of the following year, Orchard led an unsuccessful legal challenge to the merger of the two parties.

In October and November, during the course of the PC party&#x27;s process of ratifying the merger, three sitting Progressive Conservative MPs — André Bachand, John Herron and former prime minister Joe Clark — announced they would not join the new Conservative Party caucus. In the months following the merger, Rick Borotsik, who had been elected as Manitoba&#x27;s only PC, became openly critical of the new party&#x27;s leadership, while former leadership candidate Scott Brison and former Alliance leadership candidate Keith Martin left the party. Brison, Herron and Martin ran for the Liberal Party in the next election, while Clark, Bachand and Borotsik retired. Three senators — William Doody, Norman Atkins, and Lowell Murray — declined to join the new party and continued to sit in the upper house as a rump caucus of Progressive Conservatives, and a fourth (Jean-Claude Rivest) soon left to sit as an independent. In February 2005, Prime Minister Paul Martin appointed two anti-merger Progressive Conservatives, Nancy Ruth and Elaine McCoy, to the Senate. In March 2006, Nancy Ruth joined the new Conservative Party.

====Inaugural leadership election====
In the immediate aftermath of the merger announcement, some Conservative activists hoped to recruit former Ontario premier Mike Harris for the leadership. Harris declined the invitation, as did New Brunswick premier Bernard Lord and Alberta premier Ralph Klein. Outgoing Progressive Conservative leader Peter MacKay also announced he would not seek the leadership, as did former Democratic Representative Caucus leader Chuck Strahl. Jim Prentice, who had been a candidate in the 2003 PC leadership contest, entered the Conservative leadership race in mid-December but dropped out in mid-January because of an inability to raise funds so soon after his earlier leadership bid.

In the end, there were three candidates in the party&#x27;s first leadership election: former Canadian Alliance leader Stephen Harper, former Magna International CEO Belinda Stronach, and former Ontario provincial PC Cabinet minister Tony Clement. Voting took place on March 20, 2004. A total of 97,397 ballots were cast. Harper won on the first ballot with 56.2% of the vote; Stronach received 34.5%, and Clement received 9.4%.

===Stephen Harper (2004–2015)===

==== In opposition (2004–2006) ====
Two months after Harper&#x27;s election as leader, Prime Minister Paul Martin called a general election for June 28, 2004.

For the first time since the 1993 election, a Liberal government would have to deal with an opposition party that was generally seen as being able to form government. The Liberals attempted to counter this with an early election call, as this would give the Conservatives less time to consolidate their merger. During the first half of the campaign, polls showed a rise in support for the new party, leading some pollsters to predict the election of a minority Conservative government. Momentum stalled after several Conservative candidates made controversial remarks about homosexuality, official bilingualism and abortion, allowing the Liberal Party to warn of a &quot;hidden agenda&quot;. Ultimately, Harper&#x27;s new Conservatives emerged from the election with a much larger parliamentary caucus of 99 MPs while the Liberals were reduced to a minority government of 135 MPs, twenty short of a majority.

In 2005, some political analysts such as former Progressive Conservative pollster Allan Gregg and &quot;Toronto Star&quot; columnist Chantal Hébert suggested that the then-subsequent election could result in a Conservative government if the public were to perceive the Tories as emerging from the party&#x27;s founding convention (then scheduled for March 2005 in Montreal) with clearly defined, moderate policies with which to challenge the Liberals. The convention provided the public with an opportunity to see the Conservative Party in a new light, appearing to have reduced the focus on its controversial social conservative agenda. It retained its fiscal conservative appeal by espousing tax cuts, smaller government, and more decentralization by giving the provinces more taxing powers and decision-making authority in joint federal-provincial programs. The party&#x27;s law and order package was an effort to address rising homicide rates, which had gone up 12% in 2004.

On November 24, 2005, Harper introduced a motion of no confidence which, with the backing of the other two opposition parties, passed on November 28, 2005. This resulted in an election scheduled for January 23, 2006. The Conservatives started off the first month of the campaign by making a series of policy-per-day announcements, which included a Goods and Services Tax reduction and a child-care allowance. These announcements played to Harper&#x27;s strengths as a policy wonk, as opposed to the 2004 election and summer 2005 where he tried to overcome the perception that he was cool and aloof. Though his party showed only modest movement in the polls, Harper&#x27;s personal approval numbers, which had always trailed his party&#x27;s significantly, began to rise. In addition, the party also received more newspaper endorsements than in 2004.

On January 23, 2006, the Conservatives won 124 seats, compared to 103 for the Liberals. The results made the Conservatives the largest party in the 308-member House of Commons, enabling them to form a minority government.

==== In government (2006–2015) ====

On February 6, 2006, Harper and his Cabinet were sworn in. The Conservative Party confronted the In and Out scandal, regarding improper election spending during the 2006 election. The government&#x27;s first budget produced a nearly $14 billion surplus, a number slightly greater than the Martin government. The budget also drastically increased military spending and scrapped funding for the Kyoto Protocol and the Kelowna Accord. Later, the government introduced the tax-free savings account (TFSA). The government passed the Veterans&#x27; Bill of Rights, which guaranteed benefits for veterans from Veterans Affairs Canada, in addition to guaranteeing equality of veterans and referring to them as &quot;special citizens&quot;. The government also passed the Québécois nation motion which would &quot;recognize the Québécois as a nation within a united Canada&quot;, and introduced a motion to reverse the same-sex marriage law implemented by the Martin government, which was defeated.

Deadlock between the Conservatives and the Liberals, the New Democratic Party, and the Bloc Québécois led to the calling of the October 2008 federal election, in which the Conservatives won a stronger minority. Shortly after, the Conservatives fought off a vote of non-confidence by a potential governing coalition of opposition parties by proroguing parliament. In his second term, Harper&#x27;s government responded to the global recession of 2007–2008 by introducing the Economic Action Plan that implemented major personal income tax cuts. However, these tax cuts, along with increases in spending to combat the financial crisis, grew the deficit to $55.6 billion – Canada&#x27;s largest federal deficit up to that time.

A March 2011 non-confidence vote that found the Harper government to be in contempt of Parliament dissolved Parliament and triggered an election. In this election, the Conservatives won a majority government. The Harper government withdrew Canada from the Kyoto Protocol and repealed the long-gun registry. In foreign policy, the government passed the &quot;Anti-terrorism Act&quot;, launched Operation Impact to combat ISIL, negotiated the Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement (CETA) with the European Union, and negotiated the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP). The Conservatives also gained controversy surrounding the Canadian Senate expenses scandal and the Robocall scandal; the latter involved robocalls and real-person calls that were designed to result in voter suppression in the 2011 election. In economic policy, the government launched Canada&#x27;s Global Markets Action Plan to generate employment opportunities for Canadians by expanding Canadian businesses and investment in other countries, and balanced the budget in the 2014 federal budget, producing a minor deficit of $550 million.

In the 2015 federal election, after nearly a decade in power, the Conservatives were defeated by Justin Trudeau and his Liberal Party. Harper stepped down as leader on the election day on October 19. Journalist John Ibbitson of &quot;The Globe and Mail&quot; described Harper as &quot;the most conservative leader Canada has ever known.&quot;

===In opposition (2015–present)===
====First interim leadership (2015–2017)====

Following the election of the Liberals and Harper&#x27;s resignation as party leader in the 2015 election, it was announced that an interim leader would be selected to serve until a new leader could be chosen. That was completed at the caucus meeting of November 5, 2015 where Rona Ambrose, MP for Sturgeon River—Parkland and a former cabinet minister, was elected by a vote of MPs and Senators.

Some members of the party&#x27;s national council were calling for a leadership convention as early as May 2016 according to &quot;Maclean&#x27;s&quot; magazine. However, some other MPs wanted the vote to be delayed until the spring of 2017. On January 19, 2016, the party announced that a permanent leader will be chosen on May 27, 2017.

==== Andrew Scheer (2017–2020) ====
On September 28, 2016, former Speaker of the House of Commons Andrew Scheer announced his bid for the leadership of the party. On May 27, 2017, Scheer was elected as the second permanent leader of the Conservative Party of Canada, beating runner-up MP Maxime Bernier and more than 12 others with 50.95% of the vote through 13 rounds. Bernier would leave the Conservatives in 2018 to form the People&#x27;s Party of Canada, which campaigned on right-wing populist positions in subsequent elections but failed to win a seat.

Under Scheer, the Conservatives prioritized repealing the Liberal government&#x27;s carbon tax, pipeline construction, and balancing the budget within five years had they formed government in 2019. Scheer is a social conservative; he is personally pro-life and opposes same-sex marriage, though like Harper, he stated he would not attempt to overturn the legality of both laws.

The Conservative Party entered the October 2019 federal election campaign neck-in-neck with the Liberals after the SNC-Lavalin affair earlier that year involving Justin Trudeau, but the election resulted in a Liberal minority government victory. The Conservatives did, however, win the largest share of the popular vote, and gained 26 seats. Notably, they won every single seat in Saskatchewan and all but one in Alberta. While the Conservative Party has historically been highly successful in Alberta and Saskatchewan, some point to a growing sense of Western alienation to explain the results. Following the election, Scheer faced criticism from within the party for failing to defeat Trudeau, who gained criticism for his handling of the SNC-Lavalin affair and for his wearing of brownface and blackface; the latter incident was made public during the election campaign. Scheer announced his pending resignation on December 12, 2019, after the CBC reported that the Conservative party had been paying part of his children&#x27;s private school tuition. He remained party leader, until his successor was chosen in August 2020.

==== Erin O&#x27;Toole (2020–2022) ====

A leadership election to replace Scheer was held in 2020, which was won by former Veterans Affairs Minister Erin O&#x27;Toole on August 24, 2020.

Though running for the leadership on a &quot;true blue&quot; platform, O&#x27;Toole started to nudge the Conservative Party to the political centre as leader. Despite campaigning against the Liberal government&#x27;s carbon tax during his leadership campaign, O&#x27;Toole reversed his position in April 2021, instead advocating for a low carbon savings account. In contrast to his two predecessors as leader, O&#x27;Toole is pro-choice and supports same-sex marriage.

Prime Minister Trudeau called the September 2021 federal election in the hopes of winning a majority government, though in the middle of the campaign O&#x27;Toole&#x27;s Conservatives were tied with the Liberals, if not slightly ahead of the Liberals in the polls. During the campaign, O&#x27;Toole stated he would balance the budget within the next 10 years and reversed his support for repealing the Liberal government&#x27;s &quot;assault-style&quot; weapons ban. In a similar manner to the 2019 election, the Conservatives again won the popular vote but fell short of gaining the largest amount of seats, enabling the Liberal Party under Justin Trudeau to form another minority government.

As a result, party members were undecided on whether he should continue as leader. On October 5, the Conservative caucus voted to adopt the provisions of the &quot;Reform Act&quot;, giving caucus the power to trigger a leadership review. O&#x27;Toole denied that it represented a threat to his leadership, insisting that the caucus was united as a team and that, as a supporter of the Act, he had encouraged his caucus to adopt all of its provisions.

On January 31, 2022, Conservative Calgary Heritage MP Bob Benzen submitted a letter with signatures from 35 Conservative MPs calling for a leadership review on O&#x27;Toole&#x27;s leadership to the Conservative caucus chair, Scott Reid. In the letter, Benzen criticized O&#x27;Toole&#x27;s reversal on repealing the Liberal government&#x27;s carbon tax and assault weapons ban. On February 2, 2022, O&#x27;Toole was removed as leader by a margin of 73 to 45 votes.

====Second interim leadership (2022)====
Then-deputy leader of the Conservative Party Candice Bergen was elected interim leader the same day O&#x27;Toole was ousted, and a leadership election was subsequently scheduled for September 10, 2022. Conservative MP and former cabinet minister Pierre Poilievre, Conservative MP and former leadership candidate Leslyn Lewis, Independent (formerly Progressive Conservative) Member of Ontario Provincial Parliament Roman Baber, former leader of the now-defunct Progressive Conservative Party of Canada and former Premier of Quebec Jean Charest, former MP, former leader of the Progressive Conservative Party of Ontario, and Mayor of Brampton Patrick Brown, former Conservative MP Leona Alleslev, former BC MLA and Conservative MP Marc Dalton, and former Huntsville mayor and Conservative MP Scott Aitchison announced their candidacies for the leadership. On May 2, 2022, the Party announced that the six verified candidates for the leadership would be Aitchison, Baber, Brown, Charest, Lewis, Poilievre.

On July 6, 2022, the Party announced that Patrick Brown had been disqualified &quot;due to &#x27;serious allegations of wrongdoing&#x27; that &#x27;appear&#x27; to violate Canadian election law.&quot; In response, Brown hired lawyer Marie Henein, who requested the Party&#x27;s dispute resolution appeal committee be convened.

==== Pierre Poilievre (2022–present) ====
On September 10, 2022, Pierre Poilievre won the leadership on the first ballot in a landslide, winning over 68% of the points. On September 12, Poilievre gave his first speech to his caucus as leader.

==Principles and policies==
As a relatively young party with a mixed political heritage and history, the federal Conservatives are often described as a &quot;big tent&quot; party in a similar manner to the federal Canadian Liberals by encompassing members and voters who hold a variety of philosophies, ideas and stances, albeit sitting within the centre-right to the right-wing of the political spectrum. Broadly, the party is defined as practicing the Canadian model of conservatism and fiscal conservatism. Some political observers have noted the two most dominant wings of the party traditionally represented Red Tory and Blue Tory ideologies, whereas others have argued that the party has become less internally defined by these labels and that the terms tend to be used by outsiders. Other smaller but visible factional beliefs espoused by individuals within the party have been described by media commentators as liberal conservative, social conservative, right-wing populist and libertarian conservative.

In an effort to create a cohesive platform following its creation, the Conservative Party declared its founding core philosophies and principles to be fiscal accountability, upholding individual rights and freedom, belief in constitutional monarchy, the institutions of Parliament and Canada&#x27;s democratic process, support for strong national defence, law and order, and Canada&#x27;s history and traditions, and equal treatment for all Canadians.

===Party platform and policies===
In recent years, the Conservative Party has repeatedly campaigned on the following policies:

====Culture====
* Bilingualism

====Constitution====
* Supporting Canadian federalism and opposing Quebec separatism
* Support for maintaining Canada&#x27;s constitutional monarchy
* Electing Senators, rather than appointing them
* Freedom of speech, expression, religion, press and conscience
* Respecting treaties signed with Indigenous Canadians
* Allowing Indigenous Canadians more self-governance over their land

====Economic policy====
* Supply management for certain dairy, poultry and eggs
* Extracting petroleum and natural gas
* Construction of pipelines
* A belief in the right to own private property
* Right to work

====Environmental regulation====
* Subsidies and grants for carbon capture technology
* Prohibiting the dumping of raw sewage into rivers
* Marine Protected Areas
* Pollution caps for industries

====Firearms====
* Maintaining the licensing system for firearm owners
* Maintaining the prohibition of short-barreled handguns and fully automatic firearms, including assault rifles
* Opposing the prohibition of long-barreled handguns and semi-automatic firearms

====Gender====
* Equal opportunity for men and women

====Foreign policy====
* Support for most free trade agreements, including NAFTA, Canada–United Kingdom Free Trade Agreement, TPP and CETA
* CANZUK formation and membership
* Membership in NATO
* Membership in the United Nations
* Excluding abortion funding from foreign aid
* Support for Israel
* Recognizing Jerusalem as Israel&#x27;s capital
* Prohibiting the Chinese government from owning Canada&#x27;s 5G infrastructure

====Healthcare and social programs====
* Single-payer publicly funded healthcare
* Canada Pension Plan program
* Defunding the CBC public broadcaster

====Immigration====
* Linking immigration to housing and job supply
* Opposing illegal immigration

====Law-enforcement====
* Mandatory minimum sentences for violent and sexual crimes
* Opposing the police abolition movement
* Creating a national sex offender registry
* Opposition to the legalization of recreational drugs

====Life issues====
* Opposing the expansion of assisted suicide to those solely suffering from mental illness
* Conscience rights for medical practitioners

====Military====
* Increasing military spending to 2% of Canada&#x27;s GDP

====Taxation and fiscal policy====
* Income tax reductions
* Income splitting for families
* Business tax reductions
* Capital gains tax reductions
* Opposition to a carbon tax
* Tax simplification
* Balanced budget legislation
* Reducing the national debt
* Reducing grants and subsidies to businesses

===Domestic policies===
In its current platform, the Conservative Party states that its core objectives are to protect the lives and property of ordinary citizens, promote democratic accountability and reform the senate to make it a fully elected chamber. While the party platform states it is open to debate over electoral reform, it also claims it will not support changing the current electoral system. 

The party calls for a &quot;restoration of a constitutional balance between the federal and
provincial and territorial governments&quot; in regards to Canadian federalism. The Conservative Party also advocates offering tax incentives, increased business investment and more political autonomy to assist and integrate Indigenous Canadian communities over state affirmative action. 

Historically, Conservative MPs were divided on the issue of same-sex marriage in Canada, with individuals in the party arguing for and against. During debates on Bill C-38 in 2004 which would redefine the legal definition of marriage in Canada, a majority of Conservative MPs voted against when then leader Stephen Harper allowed a free vote. Under Harper&#x27;s premiership, the party proposed reopening the debate into same-sex marriage but following a defeat of the motion in the House of Commons stated it would not seek to reopen it. 

In 2016, the Conservatives amended the party constitution to recognize and support same-sex marriage. 

The Conservative leadership has supported changing the law to allow men who have sex with men to donate blood.

===Economic and environmental policies===

The party wants to keep the &quot;Fiscal Balance&quot; (which it introduced in its 2007 Budget while in government) in place and eliminate national debt. It also supports more simplified tax codes, controls on government spending and reductions in both personal and business taxes. Former party leader Erin O&#x27;Toole has listed economic recovery following the COVID-19 pandemic as a core priority for Canada. The party also supports abolishing the Carbon Tax.

At the party&#x27;s March 2021 policy convention, delegates voted to reject a proposal to expand the party&#x27;s existing climate change policies to include a statement that climate change is real.

===Foreign policy===
The Conservative Party presently supports Canada&#x27;s involvement in NATO and international trade agreements, including a CANZUK agreement that would enable mobilization of goods, trade and people between Canada, Australia, New Zealand and the United Kingdom. The party is also supportive of Israel; Conservative leaders Andrew Scheer and Erin O&#x27;Toole have both expressed support for moving Canada&#x27;s embassy to Jerusalem. 

The party also supports taking a tough stance against the People&#x27;s Republic of China and has pledged to prevent China from entering Canada&#x27;s 5G Networks. 

The party also calls on Canada to encourage other Western nations to prevent Chinese government backed corporations from accessing and taking control of important media, energy, internet, defense and security related infrastructure.

===Canadian identity, social policies and immigration===
The party supports maintaining the Official Languages Act ensuring that English and French have equality of status in Canada. It also calls for the protection of Canada&#x27;s history, culture and heritage. It also supports the re-establishment of the Office of Religious Freedom. The Conservative Party constitution also supports maintaining the constitutional Monarchy of Canada. 

The party has called for an immigration system that is &quot;non-partisan, welcoming and well-managed&quot; that encourages merit-based immigration and enticement of skilled workers to Canada to boost the economy whilst also taking a zero tolerance stance on illegal immigration and ensuring that immigrants speak English or French. The Conservatives also want to streamline the process of granting Canadian citizenship to foreign born children adopted by Canadian nationals, speed up the validation of refugee claims and give help to persecuted religious and sexual minorities whilst ensuring those who do not meet refugee status are escorted out of the country. Some MPs within the party have proposed a &quot;Canadian values test&quot; for prospective immigrants and long-term visitors, although this has not been adopted as a policy as a whole. 

Following the 2019–20 Hong Kong protests, several members of the party including former leader Erin O&#x27;Toole called on the Canadian government to grant asylum to fleeing Hong Kong pro-democracy protesters facing extradition orders to China. The party also proposes eliminating birthright citizenship unless one of the parents of a child born in Canada has permanent residency or Canadian citizenship. 

Incumbent Conservative leader Pierre Poilievre has vocally criticized the immigration policies of Justin Trudeau&#x27;s Liberal government and supports significantly restricting numbers of temporary residents and asylum seekers coming into Canada. 

Poilievre instead argues that immigration intake should be linked to housing supply and that the Conservatives will introduce a cap on the number of foreign workers and further border control and background screening measures of immigrants. 

The Conservatives also support a stricter policy on illegal immigration by amending the &quot;Safe Third Country Agreement&quot; and the reintroduction of visa requirements for Mexico.

===Law and order===
The Conservative Party generally supports a tough law and order stance. Presently, the party argues for a national register for convicted child sexual offenders, stricter sentences against repeat offenders, ending early release for violent felons and believes that victims of violent crime should have a say in National Parole Board decisions. The party also supports the creation of a cross-federal task force to tackle organized crime, human trafficking and threats to national security. Some Conservative MPs are in favour of the death penalty.

=== Abortion ===
The Conservative Party has both members and MPs who favour abortion rights and members who oppose them. In the past, more Conservative members have been against abortion. 

However, the party&#x27;s policy book states that the party &quot;will not support any legislation to regulate abortion&quot; while in government, and the party&#x27;s current leader, Pierre Poilievre, has stated that &quot;no laws or rules will be passed that restrict women&#x27;s reproductive choices&quot; if he becomes prime minister.

===Gun ownership===
The party states that it supports responsible gun ownership and will &quot;not deprive Canadian Citizens of legally owned firearms&quot; but also calls for cost-effective gun control programs including screening all individuals wishing to purchase firearms and increased enforcement against arms trafficking.

==Regional conservative parties==
The Conservative Party does not have any provincial wings. However, it often works closely with the former federal Progressive Conservative Party&#x27;s provincial affiliates as well as other small &quot;c&quot; conservative and centre-right provincial parties, such as the Saskatchewan Party.

Cross-support between federal and provincial Conservatives is more tenuous in some other provinces. In Alberta, relations were sometimes strained between the federal Conservative Party and the provincial Progressive Conservative Party. The federal Tories&#x27; loss in the 2004 election was often blamed, in part, on then-Premier Ralph Klein&#x27;s public musings on health care late in the campaign. Klein had also called for a referendum on same-sex marriage. With the impending 2006 election, Klein predicted another Liberal minority, though this time the federal Conservatives won a minority government. Klein&#x27;s successor Ed Stelmach tried to avoid causing similar controversies; however, Harper&#x27;s surprise pledge to restrict bitumen exports drew a sharp rebuke from the Albertan government, who warned such restrictions would violate both the Constitution of Canada and the North American Free Trade Agreement. The rise of the Wildrose Party caused a further rift between the federal Conservatives and the Albertan PCs, as some Conservative backbench MPs endorsed Wildrose. For the 2012 Alberta election, Prime Minister Harper remained neutral and instructed federal cabinet members to also remain neutral while allowing Conservative backbenchers to back whomever they chose if they wish. Wildrose candidates for the concurrent Senate nominee election announced they would sit in the Conservative caucus should they be appointed to the Senate.

After the 2007 budget was announced, the Progressive Conservative governments in Nova Scotia and Newfoundland and Labrador accused the federal Conservatives of breaching the terms of the Atlantic Accord.

As a result, relations worsened between the federal government and the two provincial governments, leading Newfoundland and Labrador Premier Danny Williams to denounce the federal Conservatives, which gave rise to his ABC (Anything But Conservative) campaign in the 2008 election.

==Composition==
===National Council===
The National Council of the CPC is its &quot;highest governing body&quot;. Stephen Barber has served as President of the National Council since 2023. The National Council has 21 seats, including four from Ontario, three from Quebec, two from British Columbia, two from Alberta, two from Saskatchewan, two from Manitoba, four from Atlantic Canada, and one from each of the three territories.

===Geography===
The Conservative Party has historically been strongest in Western Canada as well as rural Ontario. The party is strongest particularly in the provinces of Alberta, Manitoba and Saskatchewan, where it holds 30 out of 34 and all 14 federal seats respectively. It tends to be weaker in Quebec and Atlantic Canada, particularly Newfoundland and Labrador and Prince Edward Island.

==== Youth wing ====
There is no official youth wing of the Conservative Party of Canada. There have been several attempts to create one, but all have failed. Despite this the party sets its minimum membership and voting age at 14. The party does however have several affiliated campus clubs at various universities.

==Party leadership==
===Leader===


===Deputy Leader===
The Deputy Leader is appointed by the Leader. 
===Party presidents===
* Don Plett (2003–2009; interim until 2005)
* John Walsh (2009–2016)
* Scott Lamb (2016–2021)
* Robert Batherson (2021–2023)
* Stephen Barber (2023–present)

==Parliamentary Caucus==
===House of Commons===
===Senate Caucus===
The Conservative Party&#x27;s senate caucus is the only political Senate Group that is formally linked to a federal political party. Unlike the Independent Senators Group, Canadian Senators Group and the Progressive Senate Group, which are unaffiliated with any party in the House of Commons, Conservative senators form part of the national Conservative parliamentary caucus made up of members of both houses of parliament, though the senators do meet separately to discuss Senate-specific issues.

The caucus was created following the establishment of the modern Conservative Party of Canada on February 2, 2004, as a result of the merger of the Canadian Alliance and the Progressive Conservative Party of Canada. All but three Progressive Conservative Senators joined the Conservative Party and were redesignated as Conservative senators.

When in government, the leader of the caucus has been appointed by the national Conservative Party leader, serving as Prime Minister of Canada. When in Opposition the leader is elected by Conservative senators. Most recently, Don Plett was elected Senate Conservative leader on November 5, 2019, defeating one other candidate.

The first leader of the senate caucus, John Lynch-Staunton, also served as interim leader of the Conservative Party of Canada until a leadership election could be held.

The Senate Conservative Caucus and the Conservative MPs in the House of Commons jointly constitute the national Conservative caucus. Nevertheless, Denise Batters was permitted to remain a member of the Senate Conservative Caucus despite being expelled from the national Conservative caucus on November 16, 2021, for publicly opposing the leadership of Erin O&#x27;Toole.

====Conservative leaders in the Senate====
==Electoral results==


==See also==

* List of federal political parties in Canada
* Predecessor parties:
** Conservative Party of Canada (1867–1942)
** Progressive Conservative Party of Canada (1942–2003)
** Reform Party of Canada (1987–2000)
** Canadian Alliance (2000–2003)

==Notes==

==References==
==Further reading==
===Archival holdings===
*Conservative Party of Canada – Canadian Political Parties and Political Interest Groups – Web Archive created by the University of Toronto Libraries
*Conservative Party of Canada (French) – Canadian Political Parties and Political Interest Groups – Web Archive created by the University of Toronto Libraries

==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q488523" start="4" end="32" title="Conservative Party of Canada" label="Conservative Party of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q488523" start="34" end="37" title="Conservative Party of Canada" label="CPC"/>
<link wikidata="Q488523" start="41" end="44" title="Conservative Party of Canada" label="PCC"/>
<link wikidata="Q488523" start="73" end="79" title="Conservative Party of Canada" label="Tories"/>
<link wikidata="Q488523" start="94" end="107" title="Conservative Party of Canada" label="Conservatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q422404" start="114" end="121" title="Government of Canada" label="federal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1862775" start="122" end="137" title="List of political parties in Canada" label="political party"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="141" end="147" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q76074" start="201" end="214" title="Right-wing politics" label="right-leaning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292617" start="228" end="258" title="Progressive Conservative Party of Canada" label="Progressive Conservative Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q546881" start="278" end="295" title="Canadian Alliance" label="Canadian Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145847" start="335" end="351" title="Western Canada" label="Western Canadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1680589" start="358" end="370" title="Reform Party of Canada" label="Reform Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q844072" start="394" end="406" title="Centre-right politics" label="centre-right"/>
<link wikidata="Q276861" start="427" end="454" title="Politics of Canada" label="Canadian political spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q138345" start="498" end="521" title="Liberal Party of Canada" label="Liberal Party of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q164597" start="543" end="547" title="left-wing politics" label="left"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030814" start="590" end="598" title="big tent" label="big tent"/>
<link wikidata="Q970562" start="712" end="722" title="Red Tory" label="Red Tories"/>
<link wikidata="Q2907253" start="739" end="750" title="Blue Tory" label="Blue Tories"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520743" start="764" end="786" title="Canadian Confederation" label="Canadian Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q909827" start="811" end="848" title="Conservative Party of Canada (historical)" label="original Conservative Party of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q374646" start="1013" end="1034" title="1993 Canadian federal election" label="1993 federal election"/>
<link wikidata="Q7887280" start="1346" end="1379" title="Unite the Right (Canada)" label="unite the right-of-centre parties"/>
<link wikidata="Q3516365" start="1600" end="1609" title="Goods and services tax (Canada)" label="sales tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q16150864" start="1620" end="1632" title="Income tax in Canada" label="income taxes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566674" start="1659" end="1688" title="Balanced budget" label="balancing the national budget"/>
<link wikidata="Q2990838" start="1703" end="1727" title="tax-free savings account" label="tax-free savings account"/>
<link wikidata="Q5029325" start="1753" end="1781" title="Canada Child Benefit" label="Universal Child Care Benefit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3423633" start="1831" end="1848" title="Canadian Firearms Registry" label="long-gun registry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3374310" start="1861" end="1888" title="Mandatory sentencing" label="mandatory minimum sentences"/>
<link wikidata="Q327538" start="1920" end="1934" title="age of consent" label="age of consent"/>
<link wikidata="Q97359917" start="1985" end="2002" title="Pipelines in Canada" label="several pipelines"/>
<link wikidata="Q5029463" start="2008" end="2047" title="Canada and the Kyoto Protocol" label="withdrew Canada from the Kyoto Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="2083" end="2098" title="Israel" label="State of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121969" start="2115" end="2157" title="Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement" label="Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366688" start="2185" end="2210" title="Trans-Pacific Partnership" label="Trans-Pacific Partnership"/>
<link wikidata="Q206" start="2243" end="2257" title="Stephen Harper" label="Stephen Harper"/>
<link wikidata="Q114793" start="2287" end="2306" title="minority government" label="minority government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1723544" start="2339" end="2343" title="2006 Canadian federal election" label="2006"/>
<link wikidata="Q1466815" start="2348" end="2352" title="2008 Canadian federal election" label="2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q2455328" start="2368" end="2387" title="majority government" label="majority government"/>
<link wikidata="Q41302" start="2395" end="2416" title="2011 Canadian federal election" label="2011 federal election"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586271" start="2446" end="2467" title="2015 Canadian federal election" label="2015 federal election"/>
<link wikidata="Q3099714" start="2508" end="2522" title="Justin Trudeau" label="Justin Trudeau"/>
<link wikidata="Q24190721" start="2632" end="2636" title="2019 Canadian federal election" label="2019"/>
<link wikidata="Q73837865" start="2641" end="2645" title="2021 Canadian federal election" label="2021"/>
<link wikidata="Q2846724" start="2692" end="2705" title="Andrew Scheer" label="Andrew Scheer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1840895" start="2710" end="2727" title="Erin O&amp;#x27;Toole" label="Erin O&amp;#x27;Toole"/>
<link wikidata="Q3386636" start="2742" end="2758" title="Pierre Poilievre" label="Pierre Poilievre"/>
<link wikidata="Q111443658" start="2785" end="2809" title="2022 Conservative Party of Canada leadership election" label="2022 leadership election"/>
<link wikidata="Q7898540" start="2971" end="2990" title="Upper Canada Tories" label="Upper Canada Tories"/>
<link wikidata="Q128702" start="3018" end="3035" title="John A. Macdonald" label="John A. Macdonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q669955" start="3040" end="3062" title="George-Étienne Cartier" label="George-Étienne Cartier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538184" start="3081" end="3107" title="Liberal-Conservative Party" label="Liberal-Conservative Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q909827" start="3146" end="3164" title="Conservative Party of Canada (historical)" label="Conservative Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292617" start="3185" end="3215" title="Progressive Conservative Party of Canada" label="Progressive Conservative Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="3300" end="3320" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="3334" end="3374" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative Party of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292617" start="3659" end="3689" title="Progressive Conservative Party of Canada" label="Progressive Conservative Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q128563" start="3830" end="3844" title="Brian Mulroney" label="Brian Mulroney"/>
<link wikidata="Q3407063" start="3936" end="3959" title="National Energy Program" label="National Energy Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141508" start="4000" end="4019" title="Quebec nationalists" label="Quebec nationalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q899061" start="4083" end="4105" title="Constitution of Canada" label="Constitution of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1680589" start="4363" end="4385" title="Reform Party of Canada" label="Reform Party of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q959778" start="4397" end="4412" title="Preston Manning" label="Preston Manning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518382" start="4428" end="4449" title="Alberta Social Credit Party" label="Alberta Social Credit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356461" start="4459" end="4473" title="Ernest Manning" label="Ernest Manning"/>
<link wikidata="Q15964890" start="4700" end="4720" title="Member of Parliament (Canada)" label="member of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q3020868" start="4727" end="4739" title="Deborah Grey" label="Deborah Grey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057954" start="4758" end="4769" title="by-election" label="by-election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1613118" start="5072" end="5086" title="Stanley Waters" label="Stanley Waters"/>
<link wikidata="Q374646" start="5112" end="5125" title="1993 Canadian federal election" label="1993 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145847" start="5334" end="5348" title="Western Canada" label="Western Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586269" start="5452" end="5456" title="1997 Canadian federal election" label="1997"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355905" start="5467" end="5471" title="2000 Canadian federal election" label="2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q205759" start="5681" end="5704" title="single member plurality" label="single member plurality"/>
<link wikidata="Q138345" start="5773" end="5786" title="Liberal Party of Canada" label="Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7887280" start="5965" end="5999" title="Unite the Right (Canada)" label="calls for the two parties to merge"/>
<link wikidata="Q546881" start="6092" end="6109" title="Canadian Alliance" label="Canadian Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q206" start="6174" end="6188" title="Stephen Harper" label="Stephen Harper"/>
<link wikidata="Q716246" start="6236" end="6248" title="Peter MacKay" label="Peter MacKay"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586687" start="6580" end="6596" title="Elections Canada" label="Elections Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1700898" start="6620" end="6639" title="John Lynch-Staunton" label="John Lynch-Staunton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5238241" start="6990" end="7003" title="David Orchard" label="David Orchard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7248716" start="7101" end="7152" title="2003 Progressive Conservative leadership election" label="2003 Progressive Conservative Leadership convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q2847182" start="7556" end="7569" title="André Bachand (Progressive Conservative MP)" label="André Bachand"/>
<link wikidata="Q6239097" start="7571" end="7582" title="John Herron (New Brunswick politician)" label="John Herron"/>
<link wikidata="Q128574" start="7609" end="7618" title="Joe Clark" label="Joe Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q7331250" start="7722" end="7735" title="Rick Borotsik" label="Rick Borotsik"/>
<link wikidata="Q349836" start="7879" end="7891" title="Scott Brison" label="Scott Brison"/>
<link wikidata="Q3194748" start="7933" end="7945" title="Keith Martin (politician)" label="Keith Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5006975" start="8096" end="8109" title="C. William Doody" label="William Doody"/>
<link wikidata="Q2071125" start="8111" end="8124" title="Norman K. Atkins" label="Norman Atkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q6693244" start="8130" end="8143" title="Lowell Murray" label="Lowell Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q7379375" start="8222" end="8226" title="rump party" label="rump"/>
<link wikidata="Q3165196" start="8278" end="8296" title="Jean-Claude Rivest" label="Jean-Claude Rivest"/>
<link wikidata="Q128529" start="8367" end="8378" title="Paul Martin" label="Paul Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1964518" start="8432" end="8442" title="Nancy Ruth" label="Nancy Ruth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5353253" start="8447" end="8459" title="Elaine McCoy" label="Elaine McCoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q598964" start="8699" end="8710" title="Mike Harris" label="Mike Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1965" start="8770" end="8783" title="New Brunswick" label="New Brunswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q2898254" start="8792" end="8804" title="Bernard Lord" label="Bernard Lord"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951" start="8809" end="8816" title="Alberta" label="Alberta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395297" start="8825" end="8836" title="Ralph Klein" label="Ralph Klein"/>
<link wikidata="Q716246" start="8879" end="8891" title="Peter MacKay" label="Peter MacKay"/>
<link wikidata="Q692848" start="8955" end="8987" title="Democratic Representative Caucus" label="Democratic Representative Caucus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2967611" start="8995" end="9007" title="Chuck Strahl" label="Chuck Strahl"/>
<link wikidata="Q364303" start="9009" end="9021" title="Jim Prentice" label="Jim Prentice"/>
<link wikidata="Q7248716" start="9055" end="9081" title="2003 Progressive Conservative leadership election" label="2003 PC leadership contest"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163078" start="9313" end="9338" title="2004 Conservative Party of Canada leadership election" label="first leadership election"/>
<link wikidata="Q546881" start="9347" end="9364" title="Canadian Alliance" label="Canadian Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q206" start="9372" end="9386" title="Stephen Harper" label="Stephen Harper"/>
<link wikidata="Q697311" start="9395" end="9414" title="Magna International" label="Magna International"/>
<link wikidata="Q548048" start="9419" end="9435" title="Belinda Stronach" label="Belinda Stronach"/>
<link wikidata="Q826977" start="9448" end="9469" title="Progressive Conservative Party of Ontario" label="Ontario provincial PC"/>
<link wikidata="Q3531723" start="9487" end="9499" title="Tony Clement" label="Tony Clement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637432" start="9840" end="9874" title="2004 Canadian federal election" label="general election for June 28, 2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q114793" start="10329" end="10337" title="minority government" label="minority"/>
<link wikidata="Q6636" start="10451" end="10464" title="homosexuality" label="homosexuality"/>
<link wikidata="Q233113" start="10466" end="10487" title="Bilingualism in Canada" label="official bilingualism"/>
<link wikidata="Q8452" start="10492" end="10500" title="abortion" label="abortion"/>
<link wikidata="Q751892" start="10672" end="10678" title="caucus" label="caucus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4730647" start="10869" end="10880" title="Allan Gregg" label="Allan Gregg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067299" start="10891" end="10903" title="Toronto Star" label="Toronto Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q2956293" start="10920" end="10934" title="Chantal Hébert" label="Chantal Hébert"/>
<link wikidata="Q329547" start="11809" end="11832" title="motion of no confidence" label="motion of no confidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1723544" start="11943" end="11982" title="2006 Canadian federal election" label="election scheduled for January 23, 2006"/>
<link wikidata="Q3516365" start="12115" end="12137" title="Goods and Services Tax (Canada)" label="Goods and Services Tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q7019748" start="12580" end="12602" title="Newspaper endorsements in the Canadian federal election, 2006" label="newspaper endorsements"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112702" start="12819" end="12838" title="Minority governments in Canada" label="minority government"/>
<link wikidata="Q220542" start="12910" end="12921" title="28th Canadian Ministry" label="his Cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q6011535" start="12975" end="12993" title="In and Out scandal" label="In and Out scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4605918" start="13080" end="13092" title="2006 Canadian federal budget" label="first budget"/>
<link wikidata="Q47359" start="13271" end="13285" title="Kyoto Protocol" label="Kyoto Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q321895" start="13294" end="13308" title="Kelowna Accord" label="Kelowna Accord"/>
<link wikidata="Q2990838" start="13347" end="13371" title="tax-free savings account" label="tax-free savings account"/>
<link wikidata="Q7923581" start="13406" end="13435" title="Veterans&amp;#x27; Bill of Rights" label="Veterans&amp;#x27; Bill of Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q429575" start="13481" end="13504" title="Veterans Affairs Canada" label="Veterans Affairs Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q7273096" start="13641" end="13664" title="Québécois nation motion" label="Québécois nation motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q245507" start="13697" end="13706" title="Québécois people" label="Québécois"/>
<link wikidata="Q6266" start="13712" end="13718" title="nation" label="nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q17447" start="13788" end="13805" title="Same-sex marriage in Canada" label="same-sex marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q130765" start="13926" end="13946" title="New Democratic Party" label="New Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q735105" start="13956" end="13970" title="Bloc Québécois" label="Bloc Québécois"/>
<link wikidata="Q1466815" start="13997" end="14026" title="2008 Canadian federal election" label="October 2008 federal election"/>
<link wikidata="Q329547" start="14126" end="14148" title="vote of non-confidence" label="vote of non-confidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q3002773" start="14152" end="14205" title="2008–2009 Canadian parliamentary dispute" label="a potential governing coalition of opposition parties"/>
<link wikidata="Q14931237" start="14209" end="14230" title="Prorogation in Canada" label="proroguing parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q896666" start="14294" end="14323" title="Financial crisis of 2007–2008" label="global recession of 2007–2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q4613475" start="14343" end="14363" title="2009 Canadian federal budget" label="Economic Action Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q17010135" start="14512" end="14519" title="deficit spending" label="deficit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3358649" start="14670" end="14692" title="contempt of Parliament" label="contempt of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q2816734" start="14703" end="14713" title="40th Canadian Parliament" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q41302" start="14728" end="14739" title="2011 Canadian federal election" label="an election"/>
<link wikidata="Q2455328" start="14783" end="14802" title="majority government" label="majority government"/>
<link wikidata="Q47359" start="14851" end="14865" title="Kyoto Protocol" label="Kyoto Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q3423633" start="14883" end="14900" title="Canadian Firearms Registry" label="long-gun registry"/>
<link wikidata="Q19595492" start="14953" end="14971" title="Anti-terrorism Act, 2015" label="Anti-terrorism Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q18357658" start="14988" end="15004" title="Operation Impact" label="Operation Impact"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429253" start="15015" end="15019" title="ISIL" label="ISIL"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121969" start="15036" end="15078" title="Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement" label="Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="15095" end="15109" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366688" start="15130" end="15155" title="Trans-Pacific Partnership" label="Trans-Pacific Partnership"/>
<link wikidata="Q16955391" start="15221" end="15253" title="Canadian Senate expenses scandal" label="Canadian Senate expenses scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q16156408" start="15262" end="15278" title="2011 Canadian federal election voter suppression scandal" label="Robocall scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7353270" start="15300" end="15308" title="robocall" label="robocall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7942161" start="15364" end="15381" title="voter suppression" label="voter suppression"/>
<link wikidata="Q19876724" start="15448" end="15488" title="Canada&amp;#x27;s Global Markets Action Plan" label="Canada&amp;#x27;s Global Markets Action Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566674" start="15612" end="15631" title="balanced budget" label="balanced the budget"/>
<link wikidata="Q16241876" start="15639" end="15658" title="2014 Canadian federal budget" label="2014 federal budget"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586271" start="15711" end="15732" title="2015 Canadian federal election" label="2015 federal election"/>
<link wikidata="Q3099714" start="15801" end="15815" title="Justin Trudeau" label="Justin Trudeau"/>
<link wikidata="Q6240711" start="15915" end="15928" title="John Ibbitson" label="John Ibbitson"/>
<link wikidata="Q604525" start="15938" end="15956" title="The Globe and Mail" label="The Globe and Mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q6046657" start="16261" end="16275" title="Interim leader (Canada)" label="interim leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q3441480" start="16406" end="16418" title="Rona Ambrose" label="Rona Ambrose"/>
<link wikidata="Q16977239" start="16427" end="16450" title="Sturgeon River—Parkland" label="Sturgeon River—Parkland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1184850" start="16657" end="16671" title="Maclean&amp;#x27;s" label="Maclean&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q2506685" start="16932" end="16963" title="Speaker of the House of Commons (Canada)" label="Speaker of the House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q2846724" start="16964" end="16977" title="Andrew Scheer" label="Andrew Scheer"/>
<link wikidata="Q21292718" start="17004" end="17027" title="2017 Conservative Party of Canada leadership election" label="leadership of the party"/>
<link wikidata="Q516940" start="17154" end="17168" title="Maxime Bernier" label="Maxime Bernier"/>
<link wikidata="Q56612740" start="17294" end="17323" title="People&amp;#x27;s Party of Canada" label="People&amp;#x27;s Party of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q436860" start="17345" end="17364" title="right-wing populism" label="right-wing populist"/>
<link wikidata="Q60767701" start="17510" end="17520" title="Carbon pricing in Canada" label="carbon tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q97359917" start="17522" end="17530" title="Pipelines in Canada" label="pipeline"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566674" start="17549" end="17569" title="balanced budget" label="balancing the budget"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129261" start="17674" end="17682" title="pro-life" label="pro-life"/>
<link wikidata="Q24190721" start="17840" end="17869" title="2019 Canadian federal election" label="October 2019 federal election"/>
<link wikidata="Q61946967" start="17920" end="17938" title="SNC-Lavalin affair" label="SNC-Lavalin affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1989" start="18186" end="18198" title="Saskatchewan" label="Saskatchewan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048071" start="18211" end="18214" title="Edmonton Strathcona (federal electoral district)" label="one"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951" start="18218" end="18225" title="Alberta" label="Alberta"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988461" start="18358" end="18376" title="Western alienation" label="Western alienation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4976506" start="18588" end="18597" title="brownface" label="brownface"/>
<link wikidata="Q880808" start="18602" end="18611" title="blackface" label="blackface"/>
<link wikidata="Q2931014" start="18752" end="18755" title="CBC News" label="CBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q83505810" start="18976" end="18997" title="2020 Conservative Party of Canada leadership election" label="A leadership election"/>
<link wikidata="Q3251807" start="19058" end="19083" title="Minister of Veterans Affairs (Canada)" label="Veterans Affairs Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q1840895" start="19084" end="19101" title="Erin O&amp;#x27;Toole" label="Erin O&amp;#x27;Toole"/>
<link wikidata="Q6587194" start="19254" end="19270" title="centrism" label="political centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331070" start="19549" end="19559" title="pro-choice" label="pro-choice"/>
<link wikidata="Q73837865" start="19627" end="19658" title="2021 Canadian federal election" label="September 2021 federal election"/>
<link wikidata="Q85791042" start="19847" end="19856" title="Opinion polling for the 2021 Canadian federal election" label="the polls"/>
<link wikidata="Q3558419" start="20021" end="20058" title="Firearms regulation in Canada" label="&amp;quot;assault-style&amp;quot; weapons ban"/>
<link wikidata="Q3099714" start="20235" end="20249" title="Justin Trudeau" label="Justin Trudeau"/>
<link wikidata="Q111168858" start="20446" end="20468" title="Reform Act (Canada)" label="&amp;quot;Reform Act&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q6508682" start="20507" end="20524" title="leadership review" label="leadership review"/>
<link wikidata="Q16850469" start="20774" end="20790" title="Calgary Heritage" label="Calgary Heritage"/>
<link wikidata="Q29139192" start="20794" end="20804" title="Bob Benzen" label="Bob Benzen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3476240" start="20965" end="20975" title="Scott Reid (politician)" label="Scott Reid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2936261" start="21292" end="21306" title="Candice Bergen (politician)" label="Candice Bergen"/>
<link wikidata="Q111443658" start="21378" end="21397" title="2022 Conservative Party of Canada leadership election" label="leadership election"/>
<link wikidata="Q3386636" start="21493" end="21509" title="Pierre Poilievre" label="Pierre Poilievre"/>
<link wikidata="Q94691482" start="21559" end="21571" title="Leslyn Lewis" label="Leslyn Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q55081065" start="21661" end="21672" title="Roman Baber" label="Roman Baber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292617" start="21707" end="21747" title="Progressive Conservative Party of Canada" label="Progressive Conservative Party of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2911019" start="21759" end="21776" title="Premier of Quebec" label="Premier of Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q48966" start="21777" end="21789" title="Jean Charest" label="Jean Charest"/>
<link wikidata="Q826977" start="21823" end="21864" title="Progressive Conservative Party of Ontario" label="Progressive Conservative Party of Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q44198" start="21879" end="21887" title="Brampton" label="Brampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3369936" start="21888" end="21901" title="Patrick Brown (Canadian politician)" label="Patrick Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q22003106" start="21926" end="21940" title="Leona Alleslev" label="Leona Alleslev"/>
<link wikidata="Q6755491" start="21976" end="21987" title="Marc Dalton" label="Marc Dalton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024091" start="22000" end="22010" title="Huntsville, Ontario" label="Huntsville"/>
<link wikidata="Q71912401" start="22037" end="22052" title="Scott Aitchison" label="Scott Aitchison"/>
<link wikidata="Q18619293" start="22484" end="22496" title="Marie Henein" label="Marie Henein"/>
<link wikidata="Q3386636" start="22644" end="22660" title="Pierre Poilievre" label="Pierre Poilievre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030814" start="22981" end="22989" title="big tent" label="big tent"/>
<link wikidata="Q844072" start="23171" end="23183" title="centre-right politics" label="centre-right"/>
<link wikidata="Q76074" start="23191" end="23201" title="Right-wing politics" label="right-wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163008" start="23295" end="23307" title="Canadian conservatism" label="conservatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q970562" start="23436" end="23444" title="Red Tory" label="Red Tory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2907253" start="23449" end="23458" title="Blue Tory" label="Blue Tory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043096" start="23743" end="23763" title="liberal conservative" label="liberal conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414298" start="23765" end="23784" title="social conservative" label="social conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q436860" start="23786" end="23805" title="right-wing populist" label="right-wing populist"/>
<link wikidata="Q853562" start="23810" end="23834" title="libertarian conservative" label="libertarian conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q233113" start="24436" end="24448" title="Official bilingualism in Canada" label="Bilingualism"/>
<link wikidata="Q204886" start="24493" end="24503" title="federalism" label="federalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321476" start="24517" end="24534" title="Quebec separatism" label="Quebec separatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6898045" start="24537" end="24598" title="Monarchism in Canada" label="Support for maintaining Canada&amp;#x27;s constitutional monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q863284" start="24746" end="24766" title="Indigenous Canadians" label="Indigenous Canadians"/>
<link wikidata="Q17083975" start="24863" end="24880" title="Dairy and poultry supply management in Canada" label="Supply management"/>
<link wikidata="Q22656" start="24930" end="24939" title="petroleum" label="petroleum"/>
<link wikidata="Q40858" start="24944" end="24955" title="natural gas" label="natural gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q97359917" start="24974" end="24983" title="Pipelines in Canada" label="pipelines"/>
<link wikidata="Q555911" start="25015" end="25031" title="private property" label="private property"/>
<link wikidata="Q514404" start="25034" end="25047" title="Right to work" label="Right to work"/>
<link wikidata="Q41491" start="25109" end="25123" title="Carbon capture and utilization" label="carbon capture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1574963" start="25364" end="25372" title="handguns" label="handguns"/>
<link wikidata="Q9180311" start="25377" end="25400" title="fully automatic firearm" label="fully automatic firearm"/>
<link wikidata="Q177456" start="25413" end="25427" title="assault rifles" label="assault rifles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1574963" start="25472" end="25480" title="handguns" label="handguns"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752049" start="25485" end="25507" title="semi-automatic firearm" label="semi-automatic firearm"/>
<link wikidata="Q200435" start="25606" end="25616" title="free trade" label="free trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q56839716" start="25639" end="25644" title="United States–Mexico–Canada Agreement" label="NAFTA"/>
<link wikidata="Q124077718" start="25646" end="25688" title="Canada–United Kingdom Free Trade Agreement" label="Canada–United Kingdom Free Trade Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366688" start="25690" end="25693" title="Trans-Pacific Partnership" label="TPP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121969" start="25698" end="25702" title="CETA" label="CETA"/>
<link wikidata="Q30324034" start="25705" end="25711" title="CANZUK" label="CANZUK"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="25753" end="25757" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="25778" end="25792" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q8452" start="25805" end="25813" title="abortion" label="abortion"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="25853" end="25859" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2572824" start="25862" end="25873" title="Status of Jerusalem" label="Recognizing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218" start="25874" end="25883" title="Jerusalem" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363408" start="25972" end="25974" title="5G" label="5G"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090356" start="26074" end="26093" title="Canada Pension Plan" label="Canada Pension Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q461761" start="26118" end="26121" title="Canadian Broadcasting Corporation" label="CBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q856681" start="26221" end="26240" title="illegal immigration" label="illegal immigration"/>
<link wikidata="Q3374310" start="26268" end="26295" title="Mandatory minimum sentences" label="Mandatory minimum sentences"/>
<link wikidata="Q96123999" start="26341" end="26366" title="police abolition movement" label="police abolition movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q3404298" start="26389" end="26410" title="sex offender registry" label="sex offender registry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7708739" start="26447" end="26465" title="recreational drugs" label="recreational drugs"/>
<link wikidata="Q689846" start="26515" end="26531" title="assisted suicide" label="assisted suicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q12135" start="26563" end="26577" title="mental illness" label="mental illness"/>
<link wikidata="Q179222" start="26738" end="26748" title="Income tax" label="Income tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q945036" start="26762" end="26778" title="Income splitting" label="Income splitting"/>
<link wikidata="Q645011" start="26794" end="26806" title="Business tax" label="Business tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q687591" start="26820" end="26837" title="Capital gains tax" label="Capital gains tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q288401" start="26867" end="26877" title="carbon tax" label="carbon tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566674" start="26901" end="26916" title="Balanced budget" label="Balanced budget"/>
<link wikidata="Q5172508" start="26969" end="26989" title="corporate welfare" label="grants and subsidies"/>
<link wikidata="Q841180" start="27218" end="27224" title="Senate of Canada" label="senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q863284" start="27730" end="27749" title="Indigenous Canadian" label="Indigenous Canadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q214244" start="27773" end="27791" title="affirmative action" label="affirmative action"/>
<link wikidata="Q17422" start="27855" end="27872" title="same-sex marriage" label="same-sex marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q206" start="28102" end="28116" title="Stephen Harper" label="Stephen Harper"/>
<link wikidata="Q5162729" start="28127" end="28136" title="free vote" label="free vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q4162339" start="28508" end="28549" title="Blood donation restrictions on men who have sex with men" label="men who have sex with men to donate blood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1840895" start="28897" end="28914" title="Erin O&amp;#x27;Toole" label="Erin O&amp;#x27;Toole"/>
<link wikidata="Q84263196" start="28958" end="28966" title="COVID-19" label="COVID-19"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="29234" end="29248" title="climate change" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="29351" end="29355" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q30324034" start="29404" end="29410" title="CANZUK" label="CANZUK"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="29487" end="29493" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="29495" end="29504" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="29506" end="29517" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="29526" end="29540" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="29574" end="29580" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2846724" start="29603" end="29616" title="Andrew Scheer" label="Andrew Scheer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1840895" start="29621" end="29638" title="Erin O&amp;#x27;Toole" label="Erin O&amp;#x27;Toole"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218" start="29703" end="29712" title="Jerusalem" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="29774" end="29805" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q508840" start="30535" end="30553" title="Monarchy of Canada" label="Monarchy of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q64509602" start="31422" end="31448" title="2019–20 Hong Kong protests" label="2019–20 Hong Kong protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q1840895" start="31503" end="31520" title="Erin O&amp;#x27;Toole" label="Erin O&amp;#x27;Toole"/>
<link wikidata="Q3386636" start="31845" end="31861" title="Pierre Poilievre" label="Pierre Poilievre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3099714" start="31913" end="31927" title="Justin Trudeau" label="Justin Trudeau"/>
<link wikidata="Q5998976" start="32360" end="32379" title="Illegal immigration to Canada" label="illegal immigration"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478795" start="32402" end="32430" title="Safe Third Country Agreement" label="Safe Third Country Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q5035730" start="33043" end="33060" title="Capital punishment in Canada" label="the death penalty"/>
<link wikidata="Q4668451" start="33139" end="33182" title="Abortion in Canada" label="abortion rights and members who oppose them"/>
<link wikidata="Q2225652" start="34232" end="34250" title="Saskatchewan Party" label="Saskatchewan Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518057" start="34446" end="34487" title="Progressive Conservative Association of Alberta" label="provincial Progressive Conservative Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395297" start="34583" end="34594" title="Ralph Klein" label="Ralph Klein"/>
<link wikidata="Q43109" start="34682" end="34692" title="referendum" label="referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q17447" start="34696" end="34713" title="same-sex marriage in Canada" label="same-sex marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282534" start="34884" end="34895" title="Ed Stelmach" label="Ed Stelmach"/>
<link wikidata="Q167510" start="34993" end="35000" title="bitumen" label="bitumen"/>
<link wikidata="Q899061" start="35111" end="35133" title="Constitution of Canada" label="Constitution of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q181574" start="35142" end="35177" title="North American Free Trade Agreement" label="North American Free Trade Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q3366170" start="35195" end="35209" title="Wildrose Party" label="Wildrose Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586306" start="35350" end="35371" title="2012 Alberta general election" label="2012 Alberta election"/>
<link wikidata="Q4711819" start="35596" end="35619" title="2012 Alberta Senate nominee election" label="Senate nominee election"/>
<link wikidata="Q4816278" start="35900" end="35915" title="Atlantic Accord" label="Atlantic Accord"/>
<link wikidata="Q365772" start="36059" end="36073" title="Danny Williams (Canadian politician)" label="Danny Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q4778306" start="36141" end="36166" title="Anything But Conservative" label="Anything But Conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145847" start="36705" end="36719" title="Western Canada" label="Western Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="36737" end="36744" title="Ontario" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951" start="36802" end="36809" title="Alberta" label="Alberta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1948" start="36811" end="36819" title="Manitoba" label="Manitoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1989" start="36824" end="36836" title="Saskatchewan" label="Saskatchewan"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="36930" end="36936" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q246972" start="36941" end="36956" title="Atlantic Canada" label="Atlantic Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003" start="36971" end="36996" title="Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Newfoundland and Labrador"/>
<link wikidata="Q1978" start="37001" end="37021" title="Prince Edward Island" label="Prince Edward Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q2493450" start="37066" end="37076" title="youth wing" label="youth wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q338753" start="37238" end="37248" title="voting age" label="voting age"/>
<link wikidata="Q5293328" start="37470" end="37479" title="Don Plett" label="Don Plett"/>
<link wikidata="Q17123667" start="37514" end="37524" title="John Walsh (Canadian politician)" label="John Walsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q52635360" start="37539" end="37549" title="Scott Lamb (lawyer)" label="Scott Lamb"/>
<link wikidata="Q110234463" start="37564" end="37580" title="Robert Batherson" label="Robert Batherson"/>
<link wikidata="Q848197" start="37731" end="37737" title="parliamentary group" label="caucus"/>
<link wikidata="Q28946329" start="37838" end="37864" title="Independent Senators Group" label="Independent Senators Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q73901811" start="37866" end="37889" title="Canadian Senators Group" label="Canadian Senators Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q78629555" start="37898" end="37922" title="Progressive Senate Group" label="Progressive Senate Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q546881" start="38341" end="38358" title="Canadian Alliance" label="Canadian Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292617" start="38367" end="38407" title="Progressive Conservative Party of Canada" label="Progressive Conservative Party of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q5293328" start="38762" end="38771" title="Don Plett" label="Don Plett"/>
<link wikidata="Q1700898" start="38903" end="38922" title="John Lynch-Staunton" label="John Lynch-Staunton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5257618" start="39181" end="39195" title="Denise Batters" label="Denise Batters"/>
<link wikidata="Q6619376" start="39489" end="39532" title="List of federal political parties in Canada" label="List of federal political parties in Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q909827" start="39559" end="39599" title="Conservative Party of Canada (1867–1942)" label="Conservative Party of Canada (1867–1942)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292617" start="39603" end="39643" title="Progressive Conservative Party of Canada" label="Progressive Conservative Party of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1680589" start="39659" end="39681" title="Reform Party of Canada" label="Reform Party of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q546881" start="39697" end="39714" title="Canadian Alliance" label="Canadian Alliance"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="308648" wikidata="Q2112263" url="?curid=308648" title="Progressive Party of Canada">
<text>The Progressive Party of Canada, formally the National Progressive Party, was a federal-level political party in Canada in the 1920s until 1930. It was linked with the provincial United Farmers parties in several provinces, and it spawned the Progressive Party of Saskatchewan, and the Progressive Party of Manitoba, which formed the government of that province. The Progressive Party was part of the farmers&#x27; political movement that included federal and provincial Progressive and United Farmers&#x27; parties.

The United Farmers movement in Canada rose to prominence after World War I. With the failure of the wartime Union government to alter a tariff structure that hurt farmers, various farmers movements across Canada became more radical and entered the political arena. The United Farmers movement was tied to the federal Progressive Party of Canada and formed provincial governments in Ontario, Alberta and Manitoba. It rejected the National Policy of the Conservatives, and felt that the Liberals were not strong enough proponents of free trade and were too strongly tied to business interests. Generally, farmers groups formed alliances with Labour and socialist groups though, in power, they became closer to the Liberals causing ruptures in several provinces between United Farmer governments and their organizations. 
==Origins==
The origins of the Progressive Party can be traced to the politics of compromise under Prime Minister Sir Wilfrid Laurier. The most important issue to farmers in western Canada at the time was free trade with the United States. The National Policy implemented by Prime Minister Sir John A. Macdonald in the 1890s forced farmers to pay higher prices for equipment and to sell their produce for less. After World War I, however, neither of the major political parties supported free trade.

At the turn of the century, voters in Western Canada began to consider an influx of radical political ideas. From the United States came Progressivism and the Non-Partisan League. From Britain, the new immigrants brought Fabian socialism. This mix of ideology and discontent led to discussion of forming an independent party, especially in the &quot;Grain Growers&#x27; Guide&quot;, a magazine of the day. The first organizations of agricultural protest were farmers’ organizations: Manitoba Grain Growers&#x27; Association, Alberta Farmers&#x27; Association, and the United Farmers of Alberta. The first big activity was the farmers&#x27; march on Ottawa in 1911.

After World War I, farmers&#x27; organizations across Canada became more politically active and entered electoral politics on the provincial level. The United Farmers of Ontario ran in the 1919 provincial election and, surprisingly, won. The emergence of the UFO exemplified the scope of farmer politics. It was not just western opposition to the tariff and eastern economic power, It was an occupational or class movement with a realistic chance at federal political influence. Over 1919 and 1920 several federal by-elections were won by &quot;United Farmers&quot; candidates.

In June 1919, Thomas Crerar, Minister of Agriculture in the Unionist government of Robert Borden, quit the Borden cabinet because Minister of Finance Thomas White introduced a budget that failed to sufficiently reduce the tariff. Saskatchewan farmer leader and independent MP John Archibald Maharg withdrew his support from the government and joined Crerar, as did eight other Unionist MPs from the west. This loosely-organized caucus proved to be the beginnings of the Progressive Party.

Owing to the movement&#x27;s outgrowth from a variety of provincial farmers&#x27; organizations, agrarian leaders were divided on an appropriate federal political strategy. Henry Wise Wood, president of the United Farmers of Alberta, opposed turning the farmers&#x27; political movement into a formal Third Party. His political experience in the U.S., rooted in observation of the Populists of the 1890s, led him to believe that the social friction caused by such a third party would lead to the destruction, through splintering of the farmers movements in general. Wood argued the Canadian farmers&#x27; movement should remain a grassroots democratic organization, or &quot;economic solidarity group&quot;. Philosophically, he advocated for cooperative democracy against the autocratic and corrupting tendencies of competitive party politics. Wood&#x27;s theory of group government was considered revolutionary at the time, with critics accusing his collectivism as introducing &quot;Sovietism&quot; to Westminster responsible government.

The struggle between Wood&#x27;s &quot;group government&quot; faction, and agrarian leaders including Crerar who advocated a more traditional party-centric approach to federal politics, troubled the party throughout its existence. In their first formal caucus meeting on March 3, 1920, Crerar and eleven allied MPs established the National Progressive Party of Canada with Crerar as its first leader. The name of party was referred by Michael Clark two days later in the House of Commons. Nevertheless, Crerar was unable to secure support among members of the Canadian Council of Agriculture for the establishment of significant party structure; thus, the party had no formal national organization, with the Canadian Council of Agriculture itself providing a minimal degree of structure. Crerar formally served as parliamentary leader of the Progressives until the provincial organizations accepted his endorsement as national leader by the Canadian Council of Agriculture in 1921.

The new party won 58 of the 235 seats in the 1921 general election, despite the lack of national party structure. Owing to the anti-party character of the Progressives, individual candidates&#x27; campaigns were strictly independent of the national organization, and no financial, organizational, or strategic support was provided under a policy of &quot;constituency autonomy&quot;. Support for reforming the National Policy was a common denominator, but even this was not universal within the party. Given the autonomy of individual members and lack of formal party organization, some argue that the Progressives are better termed a &quot;movement&quot; rather than a party.

==Elected to office==
The Progressive Party is commonly perceived as a western protest party, but in fact more Progressive MPs were elected in Ontario (with a sitting provincial farmers&#x27; government) than in Alberta in the 1921 election. The party had strong support among western voters, although they were few when compared to the number of seats in Ontario. All the MPs from Alberta were either United Farmers of Alberta candidates who were allied to the Progressives (and included in the totals recorded above) or Labour – no Conservatives or Liberals were elected in that province that election. Ten UFA MPs were elected, the other two seats in the province were taken by Labour candidates. Alberta had elected a UFA government prior to the 1921 federal election.
The Progressives won 24 of the 81 seats in Commons from Ontario; however, the party viewed this as a disappointing result. Despite finishing second in seat count, there were not enough Progressive and farmer MPs to safely secure the balance of power against the narrow Liberal minority government. The Progressives received significant support in the Maritime provinces, but obtained only one seat in New Brunswick. It also got five seats in British Columbia. In addition to their power in Ontario, Manitoba and Alberta, farmers&#x27; parties were significant presences in Nova Scotia and New Brunswick, but this failed to translate into seats in the House of Commons.

The Progressives were divided over what to do following the 1921 election. A significant group of ex-Liberals, including Crerar, supported forming a coalition government with the Liberals. This was resisted by Montreal interests in the Liberal Party and by radical Progressives, including the UFA MPs. These followers of Wood wished to remain a decentralized party with each individual member simply representing his constituents, supporting the Liberal government in what it did in their mind right and opposing it in what it did wrong. The two groups agreed to refuse the position of Official Opposition, normally accorded to the party with the second-largest number of seats, and this was passed on to the third-largest party, the Conservative Party.

==Demise==
Crerar attempted to introduce certain attributes of a standard party to the Progressives, including Parliamentary Whips and a national party organization. These efforts were resisted, however, and in 1922, Crerar resigned as leader. He was replaced by Robert Forke, another ex-Liberal who agreed with Crerar on most issues. The Progressives proved unsuccessful in Parliament and lost much of their moderate support in eastern Canada. While in the 1921 election Crerar had toured across the country, Forke abandoned everything east of Manitoba.

As well, the UFA MPs, other farmer MPs and the three Labour MPs in the House of Commons (J. S. Woodsworth, William Irvine and Joseph Shaw) joined together in the Ginger Group, breaking from Forke&#x27;s leadership.

In the 1925 election, the Progressives lost almost all of their Ontario members, but were still moderately successful in the west, holding many of their seats in Alberta.

This left the party dominated by the radical United Farmers of Alberta MPs. Forke resigned as Progressive house leader on June 30, 1926, one day after Mackenzie King resigned as Prime Minister. Forke and most of the Manitoba Progressives made a deal with the Liberal Party and ran as Liberal-Progressives in the 1926 election prompted by the fall of the interim Conservative government of Arthur Meighen. The Liberals formed a stable minority government following the 1926 election with the support of the seven elected Liberal-Progressive MPs. Forke entered the Mackenzie King cabinet as Minister of Immigration and Colonization.

The Alberta UFA MPs dropped the Progressive label. Identifying themselves as parliamentary representatives of the United Farmers of Alberta, 11 UFA MPs were elected in the 1926 election and nine in 1930 – most of whom were members of the radical Ginger Group faction of left wing Progressive, Labour and United Farmer MPs. Most sitting UFA MPs joined the Co-operative Commonwealth Federation party, and all the UFA MPs were defeated at the polls in the election of 1935 by the Social Credit Party of Canada political landslide.

In addition to Alberta electing nine UFA MPs in 1930, three MPs were elected as Progressives in the 1930 election. The three include Milton Neil Campbell and Archibald M. Carmichael of Saskatchewan and Agnes Macphail of Ontario (who was known as a proponent of the United Farmers of Ontario). Macphail successfully ran for re-election as a United Farmers of Ontario–Labour candidate in the 1935 election but was defeated running under the same banner in 1940.

==Legacy==
After the collapse of the party, most Progressive voters returned to the Liberal Party. The Liberals had always viewed the Progressives as simply &quot;Liberals in a hurry&quot;, and for a large group of the party&#x27;s supporters, this was true. The most important example of this return to the Liberals is T. A. Crerar, who served with the Liberals for decades, first as a cabinet minister and then as a Senator.

The more radical of the progressives split two ways. The Ginger Group was a faction formed in 1924 by radical Progressives and were later joined by several Labour and independent MPs. They would eventually form the Co-operative Commonwealth Federation (the forerunner of the modern New Democratic Party).

Others, especially the radical populists, would later turn towards Social Credit ideology, forming a definite line of western protest that continued to run through the Reform Party of Canada to the present day Conservative Party of Canada. The CCF and Social Credit had their roots in the United Farmers movement, from which a large number of MLAs were elected in New Brunswick, Nova Scotia and Manitoba, and which formed governments in Alberta, Ontario and Manitoba. In Manitoba, the United Farmers of Manitoba changed their name to the Progressive Party of Manitoba after coming to power in 1922.

The Conservative Party received the least of the Progressive&#x27;s spoils, inheriting little more than the name, in 1942. Its first leader after amalgamation was John Bracken, who was then serving as the Progressive Premier of Manitoba.

More important than these effects on individual parties, the Progressive Party also had a great effect on Canada&#x27;s governmental system — it was the most successful early example of a third party in Canada. Despite Duverger&#x27;s law of political science, the Canadian Parliament has always had a third, and sometimes a fourth or even fifth, party present ever since. The Progressives thus served both as a model and a cautionary tale for those that followed after.

==Party leaders==
* Thomas Crerar 1920–1922
* Robert Forke 1922–1926

==Election results==

The above table does not include MPs elected as United Farmers, Labour, Independent, Independent Progressive or other designations who may have been part of the Progressive Party caucus. (see United Farmers of Alberta)

Progressive MP Agnes Macphail was re-elected in the 1935 federal election as a United Farmers of Ontario–Labour candidate but was defeated running under the same banner in the 1940 federal election.

===Combined Progressive/United Farmer/Labour results===
====1921====
====1925====
Notes:

* not applicable – the party was not recognized in the previous election

**Robert Henry Halbert was elected as UFO in 1921, ran for re-election as a Progressive in 1925 but was defeated.

====1926====
Notes:

* not applicable – the party was not recognized in the previous election

x – less than 0.005% of the popular vote

====1930====
Note:

* The party did not nominate candidates in the previous election.

** Beniah Bowman was elected as a UFO MP in 1926 and ran for re-election as a Liberal in 1930 and was defeated.

====1935====
Notes:

* The party did not nominate candidates in the previous election.

** Progressive MP Agnes Macphail ran for re-election as a UFO-Labour candidate in 1930 and was successful.

*** The three Labour and Independent Labour MPs, J. S. Woodsworth, Abraham Albert Heaps and Angus MacInnis successfully ran for re-election as Co-operative Commonwealth Federation candidates. A fourth Labour MP, Humphrey Mitchell, who entered parliament in a 1931 by-election refused to join the CCF and ran for re-election as a Labour candidate but was defeated. He later joined the Liberals.

**** Of the 9 United Farmers of Alberta MPs, 8 ran for re-election as CCFers and were defeated, the ninth ran as a Conservative and was also defeated.

***** Of the 3 Progressive MPs elected in 1930, one, Agnes Macphail, ran in 1935 as a UFO-Labour candidate and was re-elected, a second, Milton Neil Campbell, resigned in 1933 to become vice-chairman of the Tariff Board of Canada and was succeeded in a by-election by a Liberal, and the third, Archibald M. Carmichael, did not seek re-election in 1935

x – less than 0.005% of the popular vote

==Historiography==
The study of the Progressive Party is almost wholly dominated by one author, W. L. Morton, whose 1950 book, &quot;The Progressive Party in Canada&quot;, won a Governor General&#x27;s Award, and had been the principal text on the Progressive Party ever since. A great number of more recently published works on western politics cite only Morton&#x27;s book in their discussion of the Progressive Party. Morton, a Red Tory, wrote in the context of a seemingly spreading Social Credit movement. Morton&#x27;s book was the first in a series exploring the origins of the Social Credit movement.

==Provincial parties==
=== Newfoundland ===
Though not part of the &quot;United Farmers&quot; movement, or indeed a movement of farmers at all, the Fisherman&#x27;s Protective Union of Newfoundland provides an interesting case that parallels that of the &quot;United Farmers&quot;. However Newfoundland was not part of Canada until 1949.

===Nova Scotia===
The United Farmers of Nova Scotia was formed in January 1920 at meetings that followed the annual convention of the Nova Scotia Farmers&#x27; Association. At an April meeting, 300 farmers approved the UFNA&#x27;s constitution and the publication of a newspaper, &quot;United Farmer&#x27;s Guide&quot;. The movement nominated 16 candidates and elected 7 in the 1920 general election. Aligning with the Independent Labour Party they formed the official opposition with 11 MLAs (elected with a 30.9% of the popular vote). Daniel G. McKenzie, a successful farmer and former school-teacher from Malagash, was appointed party and opposition leader.

The party began to lose its momentum in the fall when one of its founders, Major Hugh Dickson, was defeated in the Colchester by-election. In 1921, Nova Scotia Liberal Party Premier George Henry Murray discredited the party in the eyes of the public when he offered to divide the government&#x27;s budget surplus among members of the legislature. All but one United Farmer MLA accepted Murray&#x27;s largesse. Later that session another scandal rocked the party when it was revealed that MacKenzie had secretly accepted a government salary of $500. A series of defections followed and by 1925 the United Farmers of Nova Scotia had virtually ceased to exist.

===New Brunswick===
The 1920 provincial election elected nine United Farmers and two Farmer-Labour MLAs who sat together and allowed the incumbent Liberals to maintain confidence in a minority government situation. None of them were re-elected in the 1925 election and no other UF candidates were elected at subsequent elections.

===Ontario===
In Ontario, the United Farmers of Ontario formed government as a result of the 1919 provincial election with E. C. Drury as Premier. After the government&#x27;s defeat in 1923 and the formal decision of the UFO to withdraw from electoral politics, most remaining UFO Members of the Legislative Assembly (MLAs) took to calling themselves &quot;Progressives&quot;. In the 1934 provincial election the remaining Progressive MLAs under Harry Nixon ran as Liberal-Progressives in an alliance with the Ontario Liberal Party led by former UFO member Mitch Hepburn. The Liberal-Progressives subsequently joined the Liberal Party.

===Manitoba===
The Progressive Party of Manitoba had merged with the Manitoba Liberal Party in the 1920s to form a Liberal-Progressive party there. Despite this, in 1942, Manitoba Premier John Bracken, a Progressive, was persuaded to become the leader of the national Conservative Party. As a condition of his accepting the leadership, the party&#x27;s name was changed to Progressive Conservative Party of Canada. The Progressive Party of Canada, however, refused to disband, and ran its own candidates in the subsequent federal election against Bracken&#x27;s Tories. The party&#x27;s electoral fortunes continued to decline, and most Progressives ended up joining either the Liberal Party or the Co-operative Commonwealth Federation (CCF), rather than the renamed Progressive Conservatives.

===Saskatchewan===

The Progressive Party of Saskatchewan ran seven candidates and elected six members to the Saskatchewan legislature in the 1921 general election despite the absence of a provincial organization due to the reluctance of the Saskatchewan Grain Growers&#x27; Association to break with the Saskatchewan Liberal Party. The Liberals had a tradition of consulting the SGGA about farm policy and of appointing prominent farm activists to cabinet such as Charles Dunning and John Maharg. A political crisis ensued the Liberal government in late 1921 in which Premier William Melville Martin angered the SGGA by campaigning for the federal Liberal Party of Canada against the Progressive Party of Canada in the 1921 federal election. Agriculture Minister Maharg, a former SGGA president, resigned from the Cabinet in protest and crossed the floor to sit as an Independent and become Leader of the Opposition. Martin himself was forced to step down and the federal Progressives won 15 of 16 Saskatchewan seats in the federal election. The SGGA subsequently authorized the creation of local political action committees across the province but were unable to build on the 1921 federal breakthrough and only ran 6 of a possible 63 candidates in the next two provincial elections. In the 1925 provincial election the Progressives again won six seats and formed the official opposition. They were reduced to third party status and five seats in the 1929 provincial election with the Liberals reduced to minority government status due to a strong showing by a revived Conservative Party of Saskatchewan. The Progressives joined with the Conservatives to force the Liberals from office on September 6, 1929 and formed a coalition government allowing the Conservatives leader James T. M. Anderson to take power as premier; one Progressive, Reginald Stipe, was appointed to Anderson&#x27;s cabinet as minister without portfolio. By the next election the Progressives had disappeared.

While the Progressives moved to the right, more radical farmers gravitated to the United Farmers of Canada (Saskatchewan Section) which was formed in 1926 by members of the Farmers&#x27; Union of Canada and the Saskatchewan Grain Growers&#x27; Association. As a result of the Dust Bowl farm crisis during the Great Depression the UFC (SS) became politicised and adopted a socialist platform. In 1930, in response to the Progressive-Conservative coalition, the UFC (SS) under the leadership of George Hara Williams decided to form a new political party. In 1932 it joined with the Independent Labour Party in the province to form the Farmer-Labour Group. Progressive MLA Jacob Benson joined the new party to become its first MLA. In the 1934 provincial election, the FLG returned five MLAs to the legislature and subsequently became the Saskatchewan section of the Cooperative Commonwealth Federation.

===Alberta===

The United Farmers of Alberta formed was the governing party in Alberta from 1921 until its defeat in 1935. It also elected a number of MPs to the House of Commons of Canada who sat initially as Progressive Party MPs but were re-elected as UFA MPs beginning in 1926 due to a split in the Progressive movement.

==See also==
*List of Progressive/United Farmer MPs
*United Farmers
*United Farmers of Quebec
*Fisherman&#x27;s Protective Union a similar movement in Newfoundland
*Labour Party
*Non-Partisan League
*Co-operative Commonwealth Federation
*New Democratic Party
*List of political parties in Canada
*Farmers&#x27; movement

==References==
==External links==
*The Prairie Roots of Canada&#x27;s Political &#x27;Third Parties&#x27;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2112263" start="4" end="31" title="Progressive Party of Canada" label="Progressive Party of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2112263" start="46" end="72" title="Progressive Party of Canada" label="National Progressive Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="113" end="119" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2622935" start="179" end="193" title="United Farmers of Canada" label="United Farmers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7248792" start="243" end="276" title="Progressive Party of Saskatchewan" label="Progressive Party of Saskatchewan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261966" start="286" end="315" title="Progressive Party of Manitoba" label="Progressive Party of Manitoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q2112263" start="522" end="536" title="Progressive Party of Canada" label="United Farmers"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="581" end="592" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1686042" start="626" end="631" title="Unionist Party (Canada)" label="Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q52389" start="654" end="660" title="tariff" label="tariff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="900" end="907" title="Ontario" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951" start="909" end="916" title="Alberta" label="Alberta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1948" start="921" end="929" title="Manitoba" label="Manitoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q3395086" start="947" end="962" title="National Policy" label="National Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q909827" start="970" end="983" title="Conservative Party of Canada (1867–1942)" label="Conservatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q138345" start="1003" end="1011" title="Liberal Party of Canada" label="Liberals"/>
<link wikidata="Q200435" start="1049" end="1059" title="free trade" label="free trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q6467545" start="1158" end="1164" title="Labour Party of Canada" label="Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q3366750" start="1169" end="1178" title="Socialist Party of Canada" label="socialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q927338" start="1436" end="1450" title="Prime Ministers of Canada" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q128664" start="1455" end="1470" title="Wilfrid Laurier" label="Wilfrid Laurier"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="1562" end="1575" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q128702" start="1631" end="1648" title="John A. Macdonald" label="John A. Macdonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q821102" start="1975" end="1988" title="Progressivism" label="Progressivism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1651128" start="1997" end="2016" title="Non-Partisan League" label="Non-Partisan League"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="2023" end="2030" title="United Kingdom" label="Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q192186" start="2059" end="2075" title="Fabians" label="Fabian socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q18164909" start="2188" end="2213" title="Grain Growers&amp;#x27; Guide" label="Grain Growers&amp;#x27; Guide"/>
<link wikidata="Q18019688" start="2321" end="2361" title="Manitoba Grain Growers&amp;#x27; Association" label="Manitoba Grain Growers&amp;#x27; Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q18167781" start="2363" end="2396" title="Alberta Farmers&amp;#x27; Association" label="Alberta Farmers&amp;#x27; Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1809831" start="2406" end="2431" title="United Farmers of Alberta" label="United Farmers of Alberta"/>
<link wikidata="Q3550699" start="2656" end="2681" title="United Farmers of Ontario" label="United Farmers of Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586377" start="2693" end="2717" title="1919 Ontario general election" label="1919 provincial election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057954" start="3018" end="3029" title="by-election" label="by-election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368799" start="3097" end="3110" title="Thomas Crerar" label="Thomas Crerar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4294939" start="3112" end="3135" title="Minister of Agriculture (Canada)" label="Minister of Agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1686042" start="3143" end="3151" title="Unionist Party (Canada)" label="Unionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q128655" start="3166" end="3179" title="Robert Borden" label="Robert Borden"/>
<link wikidata="Q6219328" start="3359" end="3380" title="John Archibald Maharg" label="John Archibald Maharg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5730424" start="3746" end="3761" title="Henry Wise Wood" label="Henry Wise Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q6829279" start="5049" end="5062" title="Michael Clark (Canadian politician)" label="Michael Clark"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5174" end="5205" title="Canadian Council of Agriculture" label="Canadian Council of Agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1723530" start="5642" end="5663" title="1921 Canadian federal election" label="1921 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q383590" start="7091" end="7098" title="House of Commons of Canada" label="Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q138345" start="7317" end="7324" title="Liberal Party of Canada" label="Liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1965" start="7449" end="7462" title="New Brunswick" label="New Brunswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973" start="7490" end="7506" title="British Columbia" label="British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952" start="7621" end="7632" title="Nova Scotia" label="Nova Scotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q837416" start="7867" end="7887" title="coalition government" label="coalition government"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="7928" end="7936" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1015173" start="8304" end="8323" title="Official Opposition (Canada)" label="Official Opposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q909827" start="8452" end="8470" title="Conservative Party of Canada (1867–1942)" label="Conservative Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433693" start="8584" end="8602" title="whip (politics)" label="Parliamentary Whip"/>
<link wikidata="Q7344433" start="8736" end="8748" title="Robert Forke" label="Robert Forke"/>
<link wikidata="Q2983067" start="9118" end="9134" title="J. S. Woodsworth" label="J. S. Woodsworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q8013095" start="9136" end="9150" title="William Irvine (Canadian politician)" label="William Irvine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6287522" start="9155" end="9166" title="Joseph Tweed Shaw" label="Joseph Shaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q5563038" start="9191" end="9203" title="Ginger Group" label="Ginger Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1723528" start="9252" end="9265" title="1925 Canadian federal election" label="1925 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1809831" start="9462" end="9487" title="United Farmers of Alberta" label="United Farmers of Alberta"/>
<link wikidata="Q128633" start="9568" end="9582" title="William Lyon Mackenzie King" label="Mackenzie King"/>
<link wikidata="Q3237972" start="9701" end="9720" title="Liberal-Progressive" label="Liberal-Progressive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1666164" start="9729" end="9742" title="1926 Canadian federal election" label="1926 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q128645" start="9806" end="9820" title="Arthur Meighen" label="Arthur Meighen"/>
<link wikidata="Q114793" start="9851" end="9870" title="minority government" label="minority government"/>
<link wikidata="Q128633" start="9980" end="9994" title="William Lyon Mackenzie King" label="Mackenzie King"/>
<link wikidata="Q2458227" start="9995" end="10002" title="Canadian Cabinet" label="cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3251793" start="10006" end="10046" title="Minister of Immigration and Colonization (Canada)" label="Minister of Immigration and Colonization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1809831" start="10163" end="10188" title="United Farmers of Alberta" label="United Farmers of Alberta"/>
<link wikidata="Q5563038" start="10295" end="10307" title="Ginger Group" label="Ginger Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1104026" start="10404" end="10440" title="Co-operative Commonwealth Federation" label="Co-operative Commonwealth Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493320" start="10502" end="10518" title="1935 Canadian federal election" label="election of 1935"/>
<link wikidata="Q951941" start="10526" end="10555" title="Social Credit Party of Canada" label="Social Credit Party of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q6861355" start="10711" end="10731" title="Milton Neil Campbell" label="Milton Neil Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q4786410" start="10736" end="10759" title="Archibald M. Carmichael" label="Archibald M. Carmichael"/>
<link wikidata="Q4693080" start="10780" end="10794" title="Agnes Macphail" label="Agnes Macphail"/>
<link wikidata="Q3550699" start="10918" end="10943" title="United Farmers of Ontario" label="United Farmers of Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q6467545" start="10944" end="10950" title="Labour Party (Canada)" label="Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368799" start="11359" end="11371" title="Thomas Crerar" label="T. A. Crerar"/>
<link wikidata="Q841180" start="11457" end="11464" title="Senate of Canada" label="Senator"/>
<link wikidata="Q5563038" start="11524" end="11536" title="Ginger Group" label="Ginger Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1104026" start="11682" end="11718" title="Co-operative Commonwealth Federation" label="Co-operative Commonwealth Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q130765" start="11749" end="11769" title="New Democratic Party (Canada)" label="New Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3326543" start="11840" end="11853" title="Canadian social credit movement" label="Social Credit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1680589" start="11941" end="11963" title="Reform Party of Canada" label="Reform Party of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q488523" start="11983" end="12011" title="Conservative Party of Canada" label="Conservative Party of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2622935" start="12062" end="12076" title="United Farmers of Canada" label="United Farmers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952" start="12152" end="12163" title="Nova Scotia" label="Nova Scotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261966" start="12311" end="12340" title="Progressive Party of Manitoba" label="Progressive Party of Manitoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q464450" start="12536" end="12548" title="John Bracken" label="John Bracken"/>
<link wikidata="Q637376" start="12831" end="12850" title="Duverger&amp;#x27;s law" label="Duverger&amp;#x27;s law"/>
<link wikidata="Q5054705" start="13036" end="13051" title="cautionary tale" label="cautionary tale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368799" start="13104" end="13117" title="Thomas Crerar" label="Thomas Crerar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7344433" start="13130" end="13142" title="Robert Forke" label="Robert Forke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1809831" start="13368" end="13393" title="United Farmers of Alberta" label="United Farmers of Alberta"/>
<link wikidata="Q4693080" start="13411" end="13425" title="Agnes Macphail" label="Agnes Macphail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493320" start="13448" end="13469" title="1935 Canadian federal election" label="1935 federal election"/>
<link wikidata="Q3550699" start="13475" end="13500" title="United Farmers of Ontario" label="United Farmers of Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q6467545" start="13501" end="13507" title="Labour Party (Canada)" label="Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1448629" start="13572" end="13593" title="1940 Canadian federal election" label="1940 federal election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1723530" start="13656" end="13660" title="1921 Canadian federal election" label="1921"/>
<link wikidata="Q1723528" start="13669" end="13673" title="1925 Canadian federal election" label="1925"/>
<link wikidata="Q7345429" start="13762" end="13782" title="Robert Henry Halbert" label="Robert Henry Halbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1666164" start="13879" end="13883" title="1926 Canadian federal election" label="1926"/>
<link wikidata="Q1723531" start="14016" end="14020" title="1930 Canadian federal election" label="1930"/>
<link wikidata="Q4887921" start="14102" end="14115" title="Beniah Bowman" label="Beniah Bowman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493320" start="14216" end="14220" title="1935 Canadian federal election" label="1935"/>
<link wikidata="Q4693080" start="14318" end="14332" title="Agnes Macphail" label="Agnes Macphail"/>
<link wikidata="Q2983067" start="14457" end="14473" title="J. S. Woodsworth" label="J. S. Woodsworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q4668739" start="14475" end="14495" title="Abraham Albert Heaps" label="Abraham Albert Heaps"/>
<link wikidata="Q4764166" start="14500" end="14514" title="Angus MacInnis" label="Angus MacInnis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5941528" start="14620" end="14637" title="Humphrey Mitchell" label="Humphrey Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6861355" start="15092" end="15112" title="Milton Neil Campbell" label="Milton Neil Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15162" end="15184" title="Tariff Board of Canada" label="Tariff Board of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q4786410" start="15249" end="15272" title="Archibald M. Carmichael" label="Archibald M. Carmichael"/>
<link wikidata="Q7945782" start="15446" end="15458" title="W. L. Morton" label="W. L. Morton"/>
<link wikidata="Q283256" start="15528" end="15557" title="Governor General&amp;#x27;s Award" label="Governor General&amp;#x27;s Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q970562" start="15781" end="15789" title="Red Tory" label="Red Tory"/>
<link wikidata="Q24951363" start="16108" end="16141" title="Fisherman&amp;#x27;s Protective Union" label="Fisherman&amp;#x27;s Protective Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003" start="16145" end="16157" title="Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Newfoundland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7064276" start="16677" end="16698" title="1920 Nova Scotia general election" label="1920 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q6467545" start="16718" end="16742" title="Labour Party (Canada)" label="Independent Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193702" start="16759" end="16778" title="official opposition" label="official opposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q15997021" start="16836" end="16854" title="Daniel G. McKenzie" label="Daniel G. McKenzie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3366494" start="17109" end="17134" title="Nova Scotia Liberal Party" label="Nova Scotia Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3101643" start="17143" end="17162" title="George Henry Murray" label="George Henry Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586336" start="17644" end="17668" title="1920 New Brunswick general election" label="1920 provincial election"/>
<link wikidata="Q6467545" start="17705" end="17718" title="Farmer-Labour" label="Farmer-Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q2867848" start="17767" end="17775" title="New Brunswick Liberal Association" label="Liberals"/>
<link wikidata="Q329547" start="17779" end="17798" title="motion of confidence" label="maintain confidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q114793" start="17804" end="17823" title="minority government" label="minority government"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586337" start="17871" end="17884" title="1925 New Brunswick general election" label="1925 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="17968" end="17975" title="Ontario" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q3550699" start="17981" end="18006" title="United Farmers of Ontario" label="United Farmers of Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586377" start="18044" end="18068" title="1919 Ontario general election" label="1919 provincial election"/>
<link wikidata="Q3056893" start="18074" end="18085" title="E. C. Drury" label="E. C. Drury"/>
<link wikidata="Q2560704" start="18089" end="18096" title="Premier of Ontario" label="Premier"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586378" start="18136" end="18140" title="1923 Ontario general election" label="1923"/>
<link wikidata="Q5230427" start="18232" end="18267" title="Member of the Legislative Assembly" label="Members of the Legislative Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586379" start="18335" end="18359" title="1934 Ontario general election" label="1934 provincial election"/>
<link wikidata="Q3127880" start="18397" end="18408" title="Harry Nixon" label="Harry Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3237972" start="18416" end="18436" title="Liberal-Progressives" label="Liberal-Progressives"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553186" start="18461" end="18482" title="Ontario Liberal Party" label="Ontario Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3317082" start="18508" end="18521" title="Mitch Hepburn" label="Mitch Hepburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261966" start="18607" end="18636" title="Progressive Party of Manitoba" label="Progressive Party of Manitoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q3366499" start="18657" end="18679" title="Manitoba Liberal Party" label="Manitoba Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q464450" start="18776" end="18788" title="John Bracken" label="John Bracken"/>
<link wikidata="Q909827" start="18856" end="18874" title="Conservative Party of Canada (historical)" label="Conservative Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292617" start="18961" end="19001" title="Progressive Conservative Party of Canada" label="Progressive Conservative Party of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1104026" start="19287" end="19323" title="Co-operative Commonwealth Federation" label="Co-operative Commonwealth Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7248792" start="19407" end="19440" title="Progressive Party of Saskatchewan" label="Progressive Party of Saskatchewan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586434" start="19525" end="19546" title="1921 Saskatchewan general election" label="1921 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q18120955" start="19625" end="19669" title="Saskatchewan Grain Growers&amp;#x27; Association" label="Saskatchewan Grain Growers&amp;#x27; Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q2642245" start="19688" end="19714" title="Saskatchewan Liberal Party" label="Saskatchewan Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q931076" start="19848" end="19863" title="Charles Dunning" label="Charles Dunning"/>
<link wikidata="Q6219328" start="19868" end="19879" title="John Maharg" label="John Maharg"/>
<link wikidata="Q931104" start="19960" end="19983" title="William Melville Martin" label="William Melville Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q138345" start="20032" end="20055" title="Liberal Party of Canada" label="Liberal Party of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1723530" start="20103" end="20124" title="1921 Canadian federal election" label="1921 federal election"/>
<link wikidata="Q5188683" start="20221" end="20238" title="crossed the floor" label="crossed the floor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6596421" start="20275" end="20299" title="Leader of the Opposition (Saskatchewan)" label="Leader of the Opposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586435" start="20675" end="20699" title="1925 Saskatchewan general election" label="1925 provincial election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193702" start="20752" end="20771" title="official opposition" label="official opposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586436" start="20835" end="20859" title="1929 Saskatchewan general election" label="1929 provincial election"/>
<link wikidata="Q114793" start="20889" end="20908" title="minority government" label="minority government"/>
<link wikidata="Q628869" start="20953" end="20987" title="Conservative Party of Saskatchewan" label="Conservative Party of Saskatchewan"/>
<link wikidata="Q837416" start="21104" end="21124" title="coalition government" label="coalition government"/>
<link wikidata="Q628869" start="21138" end="21151" title="Conservative Party of Saskatchewan" label="Conservatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q376634" start="21159" end="21179" title="James Thomas Milton Anderson" label="James T. M. Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7308879" start="21223" end="21237" title="Reginald Stipe" label="Reginald Stipe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937160" start="21283" end="21309" title="minister without portfolio" label="minister without portfolio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2622935" start="21449" end="21496" title="United Farmers of Canada (Saskatchewan Section)" label="United Farmers of Canada (Saskatchewan Section)"/>
<link wikidata="Q726501" start="21643" end="21652" title="Dust Bowl" label="Dust Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="21676" end="21692" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q5540220" start="21860" end="21880" title="George Hara Williams" label="George Hara Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q6467545" start="21947" end="21971" title="Labour Party of Canada" label="Independent Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661160" start="22000" end="22019" title="Saskatchewan NDP" label="Farmer-Labour Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q16011839" start="22037" end="22049" title="Jacob Benson" label="Jacob Benson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586437" start="22103" end="22127" title="1934 Saskatchewan general election" label="1934 provincial election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1104026" start="22231" end="22266" title="Cooperative Commonwealth Federation" label="Cooperative Commonwealth Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1809831" start="22288" end="22313" title="United Farmers of Alberta" label="United Farmers of Alberta"/>
<link wikidata="Q383590" start="22431" end="22457" title="House of Commons of Canada" label="House of Commons of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q6595101" start="22609" end="22646" title="List of Progressive/United Farmer MPs" label="List of Progressive/United Farmer MPs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2622935" start="22648" end="22662" title="United Farmers of Canada" label="United Farmers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7887756" start="22664" end="22688" title="United Farmers of Quebec" label="United Farmers of Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q24951363" start="22690" end="22723" title="Fisherman&amp;#x27;s Protective Union" label="Fisherman&amp;#x27;s Protective Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003" start="22746" end="22758" title="Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Newfoundland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6467545" start="22760" end="22772" title="Labour Party of Canada" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1651128" start="22774" end="22793" title="Non-Partisan League" label="Non-Partisan League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1104026" start="22795" end="22831" title="Co-operative Commonwealth Federation" label="Co-operative Commonwealth Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q130765" start="22833" end="22853" title="New Democratic Party (Canada)" label="New Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1862775" start="22855" end="22890" title="List of political parties in Canada" label="List of political parties in Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q5435767" start="22892" end="22914" title="Farmers&amp;#x27; movement" label="Farmers&amp;#x27; movement"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="308649" wikidata="Q4462906" url="?curid=308649" title="Three Comrades">
<text>Three Comrades may refer to:

*&quot;Three Comrades&quot; (novel), written in 1938 by Erich Maria Remarque
*&quot;Three Comrades&quot; (1938 film), a 1938 adaptation of the novel, made the same year
*&quot;Three Comrades&quot; (1935 film), a 1935 Soviet film</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1257081" start="31" end="65" title="Three Comrades (novel)" label="&amp;quot;Three Comrades&amp;quot; (novel)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040470" start="108" end="146" title="Three Comrades (1938 film)" label="&amp;quot;Three Comrades&amp;quot; (1938 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4462907" start="200" end="238" title="Three Comrades (1935 film)" label="&amp;quot;Three Comrades&amp;quot; (1935 film)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="308650" wikidata="Q1587159" url="?curid=308650" title="Hartford Courant">
<text>The Hartford Courant is the largest daily newspaper in the U.S. state of Connecticut, and is advertised as the oldest continuously published newspaper in the United States. A morning newspaper serving most of the state north of New Haven and east of Waterbury, its headquarters on Broad Street in Hartford, Connecticut was a short walk from the state capitol. It reports regional news with a chain of bureaus in smaller cities and a series of local editions. It also operates &quot;CTNow&quot;, a free local weekly newspaper and website.

The &quot;Courant&quot; began as a weekly called the Connecticut Courant on October 29, 1764, becoming daily in 1837. In 1979, it was bought by the Times Mirror Company. In 2000, Times Mirror was acquired by the Tribune Company, which later combined the paper&#x27;s management and facilities with those of a Tribune-owned Hartford television station. The &quot;Courant&quot; and other Tribune print properties were spun off to a new corporate parent, Tribune Publishing, separate from the station, in 2014. &quot;Tribune Publishing&quot; agreed in May 2021 to be acquired by Alden Global Capital, which operates its media properties through Digital First Media. The transaction was finalized on May 25, 2021.

==Origins and leading figures==
According to the Library of Congress&#x27; database of U.S. newspapers, the origins of the &quot;Hartford Courant&quot; intertwines with the publication of the weekly &quot;Connecticut Courant&quot;. Founded by Thomas Green, the &quot;Connecticut Courant&quot; was first published on October 29, 1764. In the years following 1774, the title of the paper would be changed to &quot;The Connecticut Courant and Hartford Weekly Intelligencer&quot;, later simplified to &quot;The Connecticut Courant, and the Weekly Intelligencer&quot; (1778 to 1791), then reverted to the original form &quot;The Connecticut Courant&quot; from 1791 to 1914, when the publication ceased.

In 1837, John L. Boswell, who had become the printer proprietor of &quot;The Connecticut Courant&quot; the previous year (until 1849), also started the publication of &quot;The Daily Courant&quot;. In 1840, the title would be changed to &quot;The Hartford Daily Courant&quot;, to finally become &quot;The Hartford Courant&quot; in 1887. Based on the notion that the daily publication was an offshoot of the weekly &quot;Connecticut Courant&quot;, the newspaper board adopted in 2018 the motto &quot;Older than the nation&quot; as its slogan.

Other newspapers claim to be the oldest in the country. &quot;The New Hampshire Gazette&quot;, which started publication in 1756, trademarked the slogan of oldest paper in the nation after being revived as a small biweekly paper in 1989. Prior to 1989, the paper had all but disappeared into other publications for most of the 20th century, which makes the slogan doubtful. The &quot;New York Post&quot; also claims to be the oldest continuously published daily newspaper. However, even though the &quot;Post&quot; started daily publishing 35 years before &quot;The Connecticut Courant&quot; did, the &quot;Courant&quot; existed as a weekly paper for nearly 40 years before the &quot;New York Post&quot; was founded, making the &quot;Courant&quot; older. Also &quot;The Providence Journal&quot; claims to be the oldest continuously published daily newspaper in the United States: the &quot;Journal&quot; began daily publishing 28 years after the &quot;New York Post&quot;, but some critics point at strikes at the &quot;Post&quot; in 1958 and 1978 as breaks in its continuity. Regardless, &quot;The Connecticut Courant&quot; existed as a weekly paper for nearly 70 years before &quot;The Providence Journal&quot; was founded.

In 1867, Joseph Roswell Hawley, a leading Republican politician and former governor of Connecticut, bought the newspaper, which he combined with the &quot;Press.&quot; Under his editorship, the &quot;Courant&quot; became the most influential newspaper in Connecticut and one of the leading Republican papers in the country.

An eminent figure of the &quot;Courant&quot; is Emile Gauvreau, who became a reporter in 1916, and the managing editor in 1919. His energetic and often sensationalistic news style upset Charles Clark, the owner and editor. Clark fired Gauvreau when the journalist refused to stop a series of stories about false medical diplomas. Gauvreau would become later on a major figure in the New York City tabloid wars of the Roaring Twenties as the first managing editor of the New York Evening Graphic and later managing editor of the New York Mirror.

Another prominent editor of the &quot;Courant&quot; in the 20th century is Herbert Brucker.

===Recent history===

The &quot;Courant&quot; was purchased in 1979 by Times Mirror, the &quot;Los Angeles Times&quot; parent company, for $105.6 million. The first years of out-of-town ownership are described by Andrew Kreig, a former &quot;Courant&quot; reporter, in a book titled &quot;Spiked: How Chain Management Corrupted America&#x27;s Oldest Newspaper.&quot; One criticism expressed by Kreig is that the new owners were more interested in awards, and less interested in traditional &quot;Courant&quot; devotion to exhaustive coverage of local news.

The &quot;Courant&quot; won a 1992 Pulitzer Prize for inquiring into problems with the Hubble Space Telescope (a Connecticut company was involved in the construction), and it won a 1999 Pulitzer Prize in the Breaking News category for coverage of a 1998 murder-suicide that took five lives at Connecticut Lottery headquarters. A series of articles about sexual abuse by the head of a worldwide Catholic order, published since February 1997, constituted the first denunciation of Marciel Maciel known to a wider audience.
In 2000, Times Mirror and the &quot;Courant&quot; became part of the Tribune Company, one of the world&#x27;s largest multimedia companies. By then the &quot;Courant&quot; had acquired the Valley Advocate group of &quot;alternative&quot; weeklies started by two former &quot;Courant&quot; staff members in 1973. Tribune also owned two local television stations: Fox affiliate WTIC-TV and The CW affiliate WCCT-TV.

In 2005, The &quot;Courant&quot; became the most recent American newspaper to win the Society for News Design&#x27;s World&#x27;s Best Designed Newspaper award. In 2006, the paper&#x27;s investigation into mental health and suicides among Americans serving in the Iraq war was featured in the PBS documentary series &quot;Exposé: America&#x27;s Investigative Reports&quot; in an episode entitled &quot;Question 7.&quot;

In late June 2006, the Tribune Co. announced that &quot;Courant&quot; publisher Jack W. Davis Jr. would be replaced by Stephen D. Carver, vice president and general manager of Atlanta, Ga., TV station WATL. In March 2009, Tribune replaced Carver with Richard Graziano, who was given a dual role as Courant publisher and general manager of Tribune&#x27;s two Hartford television stations. In May of the same year, Tribune announced that Jeff Levine, a newspaper executive with a background in marketing, would become &quot;director of content&quot; and that the editor or &quot;print platform manager&quot; of the &quot;Courant&quot; would report to Levine as would the news director of WTIC-TV. Shortly after that, the &quot;Courant&#x27;s&quot; two highest ranking editors were let go.

After 2010, &quot;Courant&quot; has offered early retirement and buyout packages to reduce staff as it continues to experience declines in advertising revenue. There have also been layoffs and reduction in pages. Newsroom staff peaked in 1994 at close to 400 staff, down to 175 staff by 2008, and 135 staff in 2009.

Tribune Company brought frequent changes in the Courant&#x27;s top leadership. On November 18, 2013, Tribune appointed Nancy Meyer as publisher, succeeding Rich Graziano who left to become president and general manager of WPIX-TV (PIX11) in New York City.

In 2014, the &quot;Courant&quot; purchased the &quot;ReminderNews&quot; chain of weekly newspapers. The &quot;Reminder&quot; name remained on the mastheads of all editions until November 2015, when the papers were redesigned and renamed &quot;Courant Community&quot;.

On October 10, 2014, Tribune Company announced the appointment of Rick Daniels as publisher of the Courant, succeeding Nancy Meyer, who was promoted to publisher and CEO of the Orlando Sentinel.

Andrew Julien was named the combined publisher and editor in March 2016, replacing Tom Wiley, who departed after two months.

In 2018, the Hartford Courant joined more than 300 newspapers in releasing editorials in response to President&#x27;s Trump&#x27;s anti-media rhetoric, a show of solidarity initiated by The Boston Globe. &quot;The Hartford Courant joins newspapers from around the country today to reaffirm that the press is not the enemy of the American people.&quot;&quot;&quot; 

In October 2020, the &quot;Courant&quot; announced that it would be discontinuing printing the paper in Hartford and outsourcing future printing to the &quot;Springfield Republican&quot; in Massachusetts.

In December 2020, Tribune Publishing announced that it would be closing the &quot;Courant&quot;&#x27;s Broad Street newsroom by the end of the year with no current plans to open another. On its website as of 2023, the &quot;Courant&quot; lists its mailing address as 100 Pearl Street in Hartford.

In January 2024, it was announced &quot;Courant Community&quot; newspapers was to cease publication on Jan. 18.

== Origins of the title ==

Journalist Denis Edward Horgan suggest that the title could derive from Dutch &quot;krant&quot;. The word, alternatively spelled &quot;courante&quot;, would be a contraction of Dutch &quot;courante nouvellen&quot;, from French &quot;nouvelles courantes,&quot; indicating current news articles. However, this Gallicism was already current in the English world and more specifically in the early modern newspaper industry. A case in point is the &quot;New-England Courant&quot; (Boston), founded by James Franklin in 1721.

== Current news and editorial board ==

* Executive editor: Helen Bennett
* Managing editor: Kellie Love 
* Content editor: Kaitlin McCallum
* Sports editor: William Dayton

== Awards ==

=== Pulitzer Prize ===
Nancy Tracy of the &quot;Hartford Courant&quot; was a 1984 Pulitzer Prize Finalist in Feature Writing for her moving depiction of Meg Casey, a victim of premature aging.

Robert S. Capers and Eric Lipton of the Hartford Courant won the 1992 Pulitzer Prize in Explanatory Journalism for their series on how a flawed mirror built at Connecticut&#x27;s Perkin-Elmer Corporation immobilized the Hubble Space Telescope.

The Hartford Courant Staff won the 1999 Pulitzer Prize in Breaking News Reporting for its coverage of a shooting rampage in which a state lottery employee killed four supervisors then himself.

Reporters Mike McIntire and Jack Dolan of the Hartford Courant were 2001 Pulitzer Prize Finalists in Investigative Reporting for their work in revealing the mistakes of practicing doctors who have faced disciplinary action.

Photojournalist Brad Clift was a 2003 Pulitzer Prize Finalist in Feature Photography for his photo series &quot;Heroin Town&quot;, which depicted heroin use in Willimantic.

Lisa Chedekel and Matthew Kauffman of the Hartford Courant were 2007 Pulitzer Prize Finalists in Investigative Reporting for their in-depth reporting on suicide rates among American soldiers in Iraq which led to congressional and military action addressing the issues raised in the series.

The Hartford Courant Staff was a 2013 Pulitzer Prize Finalist for its comprehensive and compassionate coverage of the Sandy Hook Elementary School shooting. The paper was given exclusive access originally to the investigative files collected by the FBI on the shooter&#x27;s life, growing up.

==Politics==
The paper endorsed George W. Bush in both the 2000 and the 2004 Presidential elections.

In the 2012 Presidential Election, the &quot;Courant&quot; endorsed President Barack Obama for a second term over Republican Mitt Romney.

The &quot;Courant&quot; weighed in on the contentious and antagonistic 2016 Presidential Election, endorsing Democrat Hillary Clinton over Republican candidate Donald Trump.

In August 2018 the &quot;Courant&quot; endorsed Ned Lamont in the Democratic primary as the only &quot;credible&quot; choice compared to rival Joe Ganim. The &quot;Courant&quot; went on to endorse independent candidate Oz Griebel in the general election.

For the 2020 Presidential Election, The &quot;Courant&quot; weighed in, endorsing Democrat Joe Biden over Republican candidate Donald Trump. The Courant took a stronger stance in its 2020 endorsement against Trump than it did in 2016, arguing that a vote for Trump was a vote for racism.

==Controversies==

===Sleepy&#x27;s===
In August 2009, the &quot;Courant&quot; attracted controversy over its firing of George Gombossy, a 40-year veteran of the paper and its consumer advocate at the time. Gombossy charged that the &quot;Courant&quot; had spiked an article he had written about an ongoing investigation by the Connecticut attorney general accusing Sleepy&#x27;s (a major advertiser in the paper) of selling used and bedbug-infested mattresses as new.

Gombossy&#x27;s lawsuit against the &quot;Courant&quot; was thrown out by a Connecticut Superior Court judge in July 2010. In his decision, Judge Marshall K. Berger Jr. remarked that newspaper owners and editors have a &quot;paramount&quot; right to &quot;control [the] content of their papers,&quot; further observing that in his role at the &quot;Courant&quot;, Gombossy had &quot;no constitutional right to publish anything.&quot;

However, Gombossy&#x27;s attorneys filed a second complaint, and Judge Berger reinstated the complaint. The case headed to trial in the fall of 2011. &quot;In late 2011 the suit was resolved,&quot; according to Gombossy&#x27;s CTWatchdog website.

===Plagiarism===
In September 2009 the &quot;Courant&#x27;s&quot; publisher, Richard Graziano, publicly apologized as the newspaper accepted a plagiarism charge. Competitors had accused the &quot;Courant&quot; of taking its content without permission and refusing to give proper credit.

===Website blockage in the European Union===
In 2018, the &quot;Hartford Courant&quot; began banning users of the internet in the European Union from accessing its website because of its absence of data protection compliance.

==References==
==Further reading==
* McNulty, J. Bard. &quot;Older than the Nation: The Story of the&quot; Hartford Courant (1964).
* Smith, J. Eugene. &quot;100 Years of Hartford&#x27;s&quot; Courant&quot;: From Colonial Times through the Civil War&quot; (1949).

==External links==
*&quot;Columbia Journalism Review&#x27;s&quot; &quot;Who Owns What&quot; page about media companies.
*https://twitter.com/hartfordcourant
*hartfordcourantnews on YouTube</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q11032" start="42" end="51" title="newspaper" label="newspaper"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="59" end="69" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q779" start="73" end="84" title="Connecticut" label="Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="158" end="171" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q49145" start="228" end="237" title="New Haven" label="New Haven"/>
<link wikidata="Q49178" start="250" end="259" title="Waterbury, Connecticut" label="Waterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q33486" start="297" end="318" title="Hartford, Connecticut" label="Hartford, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126213" start="345" end="358" title="Connecticut State Capitol" label="state capitol"/>
<link wikidata="Q55665904" start="482" end="487" title="CTNow" label="CTNow"/>
<link wikidata="Q28227711" start="687" end="707" title="Times Mirror Company" label="Times Mirror Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140077" start="751" end="766" title="Tribune Company" label="Tribune Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q7956189" start="871" end="889" title="WTIC-TV" label="television station"/>
<link wikidata="Q7840491" start="991" end="1009" title="Tribune Publishing" label="Tribune Publishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7840491" start="1053" end="1071" title="Tribune Publishing" label="Tribune Publishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q54954123" start="1115" end="1135" title="Alden Global Capital" label="Alden Global Capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q1916145" start="1181" end="1200" title="Digital First Media" label="Digital First Media"/>
<link wikidata="Q4051209" start="2554" end="2579" title="The New Hampshire Gazette" label="The New Hampshire Gazette"/>
<link wikidata="Q211374" start="2876" end="2889" title="New York Post" label="New York Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q3522349" start="3258" end="3280" title="The Providence Journal" label="The Providence Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q240188" start="3728" end="3749" title="Joseph Roswell Hawley" label="Joseph Roswell Hawley"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="3761" end="3771" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q29529315" start="3794" end="3817" title="governor of Connecticut" label="governor of Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q55720422" start="4092" end="4106" title="Emile Gauvreau" label="Emile Gauvreau"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4230" end="4243" title="Charles Hopkins Clark" label="Charles Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q6806503" start="4356" end="4372" title="Medical degree" label="medical diplomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="4427" end="4440" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1449648" start="4441" end="4448" title="Tabloid (newspaper format)" label="tabloid"/>
<link wikidata="Q13468437" start="4461" end="4477" title="Roaring Twenties" label="Roaring Twenties"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068933" start="4491" end="4506" title="managing editor" label="managing editor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7013581" start="4514" end="4538" title="New York Evening Graphic" label="New York Evening Graphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3339058" start="4572" end="4587" title="New York Mirror" label="New York Mirror"/>
<link wikidata="Q16008152" start="4665" end="4680" title="Herbert Brucker" label="Herbert Brucker"/>
<link wikidata="Q28227711" start="4754" end="4766" title="Times Mirror Company" label="Times Mirror"/>
<link wikidata="Q188515" start="4778" end="4795" title="Los Angeles Times" label="Los Angeles Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q46525" start="5276" end="5290" title="Pulitzer Prize" label="Pulitzer Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q2513" start="5328" end="5350" title="Hubble Space Telescope" label="Hubble Space Telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q5161568" start="5495" end="5509" title="Connecticut Lottery shooting" label="murder-suicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q5161568" start="5534" end="5553" title="Connecticut Lottery" label="Connecticut Lottery"/>
<link wikidata="Q719825" start="5720" end="5734" title="Marciel Maciel" label="Marciel Maciel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140077" start="5831" end="5846" title="Tribune Company" label="Tribune Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q5209263" start="5951" end="5966" title="Valley Advocate" label="Valley Advocate"/>
<link wikidata="Q166419" start="6124" end="6127" title="Fox Broadcasting Company" label="Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q7956189" start="6138" end="6145" title="WTIC-TV" label="WTIC-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q212252" start="6150" end="6156" title="The CW" label="The CW"/>
<link wikidata="Q7947677" start="6167" end="6174" title="WCCT-TV" label="WCCT-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296881" start="6263" end="6286" title="Society for News Design" label="Society for News Design"/>
<link wikidata="" start="6499" end="6543" title="Exposé: America&amp;#x27;s Investigative Reports" label="Exposé: America&amp;#x27;s Investigative Reports"/>
<link wikidata="Q7311808" start="8013" end="8025" title="ReminderNews" label="ReminderNews"/>
<link wikidata="Q824451" start="8737" end="8753" title="The Boston Globe" label="The Boston Globe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2276678" start="9075" end="9097" title="Springfield Republican" label="Springfield Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q7840491" start="9141" end="9159" title="Tribune Publishing" label="Tribune Publishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2513" start="10686" end="10708" title="Hubble Space Telescope" label="Hubble Space Telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q754078" start="11290" end="11301" title="Willimantic, Connecticut" label="Willimantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q906933" start="11713" end="11750" title="Sandy Hook Elementary School shooting" label="Sandy Hook Elementary School shooting"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="11921" end="11935" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q327959" start="11948" end="11952" title="2000 United States presidential election" label="2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q464075" start="11961" end="11988" title="2004 United States presidential election" label="2004 Presidential elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="12059" end="12081" title="Barack Obama" label="President Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q4496" start="12116" end="12127" title="Mitt Romney" label="Mitt Romney"/>
<link wikidata="Q6294" start="12248" end="12263" title="Hillary Clinton" label="Hillary Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="12290" end="12302" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973878" start="12353" end="12363" title="Ned Lamont" label="Ned Lamont"/>
<link wikidata="Q6283351" start="12448" end="12457" title="Joe Ganim" label="Joe Ganim"/>
<link wikidata="Q7116421" start="12524" end="12534" title="Oz Griebel" label="Oz Griebel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6279" start="12652" end="12661" title="Joe Biden" label="Joe Biden"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="12688" end="12700" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q7577179" start="13107" end="13113" title="Spike (journalism)" label="spiked"/>
<link wikidata="Q5161480" start="13178" end="13206" title="Connecticut Attorney General" label="Connecticut attorney general"/>
<link wikidata="Q17088336" start="13216" end="13229" title="Sleepy&amp;#x27;s" label="Sleepy&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q5161627" start="13396" end="13422" title="Connecticut Superior Court" label="Connecticut Superior Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q19853509" start="14384" end="14413" title="geo-blocking" label="banning users of the internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="14421" end="14435" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172506" start="14489" end="14504" title="General Data Protection Regulation" label="data protection"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="308652" wikidata="Q3366892" url="?curid=308652" title="Proof game">
<text>A proof game is a type of retrograde analysis chess problem. The solver must construct a game starting from the initial chess position, which ends with a given position (thus proving that that position is reachable) after a specified number of moves. A proof game is called a shortest proof game if no shorter solution exists. In this case the task is simply to construct a shortest possible game ending with the given position.

When published, shortest proof games will normally present the solver with a diagram - which is the final position to be reached - and a caption such as &quot;SPG in 9.0&quot;. &quot;SPG&quot; here is short for &quot;shortest proof game&quot; and the &quot;9.0&quot; indicates how many moves must be played to reach the position; 9.0 means the position is reached after black&#x27;s ninth move, 7.5 would mean the position is reached after seven and a half moves (that is, after white&#x27;s eighth move) and so on. Sometimes the caption may be more verbose, for example &quot;Position after white&#x27;s seventh move. How did the game go?&quot;.

Most published SPGs will have only one solution: not only must the moves in the solution be unique, their order must also be unique. They can present quite a strong challenge to the solver, especially as assumptions which might be made from a glance at the initial position often turn out to be incorrect. For example, a piece apparently standing on its initial square may turn out to actually be a promoted pawn (this is known as the &quot;Pronkin&quot; theme). There are some proofgames which have more than one solution, and the number of solutions is then given in the stipulation. The majority of SPGs have a solution from about six to about thirty moves, although examples with unique solutions more than fifty moves long have been devised.

A number of chess problem composers have specialised in SPGs, with one of the most notable examples being Michel Caillaud who did much to popularise the genre in the 1970s and 1980s.

== Example problems==

A relatively simple example is given to the right. It is a version by Andrei Frolkin of a problem by Ernest Clement Mortimer, and was published in &quot;Shortest Proof Games&quot; (1991). It is an SPG in 4.0. It is natural to assume that the solution will involve the white knight leaving g1, capturing the d7 and e7 pawns and the g8 knight, and then being captured itself, but in fact the solution carries an element of paradox quite common in SPGs: it is the knight that started on b8 that has been captured and the knight now on that square has come from g8. The solution (the only possible way to reach the position after four moves) is 1. Nf3 e5 2. Nxe5 Ne7 3. Nxd7 Nec6 4. Nxb8 Nxb8.

A more complex proofgame, with more solutions, can be seen in the second diagram. The solutions are: 1. b4 h5 2. b5 Rh6 3. b6 Rc6 4. bxc7 Rxc2 5. cxb8=Q Rxd2 6. Qd6 Rxd1 7. Qxd1 and 3. ... Rd6 4. bxc7 Rxd2 5. cxb8=B Rxc2 6. Bbf4 Rxc1 7. Bxc1, showing the Pronkin theme in both solutions (in the first solution with a queen, in the second solution with a bishop).

== Variations==
There are a number of variations on SPGs. The problem may carry a stipulation similar to &quot;Find a game with 8.b7-b8=N mate&quot;, which simply means a game must be constructed starting from the initial position and ending on the given move number with the given move. Or it may be a &quot;one-sided proof game&quot;, in which only white makes moves (this is the SPG analogue to the &quot;seriesmover&quot; in other types of chess problems). An alternative rule-set may also be specified (such as circe chess or losing chess), or a fairy piece may be substituted for an orthodox piece.

An SPG-type problem is to find the shortest game in which White&#x27;s and Black&#x27;s corresponding moves are mirror images of each other. Possible solutions are 1. d4 d5 2. Qd3 Qd6 3. Qh3 Qh6 4. Qxc8#, 1. d4 d5 2. Qd3 Qd6 3. Qf5 Qf4 4. Qxc8#, and 1. c4 c5 2. Qa4 Qa5 3. Qc6 Qc3 4. Qxc8#.

==See also==
* Retrograde analysis

==Further reading==
*Gerd Wilts and Andrei Frolkin, &quot;Shortest Proof Games&quot; (1991) – published in Germany but written in English. Includes 170 examples.

==External links==
*The Retrograde Analysis Corner - includes many SPGs and notes
*Natch - a shortest proof game solving program
*Introduction - an introduction to proof games.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3366892" start="2" end="12" title="Proof game" label="proof game"/>
<link wikidata="Q2082711" start="26" end="45" title="retrograde analysis" label="retrograde analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q211115" start="46" end="59" title="chess problem" label="chess problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q718" start="120" end="125" title="chess" label="chess"/>
<link wikidata="Q3366892" start="276" end="295" title="Proof game" label="shortest proof game"/>
<link wikidata="Q356394" start="1932" end="1947" title="Michel Caillaud" label="Michel Caillaud"/>
<link wikidata="Q7454824" start="3496" end="3507" title="seriesmover" label="seriesmover"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092765" start="3604" end="3615" title="circe chess" label="circe chess"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003361" start="3619" end="3631" title="losing chess" label="losing chess"/>
<link wikidata="Q282112" start="3639" end="3650" title="fairy piece" label="fairy piece"/>
<link wikidata="Q2082711" start="4001" end="4020" title="Retrograde analysis" label="Retrograde analysis"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="308659" wikidata="Q1257081" url="?curid=308659" title="Three Comrades (novel)">
<text>Three Comrades () is a 1936 novel by the German author Erich Maria Remarque. It is written in first person by the main character Robert Lohkamp, whose somewhat disillusioned outlook on life is due to his horrifying experiences in the trenches of the First World War&#x27;s French-German front. He shares these experiences with Otto Köster and Gottfried Lenz, his two comrades with whom he runs an auto-repair shop in what may be late-1920s Hamburg. Remarque wrote the novel in exile and it was first published in the Danish translation; the English translation followed soon, being serialised in &quot;Good Housekeeping&quot; from January to March 1937, and in the book form later in the year. The first German language edition was published in 1938 by publisher &quot;Querido&quot; in Amsterdam, but the novel was published in Germany only in 1951.

==Plot==
Hamburg is crowded by a growing number of jobless and marked by increasing violence between left and right. The novel starts in the seedy milieu of bars where prostitutes mingle with the hopeless flotsam that the war left behind. While Robert and his friends manage to make a living dealing cars and driving an old taxi, economic survival in the city is getting harder by the day. It is in this setting that Robert meets Patrice Hollmann, a mysterious, beautiful, young woman with an upper-middle-class background. Their love affair intensifies as he introduces her to his life of bars and races and Robert&#x27;s nihilistic attitude slowly begins to change as he realizes how much he needs Pat.

The story takes an abrupt turn as Pat suffers a near-fatal lung hemorrhage during a summer holiday at the sea. Upon their return, Robert and Pat move in with each other, but she is scheduled to leave for a Swiss mountain sanatorium come winter. It is this temporal limitation of their happiness which makes their remaining time together so precious.

After Pat has left for Switzerland, the political situation in the city becomes heated, and Lenz, one of the comrades, is killed by a militant, not mentioned in the book by the actual name but supposed to be a Nazi. On top of this, Otto and Robert face bankruptcy and have to sell their workshop. In the midst of this misfortune, a telegram arrives informing them of Pat&#x27;s worsening state of health. The two remaining comrades don&#x27;t hesitate and drive the thousand kilometers to the sanatorium in the Alps to see her.

Reunited, Robert and an increasingly moribund Pat celebrate their remaining weeks before her inevitable death amid the snow-covered summits of Switzerland. It is in the last part of the book that this love story finds closure and leaves the main character, a nihilist who has found love, forever changed.

==Film, TV, and theatrical adaptations==
The novel was adapted in America as &quot;Three Comrades&quot;, a 1938 film starring Franchot Tone, Robert Taylor, Robert Young and Margaret Sullavan.

&quot;Flowers from the Victors&quot; (1999), directed by Aleksander Surin, also was based on the novel but set in Russia in the 1990s.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q47293" start="55" end="75" title="Erich Maria Remarque" label="Erich Maria Remarque"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="250" end="265" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055" start="440" end="447" title="Hamburg" label="Hamburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q174941" start="602" end="619" title="Good Housekeeping" label="Good Housekeeping"/>
<link wikidata="Q80968" start="1474" end="1484" title="nihilism" label="nihilistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040470" start="2826" end="2840" title="Three Comrades (1938 film)" label="Three Comrades"/>
<link wikidata="Q457229" start="2869" end="2882" title="Franchot Tone" label="Franchot Tone"/>
<link wikidata="Q145132" start="2884" end="2897" title="Robert Taylor (American actor)" label="Robert Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q516390" start="2899" end="2911" title="Robert Young (actor)" label="Robert Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q238036" start="2916" end="2933" title="Margaret Sullavan" label="Margaret Sullavan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2993" end="3009" title="Aleksander Surin" label="Aleksander Surin"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="308662" wikidata="Q3774" url="?curid=308662" title="Chillán">
<text>Chillán () is the capital city of Ñuble Region, Diguillín Province, Chile, located about south of the country&#x27;s capital, Santiago, near the center of the country. It has been the capital of the new Ñuble Region since 6 September 2015. Within the city is a railway station, an intercity bus terminal named María Teresa, and a regimental military base. The city features a modern, enclosed shopping centre in addition to the Chillán Market, an iconic multi-block, open-air farmers&#x27; market and street fair where fruits, vegetables, crafts, clothing and other goods are sold. The nearby mountains, such as in Laguna del Laja National Park (Spanish: &quot;Parque Nacional Laguna del Laja&quot;) and the &quot;Nevados de Chillán&quot; (English: &#x27;snowy peaks of Chillán&#x27;) are popular destinations for skiing, hiking and hot springs.

Founded by the Spanish in 1580, the city withstood numerous early attacks by the indigenous Mapuche and Pehuenche, among other peoples, who were vehemently opposed to Spanish colonialism. Over time, Chillán became an important marketplace and meeting-point for the descendants of these Mapuche and Pehuenche, along with Mestizos and Criollos, to meet. Many goods from Patagonia and the Argentine Pampas were brought into Chillán across the mountain passes of the area. In the early 19th century, the countryside of Chillán was ravaged by the Chilean War of Independence and a subsequent banditry epidemic. In 1939, the city was devastated by a large earthquake, prompting the government to initiate an extensive reconstruction program.

==History==

The zone where Chillán was built was previously inhabited by indigenous people called Chiquillanes.

According to Friar Ernesto Wilhelm de Moesbach Chillán is etymologically derived from &quot;chilla&quot;, an indigenous word for the South American gray fox.

Chillán was founded in 1580 at the site of Chillán Viejo as San Bartolomé de Chillán by Martín Ruiz de Gamboa,
who was campaigning against the local indigenous peoples at the time, but this moniker did not fare well, and was replaced by the current name, which in the local Indian language means &quot;where the Sun is sitting&quot;.

During the Mapuche uprising of 1655, the city was besieged by Mapuche warriors. The Spanish defended the city from trenches and a palisade fort. Hoping for a miracle, the Spaniards put an image of Mary near the trenches, against which Mapuches are said to have shot arrows. In early March, about one month after the onset of uprising, distress was such that the Spaniards abandoned the city and headed north, escaping the conflict zone. The Real Audiencia of Santiago declared the evacuation an act of cowardice, and prohibited refugees from Chillán to go beyond the Maule River north. As an outbreak of smallpox occurred among the refugees, this was. in effect. a quarantine, as trespassing north was punished with death sentences.

From its foundation, Chillán has been at the heart of Chile&#x27;s rich agricultural region. It is also in a region of seismic activity, suffering from devastating earthquakes throughout its history; the 1939 Chillán earthquake left over 30,000 dead and mobilized international help.

Chile&#x27;s founding father, Bernardo O&#x27;Higgins, was born in Chillán in 1778. He was the force behind Chile&#x27;s Independence from Spain, being elected supreme director and declaring independence after the Battle of Chacabuco against the Spaniards in 1817. His later victory at the Maipo battlefield cemented the country&#x27;s freedom. He died in exile in Peru in 1842.

==Climate==
Chillán has a Mediterranean climate (Köppen climate classification &quot;Csb&quot;). Winters are cool but mild, with a July average of . Most of the precipitation falls during this time of the year, with May to July being the wettest months, averaging over . Summers, though, are dry and warm, with a January average of , and during this time, precipitation is rare, averaging only 2–3 days per month from December to February. Temperatures can occasionally exceed from October to April. The average annual precipitation is , but it is highly variable from year to year, with 1982 being the wettest year at and 1998 being the driest year at only .

The air in Chillán is the fourth-most polluted in Chile, after Santiago, Temuco, and Concepción. &quot;As in Temuco, the main cause of air pollution in Chillán is the use of wood-burning stoves; about 62% of all households in Chillán use firewood as their main source of heating.&quot;

==Demographics==
According to the 2002 census by the National Statistics Institute, the commune of Chillán spans an area of and has 161,953 inhabitants (77,007 men and 84,946 women). Of these, 148,015 (91.4%) lived in urban areas and 13,938 (8.6%) in rural areas. The population grew by 8.3% (12,442 persons) between the 1992 and 2002 censuses.

The demonym for a person from Chillán, used for more than 400 years by local residents, is &quot;Chillanejo&quot;, yet this is not found in the Royal Spanish Academy Dictionary, which only recognizes &quot;Chillanense&quot;.

===Notable people===

Isabel Riquelme, mother of Chilean independence leader Bernardo O&#x27;Higgins, was born in Chillán in 1758. María Cornelia Olivares, one of the national heroines of the Chilean War of Independence, was also from the city. In addition, Chillán has produced a number of artists. A notable example is Claudio Arrau, a pianist. Additionally, Ramón Vinay is the tenor who played Otello in the 1950s, his recording of the role with Toscanini. He was a regular at the New York City Metropolitan Opera, where he sang both tenor and baritone roles. One of his last performances at this house was as the Barber of Seville&#x27;s Basilio, a bass role. He retired from the stage in 1969.

Other &quot;Chillanejos&quot; include writer Marta Brunet, sculptor Marta Colvin, painter Pacheco Altamirano, and Juan de Dios Aldea, who, however, did not reach the international acclaim achieved by Arrau and Vinay. &quot;Super Smash Bros.&quot; player Gonzalo &quot;ZeRo&quot; Barrios who had a record-breaking 56-tournament winning streak is also from Chillán.

==Administration==
As a commune, Chillán is a third-level administrative division of Chile administered by a municipal council, headed by an &quot;alcalde&quot;, who is directly elected every four years. The 2008-2020 &quot;alcalde&quot; is Sergio Zarzar Andonie (ILE).

Within the electoral divisions of Chile, Chillán is represented in the Chamber of Deputies by Carlos Abel Jarpa (PRSD) and Rosauro Martínez (RN) as part of the 41st electoral district, together with Coihueco, Pinto, San Ignacio, El Carmen, Pemuco, Yungay and Chillán Viejo. The commune is represented in the Senate by Victor Pérez Varela (UDI) and Felipe Harboe (PPD) as part of the 13th senatorial constituency (Biobío-Coast).

==Transport==
The city of Chillán is connected to Chile&#x27;s capital Santiago by both a modern highway and a rebuilt railway system TerraSur that makes the trip in less than five hours. TerraSur, which terminates in Chillán station, and the Alameda-Temuco train both operate on the railway connecting Chillan with Rancagua and Santiago.

==Gallery==
==See also==
* Termas de Chillán

==References==
;Bibliography

==External links==

* Municipality of Chillán
* City map
* Chillán &amp; Ñuble Fotográfico en Flickr</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3774" start="0" end="7" title="Chillán" label="Chillán"/>
<link wikidata="Q490055" start="26" end="30" title="List of cities in Chile" label="city"/>
<link wikidata="Q24076693" start="34" end="46" title="Ñuble Region" label="Ñuble Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q25916666" start="48" end="66" title="Diguillín Province" label="Diguillín Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q298" start="68" end="73" title="Chile" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q2887" start="126" end="134" title="Santiago" label="Santiago"/>
<link wikidata="Q24076693" start="203" end="215" title="Ñuble Region" label="Ñuble Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q493016" start="281" end="294" title="Intercity bus service" label="intercity bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522620" start="476" end="496" title="farmers&amp;#x27; market" label="farmers&amp;#x27; market"/>
<link wikidata="Q16911654" start="615" end="644" title="Laguna del Laja National Park" label="Laguna del Laja National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="646" end="653" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q2439886" start="714" end="732" title="Nevados de Chillán" label="Nevados de Chillán"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="740" end="747" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q130949" start="814" end="820" title="skiing" label="skiing"/>
<link wikidata="Q177380" start="833" end="844" title="hot spring" label="hot springs"/>
<link wikidata="Q636771" start="862" end="869" title="Spanish conquest of the Inca Empire" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q178484" start="939" end="946" title="Mapuche" label="Mapuche"/>
<link wikidata="Q2067521" start="951" end="960" title="Pehuenche" label="Pehuenche"/>
<link wikidata="Q431806" start="1003" end="1033" title="Arauco War" label="opposed to Spanish colonialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q106713" start="1167" end="1174" title="Mestizo" label="Mestizo"/>
<link wikidata="Q16242047" start="1180" end="1188" title="Criollo people" label="Criollos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507" start="1215" end="1224" title="Patagonia" label="Patagonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q184382" start="1233" end="1249" title="Pampas" label="Argentine Pampas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072889" start="1389" end="1416" title="Chilean War of Independence" label="Chilean War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q85745165" start="1434" end="1451" title="banditry in Chile" label="banditry epidemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3311679" start="1489" end="1507" title="1939 Chillán earthquake" label="a large earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1683" end="1695" title="Chiquillanes" label="Chiquillanes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1717" end="1744" title="Ernesto Wilhelm de Moesbach" label="Ernesto Wilhelm de Moesbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q601913" start="1831" end="1854" title="South American gray fox" label="South American gray fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q3779" start="1900" end="1913" title="Chillán Viejo" label="Chillán Viejo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353329" start="1945" end="1966" title="Martín Ruiz de Gamboa" label="Martín Ruiz de Gamboa"/>
<link wikidata="Q85783755" start="2203" end="2227" title="Mapuche uprising of 1655" label="Mapuche uprising of 1655"/>
<link wikidata="Q2134682" start="2633" end="2659" title="Real Audiencia of Santiago" label="Real Audiencia of Santiago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479360" start="2759" end="2770" title="Maule River" label="Maule River"/>
<link wikidata="Q12214" start="2796" end="2804" title="smallpox" label="smallpox"/>
<link wikidata="Q3311679" start="3130" end="3153" title="1939 Chillán earthquake" label="1939 Chillán earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q343436" start="3224" end="3239" title="List of national founders" label="founding father"/>
<link wikidata="Q28930" start="3241" end="3264" title="Bernardo O&amp;#x27;Higgins" label="Bernardo O&amp;#x27;Higgins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072889" start="3319" end="3344" title="Chilean War of Independence" label="Chile&amp;#x27;s Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="3350" end="3355" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q466956" start="3371" end="3387" title="President of Chile" label="supreme director"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425658" start="3425" end="3444" title="Battle of Chacabuco" label="Battle of Chacabuco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073849" start="3501" end="3506" title="Battle of Maipú" label="Maipo"/>
<link wikidata="Q419" start="3576" end="3580" title="Peru" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3617" end="3638" title="Mediterranean climate#Warm-summer Mediterranean climate" label="Mediterranean climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="3640" end="3669" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen climate classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q2887" start="4315" end="4323" title="Santiago" label="Santiago"/>
<link wikidata="Q82128" start="4325" end="4331" title="Temuco" label="Temuco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1880" start="4337" end="4347" title="Concepción, Chile" label="Concepción"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="4578" end="4584" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q3288549" start="4592" end="4621" title="National Statistics Institute (Chile)" label="National Statistics Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q702492" start="4757" end="4767" title="urban area" label="urban area"/>
<link wikidata="Q175185" start="4790" end="4800" title="rural area" label="rural area"/>
<link wikidata="Q217438" start="4889" end="4896" title="demonym" label="demonym"/>
<link wikidata="Q11683721" start="5133" end="5148" title="Isabel Riquelme" label="Isabel Riquelme"/>
<link wikidata="Q15712182" start="5242" end="5265" title="María Cornelia Olivares" label="María Cornelia Olivares"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072889" start="5303" end="5330" title="Chilean War of Independence" label="Chilean War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q160223" start="5432" end="5445" title="Claudio Arrau" label="Claudio Arrau"/>
<link wikidata="Q486748" start="5449" end="5456" title="pianist" label="pianist"/>
<link wikidata="Q748221" start="5472" end="5483" title="Ramón Vinay" label="Ramón Vinay"/>
<link wikidata="Q172324" start="5508" end="5514" title="Otello" label="Otello"/>
<link wikidata="Q10583424" start="5609" end="5627" title="Metropolitan Opera" label="Metropolitan Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q208659" start="5728" end="5745" title="Barber of Seville" label="Barber of Seville"/>
<link wikidata="Q275648" start="5856" end="5868" title="Marta Brunet" label="Marta Brunet"/>
<link wikidata="Q578443" start="5879" end="5891" title="Marta Colvin" label="Marta Colvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4801777" start="5901" end="5919" title="Pacheco Altamirano" label="Pacheco Altamirano"/>
<link wikidata="Q9016099" start="5925" end="5943" title="Juan de Dios Aldea" label="Juan de Dios Aldea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2778220" start="6034" end="6051" title="Super Smash Bros." label="Super Smash Bros."/>
<link wikidata="Q19880053" start="6065" end="6097" title="Gonzalo &amp;quot;ZeRo&amp;quot; Barrios" label="Gonzalo &amp;quot;ZeRo&amp;quot; Barrios"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365122" start="6234" end="6266" title="administrative division of Chile" label="administrative division of Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q701632" start="6285" end="6302" title="municipal council" label="municipal council"/>
<link wikidata="Q5663900" start="6323" end="6330" title="alcalde" label="alcalde"/>
<link wikidata="Q7454460" start="6417" end="6438" title="Sergio Zarzar Andonie" label="Sergio Zarzar Andonie"/>
<link wikidata="Q5356264" start="6458" end="6486" title="electoral divisions of Chile" label="electoral divisions of Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q2119518" start="6518" end="6537" title="Chamber of Deputies of Chile" label="Chamber of Deputies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1549779" start="6560" end="6564" title="Social Democrat Radical Party" label="PRSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422826" start="6588" end="6590" title="National Renewal (Chile)" label="RN"/>
<link wikidata="Q3814" start="6646" end="6654" title="Coihueco" label="Coihueco"/>
<link wikidata="Q51106" start="6656" end="6661" title="Pinto, Chile" label="Pinto"/>
<link wikidata="Q187824" start="6663" end="6674" title="San Ignacio, Chile" label="San Ignacio"/>
<link wikidata="Q13037" start="6676" end="6685" title="El Carmen, Chile" label="El Carmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q51090" start="6687" end="6693" title="Pemuco" label="Pemuco"/>
<link wikidata="Q201056" start="6695" end="6701" title="Yungay, Chile" label="Yungay"/>
<link wikidata="Q3779" start="6706" end="6719" title="Chillán Viejo" label="Chillán Viejo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2119458" start="6755" end="6761" title="Senate of Chile" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q602131" start="6786" end="6789" title="Independent Democratic Union" label="UDI"/>
<link wikidata="Q3068132" start="6795" end="6808" title="Felipe Harboe" label="Felipe Harboe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759292" start="6810" end="6813" title="Party for Democracy (Chile)" label="PPD"/>
<link wikidata="Q2405077" start="7010" end="7018" title="TerraSur" label="TerraSur"/>
<link wikidata="Q28163126" start="7119" end="7139" title="Alameda railway station" label="Alameda-Temuco train"/>
<link wikidata="Q4582" start="7192" end="7200" title="Rancagua" label="Rancagua"/>
<link wikidata="Q2887" start="7205" end="7213" title="Santiago" label="Santiago"/>
<link wikidata="Q631906" start="7243" end="7260" title="Termas de Chillán" label="Termas de Chillán"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="308665" wikidata="Q2389056" url="?curid=308665" title="Euston Tower">
<text>Euston Tower is a skyscraper located on Euston Road in the London Borough of Camden. To its east is Hampstead Road.

==History==
The site was developed by Joe Levy who bought properties along the north side of Euston Road to enable him to build a complex of two tower blocks with office shops and apartments. The building, which was designed by Sidney Kaye Eric Firmin &amp; Partners in the International style and built by George Wimpey, was completed in 1970. It is 36-storeys and high. Early tenants included Inmarsat and Capital Radio.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2389056" start="0" end="12" title="Euston Tower" label="Euston Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q11303" start="18" end="28" title="skyscraper" label="skyscraper"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308692" start="40" end="51" title="Euston Road" label="Euston Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q202088" start="59" end="83" title="London Borough of Camden" label="London Borough of Camden"/>
<link wikidata="Q4649212" start="100" end="114" title="Hampstead Road, London" label="Hampstead Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q162324" start="391" end="410" title="International Style (architecture)" label="International style"/>
<link wikidata="Q5546426" start="424" end="437" title="George Wimpey" label="George Wimpey"/>
<link wikidata="Q827927" start="512" end="520" title="Inmarsat" label="Inmarsat"/>
<link wikidata="Q5035608" start="525" end="538" title="Capital London" label="Capital Radio"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="308670" wikidata="Q732693" url="?curid=308670" title="Dave Barrett">
<text>David Barrett (October 2, 1930 – February 2, 2018) was a Canadian politician and social worker in British Columbia. A member of the British Columbia New Democratic Party (BCNDP), he was the 26th premier of British Columbia from 1972 to 1975. He was the first NDP premier in the province.

==Early life and career==
Barrett was born in Vancouver, British Columbia, the son of Rose and Samuel Barrett, a peddler. His family was Jewish. His mother was from Odesa, and his paternal grandparents were immigrants from Russia.

Barrett described his father as a Fabian socialist and his mother as a Communist who voted CCF.

Barrett graduated from Seattle University with a degree in philosophy. He returned to Vancouver in 1953 after graduating and married Shirley Hackman. The couple then moved to St. Louis, Missouri, where Barrett attended St Louis University and earned a master&#x27;s degree in social work.

The couple and their two children (a third would be born in 1960) returned to British Columbia in 1957 where he found work at Haney Correctional Institute as a personnel and staff training officer. He was asked to run for the Co-operative Commonwealth Federation after giving a party member a tour of the facility.

==Political career==
===Election to the legislature===
Barrett was first elected to British Columbia&#x27;s legislature in the 1960 election as a Co-operative Commonwealth Federation (soon to become the New Democratic Party of British Columbia) member for the electoral district of Dewdney. He had been fired from his job by the provincial government in 1959 after it became known that he was running for a CCF nomination and had to fight for reinstatement as at the time civil servants were barred from running for office.

He became known for his public speaking ability and held his seat through four elections. He ran for the provincial leadership of the NDP, but lost to Tom Berger. However, Berger lost the 1969 election, a contest that the NDP had been expected to win. He resigned, and there was a quick campaign to draft Barrett as party leader.

===Premier===
Barrett led the NDP to its first provincial victory against the stagnating Social Credit government of W. A. C. Bennett in the 1972 election. He became Premier on September 15, 1972.

The Barrett government substantially reformed the welfare system, initiated a number of reforms such as establishing the province&#x27;s Labour Relations Board, the Insurance Corporation of British Columbia (ICBC) in order to provide public auto insurance and the Agricultural Land Reserve (ALR) to protect the small supply of farmland in BC, all of which were retained by subsequent Social Credit and Liberal governments. The NDP also introduced more democracy into the Legislative Assembly of British Columbia through the introduction of question period and full Hansard transcripts of legislative proceedings in the province.

On social policy, in 1973, B.C. banned corporal punishment in all schools. It also banned pay toilets, launched Pharmacare, increased the minimum wage, preserved Cypress Bowl for recreation, established the BC Ambulance Service, passed the &quot;Human Rights Code&quot;, consumer protection laws, and introduced French immersion in schools.

Barrett&#x27;s government also introduced a mineral royalties tax, which inflamed the mining industry and helped mobilize it into organizing to defeat the NDP electorally.

The Barrett government also created the provincial Crown Counsel prosecutorial service, centralizing prosecution control with the provincial Attorney General and removing it from local or municipal administration. The government also removed police stations from courthouses, emphasizing the separate functions of police and courts.

The NDP passed 367 bills, an average of a new law every three days, while in power.

===Return to Opposition===
Barrett called a snap election in 1975, and was defeated by the Social Credit Party, then led by Bill Bennett, son of the man Barrett had defeated in the previous election. Bennett&#x27;s campaign focused on attacking the Barrett government&#x27;s handling of provincial finances. Businesses and other free market supporters had united the opposition to the NDP under a revitalized Social Credit with both Liberal and Conservative (MLAs) crossing the floor to join the Socreds prior to the election.

In terms of raw numbers (but not percentage), the NDP increased its popular vote in the 1975 election. However, its vote outside of the Vancouver area plummeted, costing it 20 seats and its majority. Barrett was personally defeated in the Coquitlam seat he had held since its creation in a 1965 redistribution, losing to Socred challenger George Herman Kerster by only 18 votes. In June 1976, he was returned to the legislature in a by-election in Vancouver East, after sitting NDP MLA Robert Arthur Williams stepped aside. He remained an MLA for that riding until 1984, continuing to lead the NDP against Bennett&#x27;s Socreds in the 1979 and 1983 elections.

On October 6, 1983, Barrett was forcibly removed from the Legislative Assembly chamber by the Serjeant-at-Arms, during a raucous debate on the Social Credit government&#x27;s austerity program, for failing to abide by the Speaker&#x27;s ruling and was banned from the legislature for several months. This was the first incident in the legislature&#x27;s history where security staff had to intervene and remove a member from chamber.

===Federal politics===
Barrett was elected Member of Parliament for the riding of Esquimalt—Juan de Fuca in 1988. He ran for the leadership of the federal New Democratic Party in 1989, losing narrowly on the fourth ballot to Audrey McLaughlin at the party&#x27;s leadership convention. Rival candidate Simon De Jong agreed to support Barrett in exchange for being named Party Whip. De Jong forgot that he was wearing a microphone as part of a CBC documentary on the convention and the back-room discussions leaked to the press. The surrounding controversy hurt De Jong but was short-lived. During the campaign, Barrett argued that the party should be concerned with Western alienation, rather than focusing its attention on Quebec. The Quebec leadership of the NDP strongly opposed Barrett&#x27;s candidacy, and future Quebec MP Phil Edmonston threatened to resign from the party if Barrett became leader.

During contentious attempts to amend Canada&#x27;s constitution, Barrett opposed the 1987 Meech Lake Accord, but reluctantly endorsed the 1992 Charlottetown Accord to comply with party policy. He later referred to the party&#x27;s support for the Accord as a mistake.

He lost his seat in the 1993 federal election to Reform Party candidate Keith Martin.

==Post-political life==
From 1998 to 2000, Barrett chaired two inquiries into the Leaky condo crisis in BC entitled &quot;The Commission of Inquiry into the Quality of Condominium Construction in British Columbia.&quot; The first of what became known as the &quot;Barrett Commissions&quot; was to investigate the cause of the crisis and make recommendations to prevent reoccurrence. The second was to make recommendations following the collapse of the New Home Warranty program.

Barrett retired from active politics and, for health reasons beginning in 2010, from public life altogether. In 2000, Barrett was appointed to American Income Life Insurance Company&#x27;s Labour Advisory Board as an Honorary Member. In 2003, he supported Bill Blaikie&#x27;s bid to become leader of the federal NDP. In 2005, he was made an Officer of the Order of Canada, and in 2012 a member of the Order of British Columbia. In 2014, it was announced that Barrett had Alzheimer&#x27;s disease and was living in a care facility in Victoria, British Columbia. He died on February 2, 2018, aged 87.

A state memorial service was held for former B.C. premier Dave Barrett. The service took place at the University of Victoria&#x27;s Farquhar Auditorium on Saturday, March 3, 2018 at 10 a.m.

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q732693" start="0" end="13" title="Dave Barrett" label="David Barrett"/>
<link wikidata="Q82955" start="66" end="76" title="politician" label="politician"/>
<link wikidata="Q205398" start="81" end="92" title="social work" label="social work"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973" start="98" end="114" title="British Columbia" label="British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q919052" start="132" end="169" title="British Columbia New Democratic Party" label="British Columbia New Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7240349" start="195" end="222" title="premier of British Columbia" label="premier of British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q24639" start="335" end="344" title="Vancouver" label="Vancouver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1874" start="454" end="459" title="Odesa" label="Odesa"/>
<link wikidata="Q192186" start="555" end="571" title="Fabian socialist" label="Fabian socialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="592" end="601" title="Communist" label="Communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q615873" start="641" end="659" title="Seattle University" label="Seattle University"/>
<link wikidata="Q24639" start="704" end="713" title="Vancouver" label="Vancouver"/>
<link wikidata="Q38022" start="793" end="812" title="St. Louis, Missouri" label="St. Louis, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q734774" start="837" end="856" title="St Louis University" label="St Louis University"/>
<link wikidata="Q919052" start="1134" end="1170" title="New Democratic Party of British Columbia" label="Co-operative Commonwealth Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969807" start="1351" end="1364" title="1960 British Columbia general election" label="1960 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q919052" start="1370" end="1406" title="New Democratic Party of British Columbia" label="Co-operative Commonwealth Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q919052" start="1427" end="1467" title="New Democratic Party of British Columbia" label="New Democratic Party of British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7793337" start="1900" end="1910" title="Thomas R. Berger" label="Tom Berger"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969809" start="1937" end="1950" title="1969 British Columbia general election" label="1969 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q827958" start="2169" end="2182" title="British Columbia Social Credit Party" label="Social Credit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2536629" start="2197" end="2213" title="W. A. C. Bennett" label="W. A. C. Bennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969810" start="2221" end="2234" title="1972 British Columbia general election" label="1972 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q823227" start="2246" end="2253" title="List of premiers of British Columbia" label="Premier"/>
<link wikidata="Q16986480" start="2443" end="2484" title="Insurance Corporation of British Columbia" label="Insurance Corporation of British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257697" start="2512" end="2533" title="public auto insurance" label="public auto insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q4693903" start="2542" end="2567" title="Agricultural Land Reserve (British Columbia)" label="Agricultural Land Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323479" start="2749" end="2789" title="Legislative Assembly of British Columbia" label="Legislative Assembly of British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q524352" start="2843" end="2850" title="Hansard" label="Hansard"/>
<link wikidata="Q305" start="2947" end="2966" title="corporal punishment" label="corporal punishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q4364593" start="2998" end="3008" title="pay toilet" label="pay toilet"/>
<link wikidata="Q85793035" start="3020" end="3030" title="Pharmacare" label="Pharmacare"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137200" start="3070" end="3082" title="Cypress Mountain Ski Area" label="Cypress Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969671" start="3115" end="3135" title="British Columbia Ambulance Service" label="BC Ambulance Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969712" start="3154" end="3171" title="Human Rights Code (British Columbia)" label="Human Rights Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q4492491" start="3220" end="3236" title="French immersion" label="French immersion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333366" start="3886" end="3899" title="snap election" label="snap election"/>
<link wikidata="Q360860" start="3966" end="3978" title="Bill Bennett" label="Bill Bennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969811" start="4458" end="4471" title="1975 British Columbia general election" label="1975 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q5540550" start="4709" end="4730" title="George Herman Kerster" label="George Herman Kerster"/>
<link wikidata="Q7341617" start="4856" end="4878" title="Robert Arthur Williams" label="Robert Arthur Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969812" start="5006" end="5010" title="1979 British Columbia general election" label="1979"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969814" start="5015" end="5029" title="1983 British Columbia general election" label="1983 elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q2611907" start="5126" end="5142" title="Serjeant-at-Arms" label="Serjeant-at-Arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q2814650" start="5207" end="5216" title="austerity" label="austerity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3058619" start="5549" end="5571" title="Esquimalt—Juan de Fuca" label="Esquimalt—Juan de Fuca"/>
<link wikidata="Q130765" start="5622" end="5642" title="New Democratic Party" label="New Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2870860" start="5692" end="5709" title="Audrey McLaughlin" label="Audrey McLaughlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7006909" start="5717" end="5751" title="1989 New Democratic Party leadership election" label="party&amp;#x27;s leadership convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q3484252" start="5769" end="5782" title="Simon De Jong" label="Simon De Jong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433693" start="5837" end="5847" title="Whip (politics)" label="Party Whip"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988461" start="6133" end="6151" title="Western alienation in Canada" label="Western alienation"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="6191" end="6197" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q593765" start="6296" end="6310" title="Phil Edmonston" label="Phil Edmonston"/>
<link wikidata="Q835352" start="6464" end="6481" title="Meech Lake Accord" label="Meech Lake Accord"/>
<link wikidata="Q2081029" start="6517" end="6537" title="Charlottetown Accord" label="Charlottetown Accord"/>
<link wikidata="Q374646" start="6667" end="6688" title="1993 Canadian federal election" label="1993 federal election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1680589" start="6692" end="6704" title="Reform Party of Canada" label="Reform Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3194748" start="6715" end="6727" title="Keith Martin (physician)" label="Keith Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q17009688" start="6812" end="6830" title="Leaky condo crisis" label="Leaky condo crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4744083" start="7353" end="7391" title="American Income Life Insurance Company" label="American Income Life Insurance Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q2903125" start="7466" end="7478" title="Bill Blaikie" label="Bill Blaikie"/>
<link wikidata="Q99700" start="7566" end="7581" title="Order of Canada" label="Order of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q687477" start="7611" end="7636" title="Order of British Columbia" label="Order of British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11081" start="7681" end="7705" title="Alzheimer&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Alzheimer&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q2132" start="7743" end="7769" title="Victoria, British Columbia" label="Victoria, British Columbia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="308673" wikidata="Q239823" url="?curid=308673" title="Chantal Akerman">
<text>Chantal Anne Akerman (; 6 June 19505 October 2015) was a Belgian film director, screenwriter, artist, and film professor at the City College of New York.

Akerman is best known for her films (1974), (1975), and &quot;News from Home&quot; (1976). The second of these was ranked the greatest film of all time in &quot;Sight &amp; Sound&quot; magazine&#x27;s 2022 &quot;Greatest Films of All Time&quot; critics poll, making her the first woman to top the poll. The other two films also appeared in the same poll.

==Early life and education==
Akerman was born in Brussels, Belgium, to Jewish Holocaust survivors from Poland. She was the older sister of Sylviane Akerman, her only sibling. Her mother, Natalia (Nelly), survived for years at Auschwitz, where her own parents were murdered. From a young age, Akerman and her mother were exceptionally close, and her mother encouraged her to pursue a career rather than marry young.

At age 18, Akerman entered the , a Belgian film school. She dropped out during her first term to make the short film , funding it by trading diamond shares on the Antwerp stock exchange.

==Work==

===Early work and influences===
At age 15, Akerman&#x27;s viewing of Jean-Luc Godard&#x27;s &quot;Pierrot le fou&quot; (1965) inspired her to become a filmmaker. Akerman&#x27;s first short film, &quot;Saute ma ville&quot; (1968), premiered at the International Short Film Festival Oberhausen in 1971. That year, she moved to New York City, where she would stay until 1972. She considered her time there to be a formative experience, becoming exposed to the works of Andy Warhol, Jonas Mekas, and Michael Snow, with the latter&#x27;s film &quot;La région centrale&quot; leading to her view of &quot;time as the most important thing in film.&quot; Also during this period, she would begin her long collaboration with cinematographer Babette Mangolte.

Her first feature film, the documentary &quot;Hotel Monterey&quot; (1972), along with the short films &quot;La Chambre 1&quot; and &quot;La Chambre 2,&quot; use long takes and structuralist techniques that would become trademarks of her style.

===Critical recognition===
Akerman then returned to Belgium, and in 1974 received critical recognition for her first fiction feature &quot;Je, Tu, Il, Elle (I, You, He, She)&quot;, notable for its depiction of women&#x27;s sexuality, a theme which would appear again in several of her films. Feminist and queer film scholar B. Ruby Rich believed that &quot;Je Tu Il Elle&quot; can be seen as a &quot;cinematic Rosetta Stone of female sexuality&quot;.

Akerman&#x27;s most critically-acclaimed film, &quot;Jeanne Dielman, 23 Quai du Commerce, 1080 Bruxelles&quot;, was released in 1975, and presents a largely real-time study of a middle-aged widow&#x27;s routine of domestic chores and prostitution. Upon the film&#x27;s release, &quot;Le Monde&quot; called &quot;Jeanne Dielman&quot; the &quot;first masterpiece of the feminine in the history of the cinema&quot;. Scholar Ivonne Margulies says the picture is a filmic paradigm for uniting feminism and anti-illusionism. The film was named the 19th greatest film of the 20th century by J. Hoberman of the &quot;Village Voice&quot;. In December 2022, &quot;Jeanne Dielman&quot; was awarded first place by &quot;Sight &amp; Sound&quot; magazine&#x27;s &quot;Top 100 Greatest Films of All Time&quot; list, as voted by critics, becoming the fourth film to do so after &quot;Bicycle Thieves&quot;, &quot;Citizen Kane&quot;, and &quot;Vertigo&quot;. &quot;Jeanne Dielman, 23 Quai du Commerce, 1080 Bruxelles&quot; thus became the first film directed by a woman to top the list and, together with &quot;Beau Travail&quot;, one of the first two such films to appear in the top 10.

===Feminism===

Akerman has used the setting of a kitchen to explore the intersection between femininity and domesticity. The kitchens in her work provide intimate spaces for connection and conversation, functioning as a backdrop to the dramas of daily life. The kitchens, alongside other domestic spaces, act as self-confining prisons under patriarchal conditions. In Akerman&#x27;s work, the kitchen often acts as a domestic theatre.

Akerman is usually grouped within feminist and queer thinking, but she articulated her distance from an essentialist feminism. Akerman resisted labels relating to her identity like &quot;female&quot;, &quot;Jewish&quot; and &quot;lesbian&quot;, choosing instead to immerse herself in the identity of being a daughter; she said she saw film as a &quot;generative field of freedom from the boundaries of identity&quot;. She advocated for multiplicity of expression, explaining, &quot;when people say there is a feminist film language, it is like saying there is only one way for women to express themselves&quot;. For Akerman, there are as many cinematic languages as there are individuals.

Margulies argues that Akerman&#x27;s resistance to categorization is in response to the rigidity of cinema&#x27;s earlier essentialist realism and &quot;indicates an awareness of the project of a transhistorical and transcultural feminist aesthetics of the cinema&quot;.

Akerman works with the feminist motto of the personal being political, complicating it by an investigation of representational links between private and public. In &quot;Jeanne Dielman&quot;, the protagonist does not supply a transparent, accurate representation of a fixed social reality. Throughout the film, the housewife and prostitute Jeanne is revealed to be a construct, with multiple historical, social, and cinematic resonances.

Akerman engages with realist representations, a form historically grounded to act as a feminist gesture and simultaneously as an &quot;irritant&quot; to fixed categories of &quot;woman&quot;.

===Later career===
Akerman&#x27;s later films experimented with differing genres and tempos, including the comedy &quot;Golden Eighties&quot; (1986), and several documentaries. Her final film, &quot;No Home Movie&quot;, was released in 2015.

In 1991, Akerman was a member of the jury at the 41st Berlin International Film Festival. In 2011, she joined the full-time faculty of the MFA Program in Media Arts Production at the City College of New York as a distinguished lecturer and the first Michael &amp; Irene Ross Visiting Professor of Film/Video &amp; Jewish Studies. Akerman was also Professor of Film at The European Graduate School.

==Exhibitions==
Solo exhibitions of Akerman&#x27;s work have been held at the Museum for Contemporary Art, Antwerp, Belgium (2012), MIT, Cambridge Massachusetts (2008), the Tel Aviv Museum of Art, Israel (2006); Princeton University Art Museum, Princeton, NJ (2006); and the Centre Georges Pompidou, Paris (2003). Akerman participated in Documenta XI (2002) and the Venice Biennale (2001).

In 2011, a film retrospective of Akerman&#x27;s work was shown at the Austrian Film Museum.

The 2015 Venice Biennale included her final video installation, &quot;Now&quot;, an installation of interspersed parallel screens displaying the landscape-in-motion footage that would appear in &quot;No Home Movie&quot;. In 2018, the Manhattan Jewish Museum presented the installation in the exhibition &quot;Scenes from the Collection&quot;, and acquired her work for the collection. Marian Goodman Gallery in Paris featured &quot;From the Other Side&quot; (2002) and &quot;Je tu il elle, l&#x27;installation&quot; (2007) in early 2022.

==Style==
Akerman&#x27;s filming style relies on capturing ordinary life. By encouraging viewers to have patience with a slow pace, her films emphasize the humanity of the everyday. Art curator Kathy Halbreich writes that Akerman &quot;creates a cinema of waiting, of passages, of resolutions deferred&quot;.

Many of Akerman&#x27;s films portray the movement of people across distances or their absorption with claustrophobic spaces. Curator Jon Davies writes that her domestic interiors &quot;conceal gendered labour and violence, secrecy and shame, where traumas both large and small unfold with few if any witnesses&quot;. Akerman addresses the voyeurism that is always present within cinematic discourse by often playing a character within her films, placing herself on both sides of the camera simultaneously. She used the boredom of structuralism to generate a bodily feeling in the viewer, accentuating the passage of time.

Akerman was influenced by European art cinema as well as structuralist film. Structuralist film used formalist experimentation to propose a reciprocal relationship between image and viewer. Akerman cites Michael Snow as a structuralist inspiration, especially his film &quot;Wavelength&quot;, which is composed of a single shot of a photograph of a sea on a loft wall, with the camera slowly zooming in. Akerman was drawn to the perceived dullness of structuralism because it rejected the dominant cinema&#x27;s concern for plot. As a teenager in Brussels, Akerman skipped school to see movies, including films from the .

Art historian Terrie Sultan writes that Akerman&#x27;s &quot;narrative is marked by an almost Proustian attention to detail and visual grace&quot;. Similarly, Akerman&#x27;s visual language resists easy categorization and summarization: she creates narrative through filmic syntax instead of plot development.

Many directors have cited Akerman&#x27;s directorial style as an influence on their work. Kelly Reichardt, Gus Van Sant, and Sofia Coppola have noted their exploration of filming in real time as a tribute to Akerman.

==Family==

Akerman had an extremely close relationship with her mother, which was captured in several of her films. In &quot;News from Home&quot; (1976), Akerman&#x27;s mother&#x27;s letters outlining mundane family activities play throughout the film. Her 2015 film &quot;No Home Movie&quot; centers on mother-daughter relationships, is largely situated in her mother&#x27;s kitchen, and was filmed in the final months before her mother&#x27;s death in 2014. The film explores issues of metempsychosis, the last shot of the film acting as a memento mori of the mother&#x27;s apartment.

Akerman acknowledged that her mother was at the center of her work and admitted to feeling directionless after her death. The maternal imagery can be found throughout all of Akerman&#x27;s films as an homage and an attempt to reconstitute the image and voice of the mother. In her autobiographical book &quot;Family in Brussels&quot;, Akerman narrates the story, interchanging her own voice with her mother&#x27;s.

==Death==
Akerman died by suicide on 5 October 2015 in Paris, at the age of 65. Her last film was the documentary &quot;No Home Movie&quot;, a series of conversations with her mother shortly before her mother&#x27;s death. Of the film, she said, &quot;I think if I knew I was going to do this, I wouldn&#x27;t have dared to do it.&quot;

According to Akerman&#x27;s sister, she had been hospitalized for depression and then returned home to Paris ten days before her death.

==Filmography==
===Feature films===
===Short films===
===Documentaries===
== See also ==
* List of female film and television directors
* List of lesbian filmmakers
* List of LGBT-related films directed by women

==References==
==Further reading==
* Gatti, Ilaria &quot;Chantal Akerman. Uno schermo nel deserto&quot; Roma, Fefè Editore, 2019.
* Sultan, Terrie (ed.) &quot;Chantal Akerman: Moving through Time and Space.&quot; Houston, Tex.: Blaffer Gallery, the Art Museum of the University of Houston ; New York, N.Y.: Distributed by D.A.P./Distributed Art Publishers, 2008.
* Fabienne Liptay, Margrit Tröhler (ed.): &quot;Chantal Akerman.&quot; Munich: edition text + kritik, 2017.
* 
* 
* 
* Holly Rogers and Jeremy Barham (ed.): &quot;The Music and Sound of Experimental Film.&quot; New York: Oxford University Press, 2017.
* Marente Bloemheuvel and Jaap Guldemond (ed.): &quot;Chantal Akerman: Passages.&quot; Amsterdam: Eye Filmmuseum, 2020.

==External links==

* chantal-akerman.foundation
* paradisefilms.be 
* Retrospective by &quot;The New York Times&quot;
* Artist&#x27;s page in Artfacts.Net with actual major exhibitions.
* Screens of Film, Video, Memory, and Smoke by Ana Balona de Oliveira in Fillip</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q239823" start="0" end="20" title="Chantal Akerman" label="Chantal Anne Akerman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2526255" start="65" end="78" title="film director" label="film director"/>
<link wikidata="Q28389" start="80" end="92" title="screenwriter" label="screenwriter"/>
<link wikidata="Q483501" start="94" end="100" title="artist" label="artist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1660187" start="106" end="120" title="Film studies" label="film professor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093910" start="128" end="152" title="City College of New York" label="City College of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q7019502" start="217" end="231" title="News from Home" label="News from Home"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546271" start="316" end="333" title="Sight &amp;amp; Sound" label="Sight &amp;amp; Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q115577992" start="361" end="399" title="The Sight and Sound Greatest Films of All Time 2022" label="&amp;quot;Greatest Films of All Time&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q240" start="560" end="568" title="Brussels" label="Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="570" end="577" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q12409870" start="589" end="608" title="Holocaust survivors" label="Holocaust survivors"/>
<link wikidata="Q7341" start="737" end="746" title="Auschwitz concentration camp" label="Auschwitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q12892" start="1090" end="1097" title="Antwerp" label="Antwerp"/>
<link wikidata="Q53001" start="1194" end="1209" title="Jean-Luc Godard" label="Jean-Luc Godard"/>
<link wikidata="Q938851" start="1223" end="1237" title="Pierrot le fou" label="Pierrot le fou"/>
<link wikidata="Q687212" start="1372" end="1416" title="International Short Film Festival Oberhausen" label="International Short Film Festival Oberhausen"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="1450" end="1463" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q5603" start="1591" end="1602" title="Andy Warhol" label="Andy Warhol"/>
<link wikidata="Q699702" start="1604" end="1615" title="Jonas Mekas" label="Jonas Mekas"/>
<link wikidata="Q558332" start="1621" end="1633" title="Michael Snow" label="Michael Snow"/>
<link wikidata="Q3212578" start="1669" end="1687" title="La Région Centrale" label="La région centrale"/>
<link wikidata="Q11253418" start="1856" end="1872" title="Babette Mangolte" label="Babette Mangolte"/>
<link wikidata="Q18649334" start="1921" end="1935" title="Hotel Monterey" label="Hotel Monterey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931170" start="2036" end="2045" title="long take" label="long take"/>
<link wikidata="Q2973217" start="2051" end="2064" title="Structural film" label="structuralist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065785" start="2259" end="2275" title="Je Tu Il Elle" label="Je, Tu, Il, Elle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834185" start="2444" end="2456" title="B. Ruby Rich" label="B. Ruby Rich"/>
<link wikidata="Q3480963" start="2547" end="2563" title="Human female sexuality" label="female sexuality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1686012" start="2625" end="2676" title="Jeanne Dielman, 23 Quai du Commerce, 1080 Bruxelles" label="Jeanne Dielman, 23 Quai du Commerce, 1080 Bruxelles"/>
<link wikidata="Q12461" start="2856" end="2864" title="Le Monde" label="Le Monde"/>
<link wikidata="Q4498571" start="3156" end="3167" title="J. Hoberman" label="J. Hoberman"/>
<link wikidata="Q876158" start="3181" end="3194" title="Village Voice" label="Village Voice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1686012" start="3226" end="3240" title="Jeanne Dielman, 23 Quai du Commerce, 1080 Bruxelles" label="Jeanne Dielman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546271" start="3280" end="3297" title="Sight &amp;amp; Sound" label="Sight &amp;amp; Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q115577992" start="3320" end="3366" title="The Sight and Sound Greatest Films of All Time 2022" label="&amp;quot;Top 100 Greatest Films of All Time&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q172837" start="3440" end="3455" title="Bicycle Thieves" label="Bicycle Thieves"/>
<link wikidata="Q24815" start="3469" end="3481" title="Citizen Kane" label="Citizen Kane"/>
<link wikidata="Q202548" start="3499" end="3506" title="Vertigo (film)" label="Vertigo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1686012" start="3520" end="3571" title="Jeanne Dielman, 23 Quai du Commerce, 1080 Bruxelles" label="Jeanne Dielman, 23 Quai du Commerce, 1080 Bruxelles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193562" start="3666" end="3678" title="Beau Travail" label="Beau Travail"/>
<link wikidata="Q3110045" start="5895" end="5910" title="Golden Eighties" label="Golden Eighties"/>
<link wikidata="Q467983" start="6067" end="6106" title="41st Berlin International Film Festival" label="41st Berlin International Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093910" start="6201" end="6225" title="City College of New York" label="City College of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q681250" start="6386" end="6414" title="The European Graduate School" label="The European Graduate School"/>
<link wikidata="Q2603905" start="6629" end="6660" title="Princeton University Art Museum" label="Princeton University Art Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q178065" start="6692" end="6715" title="Centre Georges Pompidou" label="Centre Georges Pompidou"/>
<link wikidata="Q72823" start="6755" end="6764" title="Documenta" label="Documenta"/>
<link wikidata="Q205751" start="6783" end="6798" title="Venice Biennale" label="Venice Biennale"/>
<link wikidata="Q205751" start="6910" end="6925" title="Venice Biennale" label="Venice Biennale"/>
<link wikidata="Q592116" start="7145" end="7158" title="Jewish Museum (Manhattan)" label="Jewish Museum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7286" end="7308" title="Marian Goodman#Marian Goodman Gallery" label="Marian Goodman Gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q558332" start="8577" end="8589" title="Michael Snow" label="Michael Snow"/>
<link wikidata="Q436861" start="9397" end="9412" title="Kelly Reichardt" label="Kelly Reichardt"/>
<link wikidata="Q25186" start="9414" end="9426" title="Gus Van Sant" label="Gus Van Sant"/>
<link wikidata="Q193628" start="9432" end="9445" title="Sofia Coppola" label="Sofia Coppola"/>
<link wikidata="Q7019502" start="9651" end="9665" title="News from Home" label="News from Home"/>
<link wikidata="Q21074321" start="9799" end="9812" title="No Home Movie" label="No Home Movie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262856" start="10014" end="10028" title="metempsychosis" label="metempsychosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q273383" start="10068" end="10080" title="memento mori" label="memento mori"/>
<link wikidata="Q10737" start="10556" end="10563" title="suicide" label="suicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q21074321" start="10650" end="10663" title="No Home Movie" label="No Home Movie"/>
<link wikidata="Q4340209" start="10934" end="10944" title="Depression (mood)" label="depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q6619427" start="11096" end="11140" title="List of female film and television directors" label="List of female film and television directors"/>
<link wikidata="Q39050105" start="11143" end="11169" title="List of lesbian filmmakers" label="List of lesbian filmmakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q38805245" start="11172" end="11216" title="List of LGBT-related films directed by women" label="List of LGBT-related films directed by women"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="12048" end="12066" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q5448836" start="12214" end="12220" title="Fillip" label="Fillip"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="308675" wikidata="Q827958" url="?curid=308675" title="British Columbia Social Credit Party">
<text>The British Columbia Social Credit Party was a conservative political party in British Columbia, Canada. It was the governing party of British Columbia for all but three years between the 1952 provincial election and the 1991 election. For four decades, the party dominated the British Columbian political scene, with the only break occurring between the 1972 and 1975 elections when the British Columbia New Democratic Party governed. Party members were known as Socreds.

Although founded as part of the Canadian social credit movement, promoting social credit policies of monetary reform, the BC Social Credit Party later discarded the ideology and became a political vehicle for fiscal conservatives and later social conservatives in British Columbia.

The party collapsed within one term of its 1991 defeat. It was not represented in the Legislative Assembly of British Columbia after 1996, and only existed in a nominal fashion after 2001. In 2013, the party was deregistered for failing to nominate more than two candidates in two consecutive provincial elections. The party re-registered in June 2016 to participate in the 2017 election, but only nominated the minimum of two candidates. It did not nominate any candidates in the 2020 election, and was again deregistered as a party on February 1, 2023.

Former Canadian prime minister Kim Campbell started her political career in the BC Social Credit Party.

==History==

===Pre-1952===
Prior to 1952, the social credit movement in British Columbia was divided between various factions. The Social Credit League of British Columbia nominated candidates for the first time in the 1937 election, but did not do so in the 1941 election.

In the 1945 election, these factions formed an alliance to field 16 candidates, who won a total of 6,627 votes (1.42% of the provincial total).

This alliance broke down before the 1949 election, and three separate groups nominated candidates:
*the Social Credit Party,
*the British Columbia Social Credit League, and 
*the Union of Electors.
Collectively, they nominated 28 candidates, who won a total of 14,326 votes, 2.05% of the popular vote in that election.

===W. A. C. Bennett era===
For the 1952 provincial election, the coalition government between the British Columbia Liberal Party and British Columbia Conservative Party reformed the electoral system from first past the post to the alternative vote. The coalition was nervous about the growing popularity of the Co-operative Commonwealth Federation (CCF), the forerunner of the NDP. With the expectation that Conservative voters would list the Liberals as their second choice and vice versa, the two parties believed they&#x27;d garner enough votes between them to stay in power.

Meanwhile, the Social Credit League went into the election under the interim leadership of the Reverend Ernest George Hansell, Member of the federal Parliament for the Alberta riding of Macleod since 1935. Hansell was hand-picked by Alberta premier Ernest Manning, as the Alberta Social Credit Party still dominated their BC sister. However, much to the BC Socreds&#x27; own surprise, the party received 200,000 more votes than in the previous election and garnered enough vote transfers to become the largest party in the legislature. It took 19 seats, one more than the CCF, while the Liberals and Conservatives were practically wiped out. The Socreds persuaded an independent Labour Member of the Legislative Assembly (MLA) to support them, allowing them to form a minority government.

As not even the Socreds expected to win the election, they now found themselves with the task of electing a leader who would become the province&#x27;s new Premier. Party president Lyle Wicks called a leadership convention at which only elected MLAs could vote. The 19 newly elected Social Credit MLAs chose former BC Conservative MLA W. A. C. Bennett, one of only three Socreds with previous experience in the legislature, to lead the new government over Philip Gaglardi. Bennett had joined the Socreds only in December, doing so with the tacit support of the federal Conservative caucus. The federal Conservatives were displeased that their provincial counterparts had sat out the previous two elections so as not to embarrass their Liberal partners. Nine months into the new term, Bennett deliberately lost a confidence vote in order to force a snap general election in 1953. At this election, Social Credit won an outright majority.

Although the party was ostensibly the British Columbia wing of the Canadian social credit movement, Bennett jettisoned the old ideology, remembering that the Alberta Socreds had tried and failed to implement it soon after winning their first term in government. Instead, he converted it into a populist conservative party. It became a political vehicle to unite opponents of the CCF in hopes of shutting it out of power.

The BC Social Credit Party drifted away from both social credit theories and from the federal Social Credit Party as many supporters of the federal Liberals and Conservatives joined it. While Bennett made sporadic appearances for the federal Socreds, their relationship was tenuous at best. Finally, in 1971, the BC Socreds formally severed their ties to the federal Socreds in order to make it easier for staunch Tories and Liberals to support it at the provincial level.

Despite being a free market party, the Bennett government formed BC Hydro in 1961 by nationalizing the province&#x27;s largest private hydroelectric concern to make sure that it could not oppose the government&#x27;s hydroelectric dam construction program. It also formed BC Ferries in 1958, and established the Bank of British Columbia, which was 25% owned by the provincial government.

The Social Credit Party would win five more terms in government, each time with fairly large majorities. However, this streak ended in 1972 amid a gaffe-prone campaign. For instance, Gagliardi suggested that Bennett would stand down after the election, accusing him of being out of touch with &quot;the young people of this province.&quot; This led to questions about whether the party had become tired and complacent after 20 years in power. Nonetheless, it came as a shock when Social Credit was heavily defeated by the British Columbia New Democratic Party (BC NDP) under Dave Barrett, falling to only 10 seats.

===Bill Bennett era===
W. A. C. Bennett&#x27;s son, Bill Bennett, took over the leadership of the party in 1973. The younger Bennett modernized the party and abandoned populism. Instead, the party became a coalition of federal Liberals, Christian conservatives from the province&#x27;s Bible Belt, and fiscal conservatives from the corporate sector with the latter firmly in control.

Bill Bennett led the Socreds back to power at the 1975 election, mainly by dominating the province outside of Vancouver. The younger Bennett, for the most part, eschewed the megaprojects of the elder Bennett (with the exception of Expo 86 and the Coquihalla Highway), and embraced a fiscally conservative program.

As a result, the party built up a small political engine that managed to win two more terms in 1979 and 1983 general elections, in spite of Bennett&#x27;s controversial &quot;Restraint&quot; program. This was nicknamed the &quot;Baby Blue Machine&quot;, and consisted of political advisors primarily imported from the Ontario Progressive Conservative Party. It never became a major political apparatus like the Big Blue Machine in Ontario did, as Bennett decided to retire in 1986.

All Socred governments attempted to curb the power of trade unions and also limited social welfare spending.

===Bill Vander Zalm era===
Bennett retired in 1986 and was succeeded by Bill Vander Zalm. Under his watch, social conservatives took control of the party; Vander Zalm himself was a member of the social conservative wing. Vander Zalm easily led the Socreds to a fourth consecutive term in government in the election later that year.

Although it was not apparent at the time, the downfall of the party began almost as soon as Vander Zalm took the premiership. Many moderate Socreds were dissatisfied at the party&#x27;s social conservative turn. They began drifting to the Liberals, a trend that would come back to haunt the party later. This process was exacerbated by Vander Zalm&#x27;s eccentricity, and the constant scandals that plagued his government. Also, Vander Zalm allowed his principal secretary, David Poole, to amass a substantial amount of power, despite his being unelected. Longtime cabinet minister Grace McCarthy resigned in protest.

===Decline===
Vander Zalm was forced to resign in a conflict of interest scandal in 1991, and was succeeded as party leader and premier by Deputy Premier Rita Johnston, who became the first female head of government at the provincial or federal level in Canada. Johnston then defeated McCarthy in the subsequent leadership election and continued as premier. Johnston had been close to Vander Zalm for several years, leading many to believe her selection as leader had been a mistake. Even BC NDP opposition leader Mike Harcourt admitted later that he preferred Johnston over McCarthy, as McCarthy would likely have been a much tougher opponent in an election.
Facing a statutory general election in 1991, Johnston was unable to make up any ground. She also had little time to reunite the party following the bruising leadership contest with McCarthy. Social Credit was roundly defeated, losing almost half of its vote from 1986. Johnston herself lost her own seat to BC NDP challenger Penny Priddy. Furthermore, many moderate Socred supporters defected to the British Columbia Liberal Party, continuing a trend that dated back to Vander Zalm&#x27;s tenure. The BC Liberals vaulted from no seats in the legislature to the Official Opposition. The combined effect was to decimate the Socreds, who plunged from a strong majority government to third place with only seven seats–including only five surviving members from Johnston&#x27;s cabinet. More party infighting occurred as McCarthy was elected to replace Johnston. McCarthy didn&#x27;t get a chance to get into the legislature until February 1994, when she ran in a by-election for Matsqui, a longtime Socred stronghold. She lost to Liberal Mike de Jong by fewer than 100 votes.

After McCarthy&#x27;s by-election loss, Social Credit collapsed with dramatic speed. Four of the seven Social Credit MLAs elected in 1991 left the party to join the British Columbia Reform Party, leaving Social Credit without official status in the legislature. McCarthy resigned as leader shortly thereafter, and Larry Gillanders was elected to succeed her. After that, Abbotsford MLA Harry de Jong resigned (and briefly contemplated taking up the leadership of the Family Coalition Party). The BC Liberals took the riding in the ensuing by-election, with Social Credit in a distant third. This left only one Socred in the legislature--Cliff Serwa from Okanagan West, which contained much of the Bennetts&#x27; former territory.

Social Credit went into the 1996 provincial election in an extremely precarious position. It had been unable to get its leader into the legislature at any point during the previous session. Even worse, Serwa had announced his retirement, leaving it without any incumbents for the first time since 1952. Gillanders took part in the leaders&#x27; debate, but pulled out of the campaign just before the vote and urged all non-socialist parties to present a united front against the BC NDP. The Social Credit Party was completely shut out of the legislature, garnering only 0.6 percent of the vote. At this point, the party was largely considered a dead force in BC politics, with most of its remaining members joining Reform or the Liberals. The collapse of the British Columbia Socreds within only one term of losing power was especially remarkable considering their Alberta counterparts managed to maintain at least a nominal presence in the legislature for a decade after their defeat in 1971.

In 2001, at the behest of former leader Vander Zalm–now leader of Reform BC–the Social Credit Party merged with other minor provincial right-wing parties to form the Unity Party, but soon left due to dissatisfaction with the way the party was run.

In the 2001 provincial election, what remained of the party ran only two candidates. Grant Mitton achieved a respectable showing in Peace River South, placing second with 1,726 votes (17.4%). The other candidate, party president Carrol Barbara Woolsey, in Vancouver-Hastings, placed 5th of 6 candidates with 222 votes (1.15% of the total). The party hadn&#x27;t had a full-time leader since 2000; Mitton was the &quot;de facto&quot; leader during the campaign. Mitton left to become leader of the British Columbia Party, leaving Woolsey as &quot;de facto&quot; party leader.

In the 2005 election, only two Socreds filed: Woolsey, who won 254 votes (1.28% of the total) in Vancouver-Hastings, and Anthony Yao, who won 225 votes (0.95% of the total) in Port Coquitlam-Burke Mountain.

The party did not field any candidates in the 2009 general election. In the 2013 election, Woolsey was the only Socred candidate, again in Vancouver-Hastings, receiving 355 votes. Since British Columbia election law mandates de-registration of parties that run fewer than two candidates in two consecutive elections, the party was deregistered by Election BC on June 7, 2013. However, it had existed in name only since at least 2001. In addition to nominating few or no candidates at all in recent years, its Website had been updated only sporadically since 2005, and hadn&#x27;t been updated at all since February 2012. Most of its constituency associations had been de-registered in 2008.

The Social Credit Party nominated two candidates in the 2017 provincial election. Neither were elected, and they only tallied 896 votes between them. It did not field any candidates in the 2020 British Columbia general election and was deregistered in 2023.

==Party leaders==
*Andrew Henry Jukes, 1937–48, leader of the Union of Electors faction, 1948-49.
*No leader as such of the Social Credit Party/Social Credit League emerged until the 1952 election. However, Eric Martin and Lyle Wicks were the most obvious figures of a collective leadership. At the 1952, party convention Wicks, W.A.C. Bennett and Rev. Hansell were nominated for the party leadership. Wicks and Bennett withdrew in favour of Hansell who was the hand-picked choice of Alberta Social Credit leader and Premier Ernest Manning. Following the election, Wicks, who was party president, called a second leadership convention at which only Social Credit MLAs could vote. This was won by Bennett.
*Reverend Ernest George Hansell, M.P. for Macleod (Alberta), leader for the 1952 election.
*W. A. C. Bennett (July 15, 1952 – November 24, 1973) *
*Bill Bennett (November 24, 1973 – July 30, 1986) *
*Bill Vander Zalm (July 30, 1986 – April 1, 1991) *
*Rita Johnston (April 2, 1991 – March 7, 1992) *
*Jack Weisgerber (interim) (March 7, 1992 – November 6, 1993)
*Grace McCarthy (November 6, 1993 – May 1994)
*Lyall Franklin Hanson (interim) (May 1994)
*Cliff Serwa (interim) (May – November 1994)
*Larry Gillanders (November 4, 1994 – May 24, 1996)
*Ken Endean (interim) (May 1996 – March 1997)
*Mike Culos (April 1997 – April 2000)
*Eric Buckley (April 2000 – October 2000)

Eric Buckley left Social Credit in October 2000 to join the British Columbia Party. The party has not had an official leader since then.

==Other prominent Socred politicians==
*Kim Campbell
*Garde Gardom
*Pat McGeer
*Rafe Mair
*Phil Gaglardi
*Tom Northcott, a prominent singer, stood unsuccessfully for the provincial legislature.

==Electoral results==

In the 1937 election, the British Columbia Social Credit League endorsed candidates, but none were elected.

In the 1941 election, no candidates ran under the social credit banner.

In the 1945 election, an alliance of social credit groups nominated candidates. None were elected.

In the 1949 election, three different social credit groups nominated candidates. None were successful.

In subsequent elections, the Social Credit Party of British Columbia emerged as the only social credit party; however, it quickly abandoned social credit theories.

==See also==
*British Columbia Conservative Party
*British Columbia Liberal Party
*British Columbia Social Credit Party leadership elections
*Canadian social credit movement
*List of British Columbia general elections
*List of British Columbia political parties
*Social Credit

==References==
==External links==
*BC Social Credit Party</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q827958" start="4" end="40" title="British Columbia Social Credit Party" label="British Columbia Social Credit Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973" start="79" end="95" title="British Columbia" label="British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="97" end="103" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973" start="135" end="151" title="British Columbia" label="British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586312" start="188" end="212" title="1952 British Columbia general election" label="1952 provincial election"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969816" start="221" end="234" title="1991 British Columbia general election" label="1991 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969810" start="355" end="359" title="1972 British Columbia general election" label="1972"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969811" start="364" end="378" title="1975 British Columbia general election" label="1975 elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q919052" start="388" end="425" title="British Columbia New Democratic Party" label="British Columbia New Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q827958" start="464" end="471" title="British Columbia Social Credit Party" label="Socreds"/>
<link wikidata="Q3326543" start="506" end="537" title="Canadian social credit movement" label="Canadian social credit movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756412" start="549" end="562" title="social credit" label="social credit"/>
<link wikidata="Q65224" start="575" end="590" title="monetary reform" label="monetary reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q2698984" start="683" end="703" title="fiscal conservatism" label="fiscal conservatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414298" start="714" end="734" title="social conservatism" label="social conservatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323479" start="843" end="883" title="Legislative Assembly of British Columbia" label="Legislative Assembly of British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16205073" start="1131" end="1144" title="2017 British Columbia general election" label="2017 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q30644243" start="1238" end="1251" title="2020 British Columbia general election" label="2020 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q839078" start="1320" end="1343" title="Prime Minister of Canada" label="Canadian prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q128553" start="1344" end="1356" title="Kim Campbell" label="Kim Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969803" start="1638" end="1651" title="1937 British Columbia general election" label="1937 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586310" start="1678" end="1691" title="1941 British Columbia general election" label="1941 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586311" start="1701" end="1714" title="1945 British Columbia general election" label="1945 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969804" start="1875" end="1888" title="1949 British Columbia general election" label="1949 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q3418128" start="2018" end="2035" title="Union of Electors" label="Union of Electors"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586312" start="2194" end="2218" title="1952 British Columbia general election" label="1952 provincial election"/>
<link wikidata="Q919043" start="2257" end="2287" title="British Columbia Liberal Party" label="British Columbia Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q918860" start="2292" end="2327" title="British Columbia Conservative Party" label="British Columbia Conservative Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q205759" start="2363" end="2382" title="first past the post" label="first past the post"/>
<link wikidata="Q1491219" start="2390" end="2406" title="Instant-runoff voting" label="alternative vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q919052" start="2470" end="2506" title="British Columbia New Democratic Party" label="Co-operative Commonwealth Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5393110" start="2843" end="2864" title="Ernest George Hansell" label="Ernest George Hansell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356461" start="2988" end="3002" title="Ernest Manning" label="Ernest Manning"/>
<link wikidata="Q5230427" start="3425" end="3459" title="Member of the Legislative Assembly" label="Member of the Legislative Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q114793" start="3507" end="3526" title="minority government" label="minority government"/>
<link wikidata="Q6707972" start="3710" end="3720" title="Lyle Wicks" label="Lyle Wicks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2536629" start="3864" end="3880" title="W. A. C. Bennett" label="W. A. C. Bennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q7183587" start="3985" end="4000" title="Philip Gaglardi" label="Philip Gaglardi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292617" start="4090" end="4117" title="Progressive Conservative Party of Canada" label="federal Conservative caucus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586313" start="4375" end="4406" title="1953 British Columbia general election" label="a snap general election in 1953"/>
<link wikidata="Q3326543" start="4534" end="4565" title="Canadian social credit movement" label="Canadian social credit movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q46607" start="5379" end="5390" title="free market" label="free market"/>
<link wikidata="Q178564" start="5448" end="5461" title="nationalization" label="nationalizing"/>
<link wikidata="Q795723" start="5635" end="5645" title="BC Ferries" label="BC Ferries"/>
<link wikidata="Q4856060" start="5675" end="5699" title="Bank of British Columbia" label="Bank of British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969810" start="5887" end="5891" title="1972 British Columbia general election" label="1972"/>
<link wikidata="Q919052" start="6274" end="6311" title="British Columbia New Democratic Party" label="British Columbia New Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q732693" start="6327" end="6339" title="Dave Barrett" label="Dave Barrett"/>
<link wikidata="Q360860" start="6420" end="6432" title="Bill Bennett" label="Bill Bennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q138345" start="6587" end="6603" title="Liberal Party of Canada" label="federal Liberals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322213" start="6605" end="6628" title="Christian Right" label="Christian conservatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q2698984" start="6670" end="6690" title="fiscal conservatism" label="fiscal conservatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969811" start="6803" end="6816" title="1975 British Columbia general election" label="1975 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384656" start="6984" end="6991" title="Expo 86" label="Expo 86"/>
<link wikidata="Q919000" start="7000" end="7018" title="Coquihalla Highway" label="Coquihalla Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969812" start="7163" end="7167" title="1979 British Columbia general election" label="1979"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969814" start="7172" end="7193" title="1983 British Columbia general election" label="1983 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q826977" start="7386" end="7424" title="Ontario Progressive Conservative Party" label="Ontario Progressive Conservative Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q826977" start="7479" end="7495" title="Big Blue Machine" label="Big Blue Machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q178790" start="7605" end="7617" title="Labor union" label="trade unions"/>
<link wikidata="Q12002092" start="7635" end="7649" title="social welfare" label="social welfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q730975" start="7733" end="7749" title="Bill Vander Zalm" label="Bill Vander Zalm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414298" start="7768" end="7788" title="social conservatism" label="social conservatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969815" start="7963" end="7991" title="1986 British Columbia general election" label="the election later that year"/>
<link wikidata="Q919043" start="8233" end="8241" title="British Columbia Liberal Party" label="Liberals"/>
<link wikidata="Q5591284" start="8577" end="8591" title="Grace McCarthy" label="Grace McCarthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q211067" start="8666" end="8686" title="conflict of interest" label="conflict of interest"/>
<link wikidata="Q529221" start="8768" end="8781" title="Rita Johnston" label="Rita Johnston"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8926" end="8945" title="British Columbia Social Credit Party leadership elections#1991 leadership convention" label="leadership election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1927699" start="9128" end="9141" title="Mike Harcourt" label="Mike Harcourt"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969816" start="9283" end="9317" title="1991 British Columbia general election" label="statutory general election in 1991"/>
<link wikidata="Q973236" start="9599" end="9611" title="Penny Priddy" label="Penny Priddy"/>
<link wikidata="Q919043" start="9674" end="9704" title="British Columbia Liberal Party" label="British Columbia Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q5283451" start="10249" end="10256" title="District of Matsqui" label="Matsqui"/>
<link wikidata="Q6849380" start="10308" end="10320" title="Mike de Jong" label="Mike de Jong"/>
<link wikidata="Q7307410" start="10512" end="10541" title="British Columbia Reform Party" label="British Columbia Reform Party"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10661" end="10677" title="Larry Gillanders" label="Larry Gillanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q19845133" start="10733" end="10746" title="Harry de Jong" label="Harry de Jong"/>
<link wikidata="Q5433078" start="10814" end="10836" title="Family Coalition Party of British Columbia" label="Family Coalition Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q5132982" start="10984" end="10995" title="Cliff Serwa" label="Cliff Serwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586314" start="11106" end="11130" title="1996 British Columbia general election" label="1996 provincial election"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969771" start="12239" end="12250" title="British Columbia Unity Party" label="Unity Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586315" start="12329" end="12353" title="2001 British Columbia general election" label="2001 provincial election"/>
<link wikidata="Q15433184" start="12407" end="12419" title="Grant Mitton (politician)" label="Grant Mitton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7157443" start="12454" end="12471" title="Peace River South" label="Peace River South"/>
<link wikidata="Q7914099" start="12578" end="12596" title="Vancouver-Hastings" label="Vancouver-Hastings"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969742" start="12819" end="12841" title="British Columbia Party" label="British Columbia Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586316" start="12905" end="12918" title="2005 British Columbia general election" label="2005 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q7230562" start="13074" end="13103" title="Port Coquitlam-Burke Mountain" label="Port Coquitlam-Burke Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969818" start="13152" end="13173" title="2009 British Columbia general election" label="2009 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q322726" start="13182" end="13195" title="2013 British Columbia general election" label="2013 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q16205073" start="13854" end="13878" title="2017 British Columbia general election" label="2017 provincial election"/>
<link wikidata="Q30644243" start="13987" end="14025" title="2020 British Columbia general election" label="2020 British Columbia general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q2933901" start="14076" end="14094" title="Andrew Henry Jukes" label="Andrew Henry Jukes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6707972" start="14280" end="14290" title="Lyle Wicks" label="Lyle Wicks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356461" start="14582" end="14596" title="Ernest Manning" label="Ernest Manning"/>
<link wikidata="Q5393110" start="14772" end="14793" title="Ernest George Hansell" label="Ernest George Hansell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2536629" start="14854" end="14870" title="W. A. C. Bennett" label="W. A. C. Bennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q360860" start="14910" end="14922" title="Bill Bennett" label="Bill Bennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q730975" start="14962" end="14978" title="Bill Vander Zalm" label="Bill Vander Zalm"/>
<link wikidata="Q529221" start="15014" end="15027" title="Rita Johnston" label="Rita Johnston"/>
<link wikidata="Q6115710" start="15063" end="15078" title="Jack Weisgerber" label="Jack Weisgerber"/>
<link wikidata="Q5591284" start="15125" end="15139" title="Grace McCarthy" label="Grace McCarthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6707045" start="15171" end="15192" title="Lyall Franklin Hanson" label="Lyall Franklin Hanson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5132982" start="15215" end="15226" title="Cliff Serwa" label="Cliff Serwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969742" start="15498" end="15520" title="British Columbia Party" label="British Columbia Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q128553" start="15616" end="15628" title="Kim Campbell" label="Kim Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494042" start="15630" end="15642" title="Garde Gardom" label="Garde Gardom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7143748" start="15644" end="15654" title="Pat McGeer" label="Pat McGeer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7282484" start="15656" end="15665" title="Rafe Mair" label="Rafe Mair"/>
<link wikidata="Q7183587" start="15667" end="15680" title="Phil Gaglardi" label="Phil Gaglardi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817059" start="15682" end="15695" title="Tom Northcott" label="Tom Northcott"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586310" start="15910" end="15923" title="1941 British Columbia general election" label="1941 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q918860" start="16359" end="16394" title="British Columbia Conservative Party" label="British Columbia Conservative Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q919043" start="16396" end="16426" title="British Columbia Liberal Party" label="British Columbia Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969767" start="16428" end="16485" title="British Columbia Social Credit Party leadership elections" label="British Columbia Social Credit Party leadership elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q3326543" start="16487" end="16518" title="Canadian social credit movement" label="Canadian social credit movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586936" start="16520" end="16562" title="List of British Columbia general elections" label="List of British Columbia general elections"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16564" end="16606" title="List of political parties in Canada#British Columbia" label="List of British Columbia political parties"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756412" start="16608" end="16621" title="Social Credit" label="Social Credit"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="308676" wikidata="Q289054" url="?curid=308676" title="Catherine Breillat">
<text>Catherine Breillat (; born 13 July 1948) is a French filmmaker, novelist and professor of auteur cinema at the European Graduate School.

==Life and career==
Breillat was born in Bressuire, Deux-Sèvres, but grew up in Niort. She decided to become a writer and director at the age of twelve after watching Ingmar Bergman&#x27;s &quot;Sawdust and Tinsel&quot;, believing she had found her &quot;fictional body&quot; in Harriet Andersson&#x27;s character, Anna.

She started her career after studying acting at Yves Furet&#x27;s &quot;Studio d&#x27;Entraînement de l&#x27;Acteur&quot; in Paris together with her sister, actress Marie-Hélène Breillat (born 2 June 1947) in 1967. Her novel,&quot; l&#x27;Homme facile&quot; (&quot;A Man for the Asking&quot;), was published when she was 17. The French government banned it for readers under 18. A film based on the novel was made shortly after the publication of the book, and received an R rating. The producer went bankrupt and the distributor Artedis blocked commercial release of the film for twenty years.

Breillat is known for films focusing on sexuality, intimacy, gender conflict, and sibling rivalry. Breillat has been the subject of controversy for her explicit depictions of sexuality and violence. She cast the porn actor Rocco Siffredi in her films &quot;Romance&quot; (&quot;Romance X&quot;, 1999) and &quot;Anatomie de l&#x27;enfer&quot; (&quot;Anatomy of Hell&quot;, 2004). Her novels have been best-sellers.

Her work has been associated with the cinéma du corps/cinema of the body genre. In an interview with &quot;Senses of Cinema&quot;, she described David Cronenberg as another filmmaker she considers to have a similar approach to sexuality in film.

Though Breillat spends most of her time behind the camera, she has acted in a handful of movies. She made her film debut in Bernardo Bertolucci&#x27;s &quot;Last Tango in Paris&quot; (1972) as Mouchette, a dressmaker, alongside her sister Marie-Hélène Breillat.

In 2004, Breillat suffered a intracerebral hemorrhage, causing a stroke that paralyzed her left side. After five months of hospitalization and a slow rehabilitation, she gradually returned to work, producing &quot;Une vieille maîtresse&quot; (&quot;The Last Mistress&quot;) in 2007. This film was one of three French films officially selected for the Cannes Film Festival of that year.

In 2007, Breillat met notorious con man Christophe Rocancourt, and offered him a leading role in a movie that she was planning to make, based on her own novel &quot;Bad Love&quot;, and starring Naomi Campbell. Soon after, she gave him €25,000 to write a screenplay titled &quot;La vie amoureuse de Christophe Rocancourt&quot; (&quot;The Love Life of Christophe Rocancourt&quot;), and over the next year and a half, gave him loans totalling an additional €678,000. In 2009, a book written by Breillat was published, in which she alleged that Rocancourt had taken advantage of her diminished mental capacity, as she was still recovering from her stroke. The book is titled &quot;Abus de faiblesse&quot;, a French legal term usually translated as &quot;abuse of weakness&quot;. In 2012, Rocancourt was convicted of &quot;abus de faiblesse&quot; for taking Breillat&#x27;s money, and sentenced to prison.

In September 2010, Breillat&#x27;s second fairy-tale based film, &quot;La belle endormie&quot; (&quot;Sleeping Beauty&quot;), opened in the Orizzonti sidebar in the 67th Venice Film Festival.

, although Breillat had moved on to other projects, she still hoped to film &quot;Bad Love&quot;, but had not yet been able to find financing to do so. However, a film adaptation of her book &quot;Abus de faiblesse&quot;, directed by Breillat and starring Isabelle Huppert, began production in 2012, and was screened at the 2013 Toronto International Film Festival.

It has been noted that &quot;Breillat remains committed to the long take, particularly during scenes of sexual negotiation, a technique that showcases her performers&#x27; virtuosity as well as emphasizes the political and philosophical elements of sex. In both &quot;Fat Girl&quot; and &quot;Romance&quot;, for example, key sex scenes possess shots lasting over seven minutes.&quot;

In 2018, Breillat made controversial remarks on Asia Argento, who starred in 2007&#x27;s &quot;The Last Mistress&quot;, calling Argento a &quot;traitor&quot; for accusing Harvey Weinstein of sexual assault.

== Common themes in Breillat&#x27;s films ==
Through film, Breillat attempts to redefine the female narrative in cinema by showing female characters who undergo similar experiences as their male counterparts. Many of Breillat&#x27;s films explore the transition between girlhood and adulthood. The females of her films attempt to escape their adolescence by seeking individuality. There is an unsaid silence in society for girls to hide their sexuality and desires unless directly confronted about them. Breillat offers a platform to discuss female pleasure and sexual responsibility by exposing social and sexual conflicts in her films&#x27; themes.

==Allegations of sexual misconduct==

In August 2024 the actress Caroline Ducey, in an interview with the &quot;Nouvel Obs&quot; newsmagazine, accused Breillat of directing male actors to perform unsimulated sex acts upon her against her will during the filming of Romance. The allegations were described in more detail in Ducey&#x27;s memoir, &quot;La Prédation (nom féminin)&quot; [&quot;Predation: Feminine Noun&quot;]. According to Ducey, Breillat demanded that her coactor, François Berléand, with his fingers penetrate her on camera; Ducey and Berléand worked together successfully to simulate the scene without Breillat&#x27;s knowledge. Ducey stated that actor Reza Habouhossein later orally penetrated her in a cunnilingus scene at Breillat&#x27;s command, despite her plea to the director &quot;not to force me to do things I didn&#x27;t want to.&quot; Ducey at the time did not know what &quot;cunnilingus&quot; meant or that there were sexual practices like it. In an earlier investigation by IndieWire Ducey had told the journalist that she was able to prevent the actor from penetrating her. Breillat, on the other hand, speaking to the Indiewire journalist claims that she had planned the film to be shot with unsimmulated sex-scenes from the beginning and everyone who had read the extremely explicit script, including Ducey, knew what kind of film she was planning to make.

Breillat denied the allegations, accusing Ducey of being &quot;delusional&quot; and announcing her intention to file suit against the actress for defamation.

==Works==
===Filmography===
===Stage plays===
* &quot;Les Vêtements de mer&quot;

===Bibliography===

* &quot;Abus de faiblesse&quot;
* &quot;Pornocratie&quot;
* &quot;Le Soupirail&quot;
* &quot;L&#x27;homme facile&quot;
* &quot;Tapage Nocturne&quot;

==References==
==Further reading==
* Anne-Élisabeth Blateau, « Une vieille maîtresse sans Breillat » (A Last Mistress without Breillat), in &quot;Carré d&#x27;Art&quot; by Jean-Pierre Thiollet, Anagramme, Paris, 2008 (pp. 143–149).
* Douglas Keesey, &quot;Catherine Breillat&quot;, Manchester University Press, coll. « French film directors », 2009.

==External links==
* Catherine Breillat Faculty Page at European Graduate School (Biography, bibliography, lectures and videos)
*Catherine Breillat bibliography via UC Berkeley Media Resources Center
*A &quot;Salon&quot; interview with Catherine Breillat
*&quot;Salon&quot; review of &quot;Romance&quot;
*&quot;indiewire&quot; review of &quot;Romance&quot;
* Rewriting Fairy Tales, Revisiting Female Identity: An Interview with Catherine Breillat, Maria Garcia, &quot;Cineaste&quot;, Summer 2011</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q289054" start="0" end="18" title="Catherine Breillat" label="Catherine Breillat"/>
<link wikidata="Q788514" start="90" end="103" title="auteur cinema" label="auteur cinema"/>
<link wikidata="Q681250" start="111" end="135" title="European Graduate School" label="European Graduate School"/>
<link wikidata="Q210760" start="179" end="188" title="Bressuire" label="Bressuire"/>
<link wikidata="Q12765" start="190" end="201" title="Deux-Sèvres" label="Deux-Sèvres"/>
<link wikidata="Q184159" start="218" end="223" title="Niort" label="Niort"/>
<link wikidata="Q7546" start="305" end="319" title="Ingmar Bergman" label="Ingmar Bergman"/>
<link wikidata="Q318827" start="333" end="351" title="Sawdust and Tinsel" label="Sawdust and Tinsel"/>
<link wikidata="Q234923" start="417" end="434" title="Harriet Andersson" label="Harriet Andersson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2865998" start="990" end="997" title="Artedis" label="Artedis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438096" start="1138" end="1153" title="sibling rivalry" label="sibling rivalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q56219" start="1279" end="1293" title="Rocco Siffredi" label="Rocco Siffredi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752790" start="1313" end="1320" title="Romance (1999 film)" label="Romance"/>
<link wikidata="Q59531" start="1405" end="1420" title="Anatomy of Hell" label="Anatomy of Hell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3338945" start="1509" end="1543" title="New French Extremity" label="cinéma du corps/cinema of the body"/>
<link wikidata="Q7451025" start="1578" end="1594" title="Senses of Cinema" label="Senses of Cinema"/>
<link wikidata="Q55422" start="1616" end="1632" title="David Cronenberg" label="David Cronenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q53009" start="1842" end="1861" title="Bernardo Bertolucci" label="Bernardo Bertolucci"/>
<link wikidata="Q570567" start="1875" end="1894" title="Last Tango in Paris" label="Last Tango in Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368943" start="2010" end="2034" title="intracerebral hemorrhage" label="intracerebral hemorrhage"/>
<link wikidata="Q687227" start="2230" end="2247" title="The Last Mistress" label="The Last Mistress"/>
<link wikidata="Q42369" start="2332" end="2352" title="Cannes Film Festival" label="Cannes Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2400" end="2407" title="confidence trick#Terminology" label="con man"/>
<link wikidata="Q592759" start="2408" end="2429" title="Christophe Rocancourt" label="Christophe Rocancourt"/>
<link wikidata="Q199369" start="2562" end="2576" title="Naomi Campbell" label="Naomi Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916" start="2603" end="2604" title="Euro" label="€"/>
<link wikidata="Q49024" start="3440" end="3460" title="Venice Film Festival" label="Venice Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q15142164" start="3660" end="3677" title="Abuse of Weakness" label="Abus de faiblesse"/>
<link wikidata="Q106365" start="3719" end="3735" title="Isabelle Huppert" label="Isabelle Huppert"/>
<link wikidata="Q14326096" start="3787" end="3827" title="2013 Toronto International Film Festival" label="2013 Toronto International Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q59503" start="4098" end="4106" title="Fat Girl" label="Fat Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q232052" start="4263" end="4275" title="Asia Argento" label="Asia Argento"/>
<link wikidata="Q41832063" start="4386" end="4402" title="Harvey Weinstein sexual abuse cases" label="Harvey Weinstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q273770" start="5140" end="5154" title="Caroline Ducey" label="Caroline Ducey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044328" start="5187" end="5197" title="Nouvel Obs" label="Nouvel Obs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752790" start="5340" end="5347" title="Romance (1999 film)" label="Romance"/>
<link wikidata="Q576085" start="5554" end="5571" title="François Berléand" label="François Berléand"/>
<link wikidata="Q982049" start="7050" end="7070" title="Jean-Pierre Thiollet" label="Jean-Pierre Thiollet"/>
<link wikidata="Q230899" start="7160" end="7181" title="Manchester University" label="Manchester University"/>
<link wikidata="Q681250" start="7285" end="7309" title="European Graduate School" label="European Graduate School"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="308680" wikidata="Q467382" url="?curid=308680" title="Amphisbaenia">
<text>Amphisbaenia (called amphisbaenians or worm lizards) is a group of typically legless lizards, comprising over 200 extant species. Amphisbaenians are characterized by their long bodies, the reduction or loss of the limbs, and rudimentary eyes. As many species have a pink body and scales arranged in rings, they have a superficial resemblance to earthworms. While the genus &quot;Bipes&quot; retains forelimbs, all other genera are limbless. Phylogenetic studies suggest that they are nested within Lacertoidea, closely related to the lizard family Lacertidae. Amphisbaenians are widely distributed, occurring in North America, Europe, Africa, South America, Western Asia and the Caribbean. Most species are less than long.

==Description==

Despite a superficial resemblance to some primitive snakes, amphisbaenians have many unique features that distinguish them from other reptiles. Internally, their right lung is reduced in size to fit their narrow bodies, whereas in snakes, it is always the left lung. Their skeletal structure and skin are also different from those of other squamates. Both genetic and recent fossil evidence indicate that amphisbaenians lost their legs independently from snakes.

The head is stout, not set off from the neck, and either rounded, sloped, or sloped with a ridge down the middle. Most of the skull is solid bone, with a distinctive single median tooth in the upper jaw. It has no outer ears, and the eyes are deeply recessed and covered with skin and scales. These rudimentary eyes have a cornea, lens, and complex ciliary body, which allows them to detect light, but they are reduced in size and do not have an anterior chamber. The body is elongated, and the tail truncates in a manner that vaguely resembles the head. At their tail is a single fracture plane for tail autotomy, between the fifth and eighth caudal rings and is often visible due to coloration. The purpose seems to be to distract predators with the tail acting as a decoy. Their name is derived from Amphisbaena, a mythical serpent with a head at each end—referencing both the manner in which their tail truncates, and their ability to move just as well in reverse as forwards. The four species of &quot;Bipes&quot; are unusual in having a pair of forelimbs. All other species lack any trace of forelimb skeletal elements, and &quot;Rhineura floridana&quot; also lack any pectoral girdle skeletal element. The other species have some remnants of the pectoral girdle embedded within the body musculature. A remnant of the pelvic girdle is present in all families, and &quot;Bipes&quot; and the genus &quot;Blanus&quot; have also retained a reduced femur.
Amphisbaenians have a distinctive skin made up of rings of scales (annuli) that form a tube in which the loosely attached trunk of the body moves. Burrowing is achieved with an accordion-like motion, with longitudinal muscles in the skin bunching up the annuli, anchoring it to the surrounding soil, and trunk muscles moving the body forward or backwards within the integumentary tube.

Amphisbaenians are carnivorous, able to tear chunks out of larger prey with their powerful, interlocking teeth. Like lizards, some species are able to shed their tails (autotomy). Most species lay eggs, although at least some are known to be viviparous.

The red worm lizard (&quot;Amphisbaena alba&quot;) is often found in association with leafcutter ants. This reptile is thought to forage in the ants&#x27; deep galleries, where the insects deposit their waste. The presence of these reptiles is easily explained by the fact that they prey on the larvae of large beetles that also inhabit the leafcutter ants&#x27; galleries.

Amphisbaenians have often been categorized by their skull shape. The specialized skull shape is hypothesized to be driven by environmental and ecological conditions, such as soil type, and is an instance of convergent evolution. Traditionally four types of skulls are recognized; &quot;shovel-headed&quot;, &quot;round-headed&quot;, &quot;keel-headed&quot;, and &quot;spade-headed&quot;, although it doesn&#x27;t say anything about the relationship between the types. Of these four morphotypes, the round-headed species produce the lowest burrowing forces, the shovel-headed species the second lowest forces, the keel-headed species the second highest forces, and the spade-headed the highest forces.

==Distribution==
Amphisbaenians are found in North America, Europe, Africa, South America, the Middle East, and the Caribbean, a surprisingly large distribution despite being small subterranean animals that rarely ever leave their burrows.
Initially, this large distribution was thought to be due to vicariance, or the result of the breakup of Pangaea. This hypothesis was supported by morphological data that dated amphisbaenian diversification to over 200 million years ago (Mya), while Pangaea was still intact. However, a recent study using a combination of molecular and fossil evidence suggests that amphisbaenians originated in North America, where they underwent their first divergence around 107 Mya. They then underwent another major diversification into North American and European forms 40–56 Mya. Finally, the African and South American forms split around 40 Mya. This suggests that worm-lizards crossed the Atlantic Ocean (which had fully formed by 100 Mya) twice, once just after the K–Pg extinction, and then again, later in the Palaeogene. This also implies that limblessness evolved independently three times, a finding that contrasts the morphological theory that limbed amphisbaenians are the most basal. This widespread dispersal is suggested to have occurred by rafting – natural erosion or a storm event loosened a large raft of soil and vegetation that drifted across the ocean until landing on another shore. This oceanic rafting would be feasible due to the subterranean lifestyle and small nutritional requirements of amphisbaenids. After the Chicxulub impact, many predators of amphisbaenians became extinct, which allowed colonist amphisbaenians to thrive in new territories.

== Evolution ==

The fully limbed &quot;Slavoia darevskii&quot; from the Late Cretaceous (Campanian) of Mongolia may represent an early relative of amphisbaenians. The oldest known modern amphisbaenians include members of Rhineuridae and the extinct family Oligodontosauridae from the Paleocene of North America. Modern amphisbaenians likely originated in North America, before dispersing to South America, Africa and Europe via rafting during the Paleogene.

== Taxonomy ==
Taxonomic classification of amphisbaenians was traditionally based on morphological characters, such as the number of preanal pores, body annuli, tail annuli, and skull shape. Such characters are vulnerable to convergent evolution; in particular, the loss of the forelimbs and the evolution of specialized shovel-headed and keel-headed morphs appear to have occurred multiple times in the history of the group. Classifications based on mitochondrial DNA sequences and nuclear DNA sequences better reflect their true evolutionary history, and are now being used to distinguish genera of amphisbaenians.

The most ancient branch of the tree is the Rhineuridae. The remaining five families form a group to the exclusion of rhineurids. Bipedidae, Blanidae, and Cadeidae represent the most ancient divergences within this grouping, with Trogonophidae and Amphisbaenidae diverging more recently. South American amphisbaenids apparently are derived from African amphisbaenids that rafted across the Atlantic in the Eocene, about 40 million years ago. Cuban cadeids may be similarly derived from blanids that rafted across from northwestern Africa or southwestern Europe in a similar time frame.

Historically considered to be lizards, some studies have suggested that they should be considered separate from lizards, though many modern studies consider them to be true lizards, as they are closely related to other lizards of the clade Lacertoidea.

===Families===
Six extant families of amphisbaenians are currently recognised:
*Amphisbaenidae – Amphisbaenids, tropical worm lizards of South America, some Caribbean islands, and Sub-Saharan Africa. (12 genera, 182 species)
*Bipedidae – Only in Mexico and commonly called &quot;ajolotes&quot;, but not to be confused with axolotls (1 genus, 3 species)
*Blanidae – Anatolian, Iberian, and Moroccan worm lizards (1 genus, 7 species)
*Cadeidae – Cuban keel-headed worm lizards (1 genus, 2 species). Traditionally amphisbaenids, but shown by DNA to be closest to Blanidae.
*Rhineuridae – North American worm lizards (1 genus, 1 species)
*Trogonophidae – Palearctic worm lizards (4 genera, 6 species)
In addition, the following extinct families are also known from fossil remains:

* †Chthonophidae 
* †Oligodontosauridae 
* †Polyodontobaenidae 

Another fossil family, the †Crythiosauridae, was also previously placed in this group, but has since been removed due to a lack of evidence placing it within the amphisbaenians.

===Phylogeny===

The following cladogram shows the relationships between the six amphisbaenian families determined in the phylogenetic analysis of mitochondrial and nuclear genes by Vidal et al. (2008).

==References==
==Further reading==
*Branch, Bill (2004). &quot;Field Guide to Snakes and Other Reptiles of Southern Africa&quot;. Third Revised edition, Second Impression. Sanibel Island, Florida: Ralph Curtis Books. 399 pp. . (Suborder Amphisbaenia, pp. 201–202).
*Gans C (2005). &quot;Checklist and Bibliography of the Amphisbaenia of the World&quot;. &quot;Bulletin of the American Museum of Natural History&quot; (289): 1–130.
*, ; (1978). &quot;Introduction to Herpetology, Third Edition.&quot; San Francisco: W.H. Freeman and Company. xi + 378 pp. . (Suborder Amphisbaenia, pp. 276–278).
*Gray JE (1844). &quot;Catalogue of the Tortoises, Crocodiles, and Amphisbænians, in the Collection of the British Museum.&quot; London: Trustees of the British Museum. (Edward Newman, printer). viii + 80 pp. (&quot;Amphisbænia&quot;, new order, p. 68).</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q467382" start="0" end="12" title="Amphisbaenia" label="Amphisbaenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q467382" start="21" end="35" title="Amphisbaenia" label="amphisbaenians"/>
<link wikidata="Q467382" start="39" end="51" title="Amphisbaenia" label="worm lizards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1575091" start="77" end="91" title="legless lizard" label="legless lizard"/>
<link wikidata="Q124378" start="345" end="355" title="earthworms" label="earthworms"/>
<link wikidata="Q39713" start="379" end="384" title="Bipes (lizard)" label="Bipes"/>
<link wikidata="Q13518423" start="498" end="509" title="Lacertoidea" label="Lacertoidea"/>
<link wikidata="Q27532" start="548" end="558" title="Lacertidae" label="Lacertidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q168291" start="1528" end="1534" title="cornea" label="cornea"/>
<link wikidata="Q146701" start="1536" end="1540" title="Lens (anatomy)" label="lens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048080" start="1554" end="1566" title="ciliary body" label="ciliary body"/>
<link wikidata="Q5911033" start="1651" end="1667" title="anterior chamber" label="anterior chamber"/>
<link wikidata="Q474962" start="2008" end="2019" title="Amphisbaena" label="Amphisbaena"/>
<link wikidata="Q13417701" start="2212" end="2217" title="Bipedidae" label="Bipes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430039" start="2341" end="2359" title="Rhineura floridana" label="Rhineura floridana"/>
<link wikidata="Q39065" start="2613" end="2619" title="Blanus" label="Blanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q176503" start="2655" end="2660" title="femur" label="femur"/>
<link wikidata="Q465891" start="3218" end="3226" title="autotomy" label="autotomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q120446" start="3291" end="3301" title="viviparous" label="viviparous"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290784" start="3308" end="3323" title="Amphisbaena alba" label="red worm lizard"/>
<link wikidata="Q882257" start="3390" end="3404" title="leafcutter ant" label="leafcutter ant"/>
<link wikidata="Q200312" start="3886" end="3906" title="convergent evolution" label="convergent evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q853848" start="4681" end="4691" title="vicariance" label="vicariance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7054004" start="5328" end="5351" title="North Atlantic breakup" label="fully formed by 100 Mya"/>
<link wikidata="Q55811" start="5380" end="5395" title="Cretaceous–Paleogene extinction event" label="K–Pg extinction"/>
<link wikidata="Q55810" start="5426" end="5436" title="Palaeogene" label="Palaeogene"/>
<link wikidata="Q55816" start="5951" end="5967" title="Chicxulub impact" label="Chicxulub impact"/>
<link wikidata="Q21368951" start="6121" end="6150" title="Slavoia" label="&amp;quot;Slavoia darevskii&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q492941" start="6177" end="6186" title="Campanian" label="Campanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q13416851" start="6309" end="6320" title="Rhineuridae" label="Rhineuridae"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6344" end="6362" title="Oligodontosauridae" label="Oligodontosauridae"/>
<link wikidata="Q76252" start="6372" end="6381" title="Paleocene" label="Paleocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q787296" start="6516" end="6523" title="Oceanic dispersal" label="rafting"/>
<link wikidata="Q8269924" start="6562" end="6571" title="Taxonomy (biology)" label="Taxonomic"/>
<link wikidata="Q183252" start="6632" end="6656" title="Morphology (biology)" label="morphological characters"/>
<link wikidata="Q4769753" start="6700" end="6706" title="Annulus (zoology)" label="annuli"/>
<link wikidata="Q27075" start="6998" end="7015" title="mitochondrial DNA" label="mitochondrial DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q769863" start="7030" end="7041" title="nuclear DNA" label="nuclear DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="7138" end="7144" title="genera" label="genera"/>
<link wikidata="Q76274" start="7570" end="7576" title="Eocene" label="Eocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q13518423" start="7991" end="8002" title="Lacertoidea" label="Lacertoidea"/>
<link wikidata="Q733407" start="8085" end="8099" title="Amphisbaenidae" label="Amphisbaenidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q13417701" start="8231" end="8240" title="Bipedidae" label="Bipedidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q22718" start="8328" end="8335" title="axolotl" label="axolotl"/>
<link wikidata="Q39065" start="8359" end="8367" title="Blanidae" label="Blanidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q39031" start="8438" end="8446" title="Cadeidae" label="Cadeidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q13416851" start="8576" end="8587" title="Rhineuridae" label="Rhineuridae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1580794" start="8640" end="8653" title="Trogonophidae" label="Trogonophidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q20647042" start="8786" end="8799" title="Chthonophidae" label="Chthonophidae"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8804" end="8822" title="Oligodontosauridae" label="Oligodontosauridae"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8827" end="8845" title="Polyodontobaenidae" label="Polyodontobaenidae"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8876" end="8891" title="Crythiosauridae" label="Crythiosauridae"/>
<link wikidata="Q14939241" start="9267" end="9279" title="William Roy Branch" label="Branch, Bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q21341505" start="9497" end="9503" title="Carl Gans" label="Gans C"/>
<link wikidata="Q191963" start="9826" end="9833" title="John Edward Gray" label="Gray JE"/>
</links>
</doc>
