<doc id="308964" wikidata="Q699698" url="?curid=308964" title="Yan Xishan">
<text>Yan Xishan (; 8 October 1883 – 22 July 1960; also romanized as Yen Hsi-shan) was a Chinese warlord who served in the government of the Republic of China. He effectively controlled the province of Shanxi from the 1911 Xinhai Revolution to the 1949 Communist victory in the Chinese Civil War. 

As the leader of a relatively small, poor, remote province, he survived Yuan Shikai, the Warlord Era, the Nationalist Era, the Japanese invasion of China and the subsequent civil war, being forced from office only when the Nationalist armies with which he was aligned had completely lost control of the Chinese mainland, isolating Shanxi from any source of economic or military supply. He has been viewed by Western biographers as a transitional figure who advocated using Western technology to protect Chinese traditions, while at the same time reforming older political, social and economic conditions in a way that paved the way for the radical changes that would occur after his rule.

==Early life==
===Childhood===
Yan Xishan was born during the late Qing dynasty in Wutai County, Xinzhou, Shanxi, to a family who had been bankers and merchants for generations (Shanxi was known for its many successful banks until the late 19th century). As a young man he worked for several years at his father&#x27;s bank while he pursued a traditional Confucian education at a local village school. After his father was ruined by a late 19th-century depression, which ravaged the Chinese economy, Yan enrolled in a free military school that was run and financed by the Manchu government in Taiyuan. While studying at the school, he was first introduced to mathematics, physics, and various other subjects imported directly from the West. In 1904, he was sent to Japan to study at the Tokyo Shimbu Gakko, a military preparatory academy, and he later entered the Imperial Japanese Army Academy from which he graduated in 1909.

===Experience in Japan===
Over the five years that Yan studied in Japan, he became impressed by the country&#x27;s successful efforts at modernization. He observed the progress made by the Japanese, whom the Chinese had previously considered unsophisticated and backward, and began to worry about the consequences if China were to fall behind the rest of the world. That formative experience was later cited as a period of great inspiration for his later efforts to modernize Shanxi.

Yan eventually concluded that the Japanese had successfully modernized largely because of the government&#x27;s abilities to mobilize its populace in support of its policies and to the close respectful relationship that existed between the military and civilian populations. He attributed the surprising Japanese victory in the 1905 Russo-Japanese War to the enthusiastic mobilization of the Japanese public in supporting the military. After returning to China in 1910, he wrote a pamphlet warning China that it was in danger of being overtaken by Japan unless it developed a local form of &quot;bushido&quot;.

Even before studying in Japan, Yan had become disgusted with the open and widespread corruption of officials in Shanxi and had become convinced that China&#x27;s relative helplessness in the 19th century was the result of the Qing dynasty&#x27;s generally hostile attitude towards modernization and industrial development and its grossly inept foreign policy. While he was in Japan, he met Sun Yat-sen and joined his Tongmenghui (Revolutionary Alliance), a semi-secret society dedicated to overthrowing the Qing dynasty. He also attempted to popularize Sun&#x27;s ideology by organizing an affiliated &quot;Blood and Iron Society&quot; within the ranks of Chinese students at the Imperial Japanese Army Academy. The goal of the student group was to organize a revolution that would lead to the creation of a strong and united China, similar to how Otto von Bismarck had created a strong and united Germany. Yan also joined an even more militant organization of Chinese revolutionaries, the &quot;Dare-to-Die Corps.&quot;

===Return to China===
When Yan returned to China in 1909, he was assigned as a division commander of the New Army in Shanxi but secretly worked to overthrow the Qing. During the 1911 Xinhai Revolution, Yan led local revolutionary forces in driving Manchu troops from the province and proclaimed it independent of the Qing government. He justified his actions by attacking the Qing&#x27;s failure to repel foreign aggression, and he promised a wide range of social and political reforms.

==Career in early republic==
===Conflict with Yuan Shikai===
In 1911 Yan hoped to join forces with another prominent Shanxi revolutionary, Wu Luzhen, to undermine Yuan Shikai&#x27;s control of north China, but the plans were aborted after Wu was assassinated. Yan was elected military governor by his comrades but was unable to prevent a subsequent invasion by the troops of Yuan Shikai, who occupied most parts of Shanxi in 1913. During Yuan&#x27;s invasion, Yan survived only by withdrawing northward and aligning himself with a friendly insurgent group in neighboring Shaanxi province. By avoiding a decisive military confrontation with Yuan, Yan preserved his own base of power. Though he was friends with Sun Yat-sen, Yan withheld support for him in the 1913 &quot;Second Revolution&quot; and instead ingratiated himself with Yuan, who allowed him to return as military governor of Shanxi, commanding a military that was then staffed by Yuan&#x27;s own henchmen. In 1917, shortly after Yuan Shikai&#x27;s death, Yan solidified his control over Shanxi, ruling there uncontested. After Yuan&#x27;s death in 1916, China descended into a period of warlordism.

The determination of Shanxi to resist Manchu rule was a factor leading Yuan to believe that only the abolition of the Qing dynasty could bring peace to China and end the civil war. Yan&#x27;s inability to resist Yuan&#x27;s military domination of northern China was a factor contributing to Sun Yat-sen&#x27;s decision not to personally pursue the presidency of the Republic of China, which was established after the end of the Qing dynasty. The demonstrated futility of opposing Yuan&#x27;s military domination must have made it seem more important to Sun to bring Yuan into the process of ruling the republic and to come to terms with his (potential) enemy.

===Efforts to modernize Shanxi===
By 1911, Shanxi was one of the poorest provinces in China. Yan believed that unless he modernized and revived Shanxi&#x27;s economy and infrastructure, he would be unable to prevent Shanxi from being overrun by rival warlords. A military defeat in 1919 inflicted by a rival warlord convinced Yan that Shanxi was not sufficiently developed to compete for hegemony with other warlords, and he avoided the violent national politics of the time by enforcing a neutrality policy on Shanxi to free his province from the civil wars. Instead of participating in the ongoing civil wars, Yan devoted himself almost exclusively to modernizing Shanxi and developing its resources. The success of his reforms were sufficient for him to be dubbed by outsiders as the &quot;Model Governor,&quot; with Shanxi the &quot;Model Province.&quot;

In 1918, there was an outbreak of bubonic plague in northern Shanxi that lasted for two months and killed 2,664 people. Yan dealt with the epidemic by issuing instructions on modern germ theory and plague management to his officials. Yan instructed people that the plague was caused by tiny germs that were breathed into the lungs, the disease was incurable, and the only way to keep the disease from spreading was physical isolation of the infected. He ordered his officials to keep infected family members, neighbors, or even entire infected communities from each other by threat of police force if necessary. Yan&#x27;s promotion of germ theory and his enforcement of physical isolation to reduce the effect of epidemics were not completely accepted by the local population, and in some areas, the local people resisted the measures.

Yan&#x27;s determination to modernize Shanxi was partly inspired by his interactions with the foreign doctors and personnel who arrived in Shanxi in 1918 to help him suppress the epidemic. He was impressed with the zeal, talents, and modern outlook of the personnel and subsequently compared foreigners favorably to his own conservative and generally apathetic officials. Conversations with other famous reformers, including John Dewey, Hu Shih, and Yan&#x27;s close friend H.H. Kung, reinforced his determination to westernize Shanxi.

Yan attempted to modernize the state of medicine in China by funding the Research Society for the Advancement of Chinese Medicine, based in Taiyuan, in 1921. Highly unusual in China at the time, the school had a four-year curriculum and included courses in both Chinese and western medicine. Its courses were taught in English, German, and Japanese. The main skills that Yan hoped physicians trained at the school would learn were a standardized system of diagnosis; sanitary science, including bacteriology; surgical skills, including obstetrics; and the use of diagnostic instruments. Yan hoped that his support of the school would eventually lead to increased revenues in the domestic and international trade of Chinese drugs, improved public health, and improved public education. Yan&#x27;s interest in having such a school active in Shanxi was sparked after staying in a western hospital in Japan for three months in which he was impressed by seeing modern medical equipment, including X-rays and microscopes, for the first time.

Yan continued to promote a tradition of Chinese medicine that was informed by Western medical science throughout his period of governance, but much of the teaching and publication that the school of medicine produced was limited to the area around Taiyuan. By 1949, three of the seven government-run hospitals were in the city. In 1934, the province produced a ten-year-plan that envisaged employing a hygiene worker in every village, but the advent of World War II and the subsequent civil war made it impossible to carry those plans out.

===Involvement in Northern Expedition===
To maintain Shanxi&#x27;s neutrality and to free it from serious military confrontations with rival warlords, Yan developed a strategy of shifting alliances between various warring cliques and inevitably joining only winning sides. Although he was weaker than many of the warlords who surrounded him, he often held the balance of power between neighboring rivals, and even those whom he betrayed hesitated to retaliate against him in case they needed his support in the future. To resist the domination of the Manchurian warlord Zhang Zuolin, Yan allied himself with the forces of Chiang Kai-shek in 1927, during the Nationalists&#x27; Northern Expedition. While aiding Chiang, Yan&#x27;s occupation of Beijing in June 1928 brought the Northern Expedition to a successful conclusion. Yan&#x27;s assistance to Chiang was rewarded shortly afterwards by his being named minister of the interior and deputy commander-in-chief of all Kuomintang armies Yan&#x27;s support for Chiang&#x27;s military campaigns and his suppression of Communists influenced Chiang to recognize Yan as the governor of Shanxi and to allow him to expand his influence into Hebei.

===Involvement in Central Plains War===
Yan&#x27;s alliance with Chiang was interrupted in 1929 when Yan joined Chiang&#x27;s enemies to establish an alternative national government in northern China. His allies included the northern warlord Feng Yuxiang, the Guangxi Clique led by Li Zongren, and the left-leaning Kuomintang faction led by Wang Jingwei. While Feng and Chiang&#x27;s armies were annihilating each other, Yan marched virtually unopposed through Shandong and captured the provincial capital of Jinan in June 1930. After those victories, Yan attempted to forge a new national government, with himself as president, by calling an &quot;Enlarged Party Conference.&quot; Under his plan, Yan was to be president, and Wang was to serve as his prime minister. The conference attempted to draft a national constitution and involved the participation of numerous high-ranking Chinese militarists and politicians from among Chiang&#x27;s rivals. The deliberations were interrupted by Chiang, who decisively defeated Feng&#x27;s armies, invaded Shandong, and virtually annihilated Yan&#x27;s army. When the governor of Manchuria, Zhang Xueliang, publicly declared his allegiance to Chiang, whose support Zhang required to contest the Russians and Japanese, Yan fled to Dalian in the Japanese-held Kwantung Leased Territory and returned to an unconquered Shanxi only after he had made peace with Chiang in 1931. During the Central Plains War, the Kuomintang encouraged Muslims and Mongols to overthrow both Feng Yuxiang and Yan. Chiang&#x27;s defeat of Yan and Feng in 1930 is considered the end of China&#x27;s Warlord Era.

The events between 1927 and 1931 are best explained as the strategies of warlords accustomed to the constantly-shifting chaotic alliances that had characterized Chinese politics since the breakdown of the central government a decade earlier. The main causes of Yan&#x27;s defeat were the low population and the lack of development in the areas that he had under his control, which made him incapable of fielding a large and well-equipped army similar to the ones commanded by Chiang at the time. Yan was also unable to match the quality of leadership in Chiang&#x27;s officer corps and the prestige that Chiang and the Nationalist Army had at the time. Before Chiang&#x27;s armies defeated Feng and Yan, Yan Xishan appeared on the cover of TIME Magazine, with the subtitle &quot;China&#x27;s Next President.&quot; The attention given to him by foreign observers in that period and the support and assistance that he had secured from other high-profile Chinese statesmen implied that there was a credible expectation that Yan would lead a central government if Chiang failed to defeat Yan&#x27;s alliance.

===Return to Shanxi===
Yan returned to Shanxi only through a complex effort of intrigue and politicking. Much of Chiang&#x27;s failure to immediately and permanently eject Yan or his subordinates from Shanxi was largely from the influence of Zhang Xueliang and the Japanese, who were anxious to prevent the extension of Chiang&#x27;s authority into Manchuria. In Yan&#x27;s absence, the civil government of Shanxi ground to a halt, and the various military leaders of Shanxi struggled with one another to fill the vacuum, which forced Chiang&#x27;s government to appoint Shanxi&#x27;s leaders from among Yan&#x27;s subordinates. Although he did not immediately declare his return to provincial politics, Yan returned to Shanxi in 1931 with the support and protection of Zhang. That move was not protested by Chiang because of his involvement in suppressing the forces of Li Zongren, who had marched up to northern Hunan from his base in Guangxi in support of Yan.

Yan remained in the background of Shanxi politics until the Nanjing government&#x27;s failure to resist the Japanese takeover of Manchuria after the Mukden Incident gave Yan and his followers an opportunity to informally overthrow the Kuomintang in Shanxi. On 18 December 1931, a group of students, supported and perhaps orchestrated by officials loyal to Yan, gathered in Taiyuan to protest the Nanjing government&#x27;s policy of not fighting the Japanese. The demonstration became so violent that Kuomintang police fired into the crowd. The public outrage that the &quot;Massacre of December Eighteenth&quot; generated was strong enough to give Yan&#x27;s officials a pretext to expel the Kuomintang from the province on the grounds of public safety. After that event, the Kuomintang ceased to exist in Shanxi except as a dummy organization whose members were more loyal to Yan than to Chiang.

Future difficulties in securing the loyalty of other Chinese warlords across China, the ongoing civil war with the Communists, and the ongoing threat of Japanese invasion motivated Chiang to let Yan retain the title of Pacification Commissioner in 1932, and he appointed Yan to the central government&#x27;s Mongolian and Tibetan Affairs Commission. In 1934, Chiang finally flew to Taiyuan, where he praised Yan&#x27;s administration in return for Yan&#x27;s public support for Nanjing. By publicly praising Yan&#x27;s government, Chiang in effect admitted that Yan remained the undisputed ruler of Shanxi.

===Subsequent relationship with Nationalist government===
After 1931, Yan continued to give nominal support to the Nanjing government while he maintained de facto control over Shanxi by alternatively co-operating with and fighting against Communist agents active in his province. Although he was not an active participant, Yan supported the 1936 Xi&#x27;an Incident in which Chiang was arrested by Nationalist officers, led by Zhang Xueliang and Yang Hucheng and released only when he agreed to make peace with the Communists and form the united front to resist the impending Japanese invasion of China. In his correspondence with Zhang Xueliang in 1936, Yan indicated that the growing rift between him and Chiang was because of Yan&#x27;s anxieties over the potential for a Japanese invasion and a concern for the subsequent fate of China and because Yan was not convinced of the correctness of focusing China&#x27;s resources on anti-Communist campaigns. During the Xi&#x27;an Incident itself, Yan actively involved himself in the negotiations by sending representatives to prevent Chiang&#x27;s execution and the civil war that Yan believed would follow and to push for a united front to resist the Japanese invasion of China that Yan believed was imminent.

The financial relationship between Shanxi and the central government remained complicated. Yan was successful in creating a complex of heavy industries around Taiyuan but neglected to publicize the extent of his success outside of Shanxi, probably to deceive Chiang. Despite his measured successes in modernizing the industry of Shanxi, Yan repeatedly petitioned the central government for financial assistance to extend the local railroad, and for other reasons, but his requests were usually denied. When Yan refused to send taxes collected from the trade of salt, produced in Shanxi&#x27;s public factories, to the central government, Chiang retaliated by flooding the market of northern China with so much salt, produced around coastal China, that the price of salt in China&#x27;s northern provinces dropped extremely low. Those artificially low salt prices made neighboring provinces virtually stop purchasing Shanxi salt altogether. In 1935, Chiang&#x27;s announcement of a &quot;five-year plan&quot; to modernize Chinese industry was perhaps inspired by the successes of the &quot;Ten-Year Plan&quot; that Yan had announced several years earlier.

==Public policies==
In Shanxi, Yan implemented numerous successful reforms in an effort to centralize his control over the province. Although embracing the traditional values of the landed gentry, he denounced their &quot;oppression&quot; of the peasantry and took steps to initiate land reform and weaken the power of landowners over the populace in the countryside. The reforms also weakened potential rivals in his province and benefited Shanxi farmers.

Yan attempted to develop his army as a locally recruited force, which cultivated a public image of being servants, rather than masters, of the people. He developed an all-encompassing idiosyncratic ideology (literally &quot;Yan Xishan Thought&quot;) and disseminated it by sponsoring a network of village newspapers and traveling dramatic troupes. He co-ordinated dramatic public meetings in which participants confessed their own misdeeds and/or denounced those of others. He devised a system of public education, producing a population of trained workers and farmers literate enough to be indoctrinated without difficulty. The early date by which Yan devised and implemented the reforms, during the Warlord Era, contradicts later claims that these reforms were modeled on Communist programs and not vice versa.

===Military policies===
When Yan returned from Japan in 1909, he was a firm proponent of militarism and proposed a system of national conscription along German and Japanese lines. Germany&#x27;s defeat during World War I and Yan&#x27;s defeat in Henan in 1919 caused him to reassess the value of militarism as a way of life. He then decreased the size of the army until 1923 to save money until a rumor circulated that rival warlords were planning on invading Shanxi. Yan then introduced military reforms designed to train a rural militia of 100,000 men, along the lines of Japanese and American reserves.

Yan attempted via conscription to create a civilian reserve, which would become the foundation of society in Shanxi. His troops were perhaps the only army in the Warlord era drawn exclusively from the province in which it was stationed, and because he insisted for his soldiers to perform work to improve Shanxi&#x27;s infrastructure, including road-maintenance and assisting farmers, and because his discipline ensured that his soldiers actually paid for anything that they took from civilians, the army in Shanxi enjoyed much more popular support than most of his rivals&#x27; armies in China.

Yan&#x27;s officer corps was drawn from Shanxi&#x27;s gentry and given two years of education at government expense. Despite efforts to subject his officers to a rigorous Japanese-style training regimen and to indoctrinate them in Yan Xishan Thought, his armies never proved to be especially well-trained or disciplined in battle. In general, Yan&#x27;s military record is not considered positive (he had more defeats than victories) and it is unclear whether his officer corps either understood or sympathized with his objectives or entered his service solely in the interests of achieving prestige and a higher standard of living. Yan built an arsenal in Taiyuan that for the entire period of his administration remained the only center in China that could produce field artillery. The presence of the arsenal was one of the main reasons for Yan maintaining Shanxi&#x27;s relative independence. While not particularly effective fighting rival warlords, Yan&#x27;s army was successful in eradicating banditry in Shanxi, which allowed him to maintain a relatively-high level of public order and security. Yan&#x27;s successes in eradicating banditry in Shanxi included his co-operation with Yuan Shikai to defeat Bai Lang&#x27;s remnant rebels after the failed 1913-1914 Bai Lang Rebellion.

===Attempts at social reform===
Yan went to great lengths to eradicate social traditions that he considered antiquated. He insisted for all men in Shanxi to abandon their Qing-era queues and gave to police instructions to clip off the queues of anyone still wearing them. In one instance, Yan lured people into theatres to have his police systematically cut the hair of the audience. He attempted to combat widespread female illiteracy by creating in each district at least one vocational school in which peasant girls could be given a primary-school education and taught domestic skills. After Kuomintang military victories in 1925 generated great interest in Shanxi for the Nationalist ideology, including women&#x27;s rights, Yan allowed girls to enroll in middle school and college, where they promptly formed a women&#x27;s association.

Yan attempted to eradicate the custom of foot binding by threatening to sentence men who married women with bound feet and mothers who bound their daughters&#x27; feet to hard labor in state-run factories. He discouraged the use of the traditional lunar calendar and encouraged the development of local Boy Scout organizations. Like the Communists, who later succeeded Yan, he punished habitual lawbreakers to &quot;redemption through labour&quot; in state-run factories.

===Attempts to eradicate opium use===
In 1916, at least 10% of Shanxi&#x27;s 11 million people were addicted to opium, and Yan attempted to eradicate opium use in Shanxi after he came to power. At first, he dealt with opium dealers and addicts severely by throwing addicts in prison and exposing them and their families to public humiliation. After 1922, partly because of public opposition to harsh punishment, Yan abandoned punishing addicts in favor of attempting to rehabilitate them, pressuring individuals through their families, and constructing sanitariums designed to slowly cure addicts of their addictions.

Yan&#x27;s attempts to suppress the opium trade in Shanxi were largely successful, and the number of opium addicts in the province had been reduced by 80% by 1922. In the absence of efforts by other warlords to combat opium production and trade, Yan&#x27;s efforts to combat opium use only increased the price of opium so much that narcotics of all kinds were drawn into Shanxi from other provinces. Users often switched from opium to pills mixed from morphine and heroin, which were easier to smuggle and use. Because the most influential and powerful gentry in Shanxi were often the worst offenders, officials drawn from the privileged class of Shanxi seldom enforced Yan&#x27;s decrees outlawing the use of narcotics and often evaded punishment themselves. Eventually, Yan was forced to abandon his efforts to suppress opium trafficking and attempted instead to establish a government monopoly on the production and the sale of opium in Shanxi. Yan continued to complain about the availability of narcotics into the 1930s and after 1932 executed over 600 people caught smuggling drugs into Shanxi. The traffic persisted, but Yan&#x27;s interests in opposing it were perhaps limited by a fear of provoking the Japanese, who manufactured most of the morphine and heroin available in China in their concession area in Tianjin and came to control much of the drug trade in northern China in the 1930s.

===Limitations of economic reforms===
Yan&#x27;s efforts to stimulate Shanxi&#x27;s economy mostly consisted of state-led investment in a broad variety of industries, and he generally failed to encourage private investment and trade. Though gains were made to improve the economy of Shanxi, his efforts were limited by the fact that he himself had little formal training in economic or industrial theory. He also suffered from a lack of experienced, trained advisers capable of directing even moderately complicated tasks related to economic development. Because most of the educated staff to whom he had access to were solidly entrenched within the landed gentry of Shanxi, it is possible that many of his officials may have deliberately sabotaged his efforts for reform by preferring that the peasants working their fields continue their traditional cheap labour.

==Ideology==
Throughout his life, Yan attempted to identify, formulate, and disseminate a comprehensive ideology that would improve the morale and loyalty of his officials and of the people of Shanxi. During his time of study in Japan, Yan became attracted to militarism and Social Darwinism, but he renounced them after World War I. Throughout the rest of his life, he identified with the position of most Chinese conservatives at the time: social and economic reform would progress from ethical reform, and the problems confronting China could be solved only by the moral rehabilitation of the Chinese people. Believing that no single ideology existed to unify the Chinese people when he came to power, Yan attempted to generate an ideal ideology himself, and once boasted that he had succeeded in creating a comprehensive system of belief that embodied the best features of &quot;militarism, nationalism, anarchism, democracy, capitalism, communism, individualism, imperialism, universalism, paternalism and utopianism.&quot; Much of Yan&#x27;s attempts to spread his ideology were through a network of semi-religious organizations, known as &quot;Heart-Washing Societies.&quot;

===Influence of Confucianism===
Yan was emotionally attached to Confucianism by virtue of his upbringing, and he identified its values as a historically effective solution to the chaos and disorder of his time. He justified his rule via Confucian political theories and attempted to revive Confucian virtues as being universally accepted. In his speeches and writing, Yan developed an extravagant admiration for the virtues of moderation and harmony associated with the Confucian Doctrine of the Mean. Many of the reforms that Yan attempted were undertaken with the intention of demonstrating that he was a &quot;junzi&quot;, the epitome of Confucian virtue.

Yan&#x27;s interpretations of Confucianism were mostly borrowed from the form of Neo-Confucianism, which had been popular during the Qing dynasty. He taught that everyone had a capacity for innate goodness, but to fulfill that capacity people had to subordinate their emotions and desires to the control of their conscience. He admired the Ming dynasty philosophers Lu Jiuyuan and Wang Yangming, who disparaged knowledge and urged men to act on the basis of their intuition. Because Yan believed that human beings could achieve their potentials only through intense self-criticism and self-cultivation, he established in every town a Heart-Washing Society, whose members gathered each Sunday to meditate and listen to sermons based on the themes of the Confucian classics. Everyone at the meetings was supposed to rise and confess aloud his misdeeds of the past week, inviting criticism from the other members.

===Influence of Christianity===
Yan attributed much of the West&#x27;s vitality to Christianity and believed that China could resist and overtake the West only by generating an ideological tradition that was equally inspiring. He appreciated the efforts of missionaries, mostly Americans who maintained a complex of schools in Taigu, to educate and modernize Shanxi. He regularly addressed the graduating classes of the schools but was generally unsuccessful in recruiting the students to serve his regime. Yan supported the indigenous Christian church in Taiyuan and at one time seriously considered using Christian chaplains in his army. His public support of Christianity waned after 1925, when he failed to come to the defense of Christians during the anti-foreigner and anti-Christian demonstrations that polarized Taiyuan.

Yan deliberately organized many features of his Heart-Washing Society on the Christian church, including ending each service with hymns praising Confucius. He urged his subjects to place their faith in a supreme being that he called &quot;Shangdi&quot; and justified his belief in &quot;Shangdi&quot; via the Confucian classics but described &quot;Shangdi&quot; in terms very similar to the Christian interpretation of God. Like Christianity, Yan Xishan Thought was permeated with the belief that accepting his ideology could make people become regenerated or reborn.

===Influence of Chinese Nationalism===
In 1911, Yan came to power in Shanxi as a disciple of Chinese nationalism but subsequently came to view nationalism as merely another set of ideas that could be used to achieve his own objectives. He stated that the primary goal of the Heart-Washing Society was to encourage Chinese patriotism by reviving the Confucian church, which led foreigners to accuse him of attempting to create a Chinese version of Shinto.

Yan attempted to moderate some aspects of Sun Yat-sen&#x27;s ideology that he viewed as potentially threatening to his rule. Yan altered some of Sun&#x27;s doctrines before he disseminated them in Shanxi by formulating his own version of Sun&#x27;s Three Principles of the People that replaced the principles of nationalism and democracy with the principles of virtue and knowledge. During the 1919 May Fourth Movement, when students in Taiyuan staged anti-foreign demonstrations, Yan warned that patriotism, like rainfall, was beneficial only in moderation.

After the Kuomintang succeeded in forming a nominal central government in 1930, Yan encouraged Nationalist principles that he viewed as socially beneficial. In the 1930s, he attempted to set up in every village a &quot;Good People&#x27;s Movement&quot; to promote the values of Chiang&#x27;s New Life Movement. The values included honesty, friendliness, dignity, diligence, modesty, thrift, personal neatness, and obedience.

===Influence of socialism and communism===
In 1931 Yan returned from his exile in Dalian impressed with the apparent successes of Soviet Union&#x27;s first five-year plan and attempted to reorganize the economy of Shanxi by using Soviet methods, according to a local &quot;Ten-Year Plan&quot; that Yan himself developed. Throughout the 1930s, Yan bluntly equated economic development with state control of industry and finance, and he had become successful in bringing most major industry and commerce under state control by the late 1930s.

Yan&#x27;s speeches after 1931 reflect an interpretation of Marxist economics, mostly drawn from &quot;Das Kapital&quot;, that he had gained in exile in Dalian. Following that interpretation, Yan attempted to change the economy of Shanxi to become more like that of the Soviets and inspired a scheme of economic &quot;distribution according to labour&quot;. When the threat of Communists became a significant threat to Yan&#x27;s rule, he defended them as courageous and self-sacrificing fanatics who were different from common bandits, contrary to Kuomintang propaganda and thought that their challenge must be met by social and economic reforms, which alleviated the conditions responsible for them.

Like Karl Marx, Yan wanted to eliminate what he saw as unearned profit by restructuring Shanxi&#x27;s economy to reward only those who worked. Unlike Marx, Yan reinterpreted Communism to correct what he believed was Marxism&#x27;s chief flaw: the inevitability of class warfare. Yan praised Marx for his analysis of the material aspects of human society but professed to believe that there was a moral and spiritual unity of mankind that implied that a state of harmony was closer to the human ideal than conflict. By rejecting economic determinism in favor of morality and free will, Yan hoped to create a society that would be more productive and less violent than he perceived communism to be and to avoid the exploitation and the human misery that he believed was the inevitable result of capitalism.

Yan interpreted Franklin Roosevelt&#x27;s New Deal as promoting socialism to combat the spread of communism. &quot;The New Deal is an effective way of stopping communism,&quot; Yan said, &quot;by having the government step in and ride roughshod over the interests of the rich.&quot; Yan then undertook a series of public works projects inspired by the New Deal to reduce unemployment in his own province.

===Extent of success===
In spite of his efforts, Yan did not succeed in making his school of thought widely popular in Shanxi, and most of his subjects refused to believe that his true objectives differed substantially from those of past regimes. Yan himself blamed the failure of his ideology to become popular on the faults of his officials by charging that they abused their power and failed to explain his ideas to the common people. In general, the officials of Shanxi misappropriated funds intended to be used for propaganda, attempted to explain Yan&#x27;s ideas in language too sophisticated for the common people, and often behaved in a dictatorial manner that discredited Yan&#x27;s ideology and failed to generate popular enthusiasm for his regime.

==Threats to rule==
===Early conflict with Japan===
Yan did not come into serious conflict with the Japanese until the early 1930s. While he was in exile in Dalian in 1930, Yan became aware of Japanese plans to invade Manchuria and feigned collaboration with the Japanese to pressure Chiang Kai-shek into allowing him to return to Shanxi before warning Chiang of Japan&#x27;s intent. Japan&#x27;s subsequent success in taking Manchuria in 1931 terrified Yan, who stated that a major objective of his Ten-Year Plan was to strengthen Shanxi&#x27;s defense against the Japanese. In the early 1930s, he supported anti-Japanese riots, denounced the Japanese occupation of Manchuria as &quot;barbarous&quot; and &quot;evil,&quot; publicly appealed to Chiang to send troops to Manchuria, and arranged for his arsenal to arm partisans fighting the Japanese occupation in Manchuria.

In December 1931, Yan was warned that after taking control of Manchuria, the Japanese would attempt to take control of Inner Mongolia by subverting Chinese authority in Chahar and Suiyuan. To prevent that, he took control of Suiyuan first, developed its large iron deposits (24% of all iron in China), and settled the province with thousands of soldier-farmers. When the Manchukuo Imperial Army, armed and led by the Japanese, finally invaded Chahar in 1935, Yan virtually declared war on the Japanese by accepting a position as &quot;advisor&quot; of the Suiyuan Mongolian Political Council, an organization created by the central government to organize opposition to the Japanese.

The Japanese began promoting &quot;autonomy&quot; for northern China in the summer of 1935. Some high-ranking Japanese military officials believed that Yan and other warlords in the north were fundamentally pro-Japanese and would readily subordinate themselves to the Japanese in exchange for protection from Chiang. Yan was a particular target because of his education in Japan and his much-publicized admiration of the country&#x27;s modernization. However, Yan published an open letter in September in which he accused the Japanese of desiring to conquer all of China over the next two decades. According to Japanese sources, Yan entered into negotiations with the Japanese in 1935 but was never very enthusiastic about &quot;autonomy&quot; and rejected their overtures when he realized that they intended to make him their puppet. Yan likely used the negotiations to frighten Chiang into using his armies to defend Shanxi since he was afraid that Chiang was preparing to sacrifice northern China to avoid fighting the Japanese. If those were Yan&#x27;s intentions, they were successful since Chiang assured Yan that he would defend Shanxi with his army if it was invaded.

===Early conflict with Communists===
Although Yan admired their philosophy and economic methods, he feared the threat posed by Communists almost as much as that of the Japanese. In the early 1930s, he observed that if it invaded Shanxi, the Red Army would enjoy the support of 70% of his subjects and readily be able to recruit one million men from among its most desperate citizens. He remarked that &quot;the job of suppressing communism is 70% political and only 30% military, while the job of preventing its growth altogether is 90% political.&quot; To prevent a Communist threat to Shanxi, Yan sent troops to fight the Communists in Jiangxi and (later) Shaanxi, organized the gentry and village authorities into anti-corruption and anti-communist political organizations, and attempted (mostly unsuccessfully) to undertake a large-scale program of land reform.

Those reforms did not prevent the spread of Communist guerrilla operations into Shanxi. Led by Liu Zhidan and Xu Haidong, 34,000 Communist troops crossed into southwestern Shanxi in February 1936. As Yan had predicted, the Communists enjoyed massive popularity; although they were outnumbered and ill-armed, they succeeded in occupying the southern third of Shanxi in less than a month. The Communists&#x27; strategy of guerrilla warfare was extremely effective against and demoralizing for Yan&#x27;s forces, who repeatedly fell victim to surprise attacks. The Communists in Shanxi made good use of co-operation supplied by local peasants to evade and easily locate Yan&#x27;s forces. When the reinforcements sent by the central government forced the Communists to withdraw from Shanxi, the Red Army escaped by splitting into small groups, which were actively supplied and hidden by local supporters. Yan himself admitted that his troops had fought poorly during the campaign. The Kuomintang forces that remained in Shanxi expressed hostility to Yan&#x27;s rule but did not interfere with his governance.

===Invasion by Mengguguo===
In March 1936, Manchukuo troops occupying the province in Inner Mongolia of Chahar invaded northeastern Suiyuan, which Yan controlled. The Japanese-aligned forces seized the city of Bailingmiao in northern Suiyuan, where the pro-Japanese Inner Mongolian Autonomous Political Council maintained its headquarters. Three months later, the head of the Political Council, Prince De (Demchugdongrub), declared that he was the ruler of an independent Mongolia (Mengguguo), and organized an army with the aid of Japanese equipment and training. In August 1936, Prince De&#x27;s army attempted to invade eastern Suiyuan but was defeated by Yan&#x27;s forces under the command of Fu Zuoyi. After that defeat, Prince De planned another invasion while Japanese agents carefully sketched and photographed Suiyuan&#x27;s defenses.

To prepare for the imminent threat of Japanese invasion, which he felt after Suiyuan was invaded, Yan attempted to force all students to undergo several months of compulsive military training and formed an informal alliance with the Communists for the purpose of fighting the Japanese several months before the Xi&#x27;an Incident compelled Chiang to do the same. In November 1936, the army of Prince De presented Fu Zuoyi with an ultimatum to surrender. When Fu responded that Prince De was merely a puppet of &quot;certain quarters&quot; and requested him to submit to the authority of the central government, Prince De&#x27;s Mongolian and Manchurian armies launched another more ambitious attack. Prince De&#x27;s 15,000 soldiers were armed with Japanese weapons, supported by Japanese aircraft, and often led by Japanese officers. Japanese soldiers fighting for Mengguguo were often executed after their capture as illegal combatants since Mengguguo was not recognized as being part of Japan.

In anticipation of the war, Japanese spies destroyed a large supply depot in Datong and carried out other acts of sabotage. Yan placed his best troops and most able generals, including Zhao Chengshou and Yan&#x27;s son-in-law, Wang Jingguo, under the command of Fu Zuoyi. During the month of fighting that ensued, the army of Mengguguo suffered severe casualties. Fu&#x27;s forces succeeded in retaking Bailingmiao on 24 November, and he was considering invading Chahar before he was warned by the Japanese Kwantung Army that doing so would provoke an attack by the Imperial Japanese Army. Prince De&#x27;s forces repeatedly attempted to retake Bailingmiao, but that only provoked Fu into sending troops north, where he successfully seized the last of Prince De&#x27;s bases in Suiyuan and virtually annihilated his army. After Japanese officers were found to be aiding Prince De, Yan publicly accused Japan of aiding the invaders. His victories in Suiyuan over Japanese-backed forces were praised by Chinese newspapers and magazines, other warlords, and political leaders, and many students and members of the Chinese public.

==Second Sino-Japanese War==
During the Second Sino-Japanese War (1937–1945), most regions of Shanxi were quickly overrun by the Japanese, but Yan refused to flee the province even after he had lost the provincial capital, Taiyuan. He relocated his headquarters to a remote corner of the province and effectively resisted Japanese attempts to completely seize Shanxi. During the war, the Japanese made no less than five attempts to negotiate peace terms with Yan and hoped that he would become a second Wang Jingwei, but Yan refused and stayed aligned with the Second United Front between the Nationalists and the Communists.

===Alliance with Communists===
After the failed attempt by the Chinese Red Army to establish bases in southern Shanxi in early 1936, the subsequent continued presence of Nationalist soldiers there, and the Japanese attempts to take Suiyuan that summer, Yan became convinced that the Communists were lesser threats to his rule than were either the Nationalists or the Japanese. He then negotiated a secret anti-Japanese &quot;united front&quot; with the Communists in October 1936 and, after the Xi&#x27;an Incident two months later, successfully influenced Chiang to enter a similar agreement with the Communists. After establishing his alliance with the Communists, Yan lifted the ban on Communist activities in Shanxi. He allowed Communist agents working under Zhou Enlai to establish a secret headquarters in Taiyuan and released Communists that he had been holding in prison, including at least one general, Wang Ruofei.

Yan, under the slogan &quot;resistance against the enemy and defense of the soil,&quot; attempted to recruit young patriotic intellectuals to his government to organize a local resistance to the threat of a Japanese invasion. By 1936, Taiyuan had become a gathering point for anti-Japanese intellectuals who had fled from Beijing, Tianjin, and Northeast China and readily co-operated with Yan, but he also recruited natives of Shanxi who lived across China regardless of their former political associations. Some Shanxi officials attracted to Yan&#x27;s cause in the late 1930s later became important figures in the Chinese government, including Bo Yibo.

===Early campaigns===
In July 1937, after the Marco Polo Bridge Incident had provoked the Japanese into attacking Chinese forces in and around Beijing, the Japanese sent a large number of warplanes and Manchurian soldiers to reinforce Prince De&#x27;s army. That caused Yan to believe that a Japanese invasion of Shanxi was imminent and so he flew to Nanjing to communicate the situation to Chiang. Yan left his meeting in Nanjing with an appointment as commander of the Second War Zone, comprising Shanxi, Suiyuan, Chahar, and northern Shaanxi.

After returning to Shanxi, Yan encouraged his officials to be suspicious of enemy spies and &quot;hanjian&quot; and ordered his forces to attack Prince De&#x27;s forces in northern Chahar in the hope of surprising and overwhelming them quickly. The Mongolian and Manchu forces were quickly routed, and Japanese reinforcements attempting to force their way through the strategic Nankou pass suffered heavy casualties. Overwhelming Japanese firepower, including artillery, bombers, and tank, eventually forced Yan&#x27;s forces to surrender Nankou, and Japanese forces then quickly seized Suiyuan and Datong. The Japanese began the invasion of Shanxi in earnest.

As the Japanese had advanced southward into Taiyuan Basin, Yan attempted to impose discipline on his army by executing General Li Fuying and other officers guilty of retreating from the enemy. He issued orders not to withdraw or to surrender under any circumstances, vowed to resist Japan until the Japanese had been defeated, and invited his own soldiers to kill him if he betrayed his promise. In the face of continued Japanese advances, Yan apologized to the central government for his army&#x27;s defeats, asked it to assume responsibility for the defense of Shanxi, and agreed to share control of the provincial government with one of Chiang&#x27;s representatives.

When it became clear to Yan that his forces might not be successful in repelling the Japanese, he invited Communist military forces to re-enter Shanxi. Zhu De became the commander of the Eighth Route Army active in Shanxi and was named the vice-commander of the Second War Zone, under Yan himself. Yan initially responded warmly to the re-entry of the arrival of Communist forces, who were greeted with enthusiasm by Yan&#x27;s officials and officers. Communist forces arrived in Shanxi just in time to help defeat a decisively more powerful Japanese force attempting to move through a strategic mountain pass at the Battle of Pingxingguan. After the Japanese had responded to the defeat by outflanking the defenders and moving towards Taiyuan, the Communists avoided decisive battles and mostly attempted to harass Japanese forces and sabotage Japanese lines of supply and communication. The Japanese suffered but mostly ignored the Eighth Route Army and continued to advance towards Yan&#x27;s capital. The lack of attention directed at their forces gave the Communists time to recruit and propagandize among the local peasant populations, who generally welcomed Communist forces enthusiastically, and to organize a network of militia units, local guerrilla bands, and popular mass organizations.

Genuine Communist efforts to resist the Japanese gave them the authority to carry out sweeping and radical social and economic reforms, mostly related to land and wealth redistribution, which they defended by labeling those who resisted as &quot;hanjian&quot;. Communist efforts to resist the Japanese also won over Shanxi&#x27;s small population of patriotic intellectuals, and conservative fears of resisting them effectively gave the Communists unlimited access to the rural population. Subsequent atrocities committed by the Japanese in the effort to rid Shanxi of Communist guerrillas aroused the hatred of millions in the Shanxi countryside, which caused the rural population to turn to the Communists for leadership against the Japanese. All of those factors explain how within a year of re-entering Shanxi, the Communists had taken control of most parts of Shanxi that were not firmly held by the Japanese.

===Fall of Taiyuan===

By executing commanders guilty of retreating, Yan succeeded in improving the morale of his forces. During the Battle of Pingxingguan, Yan&#x27;s troops in Shanxi successfully resisted numerous Japanese assaults, and the Eighth Route Army harassed the Japanese from the rear and along their flanks. Other units of Yan&#x27;s army successfully defended other nearby passes. After the Japanese had successfully broken into the Taiyuan Basin, they continued to encounter ferocious resistance. At Yuanping, a single brigade of Yan&#x27;s troops held out against the Japanese advance for over a week, which allowed reinforcements sent by the Nationalist government to take up defensive positions at the Battle of Xinkou. The Communist generals Zhu De and Peng Dehuai criticized Yan for what they called &quot;suicidal tactics,&quot; but Yan was confident that the heavy losses suffered by the Japanese would eventually demoralize them and force them to abandon their effort to take Shanxi.

During the Battle of Xinkou, the Chinese defenders resisted the efforts of Japan&#x27;s elite Itakagi Division for over a month, despite Japanese advantages in artillery and air support. By the end of October 1937, Japan&#x27;s losses had become four times greater than those suffered at Pingxingguan, with the Itakagi Division near defeat. Contemporary Communist accounts called the battle &quot;the most fierce in North China,&quot; and Japanese military reports referred to the battle a &quot;stalemate&quot;, one of the few setbacks that Japanese military planners admitted to in the first several years of the war. In an effort to save their forces at Xinkou, Japanese forces began an effort to occupy Shanxi from a second direction, in the east. After a week of fighting, Japanese forces captured the strategic Niangzi Pass and opened the way to capturing Taiyuan. Communist guerrilla tactics were ineffective in slowing down the Japanese advance. The defenders at Xinkou, realizing that they were in danger of being outflanked, withdrew southward, past Taiyuan, and left a small force of 6,000 men to hold off the entire Japanese army. A representative of the Japanese Army, speaking of the final defense of Taiyuan, said that &quot;nowhere in China have the Chinese fought so obstinately.&quot;

The Japanese suffered 30,000 dead, with an equal number wounded, in their effort to take northern Shanxi. A Japanese study found that the Battles of Pingxingguan, Xinkou, and Taiyuan had been responsible for over half of all the casualties suffered by the Japanese in North China. Yan himself was forced to withdraw after 90% of his army had been destroyed, including a large force of reinforcements that had been sent into Shanxi by the central government. Throughout 1937, numerous high-ranking Communist leaders, including Mao Zedong, lavished praise on Yan for waging an uncompromising campaign of resistance against the Japanese.

===Re-establishment of Yan&#x27;s authority===
Shortly before losing Taiyuan, Yan moved his headquarters to Linfen, in southwestern Shanxi. Japanese forces halted their advance to focus on combating Communist guerrilla units still active in their territory and communicated to Yan that they would exterminate his forces within a year but that he and his supporters would be treated with consideration if they severed relations with the central government and assisted the Japanese in suppressing the Communists. Yan responded by repeating his promise not to surrender until Japan had been defeated. Possibly because of the severity of his losses in northern Shanxi, Yan abandoned a plan of defense based on positional warfare and began to reform his army as a force capable of waging guerrilla warfare. After 1938, most of Yan&#x27;s followers came to refer to his regime as a &quot;guerrilla administration.&quot;

In February 1938, Japanese forces invaded Linfen. Yan&#x27;s forces, under the command of Wei Lihuang, put up a stiff defense at Lingshi Pass but were eventually forced to abandon the position when a Japanese column broke through a different pass and threatened Linfen from the east. Wei prevented the Japanese from seizing the strategic Zhongtiao Mountain Range, but the loss of Linfen and Lingshi forced Yan to withdraw with what remained of his army across the Yellow River, into Yichuan County, Shaanxi, which closely neighbored the Communists&#x27; base, the Shaan-Gan-Ning Border Region.

In the spring of 1938, the Japanese transferred many of their forces away from Shanxi, and Yan succeeded in re-establishing his authority by setting up a headquarters in the remote mountainous district of Qixian. The Japanese made several raids into southern Shanxi but withdrew after they had encountered heavy resistance. By 1938, Yan&#x27;s tactics had evolved to resemble the guerrilla warfare practiced by Communist forces in other parts of Shanxi, and his defenses featured co-ordination with Communist forces and regular divisions of the Nationalists.

Yan&#x27;s alliance with the Communists eventually suffered, as tensions escalated between the Nationalists and the Communists in other parts of China. Yan himself eventually came to fear the rapid power and influence that Communist forces operating in Shanxi had quickly gained, and that fear caused him to become increasingly hostile to Communist agents and soldiers. Those tensions eventually led to the breakdown of his good relations with the Communists by October 1939. During the Nationalist 1939–1940 Winter Offensive, which was led by Yan, he was perceived to be intentionally weakening the Communist-dominated &quot;Shanxi New Army&quot; by sacrificing them as the vanguard. Yan accused the New Army leadership of replacing Kuomintang officers with Communists, seizing grain supply from his troops, and sabotaging the Nationalist-led Winter Offensive. In December 1939, those units rebelled against Yan in what is known as the Jin-Xi Incident. Both the Nationalists and the Communists sent in reinforcements in the subsequent conflict. By February 1940, the internal conflict had mostly ceased. Yan&#x27;s &quot;old&quot; Shanxi Clique army maintained control of southern Shanxi, the Eighth Route Army took control of north-western Shanxi, and the central government forces loyal to Chiang took control of central Shanxi. Yan&#x27;s forces continued to battle the Japanese throughout 1940 as part of an indecisive guerrilla campaign.

===Negotiations with Japanese===
In 1940 Yan&#x27;s friend, Ryūkichi Tanaka, became chief of staff of the Japanese First Army, which was stationed in Shanxi. After Yan&#x27;s animosity with the Communists became apparent, Tanaka began negotiations with Yan in an effort to induce him to enter into an anti-Communist alliance with Japan. Yan agreed to send a high-level representative to meet with the Japanese and obtained permission from the central government to negotiate with them for an agreement to remove all troops from Shanxi in exchange for Yan&#x27;s co-operation. Perhaps because the Japanese were unwilling to meet those demands, Yan withdrew from negotiations in December 1940, when Tanaka&#x27;s superiors recalled him to Japan. Two months later the Japanese repeated their charge that Yan was a &quot;dupe&quot; of the Communists.

In May 1941, Tanaka returned to Shanxi and reopened negotiations with Yan, despite a general resistance from other Japanese military leaders in Northern China. Tanaka returned to Tokyo in August 1941 to pave the way for talks between Yan and General Yoshio Iwamatsu, then the commander of the Japanese First Army in Shanxi. In the summer of 1942, Yan told the Japanese that he would aid them in their fight against the Communists if the Japanese withdrew a large part of their forces from Shanxi and provided his army with food, weapons, and CH$15 million of precious metals.

When Iwamatsu sent his chief of staff, Colonel Tadashi Hanaya, to Qixian for the purpose of delivering what Yan demanded, Yan called the Japanese concessions inadequate and refused to negotiate with them. That refusal is variously explained as Yan&#x27;s resentment over the arrogance of the Japanese, his conviction that they would lose the war in the Pacific after he had heard about the Battle of Midway, and/or the result of a translation error that convinced him that the Japanese were using the negotiations as a ploy to ambush and to attack him by surprise. The Japanese, in any case, believed that they had been intentionally misled and humiliated. Iwamatsu lost his command, and Hanaya was reassigned to the Pacific.

After 1943, the Japanese began to negotiate with Yan clandestinely through civilian representatives (notably his friend Daisaku Komoto) in an effort to avoid being humiliated by him. Through Komoto&#x27;s efforts, Yan and the Japanese came to observe an informal ceasefire, but the terms of the agreement are unknown. By 1944, Yan&#x27;s troops were actively battling the Communists, possibly with the co-operation and the assistance of the Japanese. His relationship with Chiang also deteriorated by 1944, when Yan warned that the masses would turn to Communism if Chiang&#x27;s government did not improve considerably. An American reporter who visited Shanxi in 1944 observed that Yan &quot;was thought of not necessarily as a puppet but rather as a compromise between the extremes of the treason at Nanjing and national resistance at Chongqing&quot; by the Japanese.

===Relationship with Japanese after 1945===
After the surrender of Japan and the end of World War II, Yan Xishan was notable for his ability to recruit thousands of Japanese soldiers stationed in northwest Shanxi in 1945, including their commanding officers, into his army. He was known to have successfully used a variety of tactics to achieve those defections: flattery, face-saving gestures, appeals to idealism, and genuine expressions of mutual interest. If he was not completely successful, he sometimes resorted to &quot;bribes and women.&quot; His tactics in both convincing the Japanese to stay and preventing them from leaving were highly successful, as the efforts of the Japanese were instrumental in keeping the area surrounding Taiyuan free from Communist control for the four years before the Communists won the Chinese Civil War.

Yan was successful in keeping the presence of the Japanese from American and Nationalist observers. He was known for making shows of disarming Japanese, only to rearm them at night. In one instance, he disarmed several units of Japanese, had a reporter take a picture of the stacked weapons to show that he was following orders, and gave the weapons back to the Japanese. He once officially labelled a detachment of Japanese troops as &quot;railway repair laborers&quot; in public records before he sent them, fully armed, into areas without railway tracks but full of Communist insurgents.

By recruiting the Japanese into his service in that manner, he retained both the extensive industrial complex around Taiyuan and virtually all of the managerial and technical personnel employed by the Japanese to run it. Yan was so successful in convincing surrendered Japanese to work for him that as word spread to other areas of Northern China, Japanese soldiers from those areas began to converge on Taiyuan to serve his government and army. At its greatest strength, the Japanese &quot;special forces&quot; under Yan totaled 15,000 troops, plus an officer corps that was distributed throughout Yan&#x27;s army. Those numbers were reduced to 10,000 after serious American efforts to repatriate the Japanese were partially successful. By 1949, casualties had reduced the number of Japanese soldiers under Yan&#x27;s command to 3,000. The leader of the Japanese under Yan&#x27;s command, Imamura Hosaku, committed suicide on the day that Taiyuan fell to Communist forces.

== Chinese Civil War ==

After the end of the Pacific War, Yan&#x27;s forces, including thousands of former Japanese troops, held out against the Communists during the Chinese Civil War for four years, until April 1949, after the Nationalist government had lost control of Northern China, which allowed the Communists to encircle and besiege his forces. The area surrounding the provincial capital of Taiyuan was the longest to resist Communist control.

===Shangdang Campaign===
The Shangdang Campaign was the first battle between Communist and Nationalist forces after World War II. It began as an attempt by Yan, who was authorized by Chiang, to re-assert control over southern Shanxi, where the Communists were known to be especially active. Meanwhile, Yan&#x27;s former general, Fu Zuoyi, had captured several important cities in Inner Mongolia: Baotou and Hohhot. If both Yan and Fu had been successful, they would have cut off the Communist headquarters in Yan&#x27;an from their forces in Northeast China. The local commander, Liu Bocheng, later named one of China&#x27;s &quot;Ten Great Marshals, decided to direct his forces against Yan in order to prevent that from happening. Liu&#x27;s political commissar was the 41-year-old Deng Xiaoping, who later became China&#x27;s &quot;paramount leader.&quot;

The initial skirmishes of the campaign were fought on 19 August 1945, when Yan dispatched 16,000 troops under Shi Zebo to capture the city of Changzhi, in southeastern Shanxi. On 1 September, Liu arrived with 31,000 troops and encircled Changzhi. After initial engagements between Shi Zebo&#x27;s and Liu Bocheng&#x27;s forces, Shi barricaded his forces inside the regional center of Chengzhi. Liu&#x27;s army occupied the area surrounding Chengzhi but was not able to take the city, which led to a stalemate.

After it became clear that Liu&#x27;s forces were in danger of being defeated, Yan sent 20,000 more troops, who were commanded by Peng Yubin, to reinforce Shi and break the siege. Liu responded by concentrating his forces against Peng and leaving only a screening force behind to carry out low-level suppression activities in Changzhi. Most of the forces left behind in Changzhi were selected from a local 50,000-man irregular militia unit, which had been used by Liu mainly for logistical support.

Peng was initially successful in defeating Communist detachments, but his forces were eventually led into an ambush. He was killed, and his army quickly surrendered en masse. When Shi realized that he had no hope of relief, he attempted to break out and flee to Taiyuan on 8 October but was caught on open ground, ambushed, and forced to surrender on 10 October. He was taken as a prisoner-of-war.

Although both forces suffered the same amount of dead or wounded (4,000 to 5,000) the Communists captured 31,000 of Yan&#x27;s troops, who surrendered once they had fallen into those ambushes. After surrendering, most of Yan&#x27;s forces were subjected to organized persuasion or coercion and eventually joined the Communists. Most of the Communist casualties in the campaign occurred when they attempted to confront Peng&#x27;s reinforcements in an orthodox battle, which allowed Yan&#x27;s forces to target Liu&#x27;s troops with their superior arms. After those tactics failed, Communist forces killed or captured both Shi&#x27;s and Peng&#x27;s forces by leading both of them into a series of well-orchestrated ambushes.

The Shangdang Campaign ended with the Communists being in firm control of southern Shanxi. Because the army fielded by Yan was much better supplied and armed, the victory allowed the local Communists to acquire far more arms than had previously been available to them, including, for the first time, field artillery. It is said that the victory in the Shangdang campaign altered the course of the ongoing Chongqing peace negotiations, which allowed Mao Zedong to act from a stronger negotiating position. Their victory in the Shangdang campaign boosted the long-term prestige of both Liu and Deng. After the campaign, Liu left a small force behind to defend southern Shanxi and led most of his best units and captured equipment to confront the forces of Sun Lianzhong in the Pinghan Campaign.

In 1946, Communist forces in Northwest China identified the capture of Yan&#x27;s capital of Taiyuan as one of their main objectives, and throughout 1946 and 1947, Yan was constantly involved in efforts to defend the north and to retake the south. Those efforts were only temporarily successful, and by the winter of 1947, his control of Shanxi had become restricted to the area of northern Shanxi adjacent to Taiyuan. Yan observed that the Communists were growing stronger and predicted that within six months, they would rule half of China. After losing southern Shanxi, Yan undertook preparations to defend Taiyuan to the death, perhaps in the hopes that if he and other anti-Communist leaders could hold out long enough, the United States would eventually join the war on their side and save his forces from destruction.

===Taiyuan Campaign===

By 1948, Yan&#x27;s forces had suffered a succession of serious military defeats by the Communists, lost control of southern and central Shanxi, and were surrounded on all sides by territory controlled by the Communists. Anticipating an assault on northern Shanxi, Yan prepared his armies by fortifying over 5,000 bunkers, constructed over the rugged natural terrain surrounding Taiyuan. The Nationalist 30th Army was airlifted from Xi&#x27;an to Taiyuan to fortify the city, which was protected by over 600 pieces of artillery. Yan repeatedly declared his intentions to die in the city during that period. The total number of Nationalist troops present in northern Shanxi by the fall of 1948 was 145,000.

To overcome the defenses, the Communist commander Xu Xiangqian developed a strategy of engaging positions on the outskirts of Taiyuan before the city itself was besieged. The first hostilities in the Taiyuan Campaign occurred on 5 October 1948. By 13 November, the Communists had succeeded in taking the area around the eastern side of Taiyuan. The Nationalists suffered serious setbacks when entire divisions defected or surrendered. In one case, a Nationalist division, led by Dai Bingnan, pretended to surrender but then arrested the Communist officers who entered Dai&#x27;s camp to accept. Yan Xishan mistakenly believed the leader of the arrested group, Jin Fu, was the high-ranking Communist leader Hu Yaobang, who the Nationalists believed was active in the region. Yan airlifted the captured group to Chiang, who executed them after they had failed to produce important information. Dai himself was rewarded with a large amount of gold for his actions but was not allowed to be airlifted out of Taiyuan. After the city fell, he was captured, tried in a well-propagandized show trial, and publicly executed.

Between November 1948 and April 1949, a stalemate was reached, and there was little advancement by either side. Tactics used by the Communists during that time included psychological warfare, such as forcing relatives of the Nationalist defenders to the front to ask for the defenders&#x27; surrender. Those tactics were successful, as from 1 December 1948 to March 1949, over 12,000 Nationalist soldiers surrendered.

After major PLA victories in Hebei in late January 1949, the Communist armies in Shanxi were reinforced with additional troops and artillery. After that reinforcement, the total number of men under Liu&#x27;s command exceeded 320,000, of which 220,000 were reserves. By the end of 1948, Yan Xishan had lost over 40,000 troops, but he attempted to supplement that number through large-scale conscription.

Yan Xishan himself, along with most of the provincial treasury, was airlifted out of Taiyuan in March 1949 for the express purpose of asking the central government for more supplies. He left behind Sun Chu as the commander of his military police force, with Yan&#x27;s son-in-law, Wang Jingguo, in charge of most Nationalist forces. Overall command was delegated to Imamura Hosaku, the Japanese lieutenant-general who had joined Yan after World War II.

Shortly after Yan had been airlifted out of Taiyuan, Nationalist planes stopped dropping food and supplies for the defenders for fear of being shot down by the advancing Communists. The Communists, depending largely on their reinforcements of artillery, launched a major assault on 20 April 1949 and succeeded in taking all of the positions surrounding Taiyuan by 22 April. A subsequent appeal to the defenders to surrender was refused. On the morning of 22 April 1949, the Communists bombarded Taiyuan with 1,300 pieces of artillery, breached the city&#x27;s walls, and initiated bloody street-to-street fighting for control of the city. At 10:00 a.m. on 22 April, the Taiyuan Campaign ended with the Communists taking complete control of Shanxi. The total Nationalist casualties amounted to all 145,000 defenders, many of whom were taken as prisoners-of-war. Imamura committed suicide, Sun was captured, and Wang was last seen being led away by the Communists. The Communists lost 45,000 men and an unknown number of civilian laborers whom they had drafted, all of whom had been killed or injured.

==Later life==
===Premier of Republic of China===
In March 1949, Yan flew to the capital of Nanjing to ask the central government for more food and ammunition. He had taken most of the provincial treasury with him and did not return before Taiyuan had fallen to Communist forces. Shortly after arriving in Nanjing, Yan insinuated himself into a quarrel between the acting president of the Chinese Republic, Li Zongren, and Chiang Kai-shek, who had declared incapacity in January 1949. However, many officials and generals remained loyal to Chiang, who retained over US$200 million, which he did not allow Li to use to fight the Communists or to stabilize the currency. The ongoing power struggle between Li and Chiang seriously disrupted the larger effort to defend Nationalist territory from the Communist forces.

Yan focused his efforts on attempting to promote greater co-operation between Li and Chiang. On one occasion, he broke down in tears when attempting, at Chiang&#x27;s request, to convince Li not to resign. He repeatedly used the example of the loss of Shanxi and warned that the Nationalist cause was doomed unless Li and Chiang&#x27;s relationship improved. Li eventually attempted to form a government, including Chiang&#x27;s supporters and critics, with Yan as premier. Despite Yan&#x27;s efforts, Chiang refused to allow Li access to more than a fraction of the wealth that Chiang had sent to Taiwan, and officers loyal to Chiang refused to follow Li&#x27;s orders, which frustrated efforts to co-ordinate Nationalist defenses and to stabilize the currency.

By late 1949, the Nationalists&#x27; position had become desperate. The currency issued by the central government rapidly declined in value until it became virtually worthless. Military forces loyal to Li attempted to defend Guangdong and Guangxi, and those loyal to Chiang attempted to defend Sichuan. Both forces refused to co-operate with each other, which eventually led to the loss of both regions. Yan&#x27;s constant attempts to work with both sides led to being alienated from both Li and Chiang, who resented Yan for co-operating with either side. The Communists succeeded in taking all territory held on the mainland by the end of 1949 and so defeated both Li and Chiang. Li went into exile in the United States, leaving Yan, who continued to serve as Premier in Taiwan, as the &quot;de facto&quot; leader of the Republic of China, until March 1950 when Chiang re-assumed the presidency.

===Retirement in Taiwan===
Yan&#x27;s final years were filled with disappointment and sadness. After following Chiang to Taiwan, he enjoyed the title of Chiang&#x27;s &quot;senior advisor&quot; but in reality was utterly powerless. Chiang may have held a long-term grudge against Yan for the activities on behalf of Li in Guangdong. On more than one occasion, Yan requested permission to go to Japan, but he was not allowed to leave Taiwan.

Yan was deserted by all but a handful of followers and spent most of his remaining years writing books on philosophy, history, and contemporary events, which he frequently had translated into English. His late philosophical perspective has been described as &quot;anti-communist and anti-capitalist Confucian utopianism.&quot; Several months before the Korean War Yan published a book, &quot;Peace or World War&quot;, in which he predicted that North Korea would invade South Korea, South Korea would be quickly overcome, the United States would intervene on the side of South Korea, and Communist China would intervene on the side of North Korea. All of those events later occurred over the course of the Korean War.

Yan died in Taiwan on 24 May 1960. He was buried in the Qixingjun region of Yangmingshan. For decades, Yan&#x27;s residence and grave were cared for by a small number of former aides, who had accompanied him from Shanxi. In 2011, when the last of his aides turned 81 and was unable to care for the residence, the responsibility of maintaining the site was taken over by the Taipei City Government.

==Legacy==
After the Chinese Civil War, Yan, like most other Nationalist generals who did not switch sides, was demonized by Communist propaganda. It was not until after 1979, with new reforms in China, that he began to be viewed more positively and thus more realistically as a pragmatic anti-Japanese hero. The contributions by Yan during his period in office are beginning to be recognized by the current Chinese government.

Yan was sincere about his attempts to modernize Shanxi and achieved success in some regards. When he was forced out of Shanxi by the Communists, the province had become a major producer of coal, iron, chemicals, and munitions. Yan&#x27;s generous support for the Research Association for the Improvement of Chinese Medicine generated a body of teaching and publication in modern Chinese medicine that became one of the foundations of the national institution of modern traditional Chinese medicine that was adopted in the 1950s. Throughout his rule, he attempted to promote social reforms that later came to be taken for granted but were highly controversial during his time, the abolition of foot binding, work for women outside the home, universal primary education, and the existence of peasant militias as a fundamental unit of the army. He was possibly the warlord most committed to his province in his era but was constantly challenged by his own dilettantism and the selfishness and the incompetence of his own officials.

Although Yan constantly spoke of the desirability and need for reforms, he remained until the 1930s too conservative to implement anything resembling the kind of reforms needed to successfully modernize Shanxi. Many of his attempts at reform in the 1920s had been attempted generations earlier, during the Tongzhi Restoration. The Qing dynasty reformers had found their reforms inadequate solutions to the problems of their time, and under the Model Governor, those reforms proved equally unsatisfactory. During the 1930s, Yan became increasingly open to radical social and economic policies, including wealth redistribution via graduated taxation, state-led industrialization, opposition to the money economy, an orientation towards functional (vs. &quot;moral&quot;) education and the large-scale assimilation of Western technology. Despite his adoption of Soviet-style economic policies and increasingly-radical attempts at social reform, Yan was regarded as a &quot;conservative&quot; throughout his career, which suggests that the term &quot;conservative&quot; must be used carefully within the context of modern Chinese history.

After Yan&#x27;s time, Shanxi became the site of Mao Zedong&#x27;s &quot;model brigade&quot; of Dazhai: a utopian communist scheme in Xiyang County that was supposed to be the model for all other peasants in China to emulate. If the people of Dazhai were especially suited for such an experiment, it is possible that decades of Yan&#x27;s socialist indoctrination may have prepared the people of Shanxi for Communist rule. After the death of Mao, the experiment was discontinued, and most peasants reverted to private farming.

==See also==

*An Chang-nam, Yan Xishan&#x27;s flight school principal from 1926 to 1930
*Eighth Route Army
*History of the Republic of China
*List of Warlords
*National Revolutionary Army
*Shang Zhen
*Shanxi clique

== Notes ==

== References ==

=== Citations ===
=== Sources ===
*Andrews, Bridie. &quot;The Making of Modern Chinese Medicine: 1850-1960&quot;. Vancouver: UBC Press. 2014. Retrieved 17 April 2019.
*Bonavia, David. &quot;China&#x27;s Warlords&quot;. New York: Oxford University Press. 1995. 
*Feng Chongyi and Goodman, David S. G., eds. &quot;North China at War: The Social Ecology of Revolution, 1937-1945&quot;. Lanham, Maryland: Rowman and Littlefield. 2000. . Retrieved 3 June 2012.
*Gillin, Donald G. &quot;Portrait of a Warlord: Yen Hsi-shan in Shansi Province, 1911-1930.&quot; &quot;The Journal of Asian Studies&quot;. Vol. 19, No. 3, May 1960. Retrieved 23 February 2011.
*Gillin, Donald G. &quot;Warlord: Yen Hsi-shan in Shansi Province 1911-1949&quot;. Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press. 1967.
*Gillin, Donald G. and Etter, Charles. &quot;Staying On: Japanese Soldiers and Civilians in China, 1945-1949.&quot; &quot;The Journal of Asian Studies&quot;. Vol. 42, No. 3, May 1983. Retrieved 23 February 2011.
*Goodman, David S. G. &quot;Structuring Local Identity: Nation, Province and County in Shanxi During the 1990s&quot;. &quot;The China Quarterly&quot;. Vol.172, December 2002. pp. 837–862. Retrieved 17 April 2019.
*Harrison, Henrietta. &quot;The Experience of Illness in Early Twentieth-Century Shanxi.&quot;. &quot;East Asian Science, Technology, and Medicine&quot;. No.42. pp. 39–72. 2015.
*Lawson, K. M. &quot;A Chinese Warlord&#x27;s Predictions for the Korean War&quot;. &quot;Frog in a Well&quot;. 4 August 2010. Retrieved 20 March 2011.
*Lew, Christopher R. &quot;The Third Chinese Revolutionary War, 1945-1949: An Analysis of Communist Strategy and Leadership&quot;. The USA and Canada: Routelage. 2009. .
*Lin Hsiao-ting. Modern China&#x27;s Ethnic Frontiers: A Journey to the West. New York, NY: Routledge. 2011. . Retrieved 21 May 2012.
*Spence, Jonathan D. &quot;The Search for Modern China&quot;, W.W. Norton and Company. 1999. .
*&quot;CHINA: President Resigns.&quot; &quot;TIME Magazine&quot;. Monday, 29 September 1930. Retrieved 24 February 2011.
*&quot;Foreign News: Yen to Nanking.&quot; &quot;TIME Magazine&quot;. Monday, 24 December 1928. p. 293. Retrieved 24 February 2011.
*&quot;Marshal Yen Hsi-shan&quot;. &quot;TIME Magazine&quot;. 19 May 1930. Retrieved 24 February 2011.
*Wang Ke-wen, ed. &quot;Modern China: An Encyclopedia of History, Culture, and Nationalism&quot;. United States of America: Wang Ke-wen. 1998. . Retrieved 4 June 2012.
*Wortzel, Larry M. &quot;Dictionary of Contemporary Chinese Military History&quot;. Westport, CT: Greenwood. 1999. . Retrieved 29 May 2012. 
*Yang, Benjamin. &quot;The Making of a Pragmatic Communist: The Early Life of Deng Xiaoping, 1904-49.&quot; &quot;The China Quarterly&quot;. No. 135, Sep. 1993. Retrieved 24 February 2011.
*http://cgsc.leavenworth.army.mil/carl/download/csipubs/bjorge_huai.pdf </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q699698" start="0" end="10" title="Yan Xishan" label="Yan Xishan"/>
<link wikidata="Q117073" start="50" end="59" title="Romanization of Chinese" label="romanized"/>
<link wikidata="Q699698" start="63" end="75" title="Yan Xishan" label="Yen Hsi-shan"/>
<link wikidata="Q220098" start="91" end="98" title="warlord" label="warlord"/>
<link wikidata="Q707438" start="117" end="152" title="politics of the Republic of China" label="government of the Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q46913" start="196" end="202" title="Shanxi" label="Shanxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q190517" start="217" end="234" title="Xinhai Revolution" label="Xinhai Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q179975" start="272" end="289" title="Chinese Civil War" label="Chinese Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q210329" start="365" end="376" title="Yuan Shikai" label="Yuan Shikai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201263" start="382" end="393" title="Warlord Era" label="Warlord Era"/>
<link wikidata="Q31113" start="399" end="414" title="Kuomintang" label="Nationalist Era"/>
<link wikidata="Q170314" start="420" end="446" title="Second Sino-Japanese War" label="Japanese invasion of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q179975" start="455" end="475" title="Chinese Civil War" label="subsequent civil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q8733" start="1050" end="1062" title="Qing dynasty" label="Qing dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197006" start="1066" end="1078" title="Wutai County" label="Wutai County"/>
<link wikidata="Q73119" start="1080" end="1087" title="Xinzhou" label="Xinzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q46913" start="1089" end="1095" title="Shanxi" label="Shanxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q72778" start="1576" end="1583" title="Taiyuan" label="Taiyuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q188712" start="1748" end="1753" title="Empire of Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9328701" start="1770" end="1788" title="Tokyo Shimbu Gakko" label="Tokyo Shimbu Gakko"/>
<link wikidata="Q700130" start="1847" end="1877" title="Imperial Japanese Army Academy" label="Imperial Japanese Army Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q159950" start="2730" end="2748" title="Russo-Japanese War" label="Russo-Japanese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q183738" start="2993" end="3000" title="bushido" label="bushido"/>
<link wikidata="Q8733" start="3235" end="3247" title="Qing dynasty" label="Qing dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q8573" start="3399" end="3410" title="Sun Yat-sen" label="Sun Yat-sen"/>
<link wikidata="Q950326" start="3426" end="3437" title="Tongmenghui" label="Tongmenghui"/>
<link wikidata="Q8442" start="3857" end="3874" title="Otto von Bismarck" label="Otto von Bismarck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186887" start="4136" end="4144" title="New Army" label="New Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q190517" start="4214" end="4231" title="Xinhai Revolution" label="Xinhai Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376651" start="4436" end="4454" title="concessions in China" label="foreign aggression"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4658" end="4667" title="Wu Luzhen" label="Wu Luzhen"/>
<link wikidata="Q210329" start="4682" end="4693" title="Yuan Shikai" label="Yuan Shikai"/>
<link wikidata="Q47974" start="5090" end="5097" title="Shaanxi" label="Shaanxi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5289" end="5306" title="History of the Republic of China#Second Revolution" label="Second Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q46913" start="5568" end="5574" title="Shanxi" label="Shanxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q13426199" start="6047" end="6064" title="Republic of China (1912–1949)" label="Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q8733" start="6109" end="6121" title="Qing dynasty" label="Qing dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201263" start="6890" end="6900" title="warlord era" label="civil wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425837" start="7838" end="7849" title="germ theory" label="germ theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q131805" start="8465" end="8475" title="John Dewey" label="John Dewey"/>
<link wikidata="Q47667" start="8477" end="8484" title="Hu Shih" label="Hu Shih"/>
<link wikidata="Q631416" start="8514" end="8523" title="H.H. Kung" label="H.H. Kung"/>
<link wikidata="Q197358" start="10725" end="10737" title="Zhang Zuolin" label="Zhang Zuolin"/>
<link wikidata="Q16574" start="10777" end="10792" title="Chiang Kai-shek" label="Chiang Kai-shek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073476" start="10832" end="10851" title="Northern Expedition" label="Northern Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195058" start="11207" end="11232" title="Shanghai massacre of 1927" label="suppression of Communists"/>
<link wikidata="Q21208" start="11340" end="11345" title="Hebei" label="Hebei"/>
<link wikidata="Q365894" start="11590" end="11602" title="Feng Yuxiang" label="Feng Yuxiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q6127999" start="11608" end="11622" title="New Guangxi clique" label="Guangxi Clique"/>
<link wikidata="Q20297" start="11630" end="11640" title="Li Zongren" label="Li Zongren"/>
<link wikidata="Q22303" start="11689" end="11701" title="Wang Jingwei" label="Wang Jingwei"/>
<link wikidata="Q43407" start="11809" end="11817" title="Shandong" label="Shandong"/>
<link wikidata="Q170247" start="11857" end="11862" title="Jinan" label="Jinan"/>
<link wikidata="Q20148" start="12482" end="12496" title="Zhang Xueliang" label="Zhang Xueliang"/>
<link wikidata="Q74881" start="12621" end="12627" title="Dalian" label="Dalian"/>
<link wikidata="Q678658" start="12649" end="12674" title="Kwantung Leased Territory" label="Kwantung Leased Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q717809" start="12774" end="12792" title="Central Plains War" label="Central Plains War"/>
<link wikidata="Q31113" start="12798" end="12808" title="Kuomintang" label="Kuomintang"/>
<link wikidata="Q365894" start="12858" end="12870" title="Feng Yuxiang" label="Feng Yuxiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201263" start="12963" end="12974" title="Warlord Era" label="Warlord Era"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="13717" end="13730" title="Time (magazine)" label="TIME Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q20297" start="14954" end="14964" title="Li Zongren" label="Li Zongren"/>
<link wikidata="Q45761" start="14997" end="15002" title="Hunan" label="Hunan"/>
<link wikidata="Q15176" start="15020" end="15027" title="Guangxi" label="Guangxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q242099" start="15197" end="15212" title="Mukden Incident" label="Mukden Incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q707551" start="16254" end="16294" title="Mongolian and Tibetan Affairs Commission" label="Mongolian and Tibetan Affairs Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q244941" start="16900" end="16919" title="Xi&amp;#x27;an Incident" label="Xi&amp;#x27;an Incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q20148" start="16981" end="16995" title="Zhang Xueliang" label="Zhang Xueliang"/>
<link wikidata="Q715841" start="17000" end="17012" title="Yang Hucheng" label="Yang Hucheng"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143850" start="17093" end="17105" title="Second United Front" label="united front"/>
<link wikidata="Q20148" start="17185" end="17199" title="Zhang Xueliang" label="Zhang Xueliang"/>
<link wikidata="Q208128" start="19255" end="19266" title="land reform" label="land reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q1080794" start="19927" end="19943" title="public education" label="public education"/>
<link wikidata="Q177266" start="20333" end="20343" title="militarism" label="militarism"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="20453" end="20464" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q43684" start="20490" end="20495" title="Henan" label="Henan"/>
<link wikidata="Q847759" start="22719" end="22737" title="Bai Lang Rebellion" label="Bai Lang Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q223569" start="23448" end="23467" title="women&amp;#x27;s rights" label="women&amp;#x27;s rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q498231" start="23624" end="23636" title="foot binding" label="foot binding"/>
<link wikidata="Q185688" start="23831" end="23845" title="lunar calendar" label="lunar calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q18121791" start="23886" end="23895" title="Boy Scout" label="Boy Scout"/>
<link wikidata="Q46452" start="24168" end="24173" title="opium" label="opium"/>
<link wikidata="Q81225" start="25127" end="25135" title="morphine" label="morphine"/>
<link wikidata="Q60168" start="25140" end="25146" title="heroin" label="heroin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634516" start="25552" end="25571" title="government monopoly" label="government monopoly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376651" start="25974" end="25989" title="concessions in China" label="concession area"/>
<link wikidata="Q11736" start="25993" end="26000" title="Tianjin" label="Tianjin"/>
<link wikidata="Q177266" start="27204" end="27214" title="militarism" label="militarism"/>
<link wikidata="Q202261" start="27219" end="27235" title="Social Darwinism" label="Social Darwinism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9581" start="28191" end="28203" title="Confucianism" label="Confucianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q519778" start="28607" end="28627" title="Doctrine of the Mean" label="Doctrine of the Mean"/>
<link wikidata="Q825754" start="28868" end="28884" title="Neo-Confucianism" label="Neo-Confucianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9903" start="29127" end="29139" title="Ming dynasty" label="Ming dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2466384" start="29153" end="29163" title="Lu Jiuyuan" label="Lu Jiuyuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q378462" start="29168" end="29181" title="Wang Yangming" label="Wang Yangming"/>
<link wikidata="Q955461" start="30026" end="30031" title="Taigu County" label="Taigu"/>
<link wikidata="Q812767" start="31545" end="31551" title="Shinto" label="Shinto"/>
<link wikidata="Q8573" start="31596" end="31607" title="Sun Yat-sen" label="Sun Yat-sen"/>
<link wikidata="Q260998" start="31803" end="31833" title="Three Principles of the People" label="Three Principles of the People"/>
<link wikidata="Q279790" start="31953" end="31972" title="May Fourth Movement" label="May Fourth Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q834815" start="32406" end="32423" title="New Life Movement" label="New Life Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="32670" end="32682" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661958" start="32690" end="32710" title="First five-year plan (Soviet Union)" label="first five-year plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q854537" start="33142" end="33159" title="Marxist economics" label="Marxist economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q58784" start="33185" end="33196" title="Das Kapital" label="Das Kapital"/>
<link wikidata="Q9061" start="33790" end="33799" title="Karl Marx" label="Karl Marx"/>
<link wikidata="Q7264" start="34001" end="34008" title="Marxism" label="Marxism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1744607" start="34049" end="34062" title="class conflict" label="class warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q3497299" start="34313" end="34333" title="economic determinism" label="economic determinism"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="34607" end="34625" title="Franklin Roosevelt" label="Franklin Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q186356" start="34633" end="34641" title="New Deal" label="New Deal"/>
<link wikidata="Q242099" start="35951" end="35985" title="Mukden Incident" label="Japanese plans to invade Manchuria"/>
<link wikidata="Q41079" start="36752" end="36766" title="Inner Mongolia" label="Inner Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058919" start="36802" end="36808" title="Chahar Province" label="Chahar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151036" start="36813" end="36820" title="Suiyuan" label="Suiyuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q681179" start="37004" end="37027" title="Manchukuo Imperial Army" label="Manchukuo Imperial Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q646754" start="37794" end="37805" title="open letter" label="open letter"/>
<link wikidata="Q200106" start="38735" end="38743" title="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army" label="Red Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q10875136" start="39132" end="39139" title="Jiangxi–Fujian Soviet" label="Jiangxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q47974" start="39152" end="39159" title="Shaanxi" label="Shaanxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6653943" start="39456" end="39466" title="Liu Zhidan" label="Liu Zhidan"/>
<link wikidata="Q838060" start="39471" end="39481" title="Xu Haidong" label="Xu Haidong"/>
<link wikidata="Q80895" start="39781" end="39798" title="guerrilla warfare" label="guerrilla warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q30623" start="40511" end="40520" title="Manchukuo" label="Manchukuo"/>
<link wikidata="Q41079" start="40554" end="40568" title="Inner Mongolia" label="Inner Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058919" start="40572" end="40578" title="Chahar Province" label="Chahar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151036" start="40600" end="40607" title="Suiyuan" label="Suiyuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q803778" start="40678" end="40689" title="Bailingmiao" label="Bailingmiao"/>
<link wikidata="Q6899548" start="40734" end="40778" title="Inner Mongolian Autonomous Political Council" label="Inner Mongolian Autonomous Political Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q715770" start="40874" end="40888" title="Demchugdongrub" label="Demchugdongrub"/>
<link wikidata="Q697837" start="40950" end="40959" title="Mengjiang" label="Mengguguo"/>
<link wikidata="Q717501" start="41166" end="41174" title="Fu Zuoyi" label="Fu Zuoyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q244941" start="41625" end="41644" title="Xi&amp;#x27;an Incident" label="Xi&amp;#x27;an Incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q72877" start="42390" end="42396" title="Datong" label="Datong"/>
<link wikidata="Q8070512" start="42498" end="42512" title="Zhao Chengshou" label="Zhao Chengshou"/>
<link wikidata="Q6121212" start="42540" end="42552" title="Wang Jingguo" label="Wang Jingguo"/>
<link wikidata="Q646394" start="42820" end="42833" title="Kwantung Army" label="Kwantung Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q276535" start="42879" end="42901" title="Imperial Japanese Army" label="Imperial Japanese Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q170314" start="43481" end="43505" title="Second Sino-Japanese War" label="Second Sino-Japanese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q188712" start="43570" end="43578" title="Empire of Japan" label="Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q22303" start="43944" end="43956" title="Wang Jingwei" label="Wang Jingwei"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143850" start="44002" end="44021" title="Second United Front" label="Second United Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036830" start="44131" end="44147" title="Chinese Red Army" label="Chinese Red Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q244941" start="44563" end="44582" title="Xi&amp;#x27;an Incident" label="Xi&amp;#x27;an Incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q17410" start="44831" end="44841" title="Zhou Enlai" label="Zhou Enlai"/>
<link wikidata="Q956" start="45316" end="45323" title="Beijing" label="Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q11736" start="45325" end="45332" title="Tianjin" label="Tianjin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057925" start="45338" end="45353" title="Northeast China" label="Northeast China"/>
<link wikidata="Q553682" start="45640" end="45647" title="Bo Yibo" label="Bo Yibo"/>
<link wikidata="Q219230" start="45696" end="45722" title="Marco Polo Bridge Incident" label="Marco Polo Bridge Incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154793" start="46295" end="46302" title="hanjian" label="hanjian"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="46986" end="46995" title="Li Fuying" label="Li Fuying"/>
<link wikidata="Q22513" start="47683" end="47689" title="Zhu De" label="Zhu De"/>
<link wikidata="Q712870" start="47718" end="47735" title="Eighth Route Army" label="Eighth Route Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q709396" start="48148" end="48170" title="Battle of Pingxingguan" label="Battle of Pingxingguan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154793" start="49077" end="49084" title="hanjian" label="hanjian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331388" start="50262" end="50270" title="Yuanping, Shanxi" label="Yuanping"/>
<link wikidata="Q717505" start="50467" end="50483" title="Battle of Xinkou" label="Battle of Xinkou"/>
<link wikidata="Q381823" start="50519" end="50530" title="Peng Dehuai" label="Peng Dehuai"/>
<link wikidata="Q717505" start="50766" end="50782" title="Battle of Xinkou" label="Battle of Xinkou"/>
<link wikidata="Q704374" start="50849" end="50865" title="Seishirō Itagaki" label="Itakagi Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q1729497" start="51572" end="51584" title="Niangzi Pass" label="Niangzi Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q709521" start="51953" end="51977" title="Battle of Taiyuan" label="final defense of Taiyuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5816" start="52585" end="52595" title="Mao Zedong" label="Mao Zedong"/>
<link wikidata="Q73156" start="52803" end="52809" title="Linfen" label="Linfen"/>
<link wikidata="Q716429" start="53701" end="53712" title="Wei Lihuang" label="Wei Lihuang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197064" start="53740" end="53747" title="Lingshi" label="Lingshi"/>
<link wikidata="Q197910" start="53949" end="53973" title="Zhongtiao Mountains" label="Zhongtiao Mountain Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q7355" start="54075" end="54087" title="Yellow River" label="Yellow River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153523" start="54094" end="54117" title="Yichuan County, Shaanxi" label="Yichuan County, Shaanxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5970542" start="54175" end="54203" title="Shaan-Gan-Ning Border Region" label="Shaan-Gan-Ning Border Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196900" start="54411" end="54417" title="Qi County, Shanxi" label="Qixian"/>
<link wikidata="Q705319" start="55265" end="55291" title="1939–1940 Winter Offensive" label="1939–1940 Winter Offensive"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="55703" end="55718" title="Jin-Xi Incident" label="Jin-Xi Incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q6280488" start="56271" end="56286" title="Ryūkichi Tanaka" label="Ryūkichi Tanaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q702705" start="56317" end="56336" title="First Army (Japan)" label="Japanese First Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q11615681" start="57683" end="57697" title="Tadashi Hanaya" label="Tadashi Hanaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q173034" start="58026" end="58042" title="Battle of Midway" label="Battle of Midway"/>
<link wikidata="Q6540361" start="59288" end="59306" title="surrender of Japan" label="surrender of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="59322" end="59334" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q179975" start="60061" end="60078" title="Chinese Civil War" label="Chinese Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q55647933" start="61563" end="61577" title="Imamura Hosaku" label="Imamura Hosaku"/>
<link wikidata="Q184425" start="61694" end="61705" title="Pacific War" label="Pacific War"/>
<link wikidata="Q179975" start="61816" end="61833" title="Chinese Civil War" label="Chinese Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5960763" start="62132" end="62150" title="Shangdang Campaign" label="Shangdang Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q41079" start="62483" end="62497" title="Inner Mongolia" label="Inner Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q569907" start="62499" end="62505" title="Baotou" label="Baotou"/>
<link wikidata="Q535534" start="62510" end="62516" title="Hohhot" label="Hohhot"/>
<link wikidata="Q515388" start="62612" end="62623" title="Yan&amp;#x27;an" label="Yan&amp;#x27;an"/>
<link wikidata="Q701507" start="62683" end="62694" title="Liu Bocheng" label="Liu Bocheng"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="62734" end="62752" title="Yuan Shuai#People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="Ten Great Marshals"/>
<link wikidata="Q16977" start="62887" end="62900" title="Deng Xiaoping" label="Deng Xiaoping"/>
<link wikidata="Q50684" start="62938" end="62954" title="paramount leader" label="paramount leader"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="63073" end="63081" title="Shi Zebo" label="Shi Zebo"/>
<link wikidata="Q72945" start="63105" end="63113" title="Changzhi" label="Changzhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5816" start="65549" end="65559" title="Mao Zedong" label="Mao Zedong"/>
<link wikidata="Q699254" start="65854" end="65867" title="Sun Lianzhong" label="Sun Lianzhong"/>
<link wikidata="Q5647237" start="65875" end="65891" title="Handan Campaign" label="Pinghan Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="66623" end="66636" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q702194" start="67501" end="67513" title="Xu Xiangqian" label="Xu Xiangqian"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="67930" end="67941" title="Dai Bingnan" label="Dai Bingnan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6201827" start="68111" end="68117" title="Jin Fu" label="Jin Fu"/>
<link wikidata="Q99850" start="68157" end="68167" title="Hu Yaobang" label="Hu Yaobang"/>
<link wikidata="Q163698" start="68737" end="68758" title="psychological warfare" label="psychological warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q4348111" start="68993" end="69042" title="Pingjin Campaign" label="major PLA victories in Hebei in late January 1949"/>
<link wikidata="Q7638234" start="69590" end="69597" title="Sun Chu" label="Sun Chu"/>
<link wikidata="Q6121212" start="69673" end="69685" title="Wang Jingguo" label="Wang Jingguo"/>
<link wikidata="Q55647933" start="69758" end="69772" title="Imamura Hosaku" label="Imamura Hosaku"/>
<link wikidata="Q20297" start="71354" end="71364" title="Li Zongren" label="Li Zongren"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="72361" end="72367" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q15175" start="72752" end="72761" title="Guangdong" label="Guangdong"/>
<link wikidata="Q15176" start="72766" end="72773" title="Guangxi" label="Guangxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q19770" start="72821" end="72828" title="Sichuan" label="Sichuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q8663" start="74221" end="74231" title="Korean War" label="Korean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q423" start="74313" end="74324" title="North Korea" label="North Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q884" start="74338" end="74349" title="South Korea" label="South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q8663" start="74574" end="74584" title="Korean War" label="Korean War"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="74643" end="74652" title="Qixingjun" label="Qixingjun"/>
<link wikidata="Q709029" start="74663" end="74675" title="Yangmingshan" label="Yangmingshan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9105560" start="74961" end="74983" title="Taipei City Government" label="Taipei City Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q475513" start="76751" end="76770" title="Tongzhi Restoration" label="Tongzhi Restoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q5816" start="77630" end="77640" title="Mao Zedong" label="Mao Zedong"/>
<link wikidata="Q14078319" start="77677" end="77683" title="Dazhai, Xiyang County" label="Dazhai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196928" start="77715" end="77728" title="Xiyang County" label="Xiyang County"/>
<link wikidata="Q4749849" start="78124" end="78136" title="An Chang-nam" label="An Chang-nam"/>
<link wikidata="Q712870" start="78199" end="78216" title="Eighth Route Army" label="Eighth Route Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151968" start="78218" end="78250" title="History of the Republic of China" label="History of the Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q64481740" start="78252" end="78268" title="List of warlords and military cliques in the Warlord Era" label="List of Warlords"/>
<link wikidata="Q714843" start="78270" end="78297" title="National Revolutionary Army" label="National Revolutionary Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q6132915" start="78299" end="78309" title="Shang Zhen" label="Shang Zhen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1392088" start="78311" end="78324" title="Shanxi clique" label="Shanxi clique"/>
<link wikidata="Q48936743" start="80073" end="80087" title="Lin Hsiao-ting" label="Lin Hsiao-ting"/>
<link wikidata="Q932820" start="80207" end="80226" title="Jonathan Spence" label="Spence, Jonathan D."/>
<link wikidata="Q113659272" start="80233" end="80260" title="The Search for Modern China" label="The Search for Modern China"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282208" start="80268" end="80291" title="W.W. Norton and Company" label="W.W. Norton and Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q18130712" start="80826" end="80843" title="Larry Wortzel" label="Wortzel, Larry M."/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="308976" wikidata="Q383103" url="?curid=308976" title="Music of Afghanistan">
<text>The music of [[Afghanistan]] comprises many varieties of classical music, folk music, and modern popular music. Afghanistan has a rich musical heritage and features a mix of Persian melodies, Indian compositional principles, and sounds from ethnic groups such as the Pashtuns, Tajiks and Hazaras. Instruments used range from Indian tablas to long-necked lutes. Afghanistan&#x27;s classical music is closely related to Hindustani classical music while sourcing much of its lyrics directly from classical Persian poetry such as Mawlana Balkhi (Rumi) and the Iranian tradition indigenous to central Asia. Lyrics throughout most of Afghanistan are typically in Dari (Persian) and Pashto. The multi-ethnic city of Kabul has long been the regional cultural capital, but outsiders have tended to focus on the city of Herat, which is home to traditions more closely related to Iranian music than in the rest of the country.

Under the rule of the Taliban, both from 1996 to 2001 and again when they took power by force in 2021, music has been considered prohibited.

==Current legal status==
Since their resurgence to power on 15 August 2021, Taliban authorities in Afghanistan have implemented a strict ban on music, particularly at weddings, social gatherings, and on radio and television. Additionally, there have been reports of Taliban forces destroying musical instruments, such as an incident involving the burning of instruments in late July 2023 in Herat Province.

==Folk and traditional music==
===Religious music===
The Afghan concept of music is closely associated with instruments, and thus unaccompanied religious singing is not considered music. Koran recitation is an important kind of unaccompanied religious performance, as is the ecstatic Zikr ritual of the Sufis which uses songs called &quot;na&#x27;t&quot;, and the Shi&#x27;a solo and group singing styles like &quot;mursia&quot;, &quot;manqasat&quot;, &quot;nowheh&quot; and &quot;rowzeh&quot;. The Chishti Sufi sect of Kabul is an exception in that they use instruments like the rubab, tabla also harmonium in their worship; this music is called &quot;tatti&quot; (&quot;food for the soul&quot;).

===Patriotic music===
Many patriotic songs have been made for Afghanistan. One of the best known songs is &quot;Da Zamong Zeba Watan&quot; (&quot;This is our beautiful homeland&quot; in Pashto) by Ustad Awalmir, sung sometime in the 1970s. Another popular song is &quot;Watan&quot; (&quot;Homeland&quot;) by Abdul Wahab Madadi, in Persian. Recorded in 1980, the song samples a Greek song called &quot;Antonis&quot; composed by Mikis Theodorakis. The first line, &quot;Watan ishqe tu iftekharam&quot;, translates to &quot;My country, my love for you is my honour&quot;. Its tone sounds very similar to a national anthem.

==Classical==

There is no single tradition, but many musical traditions and styles in Afghanistan. These different traditions and styles evolved over centuries in the context of a society with highly diverse ethnic, linguistic, regional, religious, and class distinctions. Afghan music can be classified in a number of ways. Although it is common practice to classify Afghan music along linguistic and regional lines (i.e. Pashto, Persian, Logari, Shomali, etc.), a more technically appropriate classification would be to distinguish various forms of Afghan music purely by their musical style. Thus, Afghan music can be mainly divided into four categories: Indian classical, Mohali (folk and regional styles), Western, and another style unique to Afghanistan simply called Afghan music.

The Indian classical tradition was a hugely influential strain. The vast majority of the elite artists in Afghanistan until the 1980s were trained in the Indian classical tradition. Ustad Sarahang, Rahim Bakhsh, Ustad Nashenas and many other singers were prominent adherents of this style. This style emphasized compositions in the Indian raga style and the singing of Ghazals in melodies very similar to Indian classical and court music. The classical musical form of Afghanistan is called klasik, which includes both instrumental and vocal and belly dancing ragas, as well as Tarana and Ghazals. Many &quot;Ustads&quot;, or professional musicians, have learned North Indian classical music in India, and some of them were Indian descendants who moved from India to the royal court in Kabul in the 1860s. They maintain cultural and personal ties with India—through discipleship or intermarriage—and they use the Hindustani musical theories and terminology, for example &quot;raga&quot; (melodic form) and &quot;tala&quot; (rhythmic cycle). Afghanistan&#x27;s classical singers include the late Ustad Mohammad Hussain Sarahang (1924-1983), who is one of the master singers of Patiala Gharana in North Indian classical music and is also well known throughout India and Pakistan as a contemporary of Ustad Bade Ghulam Ali Khan. His composition &quot;Pai Ashk&quot; was used in the theme song of the Hindi film &quot;Mera Saya&quot;. Ubaidullah Jan Kandaharai is regarded as the king of Pashto music in the southern Afghanistan region. He died in the 1980s but his music is still enjoyed by the Pashtun diaspora around the world, mainly by the Pashtuns in the Kandahar-Quetta regions. Other classical singers are Ustad Qasim, Ustad Rahim Bakhsh, and Ustad Nato.

The second group, Mohali (folk) music was more diverse. It contained various folkloric and regional styles which had evolved indigenously without outside influence. These styles include Qataghani, Logari, Qarsak etc. which are specific to a region &amp; linguistic group in Afghanistan. Some prominent artists in this category were Hamahang, Beltoon etc. Many other singers, however, who do not belong to this genre, have dabbled in recording songs in the Qataghani, logari, qarsak etc. styles. Each of these forms had its own scale (they did not use the classical Indian raga scale, nor did they use the western major/minor scale) and mainly consisted of well known songs whose composition and lyrics had evolved organically over centuries. The lyrics, though deep, were often simple and lacked the poetic sophistication of the great Persian &amp; Pashto poetic traditions.

The most popular musical traditions in Afghanistan is the pure Afghan musical style. The pure Afghan musical style was popularized by the Afghan singer Ahmad Zahir. The style borrows from many other musical traditions such as the Indian, Iranian, Middle Eastern, and folkloric Afghan traditions, but it fuses these styles into a sound that is unique to Afghanistan and suits the lyrical, poetic, rhythmic, and orchestral tastes of both afghan Dari and afghan Pashto speakers. Apart from Ahmad Zahir, the most successful contemporary proponent of this style of Farhad Darya. However, the progenitor of this musical tradition was another Afghan singer named Abdul Rahim Sarban. Sarban&#x27;s songs set the template for the unique Persian-language Afghan musical sound that characterizes the most popular Afghan musical genre today. Sarban chose poetry from the great classical Persian/Dari poets and set them to compositions which incorporated elements of Western jazz and &quot;belle chanson&quot; with the &quot;mohali&quot; (regional) traditions of Afghanistan. Up until then, Afghanistan had been mainly a borrower of styles from Iran, India and other countries. With Sarban&#x27;s arrival, Afghan music reached such a height that renowned artists from major cultural centres such as Iran borrowed his songs and covered them for their audiences (for instance Iran&#x27;s singer Googoosh covered a number of Sarban&#x27;s songs, most famously his &quot;Ay Sarban Ahesta Ran&quot;).

Sarban&#x27;s musical style was effectively adopted by Ahmad Zahir, Ahmad Wali, Nashenas, Afsana, Seems Tarana, Jawad Ghaziyar, Farhad Darya, and numerous other Afghan singers, and transformed into a genuine recognizable Afghan musical style.

This form, Western music (mainly consisting of pop, and nowadays rap), is influenced mainly by the Western musical tradition. However, in spite of its modernity, it is not the most popular musical genre. Many singers including Ahmad Zahir have sung in this tradition (pop, rock n roll, etc.). Most recently, there has been a blooming of the rap and hip hop scene in Afghanistan as well. However, the Western musical influence on Afghan music continues to be only in the fields of instrumentation and orchestration; Afghan musicians tend to choose musical languages and compositions which belong to indigenous Afghan musical forms, but they use Western musical instruments (such as drums, percussions and guitars) to orchestrate their music. There are a few musicians who compose in the Western musical tradition as well.

===Rubab===
The rubab is a common lute-like instrument in Afghanistan, and is a forerunner of the Indian sarod. The rubab is sometimes considered the national instrument of Afghanistan, and is called the &quot;lion of instruments&quot;; one reviewer claims it sounds like &quot;a Middle Eastern predecessor to the blues that popped up in the Piedmont 100 years ago&quot;. The rubab has a double-chambered body carved from mulberry wood, which is chosen to give the instrument its distinct timbre. It has three main strings and a plectrum made from ivory, bone or wood.

Famous players of the rubab are Mohammad Omar, Essa Kassemi, Homayun Sakhi, and Mohammed Rahim Khushnawaz.

===Dombura===

The &quot;dombura&quot;, &quot;dambura&quot; or &quot;dambora&quot; is a popular folk instrument among Hazaras, Uzbeks, Turkmens and Tajiks. Notable dombura players in Afghanistan include Dilagha Surood, Naseer Parwani, Dawood Sarkhosh, Mir Maftoon and Safdar Tawakoli. The dombura is played with much banging and scratching on the instrument to help give a percussive sound. The two strings are made of nylon (in modern times) or gut. They cross a short bridge to a pin at the other end of the body. There is a tiny sound hole in the back of the instrument, while the top is thick wood. It is not finished with any varnish, filing or sanding of any kind, and as with all other Afghanistan instruments there is some decoration.

===Ghichak===
Ghichak is a string instrument made by the Hazaras and Tajiks of Afghanistan.

===List of Ustads===
The following is an incomplete list of classical Afghan musicians who have been honored as an &quot;ustad&quot;:

*Awalmir
*Mohammad Hussain Sarahang
*Rahim Bakhsh
*Mahwash
*Nainawaz
*Jalil Zaland
*Amani
*Nato
*Abdul Rahim Sarban
*Ulfat Ahang
*Mohammad Omar
*Beltoon
*Shah Wali Taranasaz
*Nashenas
*Ghulam Dastagir Shaida
*Hafizullah Khyal
*Gul Zaman
*Shad Kam
*Arman
==Pop music==


In 1925, Afghanistan began radio broadcasting, but its station was destroyed in 1929. Broadcasting did not resume until Radio Kabul opened in 1940.
As Radio Afghanistan reached the entire country, popular music grew more important.

Modern popular music did not arise until the 1950s when radio became commonplace in the country. They used orchestras featuring both Afghan and Indian instruments, as well as European clarinets, guitars and violins. The 1970s were the golden age of Afghanistan&#x27;s music industry. Popular music also included Indian and Pakistani cinema film and music imported from Iran, Tajikistan, the Arab world and elsewhere.

In 1951, Mermon Parwin became the first Afghan woman to sing live on the radio. Farida Mahwash, one of the famous female singers who then gained the title of &quot;Ustad&quot; (Master), had a major hit with &quot;O bacheh&quot; in 1977; she was &quot;perhaps the most notable&quot; of pop singers. Rukhshana was another early female singer who had achieved high fame during the 1960s.

===History of pop===
Pop music emerged in Afghanistan during the 1950s, and became very popular until the late 1970s. What helped the emergence of pop music in Afghanistan were amateur singers from non-traditional music backgrounds who wanted to showcase their talents in the studio Radio Kabul. These singers were from middle- to upper-class families and were more educated than singers from traditional music backgrounds.

These amateurs innovated in Afghan music and created a more modern approach to the traditional folklore and classical music of Afghans. Amateur singers included Farhad Darya, Ahmad Zahir, Ustad Davood Vaziri, Nashenas (Dr. Sadiq Fitrat), Ahmad Wali, Zahir Howaida, Rahim Mehryar, Mahwash, Haidar Salim, Ehsan Aman, Hangama, Parasto, Naghma, Mangal, Sarban, Qamar Gula and others. Ahmad Zahir was among Afghanistan&#x27;s most famous singers; throughout the 60s and 70s he gained national and international recognition in countries like Iran and Tajikistan.

The couple Farid Rastagar and Wajiha Rastagar pioneered Afghan synthpop. They as well as Farhad Darya helped to establish new wave during the 1980s.

During the 1990s, the Afghan Civil War caused many musicians to flee, and subsequently the Taliban government banned instrumental music and much public music-making. Taliban&#x27;s punishments of being caught playing music or being caught with cassettes ranged from confiscation and a warning to severe beatings and imprisonment. Many people continued to secretly play their instruments. Exiled musicians from the famous Kharabat district of Kabul set up business premises in Peshawar, Pakistan, where they continued their musical activities. Much of the Afghan music industry was preserved via circulation in Peshawar and the holding of concerts for Afghan performers there helped to keep the industry alive.

After the 2001 US intervention in Afghanistan and the removal of the Taliban, the music scene began to re-emerge. Some groups, like the Kaboul Ensemble, gained an international reputation. In addition, traditional Pashtun music (especially in the southeast of the country) entered a period of &quot;golden years&quot;, according to a prominent spokesman for Afghan Ministry of Interior, Lutfullah Mashal.

Rock music slowly gained a foothold in the country. Kabul Dreams is one of the few Afghan rock bands; formed in 2008 by ex-pats, they claim to be the first one. However it was popularised in the mainstream by Farhad Darya who experimented with rock alongside his usual pop hits. Additionally, singing competition television series such as &quot;Afghan Star&quot; and &quot;The Voice of Afghanistan&quot; became popular, with singing contestants performing songs, including those formerly banned.

Metal music was represented by District Unknown, who as a band no longer exist and have moved to various parts of the world, from the United Kingdom to the US. They were documented in the rockumentary Rockabul, filmed by Australian Travis Beard.

== Hip-hop and rap ==
Afghan hip-hop is a type of music popular among Afghanistan&#x27;s youth and immigrant community. It inherits much of the style of traditional hip hop, but puts added emphasis on rare cultural sounds. Afghan hip hop is mostly sung in Dari (Persian), Pashto, and English. One popular hip hop artist is DJ Besho (Bezhan Zafarmal), a resident of Kabul. Another is &#x27;Awesome Qasim&#x27;, who is known in Canada and raps in Persian, Pashto, and English. Qasim&#x27;s most recent album came out in February 2013 in Canada. Kabul musician Soosan Firooz has been described as Afghanistan&#x27;s first female rapper. Sonita Alizadeh is another female Afghan rapper, who has gained notoriety for writing music protesting forced marriages. The country&#x27;s rapping scene has become increasingly prevalent in recent years. In 2017, Sayed Jamal Mubarez became the first rapper to win the annual &quot;Afghan Star&quot; musical competition. In 2022, an Afghan rap song by Jawad13 and MiSAQ were commissioned by and available on Facebook Sound library.

==See also==
* Afghanistan National Institute of Music
* List of Afghan singers
* List of Pashto-language singers
*Bacha Bazi

==References==
*
* 
*Doubleday, Veronica. &quot;Red Light at the Crossroads&quot;. 2000. In Broughton, Simon and Ellingham, Mark with McConnachie, James and Duane, Orla (Ed.), &quot;World Music, Vol. 2: Latin &amp; North America, Caribbean, India, Asia and Pacific&quot;, pp 3–8. Rough Guides Ltd, Penguin Books. 

==Notes==
==Further reading==
* 
*

==External links==
*Listen to Afghan music online
*#1 Afghan Music &amp; Entertainment Site Online 
*Afghan Music &amp; Entertainment Portal
*Audio clips - traditional music of Afghanistan. French National Library. Accessed November 25, 2010.
*Listen to Afghan Music Online</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q383103" start="4" end="28" title="Music of Afghanistan" label="music of [[Afghanistan]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q6419747" start="57" end="72" title="klasik" label="classical music"/>
<link wikidata="Q43343" start="74" end="84" title="folk music" label="folk music"/>
<link wikidata="Q373342" start="97" end="110" title="popular music" label="popular music"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223087" start="174" end="190" title="Persian traditional music" label="Persian melodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323698" start="192" end="223" title="Indian classical music" label="Indian compositional principles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2556103" start="267" end="275" title="Pashtuns" label="Pashtuns"/>
<link wikidata="Q483505" start="277" end="283" title="Tajiks" label="Tajiks"/>
<link wikidata="Q115473" start="288" end="295" title="Hazaras" label="Hazaras"/>
<link wikidata="Q213100" start="332" end="337" title="tabla" label="tabla"/>
<link wikidata="Q180733" start="354" end="358" title="lute" label="lute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770695" start="418" end="444" title="Hindustani classical music" label="Hindustani classical music"/>
<link wikidata="Q365585" start="503" end="517" title="Persian literature" label="Persian poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q43347" start="526" end="547" title="Rumi" label="Mawlana Balkhi (Rumi)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672477" start="556" end="563" title="Iranian peoples" label="Iranian"/>
<link wikidata="Q178440" start="657" end="671" title="Dari (Persian)" label="Dari (Persian)"/>
<link wikidata="Q58680" start="676" end="682" title="Pashto language" label="Pashto"/>
<link wikidata="Q5838" start="709" end="714" title="Kabul" label="Kabul"/>
<link wikidata="Q45313" start="810" end="815" title="Herat" label="Herat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672398" start="869" end="882" title="Music of Iran" label="Iranian music"/>
<link wikidata="Q42418" start="939" end="946" title="Taliban" label="Taliban"/>
<link wikidata="Q428" start="1654" end="1659" title="Koran" label="Koran"/>
<link wikidata="Q948437" start="1751" end="1755" title="Zikr" label="Zikr"/>
<link wikidata="Q9603" start="1770" end="1774" title="Sufi" label="Sufi"/>
<link wikidata="Q9585" start="1831" end="1841" title="Shi&amp;#x27;a" label="Shi&amp;#x27;a"/>
<link wikidata="Q3933628" start="1883" end="1889" title="mursia" label="mursia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1903" end="1911" title="manqasat" label="manqasat"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859713" start="1925" end="1931" title="nowheh" label="nowheh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5835556" start="1948" end="1954" title="rowzeh" label="rowzeh"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1966" end="1978" title="Chishti Sufi" label="Chishti Sufi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640934" start="2047" end="2052" title="Rubab (instrument)" label="rubab"/>
<link wikidata="Q213100" start="2054" end="2059" title="tabla" label="tabla"/>
<link wikidata="Q12460259" start="2065" end="2074" title="Pump organ" label="harmonium"/>
<link wikidata="Q741113" start="2363" end="2376" title="Ustad Awalmir" label="Ustad Awalmir"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="2543" end="2548" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q151976" start="2593" end="2610" title="Mikis Theodorakis" label="Mikis Theodorakis"/>
<link wikidata="Q23691" start="2769" end="2784" title="national anthem" label="national anthem"/>
<link wikidata="Q9168" start="3219" end="3226" title="Persian language" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q741658" start="3759" end="3773" title="Ustad Sarahang" label="Ustad Sarahang"/>
<link wikidata="Q282147" start="3775" end="3787" title="Rahim Bakhsh" label="Rahim Bakhsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q380162" start="3789" end="3803" title="Nashenas" label="Ustad Nashenas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6419747" start="4068" end="4074" title="klasik" label="klasik"/>
<link wikidata="Q216926" start="4137" end="4142" title="ragas" label="ragas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3981034" start="4155" end="4161" title="Tarana" label="Tarana"/>
<link wikidata="Q281111" start="4166" end="4172" title="Ghazal" label="Ghazal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770695" start="4240" end="4268" title="Hindustani classical music" label="North Indian classical music"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="4272" end="4277" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q5838" start="4363" end="4368" title="Kabul" label="Kabul"/>
<link wikidata="Q741658" start="4678" end="4703" title="Mohammad Hussain Sarahang" label="Mohammad Hussain Sarahang"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="4835" end="4840" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="4845" end="4853" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745300" start="4881" end="4901" title="Bade Ghulam Ali Khan" label="Bade Ghulam Ali Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3752155" start="5008" end="5033" title="Ubaidullah Jan" label="Ubaidullah Jan Kandaharai"/>
<link wikidata="Q16056535" start="5169" end="5185" title="Pashtun diaspora" label="Pashtun diaspora"/>
<link wikidata="Q173808" start="5234" end="5242" title="Kandahar Province" label="Kandahar"/>
<link wikidata="Q185458" start="5243" end="5249" title="Quetta" label="Quetta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2121416" start="5287" end="5298" title="Ustad Qasim" label="Ustad Qasim"/>
<link wikidata="Q282147" start="5306" end="5318" title="Rahim Bakhsh" label="Rahim Bakhsh"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5324" end="5334" title="Ustad Nato" label="Ustad Nato"/>
<link wikidata="Q4884787" start="5679" end="5686" title="Beltoon" label="Beltoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q195522" start="6365" end="6376" title="Ahmad Zahir" label="Ahmad Zahir"/>
<link wikidata="Q741679" start="6773" end="6785" title="Farhad Darya" label="Farhad Darya"/>
<link wikidata="Q2224651" start="6869" end="6887" title="Abdul Rahim Sarban" label="Abdul Rahim Sarban"/>
<link wikidata="Q9168" start="6941" end="6957" title="Persian language" label="Persian-language"/>
<link wikidata="Q9168" start="7088" end="7095" title="Persian language" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q255233" start="7593" end="7601" title="Googoosh" label="Googoosh"/>
<link wikidata="Q400849" start="7765" end="7775" title="Ahmad Wali" label="Ahmad Wali"/>
<link wikidata="Q380162" start="7777" end="7785" title="Nashenas" label="Nashenas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1683017" start="7809" end="7823" title="Jawad Ghaziyar" label="Jawad Ghaziyar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640934" start="8779" end="8784" title="Rubab (instrument)" label="rubab"/>
<link wikidata="Q180733" start="8797" end="8801" title="lute" label="lute"/>
<link wikidata="Q687406" start="8868" end="8873" title="sarod" label="sarod"/>
<link wikidata="Q9759" start="9077" end="9082" title="blues" label="blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109497" start="9105" end="9113" title="Piedmont blues" label="Piedmont"/>
<link wikidata="Q44789" start="9185" end="9193" title="mulberry" label="mulberry"/>
<link wikidata="Q181890" start="9292" end="9300" title="plectrum" label="plectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q82001" start="9311" end="9316" title="ivory" label="ivory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1942692" start="9365" end="9378" title="Mohammad Omar (musician)" label="Mohammad Omar"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9380" end="9392" title="Essa Kassemi" label="Essa Kassemi"/>
<link wikidata="Q21039721" start="9394" end="9407" title="Homayun Sakhi" label="Homayun Sakhi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9413" end="9438" title="Mohammed Rahim Khushnawaz" label="Mohammed Rahim Khushnawaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q115473" start="9559" end="9566" title="Hazaras" label="Hazaras"/>
<link wikidata="Q483047" start="9568" end="9574" title="Uzbeks" label="Uzbeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q484472" start="9576" end="9584" title="Turkmens" label="Turkmens"/>
<link wikidata="Q483505" start="9589" end="9595" title="Tajiks" label="Tajiks"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9644" end="9658" title="Dilagha Surood" label="Dilagha Surood"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9660" end="9674" title="Naseer Parwani" label="Naseer Parwani"/>
<link wikidata="Q4347166" start="9676" end="9691" title="Dawood Sarkhosh" label="Dawood Sarkhosh"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9693" end="9704" title="Mir Maftoon" label="Mir Maftoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7398432" start="9709" end="9724" title="Safdar Tawakoli" label="Safdar Tawakoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q133163" start="9814" end="9824" title="percussion" label="percussive"/>
<link wikidata="Q177941" start="9860" end="9865" title="nylon" label="nylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147086" start="9887" end="9890" title="gut string" label="gut"/>
<link wikidata="Q830869" start="9911" end="9917" title="bridge (instrument)" label="bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q81683" start="10072" end="10079" title="varnish" label="varnish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126002" start="10081" end="10087" title="Filing (metalworking)" label="filing"/>
<link wikidata="Q142274" start="10091" end="10098" title="sanding" label="sanding"/>
<link wikidata="Q4138014" start="10199" end="10206" title="Ghichak" label="Ghichak"/>
<link wikidata="Q115473" start="10242" end="10249" title="Hazaras" label="Hazaras"/>
<link wikidata="Q483505" start="10254" end="10260" title="Tajiks" label="Tajiks"/>
<link wikidata="Q289585" start="10399" end="10404" title="ustad" label="ustad"/>
<link wikidata="Q741113" start="10414" end="10421" title="Awalmir" label="Awalmir"/>
<link wikidata="Q741658" start="10423" end="10448" title="Mohammad Hussain Sarahang" label="Mohammad Hussain Sarahang"/>
<link wikidata="Q282147" start="10450" end="10462" title="Rahim Bakhsh" label="Rahim Bakhsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1656087" start="10464" end="10471" title="Mahwash" label="Mahwash"/>
<link wikidata="Q6959707" start="10473" end="10481" title="Nainawaz" label="Nainawaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q380167" start="10483" end="10495" title="Jalil Zaland" label="Jalil Zaland"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10497" end="10502" title="Amani (Afghan singer)" label="Amani"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10504" end="10508" title="Ustad Nato" label="Nato"/>
<link wikidata="Q2224651" start="10510" end="10528" title="Abdul Rahim Sarban" label="Abdul Rahim Sarban"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10530" end="10541" title="Ulfat Ahang" label="Ulfat Ahang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1942692" start="10543" end="10556" title="Mohammad Omar (musician)" label="Mohammad Omar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4884787" start="10558" end="10565" title="Beltoon" label="Beltoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3918470" start="10567" end="10586" title="Shah Wali Taranasaz" label="Shah Wali Taranasaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q380162" start="10588" end="10596" title="Nashenas" label="Nashenas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1521959" start="10598" end="10620" title="Ghulam Dastagir Shaida" label="Ghulam Dastagir Shaida"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10622" end="10638" title="Hafizullah Khyal" label="Hafizullah Khyal"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10640" end="10649" title="Ustad Gul Zaman" label="Gul Zaman"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10651" end="10659" title="Ustad Shad Kam" label="Shad Kam"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10661" end="10666" title="Ustad Arman" label="Arman"/>
<link wikidata="Q273623" start="10710" end="10728" title="radio broadcasting" label="radio broadcasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q142900" start="10803" end="10814" title="Radio Kabul" label="Radio Kabul"/>
<link wikidata="Q142900" start="10834" end="10851" title="Radio Afghanistan" label="Radio Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q373342" start="10923" end="10936" title="popular music" label="popular music"/>
<link wikidata="Q8343" start="11100" end="11108" title="clarinet" label="clarinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q6607" start="11111" end="11117" title="guitar" label="guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q8355" start="11123" end="11129" title="violin" label="violin"/>
<link wikidata="Q238526" start="11151" end="11161" title="golden age" label="golden age"/>
<link wikidata="Q1921943" start="11343" end="11356" title="Mermon Parwin" label="Mermon Parwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1656087" start="11414" end="11428" title="Mahwash" label="Farida Mahwash"/>
<link wikidata="Q20685369" start="11632" end="11641" title="Rukhshana" label="Rukhshana"/>
<link wikidata="Q142900" start="12003" end="12014" title="Radio Kabul" label="Radio Kabul"/>
<link wikidata="Q741679" start="12306" end="12318" title="Farhad Darya" label="Farhad Darya"/>
<link wikidata="Q195522" start="12320" end="12331" title="Ahmad Zahir" label="Ahmad Zahir"/>
<link wikidata="Q380162" start="12354" end="12362" title="Nashenas" label="Nashenas"/>
<link wikidata="Q400849" start="12383" end="12393" title="Ahmad Wali" label="Ahmad Wali"/>
<link wikidata="Q140579" start="12395" end="12408" title="Zahir Howaida" label="Zahir Howaida"/>
<link wikidata="Q7283417" start="12410" end="12423" title="Rahim Mehryar" label="Rahim Mehryar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1656087" start="12425" end="12432" title="Mahwash" label="Mahwash"/>
<link wikidata="Q5638997" start="12434" end="12446" title="Haidar Salim" label="Haidar Salim"/>
<link wikidata="Q933314" start="12448" end="12458" title="Ehsan Aman" label="Ehsan Aman"/>
<link wikidata="Q539848" start="12460" end="12467" title="Hangama" label="Hangama"/>
<link wikidata="Q7136036" start="12469" end="12476" title="Parasto" label="Parasto"/>
<link wikidata="Q3918308" start="12478" end="12484" title="Naghma (singer)" label="Naghma"/>
<link wikidata="Q16731912" start="12486" end="12492" title="Mangal (singer)" label="Mangal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2224651" start="12494" end="12500" title="Sarban (singer)" label="Sarban"/>
<link wikidata="Q7266402" start="12502" end="12512" title="Qamar Gula" label="Qamar Gula"/>
<link wikidata="Q5435263" start="12714" end="12728" title="Farid Rastagar" label="Farid Rastagar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2540832" start="12733" end="12748" title="Wajiha Rastagar" label="Wajiha Rastagar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1298934" start="12766" end="12774" title="synthpop" label="synthpop"/>
<link wikidata="Q187760" start="12825" end="12833" title="New wave music" label="new wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q1980081" start="12875" end="12891" title="Afghan Civil War (1992-96)" label="Afghan Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q427941" start="12944" end="12962" title="Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan (1996–2001)" label="Taliban government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1740571" start="13274" end="13282" title="Kharabat, Kabul" label="Kharabat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1113311" start="13329" end="13337" title="Peshawar" label="Peshawar"/>
<link wikidata="Q182865" start="13574" end="13609" title="War in Afghanistan (2001–2021)" label="2001 US intervention in Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q42418" start="13633" end="13640" title="Taliban" label="Taliban"/>
<link wikidata="Q7142067" start="13778" end="13791" title="Pashtun culture" label="Pashtun music"/>
<link wikidata="Q6589202" start="13929" end="13949" title="Ministry of Interior" label="Ministry of Interior"/>
<link wikidata="Q11399" start="13970" end="13980" title="Rock music" label="Rock music"/>
<link wikidata="Q6344431" start="14022" end="14034" title="Kabul Dreams" label="Kabul Dreams"/>
<link wikidata="Q741679" start="14179" end="14191" title="Farhad Darya" label="Farhad Darya"/>
<link wikidata="Q383040" start="14315" end="14326" title="Afghan Star" label="Afghan Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q17082635" start="14343" end="14367" title="The Voice of Afghanistan" label="The Voice of Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q84363472" start="14498" end="14514" title="District Unknown" label="District Unknown"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="14601" end="14615" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q84363472" start="14668" end="14676" title="Rockabul" label="Rockabul"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318423" start="14688" end="14698" title="Australians" label="Australian"/>
<link wikidata="Q54861527" start="15047" end="15062" title="DJ Besho" label="Bezhan Zafarmal"/>
<link wikidata="Q9168" start="15159" end="15166" title="Persian language" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7562761" start="15272" end="15285" title="Soosan Firooz" label="Soosan Firooz"/>
<link wikidata="Q20110468" start="15348" end="15363" title="Sonita Alizadeh" label="Sonita Alizadeh"/>
<link wikidata="Q383040" start="15630" end="15641" title="Afghan Star" label="Afghan Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q28223849" start="15796" end="15835" title="Afghanistan National Institute of Music" label="Afghanistan National Institute of Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q6560648" start="15838" end="15860" title="List of Afghan singers" label="List of Afghan singers"/>
<link wikidata="Q11811905" start="15863" end="15894" title="List of Pashto-language singers" label="List of Pashto-language singers"/>
<link wikidata="Q798023" start="15896" end="15906" title="Bacha Bazi" label="Bacha Bazi"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="308977" wikidata="Q122107" url="?curid=308977" title="Congress of Lushnjë">
<text>The Congress of Lushnjë (), historically documented by the name Mbledhja Kombiare Lushnje, was a conference of Albanian political leaders held from January 21 to January 31, 1920, in Lushnjë, Albania.

Its objective was to deal with the issues arising from the military control of the country by mainly Italian and secondarily French troops and its political leadership by the pro-Italian Durrës-based government. Held in the residence of Kaso Fuga it was attended by 56 delegates from Albania, adjacent Albanian-inhabited territories and representatives of Albanian emigrant colonies.

Aqif Elbasani was elected president of the congress and Ferid Vokopola secretary. The congress declared the Durrës government invalid and formed a new cabinet under Sulejman Delvina. The new government consisted of the High Council () and the National Council (). The last decision of the congress was the designation of Tirana as the new capital of Albania. The congress&#x27; decisions would eventually lead a few months later to the Vlora War and as a result to the total withdrawal of the Italian army from Albania and the final affirmation of the country&#x27;s territorial integrity in 1921. The building where it was held became a museum in 1970.

==History==
===Background===

After the end of the First World War in Albania, a new political and organizational process began for the re-establishment of the country&#x27;s institutions. Political ideas were concluded with the organization of the Congress of Durrës on 25 December 1918 and the creation of the Provisional Government of Turhan Pashë Përmeti. The so-called Government of Durrës failed to extend its authority all over the territory set by 1913 Treaty of London, as General Piacentini&#x27;s Italian forces were still present in Albania. However, the Congress anxious to keep Albania intact, expressed willingness to accept Italian protection and even an Italian prince as a ruler so long as it would mean Albania did not lose territory. In the Paris Peace Conference, the delegation of Albania removed Prime Minister Përmeti as chairman of the representative delegation, because he openly presented the idea of placing Albania under the mandate of Italy and appointed Luigj Bumçi as chairman.

On 19 July 1919, the secret agreement, later known as Venizelos–Tittoni agreement was signed by then Greek Prime Minister Eleftherios Venizelos and Italian Minister of Foreign Affairs Tommaso Tittoni, with bargains and mutual concessions for the territories of Albania. The Albanian delegation reacted to the agreement on 14 August 1919 at the Paris Peace Conference. At that conference, the agreement was merged with the secret Treaty of London of April 1915. A note of protest was also addressed to the President of the Peace Conference, Georges Clémenceau.

On 20 August 1919, an Italian-Albanian agreement was signed by Ministers Myfid Bej Libohova and Fejzi Bey Alizoti, and Marquis Carlo Durazzo, who was the Adviser of the Italian Legation in Albania. Italy accepted the extension of the authority of the administration of the Government of Durrës to all the territories occupied by Italy, with the exception of Sazan Island and that of Vlora, recognizing the latter sovereignty over those areas. The act also accepted the appointment as High Commissioner in Albania of Captain Fortunato Castoldi, to oversee the Albanian administration and institutions in &quot;the most sensitive issues&quot;.

This was not well received by many prominent figures of the country, being considered as a truncation of the independence of the Albanian state. Influential people in Vlora such as Osman Haxhiu, Aristidh Ruҫi and Beqir Sulo Agalliu asked the government to allow the election of the members of the Senate, a request which was repeated on 15 October 1919 by members of the government itself. This never happened, pushing up revolts in almost the entire country.

The political situation escalated further on 14 January 1920, when the Prime Minister of United Kingdom David Lloyd George, that of France Georges Clémenceau and Francesco Nitti of Italy, in the absence of the U.S. representative, Frank L. Polk at the Peace Conference in Paris, signed an agreement that provided for the partition of Albania between its three neighboring countries, Greece in the south, Montenegro in the northwest and Serbia in the northeast.

===Preparations===
At the Paris Peace Conference, aside from the diaspora organizations, the Albanian side was represented by Foreign Minister Mehmed Konica, Mihal Turtulli, Luigj Gurakuqi, Luigj Bumçi, Gjergj Fishta, Mustafa Kruja and Mid&#x27;hat Frashëri. But the latter was refused a passport by the Italian Government as the Albanian state at that time did not issue its own passports. The Italians behind the scenes supported Turhan Pasha Përmeti as head of the delegation, knowing that the latter would better protect Italian interests in the conference. This delegation was composed of representatives of different communities, both religious and cultural, but most of them were beys, rich people who did not enjoy the support of the general population, especially the nationalists. As if that was not enough to make things worse than they were, due to the divergences of what should be proposed at the conference, the division of the delegation into two groups began. Konica and Turtulli, who also had the support of the Albanian diaspora, especially those of the Americans such as the Vatra organization, proposed that it be formally requested before the conference that Albania pass to the U.S. mandate while the other faction argued why this did not it had to happen.

Later, Mustafa Kruja decided that there was a need to return to Albania due to some revolts undertaken by nationalists or various local groups and words that due to dissatisfaction with the provisional government a second congress could be organized and the government could be overthrown. Mehdi Frashëri and Mufid Libohova took his place to help the delegation. As soon as he returns to Durrës, he learns that some nationalists and influential figures in different regions of the country have created an alleged secret organization called &quot;Krahu Kombëtar&quot; (the National Wing or National Faction abbr. KK) also known as the &quot;Klika&quot; (the Clique) by its political opponents, with the aim of expelling Italian forces from the territory of Albania. This organization according to the later written memoirs of Mustafa Kruja and others was led by Eshref Frashëri. The two manage to meet and discuss the situation in the country and the solution. Eshref Frashëri&#x27;s proposal to Kruja to deal with the situation was that the government should definitely be changed through a second congress and people free from Italian influence. While Kruja required time for this to happen because the government could not resign when the fate of Albania is in the hands of the Paris Conference and when a revolt had started in central Albania by Essad Pasha Toptani who was considered dangerous by both government and the nationalists of the KK. In a second meeting with Rexhep Mitrovica, also a member of the KK, it was agreed and a secret protocol was signed that Mustafa Kruja himself would first deal with the suppression of the revolts and then it was planned to hold a congress that according to the proposal would be held in the city of Krujë and to be proposed as prime minister Reshid Akif Pasha, former Minister of Interior of the Ottoman Empire.

While Mustafa Kruja had just managed to regain control of his city which was occupied by the forces of Essad Pasha, according to him a letter from Ahmet Zogu informed him that a new congress would be held in Lushnja and that Zogu himself would take part as Mat District representative. According to Sejfi Vllamasi, at the end of November 1919, a group of the Krahu Kombëtar discussed at the house of Prefect Abdyl Ypi in Durrës, the acceleration of the organization of the congress. Participants in that meeting were Sotir Peçi, Esheref Frashëri, Fazlli Frashëri, Sali Vuҫiterni, Halim Jakova-Gostivari, Xhevit Leskoviku and Sejfi Vllamasi. It was decided that Fazlli Frashëri would organize the delegates in Korçë District, Sejfi Vllamasi in Shkodër District and Zogu in Mat. Other organizing figures were Aqif Pasha Elbasani, Abdi Toptani, Ismail Ndroqi, Osman Myderrizi, Ferid Vokopola and Mytesim Këlliҫi. While to convince Ilias Vrioni that Berat District should also send delegates, was sent to the Commander of the Albanian Gendarmerie Meleq Frashëri. Vrioni confirmed that he and others would join the movement. Supporters for the organization of the congress were also the ministers of the government of Durrës, at the Peace Conference in Paris, Mehmet Konica, Mihal Turtulli and Monsignor Luigj Bumçi, whom were also met in Paris by the British Consul Morton Eden. In fact, the latter was very active at the time and often seen with members of the &quot;Krahu Kombëtar&quot; but it never became clear whether the British government supported the congress or not. Such a fact is acknowledged by Eqerem Bey Vlora, who was against the congress. According to him, Morton Eden spoke openly with the Albanian nationalists about the possibility of expelling the Italians and holding a congress. Eqerem Bey Vlora, had received Morton Eden in his house and discussed political developments with him, but, as he says in his memoirs, he did not engage in politics, as he did not believe that Albanians could organize the congress without Italy&#x27;s approval and when numerous Italian forces commanded by his friend General Piacentini controlled almost all of Albania.

===Efforts to prevent the convening===
The government of Durrës did its best to prevent the holding of the Congress of Lushnjë, and there is no way it could be otherwise given that the latter aimed precisely at its dismissal from power. The movements started early with attempts to sabotage it. At a time when delegates were gathering in Lushnjë, on 15 January 1920 the Prefect of Durrës who was also a supporter and organizer of the Congress, Abdyl Ypi, was invited to the city school to discuss the situation. The moment he gets there, Sul Merlika, assisted by Salih Gjuka, shoots at him, leaving him dead. Sul Merlika was the first cousin of Mustafa Kruja while Gjuka was a close associate of his. The murder was made to look like the elimination of an Essadist, who especially in the city of Durrës did not enjoy any respect. According to the later memories of Sejfi Vllamasi, the assassination was known to have been committed due to the support that Ypi had for the Congress of Lushnjë, so much so that in a telegram sent to the Prefect of Shkodra, the then Minister of Finance Fejzi Alizoti, ordered not to allow delegates of northern Albania to go in Lushnje while at the end of the telegram he added that Abdyl Ypi had been killed. However, the assassination did not deter the congress at all, so much so that a large part of those who attended went directly from the funeral of Ypi held in the city of Durres.

The District of Kruja, the birthplace of Mustafa and where he had the most influence, also elects its delegates for the congress, one of whom was the mayor of the city Hysni Berber. Upon learning this news, Mustafa Kruja leaves for the city and urges Berberi not to go, and while the latter stubbornly leaves the next day, Kruja cuts him off and stops him by force of arms. While the first delegates arrive in Lushnjë between 15–20 January, the protection of the congress and the representatives was taken over by the &quot;Congressional Defense Chief&quot; Lazar Bozo with the command of the Gendarmerie of Lushnjë, Divjakë, and Libofshë. To their troops were added the command of the Gendarmerie of Dumrea led by Lieutenant Preng Jaku but also other volunteers from the surrounding areas.

The Minister of Justice Myfit Libohova went to Vlorë and tried to persuade General Piacentini to take military measures against the Congress of Lushnjë based on the secret agreement which the Government of Durrës had with the Italian General Command in Albania. Piacentini could not risk his actions to appear as interference in the internal affairs of Albania knowing that the situation and dissatisfaction with the Italian presence in the country was at its peak. Thus, without informing the command on anything, he ordered the Gjirokastër militia with about 1200 personnel, mostly Catholics from Shkodër, to leave for Lushnjë. The troops were stationed in Kolonjë with orders to disperse a gathering. But as soon as they arrived, the command of the militia dubious of the Italian orders established contact with Meleq Frashëri. The latter informed about the purposes and assures them that Congress is meeting for the future of Albania. The militia assured that it would not interfere in the activity of the congress but suggested speeding up the decision-making with the fear that the Italians would send more forces. The British consul Morton Eden, present in Lushnja, was anxious until the intention of the Albanian militia against the Congress was understood. As proved later, the militia stayed until the end of the Congress.

==Participants==
Members of the initiatory commission are listed below:


== Decisions ==

The Congress was also concerned with the Government of Durrës that had the backing of the invading Italian army. It was alleged that Abdyl Ypi, the initiator of the Congress, had been assassinated by members of the Government of Durrës, who wanted to scare off the other delegates to the Congress. During its first session, the Congress decided unanimously on the otherthrow of the Government of Durrës and the organization of armed resistance against the Italian forces that were in control of part of southern Albania. The High Council was made up of Luigj Bumçi, Aqif Pashë Elbasani, Abdi Toptani, and Mihal Turtulli who would perform the function of the leaders of the new Albanian state, whereas the National Council would function as the Parliament. The congress&#x27;s decisions would eventually lead a few months later to the Vlora War and as a result to the total withdrawal of the Italian army from Albania.

== Aftermath ==

The Congress of Lushnje was the most important meeting of Albanian political leaders after the Declaration of Independence on November 28, 1912. It was essential for the territorial integrity of newly formed state of Albania. Tirana became the new capital and a new government under Sulejman Delvina was created.

== Legacy ==

The Congress of Lushnje was the most important meeting of Albanian political leaders after the Declaration of Independence on November 28, 1912. It was essential for the territorial integrity of newly formed state of Albania. The other powers, mainly Italian troops were a real danger. The decisions made in the Congress had a huge impact on the future of the state. Tirana became the new capital of Albania and the first modern government under Prime Minister Suleyman Delvina was established. The Congress proved that Albanians were able to join forces and organise together in times of risk, like it happened in the past with League of Lezhe, League of Prizren and the Declaration of Independence. Several attempts to declare it a National Day (January 21) has been made by historians and civil society.

==See also==
*Congress of Durrës
*Albanian Congress of Trieste
*Congress of Dibër
*League of Prizren

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q122107" start="4" end="23" title="Congress of Lushnjë" label="Congress of Lushnjë"/>
<link wikidata="Q917351" start="111" end="137" title="Politics of Albania" label="Albanian political leaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q212680" start="183" end="190" title="Lushnjë" label="Lushnjë"/>
<link wikidata="Q222" start="192" end="199" title="Albania" label="Albania"/>
<link wikidata="Q83285" start="389" end="395" title="Durrës" label="Durrës"/>
<link wikidata="Q16030832" start="587" end="600" title="Aqif Elbasani" label="Aqif Elbasani"/>
<link wikidata="Q5444328" start="643" end="657" title="Ferid Vokopola" label="Ferid Vokopola"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051864" start="752" end="768" title="Sulejman Delvina" label="Sulejman Delvina"/>
<link wikidata="Q19689" start="908" end="914" title="Tirana" label="Tirana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2720692" start="1023" end="1032" title="Vlora War" label="Vlora War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5160877" start="1225" end="1231" title="Congress of Lushnjë Museum" label="museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="1293" end="1308" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5160866" start="1491" end="1509" title="Congress of Durrës" label="Congress of Durrës"/>
<link wikidata="Q719389" start="1580" end="1600" title="Turhan Pashë Përmeti" label="Turhan Pashë Përmeti"/>
<link wikidata="Q48843346" start="1616" end="1636" title="Përmeti II Government" label="Government of Durrës"/>
<link wikidata="Q584617" start="1703" end="1719" title="Treaty of London (1913)" label="Treaty of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q3958411" start="1732" end="1742" title="Settimio Piacentini" label="Piacentini"/>
<link wikidata="Q199820" start="2003" end="2025" title="Paris Peace Conference (1919–1920)" label="Paris Peace Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q3266574" start="2227" end="2238" title="Luigj Bumçi" label="Luigj Bumçi"/>
<link wikidata="Q12885124" start="2307" end="2334" title="Venizelos–Tittoni agreement" label="Venizelos–Tittoni agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q205545" start="2375" end="2396" title="Eleftherios Venizelos" label="Eleftherios Venizelos"/>
<link wikidata="Q537144" start="2437" end="2452" title="Tommaso Tittoni" label="Tommaso Tittoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q824165" start="2682" end="2698" title="Treaty of London (1915)" label="Treaty of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q171730" start="2793" end="2811" title="Georges Clémenceau" label="Georges Clémenceau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051859" start="2887" end="2905" title="Mufid Libohova" label="Myfid Bej Libohova"/>
<link wikidata="Q997883" start="2910" end="2927" title="Fejzi Alizoti" label="Fejzi Bey Alizoti"/>
<link wikidata="Q14211" start="3989" end="4021" title="Prime Minister of United Kingdom" label="Prime Minister of United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q134982" start="4022" end="4040" title="David Lloyd George" label="David Lloyd George"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="4050" end="4056" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q171730" start="4057" end="4075" title="Georges Clémenceau" label="Georges Clémenceau"/>
<link wikidata="Q367132" start="4080" end="4095" title="Francesco Nitti" label="Francesco Nitti"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="4099" end="4104" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="4128" end="4132" title="U.S." label="U.S."/>
<link wikidata="Q1814120" start="4149" end="4162" title="Frank L. Polk" label="Frank L. Polk"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="4301" end="4307" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q236" start="4322" end="4332" title="Montenegro" label="Montenegro"/>
<link wikidata="Q403" start="4354" end="4360" title="Serbia" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6809633" start="4523" end="4536" title="Mehmed Konica" label="Mehmed Konica"/>
<link wikidata="Q18641028" start="4538" end="4552" title="Mihal Turtulli" label="Mihal Turtulli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390790" start="4554" end="4568" title="Luigj Gurakuqi" label="Luigj Gurakuqi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3266574" start="4570" end="4581" title="Luigj Bumçi" label="Luigj Bumçi"/>
<link wikidata="Q115455" start="4583" end="4596" title="Gjergj Fishta" label="Gjergj Fishta"/>
<link wikidata="Q984363" start="4598" end="4611" title="Mustafa Kruja" label="Mustafa Kruja"/>
<link wikidata="Q707266" start="4616" end="4637" title="Mid&amp;#x27;hat Frashëri" label="Mid&amp;#x27;hat Frashëri"/>
<link wikidata="Q719389" start="4812" end="4832" title="Turhan Pasha Përmeti" label="Turhan Pasha Përmeti"/>
<link wikidata="Q16959986" start="5475" end="5480" title="Vatra, the Pan-Albanian Federation of America" label="Vatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q223435" start="5951" end="5965" title="Mehdi Frashëri" label="Mehdi Frashëri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051859" start="5970" end="5984" title="Mufid Libohova" label="Mufid Libohova"/>
<link wikidata="Q83285" start="6049" end="6055" title="Durrës" label="Durrës"/>
<link wikidata="Q1662634" start="6318" end="6324" title="Clique" label="Clique"/>
<link wikidata="Q366796" start="7010" end="7029" title="Essad Pasha Toptani" label="Essad Pasha Toptani"/>
<link wikidata="Q836500" start="7135" end="7151" title="Rexhep Mitrovica" label="Rexhep Mitrovica"/>
<link wikidata="Q194164" start="7408" end="7413" title="Krujë" label="Krujë"/>
<link wikidata="Q6081288" start="7451" end="7468" title="Reshid Akif Pasha" label="Reshid Akif Pasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="7505" end="7519" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q202665" start="7779" end="7791" title="Mat District" label="Mat District"/>
<link wikidata="Q7447077" start="7821" end="7835" title="Sejfi Vllamasi" label="Sejfi Vllamasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q66753738" start="7930" end="7939" title="Abdyl Ypi" label="Abdyl Ypi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3302104" start="8039" end="8049" title="Sotir Peçi" label="Sotir Peçi"/>
<link wikidata="Q105726681" start="8102" end="8124" title="Halim Jakova-Gostivari" label="Halim Jakova-Gostivari"/>
<link wikidata="Q191491" start="8231" end="8245" title="Korçë District" label="Korçë District"/>
<link wikidata="Q194176" start="8265" end="8281" title="Shkodër District" label="Shkodër District"/>
<link wikidata="Q16030832" start="8329" end="8348" title="Aqif Pasha Elbasani" label="Aqif Pasha Elbasani"/>
<link wikidata="Q4664958" start="8350" end="8362" title="Abdi Toptani" label="Abdi Toptani"/>
<link wikidata="Q6084812" start="8364" end="8377" title="Ismail Ndroqi" label="Ismail Ndroqi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5444328" start="8396" end="8410" title="Ferid Vokopola" label="Ferid Vokopola"/>
<link wikidata="Q731356" start="8450" end="8462" title="Ilias Vrioni" label="Ilias Vrioni"/>
<link wikidata="Q202981" start="8468" end="8482" title="Berat District" label="Berat District"/>
<link wikidata="Q3250016" start="9126" end="9142" title="Eqrem Vlora" label="Eqerem Bey Vlora"/>
<link wikidata="Q212680" start="10030" end="10037" title="Lushnjë" label="Lushnjë"/>
<link wikidata="Q66753738" start="10136" end="10145" title="Abdyl Ypi" label="Abdyl Ypi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7404489" start="10255" end="10266" title="Salih Gjuka" label="Salih Gjuka"/>
<link wikidata="Q366796" start="10448" end="10456" title="Essad Pasha Toptani" label="Essadist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3302835" start="10756" end="10775" title="Ministry of Finances and Economy (Albania)" label="Minister of Finance"/>
<link wikidata="Q997883" start="10776" end="10789" title="Fejzi Alizoti" label="Fejzi Alizoti"/>
<link wikidata="Q4412051" start="10825" end="10841" title="northern Albania" label="northern Albania"/>
<link wikidata="Q205261" start="11117" end="11134" title="Krujë District" label="District of Kruja"/>
<link wikidata="Q212680" start="11523" end="11530" title="Lushnjë" label="Lushnjë"/>
<link wikidata="Q204310" start="11706" end="11717" title="Gendarmerie" label="Gendarmerie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1945622" start="11730" end="11737" title="Divjakë" label="Divjakë"/>
<link wikidata="Q2619601" start="11743" end="11751" title="Libofshë" label="Libofshë"/>
<link wikidata="Q5108249" start="11814" end="11820" title="Dumre, Albania" label="Dumrea"/>
<link wikidata="Q4294855" start="11909" end="11928" title="Ministry of Justice (Albania)" label="Minister of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051859" start="11929" end="11943" title="Myfit Libohova" label="Myfit Libohova"/>
<link wikidata="Q159610" start="11952" end="11957" title="Vlorë" label="Vlorë"/>
<link wikidata="Q173690" start="12435" end="12446" title="Gjirokastër" label="Gjirokastër"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108212" start="12489" end="12498" title="Catholic Church in Albania" label="Catholics"/>
<link wikidata="Q644222" start="12564" end="12571" title="Kolonjë, Lushnjë" label="Kolonjë"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13371" end="13391" title="Congress of Durrës#Government of Durrës" label="Government of Durrës"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="13429" end="13436" title="Italy" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q66753738" start="13463" end="13472" title="Abdyl Ypi" label="Abdyl Ypi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3266574" start="13883" end="13894" title="Luigj Bumçi" label="Luigj Bumçi"/>
<link wikidata="Q16030832" start="13896" end="13915" title="Aqif Pashë Elbasani" label="Aqif Pashë Elbasani"/>
<link wikidata="Q4664958" start="13917" end="13929" title="Abdi Toptani" label="Abdi Toptani"/>
<link wikidata="Q18641028" start="13935" end="13949" title="Mihal Turtulli" label="Mihal Turtulli"/>
<link wikidata="Q2720692" start="14164" end="14173" title="Vlora War" label="Vlora War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5160866" start="15416" end="15434" title="Congress of Durrës" label="Congress of Durrës"/>
<link wikidata="Q4709121" start="15436" end="15464" title="Albanian Congress of Trieste" label="Albanian Congress of Trieste"/>
<link wikidata="Q94679" start="15466" end="15483" title="Congress of Dibër" label="Congress of Dibër"/>
<link wikidata="Q829597" start="15485" end="15502" title="League of Prizren" label="League of Prizren"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="308979" wikidata="Q699344" url="?curid=308979" title="Liu Zhi (ROC)">
<text>Liu Zhi (; 30 June 1892 – 15 January 1971) was a prominent Kuomintang military and political leader in the Republic of China.

==Biography==
Liu was born into a peasant family in Jiangxi province in 1892. His parents died when he was young and he was raised by his grandfather. He was educated in a local school before traveling to Japan to receive advanced education. When the Japanese government started to expel Chinese students on behalf of the Manchurian imperial government, he returned to China and enrolled in military academies in Wuhan. In 1914 he entered the Baoding Military Academy and after serving in numerous regional armies, Liu joined the faculty of the Whampoa Military Academy in 1924 and became a field commander during the Northern Expedition. He became friends with many important allies of Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek and they proved to be extremely helpful to his rise in the KMT government.

==Rise and fall in the KMT government==
He was instrumental in defeating Chiang&#x27;s rival warlords in the Central Plains War and expanding KMT military power throughout the 1930s by defeating Chinese Communist forces in Henan Province. Chiang Kai-shek rewarded him by appointing him governor of Henan Province and naming a county after him. When the Second Sino-Japanese War broke out, Liu was named deputy commander of the first war zone and commander-in-chief of the 2nd Army Group. By this time, he seemed to have gradually lost his military prowess, and the Imperial Japanese Army easily overwhelmed his forces and broke through the Chinese defensive lines despite being greatly outnumbered. Liu was forced to abandon much of Hebei province in North China and this defeat contributed to the 1938 Yellow River flood, after which he was relieved from his posts by Chiang. When the nationalist government retreated to Chongking, Chiang named him as commander of the city&#x27;s air defense. When the Japanese air force started the bombing of Chongking, Liu&#x27;s leadership was ineffective to stall Japanese terror raids and raise civilian morale. He was dismissed once again in 1942. 

In February 1945 he became commander-in-chief of the fifth war zone, a post previously held by Li Zongren. When the war with Japan was over, he was named as pacification director of Zhengzhou garrison, controlling first and fifth war zones. When the Campaign of the North China Plain Pocket broke out in the summer of 1946, he failed to destroy the Communist forces (PLA) under Marshal Liu Bocheng and Deng Xiaoping and was relieved of his command yet again. In the fall of 1948, He became the commander-in-chief of the Suppression General Headquarter of Xuzhou Garrison and controlled some 800,000 nationalist soldiers until his capable deputy commander-in-chief Du Yuming was recalled to Manchuria (Northeast) to salvage the nationalist positions there when Marshal Lin Biao launched the Liaoshen Campaign on September 12, 1948. He went into a panic and did not organize an effective defensive line around his command sector when Communist commander Su Yu attacked Xuzhou in the Huaihai Campaign. Although President Chiang Kai-shek again dispatched Lieutenant General Du Yuming to save the situation, Liu&#x27;s ineffective leadership and timidness had already doomed the KMT position in Central China. When the Communist forces finally defeated the nationalist troops the next year and deputy commander-in-chief Du Yuming was captured, Liu was reliefed by Chiang Kai-shek, who was fortunate to escape Xuzhou via a plane.

==Exile==
Liu first fled to British Hong Kong, and later on made a living in Indonesia as a Chinese language teacher. In 1953, he was ordered to return to Kuomingtang-controlled Taiwan as a political adviser to Chiang Kai-shek. He was decorated with the Order of Blue Sky and White Sun. He died in Taiwan in 1972. His grand daughter Jassamyn Liu, a Chinese American, graduated from West Point Valedictorian. President George W. Bush presented a diploma to her during 2006 graduation ceremonies.

==Evaluation==
General Liu Zhi&#x27;s early military career was full of victories and successes, but he lost his aggressiveness in combat skills after the outbreak of the Second Sino-Japanese War. He was given opportunities in part because he remained to be loyal to President Chiang would not consider to defect to opposite side like some generals.

==See also==
*History of the Republic of China

==References==
*US Naval War College
*Ministry of National Defense R.O.C </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q699344" start="0" end="7" title="Liu Zhi (ROC)" label="Liu Zhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q31113" start="59" end="69" title="Kuomintang" label="Kuomintang"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="107" end="124" title="Republic of China" label="Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q188712" start="332" end="337" title="Empire of Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q11746" start="540" end="545" title="Wuhan" label="Wuhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q697751" start="570" end="594" title="Baoding Military Academy" label="Baoding Military Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q16242140" start="672" end="696" title="Whampoa Military Academy" label="Whampoa Military Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073476" start="745" end="764" title="Northern Expedition (1926–1927)" label="Northern Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q16574" start="828" end="843" title="Chiang Kai-shek" label="Chiang Kai-shek"/>
<link wikidata="Q717809" start="1029" end="1047" title="Central Plains War" label="Central Plains War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036830" start="1115" end="1139" title="Chinese Red Army" label="Chinese Communist forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q43684" start="1143" end="1148" title="Henan" label="Henan"/>
<link wikidata="Q43684" start="1218" end="1223" title="Henan" label="Henan"/>
<link wikidata="Q170314" start="1273" end="1297" title="Second Sino-Japanese War" label="Second Sino-Japanese War"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1392" end="1406" title="2nd Army Group" label="2nd Army Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q276535" start="1485" end="1507" title="Imperial Japanese Army" label="Imperial Japanese Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q21208" start="1653" end="1658" title="Hebei" label="Hebei"/>
<link wikidata="Q129151" start="1718" end="1741" title="1938 Yellow River flood" label="1938 Yellow River flood"/>
<link wikidata="Q11725" start="1842" end="1851" title="Chongqing" label="Chongking"/>
<link wikidata="Q705165" start="1955" end="1975" title="Bombing of Chongqing" label="bombing of Chongking"/>
<link wikidata="Q20297" start="2207" end="2217" title="Li Zongren" label="Li Zongren"/>
<link wikidata="Q30340" start="2294" end="2303" title="Zhengzhou" label="Zhengzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q5027844" start="2362" end="2402" title="Campaign of the North China Plain Pocket" label="Campaign of the North China Plain Pocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q200106" start="2479" end="2482" title="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army" label="PLA"/>
<link wikidata="Q701507" start="2498" end="2509" title="Liu Bocheng" label="Liu Bocheng"/>
<link wikidata="Q16977" start="2514" end="2527" title="Deng Xiaoping" label="Deng Xiaoping"/>
<link wikidata="Q7644643" start="2632" end="2682" title="Suppression General Headquarter of Xuzhou Garrison" label="Suppression General Headquarter of Xuzhou Garrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q5310099" start="2776" end="2785" title="Du Yuming" label="Du Yuming"/>
<link wikidata="Q81126" start="2802" end="2811" title="Manchuria" label="Manchuria"/>
<link wikidata="Q315475" start="2880" end="2888" title="Lin Biao" label="Lin Biao"/>
<link wikidata="Q4272689" start="2902" end="2919" title="Liaoshen Campaign" label="Liaoshen Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q840370" start="3064" end="3069" title="Su Yu" label="Su Yu"/>
<link wikidata="Q372153" start="3093" end="3109" title="Huaihai Campaign" label="Huaihai Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q16574" start="3130" end="3145" title="Chiang Kai-shek" label="Chiang Kai-shek"/>
<link wikidata="Q5310099" start="3182" end="3191" title="Du Yuming" label="Du Yuming"/>
<link wikidata="Q5310099" start="3427" end="3436" title="Du Yuming" label="Du Yuming"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054923" start="3565" end="3582" title="British Hong Kong" label="British Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="3614" end="3623" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="3715" end="3721" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q952003" start="3791" end="3822" title="Order of Blue Sky and White Sun" label="Order of Blue Sky and White Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q170314" start="4204" end="4228" title="Second Sino-Japanese War" label="Second Sino-Japanese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151968" start="4398" end="4430" title="History of the Republic of China" label="History of the Republic of China"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="308981" wikidata="Q627214" url="?curid=308981" title="Vestigiality">
<text>Vestigiality is the retention, during the process of evolution, of genetically determined structures or attributes that have lost some or all of the ancestral function in a given species. Assessment of the vestigiality must generally rely on comparison with homologous features in related species. The emergence of vestigiality occurs by normal evolutionary processes, typically by loss of function of a feature that is no longer subject to positive selection pressures when it loses its value in a changing environment. The feature may be selected against more urgently when its function becomes definitively harmful, but if the lack of the feature provides no advantage, and its presence provides no disadvantage, the feature may not be phased out by natural selection and persist across species.

Examples of vestigial structures (also called degenerate, atrophied, or rudimentary organs) are the loss of functional wings in island-dwelling birds; the human vomeronasal organ; and the hindlimbs of the snake and whale.

==Overview==
Vestigial features may take various forms; for example, they may be patterns of behavior, anatomical structures, or biochemical processes. Like most other physical features, however functional, vestigial features in a given species may successively appear, develop, and persist or disappear at various stages within the life cycle of the organism, ranging from early embryonic development to late adulthood.

Vestigiality, biologically speaking, refers to organisms retaining organs that have seemingly lost their original function. Vestigial organs are common evolutionary knowledge. In addition, the term &quot;vestigiality&quot; is useful in referring to many genetically determined features, either morphological, behavioral, or physiological; in any such context, however, it need not follow that a vestigial feature must be completely useless. A classic example at the level of gross anatomy is the human vermiform appendix, vestigial in the sense of retaining no significant digestive function.

Similar concepts apply at the molecular level—some nucleic acid sequences in eukaryotic genomes have no known biological function; some of them may be &quot;junk DNA&quot;, but it is a difficult matter to demonstrate that a particular sequence in a particular region of a given genome is truly nonfunctional. The simple fact that it is noncoding DNA does not establish that it is functionless. Furthermore, even if an extant DNA sequence is functionless, it does not follow that it has descended from an ancestral sequence of functional DNA. Logically such DNA would not be vestigial in the sense of being the vestige of a functional structure. In contrast pseudogenes have lost their protein-coding ability or are otherwise no longer expressed in the cell. Whether they have any extant function or not, they have lost their former function and in that sense, they do fit the definition of vestigiality.

Vestigial structures are often called &quot;vestigial organs&quot;, although many of them are not actually organs. Such vestigial structures typically are degenerate, atrophied, or rudimentary, and tend to be much more variable than homologous non-vestigial parts. Although structures commonly regarded &quot;vestigial&quot; may have lost some or all of the functional roles that they had played in ancestral organisms, such structures may retain lesser functions or may have become adapted to new roles in extant populations.

It is important to avoid confusion of the concept of vestigiality with that of exaptation. Both may occur together in the same example, depending on the relevant point of view. In exaptation, a structure originally used for one purpose is modified for a new one. For example, the wings of penguins would be exaptational in the sense of serving a substantial new purpose (underwater locomotion), but might still be regarded as vestigial in the sense of having lost the function of flight. In contrast Darwin argued that the wings of emus would be definitely vestigial, as they appear to have no major extant function; however, function is a matter of degree, so judgments on what is a &quot;major&quot; function are arbitrary; the emu does seem to use its wings as organs of balance in running. Similarly, the ostrich uses its wings in displays and temperature control, though they are undoubtedly vestigial as structures for flight.

Vestigial characters range from detrimental through neutral to favorable in terms of selection. Some may be of some limited utility to an organism but still degenerate over time if they do not confer a significant enough advantage in terms of fitness to avoid the effects of genetic drift or competing selective pressures. Vestigiality in its various forms presents many examples of evidence for biological evolution.

==History==
Vestigial structures have been noticed since ancient times, and the reason for their existence was long speculated upon before Darwinian evolution provided a widely accepted explanation. In the 4th century BC, Aristotle was one of the earliest writers to comment, in his &quot;History of Animals&quot;, on the vestigial eyes of moles, calling them &quot;stunted in development&quot; due to the fact that moles can scarcely see. However, only in recent centuries have anatomical vestiges become a subject of serious study. In 1798, Étienne Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire noted on vestigial structures:

His colleague, Jean-Baptiste Lamarck, named a number of vestigial structures in his 1809 book &quot;Philosophie Zoologique&quot;. Lamarck noted &quot;Olivier&#x27;s &quot;Spalax&quot;, which lives underground like the mole, and is apparently exposed to daylight even less than the mole, has altogether lost the use of sight: so that it shows nothing more than vestiges of this organ.&quot;

Charles Darwin was familiar with the concept of vestigial structures, though the term for them did not yet exist. He listed a number of them in &quot;The Descent of Man&quot;, including the muscles of the ear, wisdom teeth, the appendix, the tail bone, body hair, and the semilunar fold in the corner of the eye. Darwin also noted, in &quot;On the Origin of Species&quot;, that a vestigial structure could be useless for its primary function, but still retain secondary anatomical roles: &quot;An organ serving for two purposes, may become rudimentary or utterly aborted for one, even the more important purpose, and remain perfectly efficient for the other... [A]n organ may become rudimentary for its proper purpose, and be used for a distinct object.&quot;

In the first edition of &quot;On the Origin of Species&quot;, Darwin briefly mentioned inheritance of acquired characters under the heading &quot;Effects of Use and Disuse&quot;, expressing little doubt that use &quot;strengthens and enlarges certain parts, and disuse diminishes them; and that such modifications are inherited&quot;. In later editions he expanded his thoughts on this, and in the final chapter of the 6th edition concluded that species have been modified &quot;chiefly through the natural selection of numerous successive, slight, favorable variations; aided in an important manner by the inherited effects of the use and disuse of parts&quot;.

In 1893, Robert Wiedersheim published &quot; The Structure of Man&quot;, a book on human anatomy and its relevance to man&#x27;s evolutionary history. &quot;The Structure of Man&quot; contained a list of 86 human organs that Wiedersheim described as, &quot;Organs having become wholly or in part functionless, some appearing in the Embryo alone, others present during Life constantly or inconstantly. For the greater part Organs which may be rightly termed Vestigial.&quot; Since his time, the function of some of these structures have been discovered, while other anatomical vestiges have been unearthed, making the list primarily of interest as a record of the knowledge of human anatomy at the time. Later versions of Wiedersheim&#x27;s list were expanded to as many as 180 human &quot;vestigial organs&quot;. This is why the zoologist Horatio Newman said in a written statement read into evidence in the Scopes Trial that &quot;There are, according to Wiedersheim, no less than 180 vestigial structures in the human body, sufficient to make of a man a veritable walking museum of antiquities.&quot;

==Common descent and evolutionary theory==
Vestigial structures are often homologous to structures that are functioning normally in other species. Therefore, vestigial structures can be considered evidence for evolution, the process by which beneficial heritable traits arise in populations over an extended period of time. The existence of vestigial traits can be attributed to changes in the environment and behavior patterns of the organism in question. Through an examination of these various traits, it is clear that evolution had a hard role in the development of organisms. Every anatomical structure or behavior response has origins in which they were, at one time, useful. As time progressed, the ancient common ancestor organisms did as well. Evolving with time, natural selection played a huge role. More advantageous structures were selected, while others were not. With this expansion, some traits were left to the wayside. As the function of the trait is no longer beneficial for survival, the likelihood that future offspring will inherit the &quot;normal&quot; form of it decreases. In some cases, the structure becomes detrimental to the organism (for example the eyes of a mole can become infected). In many cases the structure is of no direct harm, yet all structures require extra energy in terms of development, maintenance, and weight, and are also a risk in terms of disease (e.g., infection, cancer), providing some selective pressure for the removal of parts that do not contribute to an organism&#x27;s fitness. A structure that is not harmful will take longer to be &#x27;phased out&#x27; than one that is. However, some vestigial structures may persist due to limitations in development, such that complete loss of the structure could not occur without major alterations of the organism&#x27;s developmental pattern, and such alterations would likely produce numerous negative side-effects. The toes of many animals such as horses, which stand on a single toe, are still evident in a vestigial form and may become evident, although rarely, from time to time in individuals.

The vestigial versions of the structure can be compared to the original version of the structure in other species in order to determine the homology of a vestigial structure. Homologous structures indicate common ancestry with those organisms that have a functional version of the structure. Douglas Futuyma has stated that vestigial structures make no sense without evolution, just as spelling and usage of many modern English words can only be explained by their Latin or Old Norse antecedents.

Vestigial traits can still be considered adaptations. This is because an adaptation is often defined as a trait that has been favored by natural selection. Adaptations, therefore, need not be &quot;adaptive&quot;, as long as they were at some point.

==Examples==
===Non-human animals===
Vestigial characters are present throughout the animal kingdom, and an almost endless list could be given. Darwin said that &quot;it would be impossible to name one of the higher animals in which some part or other is not in a rudimentary condition.&quot;

The wings of ostriches, emus and other flightless birds are vestigial; they are remnants of their flying ancestors&#x27; wings. These birds go through the effort of developing wings, even though most birds are too large to use the wings successfully. Seeing vestigial wings in birds is also common when they no longer need to fly to escape predators, such as birds on the Galapagos Islands. The eyes of certain cavefish and salamanders are vestigial, as they no longer allow the organism to see, and are remnants of their ancestors&#x27; functional eyes. Animals that reproduce without sex (via asexual reproduction) generally lose their sexual traits, such as the ability to locate/recognize the opposite sex and copulation behavior.

Boas and pythons have vestigial pelvis remnants, which are externally visible as two small pelvic spurs on each side of the cloaca. These spurs are sometimes used in copulation, but are not essential, as no colubrid snake (the vast majority of species) possesses these remnants. Furthermore, in most snakes, the left lung is greatly reduced or absent. Amphisbaenians, which independently evolved limblessness, also retain vestiges of the pelvis as well as the pectoral girdle, and have lost their right lung.

A case of vestigial organs was described in polyopisthocotylean Monogeneans (parasitic flatworms). These parasites usually have a posterior attachment organ with several clamps, which are sclerotised organs attaching the worm to the gill of the host fish. These clamps are extremely important for the survival of the parasite. In the family Protomicrocotylidae, species have either normal clamps, simplified clamps, or no clamps at all (in the genus &quot;Lethacotyle&quot;). After a comparative study of the relative surface of clamps in more than 100 Monogeneans, this has been interpreted as an evolutionary sequence leading to the loss of clamps. Coincidentally, other attachment structures (lateral flaps, transverse striations) have evolved in protomicrocotylids. Therefore, clamps in protomicrocotylids were considered vestigial organs.

In the foregoing examples the vestigiality is generally the (sometimes incidental) result of adaptive evolution. However, there are many examples of vestigiality as the product of drastic mutation, and such vestigiality is usually harmful or counter-adaptive. One of the earliest documented examples was that of vestigial wings in &quot;Drosophila&quot;. Many examples in many other contexts have emerged since.

===Humans===

Human vestigiality is related to human evolution, and includes a variety of characters occurring in the human species. Many examples of these are vestigial in other primates and related animals, whereas other examples are still highly developed. The human caecum is vestigial, as often is the case in omnivores, being reduced to a single chamber receiving the content of the ileum into the colon. The ancestral caecum would have been a large, blind diverticulum in which resistant plant material such as cellulose would have been fermented in preparation for absorption in the colon. Analogous organs in other animals similar to humans continue to perform similar functions. The coccyx, or tailbone, though a vestige of the tail of some primate ancestors, is functional as an anchor for certain pelvic muscles including: the levator ani muscle and the largest gluteal muscle, the gluteus maximus.

Other structures that are vestigial include the plica semilunaris on the inside corner of the eye (a remnant of the nictitating membrane); and (as seen at right) muscles in the ear. Other organic structures (such as the occipitofrontalis muscle) have lost their original functions (to keep the head from falling) but are still useful for other purposes (facial expression).

Humans also bear some vestigial behaviors and reflexes. The formation of goose bumps in humans under stress is a vestigial reflex; its function in human ancestors was to raise the body&#x27;s hair, making the ancestor appear larger and scaring off predators. The &quot;arrector pili&quot; (muscle that connects the hair follicle to connective tissue) contracts and creates goosebumps on skin.

There are also vestigial molecular structures in humans, which are no longer in use but may indicate common ancestry with other species. One example of this is a gene that is functional in most other mammals and which produces L-gulonolactone oxidase, an enzyme that can make vitamin C. A documented mutation deactivated the gene in an ancestor of the modern infraorder of monkeys, and apes, and it now remains in their genomes, including the human genome, as a vestigial sequence called a pseudogene.

The shift in human diet towards soft and processed food over time caused a reduction in the number of powerful grinding teeth, especially the third molars (also known as wisdom teeth), which were highly prone to impaction.

===Plants and fungi===
Plants also have vestigial parts, including functionless stipules and carpels, leaf reduction of Equisetum, paraphyses of Fungi. Well known examples are the reductions in floral display, leading to smaller and/or paler flowers, in plants that reproduce without outcrossing, for example via selfing or obligate clonal reproduction.

=== Objects ===

Many objects in daily use contain vestigial structures. While not the result of natural selection through random mutation, much of the process is the same. Product design, like evolution, is iterative; it builds on features and processes that already exist, with limited resources available to make tweaks. To spend resources on completely weeding out a form that serves no purpose (if at the same time it is not an obstruction either) is not economically astute. These vestigial structures differ from the concept of skeuomorphism in that a skeuomorph is a design feature that has been specifically implemented as a reference to the past, enabling users to acclimatise quicker. A vestigial feature does not exist intentionally, or even usefully.

For example, men&#x27;s business suits often contain a row of buttons at the bottom of the sleeve. These used to serve a purpose, allowing the sleeve to be split and rolled up. The feature has been lost entirely, though most suits still give the impression that it is possible, complete with fake button holes. There is also an example of exaptation to be found in the business suit: it was previously possible to button a jacket up all the way to the top. As it became the fashion to fold the lapel over, the top half of buttons and their accompanying buttonholes disappeared, save for a single hole at the top; it has since found a new use as a place to fasten pins, badges, or boutonnières.

As a final example, soldiers in ceremonial or parade uniform can sometimes be seen wearing a gorget: a small decorative piece of metal suspended around the neck with a chain. The gorget serves no protection to the wearer, yet there exists an unbroken lineage from the gorget to the full suits of armour of the middle ages. With the introduction of gunpowder weapons, armour increasingly lost its usefulness on the battlefield. At the same time, military men were keen to retain the status it provided them. The result: a breastplate that &quot;shrank&quot; away over time, but never disappeared completely.

==See also==
* Atavism
* Dewclaw
* Exaptation
* Evolutionary anachronism
* Human vestigiality
* Maladaptation
* Plantaris muscle
* Recessive refuge
* Spandrel (biology)
* Vestigial response

==References==
==External links==
* Vestigial organs at the TalkOrigins Archive</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q627214" start="0" end="12" title="Vestigiality" label="Vestigiality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063" start="53" end="62" title="evolution" label="evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q224180" start="258" end="268" title="homology (biology)" label="homologous"/>
<link wikidata="Q764759" start="441" end="449" title="Directional selection" label="positive"/>
<link wikidata="Q27348" start="450" end="469" title="Evolutionary pressure" label="selection pressures"/>
<link wikidata="Q3954859" start="540" end="556" title="Negative selection (natural selection)" label="selected against"/>
<link wikidata="Q6083479" start="928" end="943" title="Island ecology" label="island-dwelling"/>
<link wikidata="Q336484" start="961" end="978" title="vomeronasal organ" label="vomeronasal organ"/>
<link wikidata="Q2102" start="1005" end="1010" title="snake" label="snake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1865281" start="1015" end="1020" title="whale" label="whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q193603" start="1356" end="1366" title="Ontogeny" label="life cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q193603" start="1403" end="1424" title="Ontogeny" label="embryonic development"/>
<link wikidata="Q9656" start="1947" end="1965" title="vermiform appendix" label="vermiform appendix"/>
<link wikidata="Q123619" start="2090" end="2102" title="nucleic acid" label="nucleic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q19088" start="2116" end="2126" title="eukaryotic" label="eukaryotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7020" start="2127" end="2134" title="genomes" label="genomes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369010" start="2196" end="2204" title="junk DNA" label="junk DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458444" start="2375" end="2388" title="noncoding DNA" label="noncoding DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q277338" start="2696" end="2706" title="pseudogene" label="pseudogene"/>
<link wikidata="Q712378" start="3051" end="3057" title="organ (anatomy)" label="organs"/>
<link wikidata="Q349856" start="3163" end="3171" title="genetic variation" label="variable"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356572" start="3551" end="3561" title="exaptation" label="exaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q9147" start="3761" end="3768" title="penguin" label="penguin"/>
<link wikidata="Q93208" start="4004" end="4007" title="emu" label="emu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576337" start="4281" end="4288" title="ostrich" label="ostrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q331710" start="4649" end="4656" title="fitness (biology)" label="fitness"/>
<link wikidata="Q486420" start="4681" end="4694" title="genetic drift" label="genetic drift"/>
<link wikidata="Q27348" start="4708" end="4727" title="Evolutionary pressure" label="selective pressures"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075815" start="4789" end="4822" title="Evidence of common descent" label="evidence for biological evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q183493" start="4964" end="4983" title="Darwinian evolution" label="Darwinian evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q868" start="5047" end="5056" title="Aristotle" label="Aristotle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1620799" start="5114" end="5132" title="History of Animals" label="History of Animals"/>
<link wikidata="Q192428" start="5368" end="5398" title="Étienne Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire" label="Étienne Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q82122" start="5446" end="5467" title="Jean-Baptiste Lamarck" label="Jean-Baptiste Lamarck"/>
<link wikidata="Q2025254" start="5531" end="5553" title="Philosophie Zoologique" label="Philosophie Zoologique"/>
<link wikidata="Q726124" start="5581" end="5588" title="Guillaume-Antoine Olivier" label="Olivier"/>
<link wikidata="Q14153702" start="5602" end="5608" title="blind mole rat" label="Spalax"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035" start="5822" end="5836" title="Charles Darwin" label="Charles Darwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165434" start="5972" end="5990" title="The Descent of Man, and Selection in Relation to Sex" label="The Descent of Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q609753" start="6012" end="6030" title="Intrinsic muscles of external ear" label="muscles of the ear"/>
<link wikidata="Q202517" start="6032" end="6044" title="wisdom teeth" label="wisdom teeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q9656" start="6050" end="6058" title="Vermiform appendix" label="appendix"/>
<link wikidata="Q193176" start="6064" end="6073" title="tail bone" label="tail bone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2167872" start="6075" end="6084" title="body hair" label="body hair"/>
<link wikidata="Q48306" start="6094" end="6108" title="Nictitating membrane" label="semilunar fold"/>
<link wikidata="Q430024" start="6130" end="6133" title="human eye" label="eye"/>
<link wikidata="Q20124" start="6163" end="6187" title="On the Origin of Species" label="On the Origin of Species"/>
<link wikidata="Q208800" start="6670" end="6704" title="inheritance of acquired characters" label="inheritance of acquired characters"/>
<link wikidata="Q443318" start="7256" end="7274" title="Robert Wiedersheim" label="Robert Wiedersheim"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7285" end="7318" title="Robert Wiedersheim#The Structure of Man" label="&amp;quot; The Structure of Man&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q59626808" start="8086" end="8100" title="Horatio Newman" label="Horatio Newman"/>
<link wikidata="Q642342" start="8155" end="8167" title="Scopes Trial" label="Scopes Trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q224180" start="8425" end="8435" title="Homology (biology)" label="homologous"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063" start="8561" end="8570" title="evolution" label="evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q11379" start="9652" end="9658" title="energy" label="energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q166231" start="9756" end="9765" title="infection" label="infection"/>
<link wikidata="Q12078" start="9767" end="9773" title="cancer" label="cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q43478" start="9791" end="9800" title="natural selection" label="selective"/>
<link wikidata="Q726" start="10303" end="10308" title="horse" label="horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q154425" start="10335" end="10338" title="toe" label="toe"/>
<link wikidata="Q333018" start="10660" end="10675" title="common descent" label="common ancestry"/>
<link wikidata="Q712110" start="10746" end="10761" title="Douglas Futuyma" label="Douglas Futuyma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="10874" end="10881" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="10919" end="10924" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q35505" start="10928" end="10937" title="Old Norse" label="Old Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q483921" start="10993" end="11003" title="adaptation" label="adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q729" start="11288" end="11294" title="animal" label="animal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576337" start="11510" end="11517" title="ostrich" label="ostrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q93208" start="11521" end="11524" title="emu" label="emu"/>
<link wikidata="Q865137" start="11536" end="11551" title="flightless bird" label="flightless bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q38095" start="11869" end="11886" title="Galápagos Islands" label="Galapagos Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q16768424" start="11908" end="11916" title="cavefish" label="cavefish"/>
<link wikidata="Q53663" start="11921" end="11931" title="salamander" label="salamander"/>
<link wikidata="Q173432" start="12092" end="12112" title="asexual reproduction" label="asexual reproduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q45556" start="12233" end="12237" title="Boidae" label="Boas"/>
<link wikidata="Q184018" start="12242" end="12249" title="Pythonidae" label="pythons"/>
<link wikidata="Q389306" start="12324" end="12335" title="pelvic spur" label="pelvic spur"/>
<link wikidata="Q467382" start="12585" end="12597" title="Amphisbaenia" label="Amphisbaenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3377527" start="12787" end="12805" title="polyopisthocotylea" label="polyopisthocotylea"/>
<link wikidata="Q575927" start="12807" end="12816" title="Monogenea" label="Monogenea"/>
<link wikidata="Q186517" start="12820" end="12829" title="parasite" label="parasitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q124900" start="12830" end="12838" title="flatworm" label="flatworm"/>
<link wikidata="Q17118906" start="12913" end="12919" title="clamp (zoology)" label="clamps"/>
<link wikidata="Q221673" start="12988" end="12992" title="host (biology)" label="host"/>
<link wikidata="Q5018598" start="13084" end="13103" title="Protomicrocotylidae" label="Protomicrocotylidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q15256617" start="13199" end="13210" title="Lethacotyle" label="Lethacotyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q575927" start="13296" end="13305" title="Monogenea" label="Monogenea"/>
<link wikidata="Q17118906" start="13524" end="13530" title="clamp (zoology)" label="clamps"/>
<link wikidata="Q5018598" start="13534" end="13552" title="Protomicrocotylidae" label="protomicrocotylids"/>
<link wikidata="Q483921" start="13681" end="13699" title="Adaptation" label="adaptive evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q42918" start="13776" end="13784" title="mutation" label="mutation"/>
<link wikidata="Q312154" start="13925" end="13935" title="Drosophila" label="Drosophila"/>
<link wikidata="Q83944" start="14048" end="14063" title="human evolution" label="human evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q5" start="14119" end="14124" title="human" label="human"/>
<link wikidata="Q7380" start="14180" end="14187" title="primate" label="primate"/>
<link wikidata="Q185317" start="14271" end="14277" title="caecum" label="caecum"/>
<link wikidata="Q164509" start="14316" end="14324" title="omnivore" label="omnivore"/>
<link wikidata="Q233345" start="14390" end="14395" title="ileum" label="ileum"/>
<link wikidata="Q11083" start="14405" end="14410" title="Colon (anatomy)" label="colon"/>
<link wikidata="Q80294" start="14519" end="14528" title="cellulose" label="cellulose"/>
<link wikidata="Q193176" start="14694" end="14700" title="coccyx" label="coccyx"/>
<link wikidata="Q4210529" start="14961" end="14978" title="plica semilunaris of the conjunctiva" label="plica semilunaris"/>
<link wikidata="Q430024" start="15007" end="15010" title="Human eye" label="eye"/>
<link wikidata="Q48306" start="15029" end="15049" title="nictitating membrane" label="nictitating membrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q609753" start="15075" end="15082" title="Auricular muscles" label="muscles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7362" start="15090" end="15093" title="ear" label="ear"/>
<link wikidata="Q932557" start="15133" end="15157" title="occipitofrontalis muscle" label="occipitofrontalis muscle"/>
<link wikidata="Q684782" start="15361" end="15372" title="goose bumps" label="goose bumps"/>
<link wikidata="Q123414" start="15389" end="15395" title="stress (medicine)" label="stress"/>
<link wikidata="Q179405" start="15411" end="15417" title="reflex action" label="reflex"/>
<link wikidata="Q2282493" start="15909" end="15932" title="L-gulonolactone oxidase" label="L-gulonolactone oxidase"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047" start="15937" end="15943" title="enzyme" label="enzyme"/>
<link wikidata="Q199678" start="15958" end="15967" title="vitamin C" label="vitamin C"/>
<link wikidata="Q5452918" start="16055" end="16072" title="Simian" label="monkeys, and apes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7020" start="16102" end="16108" title="genome" label="genome"/>
<link wikidata="Q720988" start="16125" end="16137" title="human genome" label="human genome"/>
<link wikidata="Q277338" start="16172" end="16182" title="pseudogene" label="pseudogene"/>
<link wikidata="Q202517" start="16327" end="16339" title="Wisdom tooth" label="third molars"/>
<link wikidata="Q202517" start="16397" end="16406" title="Impaction (dental)" label="impaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q304216" start="16489" end="16497" title="stipules" label="stipules"/>
<link wikidata="Q588964" start="16502" end="16509" title="Gynoecium" label="carpels"/>
<link wikidata="Q28114" start="16529" end="16538" title="Equisetum" label="Equisetum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2107902" start="16540" end="16550" title="paraphyses" label="paraphyses"/>
<link wikidata="Q764" start="16554" end="16559" title="Fungi" label="Fungi"/>
<link wikidata="Q779009" start="16693" end="16704" title="outcrossing" label="outcrossing"/>
<link wikidata="Q8271738" start="16722" end="16729" title="autogamy" label="selfing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063" start="16861" end="16902" title="Evolution" label="natural selection through random mutation"/>
<link wikidata="Q607446" start="17299" end="17309" title="skeuomorph" label="skeuomorph"/>
<link wikidata="Q614806" start="17542" end="17567" title="Suit" label="men&amp;#x27;s business suits"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356572" start="17868" end="17878" title="exaptation" label="exaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q607688" start="18023" end="18028" title="lapel" label="lapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q662531" start="18209" end="18220" title="boutonnière" label="boutonnière"/>
<link wikidata="Q1539356" start="18317" end="18323" title="gorget" label="gorget"/>
<link wikidata="Q3391846" start="18511" end="18526" title="Plate armour" label="suits of armour"/>
<link wikidata="Q727055" start="18847" end="18854" title="Atavism" label="Atavism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302901" start="18857" end="18864" title="Dewclaw" label="Dewclaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356572" start="18867" end="18877" title="Exaptation" label="Exaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5418688" start="18880" end="18904" title="Evolutionary anachronism" label="Evolutionary anachronism"/>
<link wikidata="Q17027881" start="18907" end="18925" title="Human vestigiality" label="Human vestigiality"/>
<link wikidata="Q4864574" start="18928" end="18941" title="Maladaptation" label="Maladaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q526239" start="18944" end="18960" title="Plantaris muscle" label="Plantaris muscle"/>
<link wikidata="Q131896729" start="18963" end="18979" title="Recessive refuge" label="Recessive refuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q693754" start="18982" end="19000" title="Spandrel (biology)" label="Spandrel (biology)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7923472" start="19003" end="19021" title="Vestigial response" label="Vestigial response"/>
<link wikidata="Q2626439" start="19083" end="19102" title="TalkOrigins Archive" label="TalkOrigins Archive"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="308983" wikidata="Q6653938" url="?curid=308983" title="Liu Zhi">
<text>Liu Zhi (Liu Chih in Wade–Giles) may refer to:

* Liu Zhi (prince) (劉祉), Eastern Han dynasty prince
* Liu Zhi (Boxian) (劉植; died 26), style name Boxian (伯先), Eastern Han dynasty general
* Emperor Huan of Han (132–168), name Liu Zhi (劉志), Eastern Han dynasty emperor
* Liu Zhi (historian) (劉秩), style name Zuoqing (柞卿), Tang dynasty historian
* Liu Yan (emperor) (889–942), emperor of Southern Han, also known as Liu Zhi
* Liu Zhi (poet) (劉植), style name Chengdao (成道), Song dynasty poet
* Liu Zhi (scholar) (劉智; 1660–1739), style name Jielian (介廉), Qing dynasty Hui Islamic scholar
* Liu Zhi (ROC) (劉峙; 1892–1971), Kuomintang military and political leader
* Liu Zhi (minister), CPC member and early minister of education</text><links>
<link wikidata="None" start="50" end="66" title="Liu Zhi (prince)" label="Liu Zhi (prince)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="102" end="118" title="Liu Zhi (Boxian)" label="Liu Zhi (Boxian)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7297" start="188" end="207" title="Emperor Huan of Han" label="Emperor Huan of Han"/>
<link wikidata="Q2908475" start="268" end="287" title="Liu Zhi (historian)" label="Liu Zhi (historian)"/>
<link wikidata="Q717972" start="344" end="361" title="Liu Yan (emperor)" label="Liu Yan (emperor)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="422" end="436" title="Liu Zhi (poet)" label="Liu Zhi (poet)"/>
<link wikidata="Q13424361" start="489" end="506" title="Liu Zhi (scholar)" label="Liu Zhi (scholar)"/>
<link wikidata="Q699344" start="584" end="597" title="Liu Zhi (ROC)" label="Liu Zhi (ROC)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="658" end="676" title="Liu Zhi (minister)" label="Liu Zhi (minister)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="308984" wikidata="Q856797" url="?curid=308984" title="CTOL">
<text>A conventional take-off and landing (CTOL), also known as horizontal take-off and landing (HTOL) is the process whereby conventional fixed-wing aircraft (such as passenger aircraft) take off and land, involving the use of runways.

During takeoff, the aircraft will accelerate along the runway, resting on its wheels, until its takeoff speed is reached, at which point the pilot manipulates the flight controls to make the aircraft pivot around the axis of its main landing gear while still on the ground, this increases the lift from the wings and effects takeoff.

During landings, a commercial passenger-carrying aircraft will arrive over the runway while still at flight speed. The landing consists of the final approach phase, the flare, the touchdown, and roll-out phase.

Seaplanes and amphibious aircraft, instead of using runways, use water.

==See also==
* British Aerospace HOTOL
*Index of aviation articles
*Takeoff and landing

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q856797" start="2" end="35" title="CTOL" label="conventional take-off and landing"/>
<link wikidata="Q856797" start="37" end="41" title="CTOL" label="CTOL"/>
<link wikidata="Q856797" start="58" end="89" title="CTOL" label="horizontal take-off and landing"/>
<link wikidata="Q856797" start="91" end="95" title="CTOL" label="HTOL"/>
<link wikidata="Q2875704" start="133" end="152" title="fixed-wing aircraft" label="fixed-wing aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q854248" start="182" end="190" title="takeoff" label="take off"/>
<link wikidata="Q844947" start="195" end="199" title="landing" label="land"/>
<link wikidata="Q184590" start="222" end="228" title="runway" label="runway"/>
<link wikidata="Q854248" start="328" end="335" title="takeoff" label="takeoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q11481471" start="395" end="410" title="aircraft flight control system" label="flight controls"/>
<link wikidata="Q263421" start="466" end="478" title="landing gear" label="landing gear"/>
<link wikidata="Q161358" start="539" end="543" title="wing" label="wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q844947" start="574" end="581" title="landing" label="landing"/>
<link wikidata="Q458475" start="710" end="724" title="final approach (aviation)" label="final approach"/>
<link wikidata="Q3746391" start="736" end="741" title="landing flare" label="flare"/>
<link wikidata="Q115940" start="779" end="787" title="Seaplane" label="Seaplane"/>
<link wikidata="Q474709" start="793" end="812" title="amphibious aircraft" label="amphibious aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q3143713" start="840" end="849" title="Seaplane base" label="use water"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473217" start="867" end="890" title="British Aerospace HOTOL" label="British Aerospace HOTOL"/>
<link wikidata="Q2786556" start="892" end="918" title="Index of aviation articles" label="Index of aviation articles"/>
<link wikidata="Q20046585" start="920" end="939" title="Takeoff and landing" label="Takeoff and landing"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="308985" wikidata="Q273809" url="?curid=308985" title="Thomas Pelham-Holles, 1st Duke of Newcastle">
<text>Thomas Pelham-Holles, 1st Duke of Newcastle upon Tyne, 1st Duke of Newcastle-under-Lyne (21 July 1693 – 17 November 1768) was an English Whig statesman who served as Prime Minister of Great Britain, and whose official life extended throughout the Whig supremacy of the 18th century. He is commonly known as the Duke of Newcastle.

A protégé of Robert Walpole, he served under him for more than 20 years until 1742. He held power with his brother, prime minister Henry Pelham, until 1754. He had then served as a Secretary of State continuously for 30 years and dominated British foreign policy.

After Henry&#x27;s death, Newcastle was prime minister for six years in two separate periods. While his first premiership was not particularly notable, Newcastle precipitated the Seven Years&#x27; War, and his weak diplomacy cost him his premiership. After his second term, he served briefly in Lord Rockingham&#x27;s ministry, before he retired from government. He was most effective as a deputy to a leader of greater ability, such as Walpole, his brother, or Pitt. Few politicians in British history matched his skills and industry in using patronage to maintain power over long stretches of time. His genius appeared as the chief party manager for the Whigs from 1715 to 1761. He used his energy and his money to select candidates, distribute patronage and win elections. He was especially influential in the counties of Sussex, Nottinghamshire, Yorkshire and Lincolnshire. His greatest triumph came in the 1754 election.

Outside the electoral realm, his reputation has suffered. Historian Harry Dickinson says that he became

==Early life==
Thomas Pelham was born in London on 21 July 1693 the eldest son of Thomas Pelham, 1st Baron Pelham, by his second wife, the former Lady Grace Holles, younger sister of John Holles, 1st Duke of Newcastle-upon-Tyne. He studied at Westminster School and was admitted as a fellow commoner at Clare College, Cambridge, in 1710. Pelham&#x27;s uncle died in 1711, and his father the next year, both leaving their large estates to their nephew and son. When he came of age in 1714, Lord Pelham was one of the greatest landowners in the kingdom, enjoying enormous patronage in the county of Sussex. One stipulation of his uncle&#x27;s will was that his nephew add Holles to his name, which he faithfully did, thereafter styling himself as Thomas Pelham-Holles. A long-standing legal dispute over the estate with his Aunt was finally settled in 1714.

He increasingly identified with Whig politics, like his father and uncle, but whereas they had been moderate in their views, he grew increasingly more partisan and militant in his views. Britain was very divided between Whigs who favoured the succession of George of Hanover after Queen Anne&#x27;s death and Tories who supported the return of the Jacobite James Stuart, known later as the &#x27;old pretender&#x27;. This issue dominated British politics during the last few years of Queen Anne&#x27;s reign, leading up to her death in 1714, and had a profound impact on the future career of the young Duke of Newcastle. He joined the Hannover Club and the Kit Kat Club, both leading centres of Whig thinking and organisation. Newcastle House in London became his premier residence.

==Early political career==
=== Royal favour ===

Newcastle vigorously sustained the Whigs at Queen Anne&#x27;s death and had much influence in making the Londoners accept King George I, even organising so-called &#x27;Newcastle mobs&#x27; to fight with rival Jacobites in the street.

His services were too great to be neglected by the new Hanoverian king, and in 1714, he was created Earl of Clare, and in 1715 Marquess of Clare and Duke of Newcastle-upon-Tyne, two titles previously held by his late uncle John Holles. He also became Lord-Lieutenant of the counties of Middlesex and Nottingham and a Knight of the Garter. In his new position, he was in charge of suppressing Jacobitism in the counties under his control. In Middlesex, he arrested and questioned 800 people and drew up a Voluntary Defence Association to defend the county. In 1715, he became involved in a riot that ended with two men being killed, and Newcastle fleeing along rooftops. The succession of George I was secured in late 1715 by the defeat of a Jacobite army at the Battle of Preston and the subsequent flight of the Old Pretender.

=== Walpole&#x27;s ally ===
The victory of the Hanoverians over the Jacobites marked the beginning of the Whig Ascendancy which lasted for much of the 18th century. Because the Tory opposition had been tainted, in the eyes of George I, by their support of the Jacobite pretenders, he did not trust them and drew all of his ministers and officials from the Whigs. Following their victory, the Whigs split with one group forming the government for George I, and the other dissident Whigs became the effective opposition in Parliament. After a period of political manoeuvring, he was for a while associated with a Whig faction led by James Stanhope, but from 1720, Newcastle began to identify strongly with the government Whigs, who had quickly come to be dominated by Sir Robert Walpole.

Walpole gladly welcomed the young Newcastle into his coterie because Walpole believed that he could easily control Newcastle and because it would strengthen Walpole&#x27;s hand against the rival Whig factions. Newcastle joined with Walpole because Newcastle, correctly, believed that Walpole was going to dominate British politics for a generation. In 1721, Walpole began to serve as Britain&#x27;s first prime minister and would hold that position for the next 21 years. He was related to Walpole&#x27;s leading ally, Charles Townshend, strengthening his bond with the leader of the new administration.

On 2 April 1717, he increased his Whig connections by marrying Lady Henrietta Godolphin, the granddaughter of the Duke of Marlborough, a national hero following his victories in the recent European war who was considered a Whig icon.

==Lord Chamberlain==
=== In office ===
In 1717, at 23, Newcastle first attained high political office as Lord Chamberlain of the Household and was given the responsibility of overseeing theatres. Plays were often extremely political, and Newcastle was tasked with suppressing any plays or playwrights that he believed to be too critical of the Hanoverian succession or the Whig government. Newcastle clashed repeatedly with Sir Richard Steele, a leading playwright. In 1719, he was one of the three main investors in George Frideric Handel&#x27;s new opera company, the Royal Academy of Music. The Duke ordered Handel in May 1719 to go to the Continent to contract singers for as long as possible.

He held the post for seven years and performed well enough to be considered for further promotion. Despite his youth, he had demonstrated his strength in several general elections when he had been able to get as many as 20 MPs elected to seats that he controlled through his family&#x27;s wealth and political patronage. He survived in the office during the turmoil in the Whigs between 1717 and 1721, and his switch of allegiance to Walpole secured his influence thereafter. Walpole had overseen a brief end to the rift between the Whig factions after the collapse of the South Sea Company, which had left thousands ruined. Newcastle himself had lost £4,000. Walpole was then seen as the only man to bring stability to the country and the Whigs, and he was granted unprecedented powers, effectively making him the first prime minister of Great Britain.

During his time in the office, Newcastle and his wife had become famous for throwing lavish parties that were attended by much of London society including many of his political opponents. He was also prodigiously fond of fox hunting and often went down to Bishopstone, one of his Sussex properties, expressly for that purpose. During his time as Lord Chamberlain he oversaw a major overhaul of public buildings, many of which had fallen into very poor repair.

==Secretary of State==
===Appointment===
In 1724, Newcastle was chosen by Walpole to be Secretary of State for the Southern Department in place of Lord Carteret, a move largely engineered by Townshend. He had been for some time considered the third most important man in the government, behind Walpole and Townshend, which was confirmed by his new position. Newcastle had for several years been growing increasingly interested in foreign affairs and had been educating himself on the subtle details of diplomacy and the European State System. However, his first few years in the office had him defer control of British foreign policy to the other Secretary of State, Townshend, and Newcastle effectively served as his deputy. Walpole was generally happy to allow Townshend to control foreign affairs, as he agreed with him on most issues.

===The French Alliance===

Since the Treaty of Utrecht, which had ended the last major European war, Britain had been an ally of France, a strong reversal in policy, as France had previously been considered the premier enemy of Britain. The reasons for the alliance were complex, and many had doubted the détente could last long, but when Newcastle became Secretary of State, they had been allies for nearly a decade. By 1719, they had become part of a wider Quadruple Alliance, which was by far the most powerful force in European politics, as had been demonstrated during the War of the Quadruple Alliance, a largely-naval war in the Mediterranean by which the powers had defeated a Spanish attempt to reclaim lost territory in Italy. The alliance was unpopular, however, with many in Parliament and in the country, which continued to consider France to be Britain&#x27;s natural enemy.

Newcastle had been joined in government by his young brother, Henry Pelham. The two brothers got on well but were prone to have intractable disputes. One constant source of tension between them was Newcastle&#x27;s poor handling of the family fortune, which was being constantly depleted through his out-of-control spending. Pelham was also considered by many to be the abler of the two brothers, but it was the Duke who was initially more successful in politics. In spite of their differences, they remained firm political allies.

===Domestic crisis===
The administration faced a crisis in 1727, when George I died unexpectedly, and his son George II succeeded to the throne. The new king had previously had exceptionally bad relations with Walpole and Newcastle and, during one altercation between them, George&#x27;s poor English had made Newcastle think that he had challenged him to a duel. Their relationship had not improved in recent years, and many anticipated the imminent replacement of the government.

Instead, Walpole made himself extremely useful to George II, who soon became convinced of his competence and retained him in his post. The thawing of relations was helped by the friendship between Newcastle and George&#x27;s daughter Amelia, leading many to speculate, without substantive evidence, that they were having an affair. By November 1727, Walpole and Newcastle&#x27;s positions were both safe once more, boosted by an election victory that saw them gain 430 seats to the opposition&#x27;s 128 in the House of Commons.

In 1729, a rift broke out in the government over the direction of Britain&#x27;s foreign policy. Townshend was convinced that Britain&#x27;s principal enemy was now Austria. Walpole and Newcastle saw Spain as the main threat to British power because of its large navy and colonial interests. Eventually, Walpole had his way, forcing Townshend from office, and replacing him with Lord Harrington. From then on, Newcastle served as the senior Secretary of State and largely controlled British foreign policy himself. Newcastle was saddened by the demise of his relative and former patron although their partnership had become increasingly strained and the new situation offered enormous possibilities to him personally.

===Peace policy===
Together, Newcastle and Walpole managed to drive a wedge between Spain and Austria, making an ally of the latter and directing their future efforts against Spain. Subsequently, however, it turned out that Britain&#x27;s long-term major rival was neither but France, which had been considered a close ally. The increasingly-confrontational actions of the French Chief Minister, Cardinal Fleury, soon convinced them that they had been wrong. This misjudgment was later used by the Patriot Whigs to castigate the ministry for their lack of preparation against the French threat.

In general, Newcastle shared Walpole&#x27;s abhorrence of war and wished to prevent Britain from getting dragged into major wars on the continent. Notably, Britain did not become embroiled in the War of the Polish Succession and indeed tried to prevent it from breaking out. Newcastle attempted to throw both the French and Austrians off-guard by being cagey about Britain&#x27;s response if war broke out, but that did not stop the conflict. Once the war had started, George II tried to push for Britain to honour its commitment to assist Austria, but he was blocked by Walpole, who insisted that Britain should not join the war. Newcastle broadly supported the same position as the king, but he accepted the decision.

Newcastle&#x27;s brother Henry Pelham had now attained the lucrative position of Paymaster General and had effectively replaced Townshend as the third man of the government. The three men continued what had become dubbed as the Norfolk Congress by meeting regularly at Houghton Hall, Sir Robert Walpole&#x27;s country house in Norfolk. The three men would hold private meetings, draw up wide-ranging policies on foreign and domestic issues and then present them to parliament for their seal of approval, which their vast majority allowed them to do. Slowly, however, Newcastle and his brother were moving out of the shadow of Walpole and being more assertive. Newcastle was particularly annoyed both by what he saw as the abandonment of Austria and by the suggestion that Walpole no longer trusted him.

By 1735, Newcastle had largely assumed control of colonial affairs, further increasing the amount of patronage he controlled. A devout Anglican, he was also given control over ecclesiastical matters, especially the appointment of bishops and lucrative positions in the Church of England.

Newcastle&#x27;s growing independence from Walpole was helped by the support of his brother and his best friend, Hardwicke, who had become Lord Chancellor. During the latter half of the decade, his job was increasingly dominated by managing relations with Spain, which included trade disputes and objections to the controversial founding of the American colony of Georgia in 1733. The longstanding peace policy was now beginning to look extremely fragile. He also acted as a mediator in the War of the Polish Succession, helping to bring the conflict to an end in 1738.

===Jenkins&#x27; Ear and Spanish America===

The growing tension between Britain and Spain came to a head in 1731 during an incident known as Jenkins&#x27; Ear, when a British merchant captain was captured for illegal trading off the coast of Cuba by a Spanish privateer, and in punishment for his alleged breach of the strict laws forbidding foreign commerce with Spanish colonies, he had an ear cut off. The incident shocked Britain not so much because of its brutality but because many saw it as an outrage that Spain should have the temerity to harm a British subject simply for trading, which many held to be a legitimate occupation despite the legal prohibition in force.

In 1738, Jenkins appeared in Parliament to testify about his treatment. Other merchants sent petitions, and the powerful South Sea Company mobilised popular opinion. To many, the Spanish Empire was crumbling, and its South American possessions were ripe for the picking. A vociferous group in Parliament demanded war with Spain. Walpole was adamantly opposed to such a policy and became a target for unprecedented attacks. Newcastle too came under intense pressure but initially considered the demands for Britain to declare war with Spain a dangerous step, and in spite of his increasingly bellicose statements, he still considered the idea of an Anglo-Spanish alliance as late as 1739. He tried to negotiate a solution to the crisis with the Convention of Pardo, which agreed a sum of compensation to be paid to British merchants, but British public opinion had shifted, and Walpole felt that there was no option but to declare war in December 1739.
The British opened the war with a victory, capturing Porto Bello in Panama. That led to an outbreak of patriotic fervour, and further increased the pressure on Walpole and Newcastle for their perceived unwilling prosecution of the war. Newcastle tried to combat that by cultivating a reputation as the leading &quot;patriot&quot; of the cabinet. He took on additional military responsibilities and, for the first two years of war, served as a &quot;de facto&quot; Minister of War. One of his most notable suggestions during the period was the recruitment of large numbers of troops drawn from the American colonies, whose growing manpower had previously gone largely untapped.

In 1741, the main British campaign against Spain was a combined amphibious attack on the South American city of Cartagena, which had experienced considerable delays. Command was awarded to Admiral Edward Vernon, the victor of Porto Bello, who was given a force of 31,000 soldiers and sailors to take the city. The siege proved to be a total disaster for the British, who lost thousands of men before being forced to withdraw. Although Newcastle had issued the orders and overseen the organisation of the expedition, much of the blame for the disaster fell on the shoulders of the ailing prime minister, Walpole.

===Fall of Walpole===
In the wake of the Cartagena disaster, Britain held a general election. The result reduced Walpole&#x27;s former dominance of the House to an unworkable majority. Within months, he had been forced out of office and succeeded by Lord Wilmington. Though Newcastle stayed with Walpole to the end, he was later accused by many of Walpole&#x27;s supporters of having undermined him. Horace Walpole, his son, continued to attack Newcastle&#x27;s behaviour for years to come.

Newcastle continued in office after Walpole&#x27;s fall and became more powerful on his younger brother Henry Pelham becoming prime minister in 1743. Together, the two brothers and their supporters known as the &#x27;Old Whigs&#x27; made a coalition with the &#x27;New Whigs&#x27;, previous opponents of the Walpole government. However, there remained a strident opposition, led vocally by men like William Pitt and Lord Sandwich.

===War of the Austrian Succession===
In 1740, shortly after the declaration of war with Spain, a separate war had broken out simultaneously in Europe into which the War of Jenkins&#x27; Ear soon became submerged. In a dispute over the throne of Austria, both France and Prussia had invaded Austria and planned to remove Empress Maria Theresa and replace her with their own claimant. Austria&#x27;s longstanding alliance with Britain required the latter to declare war. It was also considered by many that a French victory would leave the French too strong in Europe. However, Britain soon found itself dragged into this wider war despite the reluctance of its government.

Initially, Britain&#x27;s involvement was limited to financial subsidies and diplomacy in support of Austria, but by 1742, it was apparent that a more substantial commitment would be needed if the alliance were not to end in defeat. In the same year, 16,000 British troops were sent to the continent. Newcastle was a staunch Austrophile and strongly supported aid to the Austrians. He had long thought that the only way Britain could defeat France was in alliance with Austria, a view sharply at odds with many other leading politicians such as Walpole and Pitt.

Newcastle&#x27;s position had briefly been threatened by Carteret, a royal favourite, but by 1743, Newcastle and his brother were firmly in control of British policy until 1756. Newcastle now set about drawing up a fresh scheme to enhance British power on the continent, including an attempt to persuade the Dutch Republic into the anti-French alliance and mediating the dispute between Austria and Prussia, which led to the Treaty of Dresden in 1745. He also approved plans for a colonial raid against Louisbourg in 1745, which was successful. Along with the defeat of a Spanish Invasion of Georgia in 1742, this strengthened the British position in North America.

===Jacobite Rising===

In 1745, the Jacobite Rising broke out in Scotland and soon spread to northern England. Newcastle feared an attack from the north by Bonnie Prince Charlie, who had already gathered 5,000 men in Derby, and a French invasion of southern England. In the panic, a number of false rumours circulated around London, including news that Newcastle had fled to the Continent for fear that all was lost. He was forced to show himself to a crowd that had gathered outside Newcastle House to prove that he was still there. Nonetheless, his position was threatened since if the Jacobites were triumphant his estates would likely have been confiscated and he would have been forced into exile.

Newcastle awoke to the threat posed by the Jacobites much faster than George II and many of his colleagues, who dismissed the rebellion as a farce. Newcastle organised a response, and by late 1745, he had rallied all of the southern militias and regular forces. The Jacobites withdrew to northern Scotland where they were defeated at Culloden in 1746.

===Peace of Aix-la-Chapelle===

On the Continent, the British continued the war effort, but they were now under pressure from the Dutch Republic to make peace with the French. The Dutch feared that the French would soon launch a devastating onslaught and overrun their country. Newcastle considered that any peace that would be made would be extremely disadvantageous to Britain, and he tried to keep the anti-French coalition strong through constant diplomacy and offers of financial subsidies.

Talks for a peace settlement were convened in the city of Breda in 1746. Newcastle was instrumental in securing the appointment of Lord Sandwich as the British representative at the talks, as his views were very close to his own. Sandwich&#x27;s principal instructions were to delay the talks until a significant British victory allowed them to negotiate from a position of strength. The Congress of Breda did not progress well initially because the participants were not yet fully committed to peace. The Allies continued to do badly by suffering severe defeats at Bergen op Zoom and Lauffeld. Newcastle&#x27;s brother, Henry, was now strongly advocating peace, but Newcastle firmly rejected that since he was still convinced a major Allied victory was imminent.

In 1747, Newcastle was involved in organising a coup to put the Prince of Orange in power in the Netherlands. Orange wanted to continue the war with the French but soon had to apply to the British for a massive loan. Newcastle, now aware of how close the Dutch were to collapsing altogether, reluctantly turned towards seeking a peaceful accommodation with France. He berated himself for his &quot;ignorance, obstinacy and credulity&quot; and half expected his misjudgment in putting so much faith in the Dutch to result in his dismissal, but both the king and the rest of the cabinet retained their faith in him.

To oversee the peace settlement, Newcastle switched across to the position of Northern Secretary. He secured Sandwich&#x27;s promotion to the Admiralty although he had wanted Sandwich to succeed him as Southern Secretary. During the summer of 1748, Newcastle made his first ever trip outside Britain when he visited Hanover and was received with a rapturous reception wherever he went. When the talks got underway, they went far more smoothly, and in October 1748, the Treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle was formally concluded. Britain would give back Louisbourg to France in exchange for the return of Madras and a full French withdrawal from the Low Countries. The issue of free trade for which Britain had gone to war with Spain in 1739 was not mentioned at all.

Newcastle was immediately attacked by his opponents for giving up Louisbourg, but many of them failed to realise just how weak the British position on the Continent had become. Austria was also deeply unhappy as they felt the British had abandoned them and had not tried enough for Silesia to be returned. Nonetheless, Newcastle was happy with the terms that had been gained, and observers on the continent were full of praise on how he had overturned such a disadvantageous situation.

===Newcastle System===
Following the peace, Newcastle began to put into practice a policy that he had been developing for a very long time. He believed that the stately quadrille, which had seen states continually shifting alliances, had been unstable and led to repeated wars. He wanted instead to use vigorous diplomacy to create a lasting peace that would be built around a strong and stable British alliance with Austria. Like many Whigs he saw maintaining the European balance of power, as essential. He described the process as &quot;restoring the Old System&quot;, but it was popularly known as the Newcastle System.

He came under continuous attack from Pitt and the Patriot Whigs, who despised his European policy because of their belief that the previous war had shown that North America was increasingly the most important theatre of war. They mocked Newcastle for his perceived lack of vision and ignored the complex nature of European politics and Britain&#x27;s relationship with Hanover and the fact that as early as 1740 Newcastle had been aware of the expanding power of the American colonies.

Newcastle remained extremely attentive to the Austrian Alliance. He spent several years trying to secure the election of Maria Theresa&#x27;s son, the future Emperor Joseph II, as King of the Romans, a title of the Holy Roman Empire that carried enormous prestige but little real power, only to see the scheme fail because of Austrian indifference. There were a number of warning signs that all was not well with the alliance, but Newcastle ignored most of them since he was convinced that neither Austria or Britain had any other serious potential allies to turn to. Referring to the election, Newcastle believed that if his scheme failed, &quot;France and Prussia will dictate to all the world&quot;. He managed to broker a compromise at a Congress of Hanover to secure the election of Joseph. His triumph at the Congress was soon undermined by his failure to secure Austrian backing.

He managed to outmanoeuvre the Duke of Bedford by engineering his resignation and the dismissal of Lord Sandwich, whom Newcastle had now begun to consider a dangerously ambitious rival. The ease with which he did so demonstrated his total control of British politics, as Bedford led a strong faction. He had, however, made a significant enemy, who would later try to undermine Newcastle.

In 1752 he made a rare trip abroad by accompanying George II on his annual trip to Hanover. During the visit, Newcastle made an attempt to cultivate Lord North, a future prime minister, as an ally into his political faction. He was unsuccessful although both became good friends, and North later spoke out in defence of Newcastle.

== Prime minister ==
=== First term: 1754-1756 ===
==== Appointment ====
On Henry Pelham&#x27;s death on 6 March 1754, Newcastle succeeded him as prime minister. He had initially hoped to stay in his role as Northern Secretary as he much preferred foreign affairs, but he was persuaded there was no other serious candidate and accepted the seals of office from the king in March.

Newcastle&#x27;s first task was to select someone to represent the government in the Commons. To great surprise, he rejected the favourites, William Pitt and Henry Fox, and chose Sir Thomas Robinson, who had barely even been considered a candidate by most. Newcastle was largely instrumental in appointing men considered slightly weaker so that he could dominate them. Both Pitt and Fox bore a grudge over the perceived slight and stepped up their attacks on the ministry.

In April and May 1754, Newcastle oversaw a general election, largely adopting the electoral strategy drawn up by his brother and winning a large majority. His own personal ability to have MPs elected on his slate reached new heights. He now felt emboldened enough to try to push through some financial reforms. He proposed measures to reduce the amount of interest paid to the Bank of England on the National Debt. His decision to do so may partly have been to deflect criticism that he was not sufficiently qualified on financial matters to control the Treasury. At the same time, he was still largely directing foreign policy, his main emphasis.

====America====

The rivalry between Britain and France in North America had been growing for some time. Both coveted the Ohio Country, which offered enormous potential for a new wealthy colony to be founded. Both nations sent military forces to occupy the territory. While the British set up the first initial post, they were driven out by a French expedition in 1754. Many wealthy Americans agitated for military action, but the preparations of the individual colonies for conflict were poor. There was more pressure in London from Patriot Whigs who felt the time was ripe for British America to expand into the interior.

In 1755, a major expedition was planned against the French in America. A force of British regulars would be sent to seize Ohio, while another of New England provincials would take control of Nova Scotia. A new commander in chief, Edward Braddock, would be appointed to oversee that to take over from the fractious efforts of the colonial assemblies. The architect of the scheme was the Duke of Cumberland, who held enormous political sway at the time. Braddock was a favourite, but Newcastle had his doubts about both Braddock and the plans. Newcastle had temporarily made an alliance with Henry Fox, whom he also disliked. Fox was a strong supporter of the campaign and forced Newcastle&#x27;s hand.

A few months after arriving in America, Braddock&#x27;s force was engulfed by disaster at the Battle of Monongahela. Attacked by a mixed force of French and American Natives in the wilderness, more than half were killed, including Braddock. The remainder retreated back to Philadelphia, leaving the French in full control of the interior. The Nova Scotia scheme had been more successful, but the Great Expulsion, which followed in its wake, created serious headaches for Newcastle.

All had taken place without war being formally declared. With the decline in the American situation, Newcastle was forced to abandon his plans for financial reform, as the money would instead need to be spent on military forces.

====Loss of Menorca====

While Newcastle had been paying attention to the American campaign, more pressing events in Europe demanded his attention.

Austria had been growing increasingly tense because of a longstanding belief that the British would abandon it at a crucial moment. Newcastle&#x27;s worst fears were confirmed in 1756, when Austria concluded an alliance with France; the Diplomatic Revolution suddenly threw the whole balance of power in Europe askew.

Newcastle had hoped to prevent the outbreak of a major war in Europe by encircling France with hostile powers. He believed that would both deter them from attacking their neighbours and from sending reinforcements to North America. He thought that the only way war could happen now was if Frederick the Great unilaterally attacked Austria, but the clear disparity in numbers would make him a &quot;madman&quot; to do so. Newcastle hoped he had managed to avert war in Europe, but in 1756, Frederick invaded Saxony and Bohemia triggering the major European war that Newcastle had feared and failed to prevent. What had begun as a limited war in the Ohio Country between Britain and France now took on global proportions.

Newcastle was widely blamed for Britain&#x27;s poor start to the Seven Years&#x27; War, and in November 1756 he was replaced by the Duke of Devonshire. Some had even called for his execution after the loss of Menorca (historically called &quot;Minorca&quot; by the British) in 1756. Instead, the commander of the British fleet, John Byng, was shot after a court-martial, which many considered a smokescreen to protect Newcastle.

For his long services, he was created Duke of Newcastle-under-Lyne, with remainder to the 9th Earl of Lincoln, who had married his niece Catherine Pelham.

====Interlude====

Between November 1756 and June 1757, the Duke of Devonshire replaced Newcastle as prime minister although Pitt is widely credited as the main influence on policy.

===Second term: 1757-1762 ===

====Return====
In July 1757, he again became prime minister as Pitt could not gain enough support in Parliament. It is often incorrectly stated that Pitt was prime minister during the war, but Newcastle actually held the office. Their relationship grew into a fruitful partnership and provided a determined leadership that some felt had been lacking for some time.
On paper, it was an implausible alliance. Pitt had been a strident critic of Newcastle for years, and they had separate, conflicting visions of strategy. Newcastle saw Britain&#x27;s best chance of victory in directing resources to the war on the continent, but Pitt wanted a wholesale shift in policy to concentrate British forces in North America, West Africa and Asia, where the French were most vulnerable. However, they shared some views, were both ardent Whigs and had even once tried to create a political alliance. Newcastle had previously tried to have Pitt appointed Secretary of War in 1745, but George II vetoed the appointment.

====Seven Years&#x27; War====
Ultimately British policies were formed from a mixture of these two views. Newcastle insisted on British involvement on the continent to tie down French troops and to authorise a number of expeditions against French colonies. As they were successful, the expeditions began to grow in number and size. Pitt largely took over control of directing them, and Newcastle agreed with the measures and made sure that Parliament was kept on-side by mobilising his control of MPs. However, Pitt and Newcastle would discuss strategy along with a small number of other figures such as Hardwicke, Anson and Ligonier. 

Newcastle had been deeply concerned by Britain&#x27;s poor start to the war, particularly by the loss of Menorca and the French occupation of key ports in the Austrian Netherlands. To try to boost Britain&#x27;s position in the Mediterranean, he pushed for an invasion of Corsica, which was then controlled by neutral Genoa, to use as a naval base or for a British attack on Ostend to drive the French out. Pitt was alarmed that both prospects would lead Britain into war with Austria or Genoa. Instead, to placate Newcastle and George II, Pitt agreed to send a British contingent to fight in Germany in 1758.

====Success====

In 1758, Pitt began despatching expeditions around the world to seize French colonies. In 1758, they captured Senegal and Gambia in West Africa and Louisbourg in North America. He planned to intensify this the next year by despatching large expeditions to the West Indies and Canada. To do so, Pitt stripped the British Isles of troops and ships, which caused Newcastle to worry that they were ill-defended. His fears increased when the British received intelligence of French plans to launch an invasion of Britain. Pitt was determined to press ahead with that year&#x27;s plans but agreed to lessen the scale of colonial expeditions for 1760 since he expected that 1759 would provide a knockout blow to the French war effort.

Newcastle had retained his previous belief that Britain needed to create as broad a coalition as possible and that Europe, rather than the Americas, would be decisive. He thus attempted to persuade a number of different states to join the anti-French alliance. He was largely unsuccessful since the Dutch, Danes and Portuguese remained neutral, and Sweden and Russia joined the French and Austrians in attacking Prussia. He authorised large sums to be paid as subsidies to the Prussians, who were fighting countries whose land forces dwarfed their own.

One of Newcastle&#x27;s greatest personal achievements was his use of diplomacy to keep Spain out of the war until 1762, when it was too late to alter the balance of power significantly. In 1759, he and Pitt organised Britain&#x27;s defences against a planned French invasion, which failed because of British naval victories at Lagos and Quiberon.

===Dismissal===
This &quot;broad bottom government&quot;, under which Britain gained reputation abroad, gradually fell owing to the affection of the new king George III for John Stuart, 3rd Earl of Bute, who, having supplanted Pitt, became prime minister in place of Newcastle in May 1762. George III had described Pitt as a &quot;snake in the grass&quot; and Newcastle as a &quot;knave&quot;.

Despite their undeniably competent prosecution of the war, the new king did not trust either man with the future of Britain and cast them both into opposition. It marked arguably the last occasion upon which a British monarch was able to remove a prime minister purely out of personal animosity: that privilege would in future be ceded entirely to Parliament. As Bute was a Tory, this marked the end of the Whig monopoly on government which had been continual since the Hanoverian Succession in 1714.

==Later years==
===Opposition===
The Duke went into opposition and lost his two Lord-Lieutenancies for opposing the peace of 1763. Along with Pitt, he felt the terms of peace were overly generous to France and Spain because of the position of strength held by the British. Many territories captured during the war were handed back, but the French presence had been effectively destroyed permanently in Canada and in India.

He spent much of his time at his house at Claremont, which he considered one of his finest achievements. Newcastle had been in government for almost 45 continuous years and initially enjoyed the new freedom that opposition gave him.

===Final return===
In 1765, he became Lord Privy Seal in the government of Lord Rockingham, who shared many similarities with Newcastle, and both men were both wealthy Whig grandees. Newcastle was at one point offered the position of Southern Secretary by the king, but he turned it down. He lasted for a few months before the government collapsed, which was replaced by that of the Duke of Grafton.

===Retirement===
He remained in active opposition but accepted he would not hold office again. He continued to wield enormous patronage and influence, but his health swiftly gave way after a stroke in December 1767, which left him lame and impaired in speech and memory. In his final few months, he had counselled against the Coercive Acts on British America. He died in November 1768, aged 75, at his London home in Lincoln&#x27;s Inn Fields. After his death, Claremont was sold to Robert Clive who had made his name in the Seven Years&#x27; War.

The Duke was industrious and energetic, and to his credit, the statesman who almost monopolised the patronage of office for half a century twice refused a pension and finally left office £300,000 poorer than he entered it because of his heavy spending on political campaigns, his lavish lifestyle and his neglect of the family budget.

==Legacy==

Newcastle was widely caricatured, often being portrayed as a muddle-headed buffoon who struggled to understand the business of government. He was one of the most ridiculed politicians of the 18th century. A common and widely circulated example of his cluelessness is his reported response to being told by Ligonier that Annapolis needed to be defended, to which Newcastle allegedly replied, &quot;Annapolis! Oh yes, Annapolis must be defended, to be sure. Annapolis must be defended—where is Annapolis?&quot;.

Horace Walpole, no friend of him, sketched his character thus: &quot;A borrowed importance and real insignificance gave him the perpetual air of a solicitor... He had no pride, though infinite self-love. He loved business immoderately; yet was only always doing it, never did it. When left to himself, he always plunged into difficulties, and then shuddered for the consequences.&quot;

Historical opinion has generally been divided, with some historians drawing the conclusion that he was unfit for his office, but others regard him as a shrewd political operator who subtly navigated the complex European State System of the 18th century. He is both praised and criticised as being perhaps the greatest machine politics operator of the 18th century, who commanded immense voting strength in parliament. He could often organise majorities in the House of Commons for seemingly perplexing, unpopular and absurd policies of the government.

Generally, praise for Britain&#x27;s victory in the Seven Years&#x27; War has gone to Pitt rather than Newcastle, who officially headed the government. Traditionally, accounts of the war have portrayed Pitt as a visionary who won the war by reversing Newcastle&#x27;s previous unwise policy of focusing on European affairs; Francis Parkman records correspondence between Pitt and his military administrators and none between them and Newcastle. Others have defended Newcastle by contrasting his &#x27;continental policy&#x27; with Lord North&#x27;s failure to gather European allies during the American War of Independence, which led to Britain&#x27;s eventual defeat in this conflict.

===Popular culture===
He was portrayed in the novel &quot;Humphry Clinker&quot; by Tobias Smollett as a bungling fool, ignorant of all geography, who is convinced that Cape Breton is not an island. Newcastle was played in the 1948 film &quot;Bonnie Prince Charlie&quot; by G. H. Mulcaster. He also features in the British television series &quot;City of Vice&quot;, which covers the early years of the Bow Street Runners.

==Family==
On 2 April 1717, he married Lady Harriet Godolphin, daughter of the 2nd Earl of Godolphin and granddaughter of John Churchill, 1st Duke of Marlborough. The Duchess suffered from poor health and the couple had no children.

In 1731, at Houghton Hall, Sir Robert Walpole&#x27;s country house in Norfolk, the Duke, with the Duke of Lorraine (later the Holy Roman Emperor), was made a Master Mason by the Grand Master, Lord Lovell, at an Occasional Lodge. In 1739, at the creation of London&#x27;s Foundling Hospital, he acted as one of the charity&#x27;s founding governors.

===Succession===
With the prospect that the dukedom of Newcastle upon Tyne would become extinct once again, King George II also created the Duke of Newcastle-under-Lyne in 1756, with a special remainder for inheritance through his nephew, the 9th Earl of Lincoln.

In 1762, he was also created Baron Pelham of Stanmer, with inheritance to his cousin and male heir, Thomas Pelham.

On his death in 1768, the title Baron Pelham of Stanmer, together with the bulk of the Pelham estates in Sussex and the Duke&#x27;s private papers, were left to Thomas, who was later created Earl of Chichester. Pelham and his brother were buried at All Saints&#x27; Church in Laughton, East Sussex.

The Holles and Clare estates, meanwhile, together with his Newcastle dukedom, were inherited by Lord Lincoln from whom the Duke had become estranged.

==Ancestry==
==Arms==
==Notes==

* ; cited as &quot;ThPelODNB&quot;.

==Bibliography==
* Barnes, Donald G. &quot;The Duke of Newcastle, Ecclesiastical Minister, 1724–54.&quot; &quot;Pacific Historical Review&quot; 3.2 (1934): 164–191. in JSTOR
* 
* 
* 
* Middleton, Richard. &quot;The Bells of Victory: The Pitt-Newcastle Ministry and Conduct of the Seven Years&#x27; War 1757-1762&quot; (Cambridge University Press, 2002).
* 
* Nulle, Stebelton H. &quot;The Duke of Newcastle and the Election of 1727.&quot; &quot;Journal of Modern History&quot; 9.1 (1937): 1–22. in JSTOR
* 
* 
* Sykes, Norman. &quot;The Duke of Newcastle as Ecclesiastical Minister.&quot; &quot;English Historical Review&quot; 57.225 (1942): 59–84. in JSTOR
* Taylor, Stephen. The Fac Totum in Ecclesiastic Affairs&#x27;? The Duke of Newcastle and the Crown&#x27;s Ecclesiastical Patronage.&quot; &quot;Albion&quot; 24#3 (1992): 409–433. 
* Williams, Basil. &quot;The Whig Supremacy 1714-1760&quot; (2nd ed. Revised By C. H. Stuart; Oxford UP, 1962). online

==External links==
* More about Thomas Pelham-Holles, Duke of Newcastle on the Downing Street website
* Biography of Thomas Pelham-Holles, Duke of Newcastle, with links to online catalogues, from Manuscripts and Special Collections at The University of Nottingham
* Ancestors of Thomas Pelham-Holles, 1st Duke of Newcastle</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q273809" start="0" end="87" title="Thomas Pelham-Holles, 1st Duke of Newcastle" label="Thomas Pelham-Holles, 1st Duke of Newcastle upon Tyne, 1st Duke of Newcastle-under-Lyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q108700" start="137" end="141" title="Whigs (British political party)" label="Whig"/>
<link wikidata="Q14211" start="166" end="197" title="Prime Minister of the United Kingdom" label="Prime Minister of Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q273809" start="311" end="328" title="Thomas Pelham-Holles, 1st Duke of Newcastle" label="Duke of Newcastle"/>
<link wikidata="Q104190" start="344" end="358" title="Robert Walpole" label="Robert Walpole"/>
<link wikidata="Q244766" start="462" end="474" title="Henry Pelham" label="Henry Pelham"/>
<link wikidata="Q14214" start="512" end="530" title="Secretary of State (United Kingdom)" label="Secretary of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q33143" start="775" end="796" title="Seven Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Seven Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q378043" start="891" end="906" title="Charles Watson-Wentworth, 2nd Marquess of Rockingham" label="Lord Rockingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q4971362" start="1507" end="1520" title="1754 British general election" label="1754 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q5628588" start="1591" end="1606" title="H. T. Dickinson" label="Harry Dickinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6855629" start="1710" end="1741" title="Thomas Pelham, 1st Baron Pelham" label="Thomas Pelham, 1st Baron Pelham"/>
<link wikidata="Q6239616" start="1811" end="1855" title="John Holles, 1st Duke of Newcastle-upon-Tyne" label="John Holles, 1st Duke of Newcastle-upon-Tyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341516" start="1871" end="1889" title="Westminster School" label="Westminster School"/>
<link wikidata="Q760967" start="1931" end="1955" title="Clare College, Cambridge" label="Clare College, Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q23346" start="2225" end="2231" title="Sussex" label="Sussex"/>
<link wikidata="Q108700" start="2517" end="2521" title="Whig (British political faction)" label="Whig"/>
<link wikidata="Q130805" start="2742" end="2759" title="George I of Great Britain" label="George of Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q119702" start="2766" end="2776" title="Anne, Queen of Great Britain" label="Queen Anne"/>
<link wikidata="Q499956" start="2794" end="2800" title="Tories (British political party)" label="Tories"/>
<link wikidata="Q211681" start="2842" end="2854" title="James Francis Edward Stuart" label="James Stuart"/>
<link wikidata="Q5649232" start="3120" end="3133" title="Hannover Club" label="Hannover Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417500" start="3142" end="3154" title="Kit Kat Club" label="Kit Kat Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q10336570" start="3212" end="3227" title="Newcastle House" label="Newcastle House"/>
<link wikidata="Q119702" start="3362" end="3379" title="Anne, Queen of Great Britain" label="Queen Anne&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q130805" start="3440" end="3453" title="George I of Great Britain" label="King George I"/>
<link wikidata="Q212983" start="3528" end="3537" title="Jacobitism" label="Jacobites"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326235" start="3654" end="3667" title="Earl of Clare" label="Earl of Clare"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326235" start="3681" end="3698" title="Marquess of Clare" label="Marquess of Clare"/>
<link wikidata="Q914752" start="3805" end="3820" title="Lord-Lieutenant" label="Lord-Lieutenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q19186" start="3840" end="3849" title="Middlesex" label="Middlesex"/>
<link wikidata="Q3836792" start="3854" end="3864" title="Lord Lieutenant of Nottinghamshire" label="Nottingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q215248" start="3871" end="3891" title="Order of the Garter" label="Knight of the Garter"/>
<link wikidata="Q130805" start="4242" end="4250" title="George I of Great Britain" label="George I"/>
<link wikidata="Q3636587" start="4316" end="4333" title="Battle of Preston (1715)" label="Battle of Preston"/>
<link wikidata="Q211681" start="4367" end="4380" title="Old Pretender" label="Old Pretender"/>
<link wikidata="Q332603" start="5014" end="5028" title="James Stanhope, 1st Earl Stanhope" label="James Stanhope"/>
<link wikidata="Q104190" start="5153" end="5167" title="Robert Walpole" label="Robert Walpole"/>
<link wikidata="Q336529" start="5689" end="5706" title="Charles Townshend, 2nd Viscount Townshend" label="Charles Townshend"/>
<link wikidata="Q5664287" start="5838" end="5862" title="Henrietta Pelham-Holles, Duchess of Newcastle-upon-Tyne" label="Lady Henrietta Godolphin"/>
<link wikidata="Q153803" start="5889" end="5908" title="John Churchill, 1st Duke of Marlborough" label="Duke of Marlborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q150701" start="5964" end="5976" title="War of the Spanish Succession" label="European war"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355456" start="6115" end="6131" title="Lord Chamberlain" label="Lord Chamberlain"/>
<link wikidata="Q333148" start="6434" end="6452" title="Sir Richard Steele" label="Sir Richard Steele"/>
<link wikidata="Q7302" start="6527" end="6549" title="George Frideric Handel" label="George Frideric Handel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473756" start="6580" end="6602" title="Royal Academy of Music (1719)" label="Royal Academy of Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076105" start="6871" end="6888" title="general elections" label="general elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210696" start="7282" end="7299" title="South Sea Company" label="South Sea Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q14211" start="7530" end="7561" title="Prime Minister of Great Britain" label="prime minister of Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q133333" start="7785" end="7796" title="fox hunting" label="fox hunting"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918102" start="7820" end="7831" title="Bishopstone, East Sussex" label="Bishopstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3954357" start="8113" end="8159" title="Secretary of State for the Southern Department" label="Secretary of State for the Southern Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q335274" start="8172" end="8185" title="John Carteret, 2nd Earl Granville" label="Lord Carteret"/>
<link wikidata="Q5413483" start="8545" end="8566" title="European State System" label="European State System"/>
<link wikidata="Q154674" start="8902" end="8919" title="Treaty of Utrecht" label="Treaty of Utrecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q150701" start="8941" end="8964" title="War of the Spanish Succession" label="last major European war"/>
<link wikidata="Q221941" start="9443" end="9472" title="War of the Quadruple Alliance" label="War of the Quadruple Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q244766" start="9817" end="9829" title="Henry Pelham" label="Henry Pelham"/>
<link wikidata="Q130805" start="10358" end="10366" title="George I of Britain" label="George I"/>
<link wikidata="Q131981" start="10398" end="10407" title="George II of Great Britain" label="George II"/>
<link wikidata="Q62393" start="11005" end="11011" title="Princess Amelia of Great Britain" label="Amelia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5914852" start="11282" end="11298" title="House of Commons of Great Britain" label="House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q131964" start="11466" end="11473" title="Imperial Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018720" start="11680" end="11695" title="William Stanhope, 1st Earl of Harrington" label="Lord Harrington"/>
<link wikidata="Q439144" start="12416" end="12431" title="Cardinal Fleury" label="Cardinal Fleury"/>
<link wikidata="Q4569192" start="12518" end="12531" title="Patriot Whigs" label="Patriot Whigs"/>
<link wikidata="Q212658" start="12812" end="12840" title="War of the Polish Succession" label="War of the Polish Succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q244766" start="13362" end="13374" title="Henry Pelham" label="Henry Pelham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060844" start="13418" end="13435" title="Paymaster General" label="Paymaster General"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13565" end="13581" title="Norfolk Congress" label="Norfolk Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q2731553" start="13606" end="13619" title="Houghton Hall" label="Houghton Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343246" start="13647" end="13660" title="country house" label="country house"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326288" start="14543" end="14552" title="Baron Hardwicke" label="Hardwicke"/>
<link wikidata="Q785035" start="14794" end="14801" title="Georgia (colony)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q212658" start="14921" end="14949" title="War of the Polish Succession" label="War of the Polish Succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536332" start="15143" end="15160" title="Robert Jenkins (master mariner)" label="Jenkins&amp;#x27; Ear"/>
<link wikidata="Q241" start="15244" end="15248" title="Cuba" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210696" start="15801" end="15818" title="South Sea Company" label="South Sea Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q80702" start="15859" end="15873" title="Spanish Empire" label="Spanish Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5166269" start="16424" end="16443" title="Convention of Pardo" label="Convention of Pardo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3024756" start="16675" end="16696" title="Battle of Porto Bello (1739)" label="capturing Porto Bello"/>
<link wikidata="Q258532" start="17229" end="17246" title="British America" label="American colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q657461" start="17422" end="17431" title="Cartagena, Colombia" label="Cartagena"/>
<link wikidata="Q713145" start="17499" end="17520" title="Admiral Edward Vernon" label="Admiral Edward Vernon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2366970" start="17624" end="17629" title="Battle of Cartagena de Indias" label="siege"/>
<link wikidata="Q4971359" start="17997" end="18015" title="1741 British general election" label="a general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q270415" start="18173" end="18188" title="Lord Wilmington" label="Lord Wilmington"/>
<link wikidata="Q309903" start="18323" end="18337" title="Horace Walpole" label="Horace Walpole"/>
<link wikidata="Q244766" start="18519" end="18531" title="Henry Pelham" label="Henry Pelham"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18680" end="18689" title="New Whigs" label="New Whigs"/>
<link wikidata="Q208663" start="18814" end="18826" title="Pitt the Elder" label="William Pitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q334953" start="18831" end="18844" title="John Montagu, 4th Earl of Sandwich" label="Lord Sandwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q131706" start="19167" end="19188" title="Empress Maria Theresa" label="Empress Maria Theresa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4825753" start="19845" end="19856" title="Austrophile" label="Austrophile"/>
<link wikidata="Q335274" start="20141" end="20149" title="John Carteret, 2nd Earl Granville" label="Carteret"/>
<link wikidata="Q170072" start="20392" end="20406" title="Dutch Republic" label="Dutch Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q700716" start="20509" end="20526" title="Treaty of Dresden" label="Treaty of Dresden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152894" start="20565" end="20605" title="Siege of Louisbourg (1745)" label="colonial raid against Louisbourg in 1745"/>
<link wikidata="Q6059634" start="20656" end="20683" title="Spanish Invasion of Georgia" label="Spanish Invasion of Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788657" start="20844" end="20860" title="northern England" label="northern England"/>
<link wikidata="Q312581" start="20907" end="20928" title="Bonnie Prince Charlie" label="Bonnie Prince Charlie"/>
<link wikidata="Q43475" start="20968" end="20973" title="Derby" label="Derby"/>
<link wikidata="Q10336570" start="21235" end="21250" title="Newcastle House" label="Newcastle House"/>
<link wikidata="Q651919" start="21789" end="21797" title="Battle of Culloden" label="Culloden"/>
<link wikidata="Q5579259" start="22283" end="22302" title="Golden Cavalry of St George" label="financial subsidies"/>
<link wikidata="Q40844" start="22363" end="22368" title="Breda" label="Breda"/>
<link wikidata="Q678539" start="22436" end="22449" title="Lord Sandwich" label="Lord Sandwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q5160857" start="22693" end="22710" title="Congress of Breda" label="Congress of Breda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1835856" start="22871" end="22885" title="Siege of Bergen op Zoom (1747)" label="Bergen op Zoom"/>
<link wikidata="Q696699" start="22890" end="22898" title="Battle of Lauffeld" label="Lauffeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q380949" start="23134" end="23150" title="William IV, Prince of Orange" label="Prince of Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q3954358" start="23763" end="23781" title="Northern Secretary of State" label="Northern Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q21561383" start="23823" end="23836" title="First Lord of the Admiralty" label="the Admiralty"/>
<link wikidata="Q3954357" start="23887" end="23905" title="Southern Secretary" label="Southern Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1715" start="24001" end="24008" title="Hanover" label="Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q156086" start="24154" end="24179" title="Treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle (1748)" label="Treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3263622" start="24228" end="24238" title="Louisbourg" label="Louisbourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352" start="24279" end="24285" title="Madras" label="Madras"/>
<link wikidata="Q81720" start="24725" end="24732" title="Silesia" label="Silesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603950" start="25091" end="25108" title="stately quadrille" label="stately quadrille"/>
<link wikidata="Q4569192" start="25605" end="25618" title="Patriot Whigs" label="Patriot Whigs"/>
<link wikidata="Q258532" start="26022" end="26039" title="British America" label="American colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q131706" start="26163" end="26183" title="Maria Theresa of Austria" label="Maria Theresa&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q76555" start="26208" end="26217" title="Joseph II, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Joseph II"/>
<link wikidata="Q782985" start="26222" end="26240" title="King of the Romans" label="King of the Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="26257" end="26274" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5160870" start="26784" end="26803" title="Congress of Hanover" label="Congress of Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q335406" start="26961" end="26976" title="John Russell, 4th Duke of Bedford" label="Duke of Bedford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1715" start="27402" end="27409" title="Hanover" label="Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q312593" start="27468" end="27478" title="Lord North" label="Lord North"/>
<link wikidata="Q3954358" start="27859" end="27877" title="Northern Secretary" label="Northern Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2636053" start="28082" end="28124" title="Leader of the House of Commons" label="to represent the government in the Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q208663" start="28173" end="28185" title="William Pitt, 1st Earl of Chatham" label="William Pitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3289825" start="28190" end="28199" title="Henry Fox, 1st Baron Holland" label="Henry Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q337754" start="28211" end="28230" title="Sir Thomas Robinson" label="Sir Thomas Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q183231" start="28883" end="28898" title="Bank of England" label="Bank of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q3024789" start="28906" end="28919" title="National Debt" label="National Debt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2016453" start="29277" end="29289" title="Ohio Country" label="Ohio Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q2449358" start="29482" end="29515" title="Battle of Fort Necessity" label="driven out by a French expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q4569192" start="29689" end="29702" title="Patriot Whigs" label="Patriot Whigs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3177722" start="29791" end="29807" title="Braddock Expedition" label="major expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q18389" start="29925" end="29936" title="New England" label="New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952" start="29971" end="29982" title="Nova Scotia" label="Nova Scotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152172" start="29990" end="30008" title="Commander in Chief for North America" label="commander in chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q113412" start="30010" end="30025" title="Edward Braddock" label="Edward Braddock"/>
<link wikidata="Q378088" start="30166" end="30184" title="Prince William, Duke of Cumberland" label="Duke of Cumberland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3289825" start="30370" end="30379" title="Henry Fox, 1st Baron Holland" label="Henry Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q524828" start="30576" end="30597" title="Battle of Monongahela" label="Battle of Monongahela"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="30755" end="30767" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2723587" start="30878" end="30893" title="Great Expulsion" label="Great Expulsion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7934777" start="31581" end="31602" title="Diplomatic Revolution" label="Diplomatic Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q33550" start="31952" end="31971" title="Frederick the Great" label="Frederick the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q238639" start="32516" end="32534" title="William Cavendish, 4th Duke of Devonshire" label="Duke of Devonshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196554" start="32585" end="32600" title="loss of Menorca" label="loss of Menorca"/>
<link wikidata="Q130261" start="32712" end="32721" title="John Byng" label="John Byng"/>
<link wikidata="Q4121443" start="32904" end="32923" title="Henry Pelham-Clinton, 2nd Duke of Newcastle-under-Lyne" label="9th Earl of Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q208663" start="33095" end="33099" title="William Pitt, 1st Earl of Chatham" label="Pitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q208663" start="33247" end="33251" title="William Pitt, 1st Earl of Chatham" label="Pitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739604" start="34630" end="34640" title="Parliament of Great Britain" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q2708598" start="34794" end="34803" title="Philip Yorke, 1st Earl of Hardwicke" label="Hardwicke"/>
<link wikidata="Q510281" start="34805" end="34810" title="George Anson, 1st Baron Anson" label="Anson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5344143" start="34815" end="34823" title="Edward Ligonier, 1st Earl Ligonier" label="Ligonier"/>
<link wikidata="Q52636" start="34932" end="34939" title="Menorca" label="Menorca"/>
<link wikidata="Q700283" start="34986" end="35006" title="Austrian Netherlands" label="Austrian Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q14112" start="35099" end="35106" title="Corsica" label="Corsica"/>
<link wikidata="Q174306" start="35145" end="35150" title="Republic of Genoa" label="Genoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q12996" start="35202" end="35208" title="Ostend" label="Ostend"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041" start="35565" end="35572" title="Senegal" label="Senegal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1005" start="35577" end="35583" title="Gambia" label="Gambia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3263622" start="35603" end="35613" title="Louisbourg" label="Louisbourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q669037" start="35715" end="35726" title="West Indies" label="West Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q38272" start="35767" end="35780" title="British Isles" label="British Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7201334" start="35951" end="35970" title="planned French Invasion of Britain (1759)" label="invasion of Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q464226" start="37066" end="37071" title="Battle of Lagos" label="Lagos"/>
<link wikidata="Q450318" start="37076" end="37084" title="Battle of Quiberon Bay" label="Quiberon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4971995" start="37114" end="37137" title="broad bottom government" label="broad bottom government"/>
<link wikidata="Q127318" start="37245" end="37255" title="George III of the United Kingdom" label="George III"/>
<link wikidata="Q294651" start="37260" end="37289" title="John Stuart, 3rd Earl of Bute" label="John Stuart, 3rd Earl of Bute"/>
<link wikidata="Q156211" start="38100" end="38113" title="Treaty of Paris (1763)" label="peace of 1763"/>
<link wikidata="Q976827" start="38397" end="38405" title="Carnatic Wars" label="in India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1095337" start="38450" end="38459" title="Claremont (country house)" label="Claremont"/>
<link wikidata="Q910308" start="38680" end="38695" title="Lord Privy Seal" label="Lord Privy Seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q378043" start="38717" end="38732" title="Charles Watson-Wentworth, 2nd Marquess of Rockingham" label="Lord Rockingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q3954357" start="38876" end="38894" title="Secretary of State for the Southern Department" label="Southern Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q312583" start="39025" end="39040" title="Augustus FitzRoy, 3rd Duke of Grafton" label="Duke of Grafton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365292" start="39369" end="39382" title="Coercive Acts" label="Coercive Acts"/>
<link wikidata="Q258532" start="39386" end="39401" title="British America" label="British America"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736153" start="39460" end="39485" title="Lincoln&amp;#x27;s Inn Fields" label="Lincoln&amp;#x27;s Inn Fields"/>
<link wikidata="Q162296" start="39526" end="39538" title="Robert Clive" label="Robert Clive"/>
<link wikidata="Q33143" start="39568" end="39589" title="Seven Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Seven Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070667" start="40246" end="40254" title="John Ligonier, 1st Earl Ligonier" label="Ligonier"/>
<link wikidata="Q564536" start="40260" end="40269" title="Annapolis Royal, Nova Scotia" label="Annapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q309903" start="40451" end="40465" title="Horace Walpole" label="Horace Walpole"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340161" start="41715" end="41730" title="Francis Parkman" label="Francis Parkman"/>
<link wikidata="Q312593" start="41922" end="41932" title="Lord North" label="Lord North"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="41985" end="42013" title="American War of Independence" label="American War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q3203413" start="42136" end="42151" title="The Expedition of Humphry Clinker" label="Humphry Clinker"/>
<link wikidata="Q356283" start="42161" end="42176" title="Tobias Smollett" label="Tobias Smollett"/>
<link wikidata="Q188489" start="42246" end="42257" title="Cape Breton Island" label="Cape Breton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4942426" start="42320" end="42341" title="Bonnie Prince Charlie (1948 film)" label="Bonnie Prince Charlie"/>
<link wikidata="Q5512016" start="42351" end="42366" title="G. H. Mulcaster" label="G. H. Mulcaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q5123965" start="42424" end="42436" title="City of Vice" label="City of Vice"/>
<link wikidata="Q2341687" start="42480" end="42498" title="Bow Street Runners" label="Bow Street Runners"/>
<link wikidata="Q5664287" start="42540" end="42562" title="Harriet Pelham-Holles, Duchess of Newcastle-upon-Tyne" label="Lady Harriet Godolphin"/>
<link wikidata="Q716347" start="42580" end="42601" title="Francis Godolphin, 2nd Earl of Godolphin" label="2nd Earl of Godolphin"/>
<link wikidata="Q153803" start="42623" end="42662" title="John Churchill, 1st Duke of Marlborough" label="John Churchill, 1st Duke of Marlborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q2731553" start="42747" end="42760" title="Houghton Hall" label="Houghton Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343246" start="42788" end="42801" title="country house" label="country house"/>
<link wikidata="Q151075" start="42833" end="42849" title="Francis I, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Duke of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q181765" start="42861" end="42879" title="Holy Roman Emperor" label="Holy Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439887" start="43006" end="43024" title="Foundling Hospital" label="Foundling Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q131981" start="43193" end="43207" title="George II of Great Britain" label="King George II"/>
<link wikidata="Q4121443" start="43328" end="43347" title="Henry Pelham-Clinton, 2nd Duke of Newcastle-under-Lyne" label="9th Earl of Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q7793086" start="43450" end="43463" title="Thomas Pelham, 1st Earl of Chichester" label="Thomas Pelham"/>
<link wikidata="Q3687845" start="43657" end="43675" title="Earl of Chichester" label="Earl of Chichester"/>
<link wikidata="Q1961167" start="43742" end="43763" title="Laughton, East Sussex" label="Laughton, East Sussex"/>
<link wikidata="Q4867282" start="44828" end="44843" title="Basil Williams (historian)" label="Williams, Basil"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="308986" wikidata="Q188408" url="?curid=308986" title="Chen Yi (marshal)">
<text>Chen Yi (; August 26, 1901 – January 6, 1972) was a Chinese communist military commander and politician. He served as Mayor of Shanghai from 1949 to 1958 and as Foreign Minister of China from 1958 to 1972. He is one of Ten Marshals of the People&#x27;s Republic of China.

==Early life==
Chen was born in Lezhi County near Chengdu, Sichuan, into a moderately wealthy magistrate&#x27;s family.


==War==
A comrade of Lin Biao from their guerrilla days, he was prominent in the Jiangxi Soviet. Later, due to a leg injury, he was the only one of the later Ten Marshals to have not participated in the Long March. Thus, Chen was later made a commander under Ye Ting in the New Fourth Army. After the Wannan Incident, Chen succeeded Ye Ting as commander of the New Fourth Army during the Sino-Japanese War (1937-1945). He played a pivotal role as commander of the 3rd Field Army working closely with his close friend and comrade Su Yu. When Su Yu showed his expertise and talent in large formational warfare, the division of labour between them meant that Chen Yi remained in command of 3rd Field Army, but mainly focused on rallying support for Su Yu&#x27;s plans as well as focusing on political work, which was his area of expertise. Thus, he and Su Yu spearheaded the Shandong counter-offensive during the Chinese Civil War, and later commanded the Communist armies that defeated the KMT forces during the Huaihai Campaign and conquered the lower Yangtze region in 1948–49. After the capture of Shanghai, he remained in Shanghai as Mayor where he oversaw the economic stabilisation and reconstruction. In 1950, he offered to take command of the People&#x27;s Volunteer Army in Korea, but Mao declined, possibly because Chen&#x27;s partner Su Yu was in poor health due to shrapnel injury and selected Peng Dehuai instead. He was promoted to marshal in 1955.

==People&#x27;s Republic==
After the founding of the People&#x27;s Republic of China, Chen became mayor of Shanghai. He also served as vice premier from 1954 to 1972 and foreign minister from 1958 to 1972 and president of the China Foreign Affairs University from 1961 to 1969. As vice premier, he was present during the breakup of Sino-Soviet relations. In August 1960, Chen Yi attempted to ease tensions with the Soviets, declaring on one instance to the Soviet Ambassador to Beijing that Moscow should stop &quot;severing the friendship between the two nations,&quot; and two weeks later to the Soviet &quot;deputy&quot; foreign minister that Moscow and Beijing should &quot;both&quot; try to save the alliance.

Like other Chinese policymakers, Chen viewed the July 1963 Limited Nuclear Test Ban Treaty as demonstrating a US-USSR re-alignment against China. Chen described it was &quot;targeted against us.&quot; 

During the Cultural Revolution, Chen was one of the most vocal leaders in the February Countercurrent, which criticized the Cultural Revolution for creating social disorder and undermining China&#x27;s leadership. As a result, he was required to request a leave of absence and undertake self-criticism, but he was never dismissed, so Zhou Enlai performed the duties of foreign minister in his place. 

He was a member of the 8th CPC Politburo from 1956 to 1967 but was not admitted to the 9th Politburo (1969), though he was a member of the 9th CPC Central Committee.

After Marshal Lin Biao&#x27;s death in 1971, he was restored to favour, although not to his former power. Mao Zedong attended Chen&#x27;s funeral in 1972. This was Mao&#x27;s last public appearance and his first appearance at anyone&#x27;s funeral during the Cultural Revolution.

==Other work==
When not in military uniform, Chen Yi was known for his trademark sunglasses and white shirt. He was an avid Weiqi player and was prominent in promoting the game to a professional level in the People&#x27;s Republic of China.

==See also==

* List of officers of the People&#x27;s Liberation Army
* Historical Museum of French-Chinese Friendship

==References==
== External links ==

*Long March Leaders: Chen Yi (by Paul Noll)
*陈毅纪念馆 (Chen Yi memorial site; )
*诗人元帅——陈毅 (The poet-general Chen Yi; )
*Handbook for the Chinese Civil War (US Naval War College)



|-</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q188408" start="0" end="7" title="Chen Yi (marshal)" label="Chen Yi"/>
<link wikidata="Q115943793" start="118" end="135" title="Mayor of Shanghai" label="Mayor of Shanghai"/>
<link wikidata="Q2664362" start="161" end="186" title="Minister of Foreign Affairs (China)" label="Foreign Minister of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q55738576" start="219" end="270" title="Yuanshuai" label="Ten Marshals of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200041" start="305" end="317" title="Lezhi County" label="Lezhi County"/>
<link wikidata="Q30002" start="323" end="330" title="Chengdu" label="Chengdu"/>
<link wikidata="Q19770" start="332" end="339" title="Sichuan" label="Sichuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q315475" start="416" end="424" title="Lin Biao" label="Lin Biao"/>
<link wikidata="Q709541" start="756" end="771" title="New Fourth Army" label="New Fourth Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q170314" start="783" end="812" title="Sino-Japanese War (1937-1945)" label="Sino-Japanese War (1937-1945)"/>
<link wikidata="Q840370" start="924" end="929" title="Su Yu" label="Su Yu"/>
<link wikidata="Q43407" start="1267" end="1275" title="Shandong" label="Shandong"/>
<link wikidata="Q179975" start="1305" end="1322" title="Chinese Civil War" label="Chinese Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q372153" start="1405" end="1421" title="Huaihai Campaign" label="Huaihai Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q5413" start="1446" end="1453" title="Yangtze River" label="Yangtze"/>
<link wikidata="Q840370" start="1738" end="1743" title="Su Yu" label="Su Yu"/>
<link wikidata="Q55738576" start="1839" end="1846" title="Marshal of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="marshal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2492920" start="2083" end="2115" title="China Foreign Affairs University" label="China Foreign Affairs University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3493795" start="2314" end="2342" title="Stepan Chervonenko" label="Soviet Ambassador to Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q278960" start="2632" end="2663" title="Limited Nuclear Test Ban Treaty" label="Limited Nuclear Test Ban Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q8690" start="2787" end="2806" title="Cultural Revolution" label="Cultural Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q10880218" start="2854" end="2877" title="February Countercurrent" label="February Countercurrent"/>
<link wikidata="Q60770298" start="3063" end="3077" title="Self-criticism (Marxism–Leninism)" label="self-criticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q17410" start="3110" end="3120" title="Zhou Enlai" label="Zhou Enlai"/>
<link wikidata="Q2818602" start="3201" end="3218" title="8th Politburo of the Communist Party of China" label="8th CPC Politburo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2818785" start="3265" end="3278" title="9th Politburo of the Communist Party of China" label="9th Politburo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4646524" start="3317" end="3342" title="9th Central Committee of the Communist Party of China" label="9th CPC Central Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q315475" start="3359" end="3367" title="Lin Biao" label="Lin Biao"/>
<link wikidata="Q5816" start="3451" end="3461" title="Mao Zedong" label="Mao Zedong"/>
<link wikidata="Q11413" start="3750" end="3755" title="Weiqi" label="Weiqi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6631588" start="3884" end="3937" title="List of officers of the People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army" label="List of officers of the People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2560511" start="3940" end="3986" title="Historical Museum of French-Chinese Friendship" label="Historical Museum of French-Chinese Friendship"/>
<link wikidata="Q46333" start="4026" end="4036" title="Long March" label="Long March"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="308988" wikidata="Q701507" url="?curid=308988" title="Liu Bocheng">
<text>Liu Mingzhao (), courtesy name Bocheng (), more commonly known as Liu Bocheng (; December 4, 1892 – October 7, 1986), was a Chinese military commander and a Marshal of the People&#x27;s Republic of China.

Liu is known as the &#x27;half&#x27; of the &quot;Three and A Half&quot; Strategists of China in modern history. (The other three are Lin Biao and Su Yu, commanders of the Chinese Communist Party, and Kuomintang commander Bai Chongxi.) Officially, Liu was recognised as a revolutionary, military strategist, and theoretician and one of the founders of the People&#x27;s Liberation Army. Liu&#x27;s nicknames &quot;The Kutuzov of China&quot; and &quot;The One-eyed Dragon&quot;, also reflect his character, military achievement, Soviet officer education and the fact that he lost his right eye in battle.

==Early life==
Liu was born to a peasant family in Kaixian, Sichuan (the site is currently submerged by the Three Gorges Dam). Influenced by the revolutionary theories of Sun Yat-sen, he later decided to dedicate himself to the cause of establishing a democratic and modern China.

In 1911, Liu joined the Boy Scouts in support of the Xinhai Revolution. In the following year, he enrolled in the Chongqing Military Academy and later joined the army against Yuan Shikai, who was planning to undermine the Xinhai Revolution and proclaim himself Emperor. In 1914, Liu joined Sun Yat-sen&#x27;s party and gained extensive military experience.

In one battle during this period he captured 10,000 enemy soldiers, for which he was promoted to brigade commander.
In 1916, he lost his right eye in a battle for Fengdu county, Sichuan. After he lost the eye he gained the nickname &quot;One-Eyed Dragon&quot;. Alternative accounts of how Liu lost his eye have included the speculation that he lost it either earlier, in the 1911 Xinhai Revolution, or later, during the Long March.

In 1923, during a war against the warlord Wu Peifu, in response to the Northern Expedition of the Kuomintang, Liu was appointed commander of the Eastern Route, and later was promoted to commanding general in Sichuan.

While fighting the army of Long Yun, a Yunnan warlord, Liu defeated a force commanded by Zhu De, who would later become one of his closest comrades in the Red Army. In the same year, Liu became acquainted with , the elder brother of Yang Shangkun, and Wu Yuzhang, who were among the earliest communists of Sichuan. Their relationship marked Liu&#x27;s first real exposure to the theory and practice of Communism. In May 1926, Liu joined the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) and was appointed military commissioner of Chongqing. In December 1926, along with Zhu De and Yang, Liu masterminded the Luzhou and Nanchong uprising, fought against local warlords, while supporting the Northern Expedition.

In 1927, Liu was appointed army corps commander of the 15th Temporarily Organized National Revolutionary Army. It was during this time that Liu witnessed the split between the Kuomintang and the CCP. After joining the CCP, Liu led the Nanchang Uprising together with Zhu De, He Long, Ye Ting, Li Lisan and Zhou Enlai, effectively declaring war on the KMT.

During this uprising, Liu was appointed the first chief of staff of the newly born Chinese Red Army. However, after a series of defeats Liu&#x27;s forces were destroyed, and its leaders went underground. In 1927 Liu was selected to travel to Moscow, where he mastered Russian and attended the prestigious M. V. Frunze Military Academy. While studying in the Soviet Union he learned conventional, Western-style military tactics. While in Russia he translated a Russian textbook into Chinese, &quot;Combined Arms Tactics&quot;, produced a commentary of Sun Tzu&#x27;s &quot;Art of War&quot;, both of which promoted conventional tactics. Later on, Liu gave a lecture on the subject at the 6th National Congress of the Chinese Communist Party, which was held in Moscow.

==Commander of the CCP Army==
In the summer of 1930, Liu was sent back to China and was appointed as commissioner of the Central Military Committee of the CCP as well as Military Secretary of the Yangtze River division of the CCP. In December 1930, Liu went to Shanghai to assist Zhou Enlai in the daily administration of CCP military affairs.

In 1931, the CCP suffered great losses in several major cities and was forced to retreat to the countryside. Liu was sent to the Central Soviet Territory, the CCP&#x27;s power base in Jiangxi. In January 1932, Liu was appointed president and commissar of the Red Army Military Academy. By October he was promoted to Chief of Staff of the Red Army, assisting Zhu De and Zhou in the war against Chiang Kai-shek&#x27;s 4th Suppression on the Central Soviet Territory.

At the time, members of the 28 Bolsheviks, including Bo Gu, Zhang Wentian, and Otto Braun (also known by his Chinese name, Li De), the Military Advisor of Comintern, took control of military command and Party leadership. All three were educated in Moscow, and Liu found common ground with these young men. During his time in the Jiangxi-Fujian Soviet (and during the subsequent Long March) Liu experienced conflicts with other CCP leaders, including Mao Zedong and Peng Dehuai.

Liu&#x27;s conflict with Mao may partly be due to Liu&#x27;s support for conventional tactics, which contradicted Mao&#x27;s advocacy of guerrilla warfare. According to a later account by Zhang Guotao, Liu described Mao as being a &quot;pedant&quot;, and resented Mao&#x27;s tendency to micromanage his military officers, rather than delegating authority to Red Army&#x27;s general staff. Peng once led his troops during a siege of Guangchang under the orders of Bo and Li De, which resulted in the troops suffering heavy casualties. Peng blamed this on his army&#x27;s inferior weaponry and resources. Peng was known for being outspoken and bad-tempered. After the battle Peng became furious, leading him into direct conflict with Liu.

Liu grew to oppose the leadership of Bo and Braun later, after the Red Army began to suffer repeated defeats. In the Red Army&#x27;s endeavour against the KMT&#x27;s Fifth Encirclement Campaign, Liu was demoted to Chief of Staff of the 5th Field Army following his dissidence with Bo and Braun. Bo and Braun led by way of doctrine and extremism, and the Red Army waged a face-to-face general war against the better-equipped and larger KMT army. Failure was inevitable; the CCP had to retreat from its territory to seek refuge, marking the beginning of the Long March.

During the Long March, near the end of 1934, Liu was reappointed as Chief of the General Staff of the Red Army and commander of Central Column, which consisted of the majority of the CCP senior leaders, such as Bo, Braun, Zhou and Mao. Liu led the army across the Wu River and took control of Zunyi, a county of Guizhou province. It was in this small city that the famous Zunyi Conference was held in January 1935. During this conference, Liu and most of the attendees showed their support for Mao.

As a result of this conference, Bo, who was then Braun&#x27;s command in military, was replaced by a new three-man team consisting of Mao, Zhou and Wang Jiaxiang. Later on, Liu assisted Mao and Zhu across the Red Water River four times. Liu himself led troops in the takeover of the Jiaopin ferry, securing the route across the Jinsha River for the major troops. In May, Liu was appointed commander of avant-courier army and worked with commissar Nie Rongzhen on securing the route for the remaining troops. When his army entered the ethnic settlement areas, Liu pledged brotherhood with a chieftain of the local Yi ethnicity, which significantly reduced the minorities&#x27; hostility towards the CCP. Liu then led the 1st Division of the Red Army across the Dadu River, where Chiang plotted to have the CCP armies annihilated, in the same manner as Shi Dakai and his army&#x27;s road to perdition almost a century before.

When Mao&#x27;s 1st Red Army later united with Zhang Guotao&#x27;s 4th Red Army, Liu stayed Chief of Staff. During a dispute between Mao and Zhang over major issues, which led to their later split, Liu maintained his support for Mao. By the time they reached Yan&#x27;an, it was obvious that Mao was the winner.

==Second Sino-Japanese War==

In 1936, after the Xi&#x27;an Incident, Chiang agreed to set up an alliance with the CCP in the fight against Japanese invaders. On July 7, 1937, after the Marco Polo Bridge Incident, general war between China and Japan broke out. Under the agreement with Chiang, CCP armies were reorganised into 8th Route Army, and Liu was appointed commander of the 129th Division, one of its three divisions. It was then that he began his long cooperation with Deng Xiaoping, his commissar at that time.

According to the orthodox record of the CCP, their cooperation and friendship lasted more than five decades. Their respective military and political talents complemented the other&#x27;s perfectly, and there was a very high level of trust between them. They were said to have formed a perfect pair.

However, their true relationship might not have been as close as it seemed. Firstly, Mao distrusted most of his generals, and sent his associates out as commissars to supervise these generals. Deng, who was Mao&#x27;s close associate from the 1930s when he worked in Jiangxi, was sent out for Liu, and Luo Ronghuan for Lin Biao. Secondly, in contrast to Liu&#x27;s role as a professional soldier, Deng was a political activist and knew little about the military. Their personalities and personal lives were vastly different, which might have posed a barrier to their becoming true friends.

Liu, Deng and Deputy Commander Xu Xiangqian led their troops to Shanxi, and carried out bushfighting around Taihang Mountain. After rounds of successful battles against the Japanese army, they set up the Jin–Ji–Yu Base Area () which consisted of parts of Shanxi, Hebei and Henan. In 1940, Liu led his division in the Hundred Regiments Campaign, a major campaign led by Peng to breach the blockage on CCP base areas enforced by Japanese forces under the command of General Okamura Yasuji. At the same time, Liu integrated regular forces with militia, using frontal attack and bushfighting to frustrate the Japanese army&#x27;s suppression and clean-out efforts. The Japanese were so irritated that they sent agents to assassinate Liu. Although their mission was a failure, they did succeed in murdering Liu&#x27;s first daughter when she was kept in kindergarten. The Japanese thought that this revenge might distract Liu, but they underestimated Liu&#x27;s willpower. His heightened loathing for the Japanese gave him more courage under fire and more inspiration in command.

In 1943, Liu was called back to Yan&#x27;an for Zheng Feng. He pledged his allegiance to Mao and supported Mao&#x27;s power struggle with Wang Ming. On the contrary, Peng stood by Wang and as a result fell out of favour with Mao. (Despite this, Liu was still labelled a dogmatist for pursuing his studies in Russia, and he had to make a public apology against his will in 1959.) In 1945, Liu attended the 7th National Congress of the CCP in Yan&#x27;an, and prepared the counterattack against the Japanese and the forthcoming civil war with KMT armies.

==Chinese Civil War==

At the end of the war against the Japanese, the war-scourged Chinese people pleaded for peace. Chiang then invited Mao to Chongqing for peace talks, during which, Yan Xishan sent his armies to attack CCP territories in Shanxi under Chiang&#x27;s authorisation. Liu and Deng led the Shangdang Campaign and defeated 13 divisions of Yan&#x27;s troops totaled more than 35,000, and then headed east and annihilated another of Yan&#x27;s army corps in the Handan Campaign. These two campaigns were the first experiences of the CCP army&#x27;s shift from bushfight to campaign in movement, and proved to be valuable practice for the army groups campaign of CCP armies. They assisted in the CCP&#x27;s quick occupation of Manchuria, and won advantageous status for Mao and his peace talk delegation in Chongqing. Under immense pressure, Chiang was forced to sign a peace agreement with Mao in October 1945.

The peace, however, was fragile, and civil war broke out in 1946. Liu and Deng led several campaigns in movement, undermining the strategic attack of KMT armies. In 1947, when the territories controlled by the CCP could no longer sustain so many troops, Mao decided to send part of his army to the territories controlled by KMT, in order to relieve the heavy burden on his own territories, and to position enemies at the gates of the KMT. He ordered Liu and Deng to lead their armies from their northern China base in Henan, Shanxi and Hebei, to Anhui in southern China. This involved sending 100,000 soldiers across the Yellow River, and marching over 1,000 kilometers into central plain. Liu and Deng both saw it as a gamble rather than a strategic move, and even Mao himself was not certain if such gamble would pay off by openly discussing the three possible outcomes: 
# The communist force could not even reach Dabie Shan.
# The communist force would be driven out by the Kuomintang force after reaching Dabie Shan.
# The communist force would be able to establish new base in Dabie Mountain.

Although many expressed their concerns, Mao would not change his mind. During the expedition, they faced elite KMT armies. Liu launched the Southwestern Shandong Campaign defeating over nine brigades of KMT troops. Under this plot and cover, Liu&#x27;s army promptly moved south and went into the Dabie Mountain areas. Liu&#x27;s armies suffered great losses; half of the troops were wiped out and all of their heavy artilleries were lost, which greatly weakened their military abilities in later campaigns. Liu and Deng&#x27;s troops survived further rounds of attack. Far away from the power base, with few support armies and supplies, Liu led self-sufficient soldiers and broke rounds of heavy blockade, while boosting his strength back to the original 100,000. Mao and his associates were very impressed by Liu&#x27;s achievement and it was only then did they begin to maintain that the direct threat to Nanjing and Wuhan was a great achievement; a knife into the heart of KMT governance. Liu&#x27;s success indeed forced the nationalists to redeploy nearly two dozen brigades against him, disrupting Chiang Kai-shek&#x27;s original plan, thus relieved nationalist pressure on other CCP forces. Mao&#x27;s gamble had paid off with Liu&#x27;s clever military strategies.

Liu&#x27;s success did not end there, he carried out to expand his initial victories over the nationalists by carrying out several campaigns with armies led by Chen Yi and Su Yu, another army led by Chen Geng, to annihilate a great number of KMT troops led by two prominent generals, Chen Cheng and Bai Chongxi. After ten months of hard work, Liu and Deng had significantly enlarged the area of central plain area occupied by the CCP, and forced the KMT armies into strategic defense, as Chiang no longer had enough troops for attack. In Nov 1948, Liu, Deng, Chen, Su and Tan Zhenlin together formed the Military Committee to command the massive Huai Hai Campaign, which was carried out by CCP troops in East China and the central plain to fight against the KMT main forces in Xuzhou and Anhui. In this decisive battle, more than 500,000 KMT soldiers were annihilated; among the POWs was General Du Yuming, Chiang&#x27;s most distinguished protégé.

In April 1949, after illusive peace talks between the CCP and the KMT were broken, Liu led his armies across the Yangtze River and conquered huge areas of Anhui, Zhejiang, Jiangxi and Fujian, taking over Nanjing, the capital of the KMT. Liu was appointed mayor of Nanjing for a short while. With assistance from He Long, Liu and Deng launched new campaigns to conquer vast areas in Southwestern China, by using long distance bypass and siege strategies. Among the areas conquered were his and Deng&#x27;s own hometowns, Sichuan, Guizhou, Yunnan and Xikang.

==After the establishment of the PRC==

On October 1, 1949, Mao announced the establishment of the People&#x27;s Republic of China. During the ceremony, Liu stood next to Mao. This marked the peak of his career as a military commander. In January 1950, Liu was appointed chairman of the Southwestern Division of the Central People&#x27;s Government of PRC, together with Gao Gang, Rao Shushi, Peng and Lin Biao. The rewards of conquering southwestern China, however, proved only to be temporary. Mao soon sent his favorite general He Long to work alongside Liu, to supervise and share the power with Liu. During his short tenure as governor, Liu led his soldiers in the crackdown of bandits and restored law and order, oversaw economic development, and more importantly, made plans for the CCP invasion of Tibet.

Towards the end of 1950, Liu was transferred to Nanjing as president and commissar of the Military Academy of the PLA, which would be considered a demotion for Liu. There were no clear or generally accepted reasons on record for his falling out of favour. One popular opinion holds that, during the long period of time that Liu worked with or under Mao, he never really earned Mao&#x27;s trust. Liu himself knew that too. From the Chinese history, he learnt that most generals that helped establish a new dynasty ended up getting killed by the suspicious Emperor. In order to prevent that from happening on himself, he tried to stay as far away from politics as possible. Because of his early year military training in Soviet Union, he used that as an excuse to quit his job in the government and become the president and commissar of the Military Academy of the PLA. Mao approved his request. The other story says that, while Liu was still chairman, someone unknown to the public submitted a biography of Liu in support of his promotion. In this biography he described Liu as an offspring of Liu Bang, founder and first emperor of the Han dynasty, and hinted that Liu himself could set up his own empire as his ancestor did. Knowing of the cruelties and conspiracies in Chinese history, Liu was worried instead of happy, because he knew that it would arouse Mao&#x27;s suspicions over Liu&#x27;s intentions. Although Liu had this man arrested, Mao still learnt of the event, and Liu&#x27;s worries eventually turned into reality. This only served to further increase Mao&#x27;s long-time distrust of Liu.

Despite the demotion, Liu was dedicated to his new job, attempting to bring what he learned during his years in the Soviet Union to the academy. He organised the translations of numerous military textbooks from the Soviet Union and other countries, introducing major campaigns from ancient times to World War II to students, and sowing the seeds of the PLA&#x27;s evolution into a modern army. Although Liu was appointed vice-chairman of the Central Military Committee of the CCP and PRC in 1954 as a reward for his contributions, these titles did not promise real power as Peng&#x27;s did. (Peng was appointed defense minister for his battle achievements in the Korean War.) In 1955, Liu attained the rank of field marshal, ranking as the 4th amongst 10 field marshals of the PLA, next to Zhu De, Peng and Lin Biao.

In 1956, after Nikita Khrushchev shook the Communist world by making his famous Secret Speech denouncing the cult of personality that surrounded Joseph Stalin, Mao wanted to ensure that a similar incident within the CCP would not happen. He wrote an article, &quot;On the Ten Major Relationships&quot;, arguing that the CCP should learn from foreign countries selectively, analytically and with criticism. The CCP center then issued documents to call on all CCP members to overcome the trend of dogmatism and empiricism at work. Investigations and purges were carried out by the military, under the direction of Peng. As an advocate of learning from other countries, Liu became a key target. Some of his subordinates and deputies, including General Xiao Ke, were censored and kept in custody. Liu had to make numerous self-criticisms for his association and support of these officials. Under heavy pressure, his health worsened (he eventually lost all sight in his remaining eye), and he finally submitted his resignation as president.

In 1959, Liu left Nanjing for Beijing and lived in half-reclusion. Although he was since elected as member of the Politburo in the 8th to 11th National Congress of the CCP, Vice-chairman of the 2nd to 5th Standing Committee of the National People&#x27;s Congress, and all the while holding the title of vice-chairman of the Military Committee, he did not participate very much in politics, citing health problems as a reason for his absence. This saved him from the following rounds of purges carried out by Mao. Peng, however, was not as fortunate. He was purged in the Lushan Conference in 1959 and later tortured to death during the Cultural Revolution.

By the time of the Cultural Revolution, Liu had become completely blind. Nonetheless, he survived the purges and witnessed his long-time friend Deng returning to power again. He supported Deng in the power struggle against Mao&#x27;s widow, Jiang Qing, and her Gang of Four, and also advocated Deng&#x27;s policy of reforming and opening up China to the outside world, a policy that Liu himself had practiced in the academy decades ago.

In 1982, Liu retired due to worsening health problems. This gave Deng a boost in his calling for the retirement of aging leaders in order to clear the way for younger leaders of the CCP. On October 7, 1986, Liu died in Beijing, at the age of 94. In the lament given to him, Liu was rehabilitated and cleared of all charges against him during the movements against dogmatism.

==Anecdotes==
During the Fengdu campaign in 1916, Liu was hit by a bullet in the head, which passed through his right temple and went out from his right eye. A German surgeon performed surgery to remove the eyeball and debride necrotic tissues. To keep his brain nerves from being damaged by the anaesthetics, Liu insisted on operation without anesthesia. After the procedure was finished, Liu told the surgeon that he counted a total of 72 cuts. The doctor was greatly moved by this display of courage and perseverance, and out of great respect he gave Liu the nickname &quot;Chinese Mars&quot;.

Deng&#x27;s famous &quot;Cat Theory&quot; (&quot;Whether it is a black cat or a white cat, as long as it can catch the rat, it is a good cat&quot;), in fact, originated from Liu. During his long military career, Liu often stated that &quot;Whether it is a black cat or a yellow cat, as long as it can catch the rat, it is a good cat&quot; to demonstrate that the purpose of war is to win, no matter what strategies you take.

Liu and Deng&#x27;s relationship grew strong only after the communist takeover because both were discontent with Mao Zedong&#x27;s disastrous policies, such as Great Leap Forward and Cultural Revolution: As Liu was persecuted in the late 1950s, Deng showed his support to Liu, as the latter was making rounds of analyses and apologies for the so-called &quot;dogmatism&quot; and &quot;empiricism&quot;. Similarly, Liu showed his support to Deng for Deng&#x27;s economic policy in the early 1960s to reform the Chinese economy.

Liu told his family that after his death, he wanted his funeral to be held by Deng, and his eulogy to be done by Deng, and this was when Deng was still under house arrest and Liu did so to show his support. Deng&#x27;s entire family attended Liu&#x27;s funeral, which only happened in the case of very close family ties in traditional Chinese culture. Liu wanted a small funeral in the hospital he died in. However, because too many military and political leaders requested to attend the funeral, the funeral was moved to a bigger hall.

==Legacy==

Unlike other PLA marshals and generals, such as Peng Dehuai and Lin Biao, Liu never sought to win Chairman Mao&#x27;s political trust and support, but on the other hand this prevented him from suffering from the backlash of a political fallout with Mao as did Peng and Lin did in 1959 and 1971, respectively. Liu earned his reputation and title through his own outstanding military skills and personality. He oversaw the development of the CCP armies&#x27; expertise in regular battle, frontal attack, army groups campaigns, and sieges. Liu was also the first to introduce modern military strategies and the tactics of foreign countries to the CCP army, and incorporated science and artistry into military training. All of these endeavours shifted public perception of the CCP army from being a guerrilla force consisting of peasants and proletarians with little regular training to becoming a sophisticated and highly skilled modern military force.

== See also ==
* List of generals of the People&#x27;s Republic of China
* Outline of the military history of the People&#x27;s Republic of China

== References ==
=== Citations ===
=== Sources ===

* Barron, James. &quot;Liu Bocheng, Military Leader in Two Chinese Revolutions&quot;. &quot;New York Times&quot;. October 10, 1986. Retrieved August 31, 2014. 
* Lew, Christopher R. &quot;The Third Chinese Revolutionary War, 1945–1949: An Analysis of Communist Strategy and Leadership&quot;. US and Canada: Routelage. 2009. . p. 12.
* Long March Leaders</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q701507" start="0" end="12" title="Liu Bocheng" label="Liu Mingzhao"/>
<link wikidata="Q2075910" start="17" end="30" title="courtesy name" label="courtesy name"/>
<link wikidata="Q701507" start="31" end="38" title="Liu Bocheng" label="Bocheng"/>
<link wikidata="Q701507" start="66" end="77" title="Liu Bocheng" label="Liu Bocheng"/>
<link wikidata="Q55738576" start="157" end="164" title="Marshal of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="Marshal"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="172" end="203" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q315475" start="340" end="348" title="Lin Biao" label="Lin Biao"/>
<link wikidata="Q840370" start="353" end="358" title="Su Yu" label="Su Yu"/>
<link wikidata="Q17427" start="378" end="401" title="Chinese Communist Party" label="Chinese Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q31113" start="407" end="417" title="Kuomintang" label="Kuomintang"/>
<link wikidata="Q706491" start="428" end="439" title="Bai Chongxi" label="Bai Chongxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q185801" start="624" end="631" title="Mikhail Kutuzov" label="Kutuzov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371311" start="862" end="869" title="Kaixian" label="Kaixian"/>
<link wikidata="Q19770" start="871" end="878" title="Sichuan" label="Sichuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q12514" start="919" end="935" title="Three Gorges Dam" label="Three Gorges Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q8573" start="982" end="993" title="Sun Yat-sen" label="Sun Yat-sen"/>
<link wikidata="Q10874690" start="1117" end="1127" title="Scouting in Mainland China" label="Boy Scouts"/>
<link wikidata="Q190517" start="1146" end="1163" title="Xinhai Revolution" label="Xinhai Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q11725" start="1207" end="1216" title="Chongqing" label="Chongqing"/>
<link wikidata="Q210329" start="1268" end="1279" title="Yuan Shikai" label="Yuan Shikai"/>
<link wikidata="Q190517" start="1831" end="1848" title="Xinhai Revolution" label="Xinhai Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q46333" start="1871" end="1881" title="Long March" label="Long March"/>
<link wikidata="Q697046" start="1926" end="1934" title="Wu Peifu" label="Wu Peifu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073476" start="1955" end="1974" title="Northern Expedition (1926–1927)" label="Northern Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q31113" start="1982" end="1992" title="Kuomintang" label="Kuomintang"/>
<link wikidata="Q281514" start="2129" end="2137" title="Long Yun" label="Long Yun"/>
<link wikidata="Q43194" start="2141" end="2147" title="Yunnan" label="Yunnan"/>
<link wikidata="Q22513" start="2191" end="2197" title="Zhu De" label="Zhu De"/>
<link wikidata="Q377935" start="2335" end="2348" title="Yang Shangkun" label="Yang Shangkun"/>
<link wikidata="Q361160" start="2354" end="2364" title="Wu Yuzhang" label="Wu Yuzhang"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="2504" end="2513" title="Communism" label="Communism"/>
<link wikidata="Q17427" start="2543" end="2566" title="Chinese Communist Party" label="Chinese Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073476" start="2776" end="2795" title="Northern Expedition (1926–1927)" label="Northern Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q714843" start="2880" end="2907" title="National Revolutionary Army" label="National Revolutionary Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q31113" start="2974" end="2984" title="Kuomintang" label="Kuomintang"/>
<link wikidata="Q476634" start="3033" end="3050" title="Nanchang Uprising" label="Nanchang Uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q700713" start="3073" end="3080" title="He Long" label="He Long"/>
<link wikidata="Q715844" start="3082" end="3089" title="Ye Ting" label="Ye Ting"/>
<link wikidata="Q700892" start="3091" end="3099" title="Li Lisan" label="Li Lisan"/>
<link wikidata="Q17410" start="3104" end="3114" title="Zhou Enlai" label="Zhou Enlai"/>
<link wikidata="Q649" start="3397" end="3403" title="Moscow" label="Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q14404494" start="3460" end="3489" title="M. V. Frunze Military Academy" label="M. V. Frunze Military Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="3513" end="3525" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q37151" start="3706" end="3713" title="Sun Tzu" label="Sun Tzu"/>
<link wikidata="Q8251" start="3727" end="3737" title="Art of War" label="Art of War"/>
<link wikidata="Q780373" start="3841" end="3893" title="6th National Congress of the Chinese Communist Party" label="6th National Congress of the Chinese Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q5413" start="4118" end="4131" title="Yangtze River" label="Yangtze River"/>
<link wikidata="Q8686" start="4183" end="4191" title="Shanghai" label="Shanghai"/>
<link wikidata="Q10875136" start="4437" end="4458" title="Jiangxi-Fujian Soviet" label="power base in Jiangxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q16574" start="4660" end="4675" title="Chiang Kai-shek" label="Chiang Kai-shek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323753" start="4761" end="4774" title="28 Bolsheviks" label="28 Bolsheviks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329301" start="4786" end="4791" title="Bo Gu" label="Bo Gu"/>
<link wikidata="Q700939" start="4793" end="4806" title="Zhang Wentian" label="Zhang Wentian"/>
<link wikidata="Q61217" start="4812" end="4822" title="Otto Braun (communist)" label="Otto Braun"/>
<link wikidata="Q163931" start="4888" end="4897" title="Comintern" label="Comintern"/>
<link wikidata="Q5816" start="5183" end="5193" title="Mao Zedong" label="Mao Zedong"/>
<link wikidata="Q381823" start="5198" end="5209" title="Peng Dehuai" label="Peng Dehuai"/>
<link wikidata="Q532973" start="5400" end="5412" title="Zhang Guotao" label="Zhang Guotao"/>
<link wikidata="Q5447513" start="6116" end="6143" title="Fifth Encirclement Campaign against Jiangxi Soviet" label="Fifth Encirclement Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q46333" start="6506" end="6516" title="Long March" label="Long March"/>
<link wikidata="Q28994" start="6812" end="6817" title="Zunyi" label="Zunyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q47097" start="6831" end="6838" title="Guizhou" label="Guizhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q30341" start="6891" end="6907" title="Zunyi Conference" label="Zunyi Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q557028" start="7167" end="7180" title="Wang Jiaxiang" label="Wang Jiaxiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1038418" start="7347" end="7359" title="Jinsha River" label="Jinsha River"/>
<link wikidata="Q701453" start="7466" end="7478" title="Nie Rongzhen" label="Nie Rongzhen"/>
<link wikidata="Q461282" start="7632" end="7634" title="Yi people" label="Yi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075393" start="7779" end="7789" title="Dadu River (Sichuan)" label="Dadu River"/>
<link wikidata="Q16574" start="7797" end="7803" title="Chiang Kai-shek" label="Chiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033146" start="7870" end="7879" title="Shi Dakai" label="Shi Dakai"/>
<link wikidata="Q532973" start="7991" end="8003" title="Zhang Guotao" label="Zhang Guotao"/>
<link wikidata="Q515388" start="8203" end="8214" title="Yan&amp;#x27;an" label="Yan&amp;#x27;an"/>
<link wikidata="Q244941" start="8306" end="8325" title="Xi&amp;#x27;an Incident" label="Xi&amp;#x27;an Incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q219230" start="8443" end="8469" title="Marco Polo Bridge Incident" label="Marco Polo Bridge Incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q712870" start="8584" end="8598" title="8th Route Army" label="8th Route Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q16977" start="8735" end="8748" title="Deng Xiaoping" label="Deng Xiaoping"/>
<link wikidata="Q315475" start="9398" end="9406" title="Lin Biao" label="Lin Biao"/>
<link wikidata="Q702194" start="9701" end="9713" title="Xu Xiangqian" label="Xu Xiangqian"/>
<link wikidata="Q46913" start="9734" end="9740" title="Shanxi" label="Shanxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q46913" start="9925" end="9931" title="Shanxi" label="Shanxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q21208" start="9933" end="9938" title="Hebei" label="Hebei"/>
<link wikidata="Q43684" start="9943" end="9948" title="Henan" label="Henan"/>
<link wikidata="Q709261" start="9987" end="10013" title="Hundred Regiments Campaign" label="Hundred Regiments Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q704640" start="10142" end="10156" title="Yasuji Okamura" label="Okamura Yasuji"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148306" start="10794" end="10804" title="Yan&amp;#x27;an Rectification Movement" label="Zheng Feng"/>
<link wikidata="Q699327" start="10884" end="10893" title="Wang Ming" label="Wang Ming"/>
<link wikidata="Q699698" start="11486" end="11496" title="Yan Xishan" label="Yan Xishan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5960763" start="11605" end="11623" title="Shangdang Campaign" label="Shangdang Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q5647237" start="11774" end="11789" title="Handan Campaign" label="Handan Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q81126" start="12038" end="12047" title="Manchuria" label="Manchuria"/>
<link wikidata="Q43684" start="12742" end="12747" title="Henan" label="Henan"/>
<link wikidata="Q46913" start="12749" end="12755" title="Shanxi" label="Shanxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q21208" start="12760" end="12765" title="Hebei" label="Hebei"/>
<link wikidata="Q40956" start="12770" end="12775" title="Anhui" label="Anhui"/>
<link wikidata="Q7355" start="12845" end="12857" title="Yellow River" label="Yellow River"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="13104" end="13113" title="communist" label="communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156557" start="13141" end="13151" title="Dabie Shan" label="Dabie Shan"/>
<link wikidata="Q31113" start="13202" end="13212" title="Kuomintang" label="Kuomintang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156557" start="13234" end="13244" title="Dabie Shan" label="Dabie Shan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="13252" end="13261" title="communist" label="communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156557" start="13307" end="13321" title="Dabie Shan" label="Dabie Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q43407" start="13477" end="13485" title="Shandong" label="Shandong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156557" start="13621" end="13635" title="Dabie Shan" label="Dabie Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q16666" start="14232" end="14239" title="Nanjing" label="Nanjing"/>
<link wikidata="Q11746" start="14244" end="14249" title="Wuhan" label="Wuhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q102356" start="14396" end="14403" title="brigade" label="brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q16574" start="14429" end="14444" title="Chiang Kai-shek" label="Chiang Kai-shek"/>
<link wikidata="Q188408" start="14759" end="14766" title="Chen Yi (communist)" label="Chen Yi"/>
<link wikidata="Q840370" start="14771" end="14776" title="Su Yu" label="Su Yu"/>
<link wikidata="Q697686" start="14798" end="14807" title="Chen Geng" label="Chen Geng"/>
<link wikidata="Q701313" start="14883" end="14893" title="Chen Cheng" label="Chen Cheng"/>
<link wikidata="Q706491" start="14898" end="14909" title="Bai Chongxi" label="Bai Chongxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1858202" start="15171" end="15182" title="Tan Zhenlin" label="Tan Zhenlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q372153" start="15245" end="15262" title="Huai Hai Campaign" label="Huai Hai Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q57719" start="15376" end="15382" title="Xuzhou" label="Xuzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q179637" start="15478" end="15481" title="POW" label="POW"/>
<link wikidata="Q5310099" start="15495" end="15504" title="Du Yuming" label="Du Yuming"/>
<link wikidata="Q41705" start="15733" end="15739" title="Fujian" label="Fujian"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="16206" end="16237" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q709932" start="16478" end="16486" title="Gao Gang" label="Gao Gang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1593062" start="16488" end="16498" title="Rao Shushi" label="Rao Shushi"/>
<link wikidata="Q315475" start="16509" end="16517" title="Lin Biao" label="Lin Biao"/>
<link wikidata="Q700713" start="16638" end="16645" title="He Long" label="He Long"/>
<link wikidata="Q17252" start="16913" end="16918" title="Tibet" label="Tibet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7210" start="18014" end="18022" title="Liu Bang" label="Liu Bang"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209" start="18057" end="18068" title="Han dynasty" label="Han dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="18644" end="18656" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="18827" end="18839" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788820" start="19139" end="19155" title="defense minister" label="defense minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q8663" start="19191" end="19201" title="Korean War" label="Korean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7821620" start="19238" end="19251" title="field marshal" label="field marshal"/>
<link wikidata="Q35314" start="19361" end="19378" title="Nikita Khrushchev" label="Nikita Khrushchev"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165372" start="19426" end="19439" title="Secret Speech" label="Secret Speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q192914" start="19455" end="19474" title="cult of personality" label="cult of personality"/>
<link wikidata="Q855" start="19491" end="19504" title="Joseph Stalin" label="Joseph Stalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q845491" start="19611" end="19641" title="Ten Major Relationships" label="On the Ten Major Relationships"/>
<link wikidata="Q708941" start="20095" end="20102" title="Xiao Ke" label="Xiao Ke"/>
<link wikidata="Q309118" start="20497" end="20506" title="Politburo" label="Politburo"/>
<link wikidata="Q19211" start="20614" end="20645" title="National People&amp;#x27;s Congress" label="National People&amp;#x27;s Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q175984" start="20954" end="20971" title="Lushan Conference" label="Lushan Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q8690" start="21019" end="21038" title="Cultural Revolution" label="Cultural Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q236017" start="21282" end="21292" title="Jiang Qing" label="Jiang Qing"/>
<link wikidata="Q196341" start="21302" end="21314" title="Gang of Four" label="Gang of Four"/>
<link wikidata="Q4990531" start="22151" end="22162" title="anaesthetic" label="anaesthetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q112" start="22440" end="22444" title="Mars (mythology)" label="Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q17040435" start="22478" end="22488" title="Cat theory (Deng Xiaoping)" label="Cat Theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q5816" start="22992" end="23002" title="Mao Zedong" label="Mao Zedong"/>
<link wikidata="Q58715" start="23039" end="23057" title="Great Leap Forward" label="Great Leap Forward"/>
<link wikidata="Q8690" start="23062" end="23081" title="Cultural Revolution" label="Cultural Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q6631588" start="24925" end="24980" title="List of generals of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="List of generals of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q125688967" start="24983" end="25053" title="Outline of the military history of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="Outline of the military history of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="308993" wikidata="Q1000717" url="?curid=308993" title="Tewkesbury">
<text>Tewkesbury ( ) is a market town and civil parish in the north of Gloucestershire, England. The town grew following the construction of Tewkesbury Abbey in the twelfth century and played a significant role in the Wars of the Roses. It stands at the confluence of the River Severn and the River Avon, and thus became an important trading point, which continued as railways and, later, the M5 and M50 motorway connections were established.
The town gives its name to the Borough of Tewkesbury, a local government district of Gloucestershire. The town lies on the border with Worcestershire, marked largely by the Carrant Brook (a tributary of the River Avon).

The name Tewkesbury is thought to come from Theoc, the name of a Saxon who founded a hermitage there in the 7th century, and in the Old English language was called &quot;&quot;. An erroneous derivation from Theotokos (the Greek title of Mary, mother of God) enjoyed currency in the monastic period of the town&#x27;s history.

The Battle of Tewkesbury, which took place on 4 May 1471, was one of the decisive battles of the Wars of the Roses and is marked annually by a medieval festival in the town, including historical re-enactment.

==Geography==
===Geographic position===
The town is situated approximately halfway between the cities of Gloucester and Worcester, positioned where natural rises in the land allowed early settlers of the town to avoid flooding, yet also to take advantage of the fertile soils and transport connections. The layout of the town centre and radiating trunk roads remains largely unchanged since medieval times.

===Expansion===
In 1965, Tewkesbury borough, Gloucestershire, was enlarged by incorporating the then-new Mitton housing estate, on land previously in Bredon parish, Worcestershire, as part of the West Midland Counties Order. The estate now forms part of the &quot;Tewkesbury Town with Mitton&quot; borough council ward, which also covers Tewkesbury town centre. A further housing project in Mitton was completed in the first decade of 2000. Mitton is now a contiguous low-density rural suburb connected to Tewkesbury.

===Nearby places===

* Bredon
* Bishop&#x27;s Cleeve
* Cheltenham
* Evesham
* Gloucester
* Pershore
* Malvern (Great Malvern)
* Upton upon Severn
* Cotswolds
* Forest of Dean
* Malvern Hills
* Winchcombe
* Gretton

==Demography==
At the 2021 UK census the Tewkesbury parish had a population of 10,663. If the neighbouring parishes of Wheatpieces (3,582), Northway (4,859) and Ashchurch Rural (1,814) are added, the figure rises to 20,918. The Tewkesbury urban area is divided in two by the north–south running M5 motorway, opened in February 1971. However, the town is generally considered as the built-up area to the immediate east and west of the M5 at junction 9, with the town centre, abbey and old town situated to the west. The close proximity of large areas of land that are prone to flooding, as evidenced by the severe floods that struck the region in July 2007, would make further expansion difficult. However, the present Borough of Tewkesbury, created on 1 April 1974, also contains a large portion of rural north Gloucestershire, extending as far as the edges of Gloucester itself and also Cheltenham, and has a present population of 94,884.

==Historical landmarks==

The town features many Medieval and Tudor buildings, but is most famous for Tewkesbury Abbey, a Norman abbey church.

===The Abbey===
The Abbey was built by the Normans and consecrated in the year 1121.
Originally the Abbey formed part of a Benedictine monastery and was saved from the Dissolution of the Monasteries by King Henry VIII after being bought by the townspeople for the price of the lead on the roof to use as their parish church. 
Most of the monastery buildings, as well as the vineyards, were destroyed during this time. The Abbey Mill however still remains, resting upon the Mill Avon, a channel allegedly built by the monks. This channel represents one of the biggest projects in Tewkesbury&#x27;s history, though the present weir dates only from the 1990s, replacing two sluice gates installed in the 1930s. The Abbey Mill is also sometimes known as &quot;Abel Fletcher&#x27;s Mill&quot;, but this is simply the name given to it in Dinah Craik&#x27;s novel &quot;John Halifax, Gentleman&quot;, whose setting Norton Bury is based on Tewkesbury.

The abbey is thought to be the site of the place where the hermit Theoc once lived. The Romanesque arch and stained glass window has been restored. The monastery was founded by the Despensers as a family mausoleum, and the Despenser and Neville tombs are fine examples of small-scale late medieval stonework.

The tower is believed to be the largest Norman tower still in existence (though that at Norwich Cathedral is another strong contender). The tower once had a wooden spire which may have taken the total height of the building to as much as 260 feet, but this was blown off in a heavy storm on Easter Monday 1559; the present pinnacles and battlements were added in 1600 to give the tower a more &quot;finished&quot; look. The height to the top of the pinnacles is . The abbey is thought to be the third largest church in Britain that is not a cathedral (after Westminster Abbey and Beverley Minster). From end to end it measures , though prior to the destruction of the original Lady Chapel (also at the time of the dissolution), the total length was . The abbey is a parish church, still used for daily services, and is believed to be the second-largest parish church in England, again, after Beverley Minster.

===Pubs, inns and taverns===
Tewkesbury claims Gloucestershire&#x27;s oldest public house, the &quot;Black Bear&quot;, dating from 1308. The pub closed in 2017 and after undergoing renovation from 2019 to 2022, reopened in 2023. Other notable large hostelries are the Royal Hop Pole Hotel in Church Street (which has recently been converted into a part of the Wetherspoons pub chain with the discovery of a former medieval banqueting hall in the structure), mentioned in Charles Dickens&#x27; &quot;The Pickwick Papers&quot;, the Bell Hotel, a large half-timbered structure opposite the Abbey gateway, and the House of the Nodding Gables in the High Street.

===Around the Abbey===
The Abbey Cottages, adjacent to Tewkesbury Abbey, were built between 1410 and 1412. They were restored 1967 to 1972 by the Abbey Lawn Trust, a building preservation charity. They house the John Moore Museum, residential homes and commercial offices. The John Moore Museum was established in 1980 in memory of the writer and naturalist, John Moore. The museum consists of three buildings: the main John Moore Museum, home to an extensive Natural History collection; the Merchant&#x27;s House, restored to its Tudor appearance; and the Old Baptist Chapel. The Old Baptist Chapel, located off Church Street, is a timber-framed building, formally a medieval hall house dating to the 1480s. Sometime in the 17th century, it was converted for use as a Nonconformist meeting house. Including the original baptistery and pastor&#x27;s room, the building is of significant historic interest. The building was restored to its 1720 appearance in the 1970s by Tewkesbury Borough Council. It was further renovated and interpreted in 2015 by the Abbey Lawn Trust and is used as a venue for a variety of cultural events. Behind the chapel is a small cemetery for those who were members of the congregation. This includes the grave of William Shakespeare-Hart, fifth great-grandnephew of William Shakespeare. The cemetery is managed by Tewkesbury Borough Council.

===Along the river===
Just to the west of the town is Thomas Telford&#x27;s Mythe Bridge over the River Severn, a cast-iron structure with a span, opened in 1826. Tewkesbury&#x27;s other notable bridge is the stone-built King John&#x27;s Bridge over the Avon, commissioned by King John in the late 12th century as part of improvements to the main road from Gloucester to Worcester. Original stonework can still be seen on its north side; the bridge was widened in the 1950s to meet traffic requirements at the time.

The river was significant in the commercial development of the town.
The large industrial flour mill site, built in 1865 stands near the confluence of the Avon and Severn rivers, where barges were used to transport goods. The mill, known as Healing&#x27;s Mill (and previously owned by Allied Bakeries) closed for milling in 2006.
The mill building facing the river is now a well-known &quot;at risk&quot; structure, and can be seen clearly to have sunk on one end of its foundations.

The Gloucestershire Water Rescue Centre, also known as Tewkesbury fire station, is a combined project between Severn Area Rescue Association (SARA) and Gloucestershire Fire and Rescue Service (GFRS).

Mythe Chapel, which was built in 1870, was deconsecrated in 1977.

==Governance==

===Modern governance===

Tewkesbury Town Council (not to be confused with Tewkesbury Borough, which covers a wider area) has 16 members elected or co-opted from the three wards of Newtown, Tewkesbury North and Tewkesbury South to serve four year terms. The boundaries of these wards mirror the Tewkesbury Borough wards of Tewkesbury East, Tewkesbury North with Twyning, and Tewkesbury South. The Gloucestershire County Council divisions of Tewkesbury and Tewkesbury East are unchanged by the new ward boundaries at the Town and Borough Councils. Councillors were last elected in 2023, with all councillors sitting as independents. The Mayor of Tewkesbury, Councillor Paul Jones, is the civic head of the council and chairs meetings of the full council. The council also appoints a Deputy Mayor who supports the Mayor in their duties and often succeeds to the office of Mayor in the following civic year. The council was formally established in 1974 following the dissolution of the municipal borough of Tewkesbury but continues to occupy Tewkesbury Town Hall and maintains the same civic role within the Town.
Tewkesbury is also covered by Tewkesbury Borough Council (district level) and Gloucestershire County Council. Tewkesbury is part of the wider Tewkesbury constituency for elections to the House of Commons. Prior to Brexit in 2020, it was represented in the European Parliament as part of the South West England constituency in the European Parliament.

Through the provisions of the Local Government Act 1972, a new District Council was created comprising the pre-1974 Tewkesbury Borough, Cheltenham Rural District and parts of Gloucester Rural District. In May 1973 a joint committee of the predecessor Councils recommended that a new Royal Charter be applied for. This Royal Charter conferring Borough Status was granted on 27 February 1973 and took effect on 1 April 1974. By virtue of this Charter the Borough appoint a Mayor and Deputy Mayor which results in there being two Mayors covering Tewkesbury at different level of government. The Borough Mayor being the first citizen of Tewkesbury Borough and the Town Mayor being the first citizen of the Town itself.

===Historical governance and town mayoralty===
The following table lists the Mayors of Tewkesbury between 1836 and 1973. After 1973 both Tewkesbury Borough and Tewkesbury Town Council have appointed the Borough Mayor and Town Mayor respectively. The date of the Mayors Election changed from November to May in 1947/48 during the term of office of J.O. Martin.

==Transport==

===Railways===

Tewkesbury is served by Ashchurch for Tewkesbury railway station, located east of the town centre. It is served by Great Western Railway services primarily operating between and with some services operating to London Paddington, Salisbury and Great Malvern. Limited CrossCountry services from Cardiff to Nottingham and Stansted also call.

Tewkesbury railway station used to serve the town. It was opened by the Birmingham &amp; Gloucester Railway in 1840 and was sited in the High Street. It was replaced in 1864 by a new station built for the Tewkesbury &amp; Malvern Railway; this closed on 14 August 1961, when the Ashchurch to Upton-on-Severn passenger service was withdrawn by British Railways (through trains to Great Malvern had ceased previously in December 1952). Freight traffic continued until final closure in December 1964. Removal of the railway embankment between Ashchurch and Tewkesbury began in 2013 to aid flood prevention in the town.

===Roads===
Tewkesbury is served by the M5 and M50 motorways and the A38, A438 and A46 trunk roads. Congestion on the A46 around Ashchurch and junction 9 of the M5 is being addressed through a series of road works, which started in 2014.

===Buses===
A network of bus services serve the town and surrounding district, operated predominantly by Stagecoach West. Services run to Cheltenham, Gloucester, Bishop&#x27;s Cleeve while Evesham can be reached using Diamond Bus service 540 which runs up to every 30 minutes Mondays to Saturdays. Buses run frequently from the town centre to Ashchurch railway station.

===Cycling===
In Newtown, 10 per cent of all work trips are made by bicycle.
There are some bicycle paths in the built-up-area of Tewkesbury.

==Culture==
*Roses Theatre combines an arthouse cinema and a live performance venue. The Roses Theatre is where comedian Eric Morecambe collapsed after a charity performance in May 1984. He died hours later in Cheltenham General Hospital. A conference/changing room was later named after him.
*Battle of Tewkesbury, mentioned in Shakespeare&#x27;s play &quot;Richard III&quot;.
*Raymond Priestley, geologist on Robert Falcon Scott&#x27;s expedition to the South Pole, left one of the sleds, used on that expedition, to the former Tewkesbury Grammar School (c. 1576 – 1972). It is now kept in the Tewkesbury School&#x27;s Humanities building.
*Tewkesbury mustard, a blend of mustard and horseradish, made the town famous in the 17th century and is again being manufactured. The mustard was mentioned in some of Shakespeare&#x27;s works.

===Festivals and fairs===
*Since 2005, an annual Food and Drink Festival has been held, in or near the Abbey grounds.
*On the second full weekend of July the town hosts Tewkesbury Medieval Festival. Thousands of re-enactors travel to the town from around the world to re-enact the Battle of Tewkesbury near to the original battle site. The festival includes a &quot;living history&quot; recreation of a medieval encampment, games, food and a large fair where re-enactment clothing, furniture and weaponry can be purchased. In 2008 the festival celebrated its 25th anniversary. It has been described by Footprint Travel Guides as one of the &quot;ten most bizarre festivals&quot; in the country.
*In July the Water Festival takes place with events on the river and the banks including an evening procession of lit boats ending with a firework display. The festival started in 1996 but its future is now in question due to funding issues and the 2006 event was much reduced in scale. The event was cancelled in 2007 as it coincided with the Summer 2007 Flood (it went ahead later in the year). The event was scheduled for 2008 on Saturday, 20 September, but was again cancelled due to flooding in the weeks prior to the event.
*On 9 and 10 October, the town holds the annual mop fair. Originally a hiring fair where people came to seek employment, the event is now a large travelling funfair taking over much of the centre of town. The fair itself is also an underlining point of Tewkesbury&#x27;s industrial past, as Walker Gallopers were produced in the area by Walkers in the early 20th century. The fair is organised by The Showmen&#x27;s Guild of Great Britain (Western Section). The fair is never held on a Sunday.
*Every year at the end of July and into August the Abbey hosts a festival of liturgical music entitled &quot;Musica Deo Sacra (Music Sacred to God)&quot;.

==Local media==
Local news and television programmes are provided by BBC West Midlands and ITV Central. Television signals are received from the Ridge Hill TV transmitter. However, BBC West and ITV West Country are also received through cable and satellite television such as Freesat and Sky.

Local radio stations are BBC Radio Gloucestershire on 104.7 FM, Greatest Hits Radio South West on 107.5 FM, Heart West on 102.4 FM and Gloucester FM on 96.6 FM.

The town is served by these local newspapers:

* Gloucestershire Echo 
* Evesham Journal.

==Cultural references==
*Victorian author Dinah Craik (1826–1887) visited Tewkesbury in 1852, and later set her most famous work &quot;John Halifax, Gentleman&quot; (pub. 1857) in the town, calling it &quot;Norton Bury&quot;. There is a Craik House on Church Street, but Craik never lived there and has no other connection with Tewkesbury. Despite this, there is a memorial to her in the Abbey&#x27;s south transept.
*Author John Moore (1907–1967) was born and lived in Tewkesbury. He set his novel &quot;Portrait of Elmbury&quot; (pub. 1945) as a &quot;fictionalised biography&quot; of Tewkesbury, the town being the &quot;Elmbury&quot; of the book. Another of his books, &quot;Brensham Village&quot; (published in 1946) used nearby Bredon as its basis. A local museum has been named after him.
*A.E. Housman&#x27;s &quot;A Shropshire Lad&quot; also mentions Tewkesbury, as well as nearby Bredon Hill, even though neither place is in Shropshire.
*Four episodes of the children&#x27;s TV programme &quot;Rosie and Jim&quot; are set in the town and feature the Abbey prominently in one of the episodes.
*The opening scene of the 1995 film version of &quot;Richard III&quot; takes place at the field headquarters of King Henry&#x27;s army at Tewkesbury.
*Two episodes of the BBC show &quot;Antiques Roadshow&quot; series 39 are set on the Abbey grounds. One episode features a rare 18th-century dress which was valued at £40,000.
*The 2020 film &quot;Enola Holmes&quot; features the disappearance of the fictional Viscount of Tewkesbury, Marquess of Basilwether, played by actor Louis Partridge.

==Notable people==

* John Barston – English writer and law civic figure – born Tewkesbury c. 1545
* Robert Harold Compton – South African botanist – born Tewkesbury 1886.
* Henry Disston – American industrialist – born Tewkesbury 1819.
* Anna Ford – newsreader and TV presenter – born Tewkesbury 1943.
* Henry Green – author – born Tewkesbury 1905.
* Kathleen Hawkins - New Zealand poet – born Tewkesbury 1883.
* Alfred Jones – cricketer – born Tewkesbury 1900.
* John Moore – writer – born Tewkesbury 1907.
* Mel Nicholls – Paralympic wheelchair racer.
* Raymond Priestley – Antarctic explorer – born Tewkesbury 1886.
* Eunice Spry – foster mother convicted of child abuse in 2007 – lived in Tewkesbury.
* Oswald Wardell-Yerburgh – vicar – 1899 to 1913.
* Simon Goodwin - professional footballer - Southampton FC and Cheltenham Town FC - lives in Tewkesbury, https://www.gloucestershirelive.co.uk/sport/football/football-news/former-southampton-prospect-cheltenham-towns-1319363 https://www.gloucestershirelive.co.uk/sport/football/football-news/cheltenham-towns-youngest-ever-player-138919

==Sports and recreation==
*Tewkesbury has one of the 471 King George&#x27;s Fields as its recreation ground.
*The football club, Tewkesbury Town FC have three men&#x27;s teams in the Saturday Cheltenham Leagues, two teams in the Evesham Birdseye Sunday Leagues, a Veterans team for ages 35+ in the Gloucestershire North County League and hold weekly training sessions for Ladies in preparation for starting a team in the 2014/15 season. They are holders of the Gloucestershire County Cup as well as the Evesham Bluck cup, Pershore Hospital cup, are Evesham League Division 3 Champions and are the Evesham Leagues Team of the Year 2012/13.
*The cricket team, Tewkesbury Cricket Club 1st XI play in the Glos/wilts Division of the West of England Premier League.
*The rugby team, Tewkesbury RFC, plays Rugby Union in Gloucestershire Division One and has gained promotion to Gloucester Division Premiership
*The running club, Tewkesbury AC compete in local, national and international running events.
*Cheltenham College Boathouse is situated at Lower Lode
*Facilities at Tewkesbury School are used as a public sports centre for swimming, gym, squash and other sports.
*The Tewkesbury lawn green Bowling Club plays in the Gloucestershire men&#x27;s and ladies leagues.
*The Tewkesbury swimming club is in Tewkesbury and trains at the Leisure Centre near the Tewkesbury Abbey, and at the Tewkesbury School swimming pool.

==Twin town==
Tewkesbury Borough is twinned with Miesbach in Bavaria, Germany.
Tewkesbury Town has had a sister city relationship twinned with Tewksbury Township, New Jersey, United States of America since 2003 and also has ties with Stoneham-et-Tewkesbury, Quebec, Canada. During the 1990s the relationship between the town of Tewkesbury, Gloucestershire and Tewksbury, Massachusetts was strengthened and the possibility of a formal twinning was investigated. A formal twinning arrangement between the two towns was not progressed during the 1990s although a link was maintained during this time. The relationship between these two towns resulted in the placing of the Miko Kaufman sculpture called Touching Souls at Tewkesbury Abbey.

==References==
==External links==

* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1000717" start="0" end="10" title="Tewkesbury" label="Tewkesbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q18511725" start="20" end="31" title="market town" label="market town"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115575" start="36" end="48" title="civil parish" label="civil parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q23165" start="65" end="80" title="Gloucestershire" label="Gloucestershire"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="82" end="89" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q3405514" start="135" end="151" title="Tewkesbury Abbey" label="Tewkesbury Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q127751" start="212" end="229" title="Wars of the Roses" label="Wars of the Roses"/>
<link wikidata="Q19682" start="266" end="278" title="River Severn" label="River Severn"/>
<link wikidata="Q19709" start="287" end="297" title="River Avon, Warwickshire" label="River Avon"/>
<link wikidata="Q894096" start="468" end="489" title="Borough of Tewkesbury" label="Borough of Tewkesbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187580" start="493" end="518" title="Non-metropolitan district" label="local government district"/>
<link wikidata="Q23135" start="572" end="586" title="Worcestershire" label="Worcestershire"/>
<link wikidata="Q32768" start="723" end="728" title="Anglo-Saxons" label="Saxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q513550" start="743" end="752" title="hermitage (religious retreat)" label="hermitage"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="790" end="801" title="Old English" label="Old English"/>
<link wikidata="Q208542" start="865" end="874" title="Theotokos" label="Theotokos"/>
<link wikidata="Q345" start="895" end="914" title="Mary, mother of God" label="Mary, mother of God"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337059" start="989" end="1009" title="Battle of Tewkesbury" label="Battle of Tewkesbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q127751" start="1082" end="1099" title="Wars of the Roses" label="Wars of the Roses"/>
<link wikidata="Q170497" start="1300" end="1310" title="Gloucester" label="Gloucester"/>
<link wikidata="Q1646181" start="1315" end="1324" title="Worcester, England" label="Worcester"/>
<link wikidata="Q1877352" start="2145" end="2151" title="Bredon" label="Bredon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917406" start="2154" end="2174" title="Bishop&amp;#x27;s Cleeve" label="Bishop&amp;#x27;s Cleeve"/>
<link wikidata="Q206988" start="2177" end="2187" title="Cheltenham" label="Cheltenham"/>
<link wikidata="Q585963" start="2190" end="2197" title="Evesham" label="Evesham"/>
<link wikidata="Q170497" start="2200" end="2210" title="Gloucester" label="Gloucester"/>
<link wikidata="Q767858" start="2213" end="2221" title="Pershore" label="Pershore"/>
<link wikidata="Q623323" start="2224" end="2231" title="Malvern, Worcestershire" label="Malvern"/>
<link wikidata="Q2362440" start="2250" end="2267" title="Upton upon Severn" label="Upton upon Severn"/>
<link wikidata="Q301833" start="2270" end="2279" title="Cotswolds" label="Cotswolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q902997" start="2282" end="2296" title="Forest of Dean" label="Forest of Dean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1577855" start="2299" end="2312" title="Malvern Hills" label="Malvern Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234937" start="2315" end="2325" title="Winchcombe" label="Winchcombe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5607810" start="2328" end="2335" title="Gretton, Gloucestershire" label="Gretton"/>
<link wikidata="Q16970190" start="2359" end="2373" title="2021 UK census" label="2021 UK census"/>
<link wikidata="Q19845841" start="2456" end="2467" title="Wheatpieces" label="Wheatpieces"/>
<link wikidata="Q19794194" start="2477" end="2485" title="Northway, Gloucestershire" label="Northway"/>
<link wikidata="Q20948949" start="2498" end="2513" title="Ashchurch Rural" label="Ashchurch Rural"/>
<link wikidata="Q1824663" start="2632" end="2643" title="M5 motorway" label="M5 motorway"/>
<link wikidata="Q894096" start="3055" end="3076" title="Borough of Tewkesbury" label="Borough of Tewkesbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="3327" end="3335" title="Medieval" label="Medieval"/>
<link wikidata="Q101978" start="3340" end="3345" title="Tudor dynasty" label="Tudor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3405514" start="3380" end="3396" title="Tewkesbury Abbey" label="Tewkesbury Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q136693" start="3400" end="3406" title="Norman architecture" label="Norman"/>
<link wikidata="Q131132" start="3545" end="3556" title="Benedictine" label="Benedictine"/>
<link wikidata="Q759837" start="3590" end="3620" title="Dissolution of the Monasteries" label="Dissolution of the Monasteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q38370" start="3629" end="3639" title="Henry VIII" label="Henry VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q317557" start="3732" end="3745" title="parish church" label="parish church"/>
<link wikidata="Q46261" start="4455" end="4465" title="Romanesque architecture" label="Romanesque"/>
<link wikidata="Q5264899" start="4548" end="4558" title="Despensers" label="Despensers"/>
<link wikidata="Q768692" start="4765" end="4782" title="Norwich Cathedral" label="Norwich Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q209663" start="4968" end="4981" title="Easter Monday" label="Easter Monday"/>
<link wikidata="Q23423" start="5014" end="5025" title="battlements" label="battlements"/>
<link wikidata="Q5933" start="5235" end="5252" title="Westminster Abbey" label="Westminster Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q851660" start="5257" end="5273" title="Beverley Minster" label="Beverley Minster"/>
<link wikidata="Q317557" start="5443" end="5456" title="parish church" label="parish church"/>
<link wikidata="Q851660" start="5569" end="5585" title="Beverley Minster" label="Beverley Minster"/>
<link wikidata="Q28404714" start="5852" end="5876" title="The Royal Hop Pole" label="the Royal Hop Pole Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6109362" start="5948" end="5960" title="Wetherspoons" label="Wetherspoons"/>
<link wikidata="Q5686" start="6059" end="6074" title="Charles Dickens" label="Charles Dickens"/>
<link wikidata="Q460583" start="6087" end="6106" title="The Pickwick Papers" label="The Pickwick Papers"/>
<link wikidata="Q629000" start="6138" end="6151" title="half-timbered" label="half-timbered"/>
<link wikidata="Q3405514" start="6302" end="6318" title="Tewkesbury Abbey" label="Tewkesbury Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q6249258" start="6606" end="6616" title="John Moore (British author)" label="John Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q17539244" start="6804" end="6822" title="Old Baptist Chapel, Tewkesbury" label="Old Baptist Chapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q380875" start="7673" end="7687" title="Thomas Telford" label="Thomas Telford"/>
<link wikidata="Q13528012" start="7695" end="7707" title="Mythe Bridge" label="Mythe Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q19682" start="7717" end="7729" title="River Severn" label="River Severn"/>
<link wikidata="Q483269" start="7733" end="7742" title="cast-iron" label="cast-iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q129308" start="7895" end="7904" title="John, King of England" label="King John"/>
<link wikidata="Q170497" start="7976" end="7986" title="Gloucester" label="Gloucester"/>
<link wikidata="Q1646181" start="7990" end="7999" title="Worcester, England" label="Worcester"/>
<link wikidata="Q117059" start="8422" end="8437" title="Allied Bakeries" label="Allied Bakeries"/>
<link wikidata="Q7457917" start="8732" end="8762" title="Severn Area Rescue Association" label="Severn Area Rescue Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q5572109" start="8774" end="8813" title="Gloucestershire Fire and Rescue Service" label="Gloucestershire Fire and Rescue Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q6949141" start="8823" end="8835" title="Mythe Chapel" label="Mythe Chapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q894096" start="8980" end="8998" title="Tewkesbury Borough" label="Tewkesbury Borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q966818" start="9053" end="9061" title="Co-option" label="co-opted"/>
<link wikidata="Q30185" start="9541" end="9546" title="Mayor" label="Mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q17539216" start="9944" end="9964" title="Tewkesbury Town Hall" label="Tewkesbury Town Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q894096" start="10046" end="10072" title="Tewkesbury Borough Council" label="Tewkesbury Borough Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q16839354" start="10094" end="10124" title="Gloucestershire County Council" label="Gloucestershire County Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q987959" start="10158" end="10181" title="Tewkesbury (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Tewkesbury constituency"/>
<link wikidata="Q11005" start="10203" end="10219" title="House of Commons of the United Kingdom" label="House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888194" start="10230" end="10236" title="Brexit" label="Brexit"/>
<link wikidata="Q8889" start="10272" end="10291" title="European Parliament" label="European Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q2973373" start="10307" end="10325" title="South West England (European Parliament constituency)" label="South West England"/>
<link wikidata="Q894096" start="11221" end="11239" title="Tewkesbury Borough Council" label="Tewkesbury Borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q54817869" start="11244" end="11267" title="Tewkesbury Town Council" label="Tewkesbury Town Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1886947" start="11500" end="11540" title="Ashchurch for Tewkesbury railway station" label="Ashchurch for Tewkesbury railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419438" start="11591" end="11612" title="Great Western Railway (train operating company)" label="Great Western Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q214788" start="11686" end="11703" title="London Paddington" label="London Paddington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1976733" start="11705" end="11714" title="Salisbury railway station" label="Salisbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q2959698" start="11719" end="11732" title="Great Malvern railway station" label="Great Malvern"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141120" start="11742" end="11754" title="CrossCountry" label="CrossCountry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2292817" start="11769" end="11776" title="Cardiff Central railway station" label="Cardiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1988621" start="11780" end="11790" title="Nottingham railway station" label="Nottingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q2652717" start="11795" end="11803" title="Stansted Airport railway station" label="Stansted"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707204" start="11816" end="11842" title="Tewkesbury railway station" label="Tewkesbury railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916856" start="11888" end="11923" title="Birmingham &amp;amp; Gloucester Railway" label="Birmingham &amp;amp; Gloucester Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707202" start="12021" end="12053" title="Tewkesbury &amp;amp; Malvern Railway" label="Tewkesbury &amp;amp; Malvern Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7899367" start="12108" end="12123" title="Upton-on-Severn railway station" label="Upton-on-Severn"/>
<link wikidata="Q605169" start="12159" end="12171" title="British Rail" label="British Rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1824663" start="12473" end="12475" title="M5 motorway" label="M5"/>
<link wikidata="Q637385" start="12480" end="12483" title="M50 motorway (Great Britain)" label="M50"/>
<link wikidata="Q517034" start="12484" end="12493" title="motorways in the United Kingdom" label="motorways"/>
<link wikidata="Q4649195" start="12502" end="12505" title="A38 road" label="A38"/>
<link wikidata="Q4660971" start="12507" end="12511" title="A roads in Zone 4 of the Great Britain numbering scheme" label="A438"/>
<link wikidata="Q4649340" start="12516" end="12519" title="A46 road" label="A46"/>
<link wikidata="Q2145163" start="12520" end="12530" title="trunk road" label="trunk road"/>
<link wikidata="Q7596870" start="12777" end="12792" title="Stagecoach West" label="Stagecoach West"/>
<link wikidata="Q206988" start="12810" end="12820" title="Cheltenham" label="Cheltenham"/>
<link wikidata="Q170497" start="12822" end="12832" title="Gloucester" label="Gloucester"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917406" start="12834" end="12854" title="Bishop&amp;#x27;s Cleeve" label="Bishop&amp;#x27;s Cleeve"/>
<link wikidata="Q585963" start="12861" end="12868" title="Evesham" label="Evesham"/>
<link wikidata="Q5270737" start="12890" end="12901" title="Diamond West Midlands" label="Diamond Bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5198662" start="13135" end="13148" title="Cycling infrastructure" label="bicycle paths"/>
<link wikidata="Q15273329" start="13199" end="13212" title="Roses Theatre" label="Roses Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135802" start="13225" end="13240" title="arthouse cinema" label="arthouse cinema"/>
<link wikidata="Q583128" start="13307" end="13321" title="Eric Morecambe" label="Eric Morecambe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5090204" start="13396" end="13423" title="Cheltenham General Hospital" label="Cheltenham General Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337059" start="13480" end="13500" title="Battle of Tewkesbury" label="Battle of Tewkesbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="13515" end="13526" title="Shakespeare" label="Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q652011" start="13545" end="13556" title="Richard III (play)" label="Richard III"/>
<link wikidata="Q1558934" start="13565" end="13582" title="Raymond Priestley" label="Raymond Priestley"/>
<link wikidata="Q102527" start="13597" end="13616" title="Robert Falcon Scott" label="Robert Falcon Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q933" start="13642" end="13652" title="South Pole" label="South Pole"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707201" start="13782" end="13799" title="Tewkesbury School" label="Tewkesbury School"/>
<link wikidata="Q80083" start="13807" end="13817" title="Humanities" label="Humanities"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707203" start="13829" end="13847" title="Tewkesbury mustard" label="Tewkesbury mustard"/>
<link wikidata="Q131748" start="13860" end="13867" title="Mustard (condiment)" label="mustard"/>
<link wikidata="Q26545" start="13872" end="13883" title="horseradish" label="horseradish"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707198" start="14192" end="14220" title="Tewkesbury Medieval Festival" label="Tewkesbury Medieval Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337059" start="14304" end="14324" title="Battle of Tewkesbury" label="Battle of Tewkesbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="14426" end="14434" title="medieval" label="medieval"/>
<link wikidata="Q5466542" start="14625" end="14648" title="Footprint Travel Guides" label="Footprint Travel Guides"/>
<link wikidata="Q127933" start="14856" end="14864" title="firework" label="firework"/>
<link wikidata="Q5769830" start="15296" end="15304" title="mop fair" label="mop fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q259037" start="15394" end="15412" title="travelling funfair" label="travelling funfair"/>
<link wikidata="Q4835013" start="15967" end="15984" title="BBC West Midlands" label="BBC West Midlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q10444865" start="15989" end="16000" title="ITV Central" label="ITV Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q7332684" start="16043" end="16053" title="Ridge Hill" label="Ridge Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q4835009" start="16079" end="16087" title="BBC West" label="BBC West"/>
<link wikidata="Q5975143" start="16092" end="16108" title="ITV West Country" label="ITV West Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q2055297" start="16174" end="16181" title="Freesat" label="Freesat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033167" start="16186" end="16189" title="Sky UK" label="Sky"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834917" start="16217" end="16242" title="BBC Radio Gloucestershire" label="BBC Radio Gloucestershire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7719955" start="16256" end="16286" title="Greatest Hits Radio South West" label="Greatest Hits Radio South West"/>
<link wikidata="Q65066887" start="16300" end="16310" title="Heart West" label="Heart West"/>
<link wikidata="Q5572048" start="16327" end="16340" title="Gloucester FM" label="Gloucester FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q5572107" start="16403" end="16423" title="Gloucestershire Echo" label="Gloucestershire Echo"/>
<link wikidata="Q182688" start="16470" end="16479" title="Victorian era" label="Victorian"/>
<link wikidata="Q482980" start="16480" end="16486" title="author" label="author"/>
<link wikidata="Q2331155" start="16487" end="16498" title="Dinah Craik" label="Dinah Craik"/>
<link wikidata="Q6237289" start="16580" end="16603" title="John Halifax, Gentleman" label="John Halifax, Gentleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q202949" start="16852" end="16860" title="transept" label="transept"/>
<link wikidata="Q6249258" start="16870" end="16880" title="John Moore (author, British)" label="John Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1877352" start="17179" end="17185" title="Bredon" label="Bredon"/>
<link wikidata="Q351410" start="17242" end="17254" title="A.E. Housman" label="A.E. Housman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4659502" start="17268" end="17284" title="A Shropshire Lad" label="A Shropshire Lad"/>
<link wikidata="Q4960146" start="17335" end="17346" title="Bredon Hill" label="Bredon Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q23103" start="17380" end="17390" title="Shropshire" label="Shropshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7368937" start="17449" end="17462" title="Rosie and Jim" label="Rosie and Jim"/>
<link wikidata="Q3405514" start="17505" end="17510" title="Tewkesbury Abbey" label="Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2501468" start="17600" end="17611" title="Richard III (1995 film)" label="Richard III"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="17718" end="17721" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q3052933" start="17733" end="17750" title="Antiques Roadshow" label="Antiques Roadshow"/>
<link wikidata="Q65032692" start="17894" end="17906" title="Enola Holmes (film)" label="Enola Holmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q99560577" start="18022" end="18037" title="Louis Partridge" label="Louis Partridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q6220918" start="18062" end="18074" title="John Barston" label="John Barston"/>
<link wikidata="Q4230109" start="18141" end="18162" title="Robert Harold Compton" label="Robert Harold Compton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5720365" start="18214" end="18227" title="Henry Disston" label="Henry Disston"/>
<link wikidata="Q2850499" start="18279" end="18288" title="Anna Ford" label="Anna Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285562" start="18345" end="18356" title="Henry Green" label="Henry Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q6376739" start="18392" end="18408" title="Kathleen Hawkins" label="Kathleen Hawkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q4722983" start="18454" end="18466" title="Alfred Jones (Northamptonshire cricketer)" label="Alfred Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q6249258" start="18505" end="18515" title="John Moore (British author)" label="John Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q21585372" start="18551" end="18563" title="Mel Nicholls" label="Mel Nicholls"/>
<link wikidata="Q1558934" start="18597" end="18614" title="Raymond Priestley" label="Raymond Priestley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5409776" start="18662" end="18673" title="Eunice Spry" label="Eunice Spry"/>
<link wikidata="Q167191" start="18703" end="18714" title="child abuse" label="child abuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q62669925" start="18748" end="18771" title="Oswald Wardell-Yerburgh" label="Oswald Wardell-Yerburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q6411592" start="19191" end="19216" title="King George&amp;#x27;s Fields" label="King George&amp;#x27;s Fields"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375" start="19778" end="19785" title="cricket" label="cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378" start="19899" end="19904" title="Rugby football" label="rugby"/>
<link wikidata="Q5849" start="19933" end="19944" title="Rugby Union" label="Rugby Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q467269" start="20132" end="20150" title="Cheltenham College" label="Cheltenham College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707201" start="20202" end="20219" title="Tewkesbury School" label="Tewkesbury School"/>
<link wikidata="Q3405514" start="20488" end="20504" title="Tewkesbury Abbey" label="Tewkesbury Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707201" start="20517" end="20534" title="Tewkesbury School" label="Tewkesbury School"/>
<link wikidata="Q184711" start="20587" end="20594" title="twin towns and sister cities" label="twinned"/>
<link wikidata="Q269157" start="20600" end="20608" title="Miesbach" label="Miesbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q184711" start="20681" end="20688" title="twin towns and sister cities" label="twinned"/>
<link wikidata="Q3016994" start="20694" end="20724" title="Tewksbury Township, New Jersey" label="Tewksbury Township, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q142131" start="20785" end="20807" title="Stoneham-et-Tewkesbury" label="Stoneham-et-Tewkesbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021588" start="20911" end="20935" title="Tewksbury, Massachusetts" label="Tewksbury, Massachusetts"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="308994" wikidata="Q312583" url="?curid=308994" title="Augustus FitzRoy, 3rd Duke of Grafton">
<text>Augustus Henry FitzRoy, 3rd Duke of Grafton (28 September 173514 March 1811), styled Earl of Euston between 1747 and 1757, was a British Whig statesman of the Georgian era. He is one of a handful of dukes who have served as prime minister.

He became prime minister in 1768 at the age of 33, leading the supporters of William Pitt, and was the youngest person to hold the office until the appointment of William Pitt the Younger 15 years later. However, he struggled to demonstrate an ability to counter increasing challenges to Britain&#x27;s global dominance following the nation&#x27;s victory in the Seven Years&#x27; War. He was widely attacked for allowing France to annex Corsica, and stepped down in 1770, handing over power to Lord North.

==Background and education==
He was a son of Lord Augustus FitzRoy, a captain in the Royal Navy, and Elizabeth Cosby, the daughter of Colonel William Cosby, who served as a colonial Governor of New York. Lord Augustus was the third son of the 2nd Duke of Grafton and Lady Henrietta Somerset, which made FitzRoy a great-grandson of both the 1st Duke of Grafton and the Marquess of Worcester. He was notably a fourth-generation descendant of King Charles II and the 1st Duchess of Cleveland; the surname &quot;FitzRoy&quot; stems from this illegitimacy. His younger brother was the 1st Baron Southampton. Following the death of his uncle in 1747, he was styled Earl of Euston as his grandfather&#x27;s heir apparent.

Lord Euston was educated at Newcome&#x27;s School in Hackney and at Westminster School, made the Grand Tour, and obtained a degree at Peterhouse, University of Cambridge.

==Political career==
In 1756, he entered Parliament as MP for Boroughbridge, a pocket borough; several months later, he switched constituencies to Bury St Edmunds, which was controlled by his family. However, a year later, his grandfather died, and he succeeded as the 3rd Duke of Grafton, which elevated him to the House of Lords.

He first became known in politics as an opponent of Lord Bute, a favourite of King George III. Grafton aligned himself with the Duke of Newcastle against Lord Bute, whose term as prime minister was short-lived largely because it was felt that the peace terms to which he had agreed at the Treaty of Paris were not a sufficient return for Britain&#x27;s performance in the Seven Years&#x27; War.

In 1765, Grafton was appointed a Privy Counsellor; then, following discussions with William Pitt the Elder, he was appointed Northern Secretary in Lord Rockingham&#x27;s first government. However, Rockingham retired the following year, and Pitt (by then Lord Chatham) formed a ministry in which Grafton was First Lord of the Treasury but not the prime minister.

On 20 September 1769, he was appointed a Knight of the Order of the Garter.

===Prime minister===

Chatham&#x27;s illness, at the end of 1767, resulted in Grafton becoming the government&#x27;s effective leader (he is credited with entering the office of prime minister in 1768), but political differences, the impact of the Corsican Crisis and the attacks of &quot;Junius&quot; led to his resignation in January 1770. Also, in 1768, Grafton became Chancellor of Cambridge University. He became Lord Privy Seal in Lord North&#x27;s ministry (1771) but resigned in 1775, being in favour of conciliatory action towards the American colonists. In the second Rockingham ministry of 1782, he was again Lord Privy Seal and continued in the post in the following Shelburne ministry until March 1783.

==Militia career==

Grafton was a strong supporter of moves to reform the militia during the Seven Years&#x27; War, and as Lord Lieutenant of Suffolk his county was one of the first to raise its quota, in two regiments on 27 April 1759. He soon took personal command of the West Suffolk Militia as its Colonel. The militia remained on active service until 1762. The militia was called out again after the outbreak of the War of American Independence when Britain was threatened with invasion by the Americans&#x27; allies, France and Spain. On 26 March 1778, Grafton was ordered to embody the two regiments once more. In that summer, the West Suffolks under Grafton formed part of a concentration at Coxheath Camp, near Maidstone in Kent, which was the army&#x27;s largest training camp. The duke was chosen to train the grenadier companies of all the battalions in camp, and he worked them hard, 7–8 hours a day. Observers of the camp noted that the discipline of the West Suffolk Militia under Grafton was especially good. He resigned his commission on grounds of ill-health in February 1780, and his 20-year-old son and heir, George, Earl of Euston, succeeded him as colonel of the West Suffolk Militia.

==Religious interests==
In later years Grafton was a prominent Unitarian, being one of the early members of the inaugural Essex Street Chapel under Rev. Theophilus Lindsey when it was founded in 1774. Grafton had associated with a number of liberal Anglican theologians when at Cambridge, and devoted much time to theological study and writing after leaving office as prime minister. In 1773, in the House of Lords, he supported a bill to release Anglican clergy from subscribing to all the Thirty-nine Articles. He became a supporter of moral reform among the wealthy and of changes to the church. He was the author of:

*&quot;Hints Submitted to the Serious Attention of the Clergy, Nobility and Gentry, by a Layman&quot; (1789).
*&quot;Serious Reflections of a Rational Christian from 1788–1797&quot;.

He was a sponsor of Richard Watson&#x27;s &quot;Consideration of the Expediency of Revising the Liturgy and Articles of the Church of England&quot; (published in 1790), and he funded the printing of 700 copies of Griesbach&#x27;s edition of the Greek New Testament in 1796.

==Horseracing==

The Duke also had horse racing interests. His racing colours were sky blue, with a black cap.

==Legacy==

Grafton County, New Hampshire, in the United States, is named in his honour, as is the city of Grafton, New South Wales, Australia, the town of Grafton, New York, the unincorporated community of Grafton, Virginia, and possibly the township (since 1856 a city) of Grafton, West Virginia. The Grafton Centre Shopping Mall in Cambridge is also named after him and indeed lies on Fitzroy Street. Cape Grafton in Far North Queensland was named after him by Lieutenant James Cook during his first voyage of discovery.

Grafton had the longest post-premiership of any prime minister in British history, totalling.

==Family==

On 29 January 1756, he married The Hon. Anne Liddell, daughter of Henry Liddell, 1st Baron Ravensworth (1708–1784), at Lord Ravensworth&#x27;s house in St James&#x27;s Square, by licence. The marriage was witnessed by Lord Ravensworth and Francis Seymour-Conway, 1st Earl of Hertford.

Augustus and Anne had three children:
* Lady Georgiana FitzRoy (8 May 175718 January 1799), who married John Smyth (12 February 174812 February 1811) on 4 June 1778.
* George Henry FitzRoy, 4th Duke of Grafton (1760–1844)
* General Lord Charles FitzRoy (14 July 176420 December 1829), who married, firstly, Frances Mundy (17739 August 1797) on 20 June 1795, and had one son. He married, secondly, Lady Frances Stewart (24 June 17779 February 1810) on 10 March 1799 and had three children. His sons Sir Charles FitzRoy (1796–1858), governor of New South Wales, and Robert FitzRoy, the hydrographer, were notable for their achievements.

In 1764, the Duke had a very public affair with the courtesan Nancy Parsons whom he kept at his townhouse and took to the opera, where they allegedly were found &quot;in flagrante delicto&quot;. This brazen lack of convention offended society&#x27;s standards. After the Duchess had become pregnant by her own lover, the Earl of Upper Ossory, she and the Duke were divorced by Act of Parliament, passed 23 March 1769. Three months later, on 24 June 1769, the Duke married Elizabeth Wrottesley (1 November 174525 May 1822), daughter of the Reverend Sir Richard Wrottesley, Dean of Worcester. They had the following children:
* Lord Henry FitzRoy (9 April 17707 June 1828), clergyman; he married Caroline Pigot (died 1 January 1835) on 10 September 1800 and had five children. Ancestor of Daisy Greville, Countess of Warwick.
* Lord Frederick FitzRoy (born 16 September 1774; died young).
* Lady Augusta FitzRoy (177929 June 1839), who married Rev. George F. Tavel (died 1829) on 19 November 1811.
* Lady Frances FitzRoy (1 June 17807 January 1866), who married the 1st Baron Churchill on 25 November 1800.
* Admiral Lord William FitzRoy (1 June 178213 May 1857), who married Georgiana Raikes (died 2 December 1861) in 1816 and had two children.
* Lord John Edward FitzRoy (24 September 178528 December 1856), MP, died unmarried.
* Lady Charlotte FitzRoy (died 23 June 1857).
* Lady Elizabeth FitzRoy (died 13 March 1839), who married her cousin Lt. Gen. The Hon. William FitzRoy (1773–1837), son of the 1st Baron Southampton, on 4 July 1811.
* Lady Isabella FitzRoy (died 10 December 1866), who married Barrington Pope Blachford (3 December 178314 May 1816) on 11 August 1812.

Grafton is thus the first British prime minister before Anthony Eden (and one of only three) to have been divorced, and the second, after Robert Walpole, to marry while in office. Grafton would be the only prime minister to divorce and remarry while in office until Boris Johnson in 2021.
FitzRoy died on 14 March 1811.

==Arms==
==Cabinet of the Duke of Grafton==

==Notes==
==Bibliography==
* Lt-Col E.A.H. Webb, &quot;History of the 12th (The Suffolk) Regiment 1685–1913&quot;, London: Spottiswoode, 1914/Uckfield: Naval &amp; Military, 2001, ISBN 978-1-84342-116-0.
* J.R. Western, &quot;The English Militia in the Eighteenth Century: The Story of a Political Issue 1660–1802&quot;, London: Routledge &amp; Kegan Paul, 1965.

==Further reading==

==External links==

*The Third Duke of Grafton
*More about Augustus Henry Fitzroy, Duke of Grafton on the 10 Downing Street website.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q312583" start="0" end="43" title="Augustus FitzRoy, 3rd Duke of Grafton" label="Augustus Henry FitzRoy, 3rd Duke of Grafton"/>
<link wikidata="Q312583" start="85" end="99" title="Augustus FitzRoy, 3rd Duke of Grafton" label="Earl of Euston"/>
<link wikidata="Q108700" start="129" end="141" title="British Whig" label="British Whig"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006877" start="159" end="171" title="Georgian era" label="Georgian era"/>
<link wikidata="Q166886" start="199" end="203" title="duke" label="duke"/>
<link wikidata="Q14211" start="224" end="238" title="Prime Minister of the United Kingdom" label="prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q208663" start="318" end="330" title="William Pitt, 1st Earl of Chatham" label="William Pitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q128902" start="404" end="428" title="William Pitt the Younger" label="William Pitt the Younger"/>
<link wikidata="Q540229" start="544" end="560" title="global dominance" label="global dominance"/>
<link wikidata="Q29828922" start="589" end="625" title="Great Britain in the Seven Years&amp;#x27; War" label="victory in the Seven Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5173165" start="634" end="649" title="Corsican Crisis" label="widely attacked"/>
<link wikidata="Q14112" start="679" end="686" title="Corsica" label="Corsica"/>
<link wikidata="Q312593" start="736" end="746" title="Lord North" label="Lord North"/>
<link wikidata="Q4297162" start="794" end="815" title="Lord Augustus FitzRoy" label="Lord Augustus FitzRoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="834" end="844" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007142" start="891" end="904" title="William Cosby" label="William Cosby"/>
<link wikidata="Q2347975" start="931" end="951" title="Governor of New York" label="Governor of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071465" start="992" end="1011" title="2nd Duke of Grafton" label="2nd Duke of Grafton"/>
<link wikidata="Q538459" start="1089" end="1108" title="1st Duke of Grafton" label="1st Duke of Grafton"/>
<link wikidata="Q337667" start="1117" end="1138" title="Charles Somerset, Marquess of Worcester" label="Marquess of Worcester"/>
<link wikidata="Q122553" start="1194" end="1204" title="Charles II of England" label="Charles II"/>
<link wikidata="Q235092" start="1213" end="1237" title="Barbara Palmer, 1st Duchess of Cleveland" label="1st Duchess of Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4297250" start="1329" end="1350" title="Charles FitzRoy, 1st Baron Southampton" label="1st Baron Southampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q19664619" start="1379" end="1384" title="George FitzRoy, Earl of Euston" label="uncle"/>
<link wikidata="Q15262144" start="1493" end="1514" title="Newcome&amp;#x27;s School" label="Newcome&amp;#x27;s School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341516" start="1533" end="1551" title="Westminster School" label="Westminster School"/>
<link wikidata="Q6682302" start="1562" end="1572" title="Grand Tour" label="Grand Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q650068" start="1599" end="1609" title="Peterhouse" label="Peterhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q35794" start="1611" end="1634" title="University of Cambridge" label="University of Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739604" start="1678" end="1688" title="Parliament of Great Britain" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q16707842" start="1692" end="1694" title="Member of Parliament (United Kingdom)" label="MP"/>
<link wikidata="Q11797242" start="1699" end="1712" title="Boroughbridge (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Boroughbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q573455" start="1716" end="1730" title="pocket borough" label="pocket borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072621" start="1784" end="1799" title="Bury St Edmunds (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Bury St Edmunds"/>
<link wikidata="Q11007" start="1953" end="1967" title="House of Lords" label="House of Lords"/>
<link wikidata="Q294651" start="2022" end="2031" title="Lord Bute" label="Lord Bute"/>
<link wikidata="Q127318" start="2048" end="2063" title="King George III" label="King George III"/>
<link wikidata="Q273809" start="2098" end="2115" title="Thomas Pelham-Holles, 1st Duke of Newcastle" label="Duke of Newcastle"/>
<link wikidata="Q156211" start="2259" end="2274" title="Treaty of Paris (1763)" label="Treaty of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q29828922" start="2308" end="2363" title="Great Britain in the Seven Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Britain&amp;#x27;s performance in the Seven Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q683120" start="2399" end="2415" title="Privy Counsellor" label="Privy Counsellor"/>
<link wikidata="Q208663" start="2450" end="2472" title="William Pitt the Elder" label="William Pitt the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q3954358" start="2491" end="2509" title="Northern Secretary" label="Northern Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q378043" start="2513" end="2535" title="Charles Watson-Wentworth, 2nd Marquess of Rockingham" label="Lord Rockingham&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q609884" start="2673" end="2699" title="First Lord of the Treasury" label="First Lord of the Treasury"/>
<link wikidata="Q215248" start="2784" end="2803" title="Order of the Garter" label="Order of the Garter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5173165" start="3054" end="3069" title="Corsican Crisis" label="Corsican Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2016239" start="3095" end="3101" title="Junius (writer)" label="Junius"/>
<link wikidata="Q910308" start="3224" end="3239" title="Lord Privy Seal" label="Lord Privy Seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q312593" start="3243" end="3260" title="Frederick North, Lord North" label="Lord North&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q179997" start="3350" end="3368" title="Thirteen Colonies" label="American colonists"/>
<link wikidata="Q7493328" start="3485" end="3503" title="Shelburne ministry" label="Shelburne ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q16933815" start="3597" end="3604" title="Militia (Great Britain)" label="militia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6679668" start="3646" end="3672" title="Lord Lieutenant of Suffolk" label="Lord Lieutenant of Suffolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q17118378" start="3797" end="3817" title="West Suffolk Militia" label="West Suffolk Militia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12799162" start="3825" end="3832" title="Colonel (United Kingdom)" label="Colonel"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="3944" end="3972" title="War of American Independence" label="War of American Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q213180" start="4243" end="4252" title="Maidstone" label="Maidstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q23298" start="4256" end="4260" title="Kent" label="Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q338013" start="4652" end="4674" title="George FitzRoy, 4th Duke of Grafton" label="George, Earl of Euston"/>
<link wikidata="Q106687" start="4794" end="4803" title="Unitarianism" label="Unitarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5399801" start="4853" end="4872" title="Essex Street Chapel" label="Essex Street Chapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2690433" start="4884" end="4902" title="Theophilus Lindsey" label="Theophilus Lindsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q937617" start="5222" end="5242" title="Thirty-nine Articles" label="Thirty-nine Articles"/>
<link wikidata="Q18813" start="5788" end="5801" title="New Testament" label="New Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q187916" start="5847" end="5859" title="horse racing" label="horse racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q104860525" start="5875" end="5889" title="Horse racing colours in Great Britain" label="racing colours"/>
<link wikidata="Q54445" start="5936" end="5965" title="Grafton County, New Hampshire" label="Grafton County, New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025587" start="6031" end="6038" title="Grafton, New South Wales" label="Grafton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2411279" start="6080" end="6097" title="Grafton, New York" label="Grafton, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q12833382" start="6131" end="6148" title="Grafton, Virginia" label="Grafton, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433349" start="6199" end="6221" title="Grafton, West Virginia" label="Grafton, West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q15207386" start="6328" end="6340" title="Cape Grafton" label="Cape Grafton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396047" start="6344" end="6364" title="Far North Queensland" label="Far North Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7324" start="6399" end="6409" title="James Cook" label="James Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q3178839" start="6421" end="6446" title="First voyage of James Cook" label="first voyage of discovery"/>
<link wikidata="Q21061672" start="6532" end="6541" title="List of prime ministers of the United Kingdom by age" label="totalling"/>
<link wikidata="Q18559692" start="6587" end="6608" title="The Hon. Anne Liddell" label="The Hon. Anne Liddell"/>
<link wikidata="Q15070067" start="6622" end="6658" title="Henry Liddell, 1st Baron Ravensworth" label="Henry Liddell, 1st Baron Ravensworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3081687" start="6795" end="6839" title="Francis Seymour-Conway, 1st Marquess of Hertford" label="Francis Seymour-Conway, 1st Earl of Hertford"/>
<link wikidata="Q6258418" start="6946" end="6956" title="John Smyth (1748–1811)" label="John Smyth"/>
<link wikidata="Q338013" start="7010" end="7051" title="George Henry FitzRoy, 4th Duke of Grafton" label="George Henry FitzRoy, 4th Duke of Grafton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6679043" start="7074" end="7094" title="Lord Charles FitzRoy (British Army officer)" label="Lord Charles FitzRoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q560595" start="7340" end="7359" title="Charles Augustus FitzRoy" label="Sir Charles FitzRoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224" start="7385" end="7400" title="New South Wales" label="New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q213756" start="7406" end="7420" title="Robert FitzRoy" label="Robert FitzRoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q18526498" start="7540" end="7553" title="Anne Parsons" label="Nancy Parsons"/>
<link wikidata="Q284378" start="7645" end="7665" title="in flagrante delicto" label="in flagrante delicto"/>
<link wikidata="Q6233284" start="7799" end="7819" title="John FitzPatrick, 2nd Earl of Upper Ossory" label="Earl of Upper Ossory"/>
<link wikidata="Q17391647" start="7950" end="7970" title="Elizabeth Wrottesley" label="Elizabeth Wrottesley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7528686" start="8017" end="8048" title="Sir Richard Wrottesley, 7th Baronet" label="Reverend Sir Richard Wrottesley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5246673" start="8050" end="8067" title="Dean of Worcester" label="Dean of Worcester"/>
<link wikidata="Q461429" start="8265" end="8300" title="Daisy Greville, Countess of Warwick" label="Daisy Greville, Countess of Warwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q9287829" start="8542" end="8561" title="1st Baron Churchill" label="1st Baron Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q132851" start="8585" end="8592" title="Admiral" label="Admiral"/>
<link wikidata="Q16230330" start="8593" end="8613" title="Lord William FitzRoy" label="Lord William FitzRoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q15072593" start="8724" end="8748" title="Lord John Edward FitzRoy" label="Lord John Edward FitzRoy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8922" end="8955" title="William FitzRoy (1773–1837)" label="Lt. Gen. The Hon. William FitzRoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4297250" start="8980" end="9001" title="Charles FitzRoy, 1st Baron Southampton" label="1st Baron Southampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q128995" start="9211" end="9223" title="Anthony Eden" label="Anthony Eden"/>
<link wikidata="Q104190" start="9293" end="9307" title="Robert Walpole" label="Robert Walpole"/>
<link wikidata="Q180589" start="9421" end="9434" title="Boris Johnson" label="Boris Johnson"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="308999" wikidata="Q1193453" url="?curid=308999" title="V/STOL">
<text>A vertical and/or short take-off and landing (V/STOL) aircraft is an airplane able to take-off or land vertically or on short runways. Vertical takeoff and landing (VTOL) aircraft are a subset of V/STOL craft that do not require runways at all. Generally, a V/STOL aircraft needs to be able to hover. Helicopters are not considered under the V/STOL classification as the classification is only used for aeroplanes, aircraft that achieve lift (force) in forward flight by planing the air, thereby achieving speed and fuel efficiency that is typically greater than the capability of helicopters.

Most V/STOL aircraft types were experiments or outright failures from the 1950s to 1970s. V/STOL aircraft types that have been produced in large numbers include the F-35B Lightning II, Harrier and V-22 Osprey.

A rolling takeoff, sometimes with a ramp (ski-jump), reduces the amount of thrust required to lift an aircraft from the ground (compared with vertical takeoff), and hence increases the payload and range that can be achieved for a given thrust. For instance, the Harrier is incapable of taking off vertically with full weapons and fuel load. Hence V/STOL aircraft generally use a runway if it is available. I.e. short takeoff and vertical landing (STOVL) or conventional takeoff and landing (CTOL) operation is preferred to VTOL operation.

V/STOL was developed to allow fast jets to be operated from clearings in forests, from very short runways, and from small aircraft carriers that would previously only have been able to carry helicopters.

The main advantage of V/STOL aircraft is closer basing to the enemy, which reduces response time and tanker support requirements. In the case of the Falklands War, it also permitted high-performance fighter air cover and ground attack without a large aircraft carrier equipped with aircraft catapult.

==Lists of V/STOL aircraft==

This is a partial list; there have been many designs for V/STOL aircraft.

===Vectored thrust===
* Hawker P.1127/Kestrel/Harrier; four rotating nozzles for vectored thrust of fan and jet exhaust.

===Tilt-jet===
* Bell XF-109
* Bell 65
* EWR VJ 101

===Tilt-rotor===
* AgustaWestland AW609 (originally Bell 609)
* AgustaWestland Project Zero technology demonstrator
* Bell XV-3
* Bell XV-15
* Bell-Boeing V-22 Osprey (scale up of XV-15)
* Bell V-280 Valor

===Tilt-wing===
* Curtiss-Wright X-19 – four rotating propellers, tilt-wing.
* Canadair CL-84 Dynavert, two turboprop tilt-wing 
* LTV XC-142 four-engine tilt-wing cross-shafted turboprop
* Bell X-22 rotating ducted propellers. Small transport prototype. Slightly smaller than V-22 Osprey.
* Hiller X-18

===Separate thrust and lift===
* Dornier Do 31 Jet transport with podded vector nozzles and lift engines
* Kamov Ka-22
* Lockheed XV-4 Hummingbird
* Dassault Balzac V (V stands for vertical and is a modified Mirage III)
* Dassault Mirage IIIV the first VTOL capable of supersonic flight (Mach 2.03 during tests)
* Fokker/Republic D-24 Alliance
* Ryan XV-5. Fans in wings driven by engine exhaust gas.
* VFW VAK 191B Attack fighter similar to Harrier but supersonic dash speed, smaller wings and lift engines. Flown, but not operational.
* Yakovlev Yak-38
* Yakovlev Yak-141
* Short SC.1

===Supersonic===
Although many aircraft have been proposed and built, with a few being tested, the F-35B is the first and only supersonic V/STOL aircraft to have reached operational service, having entered service in 2016.
* Bell D-188A Mach 2 swivelling engines, mockup stage
* EWR VJ 101 Mach 2 fighter, flown to Mach 1.04 but not operational
* Dassault Mirage IIIV Delta wing Mach 2 fighter with lift engines, first VTOL capable of supersonic and Mach 2 flight (Mach 2.03 during tests), not operational
* Hawker Siddeley HS 138 Strike fighter with lift fans, It was not completed
* Hawker Siddeley P.1017 Lift engines with thrust vectoring. It was not completed 
* Hawker Siddeley P.1154 M1.7 Supersonic Harrier. It was not completed 
* Hawker Siddeley P.1184-16 Dash 18
* Hawker Siddeley P.1217
* Republic AP-100 strike fighter concept
* Convair Model 200 Lift engines plus swivel tailpipe, not built
* Rockwell XFV-12 Built with complex &quot;window blind&quot; wings but could not lift its own weight
* Yakovlev Yak-141 Lift engines plus swivel tailpipe
* Lockheed Martin X-35B / F-35B uses a vectored-thrust tailpipe (the Pratt &amp; Whitney F135) plus a shaft-driven lifting fan. It is the first aircraft capable of demonstrating transition from short take-off to supersonic flight to vertical landing on the same sortie.

==References==
==External links==
* V/STOL Wheel of Misfortune</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1193453" start="2" end="44" title="V/STOL" label="vertical and/or short take-off and landing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193453" start="46" end="52" title="V/STOL" label="V/STOL"/>
<link wikidata="Q197" start="69" end="77" title="airplane" label="airplane"/>
<link wikidata="Q20046585" start="86" end="102" title="takeoff and landing" label="take-off or land"/>
<link wikidata="Q320599" start="135" end="163" title="VTOL" label="Vertical takeoff and landing"/>
<link wikidata="Q194433" start="437" end="449" title="lift (force)" label="lift (force)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5042317" start="516" end="531" title="fuel efficiency" label="fuel efficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q29261" start="760" end="778" title="F-35B Lightning II" label="F-35B Lightning II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1212003" start="780" end="787" title="Harrier jump jet" label="Harrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q217935" start="792" end="803" title="V-22 Osprey" label="V-22 Osprey"/>
<link wikidata="Q27960872" start="848" end="856" title="Aircraft ski-jump" label="ski-jump"/>
<link wikidata="Q427062" start="1253" end="1258" title="STOVL" label="STOVL"/>
<link wikidata="Q856797" start="1297" end="1301" title="CTOL" label="CTOL"/>
<link wikidata="Q320599" start="1329" end="1333" title="VTOL" label="VTOL"/>
<link wikidata="Q17205" start="1468" end="1484" title="aircraft carrier" label="aircraft carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q34486" start="1537" end="1547" title="helicopter" label="helicopter"/>
<link wikidata="Q48249" start="1700" end="1713" title="Falklands War" label="Falklands War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031873" start="1833" end="1850" title="aircraft catapult" label="aircraft catapult"/>
<link wikidata="Q1591690" start="1982" end="2003" title="Hawker P.1127" label="Hawker P.1127/Kestrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1212003" start="2004" end="2011" title="Harrier jump jet" label="Harrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q4385116" start="2097" end="2108" title="Bell XF-109" label="Bell XF-109"/>
<link wikidata="Q4883209" start="2111" end="2118" title="Bell 65" label="Bell 65"/>
<link wikidata="Q539831" start="2121" end="2131" title="EWR VJ 101" label="EWR VJ 101"/>
<link wikidata="Q398925" start="2152" end="2172" title="AgustaWestland AW609" label="AgustaWestland AW609"/>
<link wikidata="Q13507141" start="2197" end="2224" title="AgustaWestland Project Zero" label="AgustaWestland Project Zero"/>
<link wikidata="Q390404" start="2251" end="2260" title="Bell XV-3" label="Bell XV-3"/>
<link wikidata="Q815751" start="2263" end="2273" title="Bell XV-15" label="Bell XV-15"/>
<link wikidata="Q217935" start="2276" end="2299" title="Bell-Boeing V-22 Osprey" label="Bell-Boeing V-22 Osprey"/>
<link wikidata="Q14087435" start="2322" end="2338" title="Bell V-280 Valor" label="Bell V-280 Valor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145680" start="2358" end="2377" title="Curtiss-Wright X-19" label="Curtiss-Wright X-19"/>
<link wikidata="Q914041" start="2419" end="2442" title="Canadair CL-84 Dynavert" label="Canadair CL-84 Dynavert"/>
<link wikidata="Q309027" start="2448" end="2457" title="turboprop" label="turboprop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456245" start="2471" end="2481" title="LTV XC-142" label="LTV XC-142"/>
<link wikidata="Q309027" start="2518" end="2527" title="turboprop" label="turboprop"/>
<link wikidata="Q815746" start="2530" end="2539" title="Bell X-22" label="Bell X-22"/>
<link wikidata="Q999581" start="2632" end="2643" title="Hiller X-18" label="Hiller X-18"/>
<link wikidata="Q1245869" start="2678" end="2691" title="Dornier Do 31" label="Dornier Do 31"/>
<link wikidata="Q1723250" start="2752" end="2763" title="Kamov Ka-22" label="Kamov Ka-22"/>
<link wikidata="Q1867610" start="2766" end="2791" title="Lockheed XV-4 Hummingbird" label="Lockheed XV-4 Hummingbird"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781734" start="2794" end="2811" title="Dassault Balzac V" label="Dassault Balzac V"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172017" start="2867" end="2887" title="Dassault Mirage IIIV" label="Dassault Mirage IIIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q113696465" start="2959" end="2988" title="Fokker/Republic D-24 Alliance" label="Fokker/Republic D-24 Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390439" start="2996" end="3000" title="XV-5 Vertifan" label="XV-5"/>
<link wikidata="Q2301674" start="3048" end="3060" title="VFW VAK 191B" label="VFW VAK 191B"/>
<link wikidata="Q505643" start="3184" end="3199" title="Yakovlev Yak-38" label="Yakovlev Yak-38"/>
<link wikidata="Q430766" start="3202" end="3218" title="Yakovlev Yak-141" label="Yakovlev Yak-141"/>
<link wikidata="Q2279965" start="3221" end="3231" title="Short SC.1" label="Short SC.1"/>
<link wikidata="Q4385116" start="3458" end="3469" title="Bell D-188A" label="Bell D-188A"/>
<link wikidata="Q539831" start="3512" end="3522" title="EWR VJ 101" label="EWR VJ 101"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172017" start="3580" end="3600" title="Dassault Mirage IIIV" label="Dassault Mirage IIIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q124338424" start="3818" end="3840" title="Hawker Siddeley P.1017" label="Hawker Siddeley P.1017"/>
<link wikidata="Q3268199" start="3901" end="3923" title="Hawker Siddeley P.1154" label="Hawker Siddeley P.1154"/>
<link wikidata="Q105081828" start="4034" end="4049" title="Republic AP-100" label="Republic AP-100"/>
<link wikidata="Q65233110" start="4075" end="4092" title="Convair Model 200" label="Convair Model 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q962286" start="4140" end="4155" title="Rockwell XFV-12" label="Rockwell XFV-12"/>
<link wikidata="Q430766" start="4242" end="4258" title="Yakovlev Yak-141" label="Yakovlev Yak-141"/>
<link wikidata="Q1867599" start="4295" end="4316" title="Lockheed Martin X-35" label="Lockheed Martin X-35B"/>
<link wikidata="Q29261" start="4319" end="4324" title="Lockheed Martin F-35 Lightning II" label="F-35B"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368421" start="4362" end="4386" title="Pratt &amp;amp; Whitney F135" label="Pratt &amp;amp; Whitney F135"/>
<link wikidata="Q7361327" start="4408" end="4419" title="Rolls-Royce LiftSystem" label="lifting fan"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="309003" wikidata="Q5310099" url="?curid=309003" title="Du Yuming">
<text>Du Yuming (; 28 November 1904 – 7 May 1981) was a Kuomintang field commander. He was a graduate of the first class of Whampoa Academy, took part in Chiang&#x27;s Northern Expedition, and was active in southern China and in the Burma theatre of the Sino-Japanese War. After the Japanese surrendered in 1945, he was an important commander in the Chinese Civil War.

From 1945 to 1947 Du commanded Nationalist forces in Northeast China and won several important battles against Communist forces there, including defeating the Communist general Lin Biao twice at Siping. Despite his successes, Chiang relieved him from command in 1947, after which Communist forces quickly took control of the region.

Du was captured later in the civil war and spent a decade as a prisoner of war. He was released in 1959, and given a position in the Communist government.

Yang Chen-Ning, who won the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1957, was his son-in-law.

==Biography==

===Early military career===
A trusted protégé of Chiang Kai-shek, Du was a graduate of the first cadet class at the Whampoa Military Academy. During the Second Sino-Japanese War, he was the creator and first commander of the 200th Division, China&#x27;s first mechanized division, and later commanded the KMT 5th Army in the First Changsha Campaign, and Battle of South Guangxi.

During World War II, he commanded the same 5th Army of the Nationalist Central Army of the Chinese Expeditionary Force in Burma in the Battle of Yunnan-Burma Road from mid March to early June 1942, during the Burma Campaign under Lieutenant General Joseph Stilwell. When the British Army collapsed and abandoned Burma under Japanese pressure, Du was forced to order a hastily planned withdrawal that resulted in the loss of 50,000 Chinese soldiers. Du fell back to China despite General Sun Li-Jen&#x27;s advice that, because the route back to China was hazardous, he should instead retreat with the British to India. Most of the men who followed Du died in the Burmese jungle of tropical disease and starvation or were killed by Axis forces, while Sun&#x27;s army retreated in an orderly fashion into India. Because he was acting on the orders of Chiang Kai-shek when he withdrew to China, he was not punished for the outcome of the campaign.

===Chinese Civil War===
After the war, Du helped strengthen the Nationalist position in the Southwest by removing Long Yun, the local warlord of Yunnan, in October 1945. Du was then transferred to the Northeast Theatre to consolidate Kuomintang control. After the civil war resumed in 1945, Du was able to win a number of victories.

In November 1945 he retook strategic positions around Shanhaiguan from Communist forces. Later, on November 22, he retook the strategic city of Jinzhou, which forced Communist forces to temporarily abandon any attempts to take major cities in the region and to agree to a temporary ceasefire. Fighting resumed in April 1946, and in May Du defeated Lin Biao in the Battle of Siping. Following the Communist withdrawal he pursued them, capturing Gongzhuling on May 21 and Changchun on May 23. His advance was eventually halted at the south bank of the Songhua River due to concerns about overextending his forces. Du&#x27;s victory in Siping led to a general ceasefire across China brokered by George Marshall, during which Du consolidated his communication and supply lines.

The ceasefire held in Northeast China until January 1947, when Du led the majority of his forces to attack Communist forces on the Korean border in January 1947. When Du led his forces south, Lin Biao ordered 20,000 of his soldiers to cross the Songjiang River, where they staged guerrilla raids, ambushed relief forces, attacked isolated garrisons, and avoided decisive confrontations with strong and well-prepared armies that Du had sent to counterattack them. While the Communists did so they looted large quantities of supplies and destroyed the infrastructure of the KMT-held territories that they passed through, including bridges, railroads, fortifications, electrical lines, and boats. When Du sent forces north, Communist forces in the south advanced and besieged Du&#x27;s forces at Tonghua. When Du sent his forces back south to attack the Communist headquarters at Linjiang, they fell into an ambush and were destroyed. When Du requested reinforcements from Chiang Kai-shek, his request was rejected.

Following his forces&#x27; defeat in the summer of 1947, Du reorganized his forces into six divisions, and focused on the defense of Changchun, Jilin City, Siping (which was already under siege) and West Liaoning, which was necessary to maintain communication with Beiping and Nanjing. By focusing on defense he effectively adopted a reactionary position and lost the initiative of the campaign.

On June 11 Lin&#x27;s forces returned to Siping and began to engage and besiege it. Du&#x27;s commander in the siege of Siping was Chen Mingren, who commanded 29,000 soldiers. Before Lin&#x27;s forces arrived, Chen was able to entrench his forces in strong positions, and the first waves of Communist attackers suffered heavy casualties. The defenders in Siping also benefited from effective air support. The Communists were able to break into the city twice, but were driven back both times with heavy casualties. By mid-June the attackers were beginning to suffer from attrition and exhaustion, and by June 24 Nationalist reinforcements began to arrive from Hebei, and from Du&#x27;s garrisons in other areas. On July 1 the siege was broken and the attackers were ordered to retreat north of the Songjiang river.

The Communists suffered between 13,000 and 40,000 casualties (depending on the source), while the Nationalist garrison at Siping was reduced to slightly over 3,000 men. Nationalist sources also reported that they had captured 94,000 enemy soldiers, and that 143,000 men in Lin&#x27;s army had defected. Communist sources confirm slightly lower rates of desertion, with some divisions reporting a desertion rate of over 20%. Chiang Kai-shek interpreted the battle as decisive victory, but recalled Du from the Northeast and replaced him with Chen Cheng, who was one of Chiang&#x27;s favourite generals. After Du&#x27;s victory at Siping, Chiang may have sent Chen to the Northeast in order for Chen to have what Chiang believed would be the &quot;final blow&quot; against Lin. Shortly after Du was recalled, Lin Biao defeated Chen, taking control of Manchuria in 1948.

When the military situation in Xuzhou got serious, he was extracted from North East China and flown to Xuzhou as Deputy Commander of Xuzhou Bandit Suppression Headquarters to rescue Huang Baitao&#x27;s Army Group. He was unable to do so and he himself was besieged as he attempted to breakout to the Yangtze. After 66 days of intense combat, he was finally defeated and Chiang&#x27;s forces North of the Huai river were completely annihilated.

=== Capture and exoneration ===
After the 1948-49 Battle of Huaihai, Du was taken prisoner and later held in Beijing&#x27;s Gongdelin Re-education prison until 1959 as a war criminal. In 1959, Chairman Mao pardoned and released him along with Wang Yaowu, Song Xilian and several other former ROC Army generals. After his release, he was appointed to the Chinese People’s Political Consultative Conference. He died in May 1981 in Beijing.

==See also==
*Sun Liren
*New 1st Army
*Yang Chen-Ning, once son-in-law of Du

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5310099" start="0" end="9" title="Du Yuming" label="Du Yuming"/>
<link wikidata="Q31113" start="50" end="60" title="Kuomintang" label="Kuomintang"/>
<link wikidata="Q16242140" start="118" end="133" title="Whampoa Academy" label="Whampoa Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073476" start="162" end="181" title="Northern Expedition" label="Northern Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q170314" start="248" end="265" title="Sino-Japanese War (1937-1945)" label="Sino-Japanese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q179975" start="344" end="361" title="Chinese Civil War" label="Chinese Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057925" start="417" end="432" title="Northeast China" label="Northeast China"/>
<link wikidata="Q315475" start="541" end="549" title="Lin Biao" label="Lin Biao"/>
<link wikidata="Q92297" start="559" end="565" title="Siping, Jilin" label="Siping"/>
<link wikidata="Q181369" start="854" end="868" title="Yang Chen-Ning" label="Yang Chen-Ning"/>
<link wikidata="Q16574" start="999" end="1014" title="Chiang Kai-shek" label="Chiang Kai-shek"/>
<link wikidata="Q16242140" start="1066" end="1090" title="Whampoa Military Academy" label="Whampoa Military Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q170314" start="1103" end="1127" title="Second Sino-Japanese War" label="Second Sino-Japanese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2814448" start="1175" end="1189" title="200th Division (National Revolutionary Army)" label="200th Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q31113" start="1255" end="1258" title="Kuomintang" label="KMT"/>
<link wikidata="Q709333" start="1275" end="1298" title="Battle of Changsha (1939)" label="First Changsha Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q709704" start="1304" end="1327" title="Battle of South Guangxi" label="Battle of South Guangxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5100448" start="1421" end="1457" title="Chinese Expeditionary Force in Burma" label="Chinese Expeditionary Force in Burma"/>
<link wikidata="Q10396694" start="1465" end="1492" title="Battle of Yunnan-Burma Road" label="Battle of Yunnan-Burma Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q221519" start="1539" end="1553" title="Burma Campaign" label="Burma Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q346551" start="1579" end="1594" title="Joseph Stilwell" label="Joseph Stilwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q222595" start="1605" end="1617" title="British Army" label="British Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q711110" start="1817" end="1827" title="Sun Li-Jen" label="Sun Li-Jen"/>
<link wikidata="Q281514" start="2389" end="2397" title="Long Yun" label="Long Yun"/>
<link wikidata="Q43194" start="2420" end="2426" title="Yunnan" label="Yunnan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057925" start="2476" end="2485" title="Northeast China" label="Northeast"/>
<link wikidata="Q179975" start="2539" end="2548" title="Chinese Civil War" label="civil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048381" start="2663" end="2674" title="Shanhai Pass" label="Shanhaiguan"/>
<link wikidata="Q28996" start="2753" end="2760" title="Jinzhou" label="Jinzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q315475" start="2957" end="2965" title="Lin Biao" label="Lin Biao"/>
<link wikidata="Q5027847" start="2973" end="2989" title="Campaign to Defend Siping" label="Battle of Siping"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207108" start="3053" end="3064" title="Gongzhuling" label="Gongzhuling"/>
<link wikidata="Q92161" start="3079" end="3088" title="Changchun" label="Changchun"/>
<link wikidata="Q210326" start="3159" end="3172" title="Songhua River" label="Songhua River"/>
<link wikidata="Q151414" start="3301" end="3316" title="George Marshall" label="George Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q92324" start="4177" end="4184" title="Tonghua" label="Tonghua"/>
<link wikidata="Q594843" start="4261" end="4269" title="Linjiang" label="Linjiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q16574" start="4354" end="4369" title="Chiang Kai-shek" label="Chiang Kai-shek"/>
<link wikidata="Q92161" start="4531" end="4540" title="Changchun" label="Changchun"/>
<link wikidata="Q92277" start="4542" end="4552" title="Jilin City" label="Jilin City"/>
<link wikidata="Q92297" start="4554" end="4560" title="Siping, Jilin" label="Siping"/>
<link wikidata="Q43934" start="4602" end="4610" title="Liaoning" label="Liaoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q6961622" start="4663" end="4670" title="Beiping" label="Beiping"/>
<link wikidata="Q16666" start="4675" end="4682" title="Nanjing" label="Nanjing"/>
<link wikidata="Q92297" start="4836" end="4842" title="Siping, Jilin" label="Siping"/>
<link wikidata="Q8272159" start="4926" end="4938" title="Chen Mingren" label="Chen Mingren"/>
<link wikidata="Q21208" start="5455" end="5460" title="Hebei" label="Hebei"/>
<link wikidata="Q701313" start="6152" end="6162" title="Chen Cheng" label="Chen Cheng"/>
<link wikidata="Q372153" start="6975" end="6992" title="Battle of Huai-Hai" label="Battle of Huaihai"/>
<link wikidata="Q708390" start="7168" end="7178" title="Wang Yaowu" label="Wang Yaowu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7561062" start="7180" end="7191" title="Song Xilian" label="Song Xilian"/>
<link wikidata="Q19215" start="7279" end="7329" title="Chinese People’s Political Consultative Conference" label="Chinese People’s Political Consultative Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q711110" start="7378" end="7387" title="Sun Liren" label="Sun Liren"/>
<link wikidata="Q7005172" start="7389" end="7401" title="New 1st Army" label="New 1st Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q181369" start="7403" end="7417" title="Yang Chen-Ning" label="Yang Chen-Ning"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="309006" wikidata="Q701453" url="?curid=309006" title="Nie Rongzhen">
<text>Nie Rongzhen (; December 29, 1899 – May 14, 1992) was a Marshal of the People&#x27;s Republic of China. He died as the last People&#x27;s Liberation Army (PLA) marshal.

==Biography==
Nie was born in Jiangjin County in Sichuan (now part of Chongqing municipality), the cosmopolitan and well-educated son of a wealthy family. In his 20s, Nie applied to the &quot;Université du Travail&quot; (University of Labour) in Charleroi, Belgium, with a scholarship from the Socialist Party, and was thus able to study science in Charleroi.

=== Political leanings ===
Zhou Enlai spent a night in Charleroi and met with Nie. Nie agreed to join the group of Chinese students in France on a work-study program, in which he studied engineering and became a protégé of Zhou Enlai. He joined the Chinese Communist Party in 1923.

A graduate of the Soviet Red Army Military College and Whampoa Academy, Nie spent his early career first as a political officer in Whampoa&#x27;s Political Department, where Zhou served as the Deputy Director, and in the Chinese Red Army.

=== World War II ===

During the Second Sino-Japanese War, he was first assigned as the deputy division commander of the 115th division of the Eighth Route Army, with the commander being Lin Biao, and in the late 1930s he was given a field command close to Yan Xishan&#x27;s Shanxi stronghold. This assignment was one of the 8th Route Army&#x27;s first moves was to build guerrilla bases. A unit of 2,000 troops from the 115th Division under General Nieh Jung-chen moved to Wutai Mountain to establish what was to be called the Chin-Ch&#x27;a-Chi Border Region.

=== Civil War ===
In the Chinese Civil War he commanded the Northern China Military Region, and with his deputy Xu Xiangqian, his force defeated Fu Zuoyi&#x27;s forces in Tianjin near Beijing in the Pingjin campaign alongside Lin Biao and Luo Ronghuan. During the Korean War, Nie took part in high level command decision making, military operations planning, and shared responsibility for war mobilization. Nie was promoted to marshal in 1955 and later ran the Chinese nuclear weapons program.

He established the Bayi School in 1947.

===Chinese nuclear programme===

By spring 1969, &quot;The whole Chinese nuclear weapons program [was] under the authority of Nieh Jung-chen [Rongzhen], the head of the Seventh Ministry for Machine Building.&quot;

=== Cultural Revolution ===
He played a complex role during the Cultural Revolution. He was variously accused of factionalism by opponents and engaged in political maneuvering to preserve his role as director of China&#x27;s military technological commission. He later served as vice chairman of the Central Military Committee, which controlled the nation&#x27;s armed forces, and also became the vice chairman of the National People&#x27;s Congress. He retired in 1987 and died in Beijing.

===Personal life===
Nie had a daughter with Zhang Ruihua (张瑞华) in 1930, named Nie Li. Li and Zhang Ruihua were imprisoned by the Kuomintang in 1934 and reunited with Nie in 1945. Nie Li was the first woman to be a lieutenant general in the PLA.

== See also ==
* List of officers of the People&#x27;s Liberation Army
* Historical Museum of French-Chinese Friendship

== References ==
=== Citations ===
=== Sources ===

* People&#x27;s Daily article
* Long March leaders
* US Naval War College
&#x27;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q701453" start="0" end="12" title="Nie Rongzhen" label="Nie Rongzhen"/>
<link wikidata="Q55738576" start="56" end="63" title="Marshal of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="Marshal"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="71" end="102" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q200106" start="124" end="153" title="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army" label="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q201723" start="200" end="215" title="Jiangjin District" label="Jiangjin County"/>
<link wikidata="Q19770" start="219" end="226" title="Sichuan" label="Sichuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q11725" start="240" end="249" title="Chongqing" label="Chongqing"/>
<link wikidata="Q81046" start="416" end="425" title="Charleroi" label="Charleroi"/>
<link wikidata="Q17410" start="558" end="568" title="Zhou Enlai" label="Zhou Enlai"/>
<link wikidata="Q11023" start="718" end="729" title="engineering" label="engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q17427" start="780" end="803" title="Chinese Communist Party" label="Chinese Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="832" end="864" title="Soviet Red Army Military College" label="Soviet Red Army Military College"/>
<link wikidata="Q16242140" start="869" end="884" title="Whampoa Academy" label="Whampoa Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q200106" start="1043" end="1051" title="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army" label="Red Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q170314" start="1087" end="1111" title="Second Sino-Japanese War" label="Second Sino-Japanese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q712870" start="1197" end="1214" title="Eighth Route Army" label="Eighth Route Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q315475" start="1241" end="1249" title="Lin Biao" label="Lin Biao"/>
<link wikidata="Q699698" start="1311" end="1321" title="Yan Xishan" label="Yan Xishan"/>
<link wikidata="Q46913" start="1329" end="1335" title="Shanxi" label="Shanxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q179975" start="1642" end="1659" title="Chinese Civil War" label="Chinese Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q702194" start="1729" end="1741" title="Xu Xiangqian" label="Xu Xiangqian"/>
<link wikidata="Q717501" start="1762" end="1770" title="Fu Zuoyi" label="Fu Zuoyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q11736" start="1788" end="1795" title="Tianjin" label="Tianjin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4348111" start="1816" end="1832" title="Pingjin campaign" label="Pingjin campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q8663" start="1881" end="1891" title="Korean War" label="Korean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196651" start="2078" end="2109" title="Chinese nuclear weapons program" label="Chinese nuclear weapons program"/>
<link wikidata="Q20670443" start="2131" end="2142" title="Beijing Bayi School" label="Bayi School"/>
<link wikidata="Q591387" start="2322" end="2359" title="Seventh Ministry for Machine Building" label="Seventh Ministry for Machine Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q8690" start="2432" end="2451" title="Cultural Revolution" label="Cultural Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q8248937" start="2938" end="2944" title="Nie Li" label="Nie Li"/>
<link wikidata="Q31113" start="2989" end="2999" title="Kuomintang" label="Kuomintang"/>
<link wikidata="Q6631588" start="3123" end="3176" title="List of officers of the People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army" label="List of officers of the People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2560511" start="3179" end="3225" title="Historical Museum of French-Chinese Friendship" label="Historical Museum of French-Chinese Friendship"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="309008" wikidata="Q312573" url="?curid=309008" title="William Petty, 2nd Earl of Shelburne">
<text>William Petty Fitzmaurice, 1st Marquess of Lansdowne (2 May 17377 May 1805), known as the Earl of Shelburne between 1761 and 1784, by which title he is generally known to history, was an Anglo-Irish Whig statesman who was the first home secretary in 1782 and then prime minister in 1782–83 during the final months of the American War of Independence. He succeeded in securing peace with America and this feat remains his most notable legacy.

Lord Shelburne was born in Dublin and spent his formative years in Ireland. After attending Oxford University, he served in the British Army during the Seven Years&#x27; War. As a reward for his conduct at the Battle of Kloster Kampen, Shelburne was appointed an aide-de-camp to George III. He became involved in politics, becoming a member of parliament in 1760. After his father&#x27;s death in 1761, he inherited his title and entered the House of Lords.

In 1766, Shelburne was appointed as Southern Secretary, a position which he held for two years. He departed office during the Corsican Crisis and joined the Opposition. Following the fall of the North government, Shelburne joined its replacement under Lord Rockingham. Shelburne was made Prime Minister in 1782 following Rockingham&#x27;s death, with the American War still being fought.

He lost his authority and influence after being driven out of office at the age of 45 in 1783. Shelburne lamented that his career had been a failure, despite the many high offices he held over 17 years, and his undoubted abilities as a debater. He blamed his poor education—although it was as good as that of most peers—and said the real problem was that &quot;it has been my fate through life to fall in with clever but unpopular connections&quot;.

==Early life==
The future Marquess of Lansdowne was born William Fitzmaurice in Dublin, the first son of John Fitzmaurice, who was the second surviving son of the 1st Earl of Kerry. Lord Kerry had married Anne Petty, the daughter of Sir William Petty, Surveyor General of Ireland, whose elder son had been created Baron Shelburne in 1688 and (on the elder son&#x27;s death) whose younger son had been created Baron Shelburne in 1699 and Earl of Shelburne in 1719.

On the younger son&#x27;s death, the Petty estates passed to the aforementioned John Fitzmaurice, who changed his branch of the family&#x27;s surname to &quot;Petty&quot; in place of &quot;Fitzmaurice&quot;, and was created Viscount Fitzmaurice later in 1751 and Earl of Shelburne in 1753 (after which his elder son John was styled Viscount Fitzmaurice). His grandfather, Lord Kerry, died when he was four, but Fitzmaurice grew up with other people&#x27;s grim memories of the old man as a &quot;tyrant&quot;, whose family and servants lived in permanent fear of him.

Fitzmaurice spent his childhood &quot;in the remotest parts of the south of Ireland,&quot; and, according to his own account, when he entered Christ Church, Oxford, in 1755, he had &quot;both everything to learn and everything to unlearn&quot;.

From a tutor whom he describes as &quot;narrow-minded&quot; he received advantageous guidance in his studies, but he attributes his improvement in manners and in knowledge of the world chiefly to the fact that, as was his &quot;fate through life&quot;, he fell in &quot;with clever but unpopular connexions&quot;.

==Military career and election to Parliament==
Shortly after leaving the university, he served in 20th Foot regiment commanded by James Wolfe during the Seven Years&#x27; War. He became friends with his fellow officer Charles Grey, whose career he later assisted. In 1757 he took part in the amphibious Raid on Rochefort which withdrew without making any serious attempt on the town. The following year he was sent to serve in Germany and distinguished himself at Minden and Kloster-Kampen. For his services he was appointed aide-de-camp to the new King, George III, with the rank of colonel.

This brought protests from several members of the cabinet as it meant he was promoted ahead of much more senior officers. In response to the appointment, the Duke of Richmond resigned a post in the royal household. Though he had no active military career after this, his early promotion as colonel meant that he would be further promoted through seniority to major-general in 1765, lieutenant-general in 1772 and general in 1783.

On 2 June 1760, while still abroad, Fitzmaurice had been returned to the British House of Commons as a member for Wycombe. He was re-elected unopposed at the general election of 1761, and was also elected to the Irish House of Commons for County Kerry.

However, on 14 May 1761, before either Parliament met, he succeeded on his father&#x27;s death as the second Earl of Shelburne in the Peerage of Ireland and the second Baron Wycombe in the Peerage of Great Britain. As a result, he lost his seat in both Houses of Commons and moved up to the House of Lords, though he would not take his seat in the Irish House of Lords until April 1764. He was succeeded in Wycombe by one of his supporters Colonel Isaac Barré who had a distinguished war record after serving with James Wolfe in Canada.

==Economics==
Shelburne, who was a descendant of the father of quantitative economics, William Petty, displayed a serious interest in economic reform, and was a proselytizer for free trade. He consulted with numerous English, Scottish, French and American economists and experts. He was on good terms with Benjamin Franklin and David Hume. He met in Paris with leading French economists and intellectuals. By the 1770s Shelburne had become the most prominent British statesman to advocate free trade. Shelburne said his conversion from mercantilism to free trade ultimately derived from long conversations in 1761 with Adam Smith. In 1795 he described this to Dugald Stewart:

Ritcheson is dubious on whether the journey with Smith actually happened, but provides no evidence to the contrary. There is proof that Shelburne did consult with Smith on at least one occasion, and Smith was close to Shelburne&#x27;s father and his brother.

==Early political career==

Shelburne&#x27;s new military role close to the King brought him into communication with Lord Bute, who was the King&#x27;s closest advisor and a senior minister in the government. In 1761 Shelburne was employed by Bute to negotiate for the support of Henry Fox. Fox held the lucrative but unimportant post of Paymaster of the Forces, but commanded large support in the House of Commons and could boost Bute&#x27;s power base. Shelburne was opposed to Pitt, who had resigned from the government in 1761. Under instructions from Shelburne, Barré made a vehement attack on Pitt in the House of Commons.

In 1762 negotiations for a peace agreement went on in London and Paris. Eventually, a deal was agreed but it was heavily criticised for the perceived leniency of its terms as it handed back a number of captured territories to France and Spain. Defending it in the House of Lords, Shelburne observed &quot;the security of the British colonies in North America was the first cause of the war&quot; asserting that security &quot;has been wisely attended to in the negotiations for peace&quot;. Led by Fox, the government was able to push the peace treaty through parliament despite opposition led by Pitt. Shortly afterwards, Bute chose to resign as Prime Minister and retire from politics and was replaced by George Grenville.

Shelburne joined the Grenville ministry in 1763 as First Lord of Trade. By this stage, Shelburne had changed his opinion of Pitt and become an admirer of him. After failing to secure Pitt&#x27;s inclusion in the Cabinet he resigned office after only a few months. Having moreover on account of his support of Pitt on the question of John Wilkes&#x27;s expulsion from the House of Commons incurred the displeasure of the King, he retired for a time to his estate.

===Southern Secretary===
After Pitt&#x27;s return to power in 1766, he became Southern Secretary, but during Pitt&#x27;s illness his conciliatory policy towards America was completely thwarted by his colleagues and the King, and in 1768 he was dismissed from office. During the Corsican Crisis, sparked by the French invasion of Corsica, Shelburne was the major voice in the cabinet who favoured assisting the Corsican Republic. Although secret aid was given to the Corsicans it was decided not to intervene militarily and provoke a war with France, a decision made easier by the departure of the hard-line Shelburne from the cabinet.

In June 1768 the General Court incorporated the district of Shelburne, Massachusetts from the area formerly known as &quot;Deerfield Northeast&quot; and in 1786 the district became a town. The town was named in honour of Lord Shelburne, who, in return sent a church bell, which never reached the town.

===Opposition===
Shelburne went into Opposition where he continued to associate with William Pitt, 1st Earl of Chatham. They were both critical of the policies of the North government in the years leading up to the outbreak of the American War of Independence in 1775. As the war progressed, Shelburne cooperated with the Rockingham Whigs to attack the government of Lord North. After a British army was compelled to surrender at the Battle of Saratoga in 1777, Shelburne joined other leaders of the Opposition to call for a total withdrawal of British troops.

==Prime Minister==

In March 1782, following the downfall of the North ministry, Shelburne agreed to take office under Lord Rockingham on condition that the King would recognise the United States. Following the sudden and unexpected death of Lord Rockingham on 1 July 1782, Shelburne succeeded him as Prime Minister. Shelburne&#x27;s appointment by the King provoked Charles James Fox and his supporters, including Edmund Burke, to resign their posts on 4 July 1782. Burke scathingly compared Shelburne to his predecessor Rockingham. One of the figures brought in as a replacement was the 23-year-old William Pitt, son of Shelburne&#x27;s former political ally, who became Chancellor of the Exchequer. That year, Shelburne was appointed to the Order of the Garter as its 599th Knight.

===Peace negotiations===

Shelburne&#x27;s government continued negotiations begun in early 1782 under Rockingham for peace in Paris, using Richard Oswald as the chief negotiator. Shelburne entertained a French peace envoy Joseph Matthias Gérard de Rayneval at his country estate in Wiltshire, and they discreetly agreed on a number of points which formed a basis for peace. Shelburne&#x27;s own envoys negotiated a separate peace with American commissioners which eventually led to an agreement on American independence and the borders of the newly created United States. Shelburne agreed to generous borders in the Illinois Country, but rejected demands by Benjamin Franklin for the cession of Canada and other territories. Historians have often commented that the treaty was very generous to the United States in terms of greatly enlarged boundaries. Historians such as Alvord, Harlow and Ritcheson have emphasized that British generosity was based on Shelburne&#x27;s statesmanlike vision of close economic ties between Britain and the United States. The concession of the vast trans-Appalachian areas was designed to facilitate the growth of the American population and create lucrative markets for British merchants, without any military or administrative costs to Britain. The point was the United States would become a major trading partner. As the French foreign minister Vergennes later put it, &quot;The English buy peace rather than make it&quot;.

===Downfall===
Fox&#x27;s resignation in 1782 led to the unexpected creation of a coalition led by Fox and Lord North, previously bitter rivals, which soon dominated the Opposition.

In April 1783 the Opposition forced Shelburne&#x27;s resignation, and the new coalition government selected The Duke of Portland as Prime Minister until its fall in December that same year. The Treaty of Paris which formally ended the American Revolutionary War was signed during Portland&#x27;s tenure, but the agreement of peace terms that formed the basis of the treaty was the major achievement of Shelburne&#x27;s time in office.

Shelburn&#x27;s fall was perhaps hastened by his plans for the reform of the public service. He had also in contemplation a Bill to promote free trade between Britain and the United States.

==Later life==
When Pitt became Prime Minister in 1784, Shelburne, instead of receiving a place in the Cabinet, was created Marquess of Lansdowne. Though giving general support to the policy of Pitt, he from this time ceased to take an active part in public affairs. He was elected a Foreign Honorary Member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1803. A personal act, the Marquis of Lansdowne&#x27;s Relief Act 1797 (37 Geo. 3. c. &quot;22&quot; ), relieved him &quot;from disabilities in consequence of his having sat and voted in the House of Lords without having made the necessary oaths and declarations&quot;.

Around 1762, he founded the Boodle&#x27;s Club, which would later have as members Adam Smith, the Duke of Wellington, Sir Winston Churchill, and Ian Fleming, among others, and is now the second oldest club in the world.

==Marriage and issue==
Lord Lansdowne was twice married:

First to Lady Sophia Carteret (26 August 17455 January 1771), daughter of John Carteret, 2nd Earl Granville, through whom he obtained the Lansdowne estates near Bath. They had at least one child:
*John Henry Petty, 2nd Marquess of Lansdowne (6 December 176515 November 1809), sat from 1786 in his father&#x27;s interest House of Commons for Chipping Wycombe. After witnessing revolutionary events in Paris, he began to establish an independent reputation as a critic of the war with France and of the suppression of democratic agitation at home. In Ireland, to which he repaired in 1797, he was suspected by the Dublin Castle administration of being a party to Robert Emmet&#x27;s conspiracy to renew the United Irish rebellion of 1798 with a rising Dublin. He died, without issue, within four years of his father&#x27;s death in 1809, aged 43.

Secondly, to Lady Louisa FitzPatrick (17557 August 1789), daughter of the 1st Earl of Upper Ossory. They had at least one child:
*Henry Petty-Fitzmaurice, 3rd Marquess of Lansdowne (1780–1863), who succeeded his half-brother in the title.
Lord Lansdowne&#x27;s brother, The Hon. Thomas Fitzmaurice (1742–1793) of Cliveden, was also a Member of Parliament.

==Cabinet of Lord Shelburne==

==Ancestry==
== Collections ==
University College London holds over 4000 tracts in its Lansdowne and Halifax tracts collections, the former being named after Petty. The tracts were published in England between 1559 and 1776, and relate to the union between England and Scotland, the Civil War and the Restoration. Many of the tracts were written by Daniel Defoe and Jonathan Swift under pseudonyms.

==See also==
*Lansdowne portrait

==Notes==
==References==

==Literature==
* Cannon, John. &quot;Petty, William, second earl of Shelburne and first marquess of Lansdowne (1737–1805)&quot;, &quot;Oxford Dictionary of National Biography&quot;, (Oxford University Press, 2004); online edn, Sept 2013 accessed 16 Nov 2014 doi:10.1093/ref:odnb/22070
* Fitzmaurice, Edmond. &quot;&quot; Macmillan &amp; Co. (2nd ed., 1912 [1st ed. 1875], reprinted 2006). .
* Fleming, Thomas. &quot;The Perils of Peace: America&#x27;s Struggle for Survival After Yorktown&quot;. First Smithsonian books, 2008.
* Middleton, Charles. &quot;The Bells of Victory: The Pitt-North Ministry and the Conduct of the Seven Years&#x27; War, 1757–1762&quot;. Cambridge University Press, 1985.
* Nelson, Paul David. &quot;Sir Charles Grey, First Earl Grey: Royal Soldier, Family Patriarch&quot;. Associated University Presses, 1996.
* Norris, John. &quot;Shelburne and Reform&quot;. Macmillan, 1963. online
* Ritcheson, Charles R. &quot;The Earl of Shelbourne and Peace with America, 1782–1783: Vision and Reality.&quot; &quot;International History Review&quot; (1983) 5#3 pp: 322–345. online
* Schweizer, Karl W. (ed.) &quot;Lord Bute: Essays in Reinterpritation&quot;. Leicester University Press, 1998.
* Simpson, W. O. &quot;Lord Shelburne and North America.&quot; &quot;History Today&quot; (Jan 1960) 19#1 pp 52–62.

==External links==
*More about William Petty, Earl of Shelburne on the Downing Street website.
*William Petty, 1st Marquis of Lansdowne, 2nd Earl of Shelburne papers, William L. Clements Library, University of Michigan.
*Lansdowne and Halifax Tracts at University College London</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q312573" start="0" end="52" title="William Petty, 2nd Earl of Shelburne" label="William Petty Fitzmaurice, 1st Marquess of Lansdowne"/>
<link wikidata="Q312573" start="90" end="107" title="William Petty, 2nd Earl of Shelburne" label="Earl of Shelburne"/>
<link wikidata="Q108700" start="199" end="203" title="Whig (British political party)" label="Whig"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484309" start="232" end="246" title="home secretary" label="home secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q14211" start="264" end="278" title="Prime Minister of the United Kingdom" label="prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="321" end="349" title="American War of Independence" label="American War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="470" end="476" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="535" end="552" title="Oxford University" label="Oxford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q33143" start="595" end="616" title="Seven Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Seven Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q573963" start="653" end="677" title="Battle of Kloster Kampen" label="Battle of Kloster Kampen"/>
<link wikidata="Q369894" start="706" end="718" title="aide-de-camp" label="aide-de-camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q127318" start="722" end="732" title="George III" label="George III"/>
<link wikidata="Q11007" start="885" end="899" title="House of Lords" label="House of Lords"/>
<link wikidata="Q3954357" start="938" end="956" title="Southern Secretary" label="Southern Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q5173165" start="1028" end="1043" title="Corsican Crisis" label="Corsican Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7056125" start="1097" end="1113" title="North ministry" label="North government"/>
<link wikidata="Q378043" start="1154" end="1169" title="Charles Watson-Wentworth, 2nd Marquess of Rockingham" label="Lord Rockingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="1822" end="1828" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6252711" start="1847" end="1863" title="John Petty, 1st Earl of Shelburne" label="John Fitzmaurice"/>
<link wikidata="Q7789618" start="1905" end="1922" title="Thomas Fitzmaurice, 1st Earl of Kerry" label="1st Earl of Kerry"/>
<link wikidata="Q278699" start="1979" end="1992" title="William Petty" label="William Petty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7647116" start="1994" end="2021" title="Surveyor General of Ireland" label="Surveyor General of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q745967" start="2918" end="2939" title="Christ Church, Oxford" label="Christ Church, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q901222" start="3029" end="3034" title="tutor" label="tutor"/>
<link wikidata="Q81925" start="3435" end="3444" title="20th Foot" label="20th Foot"/>
<link wikidata="Q379812" start="3467" end="3478" title="James Wolfe" label="James Wolfe"/>
<link wikidata="Q33143" start="3490" end="3511" title="Seven Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Seven Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q320300" start="3555" end="3567" title="Charles Grey, 1st Earl Grey" label="Charles Grey"/>
<link wikidata="Q348120" start="3629" end="3639" title="Amphibious warfare" label="amphibious"/>
<link wikidata="Q3417631" start="3640" end="3657" title="Raid on Rochefort" label="Raid on Rochefort"/>
<link wikidata="Q683044" start="3801" end="3807" title="Battle of Minden" label="Minden"/>
<link wikidata="Q573963" start="3812" end="3826" title="Battle of Kloster-Kampen" label="Kloster-Kampen"/>
<link wikidata="Q369894" start="3862" end="3874" title="aide-de-camp" label="aide-de-camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q127318" start="3892" end="3902" title="George III of the United Kingdom" label="George III"/>
<link wikidata="Q12799162" start="3921" end="3928" title="Colonel (United Kingdom)" label="colonel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065334" start="4089" end="4105" title="Charles Lennox, 3rd Duke of Richmond" label="Duke of Richmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q287709" start="4290" end="4303" title="major-general (British Army)" label="major-general"/>
<link wikidata="Q6544390" start="4313" end="4331" title="lieutenant-general (British Army)" label="lieutenant-general"/>
<link wikidata="Q5531654" start="4344" end="4351" title="general (British Army)" label="general"/>
<link wikidata="Q11005" start="4435" end="4459" title="British House of Commons" label="British House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q750841" start="4476" end="4483" title="Wycombe (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Wycombe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4971364" start="4520" end="4544" title="1761 British general election" label="general election of 1761"/>
<link wikidata="Q2948400" start="4574" end="4596" title="Irish House of Commons" label="Irish House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q6394445" start="4601" end="4613" title="County Kerry (Parliament of Ireland constituency)" label="County Kerry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1859616" start="4750" end="4768" title="Peerage of Ireland" label="Peerage of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375309" start="4805" end="4829" title="Peerage of Great Britain" label="Peerage of Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522992" start="4964" end="4984" title="Irish House of Lords" label="Irish House of Lords"/>
<link wikidata="Q6076021" start="5064" end="5075" title="Isaac Barré" label="Isaac Barré"/>
<link wikidata="Q379812" start="5130" end="5141" title="James Wolfe" label="James Wolfe"/>
<link wikidata="Q278699" start="5241" end="5254" title="William Petty" label="William Petty"/>
<link wikidata="Q6839494" start="5288" end="5303" title="economic reform" label="economic reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q200435" start="5332" end="5342" title="free trade" label="free trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q34969" start="5460" end="5477" title="Benjamin Franklin" label="Benjamin Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q37160" start="5482" end="5492" title="David Hume" label="David Hume"/>
<link wikidata="Q162527" start="5690" end="5702" title="mercantilism" label="mercantilism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9381" start="5773" end="5783" title="Adam Smith" label="Adam Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q218254" start="5814" end="5828" title="Dugald Stewart" label="Dugald Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q294651" start="6208" end="6217" title="John Stuart, 3rd Earl of Bute" label="Lord Bute"/>
<link wikidata="Q3289825" start="6371" end="6380" title="Henry Fox, 1st Baron Holland" label="Henry Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q7156775" start="6429" end="6452" title="Paymaster of the Forces" label="Paymaster of the Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q244616" start="7428" end="7444" title="George Grenville" label="George Grenville"/>
<link wikidata="Q244616" start="7468" end="7477" title="George Grenville" label="Grenville"/>
<link wikidata="Q27037814" start="7498" end="7517" title="President of the Board of Trade" label="First Lord of Trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q333127" start="7780" end="7791" title="John Wilkes" label="John Wilkes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3954357" start="7989" end="8007" title="Secretary of State for the Southern Department" label="Southern Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q5173165" start="8189" end="8204" title="Corsican Crisis" label="Corsican Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q16931155" start="8221" end="8247" title="French Conquest of Corsica" label="French invasion of Corsica"/>
<link wikidata="Q71234" start="8321" end="8338" title="Corsican Republic" label="Corsican Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2416708" start="8607" end="8631" title="Shelburne, Massachusetts" label="Shelburne, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q3500690" start="8806" end="8817" title="church bell" label="church bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q208663" start="8935" end="8968" title="William Pitt, 1st Earl of Chatham" label="William Pitt, 1st Earl of Chatham"/>
<link wikidata="Q7056125" start="9017" end="9033" title="North Ministry" label="North government"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="9081" end="9109" title="American War of Independence" label="American War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q7355405" start="9172" end="9188" title="Rockingham Whigs" label="Rockingham Whigs"/>
<link wikidata="Q846674" start="9284" end="9302" title="Battle of Saratoga" label="Battle of Saratoga"/>
<link wikidata="Q7056125" start="9477" end="9491" title="North ministry" label="North ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q378043" start="9531" end="9546" title="Charles Watson-Wentworth, 2nd Marquess of Rockingham" label="Lord Rockingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q438131" start="9779" end="9796" title="Charles James Fox" label="Charles James Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q165792" start="9827" end="9839" title="Edmund Burke" label="Edmund Burke"/>
<link wikidata="Q128902" start="10013" end="10025" title="William Pitt the Younger" label="William Pitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q531471" start="10085" end="10112" title="Chancellor of the Exchequer" label="Chancellor of the Exchequer"/>
<link wikidata="Q215248" start="10156" end="10175" title="Order of the Garter" label="Order of the Garter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7328204" start="10338" end="10352" title="Richard Oswald (merchant)" label="Richard Oswald"/>
<link wikidata="Q3298580" start="10421" end="10455" title="Joseph Matthias Gérard de Rayneval" label="Joseph Matthias Gérard de Rayneval"/>
<link wikidata="Q2554770" start="10815" end="10831" title="Illinois Country" label="Illinois Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q34969" start="10857" end="10874" title="Benjamin Franklin" label="Benjamin Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q726681" start="11579" end="11588" title="Charles Gravier, comte de Vergennes" label="Vergennes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5477357" start="11739" end="11750" title="Fox-North Coalition" label="a coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q312593" start="11766" end="11776" title="Frederick North, Lord North" label="Lord North"/>
<link wikidata="Q157208" start="11950" end="11970" title="William Cavendish-Bentinck, 3rd Duke of Portland" label="The Duke of Portland"/>
<link wikidata="Q14211" start="11974" end="11988" title="Prime Minister of Great Britain" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q217450" start="12036" end="12051" title="Treaty of Paris (1783)" label="Treaty of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q2974879" start="12355" end="12369" title="Civil Service (United Kingdom)" label="public service"/>
<link wikidata="Q128902" start="12489" end="12493" title="William Pitt the Younger" label="Pitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q463303" start="12784" end="12821" title="American Academy of Arts and Sciences" label="American Academy of Arts and Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q6664265" start="12833" end="12845" title="Local and personal acts of Parliament (United Kingdom)" label="personal act"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12851" end="12894" title="Marquis of Lansdowne&amp;#x27;s Relief Act 1797" label="Marquis of Lansdowne&amp;#x27;s Relief Act 1797"/>
<link wikidata="Q131378483" start="12896" end="12905" title="37 Geo. 3" label="37 Geo. 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q11007" start="13015" end="13029" title="House of Lords" label="House of Lords"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13050" end="13086" title="Oath of Allegiance (United Kingdom)#Origins" label="the necessary oaths and declarations"/>
<link wikidata="Q14996889" start="13123" end="13141" title="Boodle&amp;#x27;s" label="Boodle&amp;#x27;s Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q9381" start="13177" end="13187" title="Adam Smith" label="Adam Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q131691" start="13193" end="13211" title="Duke of Wellington" label="Duke of Wellington"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="13217" end="13234" title="Winston Churchill" label="Winston Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q82104" start="13240" end="13251" title="Ian Fleming" label="Ian Fleming"/>
<link wikidata="Q335274" start="13448" end="13481" title="John Carteret, 2nd Earl Granville" label="John Carteret, 2nd Earl Granville"/>
<link wikidata="Q22889" start="13535" end="13539" title="Bath, Somerset" label="Bath"/>
<link wikidata="Q923438" start="13571" end="13614" title="John Petty, 2nd Marquess of Lansdowne" label="John Henry Petty, 2nd Marquess of Lansdowne"/>
<link wikidata="Q5310838" start="13986" end="14014" title="Dublin Castle administration" label="Dublin Castle administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q558750" start="14035" end="14047" title="Robert Emmet" label="Robert Emmet"/>
<link wikidata="Q944941" start="14079" end="14109" title="Irish Rebellion of 1798" label="United Irish rebellion of 1798"/>
<link wikidata="Q46123262" start="14233" end="14256" title="Louisa Petty, Marchioness of Lansdowne" label="Lady Louisa FitzPatrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q6233282" start="14294" end="14318" title="John FitzPatrick, 1st Earl of Upper Ossory" label="1st Earl of Upper Ossory"/>
<link wikidata="Q332639" start="14350" end="14400" title="Henry Petty-Fitzmaurice, 3rd Marquess of Lansdowne" label="Henry Petty-Fitzmaurice, 3rd Marquess of Lansdowne"/>
<link wikidata="Q7789619" start="14490" end="14517" title="Thomas Fitzmaurice (MP)" label="The Hon. Thomas Fitzmaurice"/>
<link wikidata="Q2464716" start="14533" end="14541" title="Cliveden" label="Cliveden"/>
<link wikidata="Q486839" start="14554" end="14574" title="Member of Parliament" label="Member of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q193196" start="14639" end="14664" title="University College London" label="University College London"/>
<link wikidata="Q3250561" start="14681" end="14687" title="Tract (literature)" label="tracts"/>
<link wikidata="Q682403" start="14851" end="14885" title="Treaty of Union" label="union between England and Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q80330" start="14891" end="14900" title="English Civil War" label="Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q846848" start="14909" end="14920" title="Stuart Restoration" label="Restoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q40946" start="14957" end="14969" title="Daniel Defoe" label="Daniel Defoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q41166" start="14974" end="14988" title="Jonathan Swift" label="Jonathan Swift"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760522" start="15022" end="15040" title="Lansdowne portrait" label="Lansdowne portrait"/>
<link wikidata="Q337913" start="15355" end="15374" title="Edmond Fitzmaurice, 1st Baron Fitzmaurice" label="Fitzmaurice, Edmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q8014152" start="16560" end="16587" title="William L. Clements Library" label="William L. Clements Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q230492" start="16589" end="16611" title="University of Michigan" label="University of Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q193196" start="16646" end="16671" title="University College London" label="University College London"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="309012" wikidata="Q24530" url="?curid=309012" title="Thomas Robinson, 2nd Baron Grantham">
<text>Thomas Robinson, 2nd Baron Grantham PC (30 November 173820 July 1786) was a British statesman. He notably served as Foreign Secretary between 1782 and 1783.

==Background and education==
Grantham was born in Vienna, Austria, the son of Thomas Robinson, 1st Baron Grantham, British Ambassador to Austria at the time, by his wife Frances, daughter of Thomas Worsley. He was educated at Westminster School and at Christ&#x27;s College, Cambridge.

==Political career==
Grantham entered parliament as member for Christchurch in 1761, and succeeded to the peerage, because of his father&#x27;s death, in 1770. That year he was appointed to the Privy Council. In 1771 he was sent as British Ambassador to Spain and retained this post until war broke out between Great Britain and Spain in 1779. In 1772, while at the Summer Spanish Court in Aranjuez, he received correspondence from Richard Wall, the Spanish Minister of Foreign Affairs. From 1780 to 1782 Grantham was President of the Board of Trade, and from July 1782 to April 1783 Foreign Secretary under Lord Shelburne.

==Marriage and progeny==
In 1780 Lord Grantham married Lady Mary Yorke (1757–1830), younger daughter of Philip Yorke, 2nd Earl of Hardwicke by his wife Lady Jemima Campbell (1723–1797), &quot;suo jure&quot; 2nd Marchioness Grey, a daughter of John Campbell, 3rd Earl of Breadalbane and Holland by his wife Lady Amabel Grey, a daughter of Henry Grey, 1st Duke of Kent (1671–1740).

In 1740 Lord Grantham&#x27;s mother-in-law Lady Jemima Campbell (1723–1797) succeeded as 2nd Marchioness Grey by a special remainder upon the death of her maternal grandfather Henry Grey, 1st Duke of Kent, 1st Marquess Grey, 3rd Baron Lucas. As she had no male heirs, the title later became extinct upon her own death in 1797, but in 1816 her elder daughter Lady Amabel Yorke (1750–1833) (wife of Alexander Hume-Campbell, Lord Polwarth) was created Countess de Grey in her own right.

Lord Grantham and his wife lived at Grantham House in Whitehall Yard, Westminster. By his wife had two sons:
*Thomas de Grey, 2nd Earl de Grey, eldest son and heir. He was born as Thomas Philip Robinson, his surname was Weddell from 1803 and de Grey from 1833.
*Frederick John Robinson, 1st Viscount Goderich, 1st Earl of Ripon (1782–1859), Prime Minister of the United Kingdom in 1827 and 1828.

==Death==
He died on 20 July 1786, aged only 46, and was succeeded in the barony by his eldest son, Thomas de Grey, 2nd Earl de Grey. His widow continued to live at Grantham House until her own death in January 1830, aged 72 years.

==See also==
* Wrest Park

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q24530" start="0" end="35" title="Thomas Robinson, 2nd Baron Grantham" label="Thomas Robinson, 2nd Baron Grantham"/>
<link wikidata="Q683120" start="36" end="38" title="Her Majesty&amp;#x27;s Most Honourable Privy Council" label="PC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371091" start="116" end="133" title="Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs (UK)" label="Foreign Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="208" end="214" title="Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q337754" start="236" end="271" title="Thomas Robinson, 1st Baron Grantham" label="Thomas Robinson, 1st Baron Grantham"/>
<link wikidata="Q685507" start="273" end="302" title="British Ambassador to Austria" label="British Ambassador to Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341516" start="384" end="402" title="Westminster School" label="Westminster School"/>
<link wikidata="Q714717" start="410" end="442" title="Christ&amp;#x27;s College, Cambridge" label="Christ&amp;#x27;s College, Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3334655" start="508" end="520" title="Christchurch (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Christchurch"/>
<link wikidata="Q683120" start="639" end="652" title="Her Majesty&amp;#x27;s Most Honourable Privy Council" label="Privy Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q730652" start="677" end="704" title="British Ambassador to Spain" label="British Ambassador to Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q161885" start="756" end="769" title="Kingdom of Great Britain" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q486792" start="835" end="843" title="Aranjuez" label="Aranjuez"/>
<link wikidata="Q2397740" start="877" end="889" title="Ricardo Wall" label="Richard Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q27037814" start="963" end="994" title="President of the Board of Trade" label="President of the Board of Trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371091" start="1029" end="1046" title="Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs (UK)" label="Foreign Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q312573" start="1053" end="1067" title="William Petty, 2nd Earl of Shelburne" label="Lord Shelburne"/>
<link wikidata="Q5790329" start="1174" end="1209" title="Philip Yorke, 2nd Earl of Hardwicke" label="Philip Yorke, 2nd Earl of Hardwicke"/>
<link wikidata="Q6177177" start="1222" end="1242" title="Jemima Yorke, 2nd Marchioness Grey" label="Lady Jemima Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2699324" start="1262" end="1270" title="suo jure" label="suo jure"/>
<link wikidata="Q747440" start="1313" end="1363" title="John Campbell, 3rd Earl of Breadalbane and Holland" label="John Campbell, 3rd Earl of Breadalbane and Holland"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1376" end="1392" title="Lady Amabel Grey" label="Lady Amabel Grey"/>
<link wikidata="Q336031" start="1408" end="1436" title="Henry Grey, 1st Duke of Kent" label="Henry Grey, 1st Duke of Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q6177177" start="1494" end="1514" title="Jemima Yorke, 2nd Marchioness Grey" label="Lady Jemima Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7311510" start="1566" end="1583" title="special remainder" label="special remainder"/>
<link wikidata="Q336031" start="1627" end="1691" title="Henry Grey, 1st Duke of Kent" label="Henry Grey, 1st Duke of Kent, 1st Marquess Grey, 3rd Baron Lucas"/>
<link wikidata="Q18572212" start="1809" end="1826" title="Amabel Hume-Campbell, 1st Countess de Grey" label="Lady Amabel Yorke"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326187" start="1900" end="1916" title="Earl de Grey" label="Countess de Grey"/>
<link wikidata="Q337676" start="2046" end="2078" title="Thomas de Grey, 2nd Earl de Grey" label="Thomas de Grey, 2nd Earl de Grey"/>
<link wikidata="Q312591" start="2198" end="2263" title="Frederick John Robinson, 1st Viscount Goderich" label="Frederick John Robinson, 1st Viscount Goderich, 1st Earl of Ripon"/>
<link wikidata="Q14211" start="2277" end="2313" title="Prime Minister of the United Kingdom" label="Prime Minister of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q337676" start="2433" end="2465" title="Thomas de Grey, 2nd Earl de Grey" label="Thomas de Grey, 2nd Earl de Grey"/>
<link wikidata="Q24662487" start="2581" end="2591" title="Wrest Park" label="Wrest Park"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="309013" wikidata="Q365894" url="?curid=309013" title="Feng Yuxiang">
<text>Feng Yuxiang (; ; 6 November 1882 – 1 September 1948), courtesy name Huanzhang (焕章), was a Chinese warlord and later general in the National Revolutionary Army. He served as Vice Premier of the Republic of China from 1928 to 1930.

At the start of the 1911 Revolution, Feng was an officer in the ranks of Yuan Shikai&#x27;s Beiyang Army. He initially joined forces with the revolutionaries, but came to support Yuan&#x27;s regime. In 1914, he converted to Christianity, earning him the nickname the &quot;Christian General&quot;. He became a warlord in Northwest China, based in Shaanxi, and rose to a high rank within the Zhili clique. In 1924, Feng launched the Beijing Coup, which knocked the Zhili out of power, and re-organised his troops as the Guominjun. He brought Sun Yat-sen to Beijing for negotiations on re-unification, but this was not realized. In 1926, Feng was defeated by the Zhili and Fengtian cliques in the Anti-Fengtian War, and he retreated to the northwest. In 1926, Feng joined the Kuomintang&#x27;s successful Northern Expedition. He later resisted Chiang&#x27;s consolidation of power in the Central Plains War and was forced to retire, but in 1933 organized a new army which successfully drove the Japanese Army out of Chahar. In the 1930s, Feng held positions in the Nationalist government, including brief army commands at the start of the Second Sino-Japanese War in 1937. He spent his later years supporting the anti-Chiang Revolutionary Committee of the Kuomintang before his death in 1948.

==Early life and career==
Feng was born in Chaohu, Anhui. As the son of an officer in the Qing Imperial Army, Feng spent his youth immersed in military life. He joined the Huai Army when he was 11 as a deputy soldier (Fu Bing, 副兵), the lowest rank in the army, he received a uniform and food, but no salary, unlike regular soldiers. By the age of 16 he had proved himself and became a regular. Unlike other soldiers who gambled away their pay, Feng saved his salary and used a portion of it to help out other soldiers in need, especially those deputy soldiers (Fu Bing, 副兵), like he had once been, and so he was popular among his comrades-in-arms. Feng was hard-working and motivated, and in 1902 he was reassigned to Yuan Shikai&#x27;s newly established Beiyang Army.

During the Xinhai Revolution of 1911 Feng joined the Luanzhou Uprising against the Qing Court and supported the revolutionaries in the South. The uprising was suppressed by the Beiyang Army and Feng was imprisoned by Yuan Shikai. In 1914 he regained military rank and spent the next four years defending Yuan&#x27;s regime. In July 1914, as a brigade commander, he participated in the suppression of the Bailang Peasant Uprising in Henan and Shaanxi. During the National Protection War of 1915–16 he was sent to Sichuan to fight the Anti-Yuan National Protection Army, but secretly communicated with revolution leader Cai E. In April 1917 he was stripped of his military rank but still led his old troops in the campaign against Zhang Xun and was restored to his rank. In February 1918 he was ordered to suppress the Constitutional Protection Movement, but proclaimed his support for peace talks in Hubei and was stripped of titles but permitted to stay in command of his forces. The capture of Changde in June earned him back his titles. By August 1921 he was promoted to command a division and was based in Shaanxi.

==Conversion to Christianity==
Feng, like many young officers, was involved in revolutionary activity and was nearly executed for treason. He later joined Yuan Shikai&#x27;s Beiyang Army and with the help and advice of Chinese diplomat Wang Zhengting, converted to Christianity in 1914, being baptized into the Methodist Episcopal Church.

Feng&#x27;s career as a warlord began soon after the collapse of the Yuan Shikai government in 1916. Feng, however, distinguished himself from other regional militarists by governing his domains with a mixture of paternalistic Christian socialism and military discipline. He forbade prostitution, gambling and the sale of opium and morphia. From 1919 he was known as the &quot;Christian General&quot;.

In 1923 British Protestant Christian missionary Marshall B. Broomhall said of him:

:The contrast between Cromwell&#x27;s Ironsides and Charles&#x27;s Cavaliers is not more striking than that which exists in China to-day between the godly and well-disciplined troops of General Feng and the normal type of man who in that land goes by the name of soldier ... While it is too much to say that there are no good soldiers in China outside of General Feng&#x27;s army, it is none the less true that the people generally are as fearful of the presence of troops as of brigand bands.

He was reputed to have liked baptizing his troops with water from a fire hose. However, no such incident is mentioned in Sheriden&#x27;s detailed biography, or in Broomhall&#x27;s account. Both Broomhall and Sheriden say that baptism was taken very seriously and that not all of Feng&#x27;s troops were baptized. Journalist John Gunther, in his 1939 book &quot;Inside Asia&quot;, specifically denied that such mass baptisms took place.

==Rise==
In the early 1920s Feng rose to prominence in the Zhili clique of warlords, named so because their base of power was centred around Zhili Province. This Zhili clique defeated the Fengtian clique, headed by Zhang Zuolin, father of Zhang Xueliang, in the First Zhili–Fengtian War in 1922. It was at this time that Feng also began to move closer to the Soviet Union.

Within the Zhili clique Feng was demoted by Wu Peifu and sent to guard the southern suburbs of Beijing. In 1923 Feng was inspired by Sun Yat-sen and secretly plotted with Hu Jingyi and Xue Yue to overthrow Wu Peifu and Cao Kun, who controlled the Beiyang government. When the Second Zhili–Fengtian War began in 1924, Feng was in charge of defending Rehe against the Fengtian clique. However, he switched sides and seized the capital in the Beijing Coup on 23 October 1924. This turnabout prompted Shandong warlord Zhang Zongchang to join the Fengtian and led to a decisive defeat of the Zhili forces. Hence, Feng&#x27;s coup brought far-reaching political changes in China. Feng imprisoned Zhili-leader and president Cao Kun, installed the more liberal Huang Fu, evicted the last Emperor Puyi from the Forbidden City and invited Sun Yat-sen to Beijing to resurrect the Republican government and reunify the country. Despite being severely ill already, Sun came to Beijing and died there in April 1925.

Feng renamed his army the &quot;Guominjun&quot; or the National People&#x27;s Army. To counter pressure from the Zhili and Fengtian factions, he invited Duan Qirui to take on the presidency. Nevertheless, Feng was defeated by a Zhili–Fengtian alliance in the Anti-Fengtian War in January 1926. He lost control of Beijing and retreated to Zhangjiakou, where his army became known as the Northwest Army.

In April 1926 Sun Yat-sen&#x27;s successor, Chiang Kai-shek, launched the Northern Expedition from Guangzhou against the northern warlords. Feng threw his support behind the Nationalists in the Northern Expedition and merged his &quot;Guominjun&quot; with the National Revolutionary Army. The Nationalists vanquished the Zhili faction in the south and Feng asserted control over much of north-central China. Zhang Zuolin was forced to withdraw the Fengtian forces back to Manchuria. In August Feng went to the Soviet Union and returned in September.
In October 1928 Feng Yuxiang was appointed as Vice President of the Executive Yuan and War Minister of the Republic of China by President Chiang Kai-shek. Feng&#x27;s patriotism was a basic motivation. Because of atrocities he saw Japanese soldiers commit during the Sino-Japanese War of 1895, Feng promised that he would fight the Japanese to death if he ever became a soldier. Every year on the anniversary of Japan&#x27;s 21 Demands in 1915 he and his officers wore belts on which was written &quot;In Memory of the National Humiliation of May 7th&quot;.

By early 1929 Feng grew dissatisfied with Chiang Kai-shek&#x27;s Nationalist government in Nanjing. He joined Yan Xishan and Li Zongren to challenge Chiang&#x27;s supremacy, but was defeated by Chiang in the Central Plains War. Chiang then incited anti-Yan Xishan and Feng Yuxiang sentiments among the Chinese Muslims and Mongols, encouraging them to topple their rule.

==Out of power==
Stripped of his military power, Feng spent the early 1930s criticizing Chiang Kai-shek&#x27;s failure to resist Japanese aggression. On 26 May 1933, Feng Yuxiang became commander-in-chief of the Chahar People&#x27;s Anti-Japanese Army Alliance, with Ji Hongchang and Fang Zhenwu as frontline commanders. Ji Hongchang&#x27;s army, numbering over 100,000 men according to Feng, pushed against Duolun, and by July 1933 drove the Japanese and Manchukuoan troops out of Chahar Province. By late July Feng and Ji Hongchang established, at Zhangjiakou, the &quot;Committee for Recovering the Four Provinces of the Northeast&quot;. Chiang Kai-shek, fearing that Communists had taken control of the Anti-Japanese Allied Army, launched a concerted siege of the army with 60,000 men. Surrounded by Chiang Kai-shek and the Japanese, Feng Yuxiang resigned his post and retired to Tai&#x27;an in Shandong.

==Later years==

Between 1935 and 1945 Feng Yuxiang supported the KMT and held various positions in the Nationalist army and government. In October 1935 Chiang invited him to Nanjing to serve as the vice-president of the Military Affairs Commission. He held the nominal position until 1938 and remained a member of the council until 1945. During the Xi&#x27;an Incident, when Chiang Kai-Shek was held prisoner by rebellious warlords, Feng immediately called for Chiang&#x27;s release. After the Second Sino-Japanese War began in 1937 he briefly served as Commander-in-Chief of the 3rd War Area. In this capacity Feng led Chinese forces early in the defense of Shanghai, but he was quickly relieved in favor of Zhang Zhizhong and later Chiang himself.

After World War II he traveled to the United States, where he was an outspoken critic of the Chiang regime and of the Truman administration&#x27;s support for it. While there, he went to Gen. Joseph Stilwell&#x27;s house in California, as he admired Stilwell. Barbara Tuchman tells the story: &quot;a few days after her husband&#x27;s death, Mrs. Stilwell was upstairs at her home in Carmel, California when a visitor was announced with some confusion as &#x27;the Christian.&#x27; Mystified, she went down to find in the hall the huge figure and cannonball head of [Feng Yuxiang], who said, &#x27;I have come to mourn with you for Shih Ti-wei, my friend. Feng Yuxiang also visited and lived for several months in Berkeley, California, during his stay as visiting scholar.

Although he was never a Communist himself, he was close to them in his final years.

According to descendants whose father was raised by Feng Yuxiang in his household, he was inspired by the elder Feng&#x27;s example of service to country and countrymen to serve in the military. 
He died in a shipboard fire on the Black Sea while en route to the Soviet Union in 1948, along with one of his daughters. Some believe he was murdered; others deny it.

The same descendants also learned from their father that many believed Feng was murdered by political adversaries. Allegedly, those who knew details of the shipboard fire and its circumstances had reported that Feng and his daughter perished in the middle of night, with their cabin door(s) locked from the outside.

The Chinese Communists under Mao Zedong classified Feng as a &quot;good warlord&quot;, and his remains were buried with honors in 1953 at the sacred Mount Tai in Shandong. His tomb is located immediately to the east of Tianwai Village square (). His widow Li Dequan served as Minister of Health of the People&#x27;s Republic of China.

==Legacy ==
Many of Feng Yuxiang&#x27;s former subordinates joined or merged into Kuomintang National Revolutionary Army and fought with distinction in the Second Sino-Japanese War. They include Song Zheyuan, Tong Linge, Zhao Dengyu, Sun Lianzhong, Liu Ruming, Feng Zhi&#x27;an, Yang Hucheng, Ji Hongchang and Zhang Zizhong. Notable exceptions were Sun Liangcheng and Qin Dechun, who collaborated with the Japanese. Other generals, after serving a lengthy term in the warlord era, retired to live a life of pleasure.

Sir Richard Evans, author of &quot;Deng Xiaoping and the Making of Modern China&quot;, described Feng as &quot;an honest man&quot; in his book. Peter R. Moody wrote in the &quot;Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science&quot; &quot;Many of Feng&#x27;s allies might dispute this, since he betrayed every one of them.&quot;

==See also==

*Warlord Era
*Central Plains War
*History of the Republic of China
*National Revolutionary Army
*Second Sino-Japanese War
*Actions in Inner Mongolia (1933–36)

==References==
==Further reading==
*Marshall Broomhall; &quot;Marshal Feng: A Good Soldier of Jesus Christ&quot;; London: China Inland Mission and Religious Tract Society, 1923.
*Jonathan Goforth; &quot;Chinese Christian General: Feng Yu Hsiang&quot;
*James E. Sheridan; &quot;Chinese Warlord: The Career of Feng Yu-hsiang&quot;. Stanford University 1966.
* United Press, Christian General Feng Charges British Caused Rioting, &quot;Evening Independent&quot;, 15 July 1925 (Statement of General Feng to the United Press on the Shanghai and Canton riots)
* Feng Yu-hsiang (Feng Yuxiang) 馮玉祥 from &quot;Biographies of Prominent Chinese&quot; c. 1925.

==External links==

*Handbook for the Chinese Civil War - US Naval War College
*RESISTANCE WARS
*&quot;Toward Righteousness!&quot;. &quot;Time&quot;. 31 July 1933. 
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q365894" start="0" end="12" title="Feng Yuxiang" label="Feng Yuxiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q365894" start="69" end="78" title="Feng Yuxiang" label="Huanzhang"/>
<link wikidata="Q64481740" start="99" end="106" title="List of warlords and military cliques in the Warlord Era" label="warlord"/>
<link wikidata="Q714843" start="132" end="159" title="National Revolutionary Army" label="National Revolutionary Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q13644819" start="174" end="211" title="Vice Premier of the Republic of China" label="Vice Premier of the Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q190517" start="252" end="267" title="1911 Revolution" label="1911 Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q210329" start="305" end="316" title="Yuan Shikai" label="Yuan Shikai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144627" start="324" end="336" title="Beiyang Army" label="Beiyang Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q814959" start="411" end="429" title="Beiyang government" label="Yuan&amp;#x27;s regime"/>
<link wikidata="Q47974" start="579" end="586" title="Shaanxi" label="Shaanxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q365894" start="586" end="587" title="Feng Yuxiang" label=","/>
<link wikidata="Q1257156" start="623" end="635" title="Zhili clique" label="Zhili clique"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049741" start="664" end="676" title="1924 Beijing Coup" label="Beijing Coup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2468147" start="751" end="760" title="Guominjun" label="Guominjun"/>
<link wikidata="Q8573" start="773" end="784" title="Sun Yat-sen" label="Sun Yat-sen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1257143" start="903" end="919" title="Fengtian clique" label="Fengtian cliques"/>
<link wikidata="Q868962" start="927" end="944" title="Anti-Fengtian War" label="Anti-Fengtian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q31113" start="1006" end="1016" title="Kuomintang" label="Kuomintang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073476" start="1035" end="1054" title="Northern Expedition" label="Northern Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q717809" start="1118" end="1136" title="Central Plains War" label="Central Plains War"/>
<link wikidata="Q276535" start="1225" end="1238" title="Imperial Japanese Army" label="Japanese Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058919" start="1246" end="1252" title="Chahar Province" label="Chahar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2308761" start="1295" end="1317" title="Nationalist government" label="Nationalist government"/>
<link wikidata="Q170314" start="1369" end="1393" title="Second Sino-Japanese War" label="Second Sino-Japanese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202612" start="1455" end="1496" title="Revolutionary Committee of the Kuomintang" label="Revolutionary Committee of the Kuomintang"/>
<link wikidata="Q855220" start="1567" end="1573" title="Chaohu" label="Chaohu"/>
<link wikidata="Q40956" start="1575" end="1580" title="Anhui" label="Anhui"/>
<link wikidata="Q4505775" start="1614" end="1632" title="Qing Imperial Army" label="Qing Imperial Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q846620" start="1696" end="1705" title="Huai Army" label="Huai Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q210329" start="2242" end="2253" title="Yuan Shikai" label="Yuan Shikai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144627" start="2279" end="2291" title="Beiyang Army" label="Beiyang Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q190517" start="2305" end="2322" title="Xinhai Revolution" label="Xinhai Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2347" end="2364" title="Luanzhou Uprising" label="Luanzhou Uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q210329" start="2511" end="2522" title="Yuan Shikai" label="Yuan Shikai"/>
<link wikidata="Q43684" start="2726" end="2731" title="Henan" label="Henan"/>
<link wikidata="Q47974" start="2736" end="2743" title="Shaanxi" label="Shaanxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345258" start="2756" end="2779" title="National Protection War" label="National Protection War"/>
<link wikidata="Q19770" start="2806" end="2813" title="Sichuan" label="Sichuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q702808" start="2912" end="2917" title="Cai E" label="Cai E"/>
<link wikidata="Q699600" start="3023" end="3032" title="Zhang Xun" label="Zhang Xun"/>
<link wikidata="Q2641005" start="3111" end="3145" title="Constitutional Protection Movement" label="Constitutional Protection Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q46862" start="3193" end="3198" title="Hubei" label="Hubei"/>
<link wikidata="Q416544" start="3289" end="3296" title="Changde" label="Changde"/>
<link wikidata="Q210329" start="3568" end="3579" title="Yuan Shikai" label="Yuan Shikai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144627" start="3587" end="3599" title="Beiyang Army" label="Beiyang Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q6127766" start="3649" end="3663" title="Wang Zhengting" label="Wang Zhengting"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="3678" end="3690" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q369557" start="3724" end="3750" title="Methodist Episcopal Church" label="Methodist Episcopal Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q739609" start="3980" end="3999" title="Christian socialism" label="Christian socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6773503" start="4204" end="4225" title="Marshall B. Broomhall" label="Marshall B. Broomhall"/>
<link wikidata="Q44279" start="4262" end="4270" title="Oliver Cromwell" label="Cromwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1673164" start="4278" end="4287" title="Ironside (cavalry)" label="Ironsides"/>
<link wikidata="Q81506" start="4292" end="4299" title="Charles I of England" label="Charles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2284765" start="4307" end="4315" title="Cavalier" label="Cavalier"/>
<link wikidata="Q35856" start="4764" end="4773" title="baptism" label="baptizing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410061" start="4803" end="4812" title="fire hose" label="fire hose"/>
<link wikidata="Q929597" start="5059" end="5071" title="John Gunther" label="John Gunther"/>
<link wikidata="Q1257156" start="5231" end="5243" title="Zhili clique" label="Zhili clique"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604022" start="5313" end="5327" title="Zhili Province" label="Zhili Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q1257143" start="5360" end="5375" title="Fengtian clique" label="Fengtian clique"/>
<link wikidata="Q197358" start="5387" end="5399" title="Zhang Zuolin" label="Zhang Zuolin"/>
<link wikidata="Q20148" start="5411" end="5425" title="Zhang Xueliang" label="Zhang Xueliang"/>
<link wikidata="Q840403" start="5434" end="5458" title="First Zhili–Fengtian War" label="First Zhili–Fengtian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="5531" end="5543" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q697046" start="5590" end="5598" title="Wu Peifu" label="Wu Peifu"/>
<link wikidata="Q10310162" start="5717" end="5726" title="Hu Jingyi" label="Hu Jingyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q715405" start="5731" end="5738" title="Xue Yue" label="Xue Yue"/>
<link wikidata="Q699591" start="5765" end="5772" title="Cao Kun" label="Cao Kun"/>
<link wikidata="Q814959" start="5793" end="5811" title="Beiyang government" label="Beiyang government"/>
<link wikidata="Q864847" start="5822" end="5847" title="Second Zhili–Fengtian War" label="Second Zhili–Fengtian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148671" start="5895" end="5899" title="Rehe Province" label="Rehe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049741" start="5986" end="5998" title="1924 Beijing Coup" label="Beijing Coup"/>
<link wikidata="Q43407" start="6043" end="6051" title="Shandong" label="Shandong"/>
<link wikidata="Q704565" start="6060" end="6075" title="Zhang Zongchang" label="Zhang Zongchang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1257143" start="6088" end="6096" title="Fengtian clique" label="Fengtian"/>
<link wikidata="Q712780" start="6299" end="6307" title="Huang Fu" label="Huang Fu"/>
<link wikidata="Q185152" start="6334" end="6338" title="Puyi" label="Puyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q80290" start="6348" end="6362" title="Forbidden City" label="Forbidden City"/>
<link wikidata="Q2468147" start="6581" end="6590" title="Guominjun" label="Guominjun"/>
<link wikidata="Q706172" start="6702" end="6712" title="Duan Qirui" label="Duan Qirui"/>
<link wikidata="Q868962" start="6808" end="6825" title="Anti-Fengtian War" label="Anti-Fengtian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q58650" start="6887" end="6898" title="Zhangjiakou" label="Zhangjiakou"/>
<link wikidata="Q16574" start="6996" end="7011" title="Chiang Kai-shek" label="Chiang Kai-shek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073476" start="7026" end="7045" title="Northern Expedition" label="Northern Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q16572" start="7051" end="7060" title="Guangzhou" label="Guangzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q714843" start="7212" end="7239" title="National Revolutionary Army" label="National Revolutionary Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="7462" end="7474" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q715055" start="7570" end="7584" title="Executive Yuan" label="Executive Yuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q13426199" start="7609" end="7626" title="Republic of China (1912–1949)" label="Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q178687" start="7769" end="7786" title="First Sino-Japanese War" label="Sino-Japanese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q696785" start="7927" end="7937" title="Twenty-One Demands" label="21 Demands"/>
<link wikidata="Q31113" start="8126" end="8137" title="Kuomintang" label="Nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q699698" start="8171" end="8181" title="Yan Xishan" label="Yan Xishan"/>
<link wikidata="Q20297" start="8186" end="8196" title="Li Zongren" label="Li Zongren"/>
<link wikidata="Q717809" start="8269" end="8287" title="Central Plains War" label="Central Plains War"/>
<link wikidata="Q183573" start="8363" end="8378" title="Hui people" label="Chinese Muslims"/>
<link wikidata="Q16574" start="8520" end="8542" title="Chiang Kai-shek" label="Chiang Kai-shek&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q5067601" start="8644" end="8683" title="Chahar People&amp;#x27;s Anti-Japanese Army" label="Chahar People&amp;#x27;s Anti-Japanese Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q697362" start="8699" end="8711" title="Ji Hongchang" label="Ji Hongchang"/>
<link wikidata="Q698775" start="8716" end="8727" title="Fang Zhenwu" label="Fang Zhenwu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266442" start="8840" end="8846" title="Duolun County" label="Duolun"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8865" end="8870" title="Actions in Inner Mongolia (1933–1936)#Campaign of the Anti-Japanese Allied Army" label="drove"/>
<link wikidata="Q30623" start="8888" end="8897" title="Manchukuo" label="Manchukuo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058919" start="8914" end="8929" title="Chahar Province" label="Chahar Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q58650" start="8982" end="8993" title="Zhangjiakou" label="Zhangjiakou"/>
<link wikidata="Q217681" start="9316" end="9327" title="Tai&amp;#x27;an" label="Tai&amp;#x27;an"/>
<link wikidata="Q6851957" start="9563" end="9590" title="Military Affairs Commission" label="Military Affairs Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q244941" start="9692" end="9711" title="Xi&amp;#x27;an Incident" label="Xi&amp;#x27;an Incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q170314" start="9837" end="9861" title="Second Sino-Japanese War" label="Second Sino-Japanese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q254599" start="9991" end="10010" title="Battle of Shanghai" label="defense of Shanghai"/>
<link wikidata="Q197347" start="10052" end="10066" title="Zhang Zhizhong" label="Zhang Zhizhong"/>
<link wikidata="Q11613" start="10212" end="10218" title="Harry S. Truman" label="Truman"/>
<link wikidata="Q346551" start="10286" end="10301" title="Joseph Stilwell" label="Joseph Stilwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q59112" start="10354" end="10369" title="Barbara Tuchman" label="Barbara Tuchman"/>
<link wikidata="Q625458" start="10478" end="10496" title="Carmel, California" label="Carmel, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q346551" start="10726" end="10737" title="Joseph Stilwell" label="Shih Ti-wei"/>
<link wikidata="Q166" start="11184" end="11193" title="Black Sea" label="Black Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q5816" start="11664" end="11674" title="Mao Zedong" label="Mao Zedong"/>
<link wikidata="Q216059" start="11784" end="11793" title="Mount Tai" label="Mount Tai"/>
<link wikidata="Q43407" start="11797" end="11805" title="Shandong" label="Shandong"/>
<link wikidata="Q6538739" start="11891" end="11900" title="Li Dequan" label="Li Dequan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604300" start="11911" end="11968" title="Ministry of Health of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="Minister of Health of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q714843" start="12064" end="12091" title="National Revolutionary Army" label="National Revolutionary Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q170314" start="12127" end="12151" title="Second Sino-Japanese War" label="Second Sino-Japanese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q711969" start="12166" end="12178" title="Song Zheyuan" label="Song Zheyuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q698645" start="12180" end="12190" title="Tong Linge" label="Tong Linge"/>
<link wikidata="Q4261993" start="12192" end="12203" title="Zhao Dengyu" label="Zhao Dengyu"/>
<link wikidata="Q699254" start="12205" end="12218" title="Sun Lianzhong" label="Sun Lianzhong"/>
<link wikidata="Q700876" start="12220" end="12230" title="Liu Ruming" label="Liu Ruming"/>
<link wikidata="Q5443370" start="12232" end="12248" title="Feng Zhi&amp;#x27;an" label="Feng Zhi&amp;#x27;an"/>
<link wikidata="Q715841" start="12250" end="12262" title="Yang Hucheng" label="Yang Hucheng"/>
<link wikidata="Q697362" start="12264" end="12276" title="Ji Hongchang" label="Ji Hongchang"/>
<link wikidata="Q706851" start="12281" end="12294" title="Zhang Zizhong" label="Zhang Zizhong"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12320" end="12334" title="Sun Liangcheng" label="Sun Liangcheng"/>
<link wikidata="Q4505790" start="12339" end="12349" title="Qin Dechun" label="Qin Dechun"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325549" start="12489" end="12506" title="Sir Richard Evans" label="Sir Richard Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q5256931" start="12524" end="12568" title="Deng Xiaoping and the Making of Modern China" label="Deng Xiaoping and the Making of Modern China"/>
<link wikidata="Q4742907" start="12667" end="12729" title="Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science" label="Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201263" start="12848" end="12859" title="Warlord Era" label="Warlord Era"/>
<link wikidata="Q717809" start="12861" end="12879" title="Central Plains War" label="Central Plains War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151968" start="12881" end="12913" title="History of the Republic of China" label="History of the Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q714843" start="12915" end="12942" title="National Revolutionary Army" label="National Revolutionary Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q170314" start="12944" end="12968" title="Second Sino-Japanese War" label="Second Sino-Japanese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4211700" start="12970" end="13005" title="Actions in Inner Mongolia (1933–36)" label="Actions in Inner Mongolia (1933–36)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6773503" start="13043" end="13061" title="Marshall Broomhall" label="Marshall Broomhall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073203" start="13129" end="13149" title="China Inland Mission" label="China Inland Mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q3522472" start="13154" end="13177" title="Religious Tract Society" label="Religious Tract Society"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="309016" wikidata="Q1402155" url="?curid=309016" title="Bugbear">
<text>A bugbear is a legendary creature or type of hobgoblin comparable to the boogeyman (or bugaboo or babau or cucuy), and other creatures of folklore, all of which were historically used in some cultures to frighten disobedient children.

==Etymology==
Its name is derived from the Middle English word &quot;bugge&quot; (a frightening thing), or perhaps the Old Welsh word &quot;bwg&quot; (evil spirit or goblin), or Old Scots &quot;bogill&quot; (goblin), and cognates most probably English &quot;bogeyman&quot; and &quot;bugaboo&quot;.

In medieval England, the bugbear was depicted as a creepy bear that lurked in the woods to scare children. It was described in this manner in &quot;The Buggbears&quot;, an adaptation, with additions, from Antonio Francesco Grazzini’s &quot;La Spiritata&quot; (‘The Possessed [Woman]’, 1561).

In a modern context, the term &quot;bugbear&quot; may also mean pet peeve.

==In popular culture==
Bugbears appear in a number of modern fantasy literature and related media, where they are usually minor antagonists. They also appear as monsters, described as large, hairy goblinoids, in the canon of popular fantasy role-playing games.

The show &quot;My Little Pony: Friendship Is Magic&quot; introduced bugbears to the series in the 100th episode &quot;Slice of Life.&quot; Bugbears in the show are depicted as being literal to the name, being a four-armed panda with the antennae, wings, and stinger of either a wasp or bumblebee.

==See also==
* Moss people
* Nachtkrapp
* Sprite (creature)
* Wirry-cow
* Yōkai

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1402155" start="2" end="9" title="Bugbear" label="bugbear"/>
<link wikidata="Q2239243" start="15" end="33" title="legendary creature" label="legendary creature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1938640" start="45" end="54" title="hobgoblin" label="hobgoblin"/>
<link wikidata="Q172451" start="73" end="82" title="boogeyman" label="boogeyman"/>
<link wikidata="Q36192" start="138" end="146" title="folklore" label="folklore"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569" start="225" end="230" title="child" label="child"/>
<link wikidata="Q36395" start="279" end="293" title="Middle English" label="Middle English"/>
<link wikidata="Q2266723" start="355" end="364" title="Old Welsh" label="Old Welsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q308697" start="402" end="408" title="goblin" label="goblin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326738" start="414" end="423" title="Old Scots" label="Old Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q2251971" start="538" end="554" title="medieval England" label="medieval England"/>
<link wikidata="Q602056" start="740" end="766" title="Antonio Francesco Grazzini" label="Antonio Francesco Grazzini"/>
<link wikidata="Q1664842" start="892" end="901" title="pet peeve" label="pet peeve"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1284" end="1297" title="Slice of Life (My Little Pony: Friendship Is Magic)" label="Slice of Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q33602" start="1388" end="1393" title="Giant panda" label="panda"/>
<link wikidata="Q9458574" start="1444" end="1448" title="wasp" label="wasp"/>
<link wikidata="Q25407" start="1452" end="1461" title="bumblebee" label="bumblebee"/>
<link wikidata="Q20828828" start="1479" end="1490" title="Moss people" label="Moss people"/>
<link wikidata="Q1962768" start="1493" end="1503" title="Nachtkrapp" label="Nachtkrapp"/>
<link wikidata="Q20828805" start="1506" end="1523" title="Sprite (creature)" label="Sprite (creature)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4020495" start="1526" end="1535" title="Wirry-cow" label="Wirry-cow"/>
<link wikidata="Q503186" start="1538" end="1543" title="Yōkai" label="Yōkai"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="309018" wikidata="Q333744" url="?curid=309018" title="George Nugent-Temple-Grenville, 1st Marquess of Buckingham">
<text>George Nugent-Temple-Grenville, 1st Marquess of Buckingham (17 June 1753 – 11 February 1813), known as George Grenville before 1779 and as The Earl Temple between 1779 and 1784, was a British statesman.

==Background and early life==
Grenville was the eldest son of George Grenville, Prime Minister of Great Britain, and his wife, the former Elizabeth Wyndham, daughter of Sir William Wyndham, 3rd Baronet. He was the nephew of Richard Grenville-Temple, 2nd Earl Temple (his father&#x27;s elder brother), and the elder brother of Thomas Grenville and of William Grenville (later 1st Baron Grenville and also Prime Minister of Great Britain). In 1764, he was appointed a Teller of the Exchequer. He was educated at Eton College from 1764 to 1770 and matriculated at Christ Church, Oxford in 1770. In 1774 he undertook a Grand Tour through Italy and Austria. In 1775, he married the Hon. Mary Nugent, daughter of Robert Nugent, 1st Viscount Clare, and the following year his father-in-law Lord Clare was created Earl Nugent, with special remainder (in default of his own heirs male, of which he had none) to his new son-in-law.

==Political career==

Grenville was returned as Member of Parliament for Buckinghamshire at the 1774 general election. In the House of Commons he emerged as a sharp critic of the American policy of Lord North. In September 1779, he succeeded his uncle as 3rd Earl Temple and moved to the House of Lords.

The now Lord Temple also took the additional family names Nugent and Temple by Royal Warrant issued on 4 December making the compound family name Nugent-Temple-Grenville. In 1782, Temple was appointed Lord Lieutenant of Buckinghamshire and in July 1782, he became a member of the Privy Council and Lord Lieutenant of Ireland in the Ministry of Lord Shelburne. He was instrumental in the enactment of the Renunciation Act 1783 (23 Geo. 3. c. 28), which supplemented the legislative independence granted to Ireland in 1782. As Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, and by royal warrant, he created the Order of St Patrick in February 1783, with himself as the first Grand Master. He left Ireland in 1783 and again turned his attention to English politics. He enjoyed the confidence of King George III, and having opposed Fox&#x27;s East India Bill, he was authorised by the king to say that &quot;whoever voted for the India Bill was not only not his friend, but would be considered by him as an enemy&quot;, a message which ensured the defeat of the bill. He was appointed a Secretary of State when Pitt the Younger (his father&#x27;s sister&#x27;s son) formed his ministry in December 1783, but resigned only three days later. This was the shortest cabinet tenure until Michelle Donelan in 2022.

In December 1784, Lord Temple was created Marquess of Buckingham. In November 1787, he was again appointed Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, this time under Pitt, but his second tenure of this office proved less successful than the first. Grattan denounced him for extravagance; the Irish Parliament censured him for refusing to transmit to England an address calling upon the Prince of Wales to assume the regency; and he could only maintain his position by resorting to bribery on a large scale. When his father-in-law died in 1788, Buckingham succeeded him as 2nd Earl Nugent. However, since he already held a marquessate, he was never known by this title. (His wife was, however, created Baroness Nugent in 1800, with special remainder to their second son, Lord George Nugent-Grenville.) Having become very unpopular, he resigned his office in September 1789.

==Later years==
Buckingham subsequently took very little part in politics, although he spoke in favour of the Act of Union of 1800. His wife died in 1812 and he died on 11 February 1813 at his residence, Stowe in Buckinghamshire. He was buried at his ancestral home Wotton. He left two sons: Richard, Earl Temple (who succeeded him as 2nd Marquess of Buckingham and was later created Duke of Buckingham and Chandos) and George, 2nd Baron Nugent (who had succeeded his mother in that title on her death).

==See also==
*Grenvillite

==References==


==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q333744" start="0" end="58" title="George Nugent-Temple-Grenville, 1st Marquess of Buckingham" label="George Nugent-Temple-Grenville, 1st Marquess of Buckingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q333744" start="103" end="119" title="George Nugent-Temple-Grenville, 1st Marquess of Buckingham" label="George Grenville"/>
<link wikidata="Q333744" start="139" end="154" title="George Nugent-Temple-Grenville, 1st Marquess of Buckingham" label="The Earl Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q244616" start="266" end="282" title="George Grenville" label="George Grenville"/>
<link wikidata="Q14211" start="284" end="315" title="Prime Minister of Great Britain" label="Prime Minister of Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q17391648" start="342" end="359" title="Elizabeth Grenville" label="Elizabeth Wyndham"/>
<link wikidata="Q3569043" start="373" end="405" title="Sir William Wyndham, 3rd Baronet" label="Sir William Wyndham, 3rd Baronet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2041357" start="428" end="469" title="Richard Grenville-Temple, 2nd Earl Temple" label="Richard Grenville-Temple, 2nd Earl Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q334084" start="530" end="546" title="Thomas Grenville" label="Thomas Grenville"/>
<link wikidata="Q312596" start="554" end="571" title="William Grenville, 1st Baron Grenville" label="William Grenville"/>
<link wikidata="Q2408803" start="684" end="693" title="Exchequer" label="Exchequer"/>
<link wikidata="Q192088" start="714" end="726" title="Eton College" label="Eton College"/>
<link wikidata="Q745967" start="765" end="786" title="Christ Church, Oxford" label="Christ Church, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q6682302" start="819" end="829" title="Grand Tour" label="Grand Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q7348077" start="911" end="944" title="Robert Nugent, 1st Earl Nugent" label="Robert Nugent, 1st Viscount Clare"/>
<link wikidata="Q486839" start="1175" end="1195" title="Member of Parliament" label="Member of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q4983254" start="1200" end="1215" title="Buckinghamshire (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Buckinghamshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q4971367" start="1223" end="1244" title="1774 British general election" label="1774 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q312593" start="1325" end="1335" title="Frederick North, Lord North" label="Lord North"/>
<link wikidata="Q11007" start="1415" end="1429" title="House of Lords" label="House of Lords"/>
<link wikidata="Q6679526" start="1633" end="1667" title="Lord Lieutenant of Buckinghamshire" label="Lord Lieutenant of Buckinghamshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q683120" start="1712" end="1725" title="Privy Council of Great Britain" label="Privy Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752225" start="1730" end="1756" title="Lord Lieutenant of Ireland" label="Lord Lieutenant of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q312573" start="1776" end="1790" title="William Petty, 2nd Earl of Shelburne" label="Lord Shelburne"/>
<link wikidata="Q29378841" start="1836" end="1857" title="Renunciation Act 1783" label="Renunciation Act 1783"/>
<link wikidata="Q122835067" start="1859" end="1868" title="23 Geo. 3" label="23 Geo. 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q7313933" start="1901" end="1925" title="Repeal of Act for Securing Dependence of Ireland Act 1782" label="legislative independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326038" start="2022" end="2041" title="Order of St Patrick" label="Order of St Patrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q127318" start="2205" end="2220" title="George III of the United Kingdom" label="King George III"/>
<link wikidata="Q438131" start="2241" end="2251" title="Charles James Fox" label="Fox&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q5477357" start="2252" end="2267" title="East India Bill" label="East India Bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q128902" start="2520" end="2536" title="William Pitt the Younger" label="Pitt the Younger"/>
<link wikidata="Q19872694" start="2692" end="2708" title="Michelle Donelan" label="Michelle Donelan"/>
<link wikidata="Q130586" start="3090" end="3105" title="George IV of the United Kingdom" label="Prince of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q343100" start="3688" end="3708" title="Act of Union 1800" label="Act of Union of 1800"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003761" start="3782" end="3787" title="Stowe, Buckinghamshire" label="Stowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2074016" start="3844" end="3850" title="Wotton Underwood" label="Wotton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589390" start="3870" end="3890" title="Richard Temple-Nugent-Brydges-Chandos-Grenville, 1st Duke of Buckingham and Chandos" label="Richard, Earl Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q3101799" start="3998" end="4022" title="George Nugent-Grenville, 2nd Baron Nugent" label="George, 2nd Baron Nugent"/>
<link wikidata="Q5607537" start="4097" end="4108" title="Grenvillite" label="Grenvillite"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="309020" wikidata="Q333862" url="?curid=309020" title="Francis Osborne, 5th Duke of Leeds">
<text>Francis Godolphin Osborne, 5th Duke of Leeds, (29 January 1751 – 31 January 1799), styled Marquess of Carmarthen until 1789, was a British politician. He notably served as Foreign Secretary under William Pitt the Younger from 1783 to 1791. He also was Governor of Scilly. In 1790, he was made a Knight of the Order of the Garter. As a statesman, he is generally regarded as a failure, and his deep hostility to the newly independent United States damaged relations between the two countries.

==Background and education==
Carmarthen was the only surviving son of Thomas Osborne, 4th Duke of Leeds, by his wife, Lady Mary, daughter of Francis Godolphin, 2nd Earl of Godolphin, and Henrietta Godolphin, 2nd Duchess of Marlborough. He was educated at Westminster School and at Christ Church, Oxford.

==Political career==

Carmarthen was a Member of Parliament for Eye in 1774 and for Helston from 1774 to 1775; in 1776 having received a writ of acceleration as Baron Osborne, he entered the House of Lords, and in 1777 Lord Chamberlain of the Queen&#x27;s Household and Captain of Deal Castle. In the House of Lords he was prominent as a determined foe of the prime minister, Lord North, who, after he had resigned his position as chamberlain, deprived him of the office of Lord Lieutenant of the East Riding of Yorkshire in 1780. He regained this, however, two years later.

Early in 1783, Carmarthen was selected as ambassador to France, but he did not take up this appointment, becoming instead Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs under William Pitt the Younger in December of the same year. Historian Jeremy Black says that in terms of foreign policy, Pitt and other leaders were disappointed with his performance as a minister. The Duke of Leeds, as he became upon his father&#x27;s death in 1789, was anti-French but did not develop an active and aggressive foreign policy. Instead, King George III himself set the main lines of foreign policy before he became mentally disabled. Pitt&#x27;s rejection of Leeds&#x27; anti-Russian policy was the final blow and he left office in April 1791. 

Leeds had done nothing to foster good relations with the newly independent United States: two future Presidents, John Adams and Thomas Jefferson, as envoys from the United States, both complained of his obstructive attitude and &quot;aversion to having anything to do with us&quot;. While Adams, who was rather Anglophile by inclination, was prepared to forgive and forget, Jefferson was not, and it can be argued that Leeds&#x27;s only lasting achievement was to foster Jefferson&#x27;s implacable hostility as President to Great Britain and its rulers.

Subsequently, Leeds took little part in politics: in 1792, hearing rumours that a new coalition might be formed, he unwisely offered himself as its head and met with a firm rebuff from both Pitt and the King.

==Family==

Leeds married firstly in 1773 Lady Amelia Darcy, daughter of Robert Darcy, 4th Earl of Holderness on 29 November 1773. Lady Amelia became Baroness Darcy de Knayth and Baroness Conyers in her own right in 1778. They were divorced in 1779. Their marriage produced three children:
* &quot;George&quot; William Frederick Osborne, Marquess of Carmarthen (21 July 1775 – 10 July 1838), later 6th Duke of Leeds; married Lady Charlotte Townshend, daughter of the 1st Marquess Townshend, on 17 August 1797 and had issue.
* Lady &quot;Mary&quot; Henrietta Juliana Osborne (7 September 1776 – 21 October 1862); married Thomas Pelham, 2nd Earl of Chichester (28 April 1756 – 4 July 1826) in 1801 and had issue.
* Lord &quot;Francis&quot; Osborne (18 October 1777 – 15 February 1850), later 1st Baron Godolphin; married The Hon. Elizabeth Eden, third daughter of the 1st Baron Auckland, on 31 March 1800 and had issue.

He married secondly Catherine, daughter of Thomas Anguish, in 1788 and had two more children: 
* Lord Sidney Godolphin Osborne (1789–1861); unmarried.
* Lady Catherine Anne Sarah Osborne (1791–1878); married Major John Whyte-Melville on 1 June 1819 and had issue.

Leeds died in London in January 1799, aged 48, and was buried in the Osborne family chapel at All Hallows Church, Harthill, South Yorkshire. He was succeeded in the dukedom by his eldest son from his first marriage, George Osborne, 6th Duke of Leeds. His second son from his first marriage, Lord Francis Osborne, was created Baron Godolphin in 1832. The dowager Duchess of Leeds died in October 1837, aged 73. Leeds&#x27;s Political Memoranda were edited by Oscar Browning for the Camden Society in 1884, and there are eight volumes of his official correspondence in the British Museum.

==References==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q333862" start="0" end="44" title="Francis Osborne, 5th Duke of Leeds" label="Francis Godolphin Osborne, 5th Duke of Leeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q333862" start="90" end="112" title="Francis Osborne, 5th Duke of Leeds" label="Marquess of Carmarthen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371091" start="172" end="189" title="Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs (UK)" label="Foreign Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q128902" start="196" end="220" title="William Pitt the Younger" label="William Pitt the Younger"/>
<link wikidata="Q48774864" start="252" end="270" title="Governor of the Scilly Isles" label="Governor of Scilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q215248" start="309" end="328" title="Order of the Garter" label="Order of the Garter"/>
<link wikidata="Q59400" start="563" end="596" title="Thomas Osborne, 4th Duke of Leeds" label="Thomas Osborne, 4th Duke of Leeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q71799" start="611" end="620" title="Mary Osborne, Duchess of Leeds" label="Lady Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q716347" start="634" end="674" title="Francis Godolphin, 2nd Earl of Godolphin" label="Francis Godolphin, 2nd Earl of Godolphin"/>
<link wikidata="Q151628" start="680" end="727" title="Henrietta Godolphin, 2nd Duchess of Marlborough" label="Henrietta Godolphin, 2nd Duchess of Marlborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341516" start="748" end="766" title="Westminster School" label="Westminster School"/>
<link wikidata="Q745967" start="774" end="795" title="Christ Church, Oxford" label="Christ Church, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q486839" start="837" end="857" title="Member of Parliament" label="Member of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q5422600" start="862" end="865" title="Eye (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Eye"/>
<link wikidata="Q5710584" start="882" end="889" title="Helston (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Helston"/>
<link wikidata="Q4021063" start="935" end="955" title="writ of acceleration" label="writ of acceleration"/>
<link wikidata="Q927300" start="959" end="972" title="Baron Osborne" label="Baron Osborne"/>
<link wikidata="Q11007" start="989" end="1003" title="House of Lords" label="House of Lords"/>
<link wikidata="Q161159" start="1037" end="1046" title="Charlotte of Mecklenburg-Strelitz" label="the Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q28408162" start="1068" end="1090" title="Captain of Deal Castle" label="Captain of Deal Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q11007" start="1099" end="1113" title="House of Lords" label="House of Lords"/>
<link wikidata="Q312593" start="1174" end="1184" title="Frederick North, Lord North" label="Lord North"/>
<link wikidata="Q11798105" start="1272" end="1319" title="Lord Lieutenant of the East Riding of Yorkshire" label="Lord Lieutenant of the East Riding of Yorkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371091" start="1496" end="1534" title="Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs (UK)" label="Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q128902" start="1541" end="1565" title="William Pitt the Younger" label="William Pitt the Younger"/>
<link wikidata="Q5975504" start="1606" end="1618" title="Jeremy Black (historian)" label="Jeremy Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q927300" start="1738" end="1751" title="Duke of Leeds" label="Duke of Leeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q127318" start="1890" end="1905" title="King George III" label="King George III"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="2174" end="2187" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q11806" start="2212" end="2222" title="John Adams" label="John Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812" start="2227" end="2243" title="Thomas Jefferson" label="Thomas Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q541557" start="2410" end="2420" title="Anglophile" label="Anglophile"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="2611" end="2620" title="President of the United States" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q71854" start="2907" end="2924" title="Amelia Osborne, Marchioness of Carmarthen" label="Lady Amelia Darcy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7343394" start="2938" end="2974" title="Robert Darcy, 4th Earl of Holderness" label="Robert Darcy, 4th Earl of Holderness"/>
<link wikidata="Q71795" start="3157" end="3225" title="George Osborne, 6th Duke of Leeds" label="&amp;quot;George&amp;quot; William Frederick Osborne, Marquess of Carmarthen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3101971" start="3332" end="3354" title="George Townshend, 1st Marquess Townshend" label="1st Marquess Townshend"/>
<link wikidata="Q47538633" start="3391" end="3438" title="Mary Pelham, Countess of Chichester" label="Lady &amp;quot;Mary&amp;quot; Henrietta Juliana Osborne"/>
<link wikidata="Q337864" start="3485" end="3522" title="Thomas Pelham, 2nd Earl of Chichester" label="Thomas Pelham, 2nd Earl of Chichester"/>
<link wikidata="Q16066414" start="3578" end="3610" title="Francis Osborne, 1st Baron Godolphin" label="Lord &amp;quot;Francis&amp;quot; Osborne"/>
<link wikidata="Q333449" start="3731" end="3749" title="William Eden, 1st Baron Auckland" label="1st Baron Auckland"/>
<link wikidata="Q46215420" start="3804" end="3813" title="Catherine Osborne, Duchess of Leeds" label="Catherine"/>
<link wikidata="Q17529409" start="4143" end="4188" title="All Hallows Church, Harthill, South Yorkshire" label="All Hallows Church, Harthill, South Yorkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q71795" start="4265" end="4298" title="George Osborne, 6th Duke of Leeds" label="George Osborne, 6th Duke of Leeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q16066414" start="4340" end="4360" title="Francis Osborne, 1st Baron Godolphin" label="Lord Francis Osborne"/>
<link wikidata="Q4862406" start="4374" end="4389" title="Baron Godolphin" label="Baron Godolphin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7105899" start="4507" end="4521" title="Oscar Browning" label="Oscar Browning"/>
<link wikidata="Q5025817" start="4530" end="4544" title="Camden Society" label="Camden Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q6373" start="4620" end="4634" title="British Museum" label="British Museum"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="309026" wikidata="Q333011" url="?curid=309026" title="Dudley Ryder, 1st Earl of Harrowby">
<text>Dudley Ryder, 1st Earl of Harrowby, PC, FSA (22 December 176226 December 1847) was a prominent British politician of the Pittite faction and the Tory party.

==Background and education==
Born in London, Ryder was the eldest son of Nathaniel Ryder, 1st Baron Harrowby, and his wife Elizabeth (née Terrick). Sir Dudley Ryder was his grandfather and Richard Ryder his younger brother. He was educated at Harrow School and St John&#x27;s College, Cambridge.

==Political career==
Harrowby was elected to his father&#x27;s old Parliament seat of Tiverton in 1784. His administrative career began with an appointment to be Joint Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs in 1789. In 1791 he was appointed joint Paymaster of the Forces, having been made Vice-President of the Board of Trade in 1790. He resigned the positions and also that of Treasurer of the Navy when he succeeded to his father&#x27;s barony in June 1803. In 1804 he was Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs. After James Monroe&#x27;s first interview with him on 30 May 1804, &quot;...Monroe reported to his Government that Lord Harrowby&#x27;s manners were designedly unfriendly; his reception was rough, his comments on the Senate&#x27;s habit of mutilating treaties were harsh, his conduct throughout the interview was calculated to wound and to irritate.&quot;

In 1805 he was Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster under his intimate friend William Pitt; in the latter year he was sent on a special and important mission to the emperors of Austria and Russia and the king of Prussia as part of the Hanover Expedition. In 1809 he was honoured when he was made Viscount Sandon, of Sandon in the County of Stafford, and Earl of Harrowby, in the County of Lincoln. From November 1809 to June 1812 he served as Minister without portfolio in the cabinet of Spencer Perceval.

From 1812 to 1827, he served as Lord President of the Council under Lord Liverpool. After George Canning&#x27;s death in 1827, Harrowby refused to serve George IV as prime minister and never held office again. Despite this he continued to take part in politics, being especially prominent during the deadlock which preceded the passing of the Reform Bill in 1832. Harrowby&#x27;s long association with the Tories did not prevent him from assisting to remove the disabilities of Roman Catholics and Protestant dissenters, or from supporting the movement for electoral reform; he was also in favour of the emancipation of the slaves. He was a member of the Literary Association of the Friends of Poland.

==Family==
Lord Harrowby married Lady Susanna Leveson-Gower, daughter of Granville Leveson-Gower, 1st Marquess of Stafford, in 1795. They had the following children:

* Lady Susan Ryder (1796–1827), married Hugh Fortescue, 2nd Earl Fortescue§
* Dudley Ryder, 2nd Earl of Harrowby (1798–1882)
* Granville Dudley Ryder (1799–1879)
* Lady Mary Ryder (1801–1900), married Admiral Edward Saurin (son of William Saurin)
* Lady Georgiana Elizabeth Ryder (1804–1844), married John Stuart-Wortley, 2nd Baron Wharncliffe
* Frederick Dudley Ryder (1806–1882)
* Edward Henry Dudley Ryder (1809–1811)
* Lady Harriet Charlotte Sophia Ryder (1811–1899), married Rev. Lord Charles Hervey
* Lady Louisa Elizabeth Ryder (1813–1899), married Capt. George Fortescue §

§ &quot;Earl Fortescue and George Fortescue were brothers.&quot;

Lady Susanna died in May 1838. Lord Harrowby survived her by nine years and died in December 1847 at his Staffordshire residence, Sandon Hall, aged 85, being, as Charles Cavendish Fulke Greville says, &quot;the last of his generation and of the colleagues of Mr Pitt, the sole survivor of those stirring times and mighty contests.&quot;

==Notes==
==References==
*Kidd, Charles, Williamson, David (editors). &quot;Debrett&#x27;s Peerage and Baronetage&quot; (1990 edition). New York: St Martin&#x27;s Press, 1990, 
*

==External links==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q333011" start="0" end="34" title="Dudley Ryder, 1st Earl of Harrowby" label="Dudley Ryder, 1st Earl of Harrowby"/>
<link wikidata="Q683120" start="36" end="38" title="Her Majesty&amp;#x27;s Most Honourable Privy Council" label="PC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5417893" start="40" end="43" title="Society of Antiquaries of London" label="FSA"/>
<link wikidata="Q499956" start="121" end="128" title="Pittite" label="Pittite"/>
<link wikidata="Q3433953" start="145" end="149" title="Tory" label="Tory"/>
<link wikidata="Q6969839" start="231" end="266" title="Nathaniel Ryder, 1st Baron Harrowby" label="Nathaniel Ryder, 1st Baron Harrowby"/>
<link wikidata="Q5311971" start="306" end="322" title="Dudley Ryder (judge)" label="Sir Dudley Ryder"/>
<link wikidata="Q7328800" start="347" end="360" title="Richard Ryder (19th century politician)" label="Richard Ryder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247373" start="401" end="414" title="Harrow School" label="Harrow School"/>
<link wikidata="Q691283" start="419" end="452" title="St John&amp;#x27;s College, Cambridge" label="St John&amp;#x27;s College, Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7810397" start="541" end="549" title="Tiverton (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Tiverton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7883047" start="623" end="681" title="Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs" label="Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7156775" start="722" end="745" title="Paymaster of the Forces" label="Paymaster of the Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q112958585" start="764" end="800" title="Vice-President of the Board of Trade" label="Vice-President of the Board of Trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q6488533" start="853" end="874" title="Treasurer of the Navy" label="Treasurer of the Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371091" start="950" end="988" title="Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs (UK)" label="Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q11815" start="996" end="1008" title="James Monroe" label="James Monroe"/>
<link wikidata="Q162754" start="1362" end="1398" title="Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster" label="Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q128902" start="1425" end="1437" title="William Pitt the Younger" label="William Pitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q130834" start="1524" end="1531" title="Francis II, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q15193" start="1536" end="1542" title="Alexander I of Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q37134" start="1559" end="1566" title="Frederick William III of Prussia" label="Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q111169969" start="1582" end="1600" title="Hanover Expedition" label="Hanover Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q61412205" start="1790" end="1816" title="Minister without portfolio (United Kingdom)" label="Minister without portfolio"/>
<link wikidata="Q233992" start="1835" end="1851" title="Spencer Perceval" label="Spencer Perceval"/>
<link wikidata="Q943379" start="1886" end="1915" title="Lord President of the Council" label="Lord President of the Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q312569" start="1922" end="1936" title="Robert Jenkinson, 2nd Earl of Liverpool" label="Lord Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q219731" start="1944" end="1958" title="George Canning" label="George Canning"/>
<link wikidata="Q130586" start="2007" end="2016" title="George IV of the United Kingdom" label="George IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1619120" start="2197" end="2208" title="Reform Act 1832" label="Reform Bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q3433953" start="2260" end="2266" title="Tory" label="Tories"/>
<link wikidata="Q2821697" start="2458" end="2470" title="abolitionism in the United Kingdom" label="emancipation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6647593" start="2509" end="2554" title="Literary Association of the Friends of Poland" label="Literary Association of the Friends of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090291" start="2630" end="2679" title="Granville Leveson-Gower, 1st Marquess of Stafford" label="Granville Leveson-Gower, 1st Marquess of Stafford"/>
<link wikidata="Q5359607" start="2764" end="2798" title="Hugh Fortescue, 2nd Earl Fortescue" label="Hugh Fortescue, 2nd Earl Fortescue"/>
<link wikidata="Q5311965" start="2802" end="2836" title="Dudley Ryder, 2nd Earl of Harrowby" label="Dudley Ryder, 2nd Earl of Harrowby"/>
<link wikidata="Q5596937" start="2851" end="2873" title="Granville Ryder (1799–1879)" label="Granville Dudley Ryder"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018141" start="2955" end="2969" title="William Saurin" label="William Saurin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6259508" start="3025" end="3067" title="John Stuart-Wortley, 2nd Baron Wharncliffe" label="John Stuart-Wortley, 2nd Baron Wharncliffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q17198967" start="3209" end="3228" title="Lord Charles Hervey" label="Lord Charles Hervey"/>
<link wikidata="Q24568594" start="3286" end="3302" title="George Fortescue (MP)" label="George Fortescue"/>
<link wikidata="Q23105" start="3477" end="3490" title="Staffordshire" label="Staffordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416453" start="3502" end="3513" title="Sandon Hall" label="Sandon Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q3532211" start="3534" end="3566" title="Charles Cavendish Fulke Greville" label="Charles Cavendish Fulke Greville"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="309028" wikidata="Q717501" url="?curid=309028" title="Fu Zuoyi">
<text>Fu Zuoyi () (June 2, 1895 − April 19, 1974) was a Chinese military leader. He began his military career in the service of Yan Xishan, and he was widely praised for his defense of Suiyuan from the Japanese. During the final stages of the Chinese Civil War, Fu surrendered the large and strategic garrison around Beiping to Communist forces. He later served in the government of the People&#x27;s Republic of China as Minister of the Hydraulic Ministry.

==Biography==
===Early military career===
Fu began his career as an officer in Yan Xishan&#x27;s Shanxi army. He served with distinction during the 1927–1928 Northern Expedition, after Yan declared his allegiance to the Kuomintang. Fu fought for Yan in the 1929–1930 Central Plains War, when Yan attempted to form a central government with himself as president. Yan&#x27;s forces were easily routed by the forces of Chiang Kai-shek, and Yan was forced to live for a short period in exile.

===Defense of Suiyuan===
After Yan returned to Shanxi in 1931, Fu led Yan Xishan&#x27;s efforts to &quot;colonize&quot; and take control over the Inner Mongolian province of Suiyuan. Most of the work and settlement of Suiyuan at this time was done by Shanxi farmer-soldiers under Fu&#x27;s direction. The activities of Fu&#x27;s farmer-soldiers included mining Suiyuan&#x27;s iron deposits (24% of all in China) and bringing over of farmland under cultivation for the first time. Fu cultivated a close relationship with Zhang Xueliang in order to increase the legitimacy of Yan&#x27;s control over Suiyuan.

In March 1936, Manchukuo troops occupying Chahar invaded northeastern Suiyuan, contesting Fu&#x27;s control. These Japanese-aligned troops seized the city of Bailingmiao in northern Suiyuan, where the pro-Japanese Inner Mongolian Autonomous Political Council maintained its headquarters. Three months later, the head of the Political Council, Demchugdongrub declared that he was the ruler of an independent Mongolia (Mengguguo), and organized an army with the aid of Japanese equipment and training. In August 1936 Demchugdongrub&#x27;s army attempted to invade eastern Suiyuan, but it was defeated by Yan&#x27;s forces under the command of Fu Zuoyi. Following this defeat, Demchugdongrub planned another invasion while Japanese agents carefully sketched and photographed Suiyuan&#x27;s defenses.

In November 1936 the army of Demchugdongrub presented Fu Zuoyi with an ultimatum to surrender. When Fu responded that Demchugdongrub was merely a puppet of &quot;certain quarters&quot; and requested that Demchugdongrub submit to the authority of the central government, Demchugdongrub&#x27;s armies launched another, more ambitious attack. Demchugdongrub&#x27;s 15,000 soldiers were armed with Japanese weapons, supported by Japanese aircraft, and often led by Japanese officers. (Japanese soldiers fighting for Mengguguo were often executed by Fu after their capture as illegal combatants, since Mengguguo was not recognized as being part of Japan).

In anticipation of the Second Sino-Japanese War, Japanese spies destroyed a large supply depot in Datong and carried out other acts of sabotage. In order to defend Suiyuan, Yan placed his best troops and most able generals, including Zhao Chengshou and Yan&#x27;s son-in-law, Wang Jingguo, under Fu&#x27;s command. During the month of fighting that ensued, the army of Mengguguo suffered severe casualties. Fu&#x27;s forces succeeded in occupying Bailingmiao on November 24, 1936, and was considering invading Chahar before he was warned by the Kwantung Army that doing so would provoke an attack by the Japanese Army. Demchugdongrub&#x27;s forces repeatedly attempted to retake Bailingmiao, but this only provoked Fu into sending troops north, where he successfully seized the last of Demchugdongrub&#x27;s bases in Suiyuan and virtually annihilated his army. After Japanese were found to be aiding Demchugdongrub, Yan publicly accused Japan of aiding the invaders. Fu&#x27;s victories in Suiyuan over Japanese-backed forces were praised by Chinese newspapers and magazines, other warlords and political leaders, and many students and members of the Chinese public. Fu&#x27;s victories in Suiyuan greatly increased his prestige, and the prestige of Yan Xishan.

===Defense against the Communists and Japanese===
During the Second Sino-Japanese War, Fu held numerous commands in North China. As Commander of 7th Army Group he fought in Operation Chahar, the Battle of Taiyuan and the 1939–1940 Winter Offensive, in which he was responsible for winning the Battle of Wuyuan. Fu ended the war as Commander of the 12th War Area, comprising Rehe, Chahar, and Suiyuan.

During the Chinese Civil War, Fu&#x27;s forces (500,000 men) controlled the critically important Suiyuan-Beiping Corridor that separated Manchuria from China proper. After the Communists captured the Manchurian provinces in late 1948, Communists infiltrated Fu&#x27;s inner circle and pressured Fu to negotiate a peaceful solution for the inevitable Communist take over. At the same time, Fu became increasingly disillusioned with Chiang. Fu&#x27;s personal estrangement from Chiang reaching a climax in October 1948, when Chiang suddenly withdrew from a critical meeting on the defense of territory under Fu&#x27;s command without giving any immediate explanation. Sometime earlier Chiang&#x27;s son, Chiang Ching-kuo, had arrested and refused to release his cousin, Kung Ling-kan, as part of a broader effort to punish economic and financial criminals. Realizing that her nephew could be executed for his crimes, and that Chiang Ching-kuo was highly likely to execute Kong to set an example, Soong Mei-ling begged her husband Chiang Kai-shek to fly immediately to Shanghai to rescue Kung. Chiang left in the middle of the most important stage of defensive planning, a great blow to Nationalist morale and left an impression on Fu and many other Nationalist commanders. Fu remarked that this proved Chiang &quot;loved the beauty more than the throne,&quot; that is, he had placed the welfare of his family above the welfare of the nation.

Communist agents active within Fu&#x27;s inner circle included Fu&#x27;s own daughter, Fu Dongju, and Fu&#x27;s most trusted personal secretary, Major General (閻又文), who was from the same hometown as Fu (Ronghe, in Yuncheng). Fu Dongju, Yan Youwen, and other agents pressured Fu to surrender and repeatedly passed vital intelligence to the Communists. Fu began secret negotiations with Lin Biao, in which he arranged the surrender of the Beiping garrison, totaling a quarter of a million men, on January 31, 1949. Yan Youwen acted as Fu&#x27;s representative during Fu&#x27;s communication with Lin, but Fu did not know the true allegiance of Yan until after the establishment of the People&#x27;s Republic of China.

===Life in Communist China===
Fu’s contributions to the Communist Party of China&#x27;s success were rewarded with high posts, including the Minister of Hydraulics, which he kept until 1972, as well as posts in the Chinese People&#x27;s Political Consultative Conference. During the Cultural Revolution (1966–1975) Fu was part of a list of people drafted by Zhou Enlai and approved by Mao to be protected and was moved to Jingxi Hotel for safeguarding. Fu&#x27;s daughter, Fu Dongju was not impacted by the upheaval either. 

In 1982, Fu Dongju became assistant chief editor of Xinhua News Agency&#x27;s Hong Kong branch. She retired in 1995 and died in 2007.

==Military career: important dates==
*1928–1929 General Officer Commanding Tianjin Garrison Command
*1929–1930 General Officer Commanding 10th Army
*1930–1932 General Officer Commanding 35th Army
*1931–1946 Chairman of the Government Suiyuan Province
*1933–1941 Commander in Chief 7th Army Group
*1937–1941 General Officer Commanding 35th Corps
*1938 Commander in Chief Northern Route Force, 2nd War Area
*1939–1945 Deputy Commander in Chief 8th War Area
*1945 Commander in Chief 12th War Area
*1945–1947 Director of Kalgan Pacification Headquarters
*1946–1947 Chairman of the Government of Chahar Province
*1947–1948 Commander in Chief General Headquarters for Bandit Suppression in North China

== References ==
=== Citations ===
=== Sources ===
* Gillin, Donald G. &quot;Warlord: Yen Hsi-shan in Shansi Province 1911–1949&quot;. Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press. 1967.
* Chinese generals, Fu Zuoyi

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q717501" start="0" end="8" title="Fu Zuoyi" label="Fu Zuoyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501380" start="50" end="57" title="Chinese people" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q699698" start="122" end="132" title="Yan Xishan" label="Yan Xishan"/>
<link wikidata="Q700207" start="168" end="175" title="Suiyuan campaign" label="defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151036" start="179" end="186" title="Suiyuan" label="Suiyuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q179975" start="237" end="254" title="Chinese Civil War" label="Chinese Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q6961622" start="311" end="318" title="Beiping" label="Beiping"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="381" end="412" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q699698" start="532" end="542" title="Yan Xishan" label="Yan Xishan"/>
<link wikidata="Q46913" start="550" end="556" title="Shanxi" label="Shanxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073476" start="611" end="630" title="Northern Expedition (1926–1927)" label="Northern Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q31113" start="673" end="683" title="Kuomintang" label="Kuomintang"/>
<link wikidata="Q717809" start="720" end="738" title="Central Plains War" label="Central Plains War"/>
<link wikidata="Q16574" start="869" end="884" title="Chiang Kai-shek" label="Chiang Kai-shek"/>
<link wikidata="Q41079" start="1089" end="1103" title="Inner Mongolia" label="Inner Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151036" start="1117" end="1124" title="Suiyuan" label="Suiyuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q20148" start="1463" end="1477" title="Zhang Xueliang" label="Zhang Xueliang"/>
<link wikidata="Q30623" start="1566" end="1575" title="Manchukuo" label="Manchukuo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058919" start="1593" end="1599" title="Chahar Province" label="Chahar"/>
<link wikidata="Q803778" start="1709" end="1720" title="Bailingmiao" label="Bailingmiao"/>
<link wikidata="Q6899548" start="1765" end="1809" title="Inner Mongolian Autonomous Political Council" label="Inner Mongolian Autonomous Political Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q715770" start="1894" end="1908" title="Demchugdongrub" label="Demchugdongrub"/>
<link wikidata="Q697837" start="1968" end="1977" title="Mengjiang" label="Mengguguo"/>
<link wikidata="Q170314" start="3024" end="3048" title="Second Sino-Japanese War" label="Second Sino-Japanese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q72877" start="3099" end="3105" title="Datong" label="Datong"/>
<link wikidata="Q8070512" start="3235" end="3249" title="Zhao Chengshou" label="Zhao Chengshou"/>
<link wikidata="Q6121212" start="3277" end="3289" title="Wang Jingguo" label="Wang Jingguo"/>
<link wikidata="Q646394" start="3546" end="3559" title="Kwantung Army" label="Kwantung Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q170314" start="4325" end="4349" title="Second Sino-Japanese War" label="Second Sino-Japanese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q6148020" start="4437" end="4453" title="Operation Chahar" label="Operation Chahar"/>
<link wikidata="Q709521" start="4459" end="4476" title="Battle of Taiyuan" label="Battle of Taiyuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q705319" start="4485" end="4511" title="1939–1940 Winter Offensive" label="1939–1940 Winter Offensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q705279" start="4557" end="4573" title="Battle of Wuyuan" label="Battle of Wuyuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148671" start="4638" end="4642" title="Rehe Province" label="Rehe"/>
<link wikidata="Q179975" start="4677" end="4694" title="Chinese Civil War" label="Chinese Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079794" start="4818" end="4830" title="China proper" label="China proper"/>
<link wikidata="Q313598" start="5368" end="5384" title="Chiang Ching-kuo" label="Chiang Ching-kuo"/>
<link wikidata="Q10944212" start="5434" end="5447" title="Kung Ling-kan" label="Kung Ling-kan"/>
<link wikidata="Q17135" start="5660" end="5674" title="Soong Mei-ling" label="Soong Mei-ling"/>
<link wikidata="Q16574" start="5694" end="5709" title="Chiang Kai-shek" label="Chiang Kai-shek"/>
<link wikidata="Q8288042" start="6194" end="6203" title="Fu Dongju" label="Fu Dongju"/>
<link wikidata="Q73073" start="6322" end="6330" title="Yuncheng" label="Yuncheng"/>
<link wikidata="Q315475" start="6493" end="6501" title="Lin Biao" label="Lin Biao"/>
<link wikidata="Q6961622" start="6545" end="6552" title="Beiping" label="Beiping"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="6791" end="6822" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q17427" start="6881" end="6905" title="Communist Party of China" label="Communist Party of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q19215" start="7040" end="7095" title="Chinese People&amp;#x27;s Political Consultative Conference" label="Chinese People&amp;#x27;s Political Consultative Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q8690" start="7108" end="7127" title="Cultural Revolution" label="Cultural Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q17410" start="7183" end="7193" title="Zhou Enlai" label="Zhou Enlai"/>
<link wikidata="Q16892903" start="7247" end="7259" title="Jingxi Hotel" label="Jingxi Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q204839" start="7403" end="7421" title="Xinhua News Agency" label="Xinhua News Agency"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="309032" wikidata="Q566746" url="?curid=309032" title="Annex">
<text>Annex (American English) or annexe (Commonwealth English; see spelling differences) may refer to:

== Places ==
* The Annex, a neighbourhood in downtown Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
* The Annex (New Haven), a neighborhood of New Haven, Connecticut, United States.
* Annex, Oregon, a census-designated place in the United States.

== Other uses ==
* Annex (comics), a Marvel Comics character
* Addendum or appendix at the end of a document
* The Annex, Grand Cayman, a football ground in George Town, Cayman Islands
* &quot;Annex&quot;, B-side of the 1980 Orchestral Manoeuvres in the Dark single &quot;Enola Gay&quot;
* Annex, an early name for the Bangkok Adventist Hospital

==See also==
* Annexation</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q566746" start="0" end="5" title="Annex" label="Annex"/>
<link wikidata="Q7976" start="7" end="23" title="American English" label="American English"/>
<link wikidata="Q566746" start="28" end="34" title="Annex" label="annexe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378587" start="36" end="56" title="English in the Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth English"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="58" end="82" title="American and British English spelling differences#Miscellaneous spelling differences" label="see spelling differences"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048712" start="114" end="123" title="The Annex" label="The Annex"/>
<link wikidata="Q7713852" start="181" end="202" title="The Annex (New Haven)" label="The Annex (New Haven)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5696464" start="263" end="276" title="Annex, Oregon" label="Annex, Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q371776" start="346" end="360" title="Annex (comics)" label="Annex (comics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q352858" start="390" end="398" title="Addendum" label="Addendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7713851" start="438" end="461" title="The Annex, Grand Cayman" label="The Annex, Grand Cayman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630633" start="599" end="608" title="Enola Gay (song)" label="Enola Gay"/>
<link wikidata="Q3145248" start="646" end="672" title="Bangkok Adventist Hospital" label="Bangkok Adventist Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q194465" start="689" end="699" title="Annexation" label="Annexation"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="309033" wikidata="Q335316" url="?curid=309033" title="Henry Bathurst, 3rd Earl Bathurst">
<text>Henry Bathurst, 3rd Earl Bathurst (22 May 1762 – 27 July 1834), was a High Tory, High Church Pittite. He was an MP for thirty years before ennoblement. A personal friend of William Pitt the Younger, he became a broker of deals across cabinet factions during the Napoleonic era. After the Napoleonic Wars, Bathurst was on the conservative wing of the Tory party.

==Background and education==
Lord Bathurst was the elder son of Henry Bathurst, 2nd Earl Bathurst, by his wife Tryphena Scawen, daughter of Thomas Scawen. He was educated at Eton College from 1773 to 1778 and then up to Christ Church, Oxford. This college was considered the most academic at Oxford, and went up with his closest companions at Eton William Wyndham Grenville, Richard, Lord Wellesley, and Canon Bathurst, his cousin. He matriculated at Christ Church on 22 April 1779, at the age of sixteen. In 1781, he decided to embark on a Grand Tour of Europe. Without taking a degree, Bathurst left Oxford for Germany, where he travelled with Grenville. From Switzerland, he went to Italy, before moving north to Paris. On hearing that William Petty, 2nd Earl of Shelburne&#x27;s government was challenged by a Fox–North coalition, Bathurst headed back to London in February 1783.

Immediately upon entering politics, he admired the patriotism and oratory of William Pitt.

It was through the ultra Tories Pitt and Wellington that he helped to gain recognition for the independence of Spain and Portugal; a policy decision that was influential on the Peninsular War. Later on, he would support Canada and Australia to establish &#x27;white&#x27; dominion status, a legacy of what one historian has noted was the significant tenure of Secretary of War and Colonies before Palmerston in the 19th century. This fact is often overlooked since Bathurst was far from being a radical. The social diarist Maria Edgeworth, often alluded to by Jane Austen, wrote that he was an &quot;old school dog&quot;. A &quot;formalist&quot;, she thought who was &quot;very much from that class&quot;.

==Political career==
Lord Apsley was member of the British Parliament for Cirencester from July 1783, when he was elected the moment he turned 21 but refused to serve with the Whigs owing to a friendship with Tory William Pitt. A maiden speech bravely opposing the East India Bill was sufficiently impressive to bring down the government. On New Year&#x27;s Eve 1783 the &quot;mince pie&quot; administration was without the young lord who was called away to Cirencester.

He was a junior civil lord of the Admiralty from 1783 to 1789 adhering firmly to the Pittites. At Carshalton a by-election missing voter agents Bathurst sent a former employee to aid Pitt&#x27;s party cheering on his friends to help. The department included five lords, of whom all the others were MPs with 20 clerks and a secretary, Paul Stephens. He was assisted at the Navy Board by a &quot;hard-working&quot; Captain Charles Middleton.

Apsley contested the General Election in 1790 in his father&#x27;s interest at Cirencester. Granted the reversion in 1786 from Lord Hardwicke to the tellership sinecure worth £2,700 per annum in the Commons as a lord of the treasury to 1791. A cousin Richard Hopkins vacated a junior post at the Treasury on 10 August 1789. He was therefore responsible for counting the government&#x27;s votes on divisions in the chamber as well as recording expenditure. On 19 April 1791, he voted for repealing the slave trade in the first such vote on abolition. He was however not in favour of repealing the Test Act in Scotland. On 3 June 1791 he sat on the committee of Inquiry into the Prince of Wales&#x27; civil list and use of funds which were granted for the heir apparent&#x27;s household at Carlton House. Yet by the 21st he had resigned to attend to his dying father at home.

As an unpaid Commissioner of the Board of Control from 1793, he was sworn to the Privy Council on 21 June. When awarded a salary by Pitt he rejected it for the sinecures that already obtained. He was again at the centre of cabinet government, but had failed to make his mark attending only a quarter of the meetings held every ten days. In the Commons, he was a diffident speaker, and not a great orator, which hampered advancement to the great offices of state. He relinquished office on his father&#x27;s death in 1794. Lord Mornington offered the Governorship of Madras, but even on appointment, he withdrew from travelling to India, to which his wife objected strongly.

In 1801 he was a Joint clerk of the crown in Chancery worth £1,100 pa; a position that monitored claims and civil suits, giving him an eye for better administrative competence. At the height of Bonaparte&#x27;s invasion scares he returned home to command the Cirencester Volunteer Cavalry. When Pitt was asked to resume as Prime Minister he chose his old friend again in May 1804, to be Master of the Mint in new offices built by Robert Smirke in July, while he worked on the entrance hall at Cirencester. He professed to Pitt he was &quot;well provided for&quot; after he had tried to bring the Pitt and Grenville factions to unite. He advised Grenville that the king would not tolerate Catholic officers in the Army during a national crisis, on the Whig&#x27;s summons to the palace. His friend&#x27;s death on 23 Jan 1806 prompted Bathurst to quit politics, but the Ministry of all the Talents was very brief.

Appointed as President of the Board of Trade in March 1807, Bathurst&#x27;s first concern was Napoleon&#x27;s Continental System against free trade. Yet he was defeated by cabinet &#x27;hawks&#x27;, who closed all British ports, invoking the Navigation Acts at home and abroad. Bathurst&#x27;s response was the Orders-in-council of 11 and 25 November 1807. He was behind Admiral Berkeley&#x27;s posting to Lisbon, and subsequent championing of John VI of Portugal as Emperor of Brazil. Obliged to concede Napoleon&#x27;s Convention of Cintra, Canning criticised the policy as &quot;the most disastrous.&quot;

In defending royalty when the Duke of York resigned as Commander-in-chief he refuted the allegation of corruption, being bribery for the sale of commissions. &quot;There is no calculation to advantages...to the capture of the Island of Flushing&quot; he told the vice-president at the Board. Bathurst also advised the King on Portland&#x27;s resignation from ill health. For the two months from 11 October 1809 he was briefly in charge of the Foreign Office he imposed a travel ban to Portugal, withdrawing diplomat Henry Williams-Wynne. Thinking of the lines at Torres Vedras he sent the King a board of backgammon, a strategic victory.

He remained Master of the Mint during the ministries of the Duke of Portland and Spencer Perceval, only vacating these posts in June 1812 to become Secretary of State for War and the Colonies under Lord Liverpool; a position he retained until Liverpool resigned in April 1827.

Bathurst deserves some credit for improving the conduct of the Peninsular War, while it was his duty to defend the government concerning its treatment of Napoleon Bonaparte. Bathurst endorsed Sir George Prévost&#x27;s policy in British North America when war broke out in 1812. He ordered the Provincial Marines to be replaced with Royal Navy personnel authorising the occupation of the Great Lakes; yet organized with the defence of Canada in mind. The strategy remained essentially defensive and underfunded until Napoleon I was sent to Elba in 1814; by which time it was too late. Bathurst refused to send large-scale reinforcements. However, when operations switched to the north-western forests and inlets of Vancouver Sound in British Columbia 20,000 troops arrived to prevent incursion over the border. The failure of the Plattsburgh Expedition destroyed Prevost&#x27;s reputation among Royal Navy officers. He was recalled to face a court-martial on Bathurst&#x27;s orders, but died in 1815.

When King George IV turned to George Canning to form a government following Liverpool&#x27;s resignation, Bathurst, along with Wellington and Lord Eldon on the far right of the Tory party, who called themselves the &#x27;Ultra Tories&#x27;, refused to serve under him due to the new prime minister&#x27;s humble origins, liberal policies and support for Catholic emancipation. When Wellington in turn was called to form a government a few months later in the aftermath of Canning&#x27;s death, he opted for a middle-of-the-road cabinet and Bathurst had to contend with the relatively minor position of Lord President of the council.

==A High Tory==
A close friend of Castlereagh&#x27;s and Wellington&#x27;s, Bathurst shared their view that the first responsibility of government was to try to preserve the established order both at home and overseas. He enjoyed sinecure incomes as Teller of the Exchequer and Clerk of the Crown and, as such, was a beneficiary of the &#x27;old corruption&#x27; system loathed by radicals. He was a High Churchman and a High Tory, a significant Gloucestershire landowner, a lifelong supporter of agricultural interests and a supporter of the Corn Laws. As Colonial Secretary, he would be hostile both to the introduction of representative institutions, and to the development of a free press in Britain&#x27;s possessions. While himself an efficient and conscientious bureaucrat, he ran the Colonial Office on traditional, paternalistic lines and overseas posting owed much to status, nepotism and family contacts. He appointed his brother-in-law the Duke of Richmond, who was in financial straits, Governor-General of Canada and sent out his son-in-law, Major General Sir Frederic Ponsonby, to be Governor of Malta. He appointed as Governor of Cape Colony Lord Charles Somerset, a son of his friend the Duke of Beaufort. On the other hand, while not an abolitionist, he was a friend of William Wilberforce and he pressed his colonial governors hard to improve the living conditions of Caribbean slaves.

===Position regarding penal transportation===
Bathurst reorganized the department with his capable Under-secretary Henry Goulburn. Blue books were introduced for the first time with new office routines. Goulburn&#x27;s successor, Wilmot Horton was an admirer of practical good sense and discretion. Bathurst appears to have been personable, amused and capable of delegating tasks. To prevent a Tory split he supported Pitt&#x27;s decision to return the Cape of Good Hope colony in Feb 1801, voted to keep the Aliens Act 1793 and wanted foreigners to carry passports. He accepted the Peace Treaty of Amiens in 1802 following Pitt&#x27;s lead, whom Malmesbury said: &quot;he looked up to&quot;.

In 1817 he dispatched a commission of inquiry to Australia to investigate the colony&#x27;s use of transportation and treatment of convicts. John Bigge sent back three Reports recommending that more settlers should be sent to the colony, and therefore transportation should continue. Bathurst ordered changes to the administration of justice and land distribution in the colony. He was made Knight of the Garter in 1817, and he held several lucrative sinecures. The collapse of wages and economic depression since 1800 exercised the mind of the Board President 
&quot;When I paused over this scene of misery, unequalled in the history of civilised times, I felt naturally to demand, how it was possible to sustain existence in such circumstances, and whether it were not practicable to administer charitable aid?&quot; Rising unemployment brought a real sense of crisis to Bathurst&#x27;s statement to the Lords. Much of the blame for importuned labourers begging in the streets was protectionism, Lord Brougham demanding on 13 March 1817, &quot;a full and unsparing review of the whole commercial policy of this country&quot;. Also in 1817 he made a signal speech to the Lords governing the conditions under which Napoleon had been sent to St Helena in which he made it clear the hardship the former emperor was facing.

===Position regarding the abolition of slavery===

Bathurst&#x27;s official position caused his name to be mentioned frequently during the agitation for the abolition of slavery, and with regard to this traffic, he seems to have been animated by a humane spirit. This is recognised in the naming of the town of Bathurst, Eastern Cape, which was renamed in memorial for a humanitarian gesture towards the settlers of Albany, and parliamentary censure of Lord Charles Somerset, its excessively punitive governor-general. The current capital of The Gambia, Banjul, was originally named Bathurst after the earl.

Bathurst was Lord President of the Council in the government of the Duke of Wellington from 1828 to 1830, and favoured the removal of the disabilities of Roman Catholics, although did not believe that it would improve the constitution and so voted against. He was however a sturdy opponent of the Reform Bill of 1832. The Earl, who had four sons and two daughters, died on 27 July 1834 at his London home, 16 Arlington Street, Piccadilly. He was buried in Cirencester Abbey&#x27;s parish church. Charles Greville&#x27;s much-quoted encomium is hardly flattering but remains largely because it was published in his &quot;Memoirs&quot;.

==Family==

Lord Bathurst married Lady Georgiana, daughter of Lord George Henry Lennox, in April 1789. He died in July 1834, aged 72, and was succeeded in the earldom by his eldest son, Henry.

* Henry George (1790–1866)
* William Lennox (1791–1878)
* Louisa Georgina (1792–1874)
* Peter George Allen (1794–1796)
* Seymour Thomas (1795–1834)
* Emily Charlotte (1798–1877) married Frederick Ponsonby.
* Rev. Charles (1802–1842)

Lady Bathurst died in January 1841, aged 75.

===Likenesses===
Sir Thomas Lawrence was the court painter when Bathurst sat for his studio. Subsequent etchings were done in London, in 1810, by Thomas Phillips and Henry Meyer. One example was purchased by the National Portrait Gallery of Australia in Canberra.

There is a sculpture of Bathurst on the exterior of the Colonial Office in London.

==Legacy==
Bathurst was portrayed by Christopher Lee in the South African television series &quot;Shaka Zulu&quot;.

;Some places named after Bathurst:
* Bathurst County, a county in New South Wales, Australia
* Bathurst, a regional city in New South Wales, Australia
* Bathurst Island, part of the Tiwi Islands, in Northern Territory, Australia
* Bathurst Island, an island in Nunavut, Canada
* Bathurst Street, a street in Toronto, Canada
* Bathurst, a city in New Brunswick, Canada
* Bathurst, a town in Eastern Cape, South Africa
* Bathurst, the capital city of The Gambia, now known as Banjul

==See also==
* Second Portland ministry
* Spencer Perceval ministry

==Notes==

==Sources==
* 
* Arthur Aspinall, &quot;The Letters of King George IV 1812-1830&quot;, 3 volumes, (London 1938)
* Francis Bickley (ed.), &quot;Report on the manuscripts of Earl Bathurst, preserved at Cirencester Park&quot;, HMC, 76 (1923)
* &quot;Supplementary despatches (correspondence) and memoranda of Field Marshal Arthur, duke of Wellington&quot;, ed. A. R. Wellesley, second duke of Wellington, 15 vols. (1858–72)
* &quot;Despatches, correspondence, and memoranda of Field Marshal Arthur, duke of Wellington&quot;, ed. A. R. Wellesley, second duke of Wellington, 8 vols. (1867–80)
* N. D. McLachlan, &#x27;Bathurst at the colonial office, 1812–27: a reconnaissance&#x27;, &quot;Historical Studies&quot; [University of Melbourne], 13 (1967–9), 477–502
* N. Thompson, &quot;Earl Bathurst and the British empire&quot; (Barnsley 1999)
* G. E. Cokayne, The Complete Peerage of Great Britain and Ireland, vol.XIV (London 1912–1958)
* History of Parliament, Commons
* &quot;The Greville memoirs, 1814–1860&quot;, ed. L. Strachey and R. Fulford, 8 vols. (1938)
* &quot;The Times&quot; (29 July 1834)

===Archives===

* BL, 108 volumes of corresp. and papers, Loan 57
* Lord Bathurst, Cirencester Papers, 70 Letters
* Glos. RO, Cirencester MSS
* NL Scot., dispatches and papers received
* Surrey HC, secret service accounts
* Surrey HC, Goulburn Papers
* BL, corresp. with Lord Aberdeen, Add MS 43074–43260
* BL, corresp. with Sir William A&#x27;Court, Add MS 41511–41523
* BL, corresp. with Lord Grenville, Add MS 58944
* BL, corresp. with Lord Liverpool, Add MS 38247–38575
* BL, corresp. with Sir Hudson Lowe, Add MS 20111–20233, &quot;passim&quot;
* BL, corresp. with Sir H. Lowe, Add MS 49508, &quot;passim&quot;
* BL, corresp. with Sir Robert Peel, Add MS 40226–40398
* BL, corresp. with comte de Puisaye, Add MS 7981
* BL, corresp. with George Rose, Add MS 42773
* BL, corresp. with Lord Wellesley, Add MS 37288–37314, &quot;passim&quot;
* BL OIOC, corresp. with Mary Skelton, MS Eur. E 334
* CKS, corresp. with Lord Camden
* Royal Archives
* Cumbria AS, Carlisle, letters to Lord Lonsdale
* Derbys. RO, corresp. with Sir R. J. Wilmot-Horton (Cotton) Papers
* LPL, corresp. with Bishop Howley · Mitchell L., 
* NSW, letters to Sir Robert Wilmot Horton · Mount Stuart Trust Archive, Mount Stuart, Rothesay, letters to Lord Hastings
* NA Scot., corresp. with Lord Dalhousie
* NA Scot., letters to Sir Alexander Hope
* NL Scot., corresp. with Sir Alexander Cochrane and Thomas Cochrane
* NL Scot., corresp. with Sir Francis Graham
* NL Scot., corresp. with Lord Melville
* NL Scot., dispatches and letters to Lord Stuart De Rothesay
* PRONI, corresp. with Lord Castlereagh · Sandon Hall, Staffordshire, Harrowby Manuscript Trust, corresp. with Lord Harrowby
* TNA: PRO, letters to William Pitt, PRO 30/8
* U. Nott. L., letters to Lord William Bentinck
* U. Nott. L., letters to fourth duke of Newcastle
* U. Southampton L., letters to duke of Wellington [copies].
* U. Keele, Sneyd Papers
* U. NSW Aus, The Mitchell Lib., Bathurst Papers
* U. W Ontario, D.B.Weldon Lib., Bathurst Papers
===Glossary===
* BL - British Library
* OIOC - Oriental and India Office catalogue, in British Library
* CKS - 
* Derbys RO - Derbyshire Record Office 
* Surrey HC - Surrey History Centre
* NL Scot - National Library Scotland
* NA Scot - National Archives Scotland 
* PRONI - Public Record Office of Northern Ireland 
* U. Nott. L. - University of Nottingham Library
* TNA - The National Archives of UK at Kew, Richmond, Surrey.

==External links==
* Henry Bathurst, third Earl Bathurst at &quot;Australian Dictionary of Biography&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q335316" start="0" end="33" title="Henry Bathurst, 3rd Earl Bathurst" label="Henry Bathurst, 3rd Earl Bathurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q5757318" start="70" end="79" title="High Tory" label="High Tory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070069" start="81" end="92" title="High church" label="High Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q499956" start="93" end="100" title="Tories (British political party)" label="Pittite"/>
<link wikidata="Q128902" start="173" end="197" title="William Pitt the Younger" label="William Pitt the Younger"/>
<link wikidata="Q122204616" start="262" end="276" title="Napoleonic era" label="Napoleonic era"/>
<link wikidata="Q78994" start="288" end="303" title="Napoleonic Wars" label="Napoleonic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q335667" start="427" end="460" title="Henry Bathurst, 2nd Earl Bathurst" label="Henry Bathurst, 2nd Earl Bathurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q28150473" start="503" end="516" title="Thomas Scawen (died 1774)" label="Thomas Scawen"/>
<link wikidata="Q192088" start="537" end="549" title="Eton College" label="Eton College"/>
<link wikidata="Q745967" start="583" end="604" title="Christ Church, Oxford" label="Christ Church, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q312596" start="711" end="736" title="William Grenville, 1st Baron Grenville" label="William Wyndham Grenville"/>
<link wikidata="Q6682302" start="904" end="914" title="Grand Tour" label="Grand Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q312573" start="1102" end="1138" title="William Petty, 2nd Earl of Shelburne" label="William Petty, 2nd Earl of Shelburne"/>
<link wikidata="Q5477357" start="1177" end="1196" title="Fox–North coalition" label="Fox–North coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q161885" start="2098" end="2105" title="Kingdom of Great Britain" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q5121860" start="2121" end="2132" title="Cirencester (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Cirencester"/>
<link wikidata="Q128902" start="2261" end="2273" title="William Pitt the Younger" label="William Pitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q396266" start="2553" end="2562" title="British Admiralty" label="Admiralty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043440" start="3748" end="3761" title="Carlton House" label="Carlton House"/>
<link wikidata="Q683120" start="3916" end="3929" title="Privy Council of Great Britain" label="Privy Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q6785312" start="4897" end="4915" title="Master of the Mint" label="Master of the Mint"/>
<link wikidata="Q983719" start="4940" end="4953" title="Robert Smirke (architect)" label="Robert Smirke"/>
<link wikidata="Q27037814" start="5437" end="5468" title="President of the Board of Trade" label="President of the Board of Trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q258081" start="5534" end="5552" title="Continental System" label="Continental System"/>
<link wikidata="Q200435" start="5561" end="5571" title="free trade" label="free trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q676301" start="5868" end="5887" title="John VI of Portugal" label="John VI of Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q617457" start="5891" end="5908" title="List of monarchs of Brazil" label="Emperor of Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q277204" start="5945" end="5965" title="Convention of Cintra" label="Convention of Cintra"/>
<link wikidata="Q213573" start="6064" end="6076" title="Prince Frederick, Duke of York" label="Duke of York"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6550" end="6570" title="Henry Williams-Wynne" label="Henry Williams-Wynne"/>
<link wikidata="Q157208" start="6733" end="6749" title="William Cavendish-Bentinck, 3rd Duke of Portland" label="Duke of Portland"/>
<link wikidata="Q233992" start="6754" end="6770" title="Spencer Perceval" label="Spencer Perceval"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546682" start="6821" end="6864" title="Secretary of State for War and the Colonies" label="Secretary of State for War and the Colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q312569" start="6871" end="6885" title="Robert Banks Jenkinson, 2nd Earl of Liverpool" label="Lord Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q152499" start="7014" end="7028" title="Peninsular War" label="Peninsular War"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="7105" end="7123" title="Napoleon I of France" label="Napoleon Bonaparte"/>
<link wikidata="Q602260" start="7147" end="7161" title="George Prévost" label="George Prévost"/>
<link wikidata="Q2237111" start="7780" end="7802" title="Battle of Plattsburgh" label="Plattsburgh Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q219731" start="7982" end="7996" title="George Canning" label="George Canning"/>
<link wikidata="Q337737" start="8094" end="8104" title="John Scott, 1st Earl of Eldon" label="Lord Eldon"/>
<link wikidata="Q428286" start="8306" end="8327" title="Catholic emancipation" label="Catholic emancipation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7697591" start="8836" end="8859" title="Teller of the Receipt of the Exchequer" label="Teller of the Exchequer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133144" start="9129" end="9138" title="Corn Laws" label="Corn Laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q335394" start="9534" end="9554" title="Charles Lennox, 4th Duke of Richmond" label="the Duke of Richmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q5497504" start="9656" end="9677" title="Frederick Ponsonby (British Army officer)" label="Sir Frederic Ponsonby"/>
<link wikidata="Q207672" start="9874" end="9893" title="William Wilberforce" label="William Wilberforce"/>
<link wikidata="Q5722116" start="10107" end="10121" title="Henry Goulburn" label="Henry Goulburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7528875" start="10222" end="10235" title="Robert Wilmot-Horton" label="Wilmot Horton"/>
<link wikidata="Q112183" start="10575" end="10597" title="Treaty of Amiens" label="Peace Treaty of Amiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q6221864" start="10827" end="10837" title="John Bigge" label="John Bigge"/>
<link wikidata="Q215248" start="11077" end="11097" title="Order of the Garter" label="Knight of the Garter"/>
<link wikidata="Q923724" start="11137" end="11145" title="sinecure" label="sinecure"/>
<link wikidata="Q169390" start="12165" end="12185" title="abolition of slavery" label="abolition of slavery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1005" start="12550" end="12560" title="The Gambia" label="The Gambia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3726" start="12562" end="12568" title="Banjul" label="Banjul"/>
<link wikidata="Q943379" start="12630" end="12659" title="Lord President of the Council" label="Lord President of the Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q131691" start="12685" end="12703" title="Arthur Wellesley, 1st Duke of Wellington" label="Duke of Wellington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1619120" start="12914" end="12925" title="Reform Act 1832" label="Reform Bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q3760574" start="13315" end="13339" title="Lord George Henry Lennox" label="Lord George Henry Lennox"/>
<link wikidata="Q5717877" start="13439" end="13444" title="Henry Bathurst, 4th Earl Bathurst" label="Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5717877" start="13449" end="13461" title="Henry Bathurst, 4th Earl Bathurst" label="Henry George"/>
<link wikidata="Q8005198" start="13476" end="13490" title="William Bathurst, 5th Earl Bathurst" label="William Lennox"/>
<link wikidata="Q19609382" start="13568" end="13582" title="Seymour Thomas Bathurst" label="Seymour Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5497504" start="13633" end="13651" title="Frederick Ponsonby (British Army officer)" label="Frederick Ponsonby"/>
<link wikidata="Q180338" start="14113" end="14128" title="Christopher Lee" label="Christopher Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="14136" end="14148" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q818928" start="14174" end="14184" title="Shaka Zulu (TV Series)" label="Shaka Zulu"/>
<link wikidata="Q4869110" start="14230" end="14245" title="Bathurst County" label="Bathurst County"/>
<link wikidata="Q704978" start="14288" end="14296" title="Bathurst, New South Wales" label="Bathurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q810814" start="14346" end="14361" title="Bathurst Island (Northern Territory)" label="Bathurst Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q217369" start="14424" end="14439" title="Bathurst Island (Canada)" label="Bathurst Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q4869136" start="14472" end="14487" title="Bathurst Street, Toronto" label="Bathurst Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q810807" start="14519" end="14527" title="Bathurst, New Brunswick" label="Bathurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q3642949" start="14563" end="14571" title="Bathurst, Eastern Cape" label="Bathurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q3726" start="14667" end="14673" title="Banjul" label="Banjul"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212176" start="14690" end="14714" title="Second Portland ministry" label="Second Portland ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7167054" start="14717" end="14742" title="Spencer Perceval ministry" label="Spencer Perceval ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q672680" start="18340" end="18374" title="Australian Dictionary of Biography" label="Australian Dictionary of Biography"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="309034" wikidata="Q312656" url="?curid=309034" title="Lon Chaney">
<text>Leonidas Frank &quot;Lon&quot; Chaney (April 1, 1883 – August 26, 1930) was an American actor and makeup artist. He is regarded as one of the most versatile and powerful actors of cinema, renowned for his characterizations of tortured, often grotesque and afflicted, characters and for his groundbreaking artistry with makeup. Chaney was known for his starring roles in such silent horror films as &quot;The Hunchback of Notre Dame&quot; (1923) and &quot;The Phantom of the Opera&quot; (1925). His ability to transform himself using makeup techniques that he developed earned him the nickname &quot;The Man of a Thousand Faces&quot;. 

==Early life==
Leonidas Frank Chaney was born in Colorado Springs, Colorado, to Frank H. Chaney (a barber) and Emma Alice Kennedy. His father was of English and French ancestry, and his mother was of Scottish, English, and Irish descent. Chaney&#x27;s maternal grandfather, Jonathan Ralston Kennedy, founded the &quot;Colorado School for the Education of Mutes&quot; (now Colorado School for the Deaf and Blind) in 1874, and Chaney&#x27;s parents met there. His great-grandfather was congressman John Chaney from Ohio.

Both of Chaney&#x27;s parents were deaf and, as a child of deaf adults, Chaney became skilled in American Sign Language. He entered a stage career in 1902, and began traveling with popular vaudeville and theater acts. In 1905, Chaney, then 22, met and married 16-year-old singer Cleva Creighton (Frances Cleveland Creighton) and in 1906, their only child, a son, Creighton Tull Chaney (later known as Lon Chaney Jr.) was born. The Chaneys continued touring, settling in California in 1910.

Marital troubles developed and on April 30, 1913, Cleva went to the Majestic Theatre, where Lon was managing the &quot;Kolb and Dill&quot; show, and attempted suicide by swallowing mercuric chloride. The suicide attempt failed, but it ruined her singing career; the ensuing scandal and divorce forced Chaney out of the theater and into film.

The time spent there is not clearly known, but between the years 1912 and 1917, Chaney worked under contract for Universal Studios doing bit or character parts. His skill with makeup gained him many parts in the highly competitive casting atmosphere. During this time, Chaney befriended the husband-wife director team of Joe De Grasse and Ida May Park, who gave him substantial roles in their pictures and further encouraged him to play macabre characters.

In 1915, Chaney married one of his former colleagues in the Kolb and Dill company, a recently divorced chorus girl named Hazel Hastings. The new couple gained custody of Chaney&#x27;s 10-year-old son Creighton, who had resided in various homes and boarding schools since Chaney&#x27;s divorce from Cleva in 1913.

==Career==

By 1917, Chaney was a prominent actor in the studio, but his salary did not reflect this status. When Chaney asked for a raise, studio executive William Sistrom replied, &quot;You&#x27;ll never be worth more than one hundred dollars a week.&quot; After leaving the studio, Chaney struggled for the first year as a character actor. It was not until he played a substantial role in William S. Hart&#x27;s picture &quot;Riddle Gawne&quot; (1918) that Chaney&#x27;s talents as a character actor were truly recognized by the industry.

Universal presented Chaney, Dorothy Phillips, and William Stowell as a team in &quot;The Piper&#x27;s Price&quot; (1917). In succeeding films, the men alternated playing lover, villain, or other man to the beautiful Phillips. They would occasionally be joined by Claire DuBrey, nearly making the trio a quartet of recurring actors from film to film. So successful were the films starring this group that Universal produced fourteen films from 1917 to 1919 with Chaney, Stowell, and Phillips.

The films were usually directed by Joe De Grasse or his wife Ida May Park - both, friends of Chaney - at Universal. When Chaney was away branching out on films such as &quot;Riddle Gawne&quot; and &quot;The Kaiser, the Beast of Berlin&quot; (both 1918), Stowell and Phillips would continue on as a duo until Chaney&#x27;s return. Stowell and Phillips made &quot;The Heart of Humanity&quot; (also 1918), bringing in Erich von Stroheim for a part as the villain that could easily have been played by Chaney.

&quot;Paid in Advance&quot; (1919) was the group&#x27;s last film together, for Stowell was sent to Africa by Universal to scout locations for a movie. En route from one city to another, Stowell was in the caboose when it was hit by the locomotive from another train; he was killed instantly. The majority of these films are lost apart from a few, including &quot;Triumph&quot; and &quot;Paid in Advance&quot;, which survive in private collections or in European or Russian archives.
Chaney had a breakthrough performance as &quot;The Frog&quot; in George Loane Tucker&#x27;s &quot;The Miracle Man&quot; (1919). The film displayed not only Chaney&#x27;s acting ability, but also his talent as a master of makeup. Critical praise and a gross of over $2 million put Chaney on the map as America&#x27;s foremost character actor.

Chaney exhibited great adaptability with makeup in more conventional crime and adventure films, such as &quot;The Penalty&quot; (1920), in which he played a gangster with both legs amputated. Chaney appeared in ten films directed by Tod Browning, often portraying disguised and/or mutilated characters, including carnival knife-thrower Alonzo the Armless in &quot;The Unknown&quot; (1927) opposite Joan Crawford. Around the same time, Chaney also co-starred with Conrad Nagel, Marceline Day, Henry B. Walthall, and Polly Moran in the Tod Browning horror film &quot;London After Midnight&quot; (1927), one of the most sought after lost films. His final film role was &quot;The Unholy Three&quot; (1930), a sound remake of his 1925 silent film of the same name. The 1930 remake was his only &quot;talkie&quot; and the only film in which Chaney utilized his powerful and versatile voice. Chaney signed a sworn statement declaring that five of the key voices in the film (the ventriloquist, the old woman, a parrot, the dummy and the girl) were his own.

Makeup in the early days of cinema was almost non-existent with the exception of beards and mustaches to denote villains. Most of what the Hollywood studios knew about film stemmed from their experience with theater makeup, but this did not always transfer well to the big screen, especially as the film quality improved over time. Makeup departments were not yet in place during Chaney&#x27;s time. Prior to the mid-20s, actors were expected to do their own makeup.

In the absence of such specialized professions, Chaney&#x27;s skills gave him a competitive advantage over other actors. He was the complete package. Casting crews knew that they could place him in virtually any part and he would thrive. In some films his skill allowed him to play dual roles. An extreme case of this was the film &quot;Outside the Law&quot; (1920), where he played a character who shot and killed another character, whom he also was playing.

As Quasimodo, the bell ringer of Notre Dame Cathedral, and Erik, the &quot;phantom&quot; of the Paris Opera House, Chaney created two of the most grotesquely deformed characters in film history. &quot;&quot;Phantom&quot; … became a legend almost immediately,&quot; wrote the &quot;Los Angeles Times&quot; in 1990. &quot;The newspapers of the day reported that women fainted, children bawled and grown men stepped outside for fresh air after the famous unmasking scene.&quot; &quot;The unmasking of the titular Phantom is one of the most well-known moments in silent film,&quot; wrote Meg Shields in 2020. &quot;Arguably, it’s one of the most horrifying images ever put on screen.&quot;
However, Chaney&#x27;s portrayals sought to elicit a degree of sympathy and pathos among viewers not overwhelmingly terrified or repulsed by the monstrous disfigurements of these victims of fate.
 In a 1925 autobiographical article for &quot;Movie&quot; magazine, he wrote: &quot;I wanted to remind people that the lowest types of humanity may have within them the capacity for supreme self-sacrifice. The dwarfed, misshapen beggar of the streets may have the noblest ideals. Most of my roles since &quot;The Hunchback,&quot; such as &quot;The Phantom of the Opera&quot;, &quot;He Who Gets Slapped&quot;, &quot;The Unholy Three,&quot; etc., have carried the theme of self-sacrifice or renunciation. These are the stories which I wish to do.&quot; Chaney referred to his expertise in both makeup and contorting his body to portray his subjects as &quot;extraordinary characterization&quot;. Chaney&#x27;s talents extended beyond the horror genre and stage makeup. He was also a highly skilled dancer, singer and comedian.

Ray Bradbury once said of Chaney, &quot;He was someone who acted out our psyches. He somehow got into the shadows inside our bodies; he was able to nail down some of our secret fears and put them on-screen. The history of Lon Chaney is the history of unrequited loves. He brings that part of you out into the open, because you fear that you are not loved, you fear that you never will be loved, you fear there is some part of you that&#x27;s grotesque, that the world will turn away from.&quot;
Chaney and his second wife Hazel led a discreet private life distant from the Hollywood social scene. Chaney did minimal promotional work for his films and for Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer, purposefully fostering a mysterious image, and he reportedly intentionally avoided the social scene in Hollywood.

In the final five years of his film career (1925–1930), Chaney worked exclusively under contract to Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer, giving some of his most memorable performances. His portrayal of a tough-as-nails marine drill instructor in &quot;Tell It to the Marines&quot; (1926), one of his favorite films, earned him the affection of the Marine Corps, who made him their first honorary member from the motion picture industry.

He also earned the respect and admiration of numerous aspiring actors, to whom he offered mentoring assistance, and between takes on film sets he was always willing to share his professional observations with the cast and crew. During the filming of &quot;The Unknown&quot; (1927), Joan Crawford stated that she learned more about acting from watching Chaney work than from anyone else in her career. &quot;It was then,&quot; she said, &quot;I became aware for the first time of the difference between standing in front of a camera, and acting.&quot;

==Death==
During the filming of &quot;Thunder&quot; in the winter of 1929, Chaney developed pneumonia. In late 1929, he was diagnosed with bronchial lung cancer. This was exacerbated when fake snow lodged in his throat during filming and caused a serious infection. Despite aggressive treatment, his condition gradually worsened, and he died of a throat hemorrhage on August 26, 1930, in a Los Angeles, California hospital.

His funeral was held on August 28 in Glendale, California. Honorary pallbearers included Paul Bern, Hunt Stromberg, Irving Thalberg, Louis B. Mayer, Lionel Barrymore, Wallace Beery, Tod Browning, Lew Cody, and Ramon Novarro. The U.S. Marine Corps provided a chaplain and Honor Guard for his funeral. While his funeral was being conducted, all MGM studios and offices observed two minutes of silence.
Chaney was interred at Forest Lawn Memorial Park Cemetery in Glendale, next to the crypt of his father. His wife Hazel was interred there upon her death in 1933. In accordance with his will, Chaney&#x27;s crypt has remained unmarked.

==Legacy==
In 1957, Chaney was the subject of a biopic titled &quot;Man of a Thousand Faces&quot;, in which he was portrayed by James Cagney. The film is a largely fictionalized account, as Chaney was notoriously private and hated the Hollywood lifestyle. He never revealed personal details about himself or his family, once stating, &quot;Between pictures, there is no Lon Chaney.&quot;

Chaney&#x27;s son Creighton, later known as Lon Chaney Jr., became a film actor after his father&#x27;s death. Chaney Jr. is best remembered for roles in horror films, such as the title character in &quot;The Wolf Man&quot; (1941). In October 1997, both Chaneys appeared on commemorative US postage stamps as the Phantom of the Opera and the Wolf Man, with the set completed by Bela Lugosi as Count Dracula and Boris Karloff as Frankenstein&#x27;s monster and the Mummy.

Chaney is also the subject of the 2000 documentary feature, &quot;Lon Chaney: A Thousand Faces&quot;. The film was produced by silent film historian Kevin Brownlow and narrated by Kenneth Branagh.

In the song &quot;Werewolves of London&quot; by Warren Zevon, both Chaney and his son Lon Chaney Jr are namechecked in the last verse.

==Honors==

Chaney has a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame, located on Hollywood Boulevard. In 1994, Al Hirschfeld&#x27;s caricature of Chaney was featured on a commemorative United States postage stamp.

In 1929, Chaney built a stone cabin in the remote wilderness of the eastern Sierra Nevada near Big Pine, California as a retreat, hiring Paul R. Williams. Located in the Inyo National Forest, the cabin still stands, though it is not open to the public. Following his death, Chaney&#x27;s famous makeup case was donated to the Los Angeles County Museum by his widow, Hazel. The case is occasionally displayed for the public. The stage theater at the Colorado Springs Civic Auditorium is also named after the actor.

There is a street named after Chaney in San Antonio, Texas.

==Filmography==
Approximately 102 of the 157 films made by Chaney are currently classified as lost films. A number of the remaining 55 films exist only in extremely truncated form or suffer from severe decomposition.

Two of Chaney’s films (&quot;The Phantom of the Opera&quot; and &quot;He Who Gets Slapped&quot;) are inducted into Library of Congress’ National Film Registry.

===Short subjects===
===Feature films===

==Gallery: The Man of a Thousand Faces==
==Notes==
==References==
==Bibliography==
* Anderson, Robert Gordon. &quot;Faces, Forms, Films: The Artistry of Lon Chaney&quot;. South Brunswick, New Jersey: A. S. Barnes, 1971. .
* Blackmar, Frank W., ed. &quot;Kansas: A Cyclopedia of State History, Embracing Events, Institutions, Industries, Counties, Cities, Towns, Prominent Persons, etc.&quot;. Chicago : Standard Publishing Company, 1912. 
* Blake, Michael F. &quot;The Films of Lon Chaney&quot;. Vestal, New York: Vestal Press, 1998. .
* Blake, Michael F. &quot;A Thousand Faces: Lon Chaney&#x27;s Unique Artistry in Motion Pictures&quot;. Vestal, New York: Vestal Press, 1997. .
* Blake, Michael F. &quot;Lon Chaney: The Man Behind the Thousand Faces&quot;. Vestal, New York: Vestal Press, 1997. 
* Blum, Daniel. &quot;Pictorial History of the Silent Screen&quot;. New York: Grosset and Dunlap, 1953. .
* Dick, Bernard F. &quot;City of Dreams: The Making and Remaking of Universal Pictures&quot;. Lexington, Kentucky: The University Press of Kentucky, 1997. .
* Fleming, E.J. &quot;Paul Bern: The Life and Famous Death of the Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer Director and Husband of Harlow&quot;. Jefferson, North Carolina: McFarland &amp; Company, 2009. .
* Guiley, Rosemary. &quot;The Encyclopedia of Vampires, Werewolves, and Other Monsters&quot;. New York: Infobase Publishing, 2004. .
* Herzogenrath, Bernd, ed. &quot;The Cinema of Tod Browning: Essays of the Macabre and Grotesque&quot;. Jefferson, North Carolina: McFarland &amp; Company, 2008. .
* LaSalle, Mick. &quot;Complicated Women: Sex and Power in Pre-Code Hollywood&quot;. New York: Thomas Dunne Books, an imprint of St. Martin&#x27;s Press, 2000. .
* Locan, Clarence A. &quot;The Lon Chaney I Knew,&quot; &quot;Photoplay&quot;, November 1930, p. 58.
* &quot;Lon Chaney&#x27;s Make-up,&quot; &quot;Photoplay&quot;, March 1922, p. 43.
* Riley, Philip J. &quot;MagicImage Filmbooks Presents The Wolf Man&quot;. Chesterfield, New Jersey: MagicImage Filmbooks, 1993. .
* Sangster, Margaret E. &quot;Lon Chaney&quot; (poem), &quot;Photoplay&quot;, October 1930, p. 40.
* Schikel, Richard and Allen Hurlburt. &quot;The Stars&quot;. New York: Bonanza Books, a division of Crown Publishers, 1962. .
* Slide, Anthony. &quot;Silent Players: A Biographical and Autobiographical Study of 100 Silent Film Actors and Actresses&quot;. Lexington, Kentucky: University Press of Kentucky, 2010. .
* Smith, Don G. &quot;Lon Chaney Jr.: Horror Film Star, 1906–1973&quot;. Jefferson, North Carolina: McFarland &amp; Company, 2004. .
* Vogel, Michelle. &quot;Olive Borden: The Life and Films of Hollywood&#x27;s &#x27;Joy Girl&#x27;.&quot; Jefferson, North Carolina: McFarland &amp; Company, 2010. .
==External links==
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q312656" start="0" end="14" title="Lon Chaney" label="Leonidas Frank"/>
<link wikidata="Q312656" start="21" end="24" title="Lon Chaney" label="Lon"/>
<link wikidata="Q312656" start="31" end="37" title="Lon Chaney" label="Chaney"/>
<link wikidata="Q200092" start="382" end="393" title="horror film" label="horror film"/>
<link wikidata="Q288425" start="404" end="431" title="The Hunchback of Notre Dame (1923 film)" label="The Hunchback of Notre Dame"/>
<link wikidata="Q927919" start="455" end="479" title="The Phantom of the Opera (1925 film)" label="The Phantom of the Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q312656" start="599" end="626" title="Lon Chaney" label="The Man of a Thousand Faces"/>
<link wikidata="Q49258" start="685" end="711" title="Colorado Springs, Colorado" label="Colorado Springs, Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q5148908" start="1008" end="1046" title="Colorado School for the Deaf and Blind" label="Colorado School for the Deaf and Blind"/>
<link wikidata="Q6225694" start="1132" end="1143" title="John Chaney (congressman)" label="John Chaney"/>
<link wikidata="Q2591645" start="1206" end="1225" title="child of deaf adult" label="child of deaf adult"/>
<link wikidata="Q14759" start="1253" end="1275" title="American Sign Language" label="American Sign Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q186286" start="1345" end="1355" title="vaudeville" label="vaudeville"/>
<link wikidata="Q318261" start="1557" end="1571" title="Lon Chaney Jr." label="Lon Chaney Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q18755117" start="1715" end="1731" title="Majestic Theatre (Los Angeles)" label="Majestic Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q18353097" start="1766" end="1779" title="Kolb and Dill" label="Kolb and Dill"/>
<link wikidata="Q143200" start="1828" end="1845" title="Mercury(II) chloride" label="mercuric chloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q168383" start="2103" end="2120" title="Universal Pictures" label="Universal Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373209" start="2311" end="2324" title="Joe De Grasse" label="Joe De Grasse"/>
<link wikidata="Q971059" start="2329" end="2341" title="Ida May Park" label="Ida May Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q269770" start="2696" end="2711" title="boarding school" label="boarding school"/>
<link wikidata="Q2580560" start="2919" end="2934" title="William Sistrom" label="William Sistrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q636680" start="3154" end="3169" title="William S. Hart" label="William S. Hart"/>
<link wikidata="Q7332431" start="3191" end="3203" title="Riddle Gawne" label="Riddle Gawne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2012872" start="3333" end="3349" title="Dorothy Phillips" label="Dorothy Phillips"/>
<link wikidata="Q3568977" start="3355" end="3370" title="William Stowell" label="William Stowell"/>
<link wikidata="Q17027588" start="3390" end="3412" title="The Piper&amp;#x27;s Price" label="The Piper&amp;#x27;s Price"/>
<link wikidata="Q2975042" start="3568" end="3581" title="Claire DuBrey" label="Claire DuBrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7332431" start="3972" end="3984" title="Riddle Gawne" label="Riddle Gawne"/>
<link wikidata="Q7743936" start="4001" end="4032" title="The Kaiser, the Beast of Berlin" label="The Kaiser, the Beast of Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3987491" start="4160" end="4181" title="The Heart of Humanity" label="The Heart of Humanity"/>
<link wikidata="Q78508" start="4213" end="4231" title="Erich von Stroheim" label="Erich von Stroheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q18386036" start="4311" end="4326" title="Paid in Advance" label="Paid in Advance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470867" start="4511" end="4518" title="caboose" label="caboose"/>
<link wikidata="Q2054461" start="4854" end="4873" title="George Loane Tucker" label="George Loane Tucker"/>
<link wikidata="Q3988331" start="4887" end="4902" title="The Miracle Man (1919 film)" label="The Miracle Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q948329" start="5114" end="5129" title="character actor" label="character actor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1922615" start="5242" end="5253" title="The Penalty (1920 film)" label="The Penalty"/>
<link wikidata="Q51476" start="5365" end="5377" title="Tod Browning" label="Tod Browning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197672" start="5496" end="5507" title="The Unknown (1927 film)" label="The Unknown"/>
<link wikidata="Q40475" start="5530" end="5543" title="Joan Crawford" label="Joan Crawford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126956" start="5595" end="5607" title="Conrad Nagel" label="Conrad Nagel"/>
<link wikidata="Q782604" start="5609" end="5622" title="Marceline Day" label="Marceline Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q661678" start="5624" end="5641" title="Henry B. Walthall" label="Henry B. Walthall"/>
<link wikidata="Q461681" start="5647" end="5658" title="Polly Moran" label="Polly Moran"/>
<link wikidata="Q253397" start="5697" end="5718" title="London After Midnight (film)" label="London After Midnight"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268687" start="5762" end="5771" title="lost film" label="lost film"/>
<link wikidata="Q3221520" start="5804" end="5820" title="The Unholy Three (1930 film)" label="The Unholy Three"/>
<link wikidata="Q1989317" start="5862" end="5890" title="The Unholy Three (1925 film)" label="silent film of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q848512" start="5927" end="5933" title="talkie" label="talkie"/>
<link wikidata="Q4006146" start="6988" end="7003" title="Outside the Law (1920 film)" label="Outside the Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750634" start="7115" end="7124" title="Quasimodo" label="Quasimodo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981" start="7145" end="7165" title="Notre Dame Cathedral" label="Notre Dame Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750813" start="7171" end="7175" title="Erik (The Phantom of the Opera)" label="Erik"/>
<link wikidata="Q187840" start="7208" end="7225" title="Paris Opera House" label="Paris Opera House"/>
<link wikidata="Q188515" start="7393" end="7410" title="Los Angeles Times" label="Los Angeles Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q194101" start="8204" end="8211" title="dwarfism" label="dwarfed"/>
<link wikidata="Q927919" start="8338" end="8362" title="The Phantom of the Opera (1925 film)" label="The Phantom of the Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q2046050" start="8376" end="8395" title="He Who Gets Slapped (film)" label="He Who Gets Slapped"/>
<link wikidata="Q3221520" start="8409" end="8425" title="The Unholy Three (1930 film)" label="The Unholy Three"/>
<link wikidata="Q40640" start="8820" end="8832" title="Ray Bradbury" label="Ray Bradbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q194034" start="8893" end="8899" title="Psyche (psychology)" label="psyche"/>
<link wikidata="Q179200" start="9475" end="9494" title="Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer" label="Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2397961" start="9847" end="9869" title="Tell It to the Marines (1926 film)" label="Tell It to the Marines"/>
<link wikidata="Q11218" start="9943" end="9955" title="United States Marine Corps" label="Marine Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q5896970" start="9982" end="9997" title="Honorary Marine" label="honorary member"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197672" start="10289" end="10300" title="The Unknown (1927 film)" label="The Unknown"/>
<link wikidata="Q3793943" start="10623" end="10630" title="Thunder (1929 film)" label="Thunder"/>
<link wikidata="Q12192" start="10677" end="10686" title="pneumonia" label="pneumonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q47912" start="10734" end="10745" title="lung cancer" label="lung cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q60792903" start="10773" end="10782" title="fake snow" label="fake snow"/>
<link wikidata="Q485716" start="11047" end="11067" title="Glendale, California" label="Glendale, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q64678" start="11099" end="11108" title="Paul Bern" label="Paul Bern"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638070" start="11110" end="11124" title="Hunt Stromberg" label="Hunt Stromberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q438472" start="11126" end="11141" title="Irving Thalberg" label="Irving Thalberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q319682" start="11143" end="11157" title="Louis B. Mayer" label="Louis B. Mayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q295593" start="11159" end="11175" title="Lionel Barrymore" label="Lionel Barrymore"/>
<link wikidata="Q322179" start="11177" end="11190" title="Wallace Beery" label="Wallace Beery"/>
<link wikidata="Q51476" start="11192" end="11204" title="Tod Browning" label="Tod Browning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753383" start="11206" end="11214" title="Lew Cody" label="Lew Cody"/>
<link wikidata="Q711642" start="11220" end="11233" title="Ramon Novarro" label="Ramon Novarro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060409" start="11281" end="11292" title="Guard of honour" label="Honor Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437214" start="11433" end="11467" title="Forest Lawn Memorial Park (Glendale)" label="Forest Lawn Memorial Park Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q136592" start="11713" end="11736" title="Man of a Thousand Faces (film)" label="Man of a Thousand Faces"/>
<link wikidata="Q94041" start="11773" end="11785" title="James Cagney" label="James Cagney"/>
<link wikidata="Q318261" start="12078" end="12092" title="Lon Chaney Jr." label="Lon Chaney Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q431873" start="12239" end="12251" title="The Wolf Man (1941 film)" label="The Wolf Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q34529" start="12412" end="12423" title="Bela Lugosi" label="Bela Lugosi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3266236" start="12427" end="12440" title="Count Dracula" label="Count Dracula"/>
<link wikidata="Q203219" start="12445" end="12458" title="Boris Karloff" label="Boris Karloff"/>
<link wikidata="Q2021531" start="12462" end="12489" title="Frankenstein&amp;#x27;s monster" label="Frankenstein&amp;#x27;s monster"/>
<link wikidata="Q909071" start="12498" end="12503" title="The Mummy (1932 film)" label="Mummy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1724729" start="12655" end="12669" title="Kevin Brownlow" label="Kevin Brownlow"/>
<link wikidata="Q55294" start="12686" end="12701" title="Kenneth Branagh" label="Kenneth Branagh"/>
<link wikidata="Q7983281" start="12722" end="12742" title="Werewolves of London" label="Werewolves of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q375792" start="12752" end="12764" title="Warren Zevon" label="Warren Zevon"/>
<link wikidata="Q318261" start="12790" end="12803" title="Lon Chaney Jr" label="Lon Chaney Jr"/>
<link wikidata="Q71719" start="12877" end="12899" title="Hollywood Walk of Fame" label="Hollywood Walk of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q868616" start="12912" end="12931" title="Hollywood Boulevard" label="Hollywood Boulevard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1532260" start="12942" end="12955" title="Al Hirschfeld" label="Al Hirschfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q6633142" start="13016" end="13043" title="List of people on stamps of the United States" label="United States postage stamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q124366635" start="13068" end="13081" title="Lon Chaney Cabin" label="a stone cabin"/>
<link wikidata="Q26777" start="13122" end="13135" title="Sierra Nevada (U.S.)" label="Sierra Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2532244" start="13141" end="13161" title="Big Pine, California" label="Big Pine, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q7154390" start="13183" end="13199" title="Paul R. Williams" label="Paul R. Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q1671852" start="13216" end="13236" title="Inyo National Forest" label="Inyo National Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q2502709" start="13372" end="13397" title="Natural History Museum of Los Angeles County" label="Los Angeles County Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q975" start="13601" end="13619" title="San Antonio" label="San Antonio, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268687" start="13716" end="13726" title="lost films" label="lost films"/>
<link wikidata="Q927919" start="13869" end="13893" title="The Phantom of the Opera (1925 film)" label="The Phantom of the Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q2046050" start="13910" end="13929" title="He Who Gets Slapped (film)" label="He Who Gets Slapped"/>
<link wikidata="Q131454" start="13955" end="13974" title="Library of Congress" label="Library of Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q823422" start="13976" end="13998" title="National Film Registry" label="National Film Registry"/>
<link wikidata="Q49241" start="15041" end="15060" title="Lexington, Kentucky" label="Lexington, Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q3381612" start="15809" end="15818" title="Photoplay" label="Photoplay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454098" start="16163" end="16179" title="Richard Schickel" label="Schikel, Richard"/>
<link wikidata="Q4773479" start="16290" end="16304" title="Anthony Slide" label="Slide, Anthony"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="309036" wikidata="Q21450859" url="?curid=309036" title="Chaney">
<text>Chaney is a surname. Notable people with the surname include:

* Beej Chaney (1957–2025), American punk/new wave musician
* Cassius Chaney (born 1987), American boxer
* Charles &quot;Bubba&quot; Chaney (born 1946), American politician
* Chris Chaney, American musician
* Darrel Chaney, American baseball player
* Don Chaney, American basketball player and coach
* Edward Chaney, Cultural historian
* Esty Chaney (1891–1952), American baseball player
* Fred Chaney, Australian Liberal Party politician and minister in the Fraser government (son of Fred snr)
* Fred Chaney Sr., Australian Liberal Party politician and minister in the Menzies government
* George Chaney (1892–1958), American boxer
* Gregory Chaney, American politician
* Harold O. Chaney, founder of Chaney&#x27;s department stores in Greater Los Angeles
* James Chaney (1943–1964), American civil rights activist
* James E. Chaney (1885–1967), American military officer
* James M. Chaney (1921–1976), American police officer and witness to President Kennedy&#x27;s assassination
* James McDonald Chaney, American Presbyterian minister
* John Chaney (disambiguation) (several entries)
* Kate Chaney, Australian independent politician
* Lindsay Chaney, American news editor
* Lon Chaney (1883–1930), American actor
* Lon Chaney Jr. (1906–1973), American actor
* Michael Chaney, Australian businessman
* Mike Chaney (born 1944), Insurance Commissioner of Mississippi
* Norman Chaney (1918–1936), American child actor
* Olivia Chaney (born 1982) English folk singer
* Ralph Works Chaney (1890–1971) American paleobotanist.
* Tray Chaney, American actor
* William Chaney (1922–2013), American educator

==Fictional characters==
*Markoff Chaney, a character from &quot;The Illuminatus! Trilogy&quot;
*Tom Chaney, a character from &quot;True Grit&quot;

==See also==
*Chanay
*Cheney 
*Chesney</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q21450859" start="0" end="6" title="Chaney" label="Chaney"/>
<link wikidata="Q131702135" start="65" end="76" title="Beej Chaney" label="Beej Chaney"/>
<link wikidata="Q85868044" start="124" end="138" title="Cassius Chaney" label="Cassius Chaney"/>
<link wikidata="Q5074764" start="169" end="201" title="Charles &amp;quot;Bubba&amp;quot; Chaney" label="Charles &amp;quot;Bubba&amp;quot; Chaney"/>
<link wikidata="Q598026" start="237" end="249" title="Chris Chaney" label="Chris Chaney"/>
<link wikidata="Q5224560" start="271" end="284" title="Darrel Chaney" label="Darrel Chaney"/>
<link wikidata="Q2733180" start="313" end="323" title="Don Chaney" label="Don Chaney"/>
<link wikidata="Q26251307" start="364" end="377" title="Edward Chaney" label="Edward Chaney"/>
<link wikidata="Q5401938" start="400" end="411" title="Esty Chaney" label="Esty Chaney"/>
<link wikidata="Q15462333" start="452" end="463" title="Fred Chaney" label="Fred Chaney"/>
<link wikidata="Q5494804" start="559" end="574" title="Fred Chaney Sr." label="Fred Chaney Sr."/>
<link wikidata="Q5537812" start="653" end="666" title="George Chaney" label="George Chaney"/>
<link wikidata="Q28861568" start="697" end="711" title="Gregory Chaney" label="Gregory Chaney"/>
<link wikidata="Q126343535" start="764" end="777" title="Chaney&amp;#x27;s" label="Chaney&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q2733240" start="821" end="833" title="James Chaney" label="James Chaney"/>
<link wikidata="Q41751655" start="880" end="895" title="James E. Chaney" label="James E. Chaney"/>
<link wikidata="Q3698522" start="937" end="952" title="James M. Chaney" label="James M. Chaney"/>
<link wikidata="Q6139281" start="1046" end="1067" title="James McDonald Chaney" label="James McDonald Chaney"/>
<link wikidata="Q3809149" start="1102" end="1130" title="John Chaney (disambiguation)" label="John Chaney (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q112103422" start="1151" end="1162" title="Kate Chaney" label="Kate Chaney"/>
<link wikidata="Q6552670" start="1200" end="1214" title="Lindsay Chaney" label="Lindsay Chaney"/>
<link wikidata="Q312656" start="1239" end="1249" title="Lon Chaney" label="Lon Chaney"/>
<link wikidata="Q318261" start="1280" end="1294" title="Lon Chaney Jr." label="Lon Chaney Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q6829205" start="1325" end="1339" title="Michael Chaney" label="Michael Chaney"/>
<link wikidata="Q16106582" start="1366" end="1377" title="Mike Chaney" label="Mike Chaney"/>
<link wikidata="Q3878463" start="1431" end="1444" title="Norman Chaney" label="Norman Chaney"/>
<link wikidata="Q16202903" start="1481" end="1494" title="Olivia Chaney" label="Olivia Chaney"/>
<link wikidata="Q2129808" start="1529" end="1547" title="Ralph Works Chaney" label="Ralph Works Chaney"/>
<link wikidata="Q7836480" start="1586" end="1597" title="Tray Chaney" label="Tray Chaney"/>
<link wikidata="Q30058184" start="1616" end="1630" title="William Chaney" label="William Chaney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460253" start="1689" end="1703" title="Markoff Chaney" label="Markoff Chaney"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1760" end="1770" title="Tom Chaney" label="Tom Chaney"/>
<link wikidata="Q210908" start="1826" end="1832" title="Chanay" label="Chanay"/>
<link wikidata="Q10534294" start="1834" end="1840" title="Cheney (surname)" label="Cheney"/>
<link wikidata="Q21492871" start="1843" end="1850" title="Chesney" label="Chesney"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="309037" wikidata="Q334108" url="?curid=309037" title="John Ward, 1st Earl of Dudley">
<text>John William Ward, 1st Earl of Dudley, PC, FRS (9 August 1781 – 6 March 1833), known as the Honourable John Ward from 1788 to 1823 and as the 4th Viscount Dudley and Ward from 1823 to 1827, was a British politician and slave holder. He served as Foreign Secretary from 1827 to 1828.

==Background and education==
Dudley was the son of William Ward, 3rd Viscount Dudley and Ward, and his wife Julia Bosville, and was educated at Oxford University (starting at Oriel College in 1798 and transferring to Corpus Christi College, Oxford as a Gentleman Commoner in 1800).

==Political career==
Dudley entered the House of Commons in 1802 as one of two representatives for Downton. He held this seat until 1803 and later represented Worcestershire from 1803 to 1806, Petersfield from 1806 to 1807, Wareham from 1807 to 1812, Ilchester from 1812 to 1819 and Bossiney from 1819 to 1823. The latter year he succeeded his father in the peerage and took his seat in the House of Lords.

In 1827 Ward was appointed Foreign Secretary under George Canning, a post he held also under Lord Goderich and the Duke of Wellington, resigning office in May 1828. In 1827 he was admitted to the Privy Council and created Viscount Ednam, of Ednam in the County of Roxburgh, and Earl of Dudley, of Dudley Castle in the County of Stafford. As foreign minister Ward was only a cipher; but he was a man of considerable learning and had some reputation as a writer and a talker. Dudley took an interest in the foundation of the University of London, and his Letters to Edward Copleston, the Bishop of Llandaff, were published by the bishop in 1840.

==Slave holder==
Dudley was associated with three different cases, he owned 665 slaves in Jamaica and his estate was awarded a £12,728 payment at the time (worth £ in 2025).

==Personal life==
Dudley died unmarried on 6 March 1833, aged 51. His two viscountcies and his earldom became extinct on his death while he was succeeded in his junior title of Baron Ward by his second cousin Reverend William Humble Ward.

==Industries of the estate==
As Lord of Dudley, John Ward inherited mineral bearing lands in the Black Country region of England which included coal and limestone mines and furnaces. An agreement to construct a rail line was signed in 1827 by James Foster, a local ironmaster, and Francis Downing, the mineral agent of John William Ward. The line connected some of the coal pits owned by the Dudley estate to the Staffordshire and Worcestershire Canal. The line opened in June 1829 and was operated by the early steam locomotive &quot;Agenoria&quot;. This line was later connected to a network of private railways owned by John Ward&#x27;s successors, which became known as the Earl of Dudley’s Railway.

John William Ward inherited estates in Jamaica from his grandmother Mary, Viscountess Dudley and Ward, which included enslaved people. After emancipation of the slaves in 1833, the Dudley estate received compensation for the freed slaves (the Earl having died by this time).

==Works==
Letters from Ward to Helen D&#x27;Arcy Stewart were published as &quot;Letters to &quot;Ivy&quot; from the first Earl of Dudley&quot; (1905).

==References==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q334108" start="0" end="37" title="John Ward, 1st Earl of Dudley" label="John William Ward, 1st Earl of Dudley"/>
<link wikidata="Q683120" start="39" end="41" title="Her Majesty&amp;#x27;s Most Honourable Privy Council" label="PC"/>
<link wikidata="Q123885" start="43" end="46" title="Royal Society" label="FRS"/>
<link wikidata="Q334108" start="103" end="112" title="John Ward, 1st Earl of Dudley" label="John Ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q334108" start="142" end="170" title="John Ward, 1st Earl of Dudley" label="4th Viscount Dudley and Ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371091" start="246" end="263" title="Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs (UK)" label="Foreign Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q8019993" start="335" end="377" title="William Ward, 3rd Viscount Dudley and Ward" label="William Ward, 3rd Viscount Dudley and Ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="428" end="445" title="University of Oxford" label="Oxford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q81170" start="459" end="472" title="Oriel College, Oxford" label="Oriel College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135137" start="501" end="531" title="Corpus Christi College, Oxford" label="Corpus Christi College, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q15999798" start="537" end="555" title="Gentleman Commoner" label="Gentleman Commoner"/>
<link wikidata="Q11005" start="607" end="623" title="House of Commons of the United Kingdom" label="House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q5303321" start="666" end="673" title="Downton (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Downton"/>
<link wikidata="Q591779" start="726" end="740" title="Worcestershire (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Worcestershire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7178213" start="760" end="771" title="Petersfield (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Petersfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q7969269" start="791" end="798" title="Wareham (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Wareham"/>
<link wikidata="Q11797256" start="818" end="827" title="Ilchester (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Ilchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q4947600" start="850" end="858" title="Bossiney (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Bossiney"/>
<link wikidata="Q11007" start="958" end="972" title="House of Lords" label="House of Lords"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371091" start="1002" end="1019" title="Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs (UK)" label="Foreign Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q219731" start="1026" end="1040" title="George Canning" label="George Canning"/>
<link wikidata="Q312591" start="1068" end="1081" title="F. J. Robinson, 1st Viscount Goderich" label="Lord Goderich"/>
<link wikidata="Q131691" start="1090" end="1108" title="Arthur Wellesley, 1st Duke of Wellington" label="Duke of Wellington"/>
<link wikidata="Q683120" start="1171" end="1184" title="Privy Council of the United Kingdom" label="Privy Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q170027" start="1498" end="1518" title="University of London" label="University of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q5342405" start="1539" end="1555" title="Edward Copleston" label="Edward Copleston"/>
<link wikidata="Q458634" start="1561" end="1579" title="Bishop of Llandaff" label="Bishop of Llandaff"/>
<link wikidata="Q766" start="1710" end="1717" title="Jamaica" label="Jamaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q20741565" start="2013" end="2032" title="William Humble Ward, 10th Baron Ward" label="William Humble Ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q767049" start="2132" end="2145" title="Black Country" label="Black Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q11803699" start="2278" end="2290" title="James Foster (ironmaster)" label="James Foster"/>
<link wikidata="Q2328789" start="2448" end="2486" title="Staffordshire and Worcestershire Canal" label="Staffordshire and Worcestershire Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q23710199" start="2564" end="2584" title="Agenoria (locomotive)" label="&amp;quot;Agenoria&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q20821371" start="2713" end="2737" title="Earl of Dudley’s Railway" label="Earl of Dudley’s Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q18546379" start="3047" end="3072" title="Helen D&amp;#x27;Arcy Stewart" label="Helen D&amp;#x27;Arcy Stewart"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="309040" wikidata="Q334053" url="?curid=309040" title="Granville Leveson-Gower, 2nd Earl Granville">
<text>Granville George Leveson-Gower, 2nd Earl Granville (11 May 181531 March 1891), styled Lord Leveson until 1846, was a British Liberal statesman and diplomat from the Leveson-Gower family. He is best remembered for his service as Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs.

His foreign policy kept Britain free from European wars and improved relations with the United States after the strain during the American Civil War.

==Background and education==
Leveson-Gower was born in London, the eldest son of Granville Leveson-Gower, 1st Earl Granville and Lady Harriet Cavendish, daughter of Lady Georgiana Spencer and William Cavendish, 5th Duke of Devonshire. His father was a younger son of Granville Leveson-Gower, 1st Marquess of Stafford and his third wife; an elder son with his second wife (a daughter of the 1st Duke of Bridgwater) became the 2nd Marquess of Stafford, and his marriage with the daughter and heiress of the 18th Earl of Sutherland (Countess of Sutherland in her own right) led to the merging of the Gower and Stafford titles in that of the Dukes of Sutherland (created 1833), who represent the elder branch of the family. He was educated at Eton and Christ Church, Oxford.

==Political career==
Leveson-Gower went to Paris for a short time under his father, and in 1836 was elected to Parliament as Whig MP for Morpeth. For a short time (1840-1) he was Under-Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs in Lord Melbourne&#x27;s ministry. From 1841 until his father&#x27;s death in 1846, when he succeeded to the title, he sat for Lichfield.

In the House of Lords he distinguished himself as a Free Trader, and when Lord John Russell formed a government in 1846 he made him Master of the Buckhounds. He became Vice-President of the Board of Trade in 1848, and took a prominent part in promoting the Great Exhibition of 1851. Having already been admitted to the Cabinet, for about two months at the end of 1851 and the start of 1852 he succeeded Palmerston as Foreign Secretary until Russell&#x27;s defeat in 1852.

When Lord Aberdeen formed his coalition government at the end of 1852, Granville became first Lord President of the Council, and then Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster (1854). Under Lord Palmerston (1855) he was again President of the Council. His interest in education (a subject associated with this office) led to his election (1856) as chancellor of the University of London, a post he held for thirty-five years; and he was a prominent champion of the movement for the admission of women, and also of the teaching of modern languages.

From 1855 Lord Granville led the Liberals in the Upper House, both in office and, after Palmerston&#x27;s resignation in 1858, in opposition. In 1856 he was head of the British mission to Tsar Alexander II of Russia&#x27;s coronation in Moscow. In June 1859 Queen Victoria asked him to form a ministry, but he was unable to do so, and Palmerston again became Prime Minister, with Russell as Foreign Secretary and Granville once again as President of the Council.

He retained his office when, on Palmerston&#x27;s death in 1865, Lord Russell (now a peer) became Prime Minister and took over the leadership in the House of Lords. Granville, now an established Liberal leader, was made Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports.

He received an honorary degree from Cambridge University in 1864.

==Military career==
He served in the part-time Staffordshire Yeomanry, being commissioned as a major on 12 December 1848 and being promoted to lieutenant-colonel on 3 July 1854. He continued in the regiment until the early 1860s. As Lord Warden, he was appointed honorary colonel of the 1st Cinque Ports Artillery Volunteers on 23 April 1866.

==Industrial career==
Lord Granville owned coal and ironstone mines at Stoke-on-Trent and was the principal shareholder of the Shelton Iron &amp; Steel Co In 1873 the company operated 8 blast furnaces and 97 puddling furnaces. He also held shares in the Lilleshall Company.

==Foreign policy==
During the American Civil War, Granville was non-interventionist along with the majority of Palmerston&#x27;s cabinet. His memorandum against intervention in September 1862 drew Prime Minister Palmerston&#x27;s attention. The document proved to be a strong reason for Palmerston&#x27;s refusal to intervene and for Britain&#x27;s relations with the North to remain basically stable for the rest of the conflict despite tensions. From 1866 to 1868, he was in opposition, but in December 1868 he became Colonial Secretary in Gladstone&#x27;s first ministry. His tact was invaluable to the government in carrying the Irish Church and Land Bills through the House of Lords. On 27 June 1870, on Lord Clarendon&#x27;s death, he became foreign secretary. With war clouds gathering in Europe, Granville worked to authorise preliminary talks to settle American disputes and in appointing the British High Commission to sail to the United States and negotiate the most comprehensive treaty of the nineteenth century in Anglo-American relations with an American commission in Washington.

Lord Granville&#x27;s name is mainly associated with his career as foreign secretary (1870–1874 and 1880–1885). It brought better relations with the United States, and it was innovative in supporting Gladstone&#x27;s wish to settle British-American fisheries and Civil War disputes over the Confederate cruisers built in Britain, like the &quot;Alabama,&quot; through international arbitration in 1872. For example, the long-standing San Juan Island Water Boundary Dispute in Puget Sound, which had been left ambiguous in the Oregon Treaty of 1846 to salve relations and get a treaty sorting out the primary differences, was arbitrated by the German Emperor also in 1872. In putting British-American relations up to the world as a model for how to resolve disputes peacefully, Granville helped create a breakthrough in international relations.

The Franco-Prussian War of 1870 broke out within a few days of Lord Granville&#x27;s quoting in the House of Lords (11 July 1870) the opinion of the permanent under-secretary (Edmund Hammond) that &quot;he had never known so great a lull in foreign affairs.&quot; Russia took advantage of the situation to denounce the Black Sea clauses of the Treaty of Paris, and Lord Granville&#x27;s protest was ineffectual. In 1871 an intermediate zone between Asiatic Russia and Afghanistan was agreed on between him and Shuvalov; but in 1873 Russia took possession of the Khanate of Khiva, within the neutral zone, and Lord Granville had to accept the aggression (See also: The Great Game).

When the Conservatives came into power in 1874, his part for the next six years was to criticise Disraeli&#x27;s &quot;spirited&quot; foreign policy, and to defend his own more pliant methods. He returned to the foreign office in 1880, only to find an anti-British spirit developing in German policy which the temporising methods of the Liberal leaders were generally powerless to deal with.

Lord Granville failed to realise in time the importance of the Angra Pequena question in 1883–1884, and he was forced, somewhat ignominiously, to yield to Bismarck over it. Finally, when Gladstone took up Home Rule for Ireland, Lord Granville, whose mind was similarly receptive to new ideas, adhered to his chief (1886), and gave way to Lord Rosebery when the latter was preferred to the foreign office; the Liberals had now realised that they had lost ground in the country by Lord Granville&#x27;s occupancy of the post. He went into Colonial Office service for six months, and in July 1886 retired from public life.

==Family==
Lord Granville married Lady Acton (Marie Louise Pelline de Dalberg), daughter of the Duke of Dalberg, Emmerich Joseph de Dalberg (a famous diplomat), widow of Sir Ferdinand Dalberg-Acton, Bt and mother of the historian Lord Acton, in 1840. She died in 1860.

He was engaged in 1864 to an envoy and former spy from the Confederate States of America, Rose O&#x27;Neal Greenhow; but shortly thereafter, in returning to the Confederacy, she drowned off Wilmington, North Carolina, when her rowboat overturned as she was escaping a US blockade ship.

He married, as his second wife, Castilia Rosalind Campbell (or Castalia), daughter of Walter Frederick Campbell, on 26 September 1865; their children were:

*Lady Victoria Alberta Leveson-Gower (14 April 186711 February 1953), married Harold Russell (son of Lord Arthur John Edward Russell) on 8 September 1896. They had three children:
**Elizabeth Frances Russell (6 July 18991986)
**Rachel Georgiana Russell (28 January 19031 December 1995)
**Anthony Arthur Russell (2 October 19047 April 1978)
*Lady Sophia Castelia Mary Leveson-Gower (25 February 187022 March 1934), married Hugh Morrison on 16 August 1892. They had two children:
**John Granville Morrison, 1st Baron Margadale (16 December 190626 May 1996), married The Honorable Margaret Smith on 16 October 1928. They had four children. 
**Marjorie Morrison (15 December 19101992), married Lt.-Col. Scrope Egerton on 16 January 1933. They had one daughter:
***Susan Alexandra Egerton (born 1936)
*Granville Leveson-Gower, 3rd Earl Granville (4 March 187221 July 1939), married Nina Baring (daughter of Walter Baring) on 27 September 1900.
*Lady Susan Katherine Leveson-Gower (21 August 18767 May 1878) 
*Vice-Admiral William Spencer Leveson-Gower, 4th Earl Granville (11 July 188025 June 1953), married Lady Rose Bowes-Lyon on 24 May 1916. They had two children.

==Death==
Granville died in London on 31 March 1891 and was succeeded in his peerages by his elder son, who became the 3rd Earl. He was buried in the family vault in the churchyard of St Michael and St Wulfad, Stone, Staffordshire.

==Legacy==
*Granville was the name of the present Canadian city of Vancouver from 1870 until its incorporation in 1886. Granville Street is a major north–south thoroughfare in the city.
* Granville house at Epsom College was named in his honour.
*Granville is also the name of a suburb and train station in Sydney. It was named in 1880.
*Granville Road, Granville Square and Granville Circuit in Hong Kong are named after him.
* The Granville Hotel, Ramsgate, (designed by Edward Welby Pugin) was named after him

==See also==
* Timeline of British diplomatic history

==References==
==Bibliography==
* Cecil, Algernon. &quot;British Foreign Secretaries 1807-1916&quot; (1927) pp 255–273. online
* Chamberlain, Muriel E. &quot;Gower, Granville George Leveson-, second Earl Granville (1815–1891)&quot;, &quot;Oxford Dictionary of National Biography,&quot; Oxford University Press, 2004; online edn, Jan 2008 accessed 20 Feb 2012
* Petty-Fitzmaurice, Edmond George. &quot;The life of Granville George Leveson Gower: second earl Granville&quot; (2 vol 1905) full text online
* &quot;The Gladstone-Granville Correspondence&quot; ed. by Agatha Ramm, (2 vol, 1952, 1962)
* Temperley, Harold and L.M. Penson, eds. &quot;Foundations of British Foreign Policy: From Pitt (1792) to Salisbury (1902)&quot; (1938), primary sources online
* Capt P.C.G. Webster, &quot;The Records of the Queen&#x27;s Own Royal Regiment of Staffordshire Yeomanry&quot;, Lichfield: Lomax, 1870.

Attribution:

==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q334053" start="0" end="50" title="Granville Leveson-Gower, 2nd Earl Granville" label="Granville George Leveson-Gower, 2nd Earl Granville"/>
<link wikidata="Q334053" start="86" end="98" title="Granville Leveson-Gower, 2nd Earl Granville" label="Lord Leveson"/>
<link wikidata="Q174193" start="117" end="124" title="United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q622441" start="125" end="132" title="Liberal Party (UK)" label="Liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q16147164" start="165" end="185" title="Leveson-Gower family" label="Leveson-Gower family"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371091" start="228" end="266" title="Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs (UK)" label="Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="399" end="417" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q336702" start="501" end="544" title="Granville Leveson-Gower, 1st Earl Granville" label="Granville Leveson-Gower, 1st Earl Granville"/>
<link wikidata="Q17423529" start="549" end="571" title="Harriet Leveson-Gower, Countess Granville" label="Lady Harriet Cavendish"/>
<link wikidata="Q235644" start="585" end="607" title="Lady Georgiana Spencer" label="Lady Georgiana Spencer"/>
<link wikidata="Q335425" start="612" end="653" title="William Cavendish, 5th Duke of Devonshire" label="William Cavendish, 5th Duke of Devonshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090291" start="687" end="736" title="Granville Leveson-Gower, 1st Marquess of Stafford" label="Granville Leveson-Gower, 1st Marquess of Stafford"/>
<link wikidata="Q3476483" start="810" end="832" title="Scroop Egerton, 1st Duke of Bridgwater" label="1st Duke of Bridgwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q332722" start="845" end="869" title="George Leveson-Gower, 1st Duke of Sutherland" label="2nd Marquess of Stafford"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991046" start="950" end="972" title="Countess of Sutherland" label="Countess of Sutherland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090129" start="1058" end="1077" title="Duke of Sutherland" label="Dukes of Sutherland"/>
<link wikidata="Q192088" start="1159" end="1163" title="Eton College" label="Eton"/>
<link wikidata="Q745967" start="1168" end="1189" title="Christ Church, Oxford" label="Christ Church, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q108700" start="1317" end="1321" title="British Whig Party" label="Whig"/>
<link wikidata="Q6913337" start="1329" end="1336" title="Morpeth (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Morpeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7883047" start="1371" end="1415" title="Under-Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs" label="Under-Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q312567" start="1419" end="1440" title="William Lamb, 2nd Viscount Melbourne" label="Lord Melbourne&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1080391" start="1543" end="1552" title="Lichfield (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Lichfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q11007" start="1562" end="1576" title="House of Lords" label="House of Lords"/>
<link wikidata="Q157259" start="1629" end="1646" title="John Russell, 1st Earl Russell" label="Lord John Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3851591" start="1687" end="1711" title="Master of the Buckhounds" label="Master of the Buckhounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q112958585" start="1723" end="1759" title="Vice-President of the Board of Trade" label="Vice-President of the Board of Trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q273095" start="1812" end="1836" title="Great Exhibition of 1851" label="Great Exhibition of 1851"/>
<link wikidata="Q193656" start="1958" end="1968" title="Henry John Temple, 3rd Viscount Palmerston" label="Palmerston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371091" start="1972" end="1989" title="Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs (UK)" label="Foreign Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q24631" start="2033" end="2046" title="George Hamilton-Gordon, 4th Earl of Aberdeen" label="Lord Aberdeen"/>
<link wikidata="Q943379" start="2122" end="2151" title="Lord President of the Council" label="Lord President of the Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q162754" start="2162" end="2198" title="Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster" label="Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q170027" start="2389" end="2409" title="University of London" label="University of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q83171" start="2765" end="2787" title="Alexander II of Russia" label="Alexander II of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q9439" start="2830" end="2844" title="Victoria of the United Kingdom" label="Queen Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1809853" start="3256" end="3287" title="Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports" label="Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports"/>
<link wikidata="Q35794" start="3326" end="3346" title="Cambridge University" label="Cambridge University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7596718" start="3404" end="3426" title="Staffordshire Yeomanry" label="Staffordshire Yeomanry"/>
<link wikidata="Q4896145" start="3452" end="3457" title="Major (United Kingdom)" label="major"/>
<link wikidata="Q4368198" start="3500" end="3518" title="Lieutenant colonel (United Kingdom)" label="lieutenant-colonel"/>
<link wikidata="Q12799162" start="3620" end="3636" title="Colonel (United Kingdom)" label="honorary colonel"/>
<link wikidata="Q30637647" start="3644" end="3681" title="1st Cinque Ports Artillery Volunteers" label="1st Cinque Ports Artillery Volunteers"/>
<link wikidata="Q134902" start="3772" end="3786" title="Stoke-on-Trent" label="Stoke-on-Trent"/>
<link wikidata="Q7494001" start="3828" end="3855" title="Shelton Bar" label="Shelton Iron &amp;amp; Steel Co"/>
<link wikidata="Q6548036" start="3955" end="3973" title="Lilleshall Company" label="Lilleshall Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q2519998" start="4496" end="4514" title="Secretary of State for the Colonies" label="Colonial Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q160852" start="4518" end="4534" title="William Ewart Gladstone" label="Gladstone&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q335305" start="4685" end="4706" title="George William Frederick Villiers, 4th Earl of Clarendon" label="Lord Clarendon&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q3536910" start="4968" end="4974" title="Treaty of Washington (1871)" label="treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q597443" start="5418" end="5425" title="CSS Alabama" label="Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064335" start="5507" end="5545" title="Pig War (1859)" label="San Juan Island Water Boundary Dispute"/>
<link wikidata="Q604141" start="5549" end="5560" title="Puget Sound" label="Puget Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q823433" start="5599" end="5620" title="Treaty of Oregon" label="Oregon Treaty of 1846"/>
<link wikidata="Q501503" start="5716" end="5730" title="German Emperor" label="German Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q46083" start="5922" end="5941" title="Franco-Prussian War" label="Franco-Prussian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3965300" start="6067" end="6092" title="Permanent Under-Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs" label="permanent under-secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q5339534" start="6094" end="6108" title="Edmund Hammond, 1st Baron Hammond" label="Edmund Hammond"/>
<link wikidata="Q166" start="6237" end="6246" title="Black Sea" label="Black Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q319260" start="6262" end="6277" title="Treaty of Paris (1856)" label="Treaty of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="6386" end="6397" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q778295" start="6428" end="6436" title="Pyotr Andreyevich Shuvalov" label="Shuvalov"/>
<link wikidata="Q491106" start="6480" end="6496" title="Khanate of Khiva" label="Khanate of Khiva"/>
<link wikidata="Q216702" start="6582" end="6596" title="The Great Game" label="The Great Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q82006" start="6697" end="6712" title="Benjamin Disraeli" label="Disraeli&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1880264" start="7056" end="7069" title="Angra Pequena" label="Angra Pequena"/>
<link wikidata="Q8442" start="7148" end="7156" title="Otto von Bismarck" label="Bismarck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191952" start="7198" end="7207" title="Home Rule" label="Home Rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q244620" start="7331" end="7344" title="Archibald Philip Primrose, 5th Earl of Rosebery" label="Lord Rosebery"/>
<link wikidata="Q214217" start="7727" end="7753" title="Emmerich Joseph de Dalberg" label="Emmerich Joseph de Dalberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q3742523" start="7784" end="7815" title="Ferdinand Dalberg-Acton" label="Sir Ferdinand Dalberg-Acton, Bt"/>
<link wikidata="Q311778" start="7844" end="7854" title="John Dalberg-Acton, 1st Baron Acton" label="Lord Acton"/>
<link wikidata="Q81931" start="7943" end="7972" title="Confederate States of America" label="Confederate States of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q718228" start="7974" end="7999" title="Rose O&amp;#x27;Neal Greenhow" label="Rose O&amp;#x27;Neal Greenhow"/>
<link wikidata="Q659400" start="8074" end="8100" title="Wilmington, North Carolina" label="Wilmington, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q7964877" start="8257" end="8282" title="Walter Frederick Campbell" label="Walter Frederick Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6678929" start="8429" end="8460" title="Lord Arthur John Edward Russell" label="Lord Arthur John Edward Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6249506" start="8808" end="8852" title="John Morrison, 1st Baron Margadale" label="John Granville Morrison, 1st Baron Margadale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149862" start="9125" end="9168" title="Granville Leveson-Gower, 3rd Earl Granville" label="Granville Leveson-Gower, 3rd Earl Granville"/>
<link wikidata="Q29982447" start="9230" end="9243" title="Walter Baring (diplomat)" label="Walter Baring"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149075" start="9332" end="9394" title="William Leveson-Gower, 4th Earl Granville" label="Vice-Admiral William Spencer Leveson-Gower, 4th Earl Granville"/>
<link wikidata="Q7367831" start="9431" end="9451" title="Rose Leveson-Gower, Countess Granville" label="Lady Rose Bowes-Lyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2449737" start="9702" end="9722" title="Stone, Staffordshire" label="Stone, Staffordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q24639" start="9792" end="9801" title="Vancouver" label="Vancouver"/>
<link wikidata="Q5596954" start="9845" end="9861" title="Granville Street" label="Granville Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q5383987" start="9932" end="9945" title="Epsom College" label="Epsom College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5596852" start="9972" end="9981" title="Granville, New South Wales" label="Granville"/>
<link wikidata="Q5596938" start="10063" end="10077" title="Granville Road" label="Granville Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737547" start="10154" end="10183" title="The Granville Hotel, Ramsgate" label="The Granville Hotel, Ramsgate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7805654" start="10254" end="10292" title="Timeline of British diplomatic history" label="Timeline of British diplomatic history"/>
<link wikidata="Q21598096" start="10423" end="10445" title="Chamberlain, Muriel E." label="Chamberlain, Muriel E."/>
<link wikidata="Q337913" start="10655" end="10687" title="Edmond George Fitzmaurice" label="Petty-Fitzmaurice, Edmond George"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="309044" wikidata="Q37115" url="?curid=309044" title="Sonic the Hedgehog (8-bit video game)">
<text>is a 1991 platform video game developed by Ancient and published by Sega for the Master System and Game Gear. It is a companion to the 16-bit Sega Genesis game &quot;Sonic the Hedgehog&quot; for the 8-bit Master System and Game Gear consoles. Ancient—a studio founded by composer Yuzo Koshiro—was contracted to develop the game. The 8-bit &quot;Sonic&quot; is a side-scrolling game similar in style to the 16-bit game, but reduced in complexity to fit the 8-bit systems.

The premise and story of the 8-bit &quot;Sonic&quot; are identical to that of the 16-bit game: as the anthropomorphic hedgehog Sonic, the player races through levels to rescue the imprisoned animals Doctor Robotnik plots to turn into robots. Gameplay is similar, Sonic collects rings while avoiding obstacles, but is paced extremely slower as the 8-bit version focuses more on exploration. While some level themes, such as Green Hill Zone, are borrowed from the 16-bit game, others are original. It also features a different soundtrack from Koshiro, which comprises new material alongside some rearrangements of Masato Nakamura&#x27;s tracks for the 16-bit game.

Reviewers acclaimed the 8-bit &quot;Sonic&quot; for its level variety, visuals, gameplay, and audio. Many believed that it compared favorably to its 16-bit counterpart, although some criticism was directed at its low difficulty and short length. Game journalists retrospectively considered it one of the best Game Gear and Master System games. The 8-bit &quot;Sonic&quot; has been rereleased through &quot;Sonic&quot; game compilations and Nintendo&#x27;s Virtual Console. It received several sequels, beginning with &quot;Sonic the Hedgehog 2&quot; in 1992. It was also Ancient&#x27;s first game and the only &quot;Sonic&quot; game they developed.

==Gameplay==
The 8-bit &quot;Sonic the Hedgehog&quot; is a side-scrolling platform game similar in gameplay and style to the original 16-bit Sega Genesis game of the same name, save for several new and altered game mechanics. As in the original, the anthropomorphic hedgehog Sonic ventures to rescue the animal population of South Island from the diabolical Doctor Robotnik, who plots to turn them into robots. The player jumps between platforms, avoids enemy and inanimate obstacles, and breaks televisions to collect shields, speed shoes, and invincibility, and mark checkpoints. Like the original, Sonic collects rings, which protect him from being hit by an enemy or obstacle. The player starts the game with three lives and will lose one if they are hit without carrying any rings, drown, fall into a bottomless pit, or reach the act&#x27;s 10-minute time limit.The game ends prematurely when all lives are lost, although the player can return to the beginning of the current act if they have any continues. Gameplay is slightly slower and more focused on exploration than the original.

Sonic travels through six levels called zones, each consisting of two main acts and a boss battle with Robotnik. The zones are based on various themes, such as grassy plains, ancient ruins, and jungles. While some of the level themes, such as Green Hill Zone, are borrowed from the 16-bit version, others are original, and all the level designs are different and contain no vertical loops. Some of the game&#x27;s levels require quick precision and others require the player to go underwater. Certain acts have Chaos Emeralds hidden within them, and the player must collect all six to obtain the best possible ending. At the end of each main act, the player hits a signpost, which will spin and land on an image; it can award bonuses depending on the image it settles on. If the player has over 50 rings, they can access a pinball-esque bonus stage where more rings and continues can be collected.

==Development==
In 1990, Sega released the Game Gear, an 8-bit handheld game console designed to compete with Nintendo&#x27;s Game Boy. Around the same time, Sonic Team worked on &quot;Sonic the Hedgehog&quot; for the 16-bit Genesis and Sega wanted to increase consumer awareness of the Game Gear by producing a version of &quot;Sonic&quot; for the system. 22-year old composer Yuzo Koshiro had recently started working with Sega, having been asked to compose the soundtrack for the 16-bit version of &quot;The Revenge of Shinobi&quot; (1989). After, he told a section chief he could develop games himself. As a result, a general manager, whom Koshiro met while working on &quot;The Revenge of Shinobi&quot;, asked him to start developing a Game Gear version of &quot;Sonic&quot;. Koshiro founded Ancient to develop the game because Sega could not make contracts with individuals. His sister Ayano Koshiro served as director and his mother Tomo Koshiro had a &quot;behind the scenes&quot; role, while the first programmer he hired was Shinobu Hayashi. The 8-bit &quot;Sonic&quot; was created specifically for the Game Gear, but Sega also had Ancient develop a version for the Master System, which was selling well and had similar hardware.

Porting the original game to the 8-bit hardware was impossible, so Ancient built their &quot;Sonic&quot; from scratch. The team decided to make their version completely different from its 16-bit counterpart. According to Koshiro, the game had three phases of development. In the first phase, Ancient developed the game with the 16-bit version in mind. The second and third phases were largely Ancient&#x27;s own ideas, with Sega supervising their work. Koshiro thought reinventing &quot;Sonic&quot; for 8-bit hardware was challenging, as he did not work at Sega and had never developed a game before. However, Sega had faith in him because of his relationship to the company. Koshiro composed the soundtrack and sought to retain the feel of the 16-bit version. He converted Masato Nakamura&#x27;s 16-bit &quot;Sonic&quot; score to the 8-bit programmable sound generator to start, but ended up using only three of those tracks; the remainder of the music is Koshiro&#x27;s work.

==Release history==
While the Game Gear version was developed first, Sega released the 8-bit &quot;Sonic&quot; for the Master System and Game Gear in Europe in November 1991, with North America getting both versions presumably around the same time and in Japan only for the Game Gear on December 28, 1991. In Europe, the game was built into later versions of the Master System, while in North America, it was the console&#x27;s swan song. The Master System had failed to gain a foothold in North America, so its version of &quot;Sonic&quot; became a collector&#x27;s item. The American Master System release is simply an import of the European version; Sega covered the European Article Number on the game packaging with a Universal Product Code sticker. &quot;Nintendo World Report&quot; described the game as a &quot;weird&quot; release for the franchise because it did not focus on speed. Although it was profitable for Sega, the 8-bit &quot;Sonic&quot;″s sales were &quot;nowhere near as well&quot; as those of the 16-bit original.

The game has been rereleased in emulated form on several occasions. In 2003, Sega released &quot;Sonic Adventure DX: Director&#x27;s Cut&quot;, an enhanced version of the 1998 &quot;Sonic&quot; game &quot;Sonic Adventure&quot; for the GameCube and Windows. As the player progresses through the game, they will unlock all 12 &quot;Sonic&quot; games released for the Game Gear, including the 8-bit &quot;Sonic&quot;. The Game Gear version is also available through &quot;Sonic Mega Collection Plus&quot; (2004), a compilation of &quot;Sonic&quot; games for Windows, PlayStation 2, and Xbox. Sega released the Master System version for the Wii&#x27;s Virtual Console digital distribution service in Japan and North America in August 2008, and in Europe the following month. The Game Gear version was released for the Nintendo 3DS&#x27;s Virtual Console in the west on June 13, 2013, and in Japan on December 4, 2013. It was also released along with the other 11 Game Gear &quot;Sonic&quot; games on &quot;Sonic Origins Plus&quot; in 2023.

==Reception==
Reviewers acclaimed the 8-bit &quot;Sonic&quot;. Most agreed it was a polished recreation of the 16-bit game, with &quot;ACE&quot; and &quot;Mean Machines&quot; writing those who owned that version could still enjoy it. The game&#x27;s level variety and designs, the action-packed and addictive gameplay, and sound and visual quality—thought to be on par with the original version&#x27;s—were commonly highlighted. &quot;ACE&quot; was impressed to see the Genesis version&#x27;s main features brought to the 8-bit systems intact. &quot;GamePro&quot; also considered its visuals &quot;top-of-the-line&quot; for an 8-bit game.

Reviewers criticized the relatively low difficulty and short length, although &quot;Computer and Video Games&quot; (&quot;CVG&quot;) wrote these were also problems in the original and &quot;Go!&quot; considered the game more challenging than its Genesis predecessor. However, most found the problems did not detract from the experience; &quot;CVG&quot; wrote that the game still offered the player plenty and was just as good as the Genesis version.

Retrospective reviews for the game&#x27;s rerelease on the Virtual Console were likewise positive. &quot;IGN&quot; wrote that although it was not as visually appealing, fast, or ambitious as its 16-bit predecessor, the 8-bit &quot;Sonic the Hedgehog&quot; was still a competent game in its own right, with unique level designs that managed to retain the feel of the original. &quot;Nintendo Life&quot; believed it was one of the best platformers for the Master System and felt it was an interesting piece in the &quot;Sonic&quot; franchise&#x27;s history, and found the Game Gear version easy to recommend to those who played the 16-bit version and were looking for a new experience, and those who were just starting to play &quot;Sonic&quot; games. They said &quot;It&#x27;s short, but it&#x27;s sweet,&quot; and that searching for Chaos Emeralds added replay value. &quot;GameSpy&quot;, reviewing &quot;Sonic Mega Collection Plus&quot;, felt the 8-bit &quot;Sonic&quot; and &quot;Sonic Chaos&quot; (1993) were the series&#x27; only Game Gear installments worth playing.

==Legacy==
&quot;GamesRadar+&quot; named the 8-bit &quot;Sonic&quot; the fourth best Game Gear game, and they and &quot;Retro Gamer&quot; named it one of the best Master System games. The 8-bit &quot;Sonic&quot; was Ancient&#x27;s first game and the only &quot;Sonic&quot; game they developed. Beginning with its 1992 sequel, &quot;Sonic the Hedgehog 2&quot;, all subsequent 8-bit &quot;Sonic&quot; platformers were developed by Aspect The Bridge Zone level&#x27;s track became one of the most famous pieces of &quot;Sonic&quot; music, and was used as a basis for Tails&#x27; theme in &quot;Sonic Adventure&quot;.

Some fans have independently developed new ports of the game to run natively on other platforms. In 2019, a fan remake of the game was released for Microsoft Windows and Android, featuring widescreen gameplay and new playable characters, levels, and game mechanics. A fanmade Commodore 64 port was released in December 2021, with the original Z80 assembly code hand-translated to the 6510 CPU.

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==
* Sega of Japan Wii Virtual Console page 
* Sega of Japan 3DS Virtual Console page </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q828322" start="10" end="18" title="Platformer" label="platform"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889" start="19" end="29" title="video game" label="video game"/>
<link wikidata="Q2845962" start="43" end="50" title="Ancient (company)" label="Ancient"/>
<link wikidata="Q122741" start="68" end="72" title="Sega" label="Sega"/>
<link wikidata="Q209868" start="81" end="94" title="Master System" label="Master System"/>
<link wikidata="Q751719" start="99" end="108" title="Game Gear" label="Game Gear"/>
<link wikidata="Q129585" start="135" end="141" title="Fourth generation of video game consoles" label="16-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q10676" start="142" end="154" title="Sega Genesis" label="Sega Genesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q37123" start="166" end="184" title="Sonic the Hedgehog (1991 video game)" label="Sonic the Hedgehog"/>
<link wikidata="Q129758" start="199" end="204" title="Third generation of video game consoles" label="8-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q209868" start="205" end="218" title="Master System" label="Master System"/>
<link wikidata="Q751719" start="223" end="232" title="Game Gear" label="Game Gear"/>
<link wikidata="Q948524" start="280" end="292" title="Yuzo Koshiro" label="Yuzo Koshiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1223895" start="362" end="381" title="side-scrolling video game" label="side-scrolling game"/>
<link wikidata="Q132987" start="574" end="589" title="anthropomorphism" label="anthropomorphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q191626" start="599" end="604" title="Sonic the Hedgehog (character)" label="Sonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046315" start="631" end="637" title="Level (video gaming)" label="levels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1996763" start="671" end="686" title="Doctor Robotnik" label="Doctor Robotnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046812" start="750" end="755" title="Rings (Sonic the Hedgehog)" label="rings"/>
<link wikidata="Q33183362" start="849" end="860" title="exploration game" label="exploration"/>
<link wikidata="Q5552828" start="895" end="910" title="Green Hill Zone" label="Green Hill Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q724016" start="1084" end="1099" title="Masato Nakamura" label="Masato Nakamura"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1353" end="1363" title="game balance#Difficulty level" label="difficulty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046812" start="1542" end="1547" title="Sonic the Hedgehog" label="Sonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q16070115" start="1559" end="1571" title="Video game compilation" label="compilations"/>
<link wikidata="Q8093" start="1576" end="1584" title="Nintendo" label="Nintendo"/>
<link wikidata="Q821067" start="1592" end="1607" title="Virtual Console" label="Virtual Console"/>
<link wikidata="Q35407" start="1659" end="1679" title="Sonic the Hedgehog 2 (8-bit video game)" label="Sonic the Hedgehog 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q129758" start="1803" end="1808" title="Third generation of video game consoles" label="8-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1223895" start="1845" end="1859" title="Side-scrolling video game" label="side-scrolling"/>
<link wikidata="Q828322" start="1860" end="1873" title="platform game" label="platform game"/>
<link wikidata="Q129585" start="1920" end="1926" title="Fourth generation of video game consoles" label="16-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q10676" start="1927" end="1939" title="Sega Genesis" label="Sega Genesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q37123" start="1945" end="1961" title="Sonic the Hedgehog (1991 video game)" label="of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751513" start="1996" end="2010" title="game mechanics" label="game mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q132987" start="2036" end="2051" title="anthropomorphism" label="anthropomorphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q191626" start="2061" end="2066" title="Sonic the Hedgehog (character)" label="Sonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1996763" start="2144" end="2159" title="Doctor Robotnik" label="Doctor Robotnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q289" start="2282" end="2292" title="television" label="television"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2331" end="2344" title="invincibility" label="invincibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q1565379" start="2355" end="2366" title="Checkpoint (video gaming)" label="checkpoints"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046812" start="2402" end="2407" title="Rings (Sonic the Hedgehog)" label="rings"/>
<link wikidata="Q3557866" start="2505" end="2510" title="Life (gaming)" label="lives"/>
<link wikidata="Q513471" start="2657" end="2678" title="game over" label="game ends prematurely"/>
<link wikidata="Q33183362" start="2847" end="2858" title="exploration game" label="exploration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046315" start="2905" end="2911" title="Level (video gaming)" label="levels"/>
<link wikidata="Q468388" start="2965" end="2976" title="boss fight" label="boss battle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5552828" start="3122" end="3137" title="Green Hill Zone" label="Green Hill Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046315" start="3210" end="3222" title="level design" label="level design"/>
<link wikidata="Q11832461" start="3253" end="3266" title="vertical loop" label="vertical loop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046812" start="3390" end="3404" title="Chaos Emeralds" label="Chaos Emeralds"/>
<link wikidata="Q653928" start="3702" end="3709" title="pinball" label="pinball"/>
<link wikidata="Q8023663" start="3749" end="3758" title="Continue (video games)" label="continues"/>
<link wikidata="Q122741" start="3803" end="3807" title="Sega" label="Sega"/>
<link wikidata="Q751719" start="3821" end="3830" title="Game Gear" label="Game Gear"/>
<link wikidata="Q941818" start="3841" end="3862" title="handheld game console" label="handheld game console"/>
<link wikidata="Q8093" start="3888" end="3896" title="Nintendo" label="Nintendo"/>
<link wikidata="Q186437" start="3904" end="3912" title="Game Boy" label="Game Boy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140960" start="3936" end="3946" title="Sonic Team" label="Sonic Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q948524" start="4156" end="4168" title="Yuzo Koshiro" label="Yuzo Koshiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745925" start="4285" end="4307" title="The Revenge of Shinobi (1989 video game)" label="The Revenge of Shinobi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2845962" start="4575" end="4582" title="Ancient (company)" label="Ancient"/>
<link wikidata="Q209868" start="4954" end="4967" title="Master System" label="Master System"/>
<link wikidata="Q851989" start="5019" end="5026" title="Porting" label="Porting"/>
<link wikidata="Q724016" start="5793" end="5808" title="Masato Nakamura" label="Masato Nakamura"/>
<link wikidata="Q1995838" start="5860" end="5888" title="programmable sound generator" label="programmable sound generator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509918" start="6426" end="6435" title="swan song" label="swan song"/>
<link wikidata="Q2342494" start="6548" end="6569" title="collector&amp;#x27;s item" label="collector&amp;#x27;s item"/>
<link wikidata="Q62955" start="6619" end="6625" title="import" label="import"/>
<link wikidata="Q357404" start="6668" end="6691" title="European Article Number" label="European Article Number"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193047" start="6721" end="6743" title="Universal Product Code" label="Universal Product Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046812" start="6841" end="6854" title="Sonic the Hedgehog" label="the franchise"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196126" start="7067" end="7075" title="video game console emulator" label="emulated"/>
<link wikidata="" start="7132" end="7171" title="Sonic Adventure DX: Director&amp;#x27;s Cut" label="Sonic Adventure DX: Director&amp;#x27;s Cut"/>
<link wikidata="Q182172" start="7270" end="7278" title="GameCube" label="GameCube"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="7283" end="7290" title="Windows" label="Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q2422173" start="7504" end="7530" title="Sonic Mega Collection Plus" label="Sonic Mega Collection Plus"/>
<link wikidata="Q16070115" start="7547" end="7558" title="Video game compilation" label="compilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q10680" start="7599" end="7612" title="PlayStation 2" label="PlayStation 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q132020" start="7618" end="7622" title="Xbox (console)" label="Xbox"/>
<link wikidata="Q8079" start="7672" end="7675" title="Wii" label="Wii"/>
<link wikidata="Q821067" start="7683" end="7698" title="Virtual Console" label="Virtual Console"/>
<link wikidata="Q203597" start="7849" end="7861" title="Nintendo 3DS" label="Nintendo 3DS"/>
<link wikidata="Q111667582" start="8037" end="8055" title="Sonic Origins Plus" label="Sonic Origins Plus"/>
<link wikidata="Q430533" start="8207" end="8210" title="ACE (games magazine)" label="ACE"/>
<link wikidata="Q15853476" start="8227" end="8240" title="Mean Machines" label="Mean Machines"/>
<link wikidata="Q315718" start="8622" end="8629" title="GamePro" label="GamePro"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8752" end="8762" title="game balance#Difficulty level" label="difficulty"/>
<link wikidata="Q277666" start="8796" end="8820" title="Computer and Video Games" label="Computer and Video Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q207708" start="9268" end="9271" title="IGN" label="IGN"/>
<link wikidata="Q65089906" start="9545" end="9558" title="Nintendo Life" label="Nintendo Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q1936813" start="10017" end="10029" title="replay value" label="replay value"/>
<link wikidata="Q281239" start="10037" end="10044" title="GameSpy" label="GameSpy"/>
<link wikidata="Q151531" start="10145" end="10156" title="Sonic Chaos" label="Sonic Chaos"/>
<link wikidata="Q960011" start="10253" end="10264" title="GamesRadar+" label="GamesRadar+"/>
<link wikidata="Q3021204" start="10356" end="10367" title="Retro Gamer" label="Retro Gamer"/>
<link wikidata="Q35407" start="10568" end="10588" title="Sonic the Hedgehog 2 (8-bit video game)" label="Sonic the Hedgehog 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q4807758" start="10665" end="10671" title="Aspect Co., Ltd." label="Aspect"/>
<link wikidata="Q194135" start="10800" end="10805" title="Tails (character)" label="Tails"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="10999" end="11016" title="Microsoft Windows" label="Microsoft Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q94" start="11021" end="11028" title="Android (operating system)" label="Android"/>
<link wikidata="Q99775" start="11127" end="11139" title="Commodore 64" label="Commodore 64"/>
<link wikidata="Q378246" start="11235" end="11239" title="6510" label="6510"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="309047" wikidata="Q209889" url="?curid=309047" title="Mascarpone">
<text>Mascarpone (, ; ) is a soft Italian acid-set cream cheese. It is recognized in Italy as a (&quot;traditional agri-food product&quot;; PAT).

==Production process==
After denaturation of cream, the whey is removed without pressing or aging. Mascarpone may also be made using cream and the residual tartaric acid from the bottom or sides of barreled wine.

The traditional method is to add three tablespoons of lemon juice per pint of heated heavy cream. The mixture is allowed to cool to room temperature before it is poured into a cheesecloth-lined colander, set into a shallow pan or dish, and chilled and strained for one to two days.

==Origins==
Popularly, the name is held to derive from &quot;mascarpa&quot;, an unrelated milk product made from the whey of stracchino (a young, barely aged cheese), or from &quot;mascarpia&quot;, a word in the local dialect for ricotta. Unlike ricotta, which is made from whey, mascarpone is made from cream.

==Uses==
Mascarpone is milky-white in colour and is easy to spread. It is used in various Lombardy dishes and is considered a specialty in the region. 

Mascarpone is one of the main ingredients in tiramisu. Sometimes it is used instead of, or along with, butter or Parmesan cheese to thicken and enrich risotto. Mascarpone is also used in cheesecake recipes.

Mascarpone is also commonly used in the UK on pizzas with prosciutto and mushrooms.

==See also==
* List of Italian cheeses
* List of dairy products

==Notes==
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q209889" start="0" end="10" title="Mascarpone" label="Mascarpone"/>
<link wikidata="Q192786" start="28" end="35" title="Italian cuisine" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2227260" start="36" end="44" title="acid-set cheese" label="acid-set"/>
<link wikidata="Q426337" start="45" end="57" title="cream cheese" label="cream cheese"/>
<link wikidata="Q273186" start="170" end="182" title="Denaturation (biochemistry)" label="denaturation"/>
<link wikidata="Q185009" start="197" end="201" title="whey" label="whey"/>
<link wikidata="Q13228" start="274" end="279" title="cream" label="cream"/>
<link wikidata="Q194322" start="297" end="310" title="tartaric acid" label="tartaric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002583" start="394" end="404" title="tablespoon" label="tablespoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q11123" start="425" end="429" title="pint" label="pint"/>
<link wikidata="Q111092" start="487" end="503" title="room temperature" label="room temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q2621157" start="531" end="542" title="cheesecloth" label="cheesecloth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057060" start="549" end="557" title="colander" label="colander"/>
<link wikidata="Q185009" start="755" end="759" title="whey" label="whey"/>
<link wikidata="Q432440" start="763" end="773" title="stracchino" label="stracchino"/>
<link wikidata="Q216781" start="868" end="875" title="ricotta" label="ricotta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210" start="1040" end="1048" title="Lombardy" label="Lombardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q131582" start="1148" end="1156" title="tiramisu" label="tiramisu"/>
<link wikidata="Q34172" start="1206" end="1212" title="butter" label="butter"/>
<link wikidata="Q155922" start="1216" end="1231" title="Parmesan" label="Parmesan cheese"/>
<link wikidata="Q208105" start="1254" end="1261" title="risotto" label="risotto"/>
<link wikidata="Q215348" start="1290" end="1300" title="cheesecake" label="cheesecake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230305" start="1411" end="1434" title="List of Italian cheeses" label="List of Italian cheeses"/>
<link wikidata="Q17024701" start="1437" end="1459" title="List of dairy products" label="List of dairy products"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="309059" wikidata="Q299089" url="?curid=309059" title="Lobby">
<text>Lobby may refer to:

* Lobby (room), an entranceway or foyer in a building
* Lobbying, the action or the group used to influence a viewpoint to politicians
* Lobby (food), a thick stew made in Leigh, Greater Manchester and North Staffordshire, like Lancashire Hotpot
* Lobby (band), a Slovak Eurodance band
* The Lobby, (UK) parliamentary journalists receiving privileged political access in exchange for sourcing anonymity
* The Lobby (improv), an improvisational comedy group based in Southern California
* &quot;The Lobby&quot; (TV series), a documentary series by Al Jazeera
* &quot;The Lobby&quot;, a film by Fathia Absie

==People with the name==
* &quot;Lobby&quot;, nickname of Seymour de Lotbiniere (1905–1984), English broadcasting executive and pioneer of outside broadcasts
* Lobby Loyde (1941–2007), Australian rock music guitarist, songwriter and producer

===Fictional characters===
* Lobby Lud, a fictional character invented in August 1927 by the British newspaper &quot;Westminster Gazette&quot;

== See also ==
* Lobi (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q299089" start="0" end="5" title="Lobby" label="Lobby"/>
<link wikidata="Q31948" start="23" end="35" title="Lobby (room)" label="Lobby (room)"/>
<link wikidata="Q187117" start="77" end="85" title="Lobbying" label="Lobbying"/>
<link wikidata="Q6663590" start="158" end="170" title="Lobby (food)" label="Lobby (food)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3502619" start="269" end="281" title="Lobby (band)" label="Lobby (band)"/>
<link wikidata="Q854663" start="309" end="318" title="The Lobby" label="The Lobby"/>
<link wikidata="Q7747944" start="426" end="444" title="The Lobby (improv)" label="The Lobby (improv)"/>
<link wikidata="Q61911206" start="509" end="542" title="The Lobby (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;The Lobby&amp;quot; (TV series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q17305585" start="614" end="626" title="Fathia Absie" label="Fathia Absie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7459241" start="686" end="707" title="Seymour de Lotbiniere" label="Seymour de Lotbiniere"/>
<link wikidata="Q6663594" start="788" end="799" title="Lobby Loyde" label="Lobby Loyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q6663592" start="900" end="909" title="Lobby Lud" label="Lobby Lud"/>
<link wikidata="Q2096530" start="1032" end="1053" title="Lobi (disambiguation)" label="Lobi (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="309064" wikidata="Q335305" url="?curid=309064" title="George Villiers, 4th Earl of Clarendon">
<text>George William Frederick Villiers, 4th Earl of Clarendon (12 January 180027 June 1870) was an English diplomat and statesman from the Villiers family. He served a succession of Whig and Liberal administrations. This included as Viceroy in famine-stricken Ireland and, on the first of three occasions as Foreign Secretary, as the United Kingdom&#x27;s chief representative at the Congress of Paris which ended the Crimean War.

==Background and education==
Villiers was born in London to Hon. George Villiers and Hon. Theresa Parker, daughter of John Parker, 1st Baron Boringdon. He was the second born, but first surviving, of their 10 children. His father was the third son of Thomas Villiers, 1st Earl of Clarendon (himself the second son of William Villiers, 2nd Earl of Jersey). After the death of his father in 1827, George became heir to the earldom, succeeding his uncle Thomas Villiers, 2nd Earl of Clarendon (1753–1824), who died unmarried; and his uncle John Villiers, 3rd Earl of Clarendon (1757–1838), who died without an heir.

Villiers was educated at Christ&#x27;s Hospital and St John&#x27;s College, Cambridge, which he entered at the early age of sixteen, on 29 June 1816. In 1820, as the eldest son of an earl&#x27;s brother of royal descent, he was able to take his MA degree under the statutes of the university then in force.

==Career==
In the same year, Villiers was appointed attaché to the British embassy at Saint Petersburg. There he remained three years, and gained practical knowledge of diplomacy which would be of use to him later in his life. The &quot;Encyclopaedia Britannica&quot; stated that he had &quot;received from nature a singularly handsome person, a polished and engaging address, a ready command of languages, and a remarkable power of composition&quot;. Upon his return to England in 1823, he was appointed to a commissionership of customs, an office which he retained for about ten years. In 1831, he was dispatched to France in a fruitless attempt to negotiate a commercial treaty.

=== Minister in Spain ===
On 16 August 1833, he was appointed minister at the Court of Spain. Ferdinand VII died within a month of his arrival at Madrid, and the infant Queen Isabella, then two years old, was placed on the throne based on the old Spanish custom of female inheritance – but her succession was challenged by Don Carlos, the late King&#x27;s brother, by virtue of the Salic law of the House of Bourbon which Ferdinand had renounced before the birth of his daughter. Isabella II and her mother the Queen Regent Christina became the representatives of constitutional monarchy, Don Carlos of Catholic absolutism. The conflict, which had divided the despotic and the constitutional powers of Europe since the French Revolution of 1830, broke out into civil war in Spain, and by the Quadruple Treaty, signed on 22 April 1834, France and England pledged themselves to the defence of the constitutional thrones of Spain and Portugal. For six years, on behalf of the British government, Villiers continued to aid the Liberal government of Spain. He was unjustly accused of having supported the revolution of La Granja, which drove Christina, the Queen Mother, out of the kingdom, and raised Espartero to the regency. He undoubtedly supported the chiefs of the Liberal party, such as Espartero, against the intrigues of the French court; but the object of the British government was to establish Isabella as Queen on a truly national and liberal basis and to protect her against the foreign influence which eventually undermined her regime.

Slavery had been declared illegal in Spanish colonies from 1820, but still had not been eradicated. Villiers worked with the help of &quot;The Times&quot; correspondent David Turnbull to get slavery removed from Spanish colonies. In 1835 the Spanish reaffirmed their commitment to end slavery.

=== Succession to the Earldom, Offices of State in Britain ===
Villiers received the Grand Cross of the Bath in 1838 in acknowledgment of his services in Spain, and succeeded, on the death of his uncle, to the title of Earl of Clarendon; in the following year, having left Madrid, he married a young widow, Lady Katharine Foster-Barham (&quot;née&quot; Grimston), eldest daughter of James Grimston, 1st Earl of Verulam.

In January 1840 he entered Lord Melbourne&#x27;s Whig administration as Lord Privy Seal, and from the death of Lord Holland that autumn he also held the office of Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster until the end of the ministry in 1841. Clarendon and Holland believed that friendly Anglo-French relations were important to promote peace and liberalism in Europe. He reluctantly supported Foreign Secretary Lord Palmerston&#x27;s expulsion of the pro-French Mohammed Ali of Egypt from Syria but did not resign as it might break up a cabinet he had so recently joined.

During Sir Robert Peel&#x27;s Conservative administration (1841–1846) Lord Clarendon took a strong interest in the triumph of free trade and in the repeal of the Corn Laws, a policy of which his younger brother Charles Pelham Villiers had been one of the earliest champions. Clarendon accepted the office of President of the Board of Trade in Lord John Russell&#x27;s first administration in 1846.

=== Lord Lieutenant of Ireland ===
Clarendon was twice offered the Governor-Generalship of India, and once the Governor-Generalship of Canada, but he declined as it would have meant leaving British and European politics for some years.

In 1847, Clarendon was persuaded to accept the Lord Lieutenancy of Ireland, which the Cabinet wanted to abolish and transform into an Irish secretaryship of state. He arrived during the second year of the Great Famine. His reports on the scale of the crisis were regularly discounted by a government that deferred to the permanent head of the Treasury, Sir Charles Trevelyan. 

Despairing of effective famine relief, Clarendon suggested to Russell, that &quot;there is not another legislature in Europe that would disregard such suffering as now exists in the west of Ireland, or coldly persist in a policy of extermination&quot;. Lord Russell replied: “The course of English benevolence is frozen by insult, calumny and rebellion&quot;. In London there was consternation over Irish agitation for repeal of the Act of Union, reports of violence directed against landlords and the attempted rising by the Young Irelanders. 

While he was to commute the sentences of the Young Ireland conspirators from hanging to life transportation, Clarendon did take stringent security measures, proclaiming martial law in large parts of the country and persuading Westminster to suspend Habeas Corpus. At the same time, he continued to plead what he saw as Ireland&#x27;s case. 

In the hope of garnering greater English sympathy, in 1849 he hosted Queen Victoria in Ireland. Her visit was deemed a &quot;great popular success&quot;. But it appeared to make no impression on Irish policy. Trevelyan, a student of Thomas Malthus, insisted that Ireland be &quot;left to the operation of natural causes&quot; (and was fearful that borrowing to finance relief efforts in Ireland might panic the markets.

He attempted a policy of conciliation with the Roman Catholic Church in Ireland. In 1849, he sided with Catholic bishops in their objections to a non-denominational (&quot;godless&quot;) scheme for higher education, and when an official inquiry failed to indict the Orange Order for the death of 20 Catholics in the Dolly&#x27;s Brae affray, he dismissed the magistrate concerned, Lord Roden, and helped bring in the Party Processions Act (1850) to curtail the Protestant association. However, Orangemen accused Clarendon of double-dealing, having previously supplied them with arms. The claim was publicly upheld by Isaac Butt, Member of Parliament, a former Orangeman whom the famine had converted to the cause of Irish self-government. When he returned to England following the fall of the Russell ministry in February 1852, &quot;he was distrusted by all sides in Ireland&quot;.

===Foreign Secretary===
Despite what he accounted as &quot;failure&quot; in Ireland, Clarendon continued to enjoy official favour. His services were expressly acknowledged in the Queen&#x27;s Speech to both Houses of Parliament in September 1848 - this being the first time that any civil servant obtained that honour; and he was made a Knight of the Garter (retaining also the Grand Cross of the Bath by special order) on 23 March 1849. 

In January 1853, Clarendon succeeded Lord John Russell as Foreign Secretary in Lord Aberdeen&#x27;s coalition ministry of Whigs and Peelites, which had been formed the previous December. The country was already &quot;drifting&quot; into the Crimean War, an expression of Clarendon&#x27;s which became notorious. Clarendon was not responsible for starting the war, but he supported it and maintained close relations with the French Emperor Napoleon III, and the Empress Eugenie, whom he had known in Spain from her childhood. The Tsar Nicholas I had not believed that France and Britain could cooperate successfully against Russia.

When the Crimean War ended in 1856 Lord Clarendon was first British plenipotentiary at the Congress of Paris convened to negotiate a peace treaty, the first time since Lord Castlereagh&#x27;s attendance at the Congress of Vienna that a British Foreign Secretary had personally attended such a conference. Clarendon&#x27;s first priority was to ensure that Piedmont-Sardinia was admitted to the conference as an Allied power, but that Prussia, which had remained neutral, should be excluded. Clarendon ensured that the Allies insisted on neutralising the Black Sea and that the Russian attempt to retain South Bessarabia was defeated. The congress was eager to turn to other subjects, and perhaps its most important achievement was the celebrated Declaration of the Maritime Powers, which abolished privateering, defined the right of blockade, and limited the right of capture to enemy property in enemy ships. Clarendon has been accused of abandoning Britain&#x27;s belligerent rights, which were based on the old maritime laws of Europe. But he acted with the agreement of the British Cabinet, which felt that it was not to Britain&#x27;s benefit keep to customs which exposed Britain&#x27;s vast merchant fleet to attack, even by the cruisers of a secondary maritime power, and which, if vigorously enforced against neutrals, would embroil Britain with every maritime state in the world.

When Lord Palmerston formed a Liberal government in 1859, Lord John Russell only agreed to serve if given the Foreign Office, leaving no suitably senior job for Clarendon. From 1861 to 1864, he chaired the Clarendon Commission investigating the state of nine leading schools in England. Clarendon re-entered the cabinet in May 1864 as Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster. He served as Foreign Secretary a second time in Russell&#x27;s second government (1865-66), and for a third time in the early years of Gladstone&#x27;s government formed in 1868. He died surrounded by the boxes and papers of his office on 27 June 1870.

==Marriage and issue==
On 4 June 1839, Villiers married the widowed Lady Katherine Foster-Barham (a daughter of James Grimston, 1st Earl of Verulam) and they had eight children:

*Lady Constance Villiers (1840–1922), married Frederick Stanley, 16th Earl of Derby
*Lady Alice Villiers (1841–1897), married Edward Bootle-Wilbraham, 1st Earl of Lathom
*Lady Emily Theresa (1843–1927), married Odo Russell, 1st Baron Ampthill
*Edward Hyde, Lord Hyde (30 January 1845 – 26 February 1846), died young
*Edward Villiers, 5th Earl of Clarendon (1846–1914)
*Hon. George Patrick Hyde (27 September 1847 – 10 January 1892), married Louisa Maria Maquay, daughter of George Disney Maquay, on 9 October 1884
*Lady Florence Margaret Villiers (21 September 1850 – 25 August 1851), died in infancy
*Hon. Sir Francis Hyde Villiers (1852–1925), married Virginia Katharine Smith, daughter of Eric Carrington Smith and Mary Maberly, on 28 June 1876

==Notes==
==Further reading==
* David Steele. &quot;Villiers, George William Frederick, fourth earl of Clarendon&quot; &quot;Dictionary of National Biography&quot; (2009) 
* Cecil, Algernon. &quot;British Foreign Secretaries 1807-1916&quot; (1927) pp 220–255. online
* Sir Herbert Eustace Maxwell: &quot;The Life and letters of George William Frederick 4. Earl of Clarendon&quot;. London: Arnold, 1913. online
* George Villiers Clarendon: &quot;First report on the commercial relations between France and Great Britain, addressed to ... the lords of the committee of privy council for trade and plantations: with a supplementary report, by John Bowring&quot;. London, 1834

==External links==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q335305" start="0" end="56" title="George Villiers, 4th Earl of Clarendon" label="George William Frederick Villiers, 4th Earl of Clarendon"/>
<link wikidata="Q19869586" start="134" end="149" title="Villiers family" label="Villiers family"/>
<link wikidata="Q108700" start="177" end="181" title="Whigs (British political party)" label="Whig"/>
<link wikidata="Q622441" start="186" end="193" title="Liberal Party (UK)" label="Liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752225" start="228" end="235" title="Lord Lieutenant of Ireland" label="Viceroy"/>
<link wikidata="Q188371" start="239" end="262" title="Great Famine (Ireland)" label="famine-stricken Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371091" start="303" end="320" title="Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs (UK)" label="Foreign Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q174193" start="329" end="343" title="United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110818" start="379" end="396" title="Congress of Paris (1856)" label="Congress of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q254106" start="413" end="424" title="Crimean War" label="Crimean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5545500" start="487" end="507" title="George Villiers (1759–1827)" label="Hon. George Villiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6251892" start="545" end="577" title="John Parker, 1st Baron Boringdon" label="John Parker, 1st Baron Boringdon"/>
<link wikidata="Q744389" start="678" end="716" title="Thomas Villiers, 1st Earl of Clarendon" label="Thomas Villiers, 1st Earl of Clarendon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7610830" start="744" end="780" title="William Villiers, 2nd Earl of Jersey" label="William Villiers, 2nd Earl of Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7794704" start="878" end="916" title="Thomas Villiers, 2nd Earl of Clarendon" label="Thomas Villiers, 2nd Earl of Clarendon"/>
<link wikidata="Q15989904" start="964" end="1000" title="John Villiers, 3rd Earl of Clarendon" label="John Villiers, 3rd Earl of Clarendon"/>
<link wikidata="Q677579" start="1066" end="1088" title="Christ&amp;#x27;s Hospital" label="Christ&amp;#x27;s Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q691283" start="1093" end="1126" title="St John&amp;#x27;s College, Cambridge" label="St John&amp;#x27;s College, Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3297864" start="1286" end="1295" title="Master of Arts (Oxford, Cambridge, and Dublin)" label="MA degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="1435" end="1451" title="Saint Petersburg" label="Saint Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q186256" start="2126" end="2139" title="Ferdinand VII of Spain" label="Ferdinand VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q2807" start="2178" end="2184" title="Madrid" label="Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q183085" start="2207" end="2215" title="Isabella II of Spain" label="Isabella"/>
<link wikidata="Q343621" start="2355" end="2365" title="Infante Carlos, Count of Molina" label="Don Carlos"/>
<link wikidata="Q152507" start="2414" end="2423" title="Salic law" label="Salic law"/>
<link wikidata="Q58389" start="2431" end="2447" title="House of Bourbon" label="House of Bourbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q230566" start="2556" end="2565" title="Maria Christina of the Two Sicilies" label="Christina"/>
<link wikidata="Q214028" start="2751" end="2776" title="July Revolution" label="French Revolution of 1830"/>
<link wikidata="Q3056641" start="2824" end="2840" title="Quadruple Alliance (1834)" label="Quadruple Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q6216" start="3055" end="3062" title="Liberalism" label="Liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q434529" start="3229" end="3238" title="Baldomero Espartero, Prince of Vergara" label="Espartero"/>
<link wikidata="Q50008" start="3718" end="3727" title="The Times" label="The Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q5240523" start="3748" end="3762" title="David Turnbull (abolitionist)" label="David Turnbull"/>
<link wikidata="Q506369" start="3955" end="3982" title="Order of the Bath" label="the Grand Cross of the Bath"/>
<link wikidata="Q6135004" start="4257" end="4292" title="James Grimston, 1st Earl of Verulam" label="James Grimston, 1st Earl of Verulam"/>
<link wikidata="Q312567" start="4322" end="4343" title="William Lamb, 2nd Viscount Melbourne" label="Lord Melbourne&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q108700" start="4344" end="4348" title="Whigs (British political party)" label="Whig"/>
<link wikidata="Q910308" start="4367" end="4382" title="Lord Privy Seal" label="Lord Privy Seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q723938" start="4406" end="4418" title="Henry Richard Vassall-Fox, 3rd Baron Holland" label="Lord Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q162754" start="4458" end="4494" title="Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster" label="Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q193656" start="4703" end="4718" title="Henry John Temple, 3rd Viscount Palmerston" label="Lord Palmerston"/>
<link wikidata="Q182781" start="4754" end="4766" title="Mehemet Ali (Egypt)" label="Mohammed Ali"/>
<link wikidata="Q181875" start="4876" end="4887" title="Robert Peel" label="Robert Peel"/>
<link wikidata="Q200435" start="4991" end="5001" title="free trade" label="free trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133144" start="5027" end="5036" title="Corn Laws" label="Corn Laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q5081574" start="5076" end="5099" title="Charles Pelham Villiers" label="Charles Pelham Villiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q27037814" start="5173" end="5204" title="President of the Board of Trade" label="President of the Board of Trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q157259" start="5208" end="5232" title="John Russell, 1st Earl Russell" label="Lord John Russell&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752225" start="5548" end="5575" title="Lord Lieutenant of Ireland" label="Lord Lieutenancy of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q188371" start="5706" end="5718" title="Great Famine (Ireland)" label="Great Famine"/>
<link wikidata="Q578269" start="5844" end="5852" title="HM Treasury" label="Treasury"/>
<link wikidata="Q3249693" start="5854" end="5875" title="Sir Charles Trevelyan, 1st Baronet" label="Sir Charles Trevelyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3777944" start="6298" end="6324" title="Repeal Association" label="repeal of the Act of Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7322272" start="6337" end="6372" title="Ribbonism" label="violence directed against landlords"/>
<link wikidata="Q3321690" start="6391" end="6421" title="Young Ireland rebellion" label="rising by the Young Irelanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q715625" start="6594" end="6605" title="martial law" label="martial law"/>
<link wikidata="Q62408" start="6651" end="6662" title="Palace of Westminster" label="Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q220596" start="6674" end="6687" title="Habeas corpus" label="Habeas Corpus"/>
<link wikidata="Q9439" start="6836" end="6850" title="Queen Victoria" label="Queen Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q13526" start="7000" end="7014" title="Thomas Robert Malthus" label="Thomas Malthus"/>
<link wikidata="Q640866" start="7235" end="7267" title="Catholic Church in Ireland" label="Roman Catholic Church in Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345321" start="7454" end="7466" title="Orange Order" label="Orange Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q27999479" start="7504" end="7528" title="Dolly&amp;#x27;s Brae conflict" label="Dolly&amp;#x27;s Brae affray"/>
<link wikidata="Q7346115" start="7569" end="7579" title="Robert Jocelyn, 3rd Earl of Roden" label="Lord Roden"/>
<link wikidata="Q7140944" start="7605" end="7633" title="Party Processions Act 1850" label="Party Processions Act (1850)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141134" start="7805" end="7815" title="Isaac Butt" label="Isaac Butt"/>
<link wikidata="Q16707842" start="7817" end="7837" title="Member of Parliament (United Kingdom)" label="Member of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q215248" start="8409" end="8429" title="Order of the Garter" label="Knight of the Garter"/>
<link wikidata="Q157259" start="8549" end="8566" title="Lord John Russell" label="Lord John Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371091" start="8570" end="8587" title="Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs (UK)" label="Foreign Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q24631" start="8591" end="8604" title="George Hamilton-Gordon, 4th Earl of Aberdeen" label="Lord Aberdeen"/>
<link wikidata="Q108700" start="8634" end="8639" title="Whigs (British political party)" label="Whigs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633397" start="8644" end="8651" title="Peelite" label="Peelite"/>
<link wikidata="Q254106" start="8753" end="8764" title="Crimean War" label="Crimean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7721" start="8951" end="8963" title="Napoleon III of France" label="Napoleon III"/>
<link wikidata="Q157130" start="8973" end="8988" title="Eugénie de Montijo" label="Empress Eugenie"/>
<link wikidata="Q130734" start="9046" end="9056" title="Nicholas I of Russia" label="Nicholas I"/>
<link wikidata="Q319260" start="9235" end="9252" title="Treaty of Paris (1856)" label="Congress of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q333050" start="9312" end="9328" title="Robert Stewart, Viscount Castlereagh" label="Lord Castlereagh"/>
<link wikidata="Q46362" start="9354" end="9372" title="Congress of Vienna" label="Congress of Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q165154" start="9500" end="9517" title="Kingdom of Sardinia" label="Piedmont-Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q166" start="9698" end="9707" title="Black Sea" label="Black Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025796" start="9747" end="9763" title="South Bessarabia" label="South Bessarabia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9890" end="9924" title="Declaration of the Maritime Powers" label="Declaration of the Maritime Powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q157259" start="10593" end="10610" title="Lord John Russell" label="Lord John Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5126857" start="10741" end="10761" title="Clarendon Commission" label="Clarendon Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q162754" start="10870" end="10906" title="Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster" label="Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q97356795" start="11043" end="11059" title="Foreign policy of William Ewart Gladstone" label="Gladstone&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q6135004" start="11274" end="11309" title="James Grimston, 1st Earl of Verulam" label="James Grimston, 1st Earl of Verulam"/>
<link wikidata="Q222458" start="11387" end="11424" title="Frederick Stanley, 16th Earl of Derby" label="Frederick Stanley, 16th Earl of Derby"/>
<link wikidata="Q5341949" start="11467" end="11510" title="Edward Bootle-Wilbraham, 1st Earl of Lathom" label="Edward Bootle-Wilbraham, 1st Earl of Lathom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753411" start="11512" end="11530" title="Emily Russell, Baroness Ampthill" label="Lady Emily Theresa"/>
<link wikidata="Q38346" start="11552" end="11583" title="Odo Russell, 1st Baron Ampthill" label="Odo Russell, 1st Baron Ampthill"/>
<link wikidata="Q5345728" start="11658" end="11696" title="Edward Villiers, 5th Earl of Clarendon" label="Edward Villiers, 5th Earl of Clarendon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5481380" start="11948" end="11973" title="Francis Hyde Villiers" label="Sir Francis Hyde Villiers"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="309069" wikidata="Q1783719" url="?curid=309069" title="Playboy Mansion">
<text>The Playboy Mansion, also known as the Playboy Mansion West, is the former home of &quot;Playboy&quot; magazine founder Hugh Hefner, who lived there from 1971 until his death in 2017. Barbi Benton convinced Hefner to buy the home located in Holmby Hills, Los Angeles, California, near Beverly Hills. From the 1970s onward, the mansion became the location of lavish parties held by Hefner which were often attended by celebrities and socialites. It is currently owned by Daren Metropoulos, the son of billionaire investor Dean Metropoulos, and is used for corporate activities. It also serves as a location for television production, magazine photography, charitable events, and civic functions.

Hefner established the original Playboy Mansion in 1959. It was a brick and limestone residence in Chicago&#x27;s Gold Coast, which had been built in 1899. Hefner had founded &quot;Playboy&quot; in Chicago in 1953. After he permanently relocated to California in 1975, his company eventually let the mansion for a nominal rent to the School of the Art Institute of Chicago and then donated it to the school outright. The school later sold the mansion, which was then redeveloped for luxury condominiums. Following Hefner&#x27;s death in 2017, allegations of drug and sexual abuse began to emerge at the Playboy Mansion during Hefner&#x27;s lifetime.

== History ==

The house is described as being in the &quot;Gothic-Tudor&quot; style of architecture by &quot;Forbes&quot; magazine, and sits on . It was designed by Arthur R. Kelly in 1927 as Holmby House for Arthur Letts Jr., son of The Broadway department store founder Arthur Letts.

It was acquired by Playboy Enterprises (as with the earlier Chicago Mansion, Hefner nominally rented his living accommodations from the company, which also designated the homes as promotional facilities) in 1971 for $1.05 million (equivalent to $8.2 million in 2024). Its previous owner was Louis D. Statham (1908–1983), an engineer, inventor and chess aficionado. In early 2011, it was valued at $54 million. It sits close to the northwestern corner of the Los Angeles Country Club, near the University of California, Los Angeles and the Bel-Air Country Club. Following the company&#x27;s acquisition of the property, $15 million was invested in renovation and expansion.

The mansion has 29 rooms, including a wine cellar (with a Prohibition-era secret door), a screening room with a built-in pipe organ, a game room, three zoo/aviary buildings (and related pet cemetery), a tennis/basketball court, a waterfall and a swimming pool area (including a patio and barbecue area, a grotto, and a basement gym with sauna below the bathhouse). Landscaping includes a large koi pond with an artificial stream, a small citrus orchard and two well-established forests of tree ferns and redwoods. The west wing (originally a servant&#x27;s wing) housed the editorial offices of &quot;Playboy&quot;. The main aviary building is the original greenhouse with four guest rooms adjoining. Hefner&#x27;s personal suite occupies several rooms on the second and third floors, and is the most heavily renovated area of the building proper, with an extensive carved-oak decor dating to the 1970s. Otherwise, the mansion proper is maintained in its original Gothic-revival furnishings for the most part. The pipe organ was extensively restored in the last decade. There is also an outdoor kitchen to serve party events. These features and others have been shown on television.

The game room (game house) is a separate building on the north side. There are two sidewalks from the fountain in front of the main entrance, running past a wishing well. That on the right leads to the game house and runs past a duplicate Hollywood Star of Hefner. Its front entrance opens to a game room with a pool table in the center. This room has vintage and modern arcade games, pinball machines, player piano, jukebox, television, stereo, and couch. The game house has two wings. On the left is a room with a television and a soft-cushioned floor that is surrounded by wall-to-wall mirrors. There is a restroom with a shower. The right wing of the game house has a smaller restroom and entrance to a bedroom. This bedroom is connected to another, which has an exit that leads outdoors to the game house&#x27;s rear yard. This backyard has lounge chairs and gates on either side.

In 2006, Hefner&#x27;s former girlfriend, Izabella St. James, wrote in her memoir, &quot;Bunny Tales&quot;, that the house was in need of renovation: &quot;Everything in the Mansion felt old and stale, and Archie the house dog would regularly relieve himself on the hallway curtains, adding a powerful whiff of urine to the general scent of decay.&quot; She also observed: &quot;Each bedroom had mismatched, random pieces of furniture. It was as if someone had gone to a charity shop and bought the basics for each room&quot;, and that: &quot;The mattresses on our beds were disgusting – old, worn and stained. The sheets were past their best, too.&quot;

During the time of Hefner&#x27;s marriage to Kimberly Conrad, the Mansion was modeled as a more conservative household.

The mansion next door is a mirror image of the Playboy Mansion layout, only smaller, and was purchased by Hefner in 1996, which would eventually serve as the home for Conrad and their children, Marston and Cooper, when she and Hefner separated. Hefner and Conrad married in 1989 and separated in 1998. In March 2009, Hefner and Conrad put the property up for sale for the asking price of $28 million. In August 2009, the property was purchased by Daren Metropoulos for $18 million.

In 2002, Hefner purchased a house across and down the street from the mansion for use by Playmates and other guests who would prefer to stay further from the busy activity of the Mansion proper. That residence was commonly referred to as the Bunny House. In April 2013, the Bunny House was listed for sale for the asking price of $11 million. In September 2017, the property was sold to an unidentified buyer for $17.25 million.

=== Sale of Playboy Mansion ===
In January 2016, the Playboy Mansion was listed for sale by Playboy Enterprises, Inc. for the asking price of $200 million, subject to the condition Hefner be allowed to continue to rent the mansion for life. In August 2016, the Playboy Mansion was bought for $100 million by Daren Metropoulos, the co-owner of Hostess Brands and a principal in the investment firm C. Dean Metropoulos &amp; Co. Metropoulos intends to renovate and restore the mansion to its original form.

In 2009, Metropoulos bought the mansion next door to the Playboy Mansion from Hefner and his ex-wife Kimberly Conrad, and ultimately now wants to join the two properties. The Playboy Mansion and the mansion next door owned by Metropoulos were both designed by American architect Arthur Rolland Kelly and each estate has a common boundary with the Los Angeles Country Club.

In May 2016, Eugena Washington was the last Playmate of the Year to be announced by Hefner at the Playboy Mansion.

=== Permanent protection covenant ===
In March 2018, Daren Metropoulos, the owner of the Playboy Mansion, entered into an agreement with the City of Los Angeles which permanently protects the mansion from demolition. The agreement between Metropoulos and the City of Los Angeles, referred to between the parties as a &quot;permanent protection covenant,&quot; is binding on all future owners. The agreement protects the mansion from demolition, but still allows Metropoulos to make modernizations and substantial renovations and repairs to the property &quot;following a long period of deferred maintenance while under Playboy ownership.&quot;

Under the permanent protection covenant, Metropoulos has further agreed to restore the house and facade to &quot;its original grandeur.&quot; The compromise agreement reversed a move in November 2017 by Los Angeles City Councilmember Paul Koretz to seek landmark status for the mansion in the hope of protecting the architectural integrity of the estate for what he called &quot;an excellent example of a Gothic-Tudor.&quot; If designated a historic landmark, Metropoulos would have faced a lengthy process for permitting and review for the rehabilitation of the property. The permanent protection covenant avoided a potentially drawn out and contentious legal action between the City of Los Angeles and Metropoulos for the City of Los Angeles seeking the formal designation of the mansion as a historic landmark.

=== Original Chicago Mansion ===

The original Playboy Mansion was a 54-room classical brick and limestone residence in Chicago&#x27;s Gold Coast district at 1340 North State Parkway which had been built in 1899 (or 1903) for $100,000 (equivalent to $3.07 million in 2024). Its original owner was Dr. George Swift Isham, a prominent surgeon whose social circle included Theodore Roosevelt and Robert Peary. The building was designed by architect James Gamble Rogers, best known for his work at Yale University and Columbia University.

In December 1959, the building was acquired by Playboy Enterprises in a $370,000 (equivalent to $3.9 million in 2024) cash transaction. The Chicago Mansion&#x27;s basement, renovated upon occupancy as Hefner&#x27;s original &quot;grotto&quot;, had a swimming pool with a glass wall and attached bar. In addition to a six-car garage, exercise/game room, large ballroom and restaurant-type kitchen, the residence contained a top-floor dormitory for Bunnies employed at the Chicago Playboy Club, up to six discrete apartments and seven deluxe furnished guest rooms (most notably the luxurious Blue Room and Red Room, which were immediately accessible from the ballroom and shared a common bathroom) that were variously occupied by several employees and friends of Hefner; these ranged from Playmates completing protracted photo shoots to peripatetic cartoonist-songwriter Shel Silverstein (who lived in the Red Room during extended stays in his hometown until the mothballing of the Chicago Mansion in 1975) and longtime Hefner aide Bobbie Arnstein. Located on the second floor of the building, Hefner&#x27;s personal suite (containing a three-room apartment and bathroom) was prominently connected to the Roman Bath, an &quot;elaborate bathing/sleeping area&quot; designed for marathon group sex sessions that almost always encompassed Hefner, longtime friend/roommate John Dante and their respective paramours; installed circa 1970, it contained &quot;baroque gold spigots and faucets that sprayed and showered&quot; alongside &quot;a tub with chest-high water&quot; and a mirrored alcove with an early (and mink-covered) waterbed. Hefner&#x27;s suite also was connected to three additional rooms that were employed as the publisher&#x27;s nominal office (notwithstanding his oft-publicized penchant for working in his bedroom&#x27;s metonymous round rotating/vibrating bed). 

The Chicago Mansion also boasted a brass plate on the door—gifted to Hefner by A. C. Spectorsky, the magazine&#x27;s influential editorial director—with the Latin inscription &quot;Si Non Oscillas, Noli Tintinnare&quot; (&quot;If you don&#x27;t swing, don&#x27;t ring&quot;). 

An adjacent 20-room townhouse at 1336 North State Parkway (originally built with a connection to 1340 North State Parkway as a residence for Isham&#x27;s daughter in 1914) was reincorporated into the complex in 1970; acquired in cash for $550,000 (equivalent to $4.3 million in 2024), it contained a board room, ancillary offices and bedrooms (including an addition to the Bunny dormitory, which could now accommodate more than 30 boarders). In addition, a single-lane bowling alley (possibly built for Christie Hefner and featuring a gold-plated ball for the elder Hefner, who largely eschewed the sport after proving to be a middling bowler) was furnished in the annex&#x27;s basement; following nearly two years of &quot;planning, remodeling, and building,&quot; the facility opened in July 1972.

From 1971 to 1975, Hefner divided his time between the Chicago Mansion and the Playboy Mansion West. According to a 1979 U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission decision, the publisher spent 71% of his time (8.5 months) at the Chicago Mansion in 1972, a metric that dwindled to 55% (6.6 months) in 1973 and 40% (4.8 months) in 1974. 

Although Playboy Enterprises remained headquartered in Chicago until 2012, Hefner designated the Mansion West as his full-time residence in 1975 following the criminal conviction and ensuing apparent suicide of Bobbie Arnstein, the culmination of an &quot;investigation of drug use in Hefner&#x27;s mansion&quot; by U.S. Attorney for the Northern District of Illinois (and future Governor of Illinois) James R. Thompson that attracted significant publicity after Arnstein&#x27;s March 21, 1974 indictment. Arnstein&#x27;s apparent suicide (which occurred at the Maryland Hotel, situated in the immediate vicinity of the Chicago Mansion) followed the high-profile September 1973 death of Adrienne Pollack—a 23-year-old Bunny and former dormitory resident who may have been involved in drug trafficking at the Chicago Mansion—from a methaqualone overdose.

Hefner&#x27;s use of the Chicago Mansion had already declined precipitously following his circa mid-April 1974 breakup with Playmate Karen Christy, who had been domiciled there as his primary companion in the city (Barbi Benton seldom visited Chicago after the acquisition of the Mansion West) since 1971. Attorneys also had likely advised Hefner to keep a professional distance from Arnstein (who was in the early stages of preparing to move to Los Angeles—under the stipulation of not residing at the Playboy Mansion West as a condition of maintaining her role with the company—at the time of her death) for the duration of her legal proceedings, prompting him to spend even more of his time at the Mansion West after August 1974 (as inferred from the dates of newspapers that remained in Hefner&#x27;s Chicago Mansion apartment for much of the next decade). 

Additionally, the December 1974 resignation of Robert J. Adelman (then chairman of the Rubloff Company, an influential Chicago real estate conglomerate) from Playboy Enterprises&#x27;s board in the aftermath of the Arnstein conviction appears to have further estranged Hefner from the local business community, which was long circumspect of his lifestyle. &quot;Things were very different here [in Los Angeles] from Chicago,&quot; Hefner later recalled. &quot;Tom Bradley, the mayor, attended the opening of the Playboy Club and was a frequent guest at the parties and so was Jerry Brown, the governor.” According to Hefner friend and fellow pornographer Suze Randall, the Chicago Mansion &quot;had for some time been hired out for large business meetings&quot; (such as a January 1975 convention for the Texas food industry that coincided with Arnstein&#x27;s apparent suicide and a Randall business trip) &quot;in an attempt to make it pay its way&quot; as a profitable event facility. During a thwarted attempt to sell the property amid Playboy Enterprises&#x27; financial difficulties in July 1975, Senior Vice President Victor Lownes estimated that the publisher only spent three weeks at the Chicago Mansion (including several short business trips, a visit centered around Arnstein&#x27;s funeral and a similar stay for a May 1975 backgammon tournament) during the previous year. “After [Arnstein] died, there really wasn’t a lot of reason for going back [to the Chicago Mansion],&quot; Hefner recalled in 2009. “There really wasn’t anything left for me there.” 

Unbeknownst to the public at the time, the decision to officially &quot;mothball&quot; the Chicago Mansion in September 1975 also coincided with a substantial increase (from $7,800 to $36,000 per year) in the fair rental value of the publisher&#x27;s Chicago accommodations—likely in anticipation of 1978 disputes with the Internal Revenue Service and a shareholder group concerning Hefner&#x27;s potential embezzlement of corporate assets through the Mansion lease agreements—prompting the publisher to only renew his Playboy Mansion West lease thereafter. The contemporaneous sale of the Big Bunny (the company&#x27;s McDonnell Douglas DC-9 business jet, which was almost exclusively employed for commutation purposes by Hefner and his immediate entourage after 1970) also rendered his previous lifestyle untenable due to his disdain of commercial aviation.

Beginning in the summer of 1975, the Chicago Mansion was maintained with a &quot;skeleton staff&quot; of approximately 12 security and maintenance employees (having previously burgeoned to a height of 50 staff members during the facility&#x27;s 1960s heyday, approximately 18 staffers remained when Lownes instituted layoffs in mid-1975) and primarily opened thereafter to the public for &quot;occasional charity benefits and business functions&quot; following the concomitant closure of the Bunny dormitory. The facility&#x27;s population had already dwindled to 20 (against a total capacity of 36 berths; residents included 12 Bunnies assigned to the Chicago Playboy Club and eight &quot;Jet Bunnies&quot; who proffered flight attendant service on Big Bunny flights) by September 1973 due to onerously restrictive on-site visitation policies and highly circumscribed provisions governing the boarders&#x27; alcohol use at the Mansion despite an egalitarian $50/month berth rent (equivalent to $350/month in 2024), daily maid service and affordable, a la carte 24-hour food service from the Mansion kitchen; by mid-1975, only six Bunnies lived in the dormitory. During this period, Derick Daniels (who served as president and chief operating officer of Playboy Enterprises from 1976 to 1982) lived in a Chicago Mansion apartment throughout his first year with the company. 

While Hefner vowed to &quot;spend more time&quot; in the city amid various meetings (and a lengthy press conference) at the Chicago Mansion following the controversial dismissal of Anthony Jackson (a recruiter then characterized as Playboy&#x27;s highest-ranking Black executive) in August 1975, his few documented visits to the Chicago Mansion thereafter consisted of October and November 1975 stays referenced in subsequent press reports, a July 1976 trip centered around an awards luncheon for Elton John, a December 1978 holiday jaunt coinciding with one of the magazine&#x27;s 25th anniversary parties (with a guest list that ran the gamut from Hefner&#x27;s polyamorous Los Angeles circle to onetime Chicago Mansion stalwarts like Shel Silverstein) and a November 1979 trip in conjunction with his longstanding support of the Chicago International Film Festival; actor Harry Reems (alleged by contemporaneous Mansion butler Stefan Tetenbaum to have engaged in distinct sexual assignations during this period with both Hefner and his longtime executive assistant, Mary O&#x27;Connor) accompanied the publisher on the visit en route to a New York City theatrical engagement. (In lieu of external caterers or temporary employees, Mansion West staff accompanied Hefner on the latter two stays to supervise house operations.)

Although the complex had been put on sale for $2.3 million (equivalent to $12.3 million in 2024) by late 1976 (increased to $2.5 million [equivalent to $12.5 million in 2024] a year later), Hefner&#x27;s apartment and office (including many of his remaining personal effects) remained virtually untouched during the ensuing interregnum. When no buyers manifested, the main building was leased for $10 per year as a dormitory (under the imprimatur of Hefner Hall) for the School of the Art Institute of Chicago in August 1984; as part of the agreement, the School purchased 1336 North State Parkway outright for $500,000 (equivalent to $1.5 million in 2024), while Playboy Enterprises formally deeded 1340 North State Parkway to the Art Institute when the agreement lapsed in 1989. In 1993, the Chicago Mansion was sold to developer Bruce Abrams and converted into seven high-price luxury condos. In 2011, one condominium was placed for sale at an asking price of $6.7 million.

== Events and appearances ==
* The house can be seen in the 1966 film &quot;Madame X&quot; (before it was purchased by Playboy in the next decade).
* The Playboy Mansion was used as a film location in &quot;Beverly Hills Cop II&quot;, with Hefner as himself in a cameo role.
* The mansion hosted the Starting Line of the 12th season of CBS&#x27; long-running reality competition series &quot;The Amazing Race&quot;.
* The mansion appeared on the tv show &quot;Entourage&quot;, as a party location that the group went to in season 1.
* The mansion and Hefner were featured prominently in the 2005 &quot;Curb Your Enthusiasm&quot; episode &quot;The Smoking Jacket&quot;.
* The mansion was a main setting in the 2008 film &quot;The House Bunny&quot;, and Hugh Hefner again portrayed himself.
* The mansion&#x27;s front gate appeared in the 2011 film &quot;Hop&quot; in which EB tries to request lodging in the mansion only for Hefner (in a voice-only appearance as himself, heard over the entry phone) to turn him away. Later, when the Pink Berets are searching for EB outside of the mansion, Hefner comes on the entry phone again and threatens to put a stop to what ever is going on outside. One of the Pink Berets responds by smashing the camera.
* The mansion is briefly mentioned in the last panel of the &quot;Big Nate&quot; comic strip October10, 2016 edition, which depicts Mr.Galvin denying Nate permission to interview him for the school newspaper, as the last time Nate wrote about him he included a photoshopped image of Mr.Galvin&#x27;s head on Leonardo DiCaprio&#x27;s body at the Playboy Mansion, leading readers to begin to view Mr.Galvin as a &quot;philandering party animal.&quot;
* The mansion can be seen in &quot;Grand Theft Auto V&quot;. It has a small cave, back patio and a small bar. Topless women and older men can be found there at night.
* It is featured in a scene of the 2019 film &quot;Once Upon a Time in Hollywood&quot;
* The Mansion was the setting for the band Weezer&#x27;s music video for their song &quot;Beverly Hills&quot;.

== Financial ==
According to Playboy Enterprises&#x27; SEC filings, Hefner paid Playboy rent for &quot;that portion of the Playboy Mansion used exclusively for him and his personal guests&#x27; residence as well as the per-unit value of non-business meals, beverages and other benefits received by him and his personal guests&quot;. This amount was $1.3 million in 2002, $1.4 million in 2003, and $1.3 million in 2004.

Playboy paid for the Mansion&#x27;s operating expenses (including depreciation and taxes), which were $3.6 million in 2002, $2.3 million in 2003, and $3.0 million in 2004, net of rent received from Hefner.

== Charity events ==
The Playboy Mansion has hosted charity events, including Karma Foundation, the Celebrity Poker Tournament, a fundraising party for the Marijuana Policy Project, and an event to benefit research into autism.

== 2011 bacterial outbreak ==
In February 2011, 123 people complained of fever and respiratory illness after attending a DomainFest Global conference event held at the Playboy Mansion. After an investigation in response to the reported illnesses of the DomainFest attendees, epidemiologists from the Los Angeles County Department of Public Health disclosed their findings at a Centers for Disease Control conference. The disease outbreak was traced to a hot tub in the mansion&#x27;s famed grotto, where they found &quot;Legionella pneumophila&quot;, which causes Legionnaires&#x27; disease.

== Abuse allegations ==
The 2022 A&amp;E documentary series &quot;Secrets of Playboy&quot; featured interviews with former Playboy employees who alleged numerous acts of sexual and drug abuse took place at the mansion during Hefner&#x27;s lifetime. Before the first episode of the documentary series aired on January 24, 2022, &quot;Playboy&quot; released a statement which dissociated itself from Hefner. On June 21, 2022, a California civil trial jury found that comedian Bill Cosby sexually assaulted 16-year-old Judith Huth at the Playboy Mansion in 1975.

In response to Sondra Theodore&#x27;s later claim that Hefner manipulated her into an orgy and hosted prostitution sex parties known as &quot;Pig Nights&quot; during the time she lived at the Playboy Mansion, a spokesperson for &quot;Playboy&quot; issued a statement to Fox News Digital in August 2022 saying that &quot;Today&#x27;s Playboy is not Hugh Hefner&#x27;s Playboy,&quot; and that &quot;We trust and validate these women and their stories, and we strongly support those individuals who have come forward to share their experiences. As a brand with sex positivity at its core, we believe safety, security and accountability are paramount.&quot; Soon afterwards, renowned Playmate Jenny McCarthy, who was affiliated with Playboy in later time in 1993 and 1994, claimed to Fox News that she did not experience the claims described in &quot;Secrets of Playboy&quot; and that the mansion had become &quot;almost like Catholic school&quot; by the time she was living there, but also did not speak out against the claims made by the &quot;Secrets Of Playboy&quot; accusers, stating &quot;I think I went in there in a window of time that was kind of safe, but hearing some of these girls&#x27; stories was really rough.&quot;

In 2024, Hefner&#x27;s widow Crystal would publish a memoir backing allegations that the Mansion was an environment of sexual abuse, and also describing it as a place where she felt &quot;imprisoned.&quot; Crystal also told &quot;The Guardian&quot; that &quot;Hef was on the extreme side of narcissism&quot; and &quot;I had to play mind games to survive.&quot;

== In popular culture ==
A house inspired by the Playboy Mansion makes an appearance in the 2013 videogame &quot;Grand Theft Auto V&quot;.

== See also ==
* Stocks House

== References ==
== External links ==
* World of Playboy: &quot;Inside the Mansion&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1783719" start="4" end="19" title="Playboy Mansion" label="Playboy Mansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783719" start="39" end="59" title="Playboy Mansion" label="Playboy Mansion West"/>
<link wikidata="Q150820" start="89" end="96" title="Playboy" label="Playboy"/>
<link wikidata="Q194280" start="120" end="131" title="Hugh Hefner" label="Hugh Hefner"/>
<link wikidata="Q435826" start="184" end="196" title="Barbi Benton" label="Barbi Benton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3139443" start="241" end="253" title="Holmby Hills, Los Angeles" label="Holmby Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="255" end="266" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="268" end="278" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q127856" start="285" end="298" title="Beverly Hills" label="Beverly Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q5006387" start="521" end="537" title="Dean Metropoulos" label="Dean Metropoulos"/>
<link wikidata="Q5578644" start="795" end="820" title="Gold Coast Historic District (Chicago)" label="Chicago&amp;#x27;s Gold Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432601" start="1030" end="1068" title="School of the Art Institute of Chicago" label="School of the Art Institute of Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q186363" start="1407" end="1413" title="Gothic Revival architecture" label="Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7851317" start="1414" end="1419" title="Tudor Revival architecture" label="Tudor"/>
<link wikidata="Q25161472" start="1457" end="1463" title="Forbes" label="Forbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4800164" start="1513" end="1528" title="Arthur Rolland Kelly" label="Arthur R. Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q7720224" start="1582" end="1594" title="The Broadway" label="The Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q4799502" start="1620" end="1632" title="Arthur Letts" label="Arthur Letts"/>
<link wikidata="Q3107204" start="1654" end="1673" title="Playboy Enterprises" label="Playboy Enterprises"/>
<link wikidata="Q718" start="1982" end="1987" title="chess" label="chess"/>
<link wikidata="Q6682056" start="2093" end="2117" title="Los Angeles Country Club" label="Los Angeles Country Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q174710" start="2128" end="2165" title="University of California, Los Angeles" label="University of California, Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q4881691" start="2174" end="2194" title="Bel-Air Country Club" label="Bel-Air Country Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q46388" start="2367" end="2378" title="Prohibition" label="Prohibition"/>
<link wikidata="Q281460" start="2430" end="2440" title="pipe organ" label="pipe organ"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363025" start="2465" end="2471" title="aviary" label="aviary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131329" start="2614" end="2620" title="grotto" label="grotto"/>
<link wikidata="Q57036" start="2646" end="2651" title="sauna" label="sauna"/>
<link wikidata="Q785952" start="2662" end="2671" title="Public bathing" label="bathhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q6426198" start="2703" end="2711" title="koi pond" label="koi pond"/>
<link wikidata="Q113726751" start="3864" end="3875" title="arcade game" label="arcade game"/>
<link wikidata="Q653928" start="3878" end="3893" title="pinball machine" label="pinball machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q593995" start="3896" end="3908" title="player piano" label="player piano"/>
<link wikidata="Q815249" start="3910" end="3917" title="jukebox" label="jukebox"/>
<link wikidata="Q6101527" start="4422" end="4440" title="Izabella St. James" label="Izabella St. James"/>
<link wikidata="Q3073238" start="5081" end="5096" title="Kimberly Conrad" label="Kimberly Conrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2703478" start="5184" end="5196" title="mirror image" label="mirror image"/>
<link wikidata="Q17068094" start="6413" end="6427" title="Hostess Brands" label="Hostess Brands"/>
<link wikidata="Q5006387" start="6467" end="6486" title="C. Dean Metropoulos" label="C. Dean Metropoulos"/>
<link wikidata="Q4800164" start="6855" end="6875" title="Arthur Rolland Kelly" label="Arthur Rolland Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q8925853" start="6963" end="6980" title="Eugena Washington" label="Eugena Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q7151836" start="7945" end="7956" title="Paul Koretz" label="Paul Koretz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="8646" end="8653" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q5578644" start="8661" end="8671" title="Gold Coast Historic District (Chicago)" label="Gold Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q986343" start="8695" end="8708" title="State Street (Chicago)" label="State Parkway"/>
<link wikidata="Q33866" start="8896" end="8914" title="Theodore Roosevelt" label="Theodore Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q186585" start="8919" end="8931" title="Robert Peary" label="Robert Peary"/>
<link wikidata="Q6134465" start="8972" end="8991" title="James Gamble Rogers" label="James Gamble Rogers"/>
<link wikidata="Q49112" start="9020" end="9035" title="Yale University" label="Yale University"/>
<link wikidata="Q49088" start="9040" end="9059" title="Columbia University" label="Columbia University"/>
<link wikidata="Q361257" start="9931" end="9947" title="Shel Silverstein" label="Shel Silverstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q7675376" start="10346" end="10355" title="group sex" label="group sex"/>
<link wikidata="Q17700" start="10669" end="10673" title="mink" label="mink"/>
<link wikidata="Q649066" start="10683" end="10691" title="waterbed" label="waterbed"/>
<link wikidata="Q27106471" start="11686" end="11699" title="bowling alley" label="bowling alley"/>
<link wikidata="Q509163" start="11720" end="11735" title="Christie Hefner" label="Christie Hefner"/>
<link wikidata="Q953944" start="12139" end="12178" title="U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission" label="U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889822" start="12669" end="12720" title="U.S. Attorney for the Northern District of Illinois" label="U.S. Attorney for the Northern District of Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112719" start="12733" end="12753" title="Governor of Illinois" label="Governor of Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q735247" start="12755" end="12772" title="James R. Thompson" label="James R. Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q423912" start="13184" end="13196" title="methaqualone" label="methaqualone"/>
<link wikidata="Q6594270" start="13341" end="13354" title="Karen Christy" label="Karen Christy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7376175" start="14158" end="14173" title="Rubloff Company" label="Rubloff Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133864" start="14531" end="14542" title="Tom Bradley (mayor)" label="Tom Bradley"/>
<link wikidata="Q152451" start="14647" end="14658" title="Jerry Brown" label="Jerry Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q431529" start="14726" end="14738" title="Suze Randall" label="Suze Randall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="14876" end="14881" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q15109621" start="15196" end="15209" title="Victor Lownes" label="Victor Lownes"/>
<link wikidata="Q11411" start="15408" end="15418" title="backgammon" label="backgammon"/>
<link wikidata="Q973587" start="15964" end="15988" title="Internal Revenue Service" label="Internal Revenue Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q157833" start="16048" end="16060" title="embezzlement" label="embezzlement"/>
<link wikidata="Q221414" start="16261" end="16283" title="McDonnell Douglas DC-9" label="McDonnell Douglas DC-9"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062135" start="16284" end="16296" title="business jet" label="business jet"/>
<link wikidata="Q9640723" start="16480" end="16499" title="commercial aviation" label="commercial aviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q101539" start="17224" end="17240" title="flight attendant" label="flight attendant"/>
<link wikidata="Q47146337" start="17411" end="17418" title="alcohol (drug)" label="alcohol"/>
<link wikidata="Q2808" start="18375" end="18385" title="Elton John" label="Elton John"/>
<link wikidata="Q272026" start="18542" end="18553" title="polyamorous" label="polyamorous"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071936" start="18710" end="18745" title="Chicago International Film Festival" label="Chicago International Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q222832" start="18753" end="18764" title="Harry Reems" label="Harry Reems"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="19020" end="19033" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432601" start="19677" end="19715" title="School of the Art Institute of Chicago" label="School of the Art Institute of Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q161851" start="20094" end="20099" title="condominium" label="condo"/>
<link wikidata="Q631841" start="20260" end="20268" title="Madame X (1966 film)" label="Madame X"/>
<link wikidata="Q525860" start="20391" end="20411" title="Beverly Hills Cop II" label="Beverly Hills Cop II"/>
<link wikidata="Q3267577" start="20505" end="20516" title="The Amazing Race 12" label="12th season"/>
<link wikidata="Q60096" start="20576" end="20592" title="The Amazing Race (American TV series)" label="The Amazing Race"/>
<link wikidata="Q253205" start="20644" end="20653" title="Entourage (American TV series)" label="Entourage"/>
<link wikidata="Q23722" start="20786" end="20806" title="Curb Your Enthusiasm" label="Curb Your Enthusiasm"/>
<link wikidata="Q466959" start="20909" end="20924" title="The House Bunny" label="The House Bunny"/>
<link wikidata="Q753605" start="21037" end="21040" title="Hop (film)" label="Hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q2603074" start="21170" end="21181" title="entry phone" label="entry phone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3919692" start="21496" end="21504" title="Big Nate" label="Big Nate"/>
<link wikidata="Q141130" start="21691" end="21703" title="Photograph manipulation" label="photoshopped"/>
<link wikidata="Q38111" start="21738" end="21755" title="Leonardo DiCaprio" label="Leonardo DiCaprio"/>
<link wikidata="Q17452" start="21914" end="21932" title="Grand Theft Auto V" label="Grand Theft Auto V"/>
<link wikidata="Q47300912" start="22097" end="22126" title="Once Upon a Time in Hollywood" label="Once Upon a Time in Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q209956" start="22176" end="22182" title="Weezer" label="Weezer"/>
<link wikidata="Q596995" start="22223" end="22236" title="Beverly Hills (Weezer song)" label="Beverly Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q7389632" start="22300" end="22311" title="SEC filings" label="SEC filings"/>
<link wikidata="Q6763392" start="23028" end="23052" title="Marijuana Policy Project" label="Marijuana Policy Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q583725" start="23478" end="23505" title="Centers for Disease Control" label="Centers for Disease Control"/>
<link wikidata="Q147885" start="23622" end="23644" title="Legionella pneumophila" label="Legionella pneumophila"/>
<link wikidata="Q154882" start="23665" end="23691" title="Legionnaires&amp;#x27; disease" label="Legionnaires&amp;#x27; disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q277561" start="23727" end="23734" title="A&amp;amp;E (TV network)" label="A&amp;amp;E"/>
<link wikidata="Q213512" start="24168" end="24178" title="Bill Cosby" label="Bill Cosby"/>
<link wikidata="Q7560905" start="24270" end="24285" title="Sondra Theodore" label="Sondra Theodore"/>
<link wikidata="Q186068" start="24525" end="24541" title="Fox News" label="Fox News Digital"/>
<link wikidata="Q230993" start="24944" end="24958" title="Jenny McCarthy" label="Jenny McCarthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q454813" start="25513" end="25520" title="Crystal Hefner" label="Crystal"/>
<link wikidata="Q17452" start="25959" end="25977" title="Grand Theft Auto V" label="Grand Theft Auto V"/>
<link wikidata="Q7618187" start="26003" end="26015" title="Stocks House" label="Stocks House"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="309070" wikidata="Q470735" url="?curid=309070" title="The Dirty Dozen">
<text>The Dirty Dozen is a 1967 American war film directed by Robert Aldrich and starring Lee Marvin, with an ensemble supporting cast including Ernest Borgnine, Charles Bronson, Jim Brown, John Cassavetes, Richard Jaeckel, George Kennedy, Ralph Meeker, Robert Ryan, Trini Lopez, Telly Savalas, Donald Sutherland, Clint Walker and Robert Webber. Set in 1944 during World War II, the film follows the titular penal military unit of twelve convicts as they are trained as commandos by the Allies for a suicide mission ahead of the Normandy landings.

&quot;The Dirty Dozen&quot; was filmed in England at MGM-British Studios and released by MGM. The screenplay is based on the 1965 bestseller of the same name by E. M. Nathanson, which itself was inspired by a real-life WWII unit of behind-the-lines demolition specialists from the 101st Airborne Division named the &quot;Filthy Thirteen&quot;. Another possible inspiration was the public offer to President Franklin D. Roosevelt by 44 prisoners serving life sentences at the Oklahoma State Penitentiary to serve in the Pacific War on suicide missions against the Japanese.

The film was a box office success and won the Academy Award for Best Sound Editing at the 40th Academy Awards in 1968. In 2001, the American Film Institute placed it at number 65 on their 100 Years... 100 Thrills list. The film spawned a few television film sequels in the 1980s: &quot;The Dirty Dozen: Next Mission&quot; in 1985, &quot;The Dirty Dozen: The Deadly Mission&quot; in 1987, and &quot;The Dirty Dozen: The Fatal Mission&quot; in 1988. A remake was announced in 2019 by Warner Bros.

==Plot==
In March 1944, OSS officer Major John Reisman is ordered by the commander of ADSEC in Britain, Major General Sam Worden, to undertake &quot;Project Amnesty&quot;, a top secret mission to turn some of the U.S. Army&#x27;s worst convicts into highly skilled commandos to eliminate Wehrmacht officers at a château near Rennes, disrupting the German chain of command in northern France ahead of D-Day. Any convicts who survive the mission will receive a pardon.

Reisman meets the twelve convicts (including the mob-associated robber Franko, former major Wladislaw, black soldier Jefferson, the gentle giant and hazed enduced Posey, and religiously driven psychopath Maggott) at a military prison operated by the Military Police Corps. These five are condemned to death for murder, while the others (Giplin, Pinkley, Sawyer, Lever, Bravos, Vladek, and Jiminez) face lengthy sentences, including hard labor for crimes such as assault, larceny, mugging and impersonation. Reisman quickly establishes his authority, but the group remains disgruntled. Overseen by MPs led by Sergeant Bowren, the convicts gradually learn to operate together when they are forced to build their own training camp. However, an act of insubordination by Franko results in the men&#x27;s shaving and wash kits being withheld as punishment, leading the group to be nicknamed the &quot;Dirty Dozen.&quot; During their training, the convicts are psychoanalyzed by Captain Kinder, who warns Reisman that there is a chance that at least 7 of them will likely kill him if given the chance and that Maggott is by far the most dangerous.

With their commando training almost complete, the Dirty Dozen are sent for parachute training at a facility commanded by Reisman&#x27;s nemesis, Colonel Everett Dasher Breed of the 101st Airborne Division. However, Breed is curiously not briefed about Project Amnesty. Rather than making inquiries to higher command, Breed makes several attempts to discover Reisman&#x27;s mission, including infiltration of the Dirty Dozen&#x27;s camp. Reisman, with the eager assistance of the convicts, angrily kicks Breed and his men out of the camp. Later, Breed&#x27;s testimony combined with Reisman rewarding the Dirty Dozen (with the exception of Maggott, as his crime is the rape and murder of one) with prostitutes at the end of their training, prompts the ADSEC staff to consider terminating the project and sending the men back to serve their original sentences. Reisman defends the convicts&#x27; training and agrees to have them compete against Breed&#x27;s men in war games to test their mettle. Breed finds this ridiculously humorous, but to his surprise, the Dirty Dozen successfully capture his headquarters and Worden allows Reisman to resume his mission.

Upon parachuting into northern France, the German-speaking Wladislaw and Reisman infiltrate the chateau disguised as German officers to help the rest of the team inside. However, Maggott breaks cover by murdering an officer&#x27;s spouse and firing at his teammates before he is killed by Jefferson for compromising the mission. The sound of gunfire makes the Wehrmacht officers and their companions retreat to a locked underground bomb shelter. The unit pours gasoline through ventilation shafts, and Jefferson throws grenades into the shelter through the shafts, killing the officers and their civilian guests.

After a firefight with the chateau guards and arriving reinforcements that kills nearly all of the Dozen, Reisman, Bowren and Wladislaw escape back to England alive. Worden pardons Wladislaw, who is given the opportunity to resume his work in the armed forces. As the credits roll, Reisman communicates to the other convicts&#x27; next of kin that &quot;they lost their lives in the line of duty&quot;.

==Cast==

* Lee Marvin as Major John Reisman
* Ernest Borgnine as Major General Sam Worden
* Charles Bronson as Joseph Wladislaw (#9)
* Jim Brown as Robert T. Jefferson (#3)
* John Cassavetes as Victor R. Franko (#11)
* Richard Jaeckel as Sergeant Clyde Bowren
* George Kennedy as Major Max Armbruster
* Trini López as Pedro Jimenez (#10)
* Ralph Meeker as Captain Stuart Kinder
* Robert Ryan as Colonel Everett Dasher Breed
* Telly Savalas as Archer J. Maggot (#8)
* Donald Sutherland as Vernon L. Pinkley (#2)
* Clint Walker as Samson Posey (#1)
* Robert Webber as Brigadier General Denton
* Tom Busby as Milo Vladek (#6)
* Ben Carruthers as Glenn Gilpin (#4)
* Stuart Cooper as Roscoe Lever (#5)
* Colin Maitland as Seth K. Sawyer (#7)
* Al Mancini as Tassos R. Bravos (#12)
* Robert Phillips as Corporal Carl Morgan
* Dora Reisser as German officer&#x27;s girl
* George Roubicek as Private Arthur James Gardner
* Thick Wilson as Major General Worden&#x27;s aide
* Gerry Crampton &quot;Stunt Coordinator&quot; (uncredited)
* Ray Austin as &quot;Stunt Coordinator&quot; (uncredited)
* Hildegard Knef as &quot;undetermined&quot; (uncredited)
* Richard Marner as a German sentry (uncredited)
* John Hollis as German porter at château (uncredited)
* Ann Lancaster as a prostitute (uncredited)

== Production ==
=== Writing ===
Although Robert Aldrich had failed to buy the rights to E. M. Nathanson&#x27;s novel &quot;The Dirty Dozen&quot; while it was just an outline, Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer succeeded in May 1963. On publication, the novel became a best-seller in 1965. It was adapted to the screen by veteran scriptwriter and producer Nunnally Johnson, and Lukas Heller. A repeated rhyme was written into the script where the twelve actors verbally recite the details of the attack in a rhyming chant to help them remember their roles while approaching the mission target:
# Down to the road block, we&#x27;ve just begun.
# The guards are through.
# The Major&#x27;s men are on a spree.
# Major and Wladislaw go through the door.
# Pinkley stays out in the drive.
# The Major gives the rope a fix.
# Wladislaw throws the hook to heaven.
# Jiminez has got a date.
# The other guys go up the line.
# Sawyer and Gilpin are in the pen.
# Posey guards Points Five and Seven.
# Wladislaw and the Major go down to delve.
# Franko goes up without being seen.
# Zero Hour: Jiminez cuts the cable; Franko cuts the phone.
# Franko goes in where the others have been.
# We all come out like it&#x27;s Halloween.

=== Casting ===
The cast included many American World War II veterans including Lee Marvin, Robert Webber and Robert Ryan (U.S. Marine Corps); Telly Savalas and George Kennedy (U.S. Army); Charles Bronson (U.S. Army Air Forces); Ernest Borgnine (U.S. Navy); and Richard Jaeckel and Clint Walker (U.S. Merchant Marine).

John Wayne was the original choice for Reisman, but he turned down the role because he objected to the adultery present in the original script, which featured the character having a relationship with an Englishwoman whose husband was fighting on the Continent. Jack Palance refused the &quot;Archer Maggot&quot; role when they would not rewrite the script to make his character lose his racism; Telly Savalas took the role instead.

Six of the dozen were experienced American stars, while the &quot;Back Six&quot; were actors resident in the UK: Englishman Colin Maitland, Canadians Donald Sutherland and Tom Busby, and Americans Stuart Cooper, Al Mancini, and Ben Carruthers. According to commentary on &quot;The Dirty Dozen: 2-Disc Special Edition&quot;, when Trini Lopez left the film early, the death scene of Lopez&#x27;s character where he blew himself up with the radio tower was given to Busby (in the film, Ben Carruthers&#x27; character Glenn Gilpin is given the task of blowing up the radio tower while Busby&#x27;s character Milo Vladek is shot in front of the château). Lopez&#x27;s character dies off-camera during the parachute drop that begins the mission. The impersonation of the general scene was to have been done by Clint Walker, but when he thought the scene was demeaning to his character, who was a Native American, Aldrich picked out Sutherland for the bit.

Jim Brown, the Cleveland Browns running back, announced his retirement from American football at age thirty during the making of the film. The owner of the Browns, Art Modell, demanded Brown choose between football and acting. With Brown&#x27;s considerable accomplishments in the sport (he was already the NFL&#x27;s all-time leading rusher, was well ahead statistically of the second-leading rusher, and his team had won the 1964 NFL Championship), he chose acting. In Spike Lee&#x27;s 2002 documentary &quot;Jim Brown: All-American&quot; Modell admitted he made a huge mistake in forcing Jim Brown to choose between football and Hollywood. He said that if he had it to do over again, he would never have made such a demand. Modell fined Jim Brown the equivalent of over $100 per day, a fine which Brown said that &quot;today wouldn&#x27;t even buy the doughnuts for a team&quot;.

=== Filming ===
The production was filmed in the United Kingdom during the summer of 1966. Interiors and set pieces took place at MGM-British Studios, Borehamwood, where the château set was built under the direction of art director William Hutchinson. It was wide and high, surrounded with of heather, 400 ferns, 450 shrubs, 30 spruce trees and six weeping willows. Construction of the faux château proved problematic. The script required its explosion, but it was so solid that 70 tons of explosives would have been required for the effect. Instead, a cork and plastic section was destroyed.

Exteriors were shot throughout southeast England. The credit scenes at the American military prison – alluded in the movie to be Shepton Mallett – were shot in a courtyard at Ashridge House in Hertfordshire. Co-star Richard Jaeckel recalled that when the introductory lineup scene was first shot, Aldrich, who liked to play pranks on his actors, initially placed Charles Bronson between Clint Walker and Donald Sutherland, which provoked an angry response from Bronson, making Aldrich laugh.

The jump school scene was shot at the former entrance to RAF Hendon in London. The wargame was filmed in and around the village of Aldbury. Bradenham Manor was the Wargames&#x27; Headquarters. Beechwood Park School in Markyate was also used as a location during the school&#x27;s summer term, where the training camp and tower were built and shot in the grounds and the village itself as parts of &quot;Devonshire&quot;. The main house was also used, appearing in the film as a military hospital. After filming finished, the training camp huts were relocated and used as sports equipment storage for the school&#x27;s playing fields. Residents of Chenies, Buckinghamshire complained to MGM when filming caused damage around their village.

While making the film, some of the cast members gave an interview to &quot;ABC Film review&quot;, in which they contrasted their own real wartime ranks to their officer roles in the film:
George Kennedy: Took me two years to make Private First Class.Lee Marvin: I didn&#x27;t even make that in the Marines.Ernest Borgnine: I was beneath notice in the NavyFor punks, we&#x27;re doing all right, said Marvin. I wonder how the generals are doing?

Heavy rains throughout the summer caused filming delays of several months, leading to $1 million in overruns and bringing the final cost to $5 million. In the early hours of 21 September 1966 part of the Chateau set burned down prematurely. Night-time film had been stopped at 03:30 due to fog, and the set – which was due to be destroyed during filming – caught fire at 06:29. Principal photography wrapped at MGM-British Studios in September 1966 with post-production to be completed at MGM studios in Culver City, California.

==Historical authenticity==
Nathanson states in the prologue to his novel &quot;The Dirty Dozen&quot; that, while he heard a legend that such a unit may have existed, he incorrectly heard that they were convicts. He was unable to find any corroboration in the archives of the US Army in Europe. He instead turned his research of convicted felons into the subsequent novel. He does not state where he acquired the name, but Arch Whitehouse coined the name &quot;Dirty Dozen&quot; as the 12 enlisted men of the airborne section that became the &quot;Filthy Thirteen&quot; after the lieutenant joined their ranks. In Arch Whitehouse&#x27;s article in &quot;True Magazine&quot;, he claimed that all the enlisted men were full-blood Indians, but, in reality, only their leader Jake McNeice was one-quarter Choctaw. The parts of the Filthy Thirteen story that carried over into Nathanson&#x27;s book were not bathing until the jump into Normandy, their disrespect for military authority, and the pre-invasion party. The Filthy Thirteen was actually a demolitions section with a mission to secure bridges over the Douve on D-Day.

A unit called the &quot;Filthy Thirteen&quot; was an airborne demolition unit documented in the eponymous book, and this unit&#x27;s exploits inspired the fictional account. Barbara Maloney, the daughter of John Agnew, a private in the Filthy Thirteen, told the &quot;American Valor Quarterly&quot; that her father felt that 30 percent of the film&#x27;s content was historically correct, including a scene where officers are captured. Unlike the Dirty Dozen, the Filthy Thirteen were not convicts; however, they were men prone to drinking and fighting and often spent time in the stockade.

==Release==
===Theatrical===
&quot;The Dirty Dozen&quot; premiered at the Capitol Theatre in New York City on June 15, 1967 and opened at the 34th Street East theatre the following day. Despite being shot in an aspect ratio of 1.85:1, the film was initially shown in 70 mm which cut off 15% of the film and resulted in a grainy look.

== Reception ==
=== Box office ===
&quot;The Dirty Dozen&quot; was a massive commercial success. In its first five days in New York, the film grossed $103,849 from 2 theatres. Produced on a budget of $5.4 million, it earned theatrical rentals of $7.5 million in its first five weeks from 1,152 bookings and 625 prints, one of the fastest-grossing films at the time; however, on &quot;Variety&quot;&#x27;s weekly box office survey, based on a sample of key city theatres, it only reached number two at the U.S. box office behind &quot;You Only Live Twice&quot; until it finally reached number one in its sixth week. It eventually earned rentals of $24.2 million in the United States and Canada from a gross of $45.3 million. It was the fourth-highest-grossing film of 1967 and MGM&#x27;s highest-grossing film of the year. It was also a hit in France, with admissions of 4,672,628.

=== Critical response ===
Upon release, the film has granted positive reviews from critics. It holds an 82% rating on Rotten Tomatoes based on 55 reviews, with an average rating of 8.00/10. The critical consensus reads, &quot;Amoral on the surface and exuding testosterone, &quot;The Dirty Dozen&quot; utilizes combat and its staggering cast of likable scoundrels to deliver raucous entertainment.&quot; On release, the film was criticized for its level of violence. Roger Ebert, who was in his first year as a film reviewer for the &quot;Chicago Sun-Times&quot;, wrote sarcastically:

In another contemporaneous review, Bosley Crowther called it &quot;an astonishingly wanton war film&quot; and a &quot;studied indulgence of sadism that is morbid and disgusting beyond words&quot;; he also noted:

Crowther called some of the portrayals &quot;bizarre and bold&quot;:

Art Murphy of &quot;Variety&quot; was more positive, calling it &quot;an exciting World War II pre-D-Day drama&quot; with an &quot;excellent cast&quot; and a &quot;very good screenplay&quot; with &quot;a ring of authenticity to it&quot;.

The &quot;Time Out Film Guide&quot; notes that over the years, &quot;&quot;The Dirty Dozen&quot; has taken its place alongside that other commercial classic, &quot;The Magnificent Seven&quot;&quot;. The review then states:

=== Accolades ===
===Year-end lists===
Also, the film is recognized by American Film Institute in these lists:
* 2001: AFI&#x27;s 100 Years...100 Thrills – No. 65

==Other media==
===Parody, unofficial sequels and remake===
In 1967, the same year that &quot;The Dirty Dozen&quot; was released, a parody film titled &quot;The Pogi Dozen&quot; () was released in the Philippines, starring the comedian Chiquito.

Three years after &quot;The Dirty Dozen&quot; was released, &quot;Too Late the Hero&quot;, a film also directed by Aldrich, was described as a &quot;kind of sequel to &quot;The Dirty Dozen&quot;&quot;. The 1969 Michael Caine film &quot;Play Dirty&quot; follows a similar theme of convicts recruited as soldiers. The 1977 Italian war film directed by Enzo G. Castellari, &quot;The Inglorious Bastards&quot;, is a loose remake of &quot;The Dirty Dozen&quot;. Quentin Tarantino&#x27;s 2009 &quot;Inglourious Basterds&quot; was derived from the English-language title of the Castellari film.

===Comic books===
Dell Comics published a comic &quot;The Dirty Dozen&quot; in October 1967.

In 1972 Marvel Comics launched &quot;Combat Kelly and the Deadly Dozen&quot; inspired by the movie. While the series began as a spinoff from Marvel&#x27;s more popular &quot;Sgt. Fury and his Howling Commandos&quot; and several characters from that series crossed over, &quot;Combat Kelly&quot; (as it was known in the indicia) only lasted nine issues.

DC Comics in the 1980s revived their Silver Age comic team known as the Suicide Squad with a similar premise, only using supervillains instead of military convicts. The success of this incarnation over the following years saw incarnations of the team appear in various media including television and movies (both live-action and animation) as well as video games.

===Sequels===

A few TV films were produced in the mid-to-late 1980s which capitalized on the popularity of the first film. Lee Marvin, Richard Jaeckel and Ernest Borgnine reprised their roles for &quot;The Dirty Dozen: Next Mission&quot; in 1985, leading a group of military convicts in a mission to kill a German general who was plotting to assassinate Adolf Hitler. In &quot;The Dirty Dozen: The Deadly Mission&quot; (1987), Telly Savalas, who had played the role of the psychotic Maggot in the original film, assumed the different role of Major Wright, an officer who leads a group of military convicts to extract a group of German scientists who are being forced to make a deadly nerve gas. Ernest Borgnine again reprised his role of General Worden. &quot;The Dirty Dozen: The Fatal Mission&quot; (1988) depicts Savalas&#x27;s Wright character and a group of renegade soldiers attempting to prevent a group of extreme German generals from starting a Fourth Reich, with Erik Estrada co-starring and Ernest Borgnine again playing the role of General Worden. In 1988, Fox aired a short-lived television series starring Ben Murphy. Among the cast was John Slattery, who played Private Leeds in eight of the show&#x27;s 11 episodes.

However, unlike the original film, all three sequels and it&#x27;s TV show are entirely fictional. They do not have connection to the original film.

===Toys===
Some of the surviving cast members of the original film provided the voices of the toy soldiers in Joe Dante&#x27;s &quot;Small Soldiers&quot;.

===In popular culture===
In 2014, Warner Bros. announced that director David Ayer would be the director of a live-action adaptation of the DC Comics property &quot;Suicide Squad&quot;, and Ayer has gone on to say that the film is &quot;the Dirty Dozen with super villains&quot;, citing the original film as inspiration.

Detroit-based hip-hop group D12, also known as the Dirty Dozen, took its name from the movie, which they had not seen, and mistakenly thought it was a Western movie.

===Remake===
In December 2019 Warner Bros. announced it was developing a remake with David Ayer set to direct.

==See also==
* List of American films of 1967
* &quot;Do Aankhen Barah Haath&quot;, a 1957 Indian film with a similar plot
* &quot;My Six Convicts&quot; (autobiographical story of Donald Powell Wilson)
* &quot;Silmido&quot;, a 2003 Korean film about the true story to train convicts as black ops assassins in order to kill North Korean leader Kim Il Sung

==References==
==External links==
* 
* &quot;The Dirty Dozen&quot; at AllMovie
* The Dirty Dozen - Behind the Scenes following Lee Marvin and the film&#x27;s cast during their time in England</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q369747" start="35" end="43" title="war film" label="war film"/>
<link wikidata="Q95133" start="56" end="70" title="Robert Aldrich" label="Robert Aldrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q76895" start="84" end="94" title="Lee Marvin" label="Lee Marvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q102551" start="139" end="154" title="Ernest Borgnine" label="Ernest Borgnine"/>
<link wikidata="Q36105" start="156" end="171" title="Charles Bronson" label="Charles Bronson"/>
<link wikidata="Q927916" start="173" end="182" title="Jim Brown" label="Jim Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q51488" start="184" end="199" title="John Cassavetes" label="John Cassavetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530639" start="201" end="216" title="Richard Jaeckel" label="Richard Jaeckel"/>
<link wikidata="Q298818" start="218" end="232" title="George Kennedy" label="George Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370520" start="234" end="246" title="Ralph Meeker" label="Ralph Meeker"/>
<link wikidata="Q350680" start="248" end="259" title="Robert Ryan" label="Robert Ryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q540134" start="261" end="272" title="Trini Lopez" label="Trini Lopez"/>
<link wikidata="Q209471" start="274" end="287" title="Telly Savalas" label="Telly Savalas"/>
<link wikidata="Q103784" start="289" end="306" title="Donald Sutherland" label="Donald Sutherland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1101643" start="308" end="320" title="Clint Walker" label="Clint Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q714729" start="325" end="338" title="Robert Webber" label="Robert Webber"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="359" end="371" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1306981" start="402" end="421" title="penal military unit" label="penal military unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q989174" start="432" end="439" title="convict" label="convict"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780133" start="464" end="472" title="commando" label="commando"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="481" end="487" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q360632" start="494" end="509" title="suicide mission" label="suicide mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q16470" start="523" end="540" title="Normandy landings" label="Normandy landings"/>
<link wikidata="Q6715721" start="596" end="615" title="MGM-British Studios" label="MGM-British Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q179200" start="632" end="635" title="MGM" label="MGM"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="704" end="719" title="E. M. Nathanson" label="E. M. Nathanson"/>
<link wikidata="Q165256" start="824" end="847" title="101st Airborne Division" label="101st Airborne Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q5449272" start="864" end="879" title="Filthy Thirteen" label="Filthy Thirteen"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="950" end="971" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt" label="Franklin D. Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7082369" start="1018" end="1045" title="Oklahoma State Penitentiary" label="Oklahoma State Penitentiary"/>
<link wikidata="Q184425" start="1062" end="1073" title="Pacific War" label="Pacific War"/>
<link wikidata="Q6139796" start="1106" end="1114" title="Imperial Japanese Armed Forces" label="Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q830079" start="1163" end="1199" title="Academy Award for Best Sound Editing" label="Academy Award for Best Sound Editing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065291" start="1207" end="1226" title="40th Academy Awards" label="40th Academy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q207460" start="1249" end="1272" title="American Film Institute" label="American Film Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1767231" start="1305" end="1329" title="100 Years... 100 Thrills" label="100 Years... 100 Thrills"/>
<link wikidata="Q506240" start="1359" end="1374" title="television film" label="television film"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1403" end="1432" title="The Dirty Dozen: Next Mission" label="The Dirty Dozen: Next Mission"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1454" end="1489" title="The Dirty Dozen: The Deadly Mission" label="The Dirty Dozen: The Deadly Mission"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1515" end="1549" title="The Dirty Dozen: The Fatal Mission" label="The Dirty Dozen: The Fatal Mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q126399" start="1599" end="1611" title="Warner Bros." label="Warner Bros."/>
<link wikidata="Q658626" start="1637" end="1640" title="Office of Strategic Services" label="OSS"/>
<link wikidata="Q4651188" start="1699" end="1704" title="ADSEC" label="ADSEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="1826" end="1835" title="U.S. Army" label="U.S. Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q128781" start="1901" end="1910" title="Wehrmacht" label="Wehrmacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q189290" start="1911" end="1919" title="Officer (armed forces)" label="officers"/>
<link wikidata="Q751876" start="1925" end="1932" title="château" label="château"/>
<link wikidata="Q647" start="1938" end="1944" title="Rennes" label="Rennes"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="1997" end="2003" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q16470" start="2013" end="2018" title="D-Day" label="D-Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q537151" start="2072" end="2078" title="pardon" label="pardon"/>
<link wikidata="Q983927" start="2167" end="2172" title="Major (rank)" label="major"/>
<link wikidata="Q879295" start="2230" end="2235" title="hazed" label="hazed"/>
<link wikidata="Q683992" start="2299" end="2314" title="military prison" label="military prison"/>
<link wikidata="Q617638" start="2331" end="2352" title="Military Police Corps (United States)" label="Military Police Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373376" start="2513" end="2523" title="hard labor" label="hard labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2485381" start="2552" end="2559" title="larceny" label="larceny"/>
<link wikidata="Q53706" start="2561" end="2568" title="Robbery" label="mugging"/>
<link wikidata="Q126602" start="2829" end="2844" title="insubordination" label="insubordination"/>
<link wikidata="Q165256" start="3405" end="3428" title="101st Airborne Division" label="101st Airborne Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q47092" start="3892" end="3896" title="rape" label="rape"/>
<link wikidata="Q357104" start="4187" end="4196" title="military exercise" label="war games"/>
<link wikidata="Q17003536" start="4816" end="4828" title="bomb shelter" label="bomb shelter"/>
<link wikidata="Q76895" start="5414" end="5424" title="Lee Marvin" label="Lee Marvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q102551" start="5449" end="5464" title="Ernest Borgnine" label="Ernest Borgnine"/>
<link wikidata="Q36105" start="5495" end="5510" title="Charles Bronson" label="Charles Bronson"/>
<link wikidata="Q927916" start="5538" end="5547" title="Jim Brown" label="Jim Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q51488" start="5578" end="5593" title="John Cassavetes" label="John Cassavetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530639" start="5622" end="5637" title="Richard Jaeckel" label="Richard Jaeckel"/>
<link wikidata="Q298818" start="5665" end="5679" title="George Kennedy" label="George Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q540134" start="5706" end="5717" title="Trini López" label="Trini López"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370520" start="5743" end="5755" title="Ralph Meeker" label="Ralph Meeker"/>
<link wikidata="Q350680" start="5783" end="5794" title="Robert Ryan" label="Robert Ryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q209471" start="5829" end="5842" title="Telly Savalas" label="Telly Savalas"/>
<link wikidata="Q103784" start="5870" end="5887" title="Donald Sutherland" label="Donald Sutherland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1101643" start="5916" end="5928" title="Clint Walker" label="Clint Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q714729" start="5952" end="5965" title="Robert Webber" label="Robert Webber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231578" start="5996" end="6005" title="Tom Busby" label="Tom Busby"/>
<link wikidata="Q2895358" start="6028" end="6042" title="Ben Carruthers" label="Ben Carruthers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3500787" start="6066" end="6079" title="Stuart Cooper" label="Stuart Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q5145322" start="6103" end="6117" title="Colin Maitland" label="Colin Maitland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4704371" start="6143" end="6153" title="Al Mancini" label="Al Mancini"/>
<link wikidata="Q107042458" start="6182" end="6197" title="Robert Phillips (actor)" label="Robert Phillips"/>
<link wikidata="Q5544069" start="6269" end="6284" title="George Roubicek" label="George Roubicek"/>
<link wikidata="Q66606796" start="6370" end="6384" title="Gerry Crampton" label="Gerry Crampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3420471" start="6430" end="6440" title="Ray Austin (director)" label="Ray Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q57604" start="6489" end="6503" title="Hildegard Knef" label="Hildegard Knef"/>
<link wikidata="Q3292613" start="6547" end="6561" title="Richard Marner" label="Richard Marner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1700477" start="6596" end="6607" title="John Hollis" label="John Hollis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4766496" start="6651" end="6664" title="Ann Lancaster" label="Ann Lancaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q179200" start="6871" end="6890" title="Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer" label="Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2005146" start="7036" end="7052" title="Nunnally Johnson" label="Nunnally Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q97630" start="7058" end="7070" title="Lukas Heller" label="Lukas Heller"/>
<link wikidata="Q11218" start="8025" end="8042" title="U.S. Marine Corps" label="U.S. Marine Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="8079" end="8088" title="U.S. Army" label="U.S. Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q741723" start="8108" end="8128" title="U.S. Army Air Forces" label="U.S. Army Air Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="8148" end="8157" title="U.S. Navy" label="U.S. Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772052" start="8198" end="8218" title="U.S. Merchant Marine" label="U.S. Merchant Marine"/>
<link wikidata="Q40531" start="8222" end="8232" title="John Wayne" label="John Wayne"/>
<link wikidata="Q193653" start="8483" end="8495" title="Jack Palance" label="Jack Palance"/>
<link wikidata="Q5145322" start="8779" end="8793" title="Colin Maitland" label="Colin Maitland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231578" start="8827" end="8836" title="Tom Busby" label="Tom Busby"/>
<link wikidata="Q3500787" start="8852" end="8865" title="Stuart Cooper" label="Stuart Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q4704371" start="8867" end="8877" title="Al Mancini" label="Al Mancini"/>
<link wikidata="Q2895358" start="8883" end="8897" title="Ben Carruthers" label="Ben Carruthers"/>
<link wikidata="Q540134" start="8984" end="8995" title="Trini Lopez" label="Trini Lopez"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="9545" end="9560" title="Indigenous peoples of the Americas" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q927916" start="9606" end="9615" title="Jim Brown" label="Jim Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q2907697" start="9621" end="9637" title="1965 Cleveland Browns season" label="Cleveland Browns"/>
<link wikidata="Q912985" start="9638" end="9650" title="running back" label="running back"/>
<link wikidata="Q705727" start="9770" end="9780" title="Art Modell" label="Art Modell"/>
<link wikidata="Q41323" start="9812" end="9820" title="American football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="9913" end="9916" title="NFL" label="NFL"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960122" start="10033" end="10054" title="1964 NFL Championship Game" label="1964 NFL Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q51566" start="10077" end="10086" title="Spike Lee" label="Spike Lee"/>
<link wikidata="" start="10117" end="10140" title="Jim Brown: All-American" label="Jim Brown: All-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="10539" end="10553" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q6715721" start="10620" end="10639" title="MGM-British Studios" label="MGM-British Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q19773" start="10641" end="10652" title="Borehamwood" label="Borehamwood"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10709" end="10721" title="Art director#In film" label="art director"/>
<link wikidata="Q8012734" start="10722" end="10740" title="William Hutchinson (art director)" label="William Hutchinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5635257" start="11213" end="11228" title="HM Prison Shepton Mallet" label="Shepton Mallett"/>
<link wikidata="Q726273" start="11259" end="11267" title="Ashridge" label="Ashridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3410" start="11277" end="11290" title="Hertfordshire" label="Hertfordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530639" start="11300" end="11315" title="Richard Jaeckel" label="Richard Jaeckel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5713557" start="11634" end="11644" title="RAF Hendon" label="RAF Hendon"/>
<link wikidata="Q546163" start="11708" end="11715" title="Aldbury" label="Aldbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q1855406" start="11717" end="11732" title="Bradenham, Buckinghamshire" label="Bradenham Manor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4879693" start="11770" end="11791" title="Beechwood Park School" label="Beechwood Park School"/>
<link wikidata="Q2337154" start="11795" end="11803" title="Markyate" label="Markyate"/>
<link wikidata="Q23156" start="11980" end="11990" title="Devonshire" label="Devonshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q589687" start="12224" end="12231" title="Chenies" label="Chenies"/>
<link wikidata="Q23229" start="12233" end="12248" title="Buckinghamshire" label="Buckinghamshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q742958" start="12392" end="12407" title="ABC Cinemas" label="ABC Film review"/>
<link wikidata="Q493378" start="13266" end="13289" title="Culver City, California" label="Culver City, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q5449272" start="13840" end="13855" title="Filthy Thirteen" label="Filthy Thirteen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6124842" start="14064" end="14076" title="Jake McNeice" label="Jake McNeice"/>
<link wikidata="Q324516" start="14093" end="14100" title="Choctaw" label="Choctaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252782" start="14399" end="14404" title="Douve" label="Douve"/>
<link wikidata="Q5035943" start="15082" end="15097" title="Capitol Theatre (New York City)" label="Capitol Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="15101" end="15114" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1441762" start="15219" end="15231" title="Aspect ratio (image)" label="aspect ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q261242" start="15275" end="15280" title="70 mm film" label="70 mm"/>
<link wikidata="Q877435" start="15567" end="15584" title="theatrical rental" label="theatrical rental"/>
<link wikidata="Q471728" start="15721" end="15740" title="Variety (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Variety&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q107761" start="15877" end="15896" title="You Only Live Twice (film)" label="You Only Live Twice"/>
<link wikidata="Q615531" start="16078" end="16114" title="1967 in film" label="fourth-highest-grossing film of 1967"/>
<link wikidata="Q179200" start="16119" end="16122" title="MGM" label="MGM"/>
<link wikidata="Q105584" start="16343" end="16358" title="Rotten Tomatoes" label="Rotten Tomatoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q212173" start="16692" end="16703" title="Roger Ebert" label="Roger Ebert"/>
<link wikidata="Q577417" start="16764" end="16781" title="Chicago Sun-Times" label="Chicago Sun-Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q894444" start="16846" end="16861" title="Bosley Crowther" label="Bosley Crowther"/>
<link wikidata="Q369747" start="16902" end="16910" title="war film" label="war film"/>
<link wikidata="Q2211650" start="16951" end="16957" title="Sadomasochism" label="sadism"/>
<link wikidata="Q471728" start="17114" end="17121" title="Variety (magazine)" label="Variety"/>
<link wikidata="Q19069" start="17497" end="17518" title="The Magnificent Seven" label="The Magnificent Seven"/>
<link wikidata="Q207460" start="17628" end="17651" title="American Film Institute" label="American Film Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1767231" start="17676" end="17710" title="AFI&amp;#x27;s 100 Years...100 Thrills" label="AFI&amp;#x27;s 100 Years...100 Thrills"/>
<link wikidata="Q3549261" start="17957" end="17965" title="Chiquito (actor)" label="Chiquito"/>
<link wikidata="Q227478" start="18034" end="18051" title="Too Late the Hero (film)" label="Too Late the Hero"/>
<link wikidata="Q1305437" start="18204" end="18214" title="Play Dirty (1969 film)" label="Play Dirty"/>
<link wikidata="Q966270" start="18318" end="18336" title="Enzo G. Castellari" label="Enzo G. Castellari"/>
<link wikidata="Q338002" start="18344" end="18367" title="The Inglorious Bastards" label="The Inglorious Bastards"/>
<link wikidata="Q3772" start="18425" end="18442" title="Quentin Tarantino" label="Quentin Tarantino"/>
<link wikidata="Q153723" start="18461" end="18481" title="Inglourious Basterds" label="Inglourious Basterds"/>
<link wikidata="Q2289818" start="18575" end="18586" title="Dell Comics" label="Dell Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q173496" start="18659" end="18672" title="Marvel Comics" label="Marvel Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q30587933" start="18688" end="18721" title="Combat Kelly and the Deadly Dozen" label="Combat Kelly and the Deadly Dozen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4049343" start="18825" end="18860" title="Sgt. Fury and his Howling Commandos" label="Sgt. Fury and his Howling Commandos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2924461" start="19005" end="19014" title="DC Comics" label="DC Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q430544" start="19042" end="19052" title="Silver Age of Comic Books" label="Silver Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q616136" start="19077" end="19090" title="Suicide Squad" label="Suicide Squad"/>
<link wikidata="Q506240" start="19391" end="19398" title="TV film" label="TV film"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="19725" end="19737" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q706338" start="20344" end="20356" title="Erik Estrada" label="Erik Estrada"/>
<link wikidata="Q166419" start="20440" end="20443" title="Fox Broadcasting Company" label="Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q4886202" start="20491" end="20501" title="Ben Murphy" label="Ben Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q374346" start="20522" end="20535" title="John Slattery" label="John Slattery"/>
<link wikidata="Q455279" start="20864" end="20873" title="Joe Dante" label="Joe Dante"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332263" start="20887" end="20901" title="Small Soldiers" label="Small Soldiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q126399" start="20944" end="20956" title="Warner Bros." label="Warner Bros."/>
<link wikidata="Q1091339" start="20981" end="20991" title="David Ayer" label="David Ayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q18604504" start="21019" end="21041" title="Suicide Squad (2016 film)" label="live-action adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2924461" start="21049" end="21058" title="DC Comics" label="DC Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q616136" start="21074" end="21087" title="Suicide Squad" label="Suicide Squad"/>
<link wikidata="Q12439" start="21231" end="21238" title="Detroit" label="Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q154543" start="21259" end="21262" title="D12" label="D12"/>
<link wikidata="Q172980" start="21382" end="21389" title="Western film" label="Western"/>
<link wikidata="Q6561526" start="21525" end="21555" title="List of American films of 1967" label="List of American films of 1967"/>
<link wikidata="Q231964" start="21564" end="21586" title="Do Aankhen Barah Haath" label="Do Aankhen Barah Haath"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="21601" end="21606" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q3306796" start="21641" end="21656" title="My Six Convicts" label="My Six Convicts"/>
<link wikidata="Q494993" start="21720" end="21727" title="Silmido (film)" label="Silmido"/>
<link wikidata="Q4666137" start="21778" end="21792" title="209th Detachment, 2325th Group" label="train convicts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546073" start="21796" end="21805" title="black ops" label="black ops"/>
<link wikidata="Q423" start="21833" end="21844" title="North Korea" label="North Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q41117" start="21853" end="21864" title="Kim Il Sung" label="Kim Il Sung"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="309075" wikidata="Q185390" url="?curid=309075" title="Antinuclear antibody">
<text>Antinuclear antibodies (ANAs, also known as antinuclear factor or ANF) are autoantibodies that bind to contents of the cell nucleus. In normal individuals, the immune system produces antibodies to foreign proteins (antigens) but not to human proteins (autoantigens). In some cases, antibodies to human antigens are produced; these are known as autoantibodies.

There are many subtypes of ANAs such as anti-Ro antibodies, anti-La antibodies, anti-Sm antibodies, anti-nRNP antibodies, anti-Scl-70 antibodies, anti-dsDNA antibodies, anti-histone antibodies, antibodies to nuclear pore complexes, anti-centromere antibodies and anti-sp100 antibodies. Each of these antibody subtypes binds to different proteins or protein complexes within the nucleus. They are found in many disorders including autoimmunity, cancer and infection, with different prevalences of antibodies depending on the condition. This allows the use of ANAs in the diagnosis of some autoimmune disorders, including systemic lupus erythematosus, Sjögren syndrome, scleroderma, mixed connective tissue disease, polymyositis, dermatomyositis, autoimmune hepatitis and drug-induced lupus.

The ANA test detects the autoantibodies present in an individual&#x27;s blood serum. The common tests used for detecting and quantifying ANAs are indirect immunofluorescence and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). In immunofluorescence, the level of autoantibodies is reported as a titre. This is the highest dilution of the serum at which autoantibodies are still detectable. Positive autoantibody titres at a dilution equal to or greater than 1:160 are usually considered as clinically significant. Positive titres of less than 1:160 are present in up to 20% of the healthy population, especially the elderly. Although positive titres of 1:160 or higher are strongly associated with autoimmune disorders, they are also found in 5% of healthy individuals. Autoantibody screening is useful in the diagnosis of autoimmune disorders and monitoring levels helps to predict the progression of disease. A positive ANA test is seldom useful if other clinical or laboratory data supporting a diagnosis are not present.

==Immunity and autoimmunity==
The human body has many defense mechanisms against pathogens, one of which is humoral immunity. This defence mechanism produces antibodies (large glycoproteins) in response to an immune stimulus. Many cells of the immune system are required for this process, including lymphocytes (T-cells and B-cells) and antigen presenting cells. These cells coordinate an immune response upon the detection of foreign proteins (antigens), producing antibodies that bind to these antigens. In normal physiology, lymphocytes that recognise human proteins (autoantigens) either undergo programmed cell death (apoptosis) or become non-functional. This self-tolerance means that lymphocytes should not incite an immune response against human cellular antigens. Sometimes, however, this process malfunctions and antibodies are produced against human antigens, which may lead to autoimmune disease.

==ANA subtypes==
ANAs are found in many disorders, as well as some healthy individuals. These disorders include: systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), rheumatoid arthritis, Sjögren syndrome, scleroderma, polymyositis, dermatomyositis, primary biliary cirrhosis, drug induced lupus, autoimmune hepatitis, multiple sclerosis, discoid lupus, thyroid disease, antiphospholipid syndrome, juvenile idiopathic arthritis, psoriatic arthritis, juvenile dermatomyositis, idiopathic thrombocytopaenic purpura, infection and cancer. These antibodies can be subdivided according to their specificity, and each subset has different propensities for specific disorders.

===Extractable nuclear antigens===
Extractable nuclear antigens (ENA) are a group of autoantigens that were originally identified as antibody targets in people with autoimmune disorders. They are termed ENA because they can be extracted from the cell nucleus with saline. The ENAs consist of ribonucleoproteins and non-histone proteins, named by either the name of the donor who provided the prototype serum (Sm, Ro, La, Jo), or the name of the disease setting in which the antibodies were found (SS-A, SS-B, Scl-70).

====Anti-Ro/SS-A and anti-La/SS-B====

Anti-Ro and anti-La antibodies, also known as SS-A and SS-B, respectively, are commonly found in primary Sjögren&#x27;s syndrome, an autoimmune disorder that affects the exocrine glands. The presence of both antibodies is found in 30–60% of Sjögren&#x27;s syndrome, anti-Ro antibodies alone are found in 50–70% of Sjögren&#x27;s syndrome and 30% of SLE with cutaneous involvement, and anti-La antibodies are rarely found in isolation. Anti-La antibodies are also found in SLE; however, Sjögren&#x27;s syndrome is normally also present. Anti-Ro antibodies are also found less frequently in other disorders including autoimmune liver diseases, coeliac disease, autoimmune rheumatic diseases, cardiac neonatal lupus erythematosus and polymyositis. During pregnancy, anti-Ro antibodies can cross the placenta and cause heart block and neonatal lupus in babies. In Sjögren&#x27;s syndrome, anti-Ro and anti-La antibodies correlate with early onset, increased disease duration, parotid gland enlargement, disease outside the glands and infiltration of glands by lymphocytes. Anti-Ro antibodies are specific to components of the Ro-RNP complex, comprising 45kDa, 52kDa, 54kDa and 60kDa proteins and RNA. The 60kDa DNA/RNA binding protein and 52kDa T-cell regulatory protein are the best characterised antigens of anti-Ro antibodies. Collectively, these proteins are part of a ribonucleoprotein (RNP) complex that associate with the human Y RNAs, hY1-hY5. The La antigen is a 48kDa transcription termination factor of RNA polymerase III, which associates with the Ro-RNP complex.

The mechanism of antibody production in Sjögren&#x27;s syndrome is not fully understood, but apoptosis (programmed cell death) and molecular mimicry may play a role. The Ro and La antigens are expressed on the surface of cells undergoing apoptosis and may cause the inflammation within the salivary gland by interaction with cells of the immune system. The antibodies may also be produced through molecular mimicry, where cross reactive antibodies bind to both virus and human proteins. This may occur with one of the antigens, Ro or La, and may subsequently produce antibodies to other proteins through a process known as epitope spreading. The retroviral gag protein shows similarity to the La protein and is proposed as a possible example for molecular mimicry in Sjögren&#x27;s syndrome.

==== Anti-Sm ====
Anti-Smith (Anti-Sm) antibodies are a very specific marker for SLE. Approximately 99% of individuals without SLE lack anti-Sm antibodies, but only 20% of people with SLE have the antibodies. They are associated with central nervous system involvement, kidney disease, lung fibrosis and pericarditis in SLE, but they are not associated with disease activity. The antigens of the anti-Sm antibodies are the core units of the small nuclear ribonucleoproteins (snRNPs), termed A to G, and will bind to the U1, U2, U4, U5 and U6 snRNPs. Most commonly, the antibodies are specific for the B, B&#x27; and D units. Molecular and epidemiological studies suggest that anti-Sm antibodies may be induced by molecular mimicry because the protein shows some similarity to Epstein-Barr virus proteins.

====Anti-nRNP/anti-U1-RNP====
Anti-nuclear ribonucleoprotein (anti-nRNP) antibodies, also known as anti-U1-RNP antibodies, are found in 30–40% of SLE. They are often found with anti-Sm antibodies, but they may be associated with different clinical associations. In addition to SLE, these antibodies are highly associated with mixed connective tissue disease. Anti-nRNP antibodies recognise the A and C core units of the snRNPs and because of this they primarily bind to the U1-snRNP. The immune response to RNP may be caused by the presentation of the nuclear components on the cell membrane in apoptotic blebs. Molecular mimicry has also been suggested as a possible mechanism for the production of antibodies to these proteins because of similarity between U1-RNP polypeptides and Epstein-Barr virus polypeptides.

====Anti-Scl-70/anti-topoisomerase I====
Anti-Scl-70 antibodies are linked to scleroderma. The sensitivity of the antibodies for scleroderma is approximately 34%, but is higher for cases with diffuse cutaneous involvement (40%), and lower for limited cutaneous involvement (10%). The specificity of the antibodies is 98% and 99.6% in other rheumatic diseases and normal individuals, respectively. In addition to scleroderma, these antibodies are found in approximately 5% of individuals with SLE. The antigenic target of anti-Scl-70 antibodies is topoisomerase I.

====Anti-Jo-1====
Although anti-Jo-1 antibodies are often included with ANAs, they are actually antibodies to the cytoplasmic protein, Histidyl-tRNA synthetase – an aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase essential for the synthesis of histidine loaded tRNA. They are highly associated with polymyositis and dermatomyositis, and are rarely found in other connective tissue diseases. Around 20–40% of polymyositis is positive for Jo-1 antibodies and most will have interstitial lung disease, HLA-DR3 and HLA-DRw52 human leukocyte antigen (HLA) markers; collectively known as Jo-1 syndrome.

===Anti-dsDNA===

Anti-double stranded DNA (anti-dsDNA) antibodies are highly associated with SLE. They are a very specific marker for the disease, with some studies quoting nearly 100%. Data on sensitivity ranges from 25 to 85%. Anti-dsDNA antibody levels, known as titres, correlate with disease activity in SLE; high levels indicate more active lupus. The presence of anti-dsDNA antibodies is also linked with lupus nephritis and there is evidence they are the cause. Some anti-dsDNA antibodies are cross reactive with other antigens found on the glomerular basement membrane (GBM) of the kidney, such as heparan sulphate, collagen IV, fibronectin and laminin. Binding to these antigens within the kidney could cause inflammation and complement fixation, resulting in kidney damage. Presence of high DNA-binding and low C3 levels have been shown to have extremely high predictive value (94%) for the diagnosis of SLE. It is also possible that the anti-dsDNA antibodies are internalised by cells when they bind membrane antigens and then are displayed on the cell surface. This could promote inflammatory responses by T-cells within the kidney. It is important to note that not all anti-dsDNA antibodies are associated with lupus nephritis and that other factors can cause this symptom in their absence. The antigen of anti-dsDNA antibodies is double stranded DNA.

===Anti-histone antibodies===
Anti-histone antibodies are found in the serum of up to 75–95% of people with drug-induced lupus and 75% of idiopathic SLE. Unlike anti-dsDNA antibodies in SLE, these antibodies do not fix complement. Although they are most commonly found in drug induced lupus, they are also found in some cases of SLE, scleroderma, rheumatoid arthritis and undifferentiated connective tissue disease. Many drugs are known to cause drug induced lupus and they produce various antigenic targets within the nucleosome that are often cross reactive with several histone proteins and DNA. Procainamide causes a form of drug-induced lupus that produces antibodies to the histone H2A and H2B complex.

===Anti-gp210 and anti-p62===
Both anti-glycoprotein-210 (anti-gp210) and anti-nucleoporin 62 (anti-p62) antibodies are antibodies to components of the nuclear membrane and are found in primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC). Each antibody is present in approximately 25–30% of PBC. The antigens of both antibodies are constituents of the nuclear membrane. gp210 is a 200kDa protein involved in anchoring components of the nuclear pore to the nuclear membrane. The p62 antigen is a 60kDa nuclear pore complex.

===Anti-centromere antibodies===

Anti-centromere antibodies are associated with limited cutaneous systemic sclerosis, also known as CREST syndrome, primary biliary cirrhosis and proximal scleroderma. There are six known antigens, which are all associated with the centromere; CENP-A to CENP-F. CENP-A is a 17kDa histone H3-like protein. CENP-B is an 80kDa DNA binding protein involved in the folding of heterochromatin. CENP-C is a 140kDa protein involved in kinetochore assembly. CENP-D is a 50kDa protein of unknown function, but may be homologous to another protein involved in chromatin condensation, RCC1. CENP-E is a 312kDa protein from the kinesin motor protein family. CENP-F is a 367kDa protein from the nuclear matrix that associates with the kinetochore in late G2 phase during mitosis. CENP-A, B and C antibodies are most commonly found (16–42% of systemic sclerosis) and are associated with Raynaud&#x27;s phenomenon, telangiectasias, lung involvement and early onset in systemic sclerosis.

Anti-centromere antibodies are found in approximately 60% of patients with limited systemic scleroderma and in 15% of those with the diffuse form of scleroderma. The specificity of this test is &gt;98%. Thus, a positive anti-centromere antibody finding is strongly suggestive of limited systemic scleroderma. Anti-centromere antibodies present early in the course of disease and are notably predictive of limited cutaneous involvement and a decreased likelihood of aggressive internal organ involvement, such as fibrosis in the lungs.

When present in primary biliary cirrhosis, ACAs are prognostic of portal hypertension such that serum ACA levels correlate with the severity of portal hypertension.

===Anti-sp100===
Anti-sp100 antibodies are found in approximately 20–30% of primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC). They are found in few individuals without PBC, and therefore are a very specific marker of the disease. The sp100 antigen is found within nuclear bodies; large protein complexes in the nucleus that may have a role in cell growth and differentiation.

===Anti-PM-Scl===
Anti-PM-Scl antibodies are found in up to 50% of polymyositis/systemic sclerosis (PM/SSc) overlap syndrome. Around 80% of individuals with antibodies present in their blood serum will have the disorder. The presence of the antibodies is linked to limited cutaneous involvement of PM/SSc overlap syndrome. The antigenic targets of the antibodies are components of the RNA-processing exosome complex in the nucleolus. There are ten proteins in this complex and antibodies to eight of them are found at varying frequencies; PM/Scl-100 (70–80%), PM/Scl-75 (46–80%), hRrp4 (50%), hRrp42 (21%), hRrp46 (18%), hCs14 (14%), hRrp41 (10%) and hRrp40 (7%).

===Anti-DFS70 antibodies===
Anti-DFS70 antibodies generate a dense fine speckled pattern in indirect immunofluorescence and are found in normals and in various conditions, but are not associated with a systemic autoimmune pathology. Therefore, they can be used to help to rule out such conditions in ANA positive individuals. A significant number of patients are diagnosed as systemic lupus erythematosus or undifferentiated connective tissue disease largely based on a positive ANA. In case no defined autoantibody can be detected (e.g. anti-ENA antibodies), the testing of anti-DFS70 antibodies is recommended to verify the diagnosis. Anti-DFS70 antibody tests are available as CE-marked tests. Until now, no FDA cleared assay is available.

==ANA test==
The presence of ANAs in blood can be confirmed by a screening test. Although there are many tests for the detection of ANAs, the most common tests used for screening are indirect immunofluorescence and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). Following detection of ANAs, various subtypes are determined.

===Indirect immunofluorescence===
Indirect immunofluorescence is one of the most commonly used tests for ANAs. Typically, HEp-2 cells are used as a substrate to detect the antibodies in human serum. Microscope slides are coated with HEp-2 cells and the serum is incubated with the cells. If the said and targeted antibodies are present then they will bind to the antigens on the cells; in the case of ANAs, the antibodies will bind to the nucleus. These can be visualised by adding a fluorescent tagged (usually FITC or rhodopsin B) anti-human antibody that binds to the antibodies. The molecule will fluoresce when a specific wavelength of light shines on it, which can be seen under the microscope. Depending on the antibody present in the human serum and the localisation of the antigen in the cell, distinct patterns of fluorescence will be seen on the HEp-2 cells. Levels of antibodies are analysed by performing dilutions on blood serum. An ANA test is considered positive if fluorescence is seen at a titre of 1:40/1:80. Higher titres are more clinically significant as low positives (≤1:160) are found in up to 20% of healthy individuals, especially the elderly. Only around 5% of the healthy population have ANA titres of 1:160 or higher.

====HEp-2====
 Until around 1975, when HEp-2 cells were introduced, animal tissue was used as the standard substrate for immunofluorescence. HEp-2 cells are currently one of the most common substrates for ANA detection by immunofluorescence.

Originally started a laryngeal carcinoma strain, the cell line was contaminated and displaced by HeLa cells, and has now been identified as actually HeLa cells.

They are superior to the previously used animal tissues because of their large size and the high rate of mitosis (cell division) in the cell line. This allows the detection of antibodies to mitosis-specific antigens, such as centromere antibodies. They also allow identification of anti-Ro antibodies, because acetone is used for fixation of the cells (other fixatives can wash the antigen away).

There are many nuclear staining patterns seen on HEp-2 cells: homogeneous, speckled, nucleolar, nuclear membranous, centromeric, nuclear dot and pleomorphic. The homogeneous pattern is seen when the condensed chromosomes and interphase chromatin stain. This pattern is associated with anti-dsDNA antibodies, antibodies to nucleosomal components, and anti-histone antibodies. There are two speckled patterns: fine and coarse. The fine speckled pattern has fine nuclear staining with unstained metaphase chromatin, which is associated with anti-Ro and anti-La antibodies. The coarse staining pattern has coarse granular nuclear staining, caused by anti-U1-RNP and anti-Sm antibodies. The nucleolar staining pattern is associated with many antibodies including anti-Scl-70, anti-PM-Scl, anti-fibrillarin and anti-Th/To. Nuclear membrane staining appears as a fluorescent ring around the cell nucleus and are produced by anti-gp210 and anti-p62 antibodies. The centromere pattern shows multiple nuclear dots in interphase and mitotic cells, corresponding to the number of chromosomes in the cell. Nuclear dot patterns show between 13 and 25 nuclear dots in interphase cells and are produced by anti-sp100 antibodies. Pleomorphic pattern is caused by antibodies to the proliferating cell nuclear antigen. Indirect immunofluorescence has been shown to be slightly superior compared to ELISA in detection of ANA from HEp-2 cells.

====&quot;Crithidia luciliae&quot;====

&quot;Crithidia luciliae&quot; are haemoflaggelate single celled protists. They are used as a substrate in immunofluorescence for the detection of anti-dsDNA antibodies. They possess an organelle known as the kinetoplast which is a large mitochondrion with a network of interlocking circular dsDNA molecules. After incubation with serum containing anti-dsDNA antibodies and fluorescent-labelled anti-human antibodies, the kinetoplast will fluoresce. The lack of other nuclear antigens in this organelle means that using &quot;C. luciliae&quot; as a substrate allows for the specific detection of anti-dsDNA antibodies.

===ELISA===
Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) uses antigen-coated microtitre plates for the detection of ANAs. Each well of a microtitre plate is coated with either a single antigen or multiple antigens to detect specific antibodies or to screen for ANAs, respectively. The antigens are either from cell extracts or recombinant. Blood serum is incubated in the wells of the plate and is washed out. If antibodies that bind to antigen are present then they will remain after washing. A secondary anti-human antibody conjugated to an enzyme such as horseradish peroxidase is added. The enzyme reaction will produce a change in colour of the solution that is proportional to the amount of antibody bound to the antigen. There are significant differences in the detection of ANA by immunofluorescence and different ELISA kits and there is only a marginal agreement between these. A clinician must be familiar with the differences in order to evaluate the outcomes of the various assays.

===Sensitivity===
The following table lists the sensitivity of different types of ANAs for different diseases.

Some ANAs appear in several types of disease, resulting in lower specificity of the test. For example, IgM-rheumatoid factor (IgM-RF) have been shown to cross-react with ANA giving falsely positive immunofluorescence. Positive ANA as well as anti-DNA antibodies have been reported in patients with autoimmune thyroid disease. ANA can have a positive test result in up to 45% of people with autoimmune thyroid conditions or rheumatoid arthritis and up to 15% of people with HIV or hepatitis C. As per Lupus Foundation of America, &quot;about 5% of the general population will have a positive ANA. However, at least 95% of the people who have a positive ANA do not have lupus. A positive ANA test can sometimes run in families, even if family members have no evidence of lupus.&quot; On the other hand, they say, although 95% of the patients who actually have lupus test positive for ANA, &quot;Only a small percentage have a negative ANA, and many of those have other antibodies (such as anti-phospholipid antibodies, anti-Ro, anti-SSA) or their ANA converted from positive to negative from steroids, cytotoxic medications, or uremia (kidney failure).&quot;

==History==

The LE cell was discovered in bone marrow in 1948 by Hargraves &quot;et al.&quot; In 1957 Holborow et al. first demonstrated ANA using indirect immunofluorescence. This was the first indication that processes affecting the cell nucleus were responsible for SLE. In 1959 it was discovered that serum from individuals with SLE contained antibodies that precipitated with saline extracts of nuclei, known as extractable nuclear antigens (ENAs). This led to the characterisation of ENA antigens and their respective antibodies. Thus, anti-Sm and anti-RNP antibodies were discovered in 1966 and 1971, respectively. In the 1970s, the anti-Ro/anti-SS-A and anti-La/anti-SS-B antibodies were discovered. The Scl-70 antibody was known to be a specific antibody to scleroderma in 1979, however the antigen (topoisomerase-I) was not characterised until 1986. The Jo-1 antigen and antibody were characterised in 1980.

==See also==
* Anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA)
* Rheumatoid factor

==References==
==External links==
* Autoimmunityblog – HEp-2 ANA summary
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q185390" start="0" end="22" title="Antinuclear antibody" label="Antinuclear antibodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q185390" start="24" end="28" title="Antinuclear antibody" label="ANAs"/>
<link wikidata="Q185390" start="44" end="62" title="Antinuclear antibody" label="antinuclear factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q185390" start="66" end="69" title="Antinuclear antibody" label="ANF"/>
<link wikidata="Q785022" start="75" end="89" title="autoantibodies" label="autoantibodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q40260" start="119" end="131" title="cell nucleus" label="cell nucleus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059" start="160" end="173" title="immune system" label="immune system"/>
<link wikidata="Q103537" start="215" end="222" title="antigen" label="antigen"/>
<link wikidata="Q192360" start="252" end="263" title="autoantigen" label="autoantigen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3618653" start="401" end="419" title="anti-Ro antibodies" label="anti-Ro antibodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q335555" start="421" end="439" title="anti-La antibodies" label="anti-La antibodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q185390" start="441" end="459" title="anti-Sm" label="anti-Sm antibodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q4774403" start="461" end="481" title="anti-nRNP" label="anti-nRNP antibodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3618655" start="483" end="505" title="anti-Scl-70 antibodies" label="anti-Scl-70 antibodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3618657" start="507" end="528" title="anti-dsDNA antibodies" label="anti-dsDNA antibodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q955231" start="530" end="553" title="anti-histone antibodies" label="anti-histone antibodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q30679" start="569" end="591" title="nuclear pore complexes" label="nuclear pore complexes"/>
<link wikidata="Q185390" start="593" end="619" title="anti-centromere antibodies" label="anti-centromere antibodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q21096399" start="624" end="645" title="sp100 nuclear antigen" label="anti-sp100 antibodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q192360" start="791" end="803" title="autoimmunity" label="autoimmunity"/>
<link wikidata="Q12078" start="805" end="811" title="cancer" label="cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q166231" start="816" end="825" title="infection" label="infection"/>
<link wikidata="Q1485" start="981" end="1009" title="systemic lupus erythematosus" label="systemic lupus erythematosus"/>
<link wikidata="Q335555" start="1011" end="1027" title="Sjögren syndrome" label="Sjögren syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q958797" start="1029" end="1040" title="scleroderma" label="scleroderma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1622407" start="1042" end="1073" title="mixed connective tissue disease" label="mixed connective tissue disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q980926" start="1075" end="1087" title="polymyositis" label="polymyositis"/>
<link wikidata="Q681160" start="1089" end="1104" title="dermatomyositis" label="dermatomyositis"/>
<link wikidata="Q786844" start="1106" end="1126" title="autoimmune hepatitis" label="autoimmune hepatitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2785159" start="1131" end="1149" title="drug-induced lupus erythematosus" label="drug-induced lupus"/>
<link wikidata="Q110084" start="1224" end="1235" title="blood serum" label="blood serum"/>
<link wikidata="Q592324" start="1298" end="1325" title="indirect immunofluorescence" label="indirect immunofluorescence"/>
<link wikidata="Q332126" start="1330" end="1363" title="enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay" label="enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166189" start="1441" end="1446" title="titer" label="titre"/>
<link wikidata="Q170065" start="2253" end="2261" title="pathogen" label="pathogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142875" start="2280" end="2296" title="humoral immunity" label="humoral immunity"/>
<link wikidata="Q79460" start="2330" end="2340" title="antibodies" label="antibodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q187126" start="2348" end="2361" title="glycoproteins" label="glycoproteins"/>
<link wikidata="Q715347" start="2471" end="2481" title="lymphocyte" label="lymphocyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q193529" start="2484" end="2490" title="T-cell" label="T-cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q188930" start="2496" end="2502" title="B-cell" label="B-cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047791" start="2509" end="2532" title="Antigen-presenting cell" label="antigen presenting cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q103537" start="2617" end="2624" title="antigen" label="antigen"/>
<link wikidata="Q192360" start="2743" end="2754" title="autoantigen" label="autoantigen"/>
<link wikidata="Q14599311" start="2795" end="2804" title="apoptosis" label="apoptosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356761" start="2837" end="2851" title="self-tolerance" label="self-tolerance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1485" start="3195" end="3223" title="systemic lupus erythematosus" label="systemic lupus erythematosus"/>
<link wikidata="Q187255" start="3231" end="3251" title="rheumatoid arthritis" label="rheumatoid arthritis"/>
<link wikidata="Q335555" start="3253" end="3269" title="Sjögren syndrome" label="Sjögren syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q958797" start="3271" end="3282" title="scleroderma" label="scleroderma"/>
<link wikidata="Q980926" start="3284" end="3296" title="polymyositis" label="polymyositis"/>
<link wikidata="Q681160" start="3298" end="3313" title="dermatomyositis" label="dermatomyositis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072420" start="3315" end="3340" title="primary biliary cirrhosis" label="primary biliary cirrhosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2785159" start="3342" end="3360" title="drug-induced lupus erythematosus" label="drug induced lupus"/>
<link wikidata="Q786844" start="3362" end="3382" title="autoimmune hepatitis" label="autoimmune hepatitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q8277" start="3384" end="3402" title="multiple sclerosis" label="multiple sclerosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1228801" start="3404" end="3417" title="discoid lupus" label="discoid lupus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6673122" start="3419" end="3434" title="thyroid disease" label="thyroid disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q582207" start="3436" end="3461" title="antiphospholipid syndrome" label="antiphospholipid syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q861224" start="3463" end="3492" title="juvenile idiopathic arthritis" label="juvenile idiopathic arthritis"/>
<link wikidata="Q511097" start="3494" end="3513" title="psoriatic arthritis" label="psoriatic arthritis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6318950" start="3515" end="3539" title="juvenile dermatomyositis" label="juvenile dermatomyositis"/>
<link wikidata="Q638729" start="3541" end="3577" title="idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura" label="idiopathic thrombocytopaenic purpura"/>
<link wikidata="Q166231" start="3579" end="3588" title="infection" label="infection"/>
<link wikidata="Q12078" start="3593" end="3599" title="cancer" label="cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4320806" start="3771" end="3798" title="Extractable nuclear antigen" label="Extractable nuclear antigen"/>
<link wikidata="Q192360" start="3821" end="3832" title="autoantigen" label="autoantigen"/>
<link wikidata="Q419245" start="4028" end="4045" title="ribonucleoprotein" label="ribonucleoprotein"/>
<link wikidata="Q36293" start="4055" end="4062" title="histone" label="histone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3618653" start="4294" end="4301" title="Anti-SSA/Ro autoantibodies" label="Anti-Ro"/>
<link wikidata="Q3618653" start="4306" end="4313" title="Anti-SSA/Ro autoantibodies" label="anti-La"/>
<link wikidata="Q335555" start="4399" end="4422" title="Sjögren&amp;#x27;s syndrome" label="Sjögren&amp;#x27;s syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q8084905" start="4427" end="4446" title="autoimmune disorder" label="autoimmune disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q754845" start="4464" end="4478" title="exocrine gland" label="exocrine gland"/>
<link wikidata="Q11088" start="4936" end="4951" title="coeliac disease" label="coeliac disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q1485" start="5001" end="5020" title="systemic lupus erythematosus" label="lupus erythematosus"/>
<link wikidata="Q980926" start="5025" end="5037" title="polymyositis" label="polymyositis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1212935" start="5090" end="5098" title="placenta" label="placenta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361515" start="5109" end="5120" title="heart block" label="heart block"/>
<link wikidata="Q691653" start="5266" end="5279" title="parotid gland" label="parotid gland"/>
<link wikidata="Q11053" start="5486" end="5489" title="RNA" label="RNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430" start="5501" end="5504" title="DNA" label="DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q193529" start="5535" end="5541" title="T-cell" label="T-cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q419245" start="5663" end="5680" title="ribonucleoprotein" label="ribonucleoprotein"/>
<link wikidata="Q8046171" start="5725" end="5730" title="Y RNA" label="Y RNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q177900" start="5768" end="5781" title="transcription (genetics)" label="transcription"/>
<link wikidata="Q3501658" start="5804" end="5822" title="RNA polymerase III" label="RNA polymerase III"/>
<link wikidata="Q14599311" start="5960" end="5969" title="apoptosis" label="apoptosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q963278" start="5998" end="6015" title="molecular mimicry" label="molecular mimicry"/>
<link wikidata="Q192360" start="6490" end="6507" title="epitope spreading" label="epitope spreading"/>
<link wikidata="Q47273" start="6894" end="6916" title="central nervous system" label="central nervous system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054718" start="6930" end="6944" title="kidney disease" label="kidney disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q32446" start="6946" end="6959" title="lung fibrosis" label="lung fibrosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q501561" start="6964" end="6976" title="pericarditis" label="pericarditis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2076770" start="7101" end="7132" title="snRNP" label="small nuclear ribonucleoprotein"/>
<link wikidata="Q6900" start="7436" end="7454" title="Epstein-Barr virus" label="Epstein-Barr virus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4774403" start="7496" end="7549" title="anti-nRNP" label="Anti-nuclear ribonucleoprotein (anti-nRNP) antibodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1622407" start="7792" end="7823" title="mixed connective tissue disease" label="mixed connective tissue disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q3618655" start="8324" end="8346" title="Anti-Scl-70 antibodies" label="Anti-Scl-70 antibodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q958797" start="8361" end="8372" title="scleroderma" label="scleroderma"/>
<link wikidata="Q18032062" start="8830" end="8845" title="topoisomerase I" label="topoisomerase I"/>
<link wikidata="Q415968" start="8983" end="9007" title="aminoacyl tRNA synthetase" label="Histidyl-tRNA synthetase"/>
<link wikidata="Q980926" start="9125" end="9137" title="polymyositis" label="polymyositis"/>
<link wikidata="Q681160" start="9142" end="9157" title="dermatomyositis" label="dermatomyositis"/>
<link wikidata="Q911125" start="9347" end="9370" title="human leukocyte antigen" label="human leukocyte antigen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3618657" start="9442" end="9490" title="Anti-dsDNA antibodies" label="Anti-double stranded DNA (anti-dsDNA) antibodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3808900" start="9539" end="9547" title="sensitivity and specificity" label="specific"/>
<link wikidata="Q3808900" start="9619" end="9630" title="sensitivity and specificity" label="sensitivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1621830" start="9837" end="9852" title="lupus nephritis" label="lupus nephritis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753456" start="9974" end="10002" title="glomerular basement membrane" label="glomerular basement membrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q424668" start="10032" end="10048" title="heparan sulphate" label="heparan sulphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q26868" start="10050" end="10058" title="collagen" label="collagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q413766" start="10063" end="10074" title="fibronectin" label="fibronectin"/>
<link wikidata="Q58345" start="10079" end="10086" title="laminin" label="laminin"/>
<link wikidata="Q101991" start="10144" end="10156" title="inflammation" label="inflammation"/>
<link wikidata="Q904197" start="10161" end="10180" title="complement fixation" label="complement fixation"/>
<link wikidata="Q14874317" start="10247" end="10249" title="Complement component 3" label="C3"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430" start="10770" end="10789" title="dsDNA" label="double stranded DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q955231" start="10822" end="10845" title="Anti-histone antibodies" label="Anti-histone antibodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2785159" start="10900" end="10918" title="drug-induced lupus erythematosus" label="drug-induced lupus"/>
<link wikidata="Q958797" start="11126" end="11137" title="scleroderma" label="scleroderma"/>
<link wikidata="Q187255" start="11139" end="11159" title="rheumatoid arthritis" label="rheumatoid arthritis"/>
<link wikidata="Q16543725" start="11164" end="11206" title="undifferentiated connective tissue disease" label="undifferentiated connective tissue disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q417597" start="11391" end="11403" title="Procainamide" label="Procainamide"/>
<link wikidata="Q4774370" start="11537" end="11558" title="anti-glycoprotein-210 antibodies" label="anti-glycoprotein-210"/>
<link wikidata="Q4774427" start="11576" end="11595" title="anti-p62 antibodies" label="anti-nucleoporin 62"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072420" start="11688" end="11713" title="primary biliary cirrhosis" label="primary biliary cirrhosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q465608" start="11834" end="11850" title="nuclear membrane" label="nuclear membrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q30679" start="11918" end="11930" title="nuclear pore" label="nuclear pore"/>
<link wikidata="Q185390" start="12040" end="12066" title="Anti-centromere antibodies" label="Anti-centromere antibodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q763356" start="12139" end="12153" title="CREST syndrome" label="CREST syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q14762596" start="12271" end="12281" title="centromere" label="centromere"/>
<link wikidata="Q24777451" start="12319" end="12329" title="histone H3" label="histone H3"/>
<link wikidata="Q837783" start="12410" end="12425" title="heterochromatin" label="heterochromatin"/>
<link wikidata="Q908912" start="12466" end="12477" title="kinetochore" label="kinetochore"/>
<link wikidata="Q224180" start="12546" end="12556" title="homology (biology)" label="homologous"/>
<link wikidata="Q6013254" start="12588" end="12610" title="chromatin condensation" label="chromatin condensation"/>
<link wikidata="Q17861651" start="12612" end="12616" title="RCC1" label="RCC1"/>
<link wikidata="Q15319390" start="12654" end="12661" title="kinesin" label="kinesin"/>
<link wikidata="Q306379" start="12780" end="12788" title="G2 phase" label="G2 phase"/>
<link wikidata="Q1634800" start="12938" end="12952" title="telangiectasia" label="telangiectasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q32446" start="13524" end="13545" title="Pulmonary fibrosis" label="fibrosis in the lungs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072420" start="13564" end="13589" title="primary biliary cirrhosis" label="primary biliary cirrhosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q21096399" start="13731" end="13752" title="sp100 nuclear antigen" label="Anti-sp100 antibodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072420" start="13790" end="13815" title="primary biliary cirrhosis" label="primary biliary cirrhosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7434176" start="14141" end="14198" title="PM/Scl overlap syndrome" label="polymyositis/systemic sclerosis (PM/SSc) overlap syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q11053" start="14459" end="14462" title="RNA" label="RNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q418869" start="14474" end="14489" title="exosome complex" label="exosome complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q30869" start="14497" end="14506" title="nucleolus" label="nucleolus"/>
<link wikidata="Q332126" start="15698" end="15731" title="enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay" label="enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15838" end="15865" title="Immunofluorescence#Secondary (indirect)" label="Indirect immunofluorescence"/>
<link wikidata="Q103537" start="16167" end="16174" title="antigen" label="antigen"/>
<link wikidata="Q853845" start="16316" end="16320" title="Fluorescein isothiocyanate" label="FITC"/>
<link wikidata="Q847482" start="17393" end="17397" title="HeLa" label="HeLa"/>
<link wikidata="Q14763008" start="17563" end="17570" title="mitosis" label="mitosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q115818534" start="17594" end="17603" title="cell line" label="cell line"/>
<link wikidata="Q49546" start="17768" end="17775" title="acetone" label="acetone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422013" start="17788" end="17796" title="fixation (histology)" label="fixation"/>
<link wikidata="Q37748" start="18065" end="18076" title="chromosomes" label="chromosomes"/>
<link wikidata="Q180951" start="18092" end="18101" title="chromatin" label="chromatin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3618657" start="18141" end="18162" title="anti-dsDNA antibodies" label="anti-dsDNA antibodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q574427" start="18348" end="18357" title="metaphase" label="metaphase"/>
<link wikidata="Q14817965" start="18847" end="18859" title="nuclear dots" label="nuclear dots"/>
<link wikidata="Q835950" start="19009" end="19019" title="interphase" label="interphase"/>
<link wikidata="Q21096399" start="19051" end="19056" title="sp100 nuclear antigen" label="sp100"/>
<link wikidata="Q418732" start="19120" end="19154" title="proliferating cell nuclear antigen" label="proliferating cell nuclear antigen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5186585" start="19326" end="19344" title="Crithidia luciliae" label="Crithidia luciliae"/>
<link wikidata="Q240433" start="19355" end="19370" title="flagellate" label="haemoflaggelate"/>
<link wikidata="Q36468" start="19371" end="19384" title="single celled organism" label="single celled"/>
<link wikidata="Q10892" start="19385" end="19392" title="protist" label="protist"/>
<link wikidata="Q45948" start="19506" end="19515" title="organelle" label="organelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q511594" start="19529" end="19540" title="kinetoplast" label="kinetoplast"/>
<link wikidata="Q39572" start="19558" end="19571" title="mitochondrion" label="mitochondrion"/>
<link wikidata="Q332126" start="19952" end="19985" title="Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay" label="Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay"/>
<link wikidata="Q534260" start="20014" end="20030" title="microtitre plate" label="microtitre plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q413665" start="20495" end="20517" title="horseradish peroxidase" label="horseradish peroxidase"/>
<link wikidata="Q859031" start="20980" end="20991" title="Stimulus (physiology)" label="sensitivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3808900" start="21109" end="21120" title="Sensitivity and specificity" label="specificity"/>
<link wikidata="Q702883" start="21151" end="21168" title="rheumatoid factor" label="rheumatoid factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q592324" start="21242" end="21260" title="immunofluorescence" label="immunofluorescence"/>
<link wikidata="Q11094" start="21342" end="21368" title="Autoimmune thyroiditis" label="autoimmune thyroid disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q187255" start="21467" end="21487" title="rheumatoid arthritis" label="rheumatoid arthritis"/>
<link wikidata="Q15787" start="21517" end="21520" title="HIV" label="HIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q154869" start="21524" end="21535" title="hepatitis C" label="hepatitis C"/>
<link wikidata="Q6704850" start="21544" end="21571" title="Lupus Foundation of America" label="Lupus Foundation of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q582207" start="22031" end="22059" title="anti-phospholipid antibodies" label="anti-phospholipid antibodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q210420" start="22134" end="22142" title="corticosteroids" label="steroids"/>
<link wikidata="Q974135" start="22144" end="22165" title="chemotherapy" label="cytotoxic medications"/>
<link wikidata="Q13365776" start="22170" end="22176" title="uremia" label="uremia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6457707" start="22219" end="22226" title="LE cell" label="LE cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q546523" start="22245" end="22256" title="bone marrow" label="bone marrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q4320806" start="22620" end="22648" title="extractable nuclear antigens" label="extractable nuclear antigens"/>
<link wikidata="Q574727" start="23137" end="23173" title="Anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody" label="Anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody"/>
<link wikidata="Q702883" start="23183" end="23200" title="Rheumatoid factor" label="Rheumatoid factor"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="309076" wikidata="Q670350" url="?curid=309076" title="The Imitation of Christ">
<text>The Imitation of Christ, by Thomas à Kempis, is a Christian devotional book first composed in Medieval Latin as ( 1418–1427). The devotional text is divided into four books of detailed spiritual instructions: (i) &quot;Helpful Counsels of the Spiritual Life&quot;, (ii) &quot;Directives for the Interior Life&quot;, (iii) &quot;On Interior Consolation&quot;, and (iv) &quot;On the Blessed Sacrament&quot;. The devotional approach of &quot;The Imitation of Christ&quot; emphasises the interior life and withdrawal from the mundanities of the world, as opposed to the active imitation of Christ practised by other friars. The devotions of the books emphasize devotion to the Eucharist as the key element of spiritual life.

&quot;The Imitation of Christ&quot; is a handbook for the spiritual life arising from the Devotio Moderna movement, which Thomas followed. The &quot;Imitation&quot; is perhaps the most widely read Christian devotional work after the Bible, and is regarded as a devotional and religious classic. The book was written anonymously in Latin in the Netherlands c. 1418–1427. Its popularity was immediate, and after the first printed edition in 14711472, it was printed in 745 editions before 1650. Apart from the Bible, no book had been translated into more languages than the &quot;Imitation of Christ&quot; at the time.

== Background and history ==

===Background===
The ideal of the imitation of Christ has been an important element of Christian theology, ethics and spirituality. References to this concept and its practice are found in the earliest Christian documents, such as the Pauline Epistles.

Saint Augustine viewed the imitation of Christ as the fundamental purpose of Christian life, and as a remedy for the imitation of the sins of Adam. Saint Francis of Assisi believed in the physical as well as the spiritual imitation of Christ, and advocated a path of poverty and preaching like Jesus who was poor at birth in the manger and died naked on the cross. The theme of imitation of Christ existed in all phases of Byzantine theology, and in the 14th-century book &quot;Life in Christ,&quot; Nicholas Cabasilas viewed &quot;living one&#x27;s own personal life&quot; in Christ as the fundamental Christian virtue.

Against this backdrop, the Devotio Moderna movement was started by Geert Groote who was highly dissatisfied with the state of the Church and what he perceived as the gradual loss of monastic traditions and the lack of moral values among the clergy. The initial focus of Devotio Moderna was the rediscovery of genuine pious practices and conversion and re-conversion of the lukewarm clergy. The &quot;Imitation&quot; was written within the Devotio Moderna community, as it was flourishing in Northern Europe, but grew far beyond that movement which came to an end with the Protestant Reformation.

===History===
The &quot;Imitation&quot; was written anonymously in Latin in the Netherlands c. 1418–1427, and until the seventeenth century, was attributed without much dispute to Thomas à Kempis who, according to Mabillon, was still assumed to be the author in 1651. Taking advantage of the anonymous nature of the book, however, and driven by an esprit de corps exaggerated by national sentiment, Italian Benedictines attributed the &quot;Imitation&quot; to Giovanni Gersen, the abbot of Saint Etienne de Verceil c. 1250, and French scholars claimed it to be the work of Jean Gerson, the renowned chancellor of the University of Paris. Other scholars attributed it to Bonaventure, Bernard of Clairvaux, Henri Kalkar or Ludolph of Saxony. These controversies have led some critics to allege that the &quot;Imitation&quot; was merely an impersonal compilation of various mystical authors of the Middle Ages. Nevertheless, Thomas à Kempis is generally accepted as the author by modern scholars and several sources of authority, including members of his own order, name Kempis as the author. Furthermore, various contemporary manuscripts, including one autograph codex, bear his name.
Joseph N. Tylenda, S.J., writes that the book&#x27;s anonymous composition is &quot;not surprising&quot; since the author writes in the &quot;Imitation&quot; that one should &quot;love to be unknown&quot; (Book 1, Ch. 2). Regarding the anonymity of the work, William C. Creasy also notes that the author of the &quot;Imitation&quot; wrote, &quot;Do not let the writer&#x27;s authority or learning influence you, be it little or great, but let the love of pure truth attract you to read. Do not ask, &#x27;Who said this?&#x27; but pay attention to what is said&quot; (Book 1, Ch. 5).

By 1471, the manuscripts of the book were so frequently hand-copied and passed across monasteries, that there are around 750 extant manuscripts of the &quot;Imitation&quot;. Thomas à Kempis&#x27;s 1441 autograph manuscript of the book is available at the Bibliothèque Royale in Brussels. The first printed edition appeared in Augsburg c. 1471–72. By the end of the 15th century, the book had more than 100 printed editions and translations in Italian (1480), Catalan (1482), German (1486), French (1488), Low German (1489), Spanish (1490), Portuguese and Dutch (1496).

The book received an enthusiastic response from the very early days, as characterized by the statement of George Pirkhamer, the prior of Nuremberg, regarding the 1494 edition: &quot;Nothing more holy, nothing more honorable, nothing more religious, nothing in fine more profitable for the Christian commonwealth can you ever do than to make known these works of Thomas à Kempis.&quot;

The number of counted editions exceeds 2,000; 1,000 different editions are preserved in the British Museum; 770 in the Biblioteca de Catalunya Kempis Collection; the Bullingen collection, donated to the city of Cologne in 1838, contained at the time 400 different editions. De Backer enumerates 545 Latin and about 900 French editions. A critical edition was published in 1982.

== Teachings ==
&quot;The Imitation of Christ&quot; is divided into four books which provide detailed spiritual instructions.

=== Book One ===

Book One of the &quot;Imitation&quot; is titled &quot;Helpful Counsels of the Spiritual Life&quot;. &quot;The Imitation&quot; derives its title from the first chapter of Book I, &quot;The Imitation of Christ and contempt for the vanities of the world&quot; (Latin: &quot;&quot;). The &quot;Imitation&quot; is sometimes referred to as &quot;Following of the Christ&quot;, which comes from the opening words of the first chapter—&quot;Whoever follows Me will not walk into darkness.&quot; Book One deals with the withdrawal of the outward life—so far as positive duty allows and emphasizes an interior life by renouncing all that is vain and illusory, resisting temptations and distractions of life, giving up the pride of learning and to be humble, forsaking the disputations of theologians and patiently enduring the world&#x27;s contempt and contradiction.

Kempis stresses the importance of solitude and silence, &quot;how undisturbed a conscience we would have if we never went searching after ephemeral joys nor concerned ourselves with affairs of the world...&quot; Kempis writes that the &quot;World and all its allurements pass away&quot; and following sensual desires leads to a &quot;dissipated conscience&quot; and a &quot;distracted heart&quot; (Chap. 20). Kempis writes that one should meditate on death and &quot;live as becomes a pilgrim and a stranger on earth...for this earth of ours is no lasting city&quot; (Chap. 23). On the Day of Judgement, Kempis writes that a good and pure conscience will give more joy than all the philosophy one has ever learned, fervent prayer will bring more happiness than a &quot;multi-course banquet&quot;, the silence will be more &quot;exhilarating&quot; than long tales, holy deeds will be of greater value than nice-sounding words (Chap. 24).

Kempis writes one must remain faithful and fervent to God, and keep good hope of attaining victory and salvation, but avoid overconfidence. Kempis gives the example of an anxious man who, oscillating between fear and hope and with grief went to the altar and said: &quot;Oh, if only I knew that I shall persevere to the end.&quot; Immediately he heard the divine answer, &quot;What if you knew this? What would you do? Do now what you would do then, and you will be very safe.&quot; After this the man gave himself to God&#x27;s will, and his anxiety and fear of the future disappeared (Chap. 25).

=== Book Two ===
Book Two of the &quot;Imitation&quot; is &quot;Directives for the Interior Life&quot;. The book continues the theme of Book One, and contains instructions concerning &quot;inward peace, purity of heart, a good conscience—for moderating our longings and desires, for patience, for submission to the will of God, for the love of Jesus, for enduring the loss of comfort, and for taking up the Cross.&quot; Kempis writes that if we have a clear conscience, God will defend us, and whomever God chooses to help no man&#x27;s malice can harm. Kempis writes that when a man humbles himself, &quot;God protects and defends him...God favors the humble man... and after he has been brought low raises him up to glory&quot; (Chap. 2). Kempis stresses the importance of a good conscience—&quot;The man whose conscience is pure easily finds peace and contentment... Men only see your face, but it is God who sees your heart. Men judge according to external deeds, but only God can weigh the motives behind them&quot; (Chap. 6). Kempis writes we must place our faith in Jesus rather than in men and &quot;...Do not trust nor lean on a reed that is shaken ...All flesh is grass, and all its glory shall fade like the flower in the field&quot; (Chap. 7). Kempis writes that a false sense of freedom and overconfidence are obstacles for spiritual life. Kempis writes that &quot;Grace will always be given to the truly grateful, and what is given to the humble is taken away from the proud&quot; (Chap. 10).

Kempis writes that we must not attribute any good to ourselves but attribute everything to God. Kempis asks us to be grateful for &quot;every little gift&quot; and we will be worthy to receive greater ones, to consider the least gift as great and the most common as something special. Kempis writes that if we consider the dignity of the giver, no gift will seem unimportant or small (Chap. 10). In the last chapter, &quot;The Royal Road of the Cross&quot;, Kempis writes that if we carry the cross willingly, it will lead us to our desired goal, but on the other hand if we carry our cross grudgingly, then we turn it into a heavy burden and if we should throw off one cross, we will surely find another, which is perhaps heavier. Kempis writes that by ourselves we cannot bear the cross, but if we put our trust in the Lord, He will send us strength from heaven (Chap. 12).

=== Book Three ===

Book Three, entitled &quot;On Interior Consolation&quot;, is the longest among the four books. This book is in the form of a dialogue between Jesus and the disciple.

Jesus says that very few turn to God and spirituality, since they are more eager to listen to the world and desires of their flesh than to God. Jesus says that the world promises things that are passing and of little value, which are served with great enthusiasm; while He promises things that are most excellent and eternal and men&#x27;s hearts remain indifferent (Chap. 3). Jesus says that the &quot;man who trusts in Me I never send away empty. When I make a promise I keep it, and I fulfill whatever I have pledged—if only you remain faithful...unto the end&quot; (Chap. 3).

Jesus says that spiritual progress and perfection consists in offering oneself to the divine will and not seeking oneself in &quot;anything either small or great, in time or in eternity&quot; (Chap. 25). Jesus says not be anxious about the future—&quot;Do not let your heart be troubled and do not be afraid.&quot; Jesus advises the disciple that all is not lost when the result is not as planned, when one thinks he is farthest from Jesus, it is then that Jesus is nearest, when one thinks that all is lost, it is then that victory is close at hand. Jesus says not to react to a difficulty as if there were no hope of being freed from it (Chap. 30).

Joseph Tylenda summarizes the central theme of the third book with the teaching in Chapter 56, &quot;My son, to the degree that you can leave yourself behind, to that degree will you be able to enter into Me. Just as desiring nothing outside you produces internal peace within you, so the internal renunciation of yourself unites you to God.&quot; Jesus gives his important teaching, &quot;Follow Me...I am the Way, the Truth, and the Life. Without the Way, there is no going; without the Truth, there is no knowing; without Life, there is no living. I am the Way you are to follow; I am the Truth you are to believe; I am the Life you are to hope for&quot; (Chap. 56).

=== Book Four ===
Book Four of the &quot;Imitation&quot;, &quot;On the Blessed Sacrament&quot;, is also in the form of a dialogue between Jesus and the disciple. Kempis writes that in this Sacrament spiritual grace is conferred, the soul&#x27;s strength is replenished, and the recipient&#x27;s mind is fortified and strength is given to the body debilitated by sin (Chap. 1).

Jesus says that the sooner one resigns wholeheartedly to God, and no longer seeks anything according to one&#x27;s own will or pleasure, but totally places all in God&#x27;s hands, the sooner will one be united with God and be at peace. Jesus continues, &quot;Nothing will make you happier or please you as much as being obedient to the divine will&quot; (Chap. 15). Jesus also delivers his &quot;changeless teaching&quot; — &quot;Unless you renounce all that you have, you cannot be my disciple&quot; (Chap. 8).

To receive the Sacrament, Jesus says &quot;make clean the mansions of your heart. Shut out the whole world and all its sinful din and sit as a solitary sparrow on a housetop and, in the bitterness of your soul, meditate on your transgressions&quot; (Chap. 12). Jesus says that there is no offering more worthy, no satisfaction greater, for the washing away of sins than to offer oneself purely and completely to God at the time the Body of Christ is offered in the Mass and in Communion (Chap. 7).

==Influence==

&quot;The Imitation of Christ&quot; is regarded as the most important devotional work in Catholic Christianity and is the most widely read devotional work next to the Bible. Apart from the Bible no Christian book has been translated into more languages than the &quot;Imitation of Christ&quot;.

The book was admired by the following individuals: Saint Thomas More, Chancellor of England and renowned humanist who was executed by King Henry VIII of England; Saint Ignatius of Loyola, founder of the Society of Jesus; Erasmus of Rotterdam; and twentieth-century American Catholic author and monk Thomas Merton. It also has been admired by many others, both Catholic and Protestant. The Jesuits give it an official place among their &quot;exercises&quot;. Kempis&#x27; &quot;Imitatio Christi&quot; was in close parentage with Ignatius of Loyola of the &quot;Devotio moderna&quot; movement, and also it was affirmed and practiced by St. Francis de Sales, profoundly influencing his &quot;Introduction to the Devout Life&quot;.

John Wesley, the founder of the Methodist movement, listed &quot;The Imitation&quot; among the works that influenced him at his conversion. General Gordon carried it with him to the battlefield.

José Rizal, the Philippine polymath and national hero, reportedly read the book whilst incarcerated within Fort Santiago in Intramuros, Manila, shortly before the Spanish colonial government executed him by firing squad for sedition on 30 December 1896.

Swami Vivekananda, the 19th-century Hindu philosopher and founder of the Vedanta Society, drew a number of parallels between the teachings of the &quot;Imitation&quot; and the &quot;Bhagavad Gita&quot;. Vivekananda wrote a and a of the &quot;Imitation&quot; in 1899. Vivekananda would always carry a copy of the &quot;Bhagavad Gita&quot; and the &quot;Imitation&quot;. Spiritual writer Eknath Easwaran compared the teachings of the &quot;Imitation&quot; with the Upanishads.

&quot;The Imitation of Christ&quot; was an early influence on the spirituality of Saint Thérèse of Lisieux, who used it in her prayer life, distilled its message and used it in her own writings which then influenced Catholic spirituality as a whole. Thérèse was so attached to the book and read it so many times that she could quote passages from it from memory in her teens. In her own autobiography she claims that she had memorized it in its entirety.

The theologian Shailer Mathews wrote that the &quot;Imitation&quot; presents an accurate description of the Christ of the Gospels, and gives an unbiased reading of the words of Jesus. He also wrote &quot;For centuries men have found in it inspiration to sacrifice and humility, and to severest self-examination...He who has never come under its influence has missed something that would have made him more humble and more ambitious for purity of life.&quot;

The Spanish crypto-Muslim writer known as the Young Man of Arévalo included adaptations of many passages from the &quot;Imitation&quot; in his Islamic devotional work &quot;Summary of the Account and Spiritual Exercise&quot;. He replaced specific Christian contexts and features with Islamic ones, while keeping the spiritual and moral meaning intact. The adaptation of Christian devotional literature in his Islamic work was likely the result of his being obligated to attend missionary sermons (after forced conversions of Muslims in Spain), and a lack of access to actual Islamic literature.

==Criticisms==
The theologian Hans Urs von Balthasar wrote:
René Girard wrote: &quot;Neither does Jesus propose an ascetic rule of life in the sense of Thomas à Kempis and his celebrated Imitation of Christ, as admirable as that work may be&quot;.

Friedrich Nietzsche stated that this was &quot;one of those books which I cannot hold in my hand without a physiological reaction: it exudes a perfume of the Eternal-Feminine which is strictly for Frenchmen—or Wagnerians&quot;.

==See also==
* Christian mysticism
* &quot;Vita Christi&quot;
*What Would Jesus Do?

==Notes==
==References==
*
*
*
* 
* 


== External links ==
* 
* This article is largely about the historical controversy over the identity of the author.
* &quot;The Imitation of Christ&quot;, in Latin, at The Latin Library, in English, translated by William Benham, 1905
* &quot;Of the Imitation of Christ&quot; Wikisource 
* &quot;The Imitation of Christ&quot;, modern translation by Aloysius Croft and Harold Bolton </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q220976" start="28" end="43" title="Thomas à Kempis" label="Thomas à Kempis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348220" start="50" end="75" title="Christian devotional literature" label="Christian devotional book"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163234" start="94" end="108" title="Medieval Latin" label="Medieval Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q66086" start="673" end="682" title="Eucharist" label="Eucharist"/>
<link wikidata="Q756170" start="812" end="827" title="Devotio Moderna" label="Devotio Moderna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845" start="955" end="960" title="Bible" label="Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="1066" end="1077" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q144096" start="1404" end="1423" title="imitation of Christ" label="imitation of Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q265283" start="1605" end="1621" title="Pauline Epistles" label="Pauline Epistles"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018" start="1624" end="1639" title="Augustine of Hippo" label="Saint Augustine"/>
<link wikidata="Q58701" start="1766" end="1770" title="Adam and Eve" label="Adam"/>
<link wikidata="Q676555" start="1778" end="1795" title="Francis of Assisi" label="Francis of Assisi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2047" end="2065" title="History of theology#Byzantine theology" label="Byzantine theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q506564" start="2124" end="2142" title="Nicholas Cabasilas" label="Nicholas Cabasilas"/>
<link wikidata="Q756170" start="2273" end="2288" title="Devotio Moderna" label="Devotio Moderna"/>
<link wikidata="Q467242" start="2313" end="2325" title="Geert Groote" label="Geert Groote"/>
<link wikidata="Q12562" start="2818" end="2840" title="Protestant Reformation" label="Protestant Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="2923" end="2934" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q354563" start="3057" end="3065" title="Jean Mabillon" label="Mabillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3767351" start="3303" end="3318" title="Giovanni Gersen" label="Giovanni Gersen"/>
<link wikidata="Q281179" start="3416" end="3427" title="Jean Gerson" label="Jean Gerson"/>
<link wikidata="Q43746" start="3513" end="3524" title="Bonaventure" label="Bonaventure"/>
<link wikidata="Q188411" start="3526" end="3546" title="Bernard of Clairvaux" label="Bernard of Clairvaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q85894" start="3548" end="3560" title="Henry of Kalkar" label="Henri Kalkar"/>
<link wikidata="Q669351" start="3564" end="3581" title="Ludolph of Saxony" label="Ludolph of Saxony"/>
<link wikidata="Q220976" start="3765" end="3780" title="Thomas à Kempis" label="Thomas à Kempis"/>
<link wikidata="Q87167" start="4623" end="4634" title="manuscripts" label="manuscripts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2749" start="4936" end="4944" title="Augsburg" label="Augsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5543440" start="5286" end="5302" title="George Pirkhamer" label="George Pirkhamer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090" start="5317" end="5326" title="Nuremberg" label="Nuremberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q6373" start="5658" end="5672" title="British Museum" label="British Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200925" start="5685" end="5708" title="Biblioteca de Catalunya" label="Biblioteca de Catalunya"/>
<link wikidata="Q365" start="5777" end="5784" title="Cologne" label="Cologne"/>
<link wikidata="Q275456" start="5904" end="5920" title="Textual criticism" label="critical edition"/>
<link wikidata="Q6010868" start="6983" end="6991" title="solitude" label="solitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q502261" start="6996" end="7003" title="silence" label="silence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1821239" start="7535" end="7551" title="Day of Judgement" label="Day of Judgement"/>
<link wikidata="Q193526" start="7588" end="7598" title="conscience" label="conscience"/>
<link wikidata="Q49703" start="13151" end="13160" title="Sacrament" label="Sacrament"/>
<link wikidata="Q205194" start="13171" end="13176" title="Grace (Christianity)" label="grace"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="14294" end="14300" title="Christ" label="Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q6783971" start="14319" end="14323" title="Mass (liturgy)" label="Mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q378097" start="14331" end="14340" title="Communion (Christian)" label="Communion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845" start="14535" end="14540" title="Bible" label="Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q42544" start="14721" end="14732" title="Thomas More" label="Thomas More"/>
<link wikidata="Q38370" start="14803" end="14813" title="Henry VIII" label="Henry VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q44281" start="14832" end="14850" title="Ignatius of Loyola" label="Ignatius of Loyola"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="14867" end="14883" title="Society of Jesus" label="Society of Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q43499" start="14885" end="14905" title="Erasmus of Rotterdam" label="Erasmus of Rotterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q335011" start="14963" end="14976" title="Thomas Merton" label="Thomas Merton"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="15053" end="15059" title="Jesuit" label="Jesuit"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15224" end="15239" title="Devotio moderna#The Imitation of Christ" label="Devotio moderna"/>
<link wikidata="Q3153723" start="15353" end="15384" title="Introduction to the Devout Life" label="Introduction to the Devout Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q213393" start="15393" end="15404" title="John Wesley" label="John Wesley"/>
<link wikidata="Q33203" start="15425" end="15443" title="Methodism" label="Methodist movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q310035" start="15533" end="15547" title="Charles George Gordon" label="General Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500" start="15589" end="15599" title="José Rizal" label="José Rizal"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="15605" end="15615" title="Philippines" label="Philippine"/>
<link wikidata="Q270141" start="15616" end="15624" title="polymath" label="polymath"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421433" start="15629" end="15642" title="National hero of the Philippines" label="national hero"/>
<link wikidata="Q478181" start="15696" end="15709" title="Fort Santiago" label="Fort Santiago"/>
<link wikidata="Q772211" start="15713" end="15723" title="Intramuros" label="Intramuros"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461" start="15725" end="15731" title="Manila" label="Manila"/>
<link wikidata="Q910648" start="15752" end="15779" title="Spanish East Indies" label="Spanish colonial government"/>
<link wikidata="Q216169" start="15796" end="15808" title="firing squad" label="firing squad"/>
<link wikidata="Q47478" start="15844" end="15861" title="Swami Vivekananda" label="Swami Vivekananda"/>
<link wikidata="Q10090" start="15880" end="15885" title="Hindu" label="Hindu"/>
<link wikidata="Q4330282" start="15917" end="15932" title="Vedanta Society" label="Vedanta Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q46802" start="16026" end="16039" title="Bhagavad Gita" label="Bhagavad Gita"/>
<link wikidata="Q5350511" start="16230" end="16245" title="Eknath Easwaran" label="Eknath Easwaran"/>
<link wikidata="Q6113985" start="16307" end="16317" title="Upanishads" label="Upanishads"/>
<link wikidata="Q181715" start="16408" end="16426" title="Thérèse of Lisieux" label="Thérèse of Lisieux"/>
<link wikidata="Q2276480" start="16791" end="16806" title="Shailer Mathews" label="Shailer Mathews"/>
<link wikidata="Q936346" start="17247" end="17260" title="Crypto-Islam" label="crypto-Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q16597284" start="17281" end="17301" title="Young Man of Arévalo" label="Young Man of Arévalo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17738" end="17756" title="forced conversion#Spain" label="forced conversions"/>
<link wikidata="Q122976" start="17861" end="17883" title="Hans Urs von Balthasar" label="Hans Urs von Balthasar"/>
<link wikidata="Q129228" start="17891" end="17902" title="René Girard" label="René Girard"/>
<link wikidata="Q9358" start="18080" end="18099" title="Friedrich Nietzsche" label="Friedrich Nietzsche"/>
<link wikidata="Q17001887" start="18238" end="18254" title="eternal feminine" label="Eternal-Feminine"/>
<link wikidata="Q655970" start="18324" end="18343" title="Christian mysticism" label="Christian mysticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q110979523" start="18352" end="18364" title="Vita Christi" label="Vita Christi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933884" start="18372" end="18392" title="What Would Jesus Do?" label="What Would Jesus Do?"/>
<link wikidata="Q15955418" start="18646" end="18660" title="William Benham (priest)" label="William Benham"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="309079" wikidata="Q818468" url="?curid=309079" title="Benzaiten">
<text>Benzaiten (&quot;shinjitai&quot;: or ; &quot;kyūjitai&quot;: 辯才天, 辨才天, or 辨財天, lit. &quot;goddess of eloquence&quot;, Benten, Chinese: 辯才天, Biancaitian) is an East Asian Buddhist goddess (technically a Dharmapala, &quot;Dharma protector&quot;) who originated from the Hindu deity Saraswati; goddess of speech, the arts, and learning. Worship of Benzaiten arrived in Japan during the sixth through eighth centuries, mainly via Classical Chinese translations of the &quot;Golden Light Sutra&quot; (Sanskrit: &quot;Suvarṇaprabhāsa Sūtra&quot;), which has a section devoted to her. Benzaiten was also adopted into the Shinto religion, and there are several Shinto shrines dedicated to her.

As such, Benzaiten is now also associated with dragons, snakes, local Japanese deities, wealth, fortune, protection from disease and danger, and the protection of the state.

== Etymology ==
==Indian deity==

Saraswati (Sanskrit: &quot;Sarasvatī&quot;; Pali: &quot;Sarassatī&quot;) was originally in the &quot;Rigveda&quot; a river goddess, the deification of the Sarasvati River. She was identified with Vach (Skt. &quot;Vāc&quot;), the Vedic goddess of speech, and from there became considered to be the patron of music and the arts, knowledge, and learning. 

In addition to their association with eloquence and speech, both Saraswati and Vach also show warrior traits: Saraswati for instance was called the &quot;Vritra-slayer&quot; (&quot;Vṛtraghnī&quot;) in the &quot;Rigveda&quot; (6.61.7) and was associated with the Maruts. She was also associated with the Ashvins, with whom she collaborates to bolster Indra&#x27;s strength by telling him how to kill the asura Namuchi. In a hymn in Book 10 of the &quot;Rigveda&quot; (10.125.6), Vach declares: &quot;I bend the bow for Rudra that his arrow may strike and slay the hater of devotion. I rouse and order battle for the people, and I have penetrated Earth and Heaven.&quot;

Saraswati, like many other Hindu deities, was eventually adopted into Buddhism, figuring mainly in Mahayana texts. In the 15th chapter of Yijing&#x27;s translation of the &quot;Sutra of Golden Light&quot; (&quot;Suvarṇaprabhāsa Sūtra&quot;) into Classical Chinese (Taishō Tripitaka 885), Saraswati (大辯才天女, pinyin: &quot;Dàbiàncáitiānnǚ&quot;; Japanese: &quot;Daibenzaitennyo&quot;, lit. &quot;great goddess of eloquence&quot;) appears before the Buddha&#x27;s assembly and vows to protect all those who put their faith in the sutra, recite it, or copy it. In addition, she promises to increase the intelligence of those who recite the sutra so that they will be able to understand and remember various &quot;dharanis&quot;. 

She then teaches the assembly various mantras with which one can heal all illnesses and escape all manner of misfortune. One of the Buddha&#x27;s disciples, the brahmin Kaundinya, then praises Saraswati, comparing her to Vishnu&#x27;s consort Narayani (Lakshmi) and declaring that she can manifest herself not only as a benevolent deity, but also as Yami, the sister of Yama. He then describes her eight-armed form with all its attributes — bow, arrow, sword, spear, axe, vajra, iron wheel, and noose. 

The poem describes Saraswati as one who &quot;has sovereignty in the world&quot;, as one who is &quot;good fortune, success, and peace of mind&quot;. It also states that she fights in battlefields and is always victorious. 

One key concern of the &quot;Golden Light Sutra&quot; is the protection of the state, and as such, Saraswati here also takes on some form of a warrior goddess, similar to Durga. Bernard Faure also notes that the Vach already had martial attributes, which may have been retained in some form.

== Bencaitian / Benzaiten ==
Saraswati became the Chinese 辯才天 (Bencaitian) or &quot;great eloquence deity&quot; (大辯天). This became the Japanese 弁財天 (Benzaiten). In East Asian Buddhism, she is one of the Twenty-Four Protective Deities (Chinese: 二十四諸天; pinyin: &quot;Èrshísì Zhūtiān&quot;). She remained associated with wealth, music, and eloquence and also took on aspects of a fierce protector of the state (due to the influence of the &quot;Golden Light Sutra&quot; which promises to protect a country where the sutra is chanted).

During the medieval period onwards, Benzaiten came to be associated or even conflated with a number of Buddhist and local deities, including the goddess Kisshōten whose role as goddess of fortune eventually became ascribed to Benzaiten in popular belief). As such, she was eventually also worshiped as a bestower of monetary fortune and became part of the set of popular deities known as the Seven Lucky Gods (&quot;shichifukujin&quot;).

Benzaiten is depicted a number of ways in Japanese art. She is often depicted holding a &quot;biwa&quot; (a traditional Japanese lute) similar to how Saraswati is depicted with a veena in Indian art, though she may also be portrayed wielding a sword and a wish-granting jewel (&quot;cintāmaṇi&quot;). An iconographic formula showing Benzaiten with eight arms holding a variety of weapons (based on the &quot;Golden Light Sutra&quot;) meanwhile is believed to derive from Durga&#x27;s iconography. As Uga Benzaiten, she may also be shown with Ugajin (a human-headed white snake) above her head. Lastly, she is also portrayed (albeit rarely) with the head of a snake or a dragon. 

Benzaiten&#x27;s worship also spread to Taiwan during the Japanese colonial period, and she is still venerated in certain locations in Taiwan, such as the Xian Dong Yan temple in Keelung City.

=== Syncretism with Shinto kami ===
Due to her status as a water deity, Benzaiten was also linked with &quot;nāgas&quot;, dragons, and snakes. Over time, Benzaiten became identified with the Japanese snake &quot;kami&quot; Ugajin. She also became identified with the &quot;kami&quot; Ichikishima-hime. 

Benzaiten was also adopted as a female &quot;kami&quot; in Shinto, with the name . This kami is one of three &quot;kami&quot; believed to be daughters of the sun goddess Amaterasu, the ancestress of the imperial family.

She is also believed by Tendai Buddhists to be the essence of the &quot;kami&quot; Ugajin, whose effigy she sometimes carries on her head together with a &quot;torii&quot; (see photo below). As a consequence, she is sometimes also known as Benzaiten or Uga Benten.

=== Bīja and mantra ===
The &quot;bīja&quot; or seed syllable used to represent Benzaiten in Japanese esoteric Buddhism is &#x27; (सु, traditionally read in Japanese as so&quot;&quot;&#x27;), written in Siddhaṃ script.

In Japanese esoteric Buddhism (mikkyo), Benzaiten&#x27;s main mantra is as follows: 

==Temples and shrines==

In Japan, the places of worship dedicated to Benzaiten are often called &quot;辯天堂&quot; (benten-dō) or . Shinto shrines dedicated to her are also called by this name. Entire Shinto shrines can be dedicated to her, as in the case of Kamakura&#x27;s Zeniarai Benzaiten Ugafuku Shrine or Nagoya&#x27;s Kawahara Shrine. Benzaiten temples or shrines places are commonly located near bodies of water like rivers, ponds, or springs due to her association with water. Benzaiten&#x27;s worship became integrated with native Japanese beliefs, including serpent and dragon symbolism, as she was originally a river goddess. 

Benzaiten is enshrined on numerous locations throughout Japan; for example, the Enoshima Island in Sagami Bay, the Chikubu Island in Lake Biwa and the Itsukushima Island in Seto Inland Sea (Japan&#x27;s Three Great Benzaiten Shrines); and she and a five-headed dragon are the central figures of the Enoshima Engi, a history of the shrines on Enoshima written by the Japanese Buddhist monk Kōkei (皇慶) in 1047. According to Kōkei, Benzaiten is the third daughter of the dragon-king of Munetsuchi (無熱池; literally &quot;lake without heat&quot;), known in Sanskrit as Anavatapta, the lake lying at the center of the world according to an ancient Buddhist cosmological view.

Ryōhō-ji, also known as the &quot;Moe Temple&quot;, enshrines Benzaiten. It is famous for anime style depictions of Buddhist deities.

===Benzaiten Buddhist temples===
*Hogon-ji Temple (Nagahama City, Shiga Prefecture, Chikubushima, Japan&#x27;s Three Major Benzaiten)
*Daigan-ji Temple (Hyokkaichi City, Hiroshima Prefecture, Miyajima, Japan&#x27;s three major Bensaiten)
*Yaotomi Shrine (Gamagori City, Aichi Prefecture, Takeshima (Aichi Prefecture), Japan Shichibenten)
*Enkyo-ji Temple (Himeji City, Hyogo Prefecture, on the day of Kishi every 60 days Uga Benzai Tenyu Shuku is practiced)
*Takian-ji Temple (Mino City, Osaka Prefecture)
*Shinju-ji Temple (Nishinomiya City, Hyogo Prefecture)
*Shinfuku-ji Temple (Tsuyama City, Okayama Prefecture)
*Tokai-ji Temple Fuse Benten (Kashiwa City, Chiba Prefecture)
*Senso-ji Temple Bentenzan (Taito Ward, Tokyo) [11]
*Kanei-ji Temple Shinobazu Pond Benzaiten (Taito Ward, Tokyo, Edo Shichibenten)
*Myoko-ji Temple Itsukushima Bensaiten (Ueda City, Nagano Prefecture, Kamehime-sama&#x27;s dedication)
*Togo-ji Temple (Nagoya City, Aichi Prefecture)
*Kofuku-ji Temple Kubo Benzaiten (Nara City, Nara Prefecture, in the three-storied pagoda, hidden Buddha)
*Ryozen-ji Temple Daibensai Tendo (Nara City, Nara Prefecture)
*Chokenji Temple (Fushimi Ward, Kyoto City)
*Fukasawa Zenarai Benten (Tonosawa, Hakone-cho, Ashigashimo-gun, Kanagawa Prefecture)
*Saifuku-ji Temple (Kagoshima City, Kagoshima Prefecture, Japan&#x27;s largest wooden Buddha)
*Ikko-ji Temple Benten Cave (Inagi City, Tokyo)
*Daisei-ji Temple Inokashira Benzaiten (Mitaka City, Tokyo)
*Honko-ji Temple, Suse Benzai Kotoku Tenjo (Ichikawa City, Chiba Prefecture)
*Hase-dera Bentendo Benten Cave (Kamakura City, Kanagawa Prefecture)
*Kaiko-ji Temple, Izumiyama Yutsu Benzaiten (Yamauchi of Senwakuji Temple, Higashiyama Ward, Kyoto City, Kyoto Prefecture, Hachibi statue with Denkyo Daishi Saicho Saku, Hidden Buddha)
*Ryōhō-ji Temple Shingo Benzaiten (Hachioji City, Tokyo, dating from 1489, known as &quot;Moe-ji Temple&quot; for its use of anime style depictions of Buddhist deities)
*Momo-ji Temple Naked Benzaiten (2-16 Yotsuya-dori, Chikusa-ku, Nagoya City)
*There is a shrine on a floating island protruding in Tanara-numa, Onrin-ji Temple (Oura-cho, Gunma Prefecture).
*Eian-ji Temple (Kanazawa City, Ishikawa Prefecture) Enshrined in Bentendo where vermilion Hiten dances with Bishamonten and Daikokuten (opened several times a year)
*Myoen-ji Temple Iwaya Reijo Tsuchiya Zeni Benten (Hiratsuka City, Kanagawa Prefecture)
*Jushoin Matsumoto Benten (Edogawa-ku, Tokyo)
*Hoju-in Kaiun Suzusato-saiten (Minato-ku, Tokyo)
*Meio-ji Temple (Ibaraki City, Osaka Prefecture, Benten sect headquarters)
*Nyoi-ji Temple (the head temple of the Benten sect in Gojo City, Nara Prefecture, Gyoki Bodhisattva is said to have been carved in the Nara period)

===Shinto shrines enshrining Benzaiten===
*Enoshima Shrine (Fujisawa City, Kanagawa Prefecture, Enoshima, Japan&#x27;s three major Benzaiten)
*Koami Shrine (Nihonbashi, Tokyo)
*Zeniarai Benzaiten Ugafuku Shrine (Kamakura City, Kanagawa Prefecture)
*Shimizu Benzaitensha (Saku City, Nagano Prefecture)
*Tenkawa Daibenzaitensha (Tenkawa-mura, Yoshino-gun, Nara Prefecture, Japan&#x27;s three major Benzaiten) [Note 6]
*Koganeyama Shrine (Ishinomaki City, Miyagi Prefecture, Mt. Kinka)
Benzaiten is also enshrined as Ichikishima Hime-no-Mikoto at the Munakata Taisha shrine.

==See also==
* Buddhist Tenbu (天部) deities
* Daikokuten
* Dakini
* Hinduism in Japan
* Seven Lucky Gods
* Shinbutsu-shūgō
* Three Great Shrines of Benzaiten
* Tenjin (kami)
* Vaiśravaṇa
* Anahita

==References==
==Bibliography==
*
*

==External links==

*A Study of the Enoshima Engi 
*Sacred Texts account of Benzaiten</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q818468" start="0" end="9" title="Benzaiten" label="Benzaiten"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055887" start="17" end="26" title="shinjitai" label="shinjitai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147857" start="45" end="53" title="kyūjitai" label="kyūjitai"/>
<link wikidata="Q4089509" start="90" end="97" title="Deva (Buddhism)" label="goddess"/>
<link wikidata="Q818468" start="118" end="124" title="Benzaiten" label="Benten"/>
<link wikidata="Q7850" start="126" end="133" title="Chinese language" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q818468" start="140" end="151" title="Benzaiten" label="Biancaitian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2905453" start="159" end="178" title="East Asian Buddhism" label="East Asian Buddhist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207630" start="202" end="212" title="Dharmapala" label="Dharmapala"/>
<link wikidata="Q10090" start="268" end="273" title="Hindu" label="Hindu"/>
<link wikidata="Q58838" start="280" end="289" title="Saraswati" label="Saraswati"/>
<link wikidata="Q37041" start="426" end="443" title="Classical Chinese" label="Classical Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q391694" start="470" end="488" title="Golden Light Sutra" label="Golden Light Sutra"/>
<link wikidata="Q11059" start="496" end="504" title="Sanskrit" label="Sanskrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q812767" start="614" end="629" title="Shinto religion" label="Shinto religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q845945" start="653" end="667" title="Shinto shrines" label="Shinto shrines"/>
<link wikidata="Q36727" start="940" end="944" title="Pali" label="Pali"/>
<link wikidata="Q727413" start="997" end="1004" title="Rigveda" label="Rigveda"/>
<link wikidata="Q177321" start="1051" end="1066" title="Sarasvati River" label="Sarasvati River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2427516" start="1109" end="1112" title="Vāc" label="Vāc"/>
<link wikidata="Q797498" start="1404" end="1410" title="Vritra" label="Vritra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1906028" start="1512" end="1518" title="Maruts" label="Maruts"/>
<link wikidata="Q726593" start="1553" end="1560" title="Ashvins" label="Ashvins"/>
<link wikidata="Q128335" start="1600" end="1605" title="Indra" label="Indra"/>
<link wikidata="Q624083" start="1653" end="1658" title="asura" label="asura"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1659" end="1666" title="Namuchi" label="Namuchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q855310" start="1768" end="1773" title="Rudra" label="Rudra"/>
<link wikidata="Q48362" start="2019" end="2027" title="Mahayana Buddhism" label="Mahayana"/>
<link wikidata="Q181937" start="2058" end="2064" title="Yijing" label="Yijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q391694" start="2097" end="2118" title="Sutra of Golden Light" label="Sutra of Golden Light"/>
<link wikidata="Q37041" start="2166" end="2183" title="Classical Chinese" label="Classical Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q837315" start="2185" end="2201" title="Taishō Tripitaka" label="Taishō Tripitaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q42222" start="2226" end="2232" title="pinyin" label="pinyin"/>
<link wikidata="Q9441" start="2366" end="2372" title="Buddha" label="Buddha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207590" start="2628" end="2635" title="dharani" label="dharani"/>
<link wikidata="Q47140" start="2807" end="2814" title="brahmin" label="brahmin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2708070" start="2815" end="2824" title="Kaundinya" label="Kaundinya"/>
<link wikidata="Q131443" start="2899" end="2906" title="Lakshmi" label="Lakshmi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2348057" start="2996" end="3000" title="Yamuna in Hinduism" label="Yami"/>
<link wikidata="Q2089602" start="3016" end="3020" title="Yama (Buddhism)" label="Yama"/>
<link wikidata="Q695709" start="3118" end="3123" title="vajra" label="vajra"/>
<link wikidata="Q971797" start="3125" end="3135" title="Chakram" label="iron wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7141933" start="3141" end="3146" title="Pasha (Hinduism)" label="noose"/>
<link wikidata="Q382973" start="3546" end="3551" title="Durga" label="Durga"/>
<link wikidata="Q2897888" start="3553" end="3566" title="Bernard Faure" label="Bernard Faure"/>
<link wikidata="Q15912611" start="3871" end="3901" title="Twenty-Four Protective Deities" label="Twenty-Four Protective Deities"/>
<link wikidata="Q7850" start="3903" end="3910" title="Chinese language" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q42222" start="3919" end="3925" title="pinyin" label="pinyin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2279088" start="4277" end="4291" title="Shinbutsu-shūgō" label="conflated with"/>
<link wikidata="Q2646981" start="4354" end="4363" title="Kisshōten" label="Kisshōten"/>
<link wikidata="Q846858" start="4593" end="4609" title="Seven Lucky Gods" label="Seven Lucky Gods"/>
<link wikidata="Q829729" start="4734" end="4738" title="biwa" label="biwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q959769" start="4819" end="4824" title="veena" label="veena"/>
<link wikidata="Q2963837" start="4923" end="4932" title="cintamani" label="cintāmaṇi"/>
<link wikidata="Q28416709" start="5475" end="5488" title="Xian Dong Yan" label="Xian Dong Yan"/>
<link wikidata="Q249996" start="5499" end="5511" title="Keelung" label="Keelung City"/>
<link wikidata="Q271990" start="5623" end="5628" title="nāgas" label="nāgas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2366503" start="5636" end="5643" title="Japanese dragon" label="dragons"/>
<link wikidata="Q2102" start="5649" end="5655" title="snakes" label="snakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q524158" start="5726" end="5730" title="kami" label="kami"/>
<link wikidata="Q795080" start="5737" end="5743" title="Ugajin" label="Ugajin"/>
<link wikidata="Q704962" start="5798" end="5814" title="Munakata Taisha" label="Ichikishima-hime"/>
<link wikidata="Q524158" start="5863" end="5867" title="kami" label="kami"/>
<link wikidata="Q812767" start="5877" end="5883" title="Shinto" label="Shinto"/>
<link wikidata="Q524158" start="5933" end="5937" title="kami" label="kami"/>
<link wikidata="Q455602" start="5988" end="5997" title="Amaterasu" label="Amaterasu"/>
<link wikidata="Q909452" start="6021" end="6036" title="Imperial House of Japan" label="imperial family"/>
<link wikidata="Q855964" start="6063" end="6069" title="Tendai" label="Tendai"/>
<link wikidata="Q795080" start="6122" end="6128" title="Ugajin" label="Ugajin"/>
<link wikidata="Q234731" start="6199" end="6204" title="torii" label="torii"/>
<link wikidata="Q2416043" start="6339" end="6343" title="bīja" label="bīja"/>
<link wikidata="Q250379" start="6508" end="6522" title="Siddhaṃ script" label="Siddhaṃ script"/>
<link wikidata="Q336102" start="6556" end="6562" title="Mikkyō" label="mikkyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q131510" start="6587" end="6593" title="mantra" label="mantra"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="6639" end="6644" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2896738" start="6725" end="6734" title="benten-dō" label="benten-dō"/>
<link wikidata="Q845945" start="6741" end="6754" title="Shinto shrine" label="Shinto shrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q642681" start="6884" end="6917" title="Zeniarai Benzaiten Ugafuku Shrine" label="Zeniarai Benzaiten Ugafuku Shrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3194327" start="6935" end="6950" title="Kawahara Shrine" label="Kawahara Shrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q989803" start="7330" end="7338" title="Enoshima" label="Enoshima"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061221" start="7349" end="7359" title="Sagami Bay" label="Sagami Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2975401" start="7365" end="7379" title="Chikubu Island" label="Chikubu Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q200239" start="7383" end="7392" title="Lake Biwa" label="Lake Biwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q875301" start="7401" end="7412" title="Itsukushima" label="Itsukushima"/>
<link wikidata="Q231312" start="7423" end="7438" title="Seto Inland Sea" label="Seto Inland Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q215605" start="7511" end="7517" title="Chinese dragon" label="dragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3038766" start="7549" end="7562" title="Enoshima Engi" label="Enoshima Engi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6455194" start="7639" end="7644" title="Kōkei (monk)" label="Kōkei"/>
<link wikidata="Q4752395" start="7813" end="7823" title="Anavatapta" label="Anavatapta"/>
<link wikidata="Q11371049" start="7920" end="7928" title="Ryōhō-ji" label="Ryōhō-ji"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107" start="8010" end="8015" title="anime" label="anime"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8089" end="8097" title="Hogon-ji" label="Hogon-ji"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8190" end="8199" title="Daigan-ji" label="Daigan-ji"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8294" end="8308" title="Yaotomi Shrine" label="Yaotomi Shrine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8394" end="8409" title="Enkyo-ji Temple" label="Enkyo-ji Temple"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8514" end="8523" title="Takian-ji" label="Takian-ji"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8562" end="8571" title="Shinju-ji" label="Shinju-ji"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8617" end="8628" title="Shinfuku-ji" label="Shinfuku-ji"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000448" start="8672" end="8680" title="Tōkai-ji (Chiba)" label="Tokai-ji"/>
<link wikidata="Q615183" start="8734" end="8742" title="Senso-ji" label="Senso-ji"/>
<link wikidata="Q3120766" start="8786" end="8794" title="Kanei-ji" label="Kanei-ji"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8866" end="8874" title="Myoko-ji" label="Myoko-ji"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8969" end="8976" title="Togo-ji" label="Togo-ji"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070863" start="9017" end="9026" title="Kofuku-ji" label="Kofuku-ji"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9123" end="9132" title="Ryozen-ji" label="Ryozen-ji"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9186" end="9194" title="Chokenji" label="Chokenji"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9316" end="9326" title="Saifuku-ji" label="Saifuku-ji"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9410" end="9417" title="Ikko-ji" label="Ikko-ji"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9458" end="9467" title="Daisei-ji" label="Daisei-ji"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9518" end="9526" title="Honko-ji" label="Honko-ji"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9664" end="9672" title="Kaiko-ji" label="Kaiko-ji"/>
<link wikidata="Q11371049" start="9849" end="9857" title="Ryōhō-ji" label="Ryōhō-ji"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10018" end="10025" title="Momo-ji" label="Momo-ji"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10161" end="10169" title="Onrin-ji" label="Onrin-ji"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10208" end="10215" title="Eian-ji" label="Eian-ji"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10374" end="10382" title="Myoen-ji" label="Myoen-ji"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10508" end="10515" title="Hoju-in" label="Hoju-in"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10558" end="10565" title="Meio-ji" label="Meio-ji"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10633" end="10640" title="Nyoi-ji" label="Nyoi-ji"/>
<link wikidata="Q704962" start="11330" end="11345" title="Munakata Taisha" label="Munakata Taisha"/>
<link wikidata="" start="11370" end="11397" title="Japanese Buddhist pantheon#Level 4: Heavenly deities (Ten-bu)" label="Buddhist Tenbu (天部) deities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759916" start="11400" end="11410" title="Daikokuten" label="Daikokuten"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127224" start="11413" end="11419" title="Dakini" label="Dakini"/>
<link wikidata="Q17049486" start="11422" end="11439" title="Hinduism in Japan" label="Hinduism in Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q846858" start="11442" end="11458" title="Seven Lucky Gods" label="Seven Lucky Gods"/>
<link wikidata="Q2279088" start="11461" end="11476" title="Shinbutsu-shūgō" label="Shinbutsu-shūgō"/>
<link wikidata="Q17214976" start="11479" end="11511" title="Three Great Shrines of Benzaiten" label="Three Great Shrines of Benzaiten"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753428" start="11514" end="11527" title="Tenjin (kami)" label="Tenjin (kami)"/>
<link wikidata="Q866315" start="11530" end="11540" title="Vaiśravaṇa" label="Vaiśravaṇa"/>
<link wikidata="Q484278" start="11543" end="11550" title="Anahita" label="Anahita"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="309081" wikidata="Q5406934" url="?curid=309081" title="The Forever War">
<text>The Forever War (1974) is a military science fiction novel by American author Joe Haldeman, telling the contemplative story about human soldiers fighting an interstellar war against an alien civilization known as the Taurans. It won the Nebula Award in 1975 and the Hugo and Locus awards in 1976. &quot;Forever Free&quot; (1999) and &quot;Forever Peace&quot; (1997) are, respectively, direct and thematic sequel novels. The novella &quot;A Separate War&quot; (1999) is another sequel of sorts, occurring simultaneously with the final portion of &quot;The Forever War&quot;. Informally, the novels comprise The Forever War series; the novel also inspired a comic book and a board game. &quot;The Forever War&quot; is the first title in the SF Masterworks series.

==Plot summary==

William Mandella is a physics student conscripted for an elite task force in the United Nations Exploratory Force being assembled for a war against the Taurans, an alien species discovered when they apparently attacked human colonists&#x27; ships. The UNEF ground troops are sent out for reconnaissance and revenge. The elite recruits have IQs of 150 and above, are highly educated, healthy, and fit. Training is gruelingfirst on Earth and later on a planet called &quot;Charon&quot; beyond Pluto (written before the discovery of the actual planetoid). Several of the recruits die during training due to the extreme environments and the use of live weapons. The new soldiers complete training and immediately depart for action via interconnected &quot;collapsars&quot; that allow ships to cover thousands of light-years in a split second. However, crucially, traveling to and from the collapsars at near-lightspeed has enormous relativistic time effects.

On their first encounter with Taurans, on a planet orbiting Epsilon Aurigae, their post-hypnotic training is triggered, which causes them to massacre the Taurans despite their lack of resistance. This first expedition, beginning in 1997, lasts only two years from the soldiers&#x27; point of view, but due to time dilation, they return to Earth in 2024. During the expedition&#x27;s second battle, the soldiers experience future shock first-hand, as the Taurans have much more advanced weaponry. Mandella, with fellow soldier and lover Marygay Potter, returns to civilian life, only to find humanity drastically changed. He and the other discharged soldiers have difficulty fitting into a society that has altered almost beyond their comprehension. The veterans learn that, to curb overpopulation, which led to class wars around the world caused by inequitable rationing, homosexuality has become officially encouraged by many of the world&#x27;s nations. The world has become a very dangerous place due to mass unemployment and the easy availability of weapons. Alienated, Mandella and many other veterans re-enlist, despite the extremely high casualty rate and their recognition that the military is a soulless construct. Mandella and Potter receive promised postings as instructors on Luna, but upon arrival are immediately reassigned to a combat command.

Almost entirely through luck, Mandella survives four years of military service, while several centuries elapse for humanity in general. He soon becomes the objectively oldest surviving soldier in the war, attaining high rank through seniority rather than ambition. He and Potter (who is his last link with the Earth of his youth) are eventually given different assignments, meaning that even if they both survive the war they will likely never meet again due to time dilation. After briefly contemplating suicide, Mandella assumes the post of commanding officer of a &quot;strike force&quot;, commanding soldiers who speak a language largely unrecognizable to him, whose ethnicity is now nearly uniform (&#x27;vaguely Polynesian&#x27; in appearance) and who are exclusively homosexual. He is disliked by his soldiers and he assumes this is because they had to learn 21st century English to communicate with him and other senior staff and because he is heterosexual.

Engaging in combat thousands of light years away from Earth, Mandella and his soldiers need to resort to medieval weapons to fight inside a stasis field which neutralizes all electromagnetic radiation in anything not covered with a protective coating. Upon return, the strike force learns this is the last battle of the war. Humanity has begun to clone itself, resulting in a new, collective species calling itself simply &quot;Man&quot;. &quot;Man&quot; is able to communicate with the Taurans, who are also clones. It is discovered that the war started due to a misunderstanding; the colony ships were lost to accidents and those on Earth with a vested interest in a new war used these disappearances as an excuse to begin the conflict. The futile, meaningless war, which had lasted for more than a thousand years, ends.

&quot;Man&quot; has established several colonies of old-style, heterosexual humans, just in case the evolutionary change proves to be a mistake. Mandella travels to one of these colonies (named &quot;Middle Finger&quot; in the definitive version of the novel) where he is reunited with Potter, who had been discharged much earlier and had taken trips in space to use time dilation to age at a much slower rate, hoping for Mandella&#x27;s return. The epilogue is a news item from the year 3143 announcing the birth of a &quot;fine baby boy&quot; to Marygay Potter-Mandella.

==Reception and interpretation==
The novel is widely perceived to be a portrayal of the author&#x27;s military service during the Vietnam War, and has been called an account of his war experiences written through a space opera filter. Other hints of the autobiographical nature of the work are the protagonist&#x27;s surname, Mandella, which is a near-anagram of the author&#x27;s surname; Mandella being a physics student, like Haldeman, as well as the name of the lead female character, Marygay Potter, which is nearly identical to Haldeman&#x27;s wife&#x27;s maiden name. If one accepts this reading of the book, the alienation experienced by the soldiers on returning to Earthhere caused by the time dilation effectbecomes a clear metaphor for the reception given to US troops returning to America from Vietnam, including the way in which the war ultimately proves useless and its result meaningless. He also subverts typical space opera clichés (such as the heroic soldier influencing battles through individual acts) and &quot;demonstrates how absurd many of the old clichés look to someone who had seen real combat duty&quot;.

===Connection to &quot;Starship Troopers&quot;===
Haldeman has stated that &quot;The Forever War&quot; is a result of his experiences in the Vietnam War, although he has also said that he was influenced by Robert Heinlein&#x27;s &quot;Starship Troopers&quot;. Haldeman said that he disagreed with &quot;Starship Troopers&quot; because it &quot;glorifies war&quot; but added that &quot;it&#x27;s a very well-crafted novel and I believe Heinlein was honest with it&quot;. 

&quot;The Forever War&quot; contains several parallels to &quot;Starship Troopers&quot;, including its setting and the powered armor that Heinlein&#x27;s novel first popularized. Commentators have described it as a reaction to Heinlein&#x27;s novel, a suggestion Haldeman denies; the two novels are very different in terms of their attitude towards the military. &quot;The Forever War&quot; does not depict war as a noble pursuit, with the sides clearly defined as good and evil; instead, the novel explores the dehumanizing effect of war, influenced by the real-world context of the Vietnam War.

Heinlein wrote a letter to Haldeman, congratulating Haldeman on his Nebula Award; Haldeman has said that Heinlein&#x27;s letter &quot;meant more than the award itself&quot;. According to author Spider Robinson, Heinlein approached Haldeman at the awards banquet and said the book &quot;may be the best future war story I&#x27;ve ever read!&quot;

==Editions==
&quot;The Forever War&quot; was originally written as Haldeman&#x27;s MFA thesis for the Iowa Writer&#x27;s Workshop. It was first published as a serial in &quot;Analog Magazine&quot; before its first book publication in 1974. Since then, many editions of &quot;The Forever War&quot; have been published. Editions published prior to 1991 were abridged for space by the original editor (omitting the middle section, a novella titled &quot;You Can Never Go Back&quot;). These early paperback editions have &quot;a white cover showing a man in a spacesuit with a sword, with symbolic clocks all around,&quot; according to the author, with alternatively the first hardcover edition featuring a large hourglass with planets falling through it.

The 1991 edition restored many expurgated sections, primarily dealing with the changes that befall human civilization over the course of William Mandella&#x27;s life. This version&#x27;s cover &quot;has a futuristic soldier who looks like Robin Williams in a funny hat,&quot; as Haldeman notes, &quot;But alas, not all of the changes got in, and the book has some internal contradictions because of things left over from the [earlier version].&quot;

In 1997, Avon published the version that Haldeman called &quot;definitive&quot;, with &quot;everything restored&quot; and &quot;a less funny cover illustration.&quot; This version was republished twice, first in October 2001 as a hardback with a cover showing spaceships in battle over a planet, and again in September 2003, with the cover art depicting a device worn over the eye of a soldier.

In 1999, it was republished by Millennium, an imprint of the Orion Publishing Group, as part of the SF Masterworks series. It featured as the first novel re-printed in the series, and the cover shows a close-up of Marygay Potter with soldiers and spaceships in the background. This is the same version as the 1997 Avon publication and has the same Author&#x27;s Note.

In 1999, Haldeman, at the request of Robert Silverberg, wrote Marygay&#x27;s first-person account of her time of separation from Mandella. It included not only the military details but also the difficulty of coping as a lone heterosexual woman with a society where same-sex relations are the inflexible norm. The story was included in Silverberg&#x27;s anthology &quot;Far Horizons&quot; (1999), and later was the title story in the collection of Haldeman stories &quot;A Separate War and Other Stories&quot; (2006). In his &quot;Notes on the Stories&quot; for that collection, Haldeman commented that &quot;it was fun to write her story, both as a bridge to the sequel (&quot;Forever Free&quot;) and as an oblique commentary on &quot;The Forever War&quot;, twenty years later.&quot;

In 2006, an omnibus edition containing the books &quot;Forever War&quot;, &quot;Forever Free&quot;, and &quot;Forever Peace&quot; (under the title &quot;Peace and War&quot;) was published by Gollancz. The cover depicts a futuristic gun barrel stuck into the ground with a smashed spacesuit helmet placed on top. The author&#x27;s note at the start of the book describes the edition as containing the definitive versions.

The most recent print edition was released in 2009 () with an additional foreword by John Scalzi. The cover art depicts a soldier in a spacesuit in a jungle environment. Haldeman describes it as &quot;the definitive version&quot; in the author&#x27;s note preceding the text of the novel.

An ebook version was released in July 2011 by Ridan Publishing and also contained the foreword by Scalzi and introductions by Haldeman and Robin Sullivan (President of Ridan Publishing). The cover art depicts a soldier in a war-torn setting looking down at the helmet of a fallen comrade.

==Adaptations==

===Stage play===
Stuart Gordon adapted the novel for Chicago&#x27;s Organic Theater Company in 1983, in part as a reaction to what Gordon considered the &quot;ultra-sanitized video game&quot; style &quot;Star Wars&quot; brought to science fiction. The play starred Bruce A. Young as William Mandella.

===Game===
Mayfair Games published a board game based on the novel in 1983.

===Graphic novel===

Belgian comic writer Marvano has, in cooperation with Haldeman, created a graphic novel trilogy of &quot;The Forever War&quot;. With some very minor changes and omissions to storyline and setting, it faithfully adapts the same themes in visual style. The series was translated into various languages, and had a follow-up trilogy connected to &quot;Forever Free&quot;.

===Film===
In 1988, Richard Edlund (who won Visual Effects Oscars for &quot;Star Wars&quot;, &quot;Empire&quot;, &quot;Raiders&quot;, &quot;Jedi&quot;) began to option the rights to &quot;The Forever War&quot;. In October 1994, he bought the rights to the property. In 2008, he optioned the rights to Ridley Scott, who announced that, after a 25-year wait for the rights to become available, he was making a return to science fiction with a film adaptation of &quot;The Forever War&quot;. In March 2009, Scott stated that the film would be in 3D, citing James Cameron&#x27;s &quot;Avatar&quot; as an inspiration for doing so. In the summer of 2010, Scott revealed that &quot;State of Play&quot; writer Matthew Michael Carnahan was currently on the fourth draft of a screenplay originally written by David Peoples. As of May 2014, Haldeman stated he believed the project was on its seventh draft of the script. In May 2015, following the apparent expiration of a development agreement with 20th Century Fox and Scott Free, Warner Bros. won the rights to the novel and planned to develop the project with writer Jon Spaihts and with Channing Tatum in a starring role.

==References==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q904447" start="28" end="52" title="military science fiction" label="military science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q347461" start="78" end="90" title="Joe Haldeman" label="Joe Haldeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2661982" start="157" end="173" title="interstellar war" label="interstellar war"/>
<link wikidata="Q194285" start="237" end="249" title="Nebula Award" label="Nebula Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q188914" start="266" end="270" title="Hugo Award" label="Hugo"/>
<link wikidata="Q754655" start="275" end="280" title="Locus Award" label="Locus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3210024" start="303" end="315" title="Forever Free (novel)" label="Forever Free"/>
<link wikidata="Q9183865" start="339" end="352" title="Forever Peace" label="Forever Peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q7734811" start="606" end="628" title="The Forever War series" label="The Forever War series"/>
<link wikidata="Q785972" start="656" end="666" title="The Forever War (comics)" label="comic book"/>
<link wikidata="Q7390023" start="739" end="753" title="SF Masterworks" label="SF Masterworks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7734811" start="781" end="797" title="William Mandella" label="William Mandella"/>
<link wikidata="Q170277" start="1121" end="1123" title="IQ" label="IQ"/>
<link wikidata="Q339" start="1272" end="1277" title="Pluto" label="Pluto"/>
<link wikidata="Q6604" start="1315" end="1331" title="Charon (moon)" label="actual planetoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q531" start="1589" end="1599" title="light-year" label="light-year"/>
<link wikidata="Q2111" start="1685" end="1695" title="Speed of light" label="lightspeed"/>
<link wikidata="Q11455" start="1709" end="1721" title="Special Relativity" label="relativistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q13222" start="1797" end="1812" title="Epsilon Aurigae" label="Epsilon Aurigae"/>
<link wikidata="Q8609" start="1820" end="1842" title="Post-hypnotic suggestion" label="post-hypnotic training"/>
<link wikidata="Q185918" start="2046" end="2059" title="time dilation" label="time dilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q405" start="3025" end="3029" title="Moon" label="Luna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042001" start="3815" end="3825" title="Polynesians" label="Polynesian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4967741" start="4204" end="4216" title="Stasis (fiction)" label="stasis field"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="5592" end="5603" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q468478" start="5677" end="5688" title="space opera" label="space opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q122981" start="5814" end="5821" title="anagram" label="anagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="6738" end="6749" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q123078" start="6803" end="6818" title="Robert Heinlein" label="Robert Heinlein"/>
<link wikidata="Q492207" start="6832" end="6849" title="Starship Troopers" label="Starship Troopers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443070" start="7861" end="7876" title="Spider Robinson" label="Spider Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q662801" start="8116" end="8143" title="Iowa Writer&amp;#x27;s Workshop" label="Iowa Writer&amp;#x27;s Workshop"/>
<link wikidata="Q42345" start="8189" end="8204" title="Analog Magazine" label="Analog Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q83338" start="9006" end="9020" title="Robin Williams" label="Robin Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q2874472" start="9227" end="9231" title="Avon (publisher)" label="Avon"/>
<link wikidata="Q861799" start="9675" end="9697" title="Orion Publishing Group" label="Orion Publishing Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q7390023" start="9714" end="9728" title="SF Masterworks" label="SF Masterworks"/>
<link wikidata="Q314553" start="10020" end="10037" title="Robert Silverberg" label="Robert Silverberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5233794" start="10352" end="10364" title="Far Horizons" label="Far Horizons"/>
<link wikidata="Q3210024" start="10654" end="10678" title="Forever Free (novel)" label="&amp;quot;Forever Free&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2522363" start="10959" end="10967" title="Victor Gollancz Ltd" label="Gollancz"/>
<link wikidata="Q277308" start="11275" end="11286" title="John Scalzi" label="John Scalzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346651" start="11804" end="11817" title="Stuart Gordon" label="Stuart Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7101821" start="11855" end="11878" title="Organic Theater Company" label="Organic Theater Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q2183235" start="12052" end="12066" title="Bruce A. Young" label="Bruce A. Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q921302" start="12100" end="12113" title="Mayfair Games" label="Mayfair Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q65118295" start="12126" end="12136" title="The Forever War (board game)" label="board game"/>
<link wikidata="Q3082956" start="12208" end="12215" title="Marvano" label="Marvano"/>
<link wikidata="Q725377" start="12261" end="12274" title="graphic novel" label="graphic novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3210024" start="12535" end="12547" title="Forever Free (novel)" label="Forever Free"/>
<link wikidata="Q8586" start="12576" end="12590" title="Richard Edlund" label="Richard Edlund"/>
<link wikidata="Q17738" start="12632" end="12641" title="Star Wars (film)" label="Star Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q181795" start="12655" end="12661" title="The Empire Strikes Back" label="Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q174284" start="12675" end="12682" title="Raiders of the Lost Ark" label="Raiders"/>
<link wikidata="Q181803" start="12696" end="12700" title="Return of the Jedi" label="Jedi"/>
<link wikidata="Q56005" start="12857" end="12869" title="Ridley Scott" label="Ridley Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q42574" start="13110" end="13123" title="James Cameron" label="James Cameron"/>
<link wikidata="Q24871" start="13137" end="13143" title="Avatar (2009 film)" label="Avatar"/>
<link wikidata="Q733570" start="13231" end="13244" title="State of Play (film)" label="State of Play"/>
<link wikidata="Q18823" start="13258" end="13282" title="Matthew Michael Carnahan" label="Matthew Michael Carnahan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1177114" start="13355" end="13368" title="David Peoples" label="David Peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q434841" start="13545" end="13561" title="20th Century Fox" label="20th Century Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q3476213" start="13566" end="13576" title="Scott Free Productions" label="Scott Free"/>
<link wikidata="Q126399" start="13578" end="13590" title="Warner Bros." label="Warner Bros."/>
<link wikidata="Q6271612" start="13666" end="13677" title="Jon Spaihts" label="Jon Spaihts"/>
<link wikidata="Q212064" start="13687" end="13701" title="Channing Tatum" label="Channing Tatum"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="309084" wikidata="Q203977" url="?curid=309084" title="Maury Yeston">
<text>Maury Yeston (born October 23, 1945) is an American composer, lyricist and music theorist.

Yeston has written the music and lyrics for several Broadway musicals and is also a classical orchestral and ballet composer. Among his Broadway musicals are &quot;Nine&quot; in 1982, &quot;Titanic&quot; in 1997, for both of which he won Tony Awards for Best Musical and Best Score and was nominated for Grammy Awards, and &quot;Grand Hotel&quot; in 1989, for which he was nominated for a Tony Award for best score and two Drama Desk Awards for his music and lyrics. He composed, in addition, the incidental music for the Broadway production of &quot;The Royal Family&quot; in 2009. He received a third Grammy nomination for the revival of &quot;Nine&quot; in 2004, which won a Tony Award for Best revival of a musical. He also was nominated for an Academy Award and a Golden Globe for two of his new songs in the film version of &quot;Nine&quot; (&quot;Take It All&quot; and &quot;Cinema Italiano&quot;).

His musical version of the novel &quot;The Phantom of the Opera&quot;, titled &quot;Phantom&quot; (1991), has received more than 1,000 productions worldwide. His off-Broadway musicals include &quot;Death Takes a Holiday&quot; (2011), nominated for eleven Drama Desk Awards. His classical works include &quot;December Songs&quot;, a classical crossover song cycle commissioned by Carnegie Hall for its centennial celebration; &quot;An American Cantata: 2000 Voices&quot; (a three-movement classical choral symphony commissioned by the John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts for its millennium celebration); &quot;Tom Sawyer: A Ballet in Three Acts&quot;, a full-length story ballet commissioned by the Kansas City Ballet for the opening of the new Kauffman Center for the Performing Arts in Kansas City; a Cello Concerto, premiered by Yo-Yo Ma; and other pieces for chamber ensembles and solo piano.

Earlier in his career Yeston was Associate Professor of Music and Director of Undergraduate Studies in Music at Yale University for eight years, authoring two scholarly books on music theory published by Yale University Press (&quot;The Stratification of Musical Rhythm &quot; and &quot;Readings in Schenker Analysis&quot;), and subsequently presided over and taught the BMI Lehman Engel Musical Theater Workshop in New York City for more than two decades beginning in 1982. Yeston has won two Tony Awards, two Drama Desk Awards and an Olivier Award, and was inducted into The Theater Hall of Fame in 2023.

==Life and career==
===Early years===
Yeston was born in Jersey City, New Jersey. His father, David, was born in England and founded the Dial Import Corporation, an importing and exporting firm, which his mother, Frances Haar, helped to run. The family loved music; his mother was an accomplished pianist, and father sang English music hall songs at home. Yeston noted in a 1997 interview: &quot;My mother was trained in classical piano, and her father was a cantor in a synagogue. A lot of musical theatre writers have something in common. Irving Berlin, George Gershwin, Harold Arlen, Kurt Weill – each one had a cantor in the family. When you take a young, impressionable child and put him at age three in the middle of a synagogue, and that child sees a man in a costume, dramatically raised up on a kind of stage, singing his heart out at the top of his lungs to a rapt congregation, it makes a lasting impression.&quot; At age five, Yeston began taking piano lessons from his mother, and by age seven he had won an award for composition. He attended the Yeshiva of Hudson County through grade eight. Yeston&#x27;s interest in musical theatre began at age ten when his mother took him to see &quot;My Fair Lady&quot; on Broadway. At Jersey Academy, a small private high school in Jersey City, Yeston broadened his musical study beyond classical and religious music and Broadway show tunes to include jazz, folk, rock and roll, and early music. He took up folk guitar, played vibraphone with a jazz group, and participated in madrigal singing.

As an undergraduate at Yale University Yeston majored in music theory and composition, writing an atonal sonata for piano, incidental music for a production of Brecht’s &quot;Life of Galileo&quot;, and a cello concerto that won Yale&#x27;s &quot;Friends of Music Prize&quot;, and minored in philosophy and literature, particularly French, German, Italian and Japanese. Yeston noted, &quot;I am as much a lyricist as a composer, and the musical theatre is the only genre I know in which the lyrics are as important as the music.&quot; After graduating from Yale in 1967, Yeston attended Clare College, Cambridge University on a two-year Mellon Fellowship where he continued his studies in musicology and composition. There, he belonged to Cambridge Footlights Dramatic Club and wrote several classical pieces, including a set of atonal songs for soprano and a chamber piece (&quot;Trilogues&quot;) for three string quartets in addition to a musical version of &quot;Alice in Wonderland&quot;, eventually produced at the Long Wharf Theatre in Connecticut in 1971. At Cambridge, he focused his musical goals, moving from classical composition to theatre songwriting. Upon earning his master&#x27;s degree there, Yeston returned to the United States to accept a Woodrow Wilson Fellowship to teach for a year at Lincoln University in Pennsylvania, the country&#x27;s oldest traditionally black college. At Lincoln, Yeston taught music, art history, philosophy and Western Civilization, and founded Lincoln&#x27;s course in the history of African-American music.

He then pursued a musicology doctorate at Yale, teaching the same African-American music history course there that he had taught at Lincoln. While there, he enrolled in the BMI Lehman Engel Musical Theater Workshop, traveling to New York City each week, where he and other aspiring composer/lyricists, including Ed Kleban, Alan Menken, and Howard Ashman, were able to try out material for established Broadway producers and directors. He completed his Ph.D. at Yale in 1974, with his dissertation published as a book by Yale University Press: &quot;The Stratification of Musical Rhythm&quot; (1976), Soon afterwards, his cello concerto was premiered by Yo-Yo Ma and the Norwalk Symphony with Gilbert Levine conducting. He then joined the Yale Music Dept. faculty where he taught for eight years, ultimately becoming Yale&#x27;s Director of Undergraduate Studies in Music. He subsequently published another theory book with Yale University Press, &quot;Readings in Schenker Analysis and Other Approaches&quot; (editor, 1977), (both of his books are noted for their discussions of rhythmic structure and Schenkerian analysis) and was twice cited by the student body as one of Yale&#x27;s ten best professors.

===Musical theatre career===
;&quot;Nine&quot; and &quot;La Cage&quot;
While teaching at Yale, Yeston continued to attend the BMI workshop principally to work on his project, begun in 1973, to write a musical inspired by Federico Fellini&#x27;s 1963 film &quot;8½&quot;. As a teenager, Yeston had seen the film and became intrigued by its themes. Yeston told &quot;The New York Times&quot; in 1982:

: &quot;I looked at the screen and said &#x27;That&#x27;s me.&#x27; I still believed in all the dreams and ideals of what it was to be an artist, and here was a movie about... an artist in trouble. It became an obsession&quot;. Yeston called the musical &quot;Nine&quot; (the age of the director in his flashback), explaining that if you add music to 8½, &quot;it&#x27;s like half a number more.&quot;

In 1978, at the O&#x27;Neill Conference, Yeston and director Howard Ashman held a staged reading of &quot;Nine&quot;. Unbeknownst to him, Katharine Hepburn was in the audience, and after seeing it and liking it, she wrote to Fellini saying she had seen a wonderful show based on his movie. When Yeston went to ask permission to make the show a musical, Fellini told him he already received a letter from Hepburn and gave him permission. Mario Fratti had written the book, but the producers and director Tommy Tune decided his script did not work and brought in Arthur Kopit in 1981 to write a new book. The show originally had male and female parts, but Yeston was not satisfied with the men auditioning, except Raul Julia. They had liked a lot of the women who had auditioned, so Tune suggested casting them all. Yeston began work on choral arrangements for 24 women. Yeston decided that, instead of having the band play the overture, he would have all the women sing it. Once Liliane Montevecchi joined the cast, Yeston was so impressed with her voice that he wrote &quot;Folies Bergere&quot; just for her. He also expanded &quot;Call from the Vatican&quot; for Anita Morris once he discovered she could sing a high C.

In 1981, while collaborating on &quot;Nine&quot;, Tune asked Yeston to write incidental music for an American production of Caryl Churchill&#x27;s play &quot;Cloud Nine&quot;. Tune was also engaged to work on the musical &quot;La Cage aux Folles&quot;, based on the 1978 film of the same name, and the producer, Allan Carr, was seeking a composer. Yeston was engaged to write the music and lyrics, with a book by Jay Presson Allen. Their stage version of the film was to be called &quot;The Queen of Basin Street&quot;, set in New Orleans; it was hoped to be staged in 1981. Mike Nichols was set to direct and Tommy Tune to choreograph. Yeston took time off from Yale to work on the project and had already written several jazzy songs, but Carr was unable to put together the financing for the show, and the project was postponed. Carr searched for executive producers and found them in Fritz Holt and Barry Brown, who immediately fired the entire creative team that Carr had assembled, except for Yeston, who later withdrew from the project. These creatives, other than Yeston, eventually filed lawsuits, but only Yeston collected a royalty from &quot;La Cage&quot;.

Meanwhile, Yeston and Tune turned back to &quot;Nine&quot;, which opened on Broadway on May 9, 1982, at the 46th Street Theatre and ran for 729 performances. The cast included Raul Julia as Guido. The musical won five Tony Awards, including best musical, and Yeston won for best score. A London production and a successful Broadway revival of &quot;Nine&quot; followed in 2003, starring Antonio Banderas and winning the Tony Award for Best Revival of a Musical. In 2009, a film version of Nine, directed by Rob Marshall and starring Daniel Day-Lewis, Judi Dench, Sophia Loren and Marion Cotillard, was released. Yeston wrote three new songs for the film and was nominated for the 2009 Academy Award for Best Original Song for &quot;Take It All&quot; and the 2009 Golden Globe Award for Best Original Song, &quot;Cinema Italiano&quot;.

;&quot;Phantom&quot; and next projects
After the success of &quot;Nine&quot;, Yeston left his position as associate professor at Yale, although he continued to teach a course there every other semester alternating between songwriting and Schubert Lieder. He then turned to writing a musical version of Gaston Leroux&#x27;s novel, &quot;The Phantom of the Opera&quot;. He was approached with the idea by actor/director Geoffrey Holder, who held the American rights to the novel. Initially, Yeston was skeptical of the project. &quot;I laughed and laughed... That&#x27;s the worst idea in the world! Why would you want to write a musical based on a horror story?... And then it occurred to me that the story could be somewhat changed... [The Phantom] would be a Quasimodo character, an Elephant Man. Don&#x27;t all of us feel, despite outward imperfections, that deep inside we&#x27;re good? And that is a character you cry for.&quot;

Yeston had completed much of &quot;Phantom&quot; and was in the process of raising money for a Broadway production when Andrew Lloyd Webber announced plans for his own musical version of the story. After Lloyd Webber&#x27;s show became a smash hit in London in 1986, Yeston&#x27;s version could not get funding for a Broadway production. However, in 1991, it premiered at Houston&#x27;s Theatre Under the Stars and has since received over 1,000 productions around the world. The Houston production was recorded as an original cast album by RCA records. Yeston&#x27;s &quot;Phantom&quot; is more &quot;operetta&quot;-like in style than Lloyd Webber&#x27;s, seeking to reflect the 1890s period, and seeks to project a French atmosphere to reflect its Parisian setting.

Meanwhile, Yeston&#x27;s &quot;In the Beginning&quot;, a musical poking good-natured fun at the first five books of the Bible from the perspective of ordinary people living through the events described, had been workshopped at the Manhattan Theatre Club with an initial Book by Larry Gelbart under the title &quot;1-2-3-4-5&quot; in 1987 and 1988. After various revisions and tryouts, it was finally produced under its current title at Maine State Music Theatre in 1998 and has been revived regionally since then. Yeston showed Alan Jay Lerner a song from &quot;In the Beginning&quot;, &quot;New Words&quot;, and &quot;Lerner thought the song was so wonderful he invited me to stop by his office every couple of weeks so he could give me pointers. He said Oscar Hammerstein had done that for him and he wanted to do that for me. So, I really got coaching lessons – mentoring – in a series of meetings with Alan Jay Lerner as a result of having written that song.&quot; Plácido Domingo wanted to star in a musical about Spanish painter Francisco de Goya and suggested to producer Allan Carr that Yeston would be the right person to create the vehicle, since Domingo admired &quot;Nine&quot;. Yeston wrote the piece, &quot;&quot;. Because of Domingo&#x27;s time commitments, the musical was made into a concept album and was recorded in 1988. The album was produced by Phil Ramone and included the song &quot;Till I Loved You&quot; (a 1988 cover by Barbra Streisand and Don Johnson reached number 25 on the Billboard Hot 100.). Domingo also recorded a single of the song with Gloria Estefan titled &quot;Hasta amarte&quot; (used in the Spanish-language version of the album, &quot;Goya Una Vida Hecha Cancion&quot;), which peaked at number 8 on &quot;Billboard&#x27;s&quot; Hot Latin Songs chart. Domingo sang the role of Goya, with Jennifer Rush, Gloria Estefan, Dionne Warwick, Richie Havens, and Seiko Matsuda in other roles.

;&quot;Grand Hotel&quot; and &quot;December Songs&quot;
Also in 1989, Tommy Tune, who had directed &quot;Nine&quot;, asked Yeston to improve the score of &quot;Grand Hotel&quot;, a musical that was doing badly in tryouts. The show was based on the 1932 film of the same name and on an unsuccessful 1958 musical &quot;At the Grand&quot;, with a score by Robert Wright and George Forrest. Yeston wrote eight new songs for &quot;Grand Hotel&quot; and revised much of the existing 1958 lyrics. After &quot;Grand Hotel&quot; opened on Broadway in November 1989, Yeston, along with Wright and Forrest, was nominated for the Tony Award and two Drama Desk Awards for best score. The show ran for 1,077 performances.

After this, Yeston wrote &quot;December Songs&quot; (1991), a song cycle inspired by Franz Schubert&#x27;s &quot;Winterreise&quot;. &quot;December Songs&quot; was written as a commissioned piece for the 1991 centennial celebration of New York&#x27;s Carnegie Hall, where it was premiered by cabaret singer Andrea Marcovicci. The work crosses over the lines from classical music to Broadway to cabaret and has been recorded in German (&quot;Dezemberlieder&quot;) by Pia Douwes, French (&quot;Décembre&quot;) by Isabelle Georges, Polish (Opowieści Zimowe, Edyta Krzemien), and six times in English, including as &quot;December Songs for Voice and Orchestra&quot; (2022), featuring orchestration by Larry Hochman with Victoria Clark as soloist.

;&quot;Titanic&quot;
The discovery of the wreckage of the R.M.S. &quot;Titanic&quot; in 1985 attracted Yeston&#x27;s interest in writing a musical about the famous disaster. &quot;What drew me to the project was the positive aspects of what the ship represented – 1) humankind&#x27;s striving after great artistic works and similar technological feats, despite the possibility of tragic failure, and 2) the dreams of the passengers on board: 3rd Class, to immigrate to America for a better life; 2nd Class, to live a leisured lifestyle in imitation of the upper classes; 1st Class, to maintain their privileged positions forever. The collision with the iceberg dashed all of these dreams simultaneously, and the subsequent transformation of character of the passengers and crew had, it seemed to me, the potential for great emotional and musical expression onstage.&quot; Librettist Peter Stone and Yeston knew that the idea was an unusual subject for a musical. &quot;I think if you don&#x27;t have that kind of daring damn-the-torpedoes, you shouldn&#x27;t be in this business. It&#x27;s the safe-sounding shows that often don&#x27;t do well. You have to dare greatly, and I really want to stretch the bounds of the kind of expression in musical theater,&quot; Yeston explained. Yeston saw the story as unique to turn-of-the-century British culture, with its rigid social class system and its romanticization of progress through technology. &quot;In order to depict that on the stage, because this is really a very English show, I knew I would have to have a color similar to the one found in the music of the great composers at that time, like Elgar or Vaughan Williams; this was for me an opportunity to bring in the musical theater an element of the symphonic tradition that I think we really haven&#x27;t had before. That was very exciting.&quot;

The high cost of the &quot;Titanic&quot; musical set made it impossible for the show to have traditional out-of-town tryouts. &quot;Titanic&quot; opened at Broadway&#x27;s Lunt-Fontanne Theatre in 1997 to mixed reviews. &quot;The New Yorker&quot; offered a positive assessment: : &quot;It seemed a foregone conclusion that the show would be a failure; a musical about history&#x27;s most tragic maiden voyage, in which fifteen hundred people lost their lives, was obviously preposterous... Astonishingly, &quot;Titanic&quot; manages to be grave and entertaining, somber and joyful; little by little you realize that you are in the presence of a genuine addition to American musical theatre.&quot; The show won Tony Awards in the five categories in which it was nominated, including Best Score and Best Musical and ran for 804 performances and 26 previews, toured America for three years, and has had international productions, including in the UK, Japan, Korea, China, Australia, Germany, Holland, Belgium, Hungary, and has toured across America.

;&quot;An American Cantata: 2000 Voices&quot;, &quot;Death Takes a Holiday&quot;, &quot;Tom Sawyer A Ballet in Three Acts&quot;, and later works
In 1999 Yeston was commissioned by the Kennedy Center to write and orchestrate a three-movement orchestral work for the millennium celebration, &quot;An American Cantata: 2000 Voices&quot;, which was performed by the National Symphony Orchestra under the baton of Leonard Slatkin at the Lincoln Memorial in July 2000, with a chorus of 2000 voices and tenor soloist Norm Lewis. Yeston used &quot;2000 Voices&quot; as a celebration of the year the piece was created ... chosen from 108 local ensembles.&quot; The piece was praised by the &quot;Washington Post&quot;, comparing its score to Copland and Randall Thompson and singling out in particular the second movement, which has a text from Martin Luther King Jr.&#x27;s Memphis speech he gave the day before his death, &quot;I have been to the mountaintop and I have seen the promised land.&quot;&quot; Orchestrated by Yeston, the piece celebrates the evolution of the idea of individual liberty and equality, along with our inherent and universal entitlement to it, as our civilization&#x27;s greatest intellectual achievement of the past 1,000 years. Sung by a mixed chorus, children&#x27;s choir, and gospel choir, texts include excerpts from the Magna Carta, and the writings of Thomas Jefferson, in addition to the Memphis Speech, and lyrics by the composer.

After composing the incidental music for Broadway&#x27;s 2009 revival of &quot;The Royal Family&quot;, Yeston wrote the music and lyrics to &quot;Death Takes a Holiday&quot;, a musical version of the play &quot;La Morte in Vacanza&quot; by Alberto Casella (later a film called &quot;Death Takes a Holiday&quot;), with a book by Peter Stone and Thomas Meehan&quot;.&quot; It played in the summer of 2011 Off-Broadway at the Laura Pels Theatre. The musical was nominated in eleven categories for the 2011–12 Drama Desk Awards, including Best Musical, Music and Lyrics. It was also nominated for an Outer Critics Circle Award for Outstanding Musical and Score, and cited as one of Time Magazine&#x27;s top ten plays and musicals of the 2011 season. An off West End production played in 2017 at London&#x27;s Charing Cross Theatre.

In 2011, Yeston&#x27;s ballet &quot;Tom Sawyer: A Ballet in Three Acts&quot; premiered at the Kauffman Center for the Performing Arts in Kansas City, Missouri, with the Kansas City Ballet. Alastair Macaulay&#x27;s review in &quot;The New York Times&quot; observed: 

: &quot;It&#x27;s quite likely that this is the first all-new, entirely American three-act ballet: it is based on an American literary classic, has an original score by an American composer and was given its premiere by an American choreographer and company. ... Both the score and the choreography are energetic, robust, warm, deliberately naïve (both ornery and innocent), in ways right for Twain.&quot;

In 2019 &quot;Anything Can Happen In the Theater – The Musical World of Maury Yeston&quot;, a revue, with Yeston&#x27;s songs, was created and directed by Gerard Alessandrini, at the York Theatre in Manhattan. In October 2020 on the PS Classics Label, Yeston released &quot;Maury Sings Yeston: The Demos&quot;, a compendium of his own vocal recordings of forty of his classic Demos.

;Assessment
According to &quot;Show Music&quot; magazine, Yeston &quot;has written some of the most formally structured music in recent musical theatre. But he also has the gift for creating ravishing melody – once you&#x27;ve heard &#x27;Love Can&#x27;t Happen&#x27; from &quot;Grand Hotel&quot;, or &#x27;Unusual Way&#x27; from &quot;Nine&quot;, or &#x27;Home&#x27; from &quot;Phantom&quot;, or any number of other Yeston songs, you&#x27;ll be hooked.&quot; Broadway World praised &quot;The genius of Yeston&#x27;s songs – intricate yet emotional, cerebral yet romantic, clever yet unendingly melodic [and] his immense breadth of style – from the hilarious to the deeply moving.&quot;

===Family===
Yeston is married to Julianne Waldhelm.

== Work ==
;Broadway
*&quot;Nine&quot; (1982; revived 2003)
*&quot;Grand Hotel&quot; (1989)
*&quot;Titanic&quot; (1997)
*&quot;The Royal Family&quot; (2009)

;Off-Broadway
*&quot;Cloud Nine&quot;, (1981, incidental music for the Caryl Churchill work. Theatre de Lys in NYC and production in Chicago)
*&quot;In the Beginning&quot; (1987; workshopped as &quot;1-2-3-4-5&quot; at Manhattan Theatre Club) Book by Larry Gelbart
*&quot;Death Takes a Holiday&quot; (2011)
* &quot;Anything Can Happen In The Theatre&quot; (2020) Revue at York Theatre

;Film
*&quot;Nine&quot; (2009), 

;Ballet
*&quot;Tom Sawyer: A Ballet in Three Acts&quot;, commissioned by Kansas City Ballet (2011)

;Other works
*&quot;&quot; (1989; one of Barbra Streisand&#x27;s pop hits, &quot;Till I Loved You&quot; is from the show)
*&quot;Phantom&quot;, with a Book by Arthur Kopit (1991) Productions worldwide.
*&quot;December Songs&quot;, a song cycle commissioned by Carnegie Hall for their Centennial celebration (1991).
*&quot;An American Cantata&quot; (2000), for orchestra and 2000 voices, commissioned by The Kennedy Center, a choral symphony in three movements, which premiered on the steps of the Lincoln Memorial by the National Symphony Orchestra, conducted by Leonard Slatkin
*&quot;The Peony Pavilion&quot;, a musical adaption of The Peony Pavilion, 2012, commissioned by the People&#x27;s Republic of China, only workshopped

;Concert
*&quot;Concerto for Cello and Orchestra&quot;, premiered by Yo-Yo Ma, Gilbert Levine conductor.
*&quot;December Songs&quot; – for voice and orchestra (2022)
*&quot;Sonata for Piano&quot;
*&quot;Aube&quot;, (Arthur Rimbaud) for soprano and chamber orchestra
*&quot;Five Ecstatic Songs&quot; – for soprano and piano
*&quot;Trilogues for Three String Quartets&quot;
*&quot;Song for Violin and Piano&quot;
*&quot;My Grandmother&#x27;s Love Letters&quot; (Hart Crane), for voice and piano

;Publications
*&quot;The Stratification of Musical Rhythm&quot; (1975 Yale University Press)
*&quot;Readings in Schenker Analysis and Other Approaches&quot; (1977 Yale University Press)
*&quot;Rubato and the Middleground&quot;, Journal of Music Theory. Vol. 19. No. 2. (Autumn, 1975). pp. 286-301

==Awards and recognition==
* Tony Award for Best Original Score (1982) (&quot;Nine&quot;)
* Drama Desk Award for Outstanding Music (1982) (&quot;Nine&quot;)
* Drama Desk Award for Outstanding Lyrics (1982) (&quot;Nine&quot;)
* Nominee for Tony Award for Best Original Score in 1990 (&quot;Grand Hotel&quot;)
* Nominee for the Drama Desk Award for Outstanding Music in 1990 (&quot;Grand Hotel&quot;)
* Nominee for the Drama Desk Award for Outstanding Lyrics in 1990 (&quot;Grand Hotel&quot;)
* Tony Award for Best Original Score (1997) (&quot;Titanic&quot;)
* Nominee for Grammy Award for Best Musical Show Album, 1983 (&quot;Nine&quot;)
* Nominee for Grammy Award for Best Musical Show Album, 1998 (&quot;Titanic&quot;)
* Nominee for Grammy Award for Best Musical Show Album, 2004 (&quot;Nine&quot;)
* Laurence Olivier Award 2005 (&quot;Grand Hotel&quot;)
* Nominee for Academy Award for Best Original Song – &quot;Take It All&quot; in 2010 (&quot;Nine&quot;)
* Nominee for Golden Globe Award for Best Original Song – &quot;Cinema Italiano&quot; in 2010 (&quot;Nine&quot;)
* Nominee for Broadcast Film Critics Association Award for Best Original Song (&quot;Cinema Italiano&quot;)
* Nominee for Satellite Award for Best Original Song (&quot;Cinema Italiano&quot;)
* Nominee for the Drama Desk Award for Outstanding Music in 2012 (&quot;Death Takes a Holiday&quot;)
* Nominee for the Drama Desk Award for Outstanding Lyrics in 2012 (&quot;Death Takes a Holiday&quot;)
* ACE Award – Association of Latin Entertainment Critics Argentine award – Mejor Musical for &quot;Nueve&quot;
* Yale Friends of Music Prize (cello concerto)
* Honorary Doctorate in Music, DMA Five Towns College 2004
* Elaine Kaufman Cultural Center Creative Arts Award, 1998
* Kayden Visiting Artist, Harvard University
* Emerson College Leonidas A. Nicklole Artist of Distinction Award, 2017
* Sheldon Harnick Award for Creative Excellence, 2020
* American Theater Hall of Fame, 2023

Yeston served on the board of the Songwriters Hall of Fame, the Dramatists’ Guild Council, the Kurt Weill Foundation Publication Project and the editorial board of &quot;Musical Quarterly&quot;; he is a past president of the Kleban Foundation, an advisor to the Yale University Press Broadway Series. He is an honorary ambassador of the Society of Composers &amp; Lyricists, and a founding member of the Society for Music Theory.

==Discography==
*&quot;Nine&quot;: original Broadway cast (1982; Grammy Award nomination), &quot;Nine&quot; 2003 Broadway revival cast (2004; Grammy Award nomination) London Festival Hall Concert and others in French, German, Dutch, Japanese, Swedish and Polish
*&quot;The Film version of Nine&quot;, (Soundtrack recording): &quot;Daniel Day-Lewis, Marion Cotillard, Penélope Cruz, Judi Dench, Fergie, Kate Hudson, Nicole Kidman, Sophia Loren&quot;
*&quot;&quot;, Placido Domingo, Gloria Estefan. Dionne Warwick, Richie Havens, (original studio cast, 1989)
*&quot;December Songs&quot; (English) Andrea Marcovicci, Harolyn Blackwell, Laura Osnes, Victoria Clark (with orchestra), (German) Pia Douwes, (Polish) Edyta Krzemień, (French) Isabelle Georges
*&quot;Grand Hotel&quot; (original Broadway cast, 1992)
*&quot;Phantom&quot; (original cast recording, 1993)
*&quot;Titanic&quot; (original Broadway cast (1997; Grammy Award nomination), original Dutch cast, original German Hamburg cast)
*&quot;The Maury Yeston Songbook&quot; (2003; a compilation of 20 songs recorded by Betty Buckley, Christine Ebersole, Laura Benanti, Sutton Foster, Alice Ripley, Johnny Rodgers and others)
*&quot;Death Takes a Holiday&quot; (original off-Broadway cast recording, 2011)
*&quot;Tom Sawyer: A Ballet in Three Acts&quot; (San Francisco Ballet Orchestra 2011), recorded at Skywalker Sound, 2013
*Laura Osnes – &quot;If I Tell You: The Songs of Maury Yeston&quot; (2013, Laura Osnes, singer)
*&quot;Anything Can Happen In The Theatre-The Musical World of Maury Yeston&quot; (original off-Broadway cast recording, 2020)
*&quot;Maury Sings Yeston - The Demos&quot; (a compendium of 40 of Yeston&#x27;s classic Demos, sung and accompanied on piano by Yeston, recorded over a period of 40 years) 2020
*&quot;Christmas in the Stars: Star Wars Christmas Album&quot; (1980)
*&quot;December Songs&quot; for Voice and Orchestra, featuring Victoria Clark as soloist (2022)

==Notes==
==References==
*Laurents, Arthur. &quot;Mainly on Directing: Gypsy, West Side Story, and Other Musicals&quot;, New York: Knopf (2009). 

==Further reading==
*&quot;New York Times&quot;, May 9, 1982, sect.2, pp. 1, 24; May 10, 1982, p. C13; May 23, 1982; pp. D3, 23; May 23, 1997, sect. 2, p. 6; April 24, 1997, p. C13; June 1, 1997, sect. 2, p. 1; June 2, 1997, p. B1, July 20, 1997, sect. 2, p. 5.
*Newsweek, May 5, 1997, p. 70-73.
*&quot;Rubato and The Middleground&quot;

==External links==
*Official website
* Maury Yeston at the Internet Off-Broadway Database
*2008 interview with Yeston at BroadwayWorld.com
*Information about Yeston&#x27;s recordings
*2003 review of &quot;The Maury Yeston Songbook&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q203977" start="0" end="12" title="Maury Yeston" label="Maury Yeston"/>
<link wikidata="Q193544" start="75" end="89" title="music theorist" label="music theorist"/>
<link wikidata="Q235065" start="144" end="152" title="Broadway theatre" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2743" start="153" end="161" title="musical theatre" label="musicals"/>
<link wikidata="Q2278286" start="256" end="260" title="Nine (musical)" label="Nine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416989" start="282" end="289" title="Titanic (musical)" label="Titanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q191874" start="330" end="341" title="Tony Awards" label="Tony Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="396" end="409" title="Grammy Awards" label="Grammy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500235" start="421" end="432" title="Grand Hotel (musical)" label="Grand Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q682154" start="515" end="532" title="Drama Desk Awards" label="Drama Desk Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q7761683" start="643" end="659" title="The Royal Family (play)" label="The Royal Family"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="841" end="854" title="Academy Award" label="Academy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011547" start="861" end="873" title="Golden Globe" label="Golden Globe"/>
<link wikidata="Q752989" start="902" end="938" title="Nine (2009 live-action film)" label="the film version of &amp;quot;Nine&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q17151322" start="946" end="957" title="Take It All (song)" label="Take It All"/>
<link wikidata="Q17150042" start="974" end="989" title="Cinema Italiano" label="Cinema Italiano"/>
<link wikidata="Q272506" start="1038" end="1062" title="The Phantom of the Opera (novel)" label="The Phantom of the Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q2291188" start="1083" end="1090" title="Phantom (musical)" label="Phantom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058828" start="1161" end="1173" title="off-Broadway" label="off-Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5247220" start="1197" end="1218" title="Death Takes a Holiday (musical)" label="Death Takes a Holiday"/>
<link wikidata="Q5249060" start="1307" end="1321" title="December Songs" label="December Songs"/>
<link wikidata="Q504635" start="1331" end="1350" title="classical crossover" label="classical crossover"/>
<link wikidata="Q893466" start="1351" end="1361" title="song cycle" label="song cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q200959" start="1378" end="1391" title="Carnegie Hall" label="Carnegie Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142754" start="1497" end="1512" title="choral symphony" label="choral symphony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631981" start="1533" end="1579" title="John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts" label="John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1619" end="1653" title="Tom Sawyer: A Ballet in Three Acts" label="Tom Sawyer: A Ballet in Three Acts"/>
<link wikidata="Q16965398" start="1708" end="1726" title="Kansas City Ballet" label="Kansas City Ballet"/>
<link wikidata="Q6378664" start="1754" end="1793" title="Kauffman Center for the Performing Arts" label="Kauffman Center for the Performing Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q41819" start="1797" end="1808" title="Kansas City, Missouri" label="Kansas City"/>
<link wikidata="Q234891" start="1841" end="1849" title="Yo-Yo Ma" label="Yo-Yo Ma"/>
<link wikidata="Q189201" start="1872" end="1879" title="chamber music" label="chamber"/>
<link wikidata="Q49112" start="2019" end="2034" title="Yale University" label="Yale University"/>
<link wikidata="Q193544" start="2085" end="2097" title="music theory" label="music theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q255147" start="2111" end="2132" title="Yale University Press" label="Yale University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q4835969" start="2278" end="2319" title="BMI Lehman Engel Musical Theater Workshop" label="BMI Lehman Engel Musical Theater Workshop"/>
<link wikidata="Q28470" start="2443" end="2456" title="Olivier Award" label="Olivier Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q467050" start="2484" end="2504" title="Theater Hall of Fame" label="Theater Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q26339" start="2572" end="2595" title="Jersey City, New Jersey" label="Jersey City, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q940462" start="2845" end="2855" title="music hall" label="music hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q34627" start="2986" end="2995" title="synagogue" label="synagogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q128746" start="3056" end="3069" title="Irving Berlin" label="Irving Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q123829" start="3071" end="3086" title="George Gershwin" label="George Gershwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q448644" start="3088" end="3100" title="Harold Arlen" label="Harold Arlen"/>
<link wikidata="Q55004" start="3102" end="3112" title="Kurt Weill" label="Kurt Weill"/>
<link wikidata="Q154773" start="3575" end="3582" title="Yeshiva" label="Yeshiva"/>
<link wikidata="Q490505" start="3586" end="3599" title="Hudson County, New Jersey" label="Hudson County"/>
<link wikidata="Q2743" start="3647" end="3662" title="musical theatre" label="musical theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q591943" start="3718" end="3730" title="My Fair Lady" label="My Fair Lady"/>
<link wikidata="Q235065" start="3740" end="3748" title="Broadway theatre" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q436016" start="3951" end="3962" title="early music" label="early music"/>
<link wikidata="Q2563510" start="3975" end="3986" title="folk guitar" label="folk guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q206987" start="3995" end="4005" title="vibraphone" label="vibraphone"/>
<link wikidata="Q193217" start="4045" end="4053" title="madrigal (music)" label="madrigal"/>
<link wikidata="Q49112" start="4087" end="4102" title="Yale University" label="Yale University"/>
<link wikidata="Q193544" start="4121" end="4133" title="music theory" label="music theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147752" start="4187" end="4203" title="incidental music" label="incidental music"/>
<link wikidata="Q38757" start="4224" end="4230" title="Brecht" label="Brecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q760967" start="4650" end="4663" title="Clare College" label="Clare College"/>
<link wikidata="Q35794" start="4665" end="4685" title="Cambridge University" label="Cambridge University"/>
<link wikidata="Q4758812" start="4700" end="4717" title="Mellon Fellowship" label="Mellon Fellowship"/>
<link wikidata="Q857679" start="4802" end="4822" title="Cambridge Footlights" label="Cambridge Footlights"/>
<link wikidata="Q92640" start="5029" end="5048" title="Alice in Wonderland" label="Alice in Wonderland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6673405" start="5083" end="5101" title="Long Wharf Theatre" label="Long Wharf Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q779" start="5105" end="5116" title="Connecticut" label="Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q8033214" start="5322" end="5347" title="Woodrow Wilson Fellowship" label="Woodrow Wilson Fellowship"/>
<link wikidata="Q4570781" start="5371" end="5389" title="Lincoln University (Pennsylvania)" label="Lincoln University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400" start="5393" end="5405" title="Pennsylvania" label="Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q388207" start="5597" end="5619" title="African-American music" label="African-American music"/>
<link wikidata="Q4835969" start="5795" end="5836" title="BMI Lehman Engel Musical Theater Workshop" label="BMI Lehman Engel Musical Theater Workshop"/>
<link wikidata="Q5343953" start="5934" end="5943" title="Ed Kleban" label="Ed Kleban"/>
<link wikidata="Q317272" start="5945" end="5956" title="Alan Menken" label="Alan Menken"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334295" start="5962" end="5975" title="Howard Ashman" label="Howard Ashman"/>
<link wikidata="Q255147" start="6142" end="6163" title="Yale University Press" label="Yale University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q234891" start="6275" end="6283" title="Yo-Yo Ma" label="Yo-Yo Ma"/>
<link wikidata="Q5561072" start="6314" end="6328" title="Gilbert Levine" label="Gilbert Levine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460859" start="6724" end="6744" title="Schenkerian analysis" label="Schenkerian analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7371" start="7051" end="7067" title="Federico Fellini" label="Federico Fellini"/>
<link wikidata="Q12018" start="7091" end="7093" title="8½" label="8½"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="7195" end="7213" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q2278286" start="7490" end="7494" title="Nine (musical)" label="Nine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334295" start="7694" end="7707" title="Howard Ashman" label="Howard Ashman"/>
<link wikidata="Q56016" start="7771" end="7788" title="Katharine Hepburn" label="Katharine Hepburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2680537" start="8070" end="8082" title="Mario Fratti" label="Mario Fratti"/>
<link wikidata="Q7819952" start="8136" end="8146" title="Tommy Tune" label="Tommy Tune"/>
<link wikidata="Q770566" start="8194" end="8206" title="Arthur Kopit" label="Arthur Kopit"/>
<link wikidata="Q317654" start="8345" end="8355" title="Raul Julia" label="Raul Julia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3240839" start="8611" end="8630" title="Liliane Montevecchi" label="Liliane Montevecchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q526716" start="8797" end="8809" title="Anita Morris" label="Anita Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q843813" start="8846" end="8852" title="high C" label="high C"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147752" start="8932" end="8948" title="incidental music" label="incidental music"/>
<link wikidata="Q463574" start="8979" end="8994" title="Caryl Churchill" label="Caryl Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q5135674" start="9013" end="9023" title="Cloud Nine (play)" label="Cloud Nine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035179" start="9082" end="9100" title="La Cage aux Folles (musical)" label="La Cage aux Folles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2837687" start="9167" end="9177" title="Allan Carr" label="Allan Carr"/>
<link wikidata="Q3163251" start="9268" end="9285" title="Jay Presson Allen" label="Jay Presson Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q34404" start="9382" end="9393" title="New Orleans" label="New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q51537" start="9430" end="9442" title="Mike Nichols" label="Mike Nichols"/>
<link wikidata="Q7819952" start="9465" end="9475" title="Tommy Tune" label="Tommy Tune"/>
<link wikidata="Q5504931" start="9742" end="9752" title="Fritz Holt" label="Fritz Holt"/>
<link wikidata="Q235065" start="10100" end="10108" title="Broadway theatre" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7328714" start="10132" end="10151" title="Richard Rodgers Theatre" label="46th Street Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q317654" start="10200" end="10210" title="Raul Julia" label="Raul Julia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2278286" start="10373" end="10377" title="Nine (musical)" label="Nine"/>
<link wikidata="Q41548" start="10411" end="10427" title="Antonio Banderas" label="Antonio Banderas"/>
<link wikidata="Q752989" start="10495" end="10517" title="Nine (2009 live-action film)" label="a film version of Nine"/>
<link wikidata="Q353501" start="10531" end="10543" title="Rob Marshall" label="Rob Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q166389" start="10557" end="10573" title="Daniel Day-Lewis" label="Daniel Day-Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q28054" start="10575" end="10585" title="Judi Dench" label="Judi Dench"/>
<link wikidata="Q43252" start="10587" end="10599" title="Sophia Loren" label="Sophia Loren"/>
<link wikidata="Q8927" start="10604" end="10620" title="Marion Cotillard" label="Marion Cotillard"/>
<link wikidata="Q112243" start="10709" end="10745" title="Academy Award for Best Original Song" label="Academy Award for Best Original Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q17151322" start="10756" end="10767" title="Take It All (song)" label="Take It All"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472235" start="10787" end="10828" title="Golden Globe Award for Best Original Song" label="Golden Globe Award for Best Original Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q17150042" start="10836" end="10851" title="Cinema Italiano" label="Cinema Italiano"/>
<link wikidata="Q298827" start="11162" end="11175" title="Gaston Leroux" label="Gaston Leroux"/>
<link wikidata="Q272506" start="11196" end="11220" title="The Phantom of the Opera (novel)" label="The Phantom of the Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q945691" start="11278" end="11293" title="Geoffrey Holder" label="Geoffrey Holder"/>
<link wikidata="Q2291188" start="11829" end="11836" title="Phantom (musical)" label="Phantom"/>
<link wikidata="Q180975" start="11914" end="11933" title="Andrew Lloyd Webber" label="Andrew Lloyd Webber"/>
<link wikidata="Q382353" start="11954" end="11990" title="The Phantom of the Opera (1986 musical)" label="his own musical version of the story"/>
<link wikidata="Q7777456" start="12181" end="12204" title="Theatre Under The Stars (Houston)" label="Theatre Under the Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q5049564" start="12311" end="12330" title="original cast album" label="original cast album"/>
<link wikidata="Q202585" start="12334" end="12345" title="RCA records" label="RCA records"/>
<link wikidata="Q6749316" start="12793" end="12815" title="Manhattan Theatre Club" label="Manhattan Theatre Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806065" start="12840" end="12853" title="Larry Gelbart" label="Larry Gelbart"/>
<link wikidata="Q6736480" start="12998" end="13023" title="Maine State Music Theatre" label="Maine State Music Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q961893" start="13090" end="13105" title="Alan Jay Lerner" label="Alan Jay Lerner"/>
<link wikidata="Q319693" start="13318" end="13335" title="Oscar Hammerstein II" label="Oscar Hammerstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q130853" start="13531" end="13546" title="Plácido Domingo" label="Plácido Domingo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5432" start="13597" end="13614" title="Francisco de Goya" label="Francisco de Goya"/>
<link wikidata="Q207393" start="13863" end="13876" title="concept album" label="concept album"/>
<link wikidata="Q204323" start="13929" end="13940" title="Phil Ramone" label="Phil Ramone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7802193" start="13969" end="13985" title="Till I Loved You (song)" label="Till I Loved You"/>
<link wikidata="Q4636" start="14009" end="14025" title="Barbra Streisand" label="Barbra Streisand"/>
<link wikidata="Q309788" start="14030" end="14041" title="Don Johnson" label="Don Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q180072" start="14067" end="14084" title="Billboard Hot 100" label="Billboard Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q184697" start="14136" end="14150" title="Gloria Estefan" label="Gloria Estefan"/>
<link wikidata="Q238133" start="14393" end="14406" title="Jennifer Rush" label="Jennifer Rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q184697" start="14408" end="14422" title="Gloria Estefan" label="Gloria Estefan"/>
<link wikidata="Q234695" start="14424" end="14438" title="Dionne Warwick" label="Dionne Warwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q505285" start="14440" end="14453" title="Richie Havens" label="Richie Havens"/>
<link wikidata="Q284007" start="14459" end="14472" title="Seiko Matsuda" label="Seiko Matsuda"/>
<link wikidata="Q7819952" start="14560" end="14570" title="Tommy Tune" label="Tommy Tune"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500235" start="14650" end="14661" title="Grand Hotel (musical)" label="Grand Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q246656" start="14738" end="14764" title="Grand Hotel (1932 film)" label="1932 film of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q888339" start="14843" end="14856" title="Robert Wright (writer)" label="Robert Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070832" start="14861" end="14875" title="George Forrest (author)" label="George Forrest"/>
<link wikidata="Q5249060" start="15230" end="15244" title="December Songs" label="December Songs"/>
<link wikidata="Q893466" start="15261" end="15271" title="song cycle" label="song cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7312" start="15284" end="15298" title="Franz Schubert" label="Franz Schubert"/>
<link wikidata="Q611529" start="15312" end="15323" title="Winterreise" label="Winterreise"/>
<link wikidata="Q200959" start="15449" end="15462" title="Carnegie Hall" label="Carnegie Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2846370" start="15505" end="15522" title="Andrea Marcovicci" label="Andrea Marcovicci"/>
<link wikidata="Q447220" start="15664" end="15674" title="Pia Douwes" label="Pia Douwes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5346980" start="15753" end="15767" title="Edyta Krzemien" label="Edyta Krzemien"/>
<link wikidata="Q6490509" start="15895" end="15908" title="Larry Hochman" label="Larry Hochman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7926640" start="15914" end="15928" title="Victoria Clark" label="Victoria Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q25173" start="16000" end="16026" title="Titanic" label="R.M.S. &amp;quot;Titanic&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1718449" start="16825" end="16836" title="Peter Stone (writer)" label="Peter Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q179631" start="17589" end="17594" title="Edward Elgar" label="Elgar"/>
<link wikidata="Q207947" start="17598" end="17614" title="Vaughan Williams" label="Vaughan Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416989" start="17817" end="17844" title="Titanic (musical)" label="&amp;quot;Titanic&amp;quot; musical"/>
<link wikidata="Q7634840" start="17968" end="17989" title="Lunt-Fontanne Theatre" label="Lunt-Fontanne Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q217305" start="18022" end="18036" title="The New Yorker" label="The New Yorker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631981" start="19028" end="19042" title="Kennedy Center" label="Kennedy Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q2744749" start="19206" end="19233" title="National Symphony Orchestra" label="National Symphony Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q509870" start="19253" end="19268" title="Leonard Slatkin" label="Leonard Slatkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q213559" start="19276" end="19292" title="Lincoln Memorial" label="Lincoln Memorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q7051523" start="19354" end="19364" title="Norm Lewis" label="Norm Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q12519" start="20190" end="20201" title="Magna Carta" label="Magna Carta"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812" start="20223" end="20239" title="Thomas Jefferson" label="Thomas Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7761683" start="20384" end="20400" title="The Royal Family (play)" label="The Royal Family"/>
<link wikidata="Q5247220" start="20451" end="20472" title="Death Takes a Holiday (musical)" label="Death Takes a Holiday"/>
<link wikidata="Q1219315" start="20588" end="20609" title="Death Takes a Holiday" label="Death Takes a Holiday"/>
<link wikidata="Q1718449" start="20633" end="20644" title="Peter Stone (writer)" label="Peter Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7792371" start="20649" end="20662" title="Thomas Meehan (writer)" label="Thomas Meehan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7371225" start="20728" end="20746" title="Laura Pels Theatre" label="Laura Pels Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q682154" start="20811" end="20828" title="Drama Desk Awards" label="Drama Desk Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q7111970" start="20901" end="20927" title="Outer Critics Circle Award" label="Outer Critics Circle Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q17016513" start="21054" end="21066" title="off West End" label="off West End"/>
<link wikidata="Q16890141" start="21110" end="21131" title="Charing Cross Theatre" label="Charing Cross Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="" start="21170" end="21204" title="Tom Sawyer: A Ballet in Three Acts" label="Tom Sawyer: A Ballet in Three Acts"/>
<link wikidata="Q6378664" start="21228" end="21267" title="Kauffman Center for the Performing Arts" label="Kauffman Center for the Performing Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q41819" start="21271" end="21292" title="Kansas City, Missouri" label="Kansas City, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q16965398" start="21303" end="21321" title="Kansas City Ballet" label="Kansas City Ballet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4708742" start="21323" end="21340" title="Alastair Macaulay" label="Alastair Macaulay"/>
<link wikidata="Q918727" start="21902" end="21907" title="revue" label="revue"/>
<link wikidata="Q5549903" start="21963" end="21982" title="Gerard Alessandrini" label="Gerard Alessandrini"/>
<link wikidata="Q8055572" start="21991" end="22003" title="York Theatre" label="York Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7120816" start="22041" end="22052" title="PS Classics" label="PS Classics"/>
<link wikidata="Q60743360" start="22652" end="22666" title="Broadway World" label="Broadway World"/>
<link wikidata="Q2278286" start="22962" end="22966" title="Nine (musical)" label="Nine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500235" start="23001" end="23012" title="Grand Hotel (musical)" label="Grand Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416989" start="23033" end="23040" title="Titanic (musical)" label="Titanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7761683" start="23061" end="23077" title="The Royal Family (play)" label="The Royal Family"/>
<link wikidata="Q5135674" start="23113" end="23123" title="Cloud Nine (play)" label="Cloud Nine"/>
<link wikidata="Q463574" start="23163" end="23178" title="Caryl Churchill" label="Caryl Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806065" start="23343" end="23356" title="Larry Gelbart" label="Larry Gelbart"/>
<link wikidata="Q5247220" start="23364" end="23385" title="Death Takes a Holiday (musical)" label="Death Takes a Holiday"/>
<link wikidata="Q8055572" start="23464" end="23476" title="York Theatre" label="York Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q752989" start="23491" end="23495" title="Nine (2009 live-action film)" label="Nine"/>
<link wikidata="" start="23527" end="23561" title="Tom Sawyer: A Ballet in Three Acts" label="Tom Sawyer: A Ballet in Three Acts"/>
<link wikidata="Q16965398" start="23585" end="23603" title="Kansas City Ballet" label="Kansas City Ballet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2291188" start="23741" end="23748" title="Phantom (musical)" label="Phantom"/>
<link wikidata="Q770566" start="23771" end="23783" title="Arthur Kopit" label="Arthur Kopit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5249060" start="23821" end="23835" title="December Songs" label="December Songs"/>
<link wikidata="Q893466" start="23845" end="23855" title="song cycle" label="song cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q200959" start="23872" end="23885" title="Carnegie Hall" label="Carnegie Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631981" start="24015" end="24033" title="The Kennedy Center" label="The Kennedy Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142754" start="24037" end="24052" title="choral symphony" label="choral symphony"/>
<link wikidata="Q213559" start="24109" end="24125" title="Lincoln Memorial" label="Lincoln Memorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q2744749" start="24133" end="24160" title="National Symphony Orchestra (United States)" label="National Symphony Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q509870" start="24175" end="24190" title="Leonard Slatkin" label="Leonard Slatkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196332" start="24246" end="24264" title="The Peony Pavilion" label="The Peony Pavilion"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="24292" end="24323" title="China" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q234891" start="24412" end="24420" title="Yo-Yo Ma" label="Yo-Yo Ma"/>
<link wikidata="Q5561072" start="24422" end="24436" title="Gilbert Levine" label="Gilbert Levine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5249060" start="24455" end="24469" title="December Songs" label="December Songs"/>
<link wikidata="Q493" start="24559" end="24573" title="Arthur Rimbaud" label="Arthur Rimbaud"/>
<link wikidata="Q380723" start="24803" end="24813" title="Hart Crane" label="Hart Crane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478089" start="25164" end="25198" title="Tony Award for Best Original Score" label="Tony Award for Best Original Score"/>
<link wikidata="Q682154" start="25227" end="25243" title="Drama Desk Award" label="Drama Desk Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q682154" start="25294" end="25310" title="Drama Desk Award" label="Drama Desk Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478089" start="25374" end="25408" title="Tony Award for Best Original Score" label="Tony Award for Best Original Score"/>
<link wikidata="Q682154" start="25461" end="25477" title="Drama Desk Award" label="Drama Desk Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q682154" start="25552" end="25568" title="Drama Desk Award" label="Drama Desk Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478089" start="25628" end="25662" title="Tony Award for Best Original Score" label="Tony Award for Best Original Score"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="25706" end="25718" title="Grammy Award" label="Grammy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="25786" end="25798" title="Grammy Award" label="Grammy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="25869" end="25881" title="Grammy Award" label="Grammy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q28470" start="25937" end="25959" title="Laurence Olivier Award" label="Laurence Olivier Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q112243" start="26005" end="26041" title="Academy Award for Best Original Song" label="Academy Award for Best Original Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q17151322" start="26050" end="26067" title="Take It All (song)" label="Take It All&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q752989" start="26083" end="26087" title="Nine (2009 live-action film)" label="Nine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472235" start="26109" end="26150" title="Golden Globe Award for Best Original Song" label="Golden Globe Award for Best Original Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q17150042" start="26159" end="26174" title="Cinema Italiano" label="Cinema Italiano"/>
<link wikidata="Q752989" start="26196" end="26200" title="Nine (2009 live-action film)" label="Nine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7585305" start="26222" end="26262" title="Broadcast Film Critics Association Award" label="Broadcast Film Critics Association Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q17150042" start="26293" end="26308" title="Cinema Italiano" label="Cinema Italiano"/>
<link wikidata="Q40024" start="26330" end="26345" title="Satellite Award" label="Satellite Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q17150042" start="26376" end="26391" title="Cinema Italiano" label="Cinema Italiano"/>
<link wikidata="Q682154" start="26417" end="26433" title="Drama Desk Award" label="Drama Desk Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q5247220" start="26471" end="26492" title="Death Takes a Holiday (musical)" label="Death Takes a Holiday"/>
<link wikidata="Q682154" start="26518" end="26534" title="Drama Desk Award" label="Drama Desk Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q5247220" start="26573" end="26594" title="Death Takes a Holiday (musical)" label="Death Takes a Holiday"/>
<link wikidata="Q5456170" start="26795" end="26813" title="Five Towns College" label="Five Towns College"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="26904" end="26922" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335573" start="26925" end="26940" title="Emerson College" label="Emerson College"/>
<link wikidata="Q2354471" start="26998" end="27013" title="Sheldon Harnick" label="Sheldon Harnick"/>
<link wikidata="Q467050" start="27052" end="27081" title="American Theater Hall of Fame" label="American Theater Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q861660" start="27123" end="27147" title="Songwriters Hall of Fame" label="Songwriters Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q1763768" start="27259" end="27276" title="Musical Quarterly" label="Musical Quarterly"/>
<link wikidata="Q255147" start="27351" end="27372" title="Yale University Press" label="Yale University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q7552177" start="27493" end="27517" title="Society for Music Theory" label="Society for Music Theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2278286" start="27543" end="27547" title="Nine (musical)" label="Nine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2278286" start="27617" end="27621" title="Nine (musical)" label="Nine"/>
<link wikidata="Q752989" start="27789" end="27813" title="Nine (2009 live-action film)" label="The Film version of Nine"/>
<link wikidata="Q166389" start="27851" end="27867" title="Daniel Day-Lewis" label="Daniel Day-Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q8927" start="27869" end="27885" title="Marion Cotillard" label="Marion Cotillard"/>
<link wikidata="Q39666" start="27887" end="27900" title="Penélope Cruz" label="Penélope Cruz"/>
<link wikidata="Q28054" start="27902" end="27912" title="Judi Dench" label="Judi Dench"/>
<link wikidata="Q180004" start="27914" end="27920" title="Fergie (singer)" label="Fergie"/>
<link wikidata="Q169946" start="27922" end="27933" title="Kate Hudson" label="Kate Hudson"/>
<link wikidata="Q37459" start="27935" end="27948" title="Nicole Kidman" label="Nicole Kidman"/>
<link wikidata="Q43252" start="27950" end="27962" title="Sophia Loren" label="Sophia Loren"/>
<link wikidata="Q130853" start="27984" end="27999" title="Placido Domingo" label="Placido Domingo"/>
<link wikidata="Q184697" start="28001" end="28015" title="Gloria Estefan" label="Gloria Estefan"/>
<link wikidata="Q234695" start="28017" end="28031" title="Dionne Warwick" label="Dionne Warwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q505285" start="28033" end="28046" title="Richie Havens" label="Richie Havens"/>
<link wikidata="Q5249060" start="28084" end="28098" title="December Songs" label="December Songs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2846370" start="28115" end="28132" title="Andrea Marcovicci" label="Andrea Marcovicci"/>
<link wikidata="Q3127668" start="28134" end="28151" title="Harolyn Blackwell" label="Harolyn Blackwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6499286" start="28153" end="28164" title="Laura Osnes" label="Laura Osnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7926640" start="28166" end="28180" title="Victoria Clark" label="Victoria Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q447220" start="28208" end="28218" title="Pia Douwes" label="Pia Douwes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5346980" start="28229" end="28243" title="Edyta Krzemień" label="Edyta Krzemień"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500235" start="28278" end="28289" title="Grand Hotel (musical)" label="Grand Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2291188" start="28334" end="28341" title="Phantom (musical)" label="Phantom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416989" start="28387" end="28394" title="Titanic (musical)" label="Titanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q271782" start="28593" end="28606" title="Betty Buckley" label="Betty Buckley"/>
<link wikidata="Q437438" start="28608" end="28626" title="Christine Ebersole" label="Christine Ebersole"/>
<link wikidata="Q195129" start="28628" end="28641" title="Laura Benanti" label="Laura Benanti"/>
<link wikidata="Q3011954" start="28643" end="28656" title="Sutton Foster" label="Sutton Foster"/>
<link wikidata="Q4726067" start="28658" end="28670" title="Alice Ripley" label="Alice Ripley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6267605" start="28672" end="28686" title="Johnny Rodgers (singer)" label="Johnny Rodgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5247220" start="28706" end="28727" title="Death Takes a Holiday (musical)" label="Death Takes a Holiday"/>
<link wikidata="" start="28786" end="28820" title="Tom Sawyer: A Ballet in Three Acts" label="Tom Sawyer: A Ballet in Three Acts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150942" start="28828" end="28858" title="San Francisco Ballet Orchestra" label="San Francisco Ballet Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2703822" start="28878" end="28893" title="Skywalker Sound" label="Skywalker Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q6499286" start="28901" end="28912" title="Laura Osnes" label="Laura Osnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6499286" start="28975" end="28986" title="Laura Osnes" label="Laura Osnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3675794" start="29308" end="29357" title="Christmas in the Stars" label="Christmas in the Stars: Star Wars Christmas Album"/>
<link wikidata="Q5249060" start="29378" end="29392" title="December Songs" label="December Songs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7926640" start="29434" end="29448" title="Victoria Clark" label="Victoria Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188969" start="30012" end="30042" title="Lortel Archives" label="Internet Off-Broadway Database"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="309087" wikidata="Q6942031" url="?curid=309087" title="Music of Cambodia">
<text>The music of Cambodia is derived from a mesh of cultural traditions dating back to the ancient Khmer Empire, India, China and the original indigenous tribes living in the area before the arrival of Indian and Chinese travelers. With the rapid Westernization of popular music, Cambodian music has incorporated elements from music around the world through globalization.

==Folk and classical music==

Cambodian Art music is highly influenced by ancient forms as well as Hindu forms. Religious dancing, many of which depict stories and ancient myths, are common in Cambodian culture. Classical Khmer music usually is divided into three parts: &quot;pin peat, phleng kar,&quot; and &quot;mahori,&quot; all of which are associated with their religious dances. Some dances are accompanied by a pinpeat orchestra, which includes a ching (cymbal), roneat (bamboo xylophone), pai au (flute), sralai (oboe), chapey (bass moon lute or banjo), gong (bronze gong), tro (fiddle), and various kinds of drums. Each movement the dancer makes refers to a specific idea, including abstract concepts like &quot;today&quot; (pointing a finger upwards). The 1950s saw a revival in classical dance, led by Queen Sisowath Kossamak Nearyrath.

During the early 1970s, the Khmer Rouge of Cambodia committed genocide among the country&#x27;s citizens. During their reign, an estimated &quot;90% of Cambodia&#x27;s musicians, dancers, teachers, and instrument makers&quot; were killed, interrupting the transmission of cultural knowledge to following generations. The country has been undergoing revival ever since, with those remaining trying to perform, teach, research, and document what they can.

The traditional music has had to compete with foreign music that has different tonal systems of scales and pitch frequency. Lack of a formal written-system of music theory for Cambodian music lent to a perception among modern Cambodians that the music was &quot;incorrect&quot;, &quot;out of tune&quot; or &quot;uncouth&quot; when compared to western music or to Chinese music. Traditional music still exists today, but its survival is the result of formal government efforts (both the UNESCO and Cambodian) as well as academics. These have worked to organize knowledge of the Cambodian music system and its distinct traditions.

Sam-Ang Sam, a Cambodian ethnomusicologist, wrote a brief introduction to Cambodian music on his website, part of his work to preserve knowledge Cambodian music and educating. He spoke of music in three different areas of Cambodia: villages, the court and temples. In each setting, music had a formal function or was entertainment. Village music included &quot;kar boran&quot; music for weddings, &quot;araak&quot; music for communication with spirits, and &quot;&quot;ayai&quot; repartee singing, &quot;chrieng chapey&quot; narrative, and &quot;yike&quot; and &quot;basakk&quot; theaters.&quot; Court music had orchestras composed of a specific set of instruments. The pinpeat orchestra (consisting of gong chimes, xylophones, a metallophone, oboe and drums) accompanied the formal dance, masked play, shadow play and religious ceremonies. Less formal entertainment was played by a mohori orchestra. Temples had a &quot;korng skor&quot; ensemble (gongs and drums), as well as a pinpeat orchestra.

Additionally, Sam-Ang Sam differentiates between music made by the mainstream Cambodians (&quot;Cambodian music&quot;) and the distinct music of ethnic minorities (part of the &quot;music of Cambodia&quot;). The latter includes music made by people living in Rattanakiri and Mundulkiri and provinces, the Koulen and Cardamom ranges, and the vicinity &quot;around the great lake (Tonle Sap).&quot; Differences of language and religion help to create the separation between the different cultures. Ethnic groups include upload Mon-Khmer language groups (Pnorng, Kuoy (Kui), Por, Samre) whose music consists of &quot;gong ensembles, drum ensembles, and free-reed mouth organs with gourd windchests.&quot; Other ethnic groups include Cham, Chinese, Vietnamese who all potentially could have music from their home cultures, but which is &quot;unknown.&quot;

===Pinpeat===
One of the traditional music forms is Pinpeat (), in which an orchestra or musical ensemble performs the ceremonial music of the royal courts and temples of Cambodia. The royal orchestra would accompany the classical ballets, both male (Lokhon Khol) and female (Apsara), as well as the Grand Theater of Shadows, the Sbek Thom. The orchestra consists of approximately nine or ten instruments, mainly wind and percussion (including several varieties of xylophone and drums). It accompanies court dances, masked plays, shadow plays, and religious ceremonies. The pinpeat is analogous to the piphat ensemble of Thailand.

In recent years the instrument that gave the pinpeat its name, the pin, has been revived. The instrument was lost or abandoned around the 13 century A.D.

===Mahori===
Another form of traditional music was &quot;mahori&quot; music, which was the entertainment music of the courts of Cambodia, Siam and Laos. While the pinpeat music was religious and &quot;for deities&quot;, the mohori music was made for noblemen, focusing on themes and moods to &quot;delight their souls.&quot; This music &quot;favors soft instruments&quot;, including khloy flute, krapeu, tro chhé, tro sor and Tro Ou stringed instruments, and roneat ek xylophone, roneat thong metallophone, skor romonea drums and chhing finger cymbals. It&#x27;s important to note that the term &quot;mahori&quot; has connection with Thai music, and instrumentation is closely related, but the songs are not.

===Arak===
Arak (araak, areak, aareak) music was music for religious and healing purposes, dating to &quot;animist spiritual beliefs&quot; of ancient Cambodia. Traditionally it was used to &quot;drive out illness,&quot; and used flute, drum, tro, chapei and kse diev.
==Cambodian rock and pop==

Starting in the late 1950s, Head of State Norodom Sihanouk, a musician himself, encouraged the development of popular music in Cambodia. Initially, pop records from France and Latin America were imported into the country and became popular, inspiring a flourishing music scene based in Phnom Penh and led by singers like Ros Serey Sothea, Pen Ran or Sinn Sisamouth, with hits such as &quot;Violon Sneha&quot;.

By the late 1960s and early 1970s, the scene was further influenced by Western rock and roll and soul music via U.S. armed forces radio that had been broadcast into nearby South Vietnam. This resulted in a unique sound in which Western pop and rock were combined with Khmer vocal techniques.

Many of the most important singers of this era perished during the Khmer Rouge genocide. Western interest in the popular Cambodian music of the 1960s-70s was sparked by the bootleg album &quot;Cambodian Rocks&quot; in 1996, which in turn inspired the 2015 documentary film &quot;Don&#x27;t Think I&#x27;ve Forgotten&quot;.

In early 2020, playwright Lauren Yee&#x27;s &quot;&quot;Cambodian Rock Band&quot; premiered at the Signature Theatre in NYC. It told the story of a Cambodian band coming under the regime of Pol Pot and incorporated actual music from Cambodian rock bands of the 1970s.
==Modern music==
Classic Cambodian pop music, or modern music, includes slow, crooner-type music exemplified by songs such as Sinn Sisamouth&#x27;s &quot;Ae Na Tov Thansuo?&quot; (), as well as dance music. Dance music is classified according to the type of dance signified by the rhythm. The two most common types of Cambodian dance music are &quot;romvong&quot; and &quot;rom kbach&quot;. &quot;Romvong&quot; is slow dance music, while ramkbach is closely related to Thai folk music. Recently, a form of music called &quot;kantrum&quot; has become popular. Originating among the Khmer Surin in Thailand, &quot;kantrum&quot; is performed by both Thai and Cambodian stars.

Modern Cambodian music is usually presented in Cambodian karaoke VCDs, which typically feature actors and actresses mimicking song lyrics. Noy Vanneth and Lour Sarith are two examples of modern singers who sing songs on the karaoke VCDs, and the VCDs feature songs composed by other musicians, in addition to songs sung and composed by notable musician Sinn Sisamouth.

===Production House Music===
During and after the Khmer Rouges and the People&#x27;s Republic of Kampuchea, most of the music emerged from the refugee camps such as Khao-I-Dang on the Thai border, with artists such as Keo Sarath or Barnabas Mam. The majority of post-Khmer Rouge Cambodian music is produced by a handful of production companies which include; Rasmey Hang Meas, Sunday Productions and Town Production. These companies function as the record labels within the Cambodian music business. Notable artists signed under these companies include Preap Sovath, Aok Sokunkanha, Sokun Nisa, Khemarak Sereymun and Meas Soksophea.

===Original Music Movement===
The Cambodian Original Music Movement refers to a group of young Khmer musicians in Cambodia who write, record and perform original compositions. It began largely as a result of the creation of a venue in Phnom Penh called Show Box, a cross-cultural community hub created exclusively to promote original Khmer alternative art and music, and an amalgamation of various unique contemporary artists and musicians who were encouraged by music and art platforms like Cambodia&#x27;s first alternative label Yab Moung Records. Yab Moung Records and Show Box actively encouraged the production of original music and was the artistic home of many original alternative musicians. Show Box only hosted original performances from both Khmer and international musicians and acted as a community hub for innovative ideas.

This movement is described by some as their response to a music culture, where many modern Khmer-language songs copy the melodies and lyrical themes from nearly identical Chinese, Thai, Korean, American and Vietnam works. Artists who are known in this movement include Adda Angel, Sai, Bonny B., Khmeng Khmer, Laura Mam, P-Sand, Nikki Nikki, Van Chesda, Sliten6ix, Sam Rocker, Kanhchna Chet, Sophia Kao and Smallworld Smallband. The genres of these musicians includes blues music, pop music, rap music, rock music and electronic music.

The #IAmOriginal project was formed in order to promote up and coming original artists. IAmOriginal identifies itself as a &quot;non-profit music foundation aimed at promoting creative and innovative music in Cambodia by providing training, legal consultation, financial and marketing support to artists who are passionate about music.&quot; They have released two albums and held concerts for each of the album launches. Many of Cambodia&#x27;s young celebrities participate in this movement though showing support at events and through social media.

A new project by Laura Baker, The Sound Initiative, also seeks to train and mentor new artists.

In 2016, Laura Mam founded Baramey Production, a pioneering music label, nurturing the talents of original music stars in Cambodia. Today, Baramey is on the mainstream with the success of Vannda&#x27;s several hits songs most notably Time To Rise. In 2021, Baramey signed a deal with the Asian branch of Warner Music&#x27;s ADA; the first major international agreement for a Cambodian music label.
Norodom Jenna, a member of the House of Norodom, Cambodia&#x27;s ruling family, has denied rumors of entering into the Korean pop industry.

===Khmer Alternative Music===
In recent years there has been a resurgence of creativity in contemporary Khmer art forms and music is no exception. Cambodia&#x27;s first alternative music label Yab Moung Records was founded in 2012 and has since recorded and released the first Khmer Hardcore and Death Metal tracks as well as producing a wide range of alternative artists creating unique Khmer blues, rock, hip hop and alternative music.

Yab Moung Records provides an ongoing platform for Khmer alternative music and art and actively encourages creative expression within a uniquely Cambodian context.

==Khmer Boxing Music==
The music of Khmer boxing is called vung phleng pradall or vung phleng klang khek. The music uses an oboe, drums(sampho) and cymbals(chhing). The music comes in two parts. The first part uses a spirit(teacher) to help the boxers concentrate their minds and have confidence. The first part of the music is played slowly in a rubato style. The melody is played by the oboe and the sampho plays strokes at important points of the melody. The second part which is the fight music is played much faster and in meter. The music accelerates with the progression of the round. It stops at the end of the round or when someone is knocked out. When the fight is exciting, the audience claps in rhythm with the beat of the sampho.

==See also==
*Traditional Cambodian musical instruments
*Chrieng Brunh
* Nuon Kan

==References==
*Clewley, John. &quot;Heavenly Dancers&quot;. 2000. In Broughton, Simon and Ellingham, Mark with McConnachie, James and Duane, Orla (Ed.), &quot;World Music, Vol. 2: Latin &amp; North America, Caribbean, India, Asia and Pacific&quot;, pp 20–23. Rough Guides Ltd, Penguin Books. 

==External links==
*Dontrey. The Music of Cambodia (Magazine by the Department of Media and Communication of the Royal University of Phnom Penh
*Angkorian &amp; traditional instruments (by Patrick Kersalé)
* Audio clips: Traditional music of Cambodia. Musée d&#x27;ethnographie de Genève. Accessed November 00, 2010.
*Cambodian court music &amp; court dance (Sam-Ang Sam)
*The traditional music and instruments of Cambodia
*Cambodia Cultural Profile (Ministry of Culture and Fine Arts/Visiting Arts)
*Conduct a Cambodian Ensemble
*Khmer Traditional Music
*Khmer Music and Biographies</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6942031" start="4" end="21" title="Music of Cambodia" label="music of Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q201705" start="95" end="107" title="Khmer Empire" label="Khmer Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="109" end="114" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="116" end="121" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q6498273" start="243" end="257" title="Westernization" label="Westernization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1583807" start="410" end="419" title="Art music" label="Art music"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="469" end="474" title="Hinduism" label="Hindu"/>
<link wikidata="Q11639" start="492" end="499" title="dance" label="dancing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2233484" start="563" end="580" title="Cambodian culture" label="Cambodian culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q6149344" start="789" end="796" title="pinpeat" label="pinpeat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2066397" start="825" end="830" title="Ching (musical instrument)" label="ching"/>
<link wikidata="Q190172" start="832" end="838" title="cymbal" label="cymbal"/>
<link wikidata="Q16824740" start="841" end="847" title="roneat" label="roneat"/>
<link wikidata="Q670887" start="849" end="855" title="bamboo" label="bamboo"/>
<link wikidata="Q165666" start="856" end="865" title="xylophone" label="xylophone"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="868" end="874" title="pai au" label="pai au"/>
<link wikidata="Q11405" start="876" end="881" title="flute" label="flute"/>
<link wikidata="Q7582387" start="884" end="890" title="sralai" label="sralai"/>
<link wikidata="Q8377" start="892" end="896" title="oboe" label="oboe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2957508" start="899" end="905" title="chapey" label="chapey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370147" start="912" end="921" title="moon lute" label="moon lute"/>
<link wikidata="Q258896" start="925" end="930" title="banjo" label="banjo"/>
<link wikidata="Q208320" start="933" end="937" title="gong" label="gong"/>
<link wikidata="Q34095" start="939" end="945" title="bronze" label="bronze"/>
<link wikidata="Q208320" start="946" end="950" title="gong" label="gong"/>
<link wikidata="Q7844785" start="953" end="956" title="tro (instrument)" label="tro"/>
<link wikidata="Q510487" start="958" end="964" title="fiddle" label="fiddle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4926056" start="1190" end="1217" title="Sisowath Kossamak Nearyrath" label="Sisowath Kossamak Nearyrath"/>
<link wikidata="Q191764" start="1248" end="1259" title="Khmer Rouge" label="Khmer Rouge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7407030" start="2305" end="2316" title="Sam-Ang Sam" label="Sam-Ang Sam"/>
<link wikidata="Q65427884" start="2774" end="2778" title="ayai" label="ayai"/>
<link wikidata="Q747846" start="3563" end="3574" title="Rattanakiri" label="Rattanakiri"/>
<link wikidata="Q652830" start="3579" end="3589" title="Mondulkiri Province" label="Mundulkiri"/>
<link wikidata="Q956515" start="3609" end="3615" title="Phnom Kulen" label="Koulen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089661" start="3620" end="3628" title="Cardamom Mountains" label="Cardamom"/>
<link wikidata="Q199938" start="3683" end="3692" title="Tonle Sap" label="Tonle Sap"/>
<link wikidata="Q6149344" start="4210" end="4217" title="Pinpeat" label="Pinpeat"/>
<link wikidata="Q42998" start="4234" end="4243" title="orchestra" label="orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2088357" start="4247" end="4263" title="musical ensemble" label="musical ensemble"/>
<link wikidata="Q424" start="4329" end="4337" title="Cambodia" label="Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1839404" start="4458" end="4482" title="Khmer shadow theatre" label="Grand Theater of Shadows"/>
<link wikidata="Q42998" start="4503" end="4512" title="orchestra" label="orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q173453" start="4571" end="4575" title="wind instrument" label="wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q133163" start="4580" end="4590" title="percussion instrument" label="percussion"/>
<link wikidata="Q165666" start="4623" end="4632" title="xylophone" label="xylophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q128309" start="4637" end="4642" title="Drum kit" label="drums"/>
<link wikidata="Q1037715" start="4660" end="4672" title="Royal Ballet of Cambodia" label="court dances"/>
<link wikidata="Q6479591" start="4674" end="4686" title="Lakhon khol" label="masked plays"/>
<link wikidata="Q1839404" start="4688" end="4699" title="Khmer shadow theatre" label="shadow play"/>
<link wikidata="Q9174" start="4706" end="4715" title="religion" label="religious"/>
<link wikidata="Q478176" start="4760" end="4766" title="piphat" label="piphat"/>
<link wikidata="Q60750638" start="4857" end="4860" title="pin (harp)" label="pin"/>
<link wikidata="Q19684608" start="5328" end="5333" title="khloy" label="khloy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5068327" start="5341" end="5347" title="krapeu" label="krapeu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7844785" start="5371" end="5377" title="Tro u" label="Tro Ou"/>
<link wikidata="Q7365593" start="5404" end="5413" title="roneat ek" label="roneat ek"/>
<link wikidata="Q7365591" start="5425" end="5437" title="roneat thong" label="roneat thong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165766" start="5438" end="5450" title="metallophone" label="metallophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2066397" start="5475" end="5481" title="chhing" label="chhing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7844785" start="5897" end="5900" title="Tro (instrument)" label="tro"/>
<link wikidata="Q2957508" start="5902" end="5908" title="chapey" label="chapei"/>
<link wikidata="Q15824524" start="5913" end="5921" title="kse diev" label="kse diev"/>
<link wikidata="Q160318" start="5993" end="6009" title="Norodom Sihanouk" label="Norodom Sihanouk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2982405" start="6272" end="6288" title="Ros Serey Sothea" label="Ros Serey Sothea"/>
<link wikidata="Q4930581" start="6290" end="6297" title="Pen Ran" label="Pen Ran"/>
<link wikidata="Q3485020" start="6301" end="6315" title="Sinn Sisamouth" label="Sinn Sisamouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q97359004" start="6341" end="6353" title="Violon Sneha" label="Violon Sneha"/>
<link wikidata="Q7749" start="6441" end="6454" title="rock and roll" label="rock and roll"/>
<link wikidata="Q131272" start="6459" end="6469" title="soul music" label="soul music"/>
<link wikidata="Q180573" start="6534" end="6547" title="South Vietnam" label="South Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2885072" start="6722" end="6742" title="Cambodian genocide" label="Khmer Rouge genocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q23661738" start="6848" end="6863" title="Cambodian Rocks" label="Cambodian Rocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q21034402" start="6934" end="6970" title="Don&amp;#x27;t Think I&amp;#x27;ve Forgotten" label="Don&amp;#x27;t Think I&amp;#x27;ve Forgotten"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500420" start="7005" end="7015" title="Lauren Yee" label="Lauren Yee"/>
<link wikidata="Q37073" start="7282" end="7291" title="pop music" label="pop music"/>
<link wikidata="Q5070237" start="7296" end="7308" title="jamrieng samai" label="modern music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141016" start="7325" end="7332" title="crooner" label="crooner"/>
<link wikidata="Q3485020" start="7373" end="7387" title="Sinn Sisamouth" label="Sinn Sisamouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q316930" start="7441" end="7452" title="dance music" label="dance music"/>
<link wikidata="Q6586192" start="7597" end="7604" title="romvong" label="romvong"/>
<link wikidata="Q7361460" start="7621" end="7630" title="rom kbach" label="rom kbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q867306" start="7716" end="7731" title="music of Thailand" label="Thai folk music"/>
<link wikidata="Q4925966" start="7772" end="7779" title="kantrum" label="kantrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q6676085" start="7828" end="7839" title="Khmer Surin" label="Khmer Surin"/>
<link wikidata="Q321259" start="7986" end="7990" title="Video CD" label="VCDs"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8076" end="8087" title="Lour Sarith" label="Lour Sarith"/>
<link wikidata="Q3485020" start="8274" end="8288" title="Sinn Sisamouth" label="Sinn Sisamouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q867778" start="8362" end="8397" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of Kampuchea" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of Kampuchea"/>
<link wikidata="Q5937912" start="8456" end="8467" title="Khao-I-Dang" label="Khao-I-Dang"/>
<link wikidata="Q3195347" start="8509" end="8519" title="Keo Sarath" label="Keo Sarath"/>
<link wikidata="Q425816" start="8844" end="8856" title="Preap Sovath" label="Preap Sovath"/>
<link wikidata="Q19938309" start="8858" end="8872" title="Aok Sokunkanha" label="Aok Sokunkanha"/>
<link wikidata="Q25679311" start="8874" end="8884" title="Sokun Nisa" label="Sokun Nisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q37321312" start="8886" end="8903" title="Khemarak Sereymun" label="Khemarak Sereymun"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9178" end="9186" title="Show Box" label="Show Box"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9498" end="9506" title="Show Box" label="Show Box"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9626" end="9634" title="Show Box" label="Show Box"/>
<link wikidata="Q55603194" start="10034" end="10044" title="Adda Angel" label="Adda Angel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2910317" start="10051" end="10059" title="Bonny B." label="Bonny B."/>
<link wikidata="Q64009984" start="10075" end="10084" title="Laura Mam" label="Laura Mam"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10142" end="10155" title="Kanhchna Chet" label="Kanhchna Chet"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10172" end="10192" title="Smallworld Smallband" label="Smallworld Smallband"/>
<link wikidata="Q9759" start="10233" end="10244" title="blues music" label="blues music"/>
<link wikidata="Q37073" start="10246" end="10255" title="pop music" label="pop music"/>
<link wikidata="Q11401" start="10257" end="10266" title="rap music" label="rap music"/>
<link wikidata="Q11399" start="10268" end="10278" title="rock music" label="rock music"/>
<link wikidata="Q9778" start="10283" end="10299" title="electronic music" label="electronic music"/>
<link wikidata="Q64009984" start="10961" end="10970" title="Laura Mam" label="Laura Mam"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10979" end="10997" title="Baramey Production" label="Baramey Production"/>
<link wikidata="Q106371739" start="11140" end="11146" title="Vannda" label="Vannda"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11186" end="11198" title="Time To Rise" label="Time To Rise"/>
<link wikidata="Q21077" start="11256" end="11268" title="Warner Music" label="Warner Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q106729150" start="11350" end="11363" title="Norodom Jenna" label="Norodom Jenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q15955153" start="11381" end="11397" title="House of Norodom" label="House of Norodom"/>
<link wikidata="Q213665" start="11469" end="11479" title="Korean pop" label="Korean pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q9759" start="11885" end="11890" title="blues" label="blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q11399" start="11892" end="11896" title="Rock music" label="rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q11401" start="11898" end="11905" title="hip hop" label="hip hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q7410116" start="12231" end="12237" title="sampho" label="sampho"/>
<link wikidata="Q2066397" start="12251" end="12257" title="chhing" label="chhing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063336" start="12442" end="12448" title="rubato" label="rubato"/>
<link wikidata="Q7410116" start="12497" end="12503" title="sampho" label="sampho"/>
<link wikidata="Q7410116" start="12830" end="12836" title="sampho" label="sampho"/>
<link wikidata="Q3328611" start="12853" end="12894" title="Traditional Cambodian musical instruments" label="Traditional Cambodian musical instruments"/>
<link wikidata="Q5105648" start="12896" end="12909" title="Chrieng Brunh" label="Chrieng Brunh"/>
<link wikidata="Q6683781" start="12912" end="12920" title="Nuon Kan" label="Nuon Kan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7561288" start="12992" end="13008" title="Songlines (magazine)" label="Broughton, Simon"/>
<link wikidata="Q955545" start="13182" end="13194" title="Rough Guides" label="Rough Guides"/>
<link wikidata="Q1955752" start="13469" end="13504" title="Musée d&amp;#x27;ethnographie de Genève" label="Musée d&amp;#x27;ethnographie de Genève"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="309089" wikidata="Q320719" url="?curid=309089" title="Dependent personality disorder">
<text>Dependent personality disorder (DPD) is a personality disorder characterized by a pervasive psychological dependence on other people. This personality disorder is a long-term condition in which people depend on others to meet their emotional and physical needs. Dependent personality disorder is a cluster C personality disorder, which is characterized by excessive fear and anxiety. It begins prior to early adulthood, and it is present in a variety of contexts and is associated with inadequate functioning. Symptoms can include anything from extreme passivity, devastation or helplessness when relationships end, avoidance of responsibilities, and severe submission.

==Signs and symptoms==
People who have dependent personality disorder are overdependent on other people when it comes to making decisions. Patients with DPD may be unable to make a decision on their own, as they need constant approval from other people. Consequently, individuals diagnosed with DPD tend to place needs and opinions of others above their own as they may not have the confidence to trust their own decisions. This behavior can explain why people with DPD tend to show passive and clingy behavior. These individuals display a fear of separation and typically dislike being alone. When alone, they experience feelings of isolation and loneliness due to their overwhelming dependence on other people. Generally people with DPD are also pessimistic: they expect the worst out of situations or believe that the worst will happen. They tend to be more introverted and are more sensitive to criticism and fear rejection.

==Risk factors==
People with a history of neglect and an abusive upbringing are more susceptible to develop DPD, specifically those involved in long-term abusive relationships. Those with overprotective or authoritarian parents are also more at risk to develop DPD. Having a family history of anxiety disorder can play a role in the development of DPD, as a 2004 twin study found a 0.81 heritability for personality disorders collectively.

==Causes==
While the exact cause of dependent personality disorder is unknown, a study in 2012 estimated that between 55% and 72% of the risk of the condition is inherited from one&#x27;s parents. The difference between a &quot;dependent personality&quot; and a &quot;dependent personality disorder&quot; is somewhat subjective, which makes diagnosis sensitive to cultural influences such as gender role expectations.

Dependent traits in children tended to increase with parenting behaviours and attitudes characterized by overprotectiveness and authoritarianism. Thus the likelihood of developing dependent personality disorder increased, since these parenting traits can limit them from developing a sense of autonomy, rather teaching them that others are powerful and competent.

Traumatic or adverse experiences early in an individual&#x27;s life, such as neglect and abuse or serious illness, can increase the likelihood of developing personality disorders, including dependent personality disorder, later in life. This is especially prevalent for those individuals who also experience high interpersonal stress and poor social support.

There is a higher frequency of the disorder seen in women than men; hence, expectations relating to gender role may contribute to some extent.

==Diagnosis==
Clinicians and clinical researchers conceptualize dependent personality disorder in terms of four related components:
* Cognitive: a perception of oneself as powerless and ineffectual, coupled with the belief that other people are comparatively powerful and potent.
* Motivational: a desire to obtain and maintain relationships with protectors and caregivers.
* Behavioral: a pattern of relationship-facilitating behavior designed to strengthen interpersonal ties and minimize the possibility of abandonment and rejection.
* Emotional: fear of abandonment, fear of rejection, and anxiety regarding evaluation by figures of authority.

===American Psychiatric Association and DSM===
The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM) contains a dependent personality disorder diagnosis. It refers to a pervasive and excessive need to be taken care of which leads to submissive and clinging behavior and fears of separation. This begins prior to early adulthood and can be present in a variety of contexts.

In the DSM Fifth Edition (DSM-5), there is one criterion by which there are eight features of dependent personality disorder. The disorder is indicated by at least five of the following factors:
# Has difficulty making everyday decisions without an excessive amount of advice and reassurance from others.
# Needs others to assume responsibility for most major areas of their life.
# Has difficulty expressing disagreement with others because of fear of loss of support or approval.
# Has difficulty initiating projects or doing things on their own (because of a lack of self confidence in judgment or abilities rather than a lack of motivation or energy).
# Goes to excessive lengths to obtain nurturance and support from others, to the point of volunteering to do things that are unpleasant.
# Feels uncomfortable or helpless when alone because of exaggerated fears of being unable to care for themselves.
# Urgently seeks another relationship as a source of care and support when a close relationship ends.
# Is unrealistically preoccupied with fears of being left to take care of themselves.

The diagnosis of personality disorders in the fourth edition &quot;Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders&quot;, including dependent personality disorder, was found to be problematic due to reasons such as excessive diagnostic comorbidity, inadequate coverage, arbitrary boundaries with normal psychological functioning, and heterogeneity among individuals within the same categorial diagnosis.

===World Health Organization===
The World Health Organization&#x27;s ICD-10 lists dependent personality disorder as &quot; Dependent personality disorder&quot;:

It is characterized by at least 4 of the following:

# Encouraging or allowing others to make most of one&#x27;s important life decisions;
# Subordination of one&#x27;s own needs to those of others on whom one is dependent, and undue compliance with their wishes;
# Unwillingness to make even reasonable demands on the people one depends on;
# Feeling uncomfortable or helpless when alone, because of exaggerated fears of inability to care for oneself;
# Preoccupation with fears of being abandoned by a person with whom one has a close relationship, and of being left to care for oneself;
# Limited capacity to make everyday decisions without an excessive amount of advice and reassurance from others.

Associated features may include perceiving oneself as helpless, incompetent, and lacking stamina.

Includes:
* Asthenic, inadequate, passive, and self-defeating personality (disorder)

It is a requirement of ICD-10 that a diagnosis of any specific personality disorder also satisfies a set of general personality disorder criteria.

===SWAP-200===
The SWAP-200 is a diagnostic tool that was proposed with the goal of overcoming limitations, such as limited external validity for the diagnostic criteria for dependent personality disorder, to the DSM. It serves as a possible alternative nosological system that emerged from the efforts to create an empirically based approach to personality disorders – while also preserving the complexity of clinical reality. Dependent personality disorder is considered a clinical prototype in the context of the SWAP-200. Rather than discrete symptoms, it provides composite description characteristic criteria – such as personality tendencies.

Based on the Q-Sort method and prototype matching, the SWAP-200 is a personality assessment procedure relying on an external observer&#x27;s judgment. It provides:
* A personality diagnosis expressed as the matching with ten prototypical descriptions of DSM-IV personality disorders.
* A personality diagnosis based on the matching of the patient with 11 Q-factors of personality derived empirically.
* A dimensional profile of healthy and adaptive functioning.
The traits that define dependent personality disorder according to SWAP-200 are:
# They tend to become attached quickly and/or intensely, developing feelings and expectations that are not warranted by the history or context of the relationship.
# Since they tend to be ingratiating and submissive, people with DPD tend to be in relationships in which they are emotionally or physically abused.
# They tend to feel ashamed, inadequate, and depressed.
# They also feel powerless and tend to be suggestible.
# They are often anxious and tend to feel guilty.
# These people have difficulty acknowledging and expressing anger and struggle to get their own needs and goals met.
# Unable to soothe or comfort themselves when distressed, they require involvement of another person to help regulate their emotions.

===Psychodynamic Diagnostic Manual===
The Psychodynamic Diagnostic Manual (PDM) approaches dependent personality disorder in a descriptive, rather than prescriptive sense and has received empirical support. The Psychodynamic Diagnostic Manual includes two different types of dependent personality disorder:
# Passive-aggressive
# Counter-dependent 
The PDM-2 adopts and applies a prototypic approach, using empirical measures like the SWAP-200. It was influenced by a developmental and empirically grounded perspective, as proposed by Sidney Blatt. This model is of particular interest when focusing on dependent personality disorder, claiming that psychopathology comes from distortions of two main coordinates of psychological development:
# The anaclitic/introjective dimension.
# The relatedness/self-definition dimension.
The anaclitic personality organization in individuals exhibits difficulties in interpersonal relatedness, exhibiting the following behaviours:
* Preoccupation with relationships
* Fear of abandonment and of rejection
* Seeking closeness and intimacy
* Difficulty managing interpersonal boundaries
* Tend to have an anxious-preoccupied attachment style.
Introjective personality style is associated with problems in self-definition.

===Differential diagnosis===
Similarities between individuals with dependent personality disorder and individuals with borderline personality disorder include having a fear of abandonment. Those with dependent personality disorder do not necessarily exhibit impulsive behaviour or unstable affect experienced by those with borderline personality disorder, differentiating the two disorders.

==Treatment==
Individuals who have DPD are generally treated with psychotherapy. The main goal of this therapy is to make the individual more independent and help them form healthy relationships with the people around them. This is done by improving their self-esteem and confidence.

Medication can be used to treat patients who suffer from depression or anxiety because of their DPD, but this does not treat the core problems caused by the disorder.

==Epidemiology==
Based on a recent survey of 43,093 Americans, 0.49% of adults meet diagnostic criteria for DPD (National Epidemiologic Survey on Alcohol and Related Conditions; NESARC; Grant et al., 2004). 
Traits related to DPD, like most personality disorders, emerge in childhood or early adulthood. Findings from the NESArC study found that 18 to 29 year olds have a greater chance of developing DPD. DPD is more common among women compared to men as 0.6% of women have DPD compared to 0.4% of men.

A 2004 twin study suggests a heritability of 0.81 for developing dependent personality disorder. Because of this, there is significant evidence that this disorder runs in families.

Children and adolescents with a history of anxiety disorders and physical illnesses are more susceptible to acquiring this disorder.

===Millon&#x27;s subtypes===
Psychologist Theodore Millon identified five adult subtypes of dependent personality disorder. Any individual dependent may exhibit none or one or more of the following:

==History==
The conceptualization of dependency, within classical psychoanalytic theory, is directly related to Sigmund Freud&#x27;s oral psychosexual stage of development. Frustration or over-gratification was said to result in an oral fixation and in an oral type of character, characterized by feeling dependent on others for nurturing and by behaviors representative of the oral stage. Later psychoanalytic theories shifted the focus from a drive-based approach of dependency to the recognition of the importance of early relationships and establishing separation from these early caregivers, in which the exchanges between the caregiver and the child become internalized, and the nature of these interactions becomes part of the concepts of the self and of others.

==References==
===Sources===
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*

==External links==
*J. Christopher Perry, M.P.H., M.D., 2005 (Dependent Personality Disorder)
*Diagnostic Features, Complications, Prevalence, Associated Laboratory Findings
*MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia: Dependent personality disorder</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q320719" start="0" end="30" title="Dependent personality disorder" label="Dependent personality disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q320719" start="32" end="35" title="Dependent personality disorder" label="DPD"/>
<link wikidata="Q270673" start="42" end="62" title="personality disorder" label="personality disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q4420150" start="92" end="116" title="psychological dependence" label="psychological dependence"/>
<link wikidata="Q270673" start="298" end="328" title="Cluster C" label="cluster C personality disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q154430" start="375" end="382" title="anxiety" label="anxiety"/>
<link wikidata="Q396568" start="553" end="562" title="Deference" label="passivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2517007" start="616" end="625" title="Avoidance coping" label="avoidance"/>
<link wikidata="Q11042" start="2406" end="2424" title="cultural influence" label="cultural influence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2672163" start="2434" end="2445" title="gender role" label="gender role"/>
<link wikidata="Q270673" start="2983" end="3003" title="personality disorder" label="personality disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q3064664" start="4389" end="4394" title="DSM-5" label="DSM-5"/>
<link wikidata="Q201561" start="5526" end="5579" title="Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders" label="Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders"/>
<link wikidata="Q19933904" start="5799" end="5812" title="Homogeneity and heterogeneity" label="heterogeneity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="5906" end="5931" title="World Health Organization" label="World Health Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q45127" start="5939" end="5945" title="ICD-10" label="ICD-10"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7029" end="7066" title="Personality disorder#Diagnosis" label="general personality disorder criteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q7395139" start="7088" end="7096" title="SWAP-200" label="SWAP-200"/>
<link wikidata="Q3064664" start="7282" end="7286" title="DSM-5" label="DSM."/>
<link wikidata="Q7265665" start="7732" end="7738" title="Q methodology" label="Q-Sort"/>
<link wikidata="Q7252164" start="7750" end="7768" title="Prototype-matching" label="prototype matching"/>
<link wikidata="Q3844961" start="9030" end="9061" title="Psychodynamic Diagnostic Manual" label="Psychodynamic Diagnostic Manual"/>
<link wikidata="Q20273412" start="9523" end="9535" title="Sidney Blatt" label="Sidney Blatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q909609" start="10150" end="10166" title="Attachment theory" label="attachment style"/>
<link wikidata="Q208166" start="10367" end="10398" title="borderline personality disorder" label="borderline personality disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q159904" start="10538" end="10544" title="Affect (psychology)" label="affect"/>
<link wikidata="Q183257" start="10706" end="10719" title="psychotherapy" label="psychotherapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q244775" start="11605" end="11615" title="twin study" label="twin study"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503548" start="11627" end="11639" title="heritability" label="heritability"/>
<link wikidata="Q544006" start="11823" end="11840" title="anxiety disorders" label="anxiety disorders"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495911" start="11956" end="11971" title="Theodore Millon" label="Theodore Millon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7256338" start="12180" end="12201" title="psychoanalytic theory" label="psychoanalytic theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q9215" start="12226" end="12239" title="Sigmund Freud" label="Sigmund Freud"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12247" end="12285" title="Psychosexual development#Oral stage" label="oral psychosexual stage of development"/>
<link wikidata="Q3496249" start="12492" end="12502" title="oral stage" label="oral stage"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="309090" wikidata="Q286449" url="?curid=309090" title="Esquire">
<text>Esquire (, ; abbreviated Esq.) is usually a courtesy title. In the United Kingdom, &quot;esquire&quot; historically was a title of respect accorded to men of higher social rank, particularly members of the landed gentry above the rank of gentleman and below the rank of knight. Some sources cite that the title was bestowed on &quot;candidates for knighthood in England&quot;, this title is also reserved for those in a high respected band and even used with respect to other dignitaries, such as justices of the peace, sheriffs, and sergeants.

The 1826 edition of William Blackstone&#x27;s &quot;Commentaries on the Laws of England&quot; reiterated that &quot;the title should be limited to those only who bear an office of trust under the Crown and who are styled esquires by the king in their commissions and appointments; and all, I conceive, who are once honoured by the king with the title of esquire have a right to that distinction for life.&quot; By the early 20th century, however, &quot;esquire&quot; was being used as a general courtesy title for any man in a formal setting, with no precise significance, usually as a suffix to his name, and commonly with initials only. In the United Kingdom today, &quot;esquire&quot; is still occasionally used as a written style of address in formal or professional correspondence. In certain formal contexts, it remains an indication of a social status that is recognised in the order of precedence. In the legal profession, the title is only available for barristers.

In the United States, the term &quot;esquire&quot; (abbreviated &quot;Esq.&quot;) is generally used by lawyers, as a suffix, preceded by a comma, after the lawyer&#x27;s full name. According to research by a New York City Bar Association committee, in the United States, esquire over time came to refer &quot;commonly and exclusively&quot; to lawyers, but how that happened is unclear. The only certainty, the committee stated, is that &quot;based on common usage it is fair to state that if the title appears after a person&#x27;s name, that person may be presumed to be a lawyer&quot;.

==History==

Chief Justice Coke (1552–1634) defined &quot;gentlemen&quot; as those who bear coats of arms. From the 16th century such families were defined by the inclusion of their pedigrees within their county&#x27;s heraldic visitations, which necessitated their submitting a return of their pedigree to the visiting herald at the specified location, generally one of the chief towns of the county. The 1623 Heraldic Visitation for Gloucestershire, for example, includes a section at the back headed: &quot;A note of such as were disclaymed to be no gentilmen within the county and city of Gloucester&quot;, the list being headed by &quot;Edward Hill, Customer, of Gloucester, neither gentilman of bloud, ancestry nor armes&quot;. The list thus identifies those persons whose returns were not accepted, perhaps because they were fabricated or insufficiently evidenced in some way.

=== Defined in 1586 by Fearn ===

Sir John Fearn in &quot;Glory of Generositie&quot; spoke of esquires by creation, birth, dignity and office, specifying several circumstances that customarily conferred the title.

* Offices of justice or government in the king&#x27;s palace
* Advocates and procurators of the sovereign
* Serjeants at the coif
* Offices of sheriff, escheator or serjeant at arms
* Eldest born of a baron peer of the realm or that of a knight

===Defined by Camden (d. 1623)===

Coke followed Sir William Camden, Clarenceux King of Arms (1551–1623), who defined esquires as:

* the eldest sons of knights and their eldest sons in perpetuity,
* the eldest sons of younger sons of peers and their eldest sons in perpetuity,
* esquires so created by the king,
* esquires by office, such as justices of the peace and those holding an office of trust under the Crown.

===Defined by Weever (d. 1632)===

John Weever (d. 1632) identified five categories of esquires:

*&quot;Those who are elect for the prince&#x27;s body&quot;, which he classed as the principal esquires. These were royal courtiers known as Esquires of the Body
*Knights&#x27; eldest sons
*Younger sons of the eldest sons of barons and other nobles of higher estate
*White Spurs, a form mainly restricted to West Country usage
*Those who are so by office and by serving the prince in any worshipful calling

===Defined in 1830 by Burn, Chitty &amp; Black===

According to one typical definition, esquires in English law included:

* The eldest sons of knights, and their eldest sons in perpetual succession
* The eldest sons of younger sons of peers, and their eldest sons in perpetual succession (children of peers already had higher precedence)
* Esquires created by letters patent or other investiture, and their eldest sons
* Esquires by virtue of their offices, as justices of the peace and others who bear any office of trust under the Crown
* Esquires of knights constituted at their investiture
* Foreign noblemen
* Persons who are so styled under the royal sign-manual (officers of the Armed Forces of or above the rank of Captain in the Army or its equivalent) and sons thereof.
* Barristers (but not solicitors)

===Defined by Boutell (d. 1877)===

Charles Boutell (1812–1877) defined the term as

===Defined in 1894 by James Parker===

James Parker supplied the following definition:

===Modern definition===

Oxford Dictionaries provided for the following definition of &quot;esquire&quot; in 2016:

===Misuse===

By the end of the 16th century, the pretentious use of the title, especially in its Latin form, &quot;armiger&quot;, was being mocked by Shakespeare in his character Robert Shallow, a justice of the peace:

To which Shallow directly replies:

===Other criteria===

Nineteenth century tables of precedence further distinguished between &quot;esquires by birth&quot; and &quot;esquires by office&quot; (and likewise for &quot;gentleman&quot;). Today the term &quot;gentleman&quot; is still found in official tables of precedence, and it means a person who is an armiger with no higher rank or a descendant of someone who has borne arms. An English use of the term is to distinguish between men of the upper and lower gentry, who are &quot;esquires&quot; and &quot;gentlemen&quot; respectively, which still applies in terms of the official Order of Precedence. Examples of this may be found in the parish tithe map schedules made under the Tithe Commutation Act 1836. Later examples appear in the list of subscribers to &quot;The History of Elton&quot;, by the Rev. Rose Fuller Whistler, published in 1892, which distinguishes between subscribers designated &quot;Mr.&quot; (another way of indicating gentlemen) and those allowed &quot;esquire&quot;.

But formal definitions like these were proposed because there was, in reality, no fixed criterion distinguishing those designated esquire: it was essentially a matter of impression as to whether a person qualified for this status. William Segar, Garter King of Arms (the senior officer of arms at the College of Arms), wrote in 1602: &quot;And who so can make proofe, that his Ancestors or himselfe, have had Armes, or can procure them by purchase, may be called Armiger or Esquier.&quot; &quot;Honor military, and civill&quot; (1602; lib. 4, cap. 15, p. 228). (By &quot;Armes&quot; he referred to a coat of arms; it is not clear from this quotation whether Segar made a distinction between esquires and gentlemen.) For example, lords of the manor hold the rank of esquire by prescription.

The 1660 poll tax used to pay off the New Model Army levied an amount of £10 on esquires, which was half the amount due from knights. Samuel Pepys should have paid this amount due to his office, but was delighted to find he had been misrecorded as just a gentleman having to pay 10 shillings, a twentieth of the correct amount.

Although esquire is the English translation of the French &quot;écuyer&quot;, the latter indicated legal membership in the nobilities of &quot;ancien régime&quot; France and contemporaneous Belgium, whereas an esquire belongs to the British gentry rather than to its nobility, albeit that &quot;gentry&quot; in England means untitled nobility. in French (Actually in Old French) (in the 11th to 14th century) means &quot;shield-bearer&quot;, a knight in training, age 14 to 21. In the later stages of the Middle Ages, the cost of the or accolade became too high for many noblemen to bear. They stayed all their lives, making that title synonymous with &quot;nobleman&quot; or &quot;gentleman&quot;.

==Modern British usage==

The most common occurrence of the term &quot;esquire&quot; today is in the addition of the suffix &quot;Esq.&quot; in order to pay an informal compliment to a male recipient by way of implying gentle birth. There remain respected protocols for identifying those to whom it is thought most proper that the suffix should be given, especially in very formal or in official circumstances.

The breadth of &quot;esquire&quot; (as &quot;Esq.&quot;) had become universal in the United Kingdom by the mid 20th century, with no distinction in status being perceived between &quot;Mr&quot; and &quot;esquire&quot;. &quot;Esquire&quot; was used generally as the default title for all men who did not have a grander title when addressing correspondence, with letters addressed using the name in initial format (e.g., &quot;K. S. Smith, Esq.&quot;) but &quot;Mr&quot; being used as the form of address (e.g. &quot;Dear Mr Smith&quot;). In the 1970s, the use of &quot;Esq.&quot; started to decline, and by the end of the 20th century most people had stopped using it and changed to using &quot;Mr&quot; instead. &quot;Esq.&quot; was generally considered to be old-fashioned but was still used by some traditional individuals. However, from around 2010 it has started to return once more as a formal address to a male in business and also in a social setting, particularly where the status of an individual is unknown so is used more as a general courtesy title. Its usage has always remained constant with organisations such as Christie&#x27;s and Berry Bros. &amp; Rudd. British men invited to Buckingham Palace also receive their invitations in an envelope with the suffix &quot;Esq.&quot; after their names, while men of foreign nationalities instead have the prefix &quot;Mr&quot; (women are addressed as &quot;Miss&quot;, &quot;Ms&quot;, or &quot;Mrs&quot;). The same practice applies for other post from the palace (e.g., to employees).

===In Scotland===

Esquire is historically a feudal designation in Scotland. Today, the title of esquire is defined as a social dignity that refers to people of the Scottish gentry, who hold the next position in the Order of Precedence above gentlemen. It is also used as a common courtesy in correspondence. Traditionally, this was one who was classified as a &quot;cadet for knighthood&quot;. Today, the title of esquire is not bestowed on gentlemen, although certain positions carry with them the degree of esquire, such as that of advocate or justice of the peace. Whether an armiger is a gentleman, an esquire, or of a higher rank can be told by the type of helm depicted on the letters patent granting or matriculating the arms. In &quot;Scots Heraldry&quot;, Sir Thomas Innes of Learney makes clear that a gentleman&#x27;s helm is a closed pot helm, in plain steel, with no gold, whereas an esquire&#x27;s helm can be a steel pot helm garnished in gold or a helmet with a closed visor garnished in gold. The Court of the Lord Lyon will display the helm appropriate to their &quot;degree&quot;, or social rank, in the illustration on the letters patent.

The definition of esquire today includes:

# The male primogeniture descendant of a knight (with or without Scottish arms),
# Scottish armigers recognised with a territorial designation within their letters patent, frequently described as a laird, which is taken to imply the rank of Esquire. Lairds with a territorial designation recognised by the Court of the Lord Lyon would not use the post nominal letters of &quot;Esq.&quot; after their name, as the use of the territorial designation implies the rank of esquire.
# Male Scottish clan chiefs recognized by the Court of the Lord Lyon (with Scottish arms) who are not feudal barons, or peers.
# Those other armigers recognised in the degree of esquire via the helm indicated in their letters patent as per the guidance mentioned above.

There is some confusion over the fact that the Lord Lyon King of Arms addresses correspondents by their name followed by &quot;Esq.&quot; in correspondence, namely on letters. Some people erroneously believe that this makes them an esquire, however this is a common courtesy in Scotland, as in the rest of Britain, and does not constitute official recognition in the degree of an esquire. The Scottish courts have confirmed that the base degree in which an armiger is recognised is the dignity of gentleman, not esquire.

In feudal times an esquire was an armour-bearer, attendant upon a knight, but bearing his own unique armorial device. Similarly, an armiger in contemporary terms is well-defined within the jurisdiction of Scotland as someone who is an armour-bearer. These two senses of &quot;armour-bearer&quot; are different: An esquire in feudal times was an &quot;armour-bearer&quot; in the sense of being the person who carried their knight&#x27;s armour for them; whereas in the contemporary sense the term &quot;armour-bearer&quot; is being used to mean the bearer of a coat of arms, an armiger. The two are not the same thing, although the feudal esquire would also most likely have been an armiger. For centuries the title of esquire has not been bestowed on a knight&#x27;s attendee (since knights no longer need to train for battle). Attendants on knights, however, were not the only bearers of arms, and similarly not all armigers were esquires. Today, being an armiger is synonymous with the title of gentleman within the order of precedence in Scotland, and is a social dignity. The letters patent of Scottish armigers will never include the title of gentleman, because the letters patent themselves evidence the individual is an armour-bearer, or gentleman by the strictest sense of the definition. A Scottish armiger is a gentleman or gentlewoman unless they hold a higher rank.

Scottish armigers are those individuals with a hereditary right, grant or matriculation of arms so entitling them to use personal arms by the Court of the Lord Lyon. The bearing of duly registered arms is an indication of nobility (either peerage or non-peerage in rank). All Scottish armigers are recognised as members of the nobility in the broader sense through their grant or matriculation of arms awarded by the Crown or sovereign through the Court of the Lord Lyon, and by issuance of a warrant from the Lord Lyon King of Arms is so entered in the Public Register of All Arms and Bearings in Scotland and through later official &quot;Ensigns of Nobility&quot;. Without such legal arms it is practically impossible to prove one&#x27;s nobiliary status. &quot;Technically, a grant of arms from the Lord Lyon is a patent of nobility (also referred to a &#x27;Diploma of Nobility&#x27;); the Grantee is thereby &#x27;enrolled with all nobles in the noblesse of Scotland.&#x27;&quot;, however the term &quot;nobility&quot; today is little used in this context, as in common parlance in Britain the term is widely associated with the peerage. Instead the French term of &quot;noblesse&quot; has been used by the Court of the Lord Lyon as this term not only includes peers but also the non-peerage minor-nobility, which includes baronets, knights, feudal barons, armigers with territorial designations, esquires and gentlemen.

==Usage in the United States==

In the United States of America, the term is almost exclusively reserved for lawyers, much as one with any doctorate (such as PhD, EdD, MD, DO, or PsyD) is called Dr. 

===In the legal profession===

In the United States, the title &quot;esquire&quot; is commonly encountered among members of the legal profession. The title is not allocated by the law of any state to any profession, class, or station in society. However, some state bar associations, such as the New York State Bar Association, protect the use of the term esquire, and have held that use of the term connotes licensure in the jurisdiction, so that its use by non-lawyers amounts to unauthorized practice of law.

===Diplomatic use===

Similarly, when addressing social correspondence to a commissioned officer of the United States Foreign Service, &quot;esquire&quot; may be used as a complimentary title. While the abbreviated &quot;Esq.&quot; is correct, &quot;esquire&quot; is typically written in full when addressing a diplomat. If any other titles are used on the same line, &quot;esquire&quot; is omitted.

===In fraternal groups===

Some fraternal groups use the esquire title. One appendant body in Freemasonry also uses esquire as a degree title.

In print publications, the cartoon and comics character Bugs Bunny is often portrayed as living in a rabbit hole marked with a sign or mailbox reading &quot;Home of Bugs Bunny, Esq.&quot; Occasional comic book stories have shown Bugs as a member of various fraternal organizations; other times, the British gentry application of the term is implied, as the character of Bugs simply likes showing off his intelligence.

===In colonial Virginia===

In the Colony of Virginia, during the 17th and 18th centuries, &quot;esquire&quot; was the title given to members of the Council of Virginia, the upper house of the Virginia Assembly.

===Use of honorifics and post-nominals===

Honorifics are not used with courtesy titles, so &quot;John Smith, Esq.&quot; or &quot;Mr. John Smith&quot; would be correct, but &quot;Mr. John Smith, Esq.&quot; would be incorrect.

When addressing a person who has an academic degree or other post-nominal professional designation, such as a Certified Public Accountant, a writer should use either the post-nominal designation (usually abbreviated) or the &quot;Esq.&quot;, but not both; when esquire is used as a &quot;courtesy title&quot;, it should not be used with post-nominals.

==Usage in India==

Before 1947, the term &quot;esquire&quot; was used by senior officers of the Indian Civil Service and other members of the government. In keeping with the criteria established centuries earlier, the title was mostly used by government officials who studied or trained in England, especially in the universities of Oxford, Cambridge, or London or other professional organisations managed by the government. Barristers were especially included in the order of the esquires. Members of the armed forces as well as those who were inducted in to it from other services, temporarily or permanently, were also called esquires.

== Kingdom of France ==

In the French Nobility, (&#x27;squire&#x27;, ) was the lowest specific rank, to which the vast majority of untitled nobles were entitled; also called or in certain regions.

== Kingdom of Belgium ==
In Belgium, (French) or its Dutch equivalent is the lowest title within the nobility system, recognised by the Court of Cassation.

==See also==

*English honorifics

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q286449" start="0" end="7" title="Esquire" label="Esquire"/>
<link wikidata="Q286449" start="25" end="29" title="Esquire" label="Esq."/>
<link wikidata="Q2304081" start="44" end="58" title="courtesy title" label="courtesy title"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="67" end="81" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q56304279" start="206" end="219" title="landed gentry" label="landed gentry"/>
<link wikidata="Q749212" start="238" end="247" title="gentleman" label="gentleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q102083" start="270" end="276" title="knight" label="knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q329455" start="497" end="518" title="Justice of the peace" label="justices of the peace"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="520" end="528" title="Sheriff#United Kingdom" label="sheriffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q332449" start="566" end="584" title="William Blackstone" label="William Blackstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986212" start="598" end="633" title="Commentaries on the Laws of England" label="Commentaries on the Laws of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q21941952" start="738" end="747" title="the Crown" label="the Crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479879" start="1431" end="1450" title="order of precedence" label="order of precedence"/>
<link wikidata="Q808967" start="1509" end="1519" title="barristers" label="barristers"/>
<link wikidata="Q40348" start="1625" end="1631" title="lawyer" label="lawyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1964223" start="1639" end="1645" title="Suffix (name)" label="suffix"/>
<link wikidata="Q161736" start="1661" end="1666" title="comma" label="comma"/>
<link wikidata="Q7013133" start="1730" end="1759" title="New York City Bar Association" label="New York City Bar Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q332435" start="2124" end="2142" title="Edward Coke" label="Chief Justice Coke"/>
<link wikidata="Q14659" start="2203" end="2216" title="Coat of arms" label="coats of arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q5732698" start="2330" end="2349" title="heraldic visitation" label="heraldic visitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1101269" start="3030" end="3044" title="John Ferne" label="Sir John Fearn"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3274" end="3283" title="Advocate#England and Wales" label="Advocates"/>
<link wikidata="Q15999952" start="3288" end="3299" title="Proctor" label="procurators"/>
<link wikidata="Q17104090" start="3319" end="3340" title="Serjeant-at-law" label="Serjeants at the coif"/>
<link wikidata="Q578478" start="3354" end="3361" title="sheriff" label="sheriff"/>
<link wikidata="Q552592" start="3363" end="3370" title="escheat" label="escheat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2611907" start="3376" end="3392" title="Serjeant-at-arms" label="serjeant at arms"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3412" end="3435" title="Baron#United Kingdom and the Commonwealth" label="baron peer of the realm"/>
<link wikidata="Q102083" start="3449" end="3455" title="knight" label="knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q364239" start="3510" end="3524" title="William Camden" label="William Camden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1095534" start="3526" end="3549" title="Clarenceux King of Arms" label="Clarenceux King of Arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q6263369" start="3912" end="3923" title="John Weever" label="John Weever"/>
<link wikidata="Q15132701" start="4116" end="4136" title="Esquire of the Body" label="Esquires of the Body"/>
<link wikidata="Q18109277" start="4242" end="4252" title="White Spur (esquire)" label="White Spur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344070" start="4283" end="4295" title="West Country" label="West Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q102083" start="4527" end="4533" title="knight" label="knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q51280089" start="4619" end="4623" title="Peerage" label="peer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511010" start="4744" end="4758" title="letters patent" label="letters patent"/>
<link wikidata="Q329455" start="4845" end="4866" title="justice of the peace" label="justices of the peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q21941952" start="4913" end="4922" title="the Crown" label="the Crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q167407" start="4966" end="4977" title="investiture" label="investiture"/>
<link wikidata="Q7375085" start="5035" end="5052" title="royal sign-manual" label="royal sign-manual"/>
<link wikidata="Q275482" start="5070" end="5082" title="British Armed Forces" label="Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q19100" start="5107" end="5114" title="Captain (armed forces)" label="Captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q222595" start="5122" end="5126" title="British Army" label="Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q808967" start="5166" end="5175" title="Barrister" label="Barrister"/>
<link wikidata="Q14284" start="5186" end="5195" title="solicitor" label="solicitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5075700" start="5235" end="5250" title="Charles Boutell" label="Charles Boutell"/>
<link wikidata="Q4807054" start="5397" end="5416" title="Oxford Dictionaries (website)" label="Oxford Dictionaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q2701343" start="5604" end="5611" title="armiger" label="armiger"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="5639" end="5650" title="Shakespeare" label="Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q18390753" start="5668" end="5682" title="Robert Shallow" label="Robert Shallow"/>
<link wikidata="Q329455" start="5686" end="5706" title="justice of the peace" label="justice of the peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q2701343" start="6062" end="6069" title="armiger" label="armiger"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809949" start="6439" end="6465" title="Tithe Commutation Act 1836" label="Tithe Commutation Act 1836"/>
<link wikidata="Q177053" start="6663" end="6666" title="Mr." label="Mr."/>
<link wikidata="Q535393" start="6982" end="6995" title="William Segar" label="William Segar"/>
<link wikidata="Q640138" start="6997" end="7016" title="Garter King of Arms" label="Garter King of Arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q3247049" start="7029" end="7044" title="officer of arms" label="officer of arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109101" start="7052" end="7067" title="College of Arms" label="College of Arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q14659" start="7351" end="7363" title="coat of arms" label="coat of arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815782" start="7480" end="7498" title="lord of the manor" label="lords of the manor"/>
<link wikidata="Q721368" start="7551" end="7559" title="poll tax" label="poll tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432954" start="7580" end="7594" title="New Model Army" label="New Model Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q106143" start="7676" end="7688" title="Samuel Pepys" label="Samuel Pepys"/>
<link wikidata="Q234081" start="8014" end="8027" title="ancien régime" label="ancien régime"/>
<link wikidata="Q844586" start="8112" end="8118" title="gentry" label="gentry"/>
<link wikidata="Q134737" start="8138" end="8146" title="nobility" label="nobility"/>
<link wikidata="Q547314" start="8408" end="8416" title="accolade" label="accolade"/>
<link wikidata="Q134737" start="8529" end="8537" title="nobleman" label="nobleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q749212" start="8553" end="8562" title="gentleman" label="gentleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q844586" start="8790" end="8802" title="gentry" label="gentle birth"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="9068" end="9082" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q177053" start="9168" end="9170" title="Mr" label="Mr"/>
<link wikidata="Q503176" start="10111" end="10126" title="Christie&amp;#x27;s" label="Christie&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q2899153" start="10131" end="10153" title="Berry Bros. &amp;amp; Rudd" label="Berry Bros. &amp;amp; Rudd"/>
<link wikidata="Q42182" start="10178" end="10195" title="Buckingham Palace" label="Buckingham Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q844586" start="10701" end="10707" title="gentry" label="gentry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7100638" start="10743" end="10762" title="order of precedence in Scotland" label="Order of Precedence"/>
<link wikidata="Q749212" start="10769" end="10778" title="gentlemen" label="gentlemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q380075" start="11062" end="11070" title="advocate" label="advocate"/>
<link wikidata="Q329455" start="11074" end="11094" title="justice of the peace" label="justice of the peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q7790994" start="11293" end="11320" title="Sir Thomas Innes of Learney" label="Sir Thomas Innes of Learney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137768" start="11542" end="11564" title="Court of the Lord Lyon" label="Court of the Lord Lyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511010" start="11671" end="11685" title="letters patent" label="letters patent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515878" start="11929" end="11934" title="laird" label="laird"/>
<link wikidata="Q1523599" start="12526" end="12548" title="Lord Lyon King of Arms" label="Lord Lyon King of Arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q7100638" start="14019" end="14050" title="order of precedence in Scotland" label="order of precedence in Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2701343" start="14389" end="14397" title="armigers" label="armigers"/>
<link wikidata="Q355379" start="15197" end="15215" title="patent of nobility" label="patent of nobility"/>
<link wikidata="Q7045841" start="15556" end="15564" title="noblesse" label="noblesse"/>
<link wikidata="Q849697" start="15946" end="15955" title="doctorate" label="doctorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q4618975" start="16002" end="16005" title="Doctor (title)" label="Dr."/>
<link wikidata="Q7014031" start="16304" end="16334" title="New York State Bar Association" label="New York State Bar Association"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16490" end="16518" title="Practice of law#Unauthorized practice of law" label="unauthorized practice of law"/>
<link wikidata="Q3480437" start="16625" end="16654" title="United States Foreign Service" label="United States Foreign Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q41726" start="17016" end="17027" title="Freemasons" label="Freemasonry"/>
<link wikidata="Q183102" start="17122" end="17132" title="Bugs Bunny" label="Bugs Bunny"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070529" start="17520" end="17538" title="Colony of Virginia" label="Colony of Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17634" end="17653" title="Virginia Governor&amp;#x27;s Council#Royal colony (1624–1776)" label="Council of Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q637846" start="17659" end="17670" title="upper house" label="upper house"/>
<link wikidata="Q530970" start="17678" end="17695" title="Virginia Assembly" label="Virginia Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056337" start="18035" end="18062" title="Certified Public Accountant" label="Certified Public Accountant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661231" start="18375" end="18395" title="Indian Civil Service" label="Indian Civil Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="18612" end="18618" title="University of Oxford" label="Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q35794" start="18620" end="18629" title="University of Cambridge" label="Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q170027" start="18634" end="18640" title="University of London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q808967" start="18704" end="18713" title="Barrister" label="Barrister"/>
<link wikidata="Q1450700" start="18951" end="18966" title="French nobility" label="French Nobility"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="19146" end="19153" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="19156" end="19162" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411" start="19171" end="19176" title="Dutch language" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230309" start="19254" end="19272" title="Court of Cassation (Belgium)" label="Court of Cassation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378582" start="19290" end="19308" title="English honorifics" label="English honorifics"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="309092" wikidata="Q321003" url="?curid=309092" title="James Harris, 3rd Earl of Malmesbury">
<text>James Howard Harris, 3rd Earl of Malmesbury, GCB, PC (25 March 1807 – 17 May 1889), styled Viscount FitzHarris from 1820 to 1841, was a British statesman of the Victorian era.

==Background and education==
James Howard Harris was born on 25 March 1807 in London, the eldest son and heir of James Harris, 2nd Earl of Malmesbury, and his wife, Harriet Susan Dashwood, daughter of Francis Bateman Dashwood, of Well Vale, Lincolnshire, and his wife, Teresa March, daughter of John March, of Willeslet Park, Cambridgeshire. Having been educated privately, he went to Eton College, a Public school, and Oriel College, Oxford, graduating from the latter in 1828 with a Bachelor of Arts degree. In the years that followed his graduation, he went travelling around Europe and making acquaintance with aristocratic circles, becoming familiar with Prince Louis Napoleon, who would later become Napoleon III of France.

===Family===
Harris married, firstly, on 13 May 1876, Lady Corisande Emma Bennet, daughter of Charles Augustus Bennet, 5th Earl of Tankerville, and his wife Corisanda, daughter of Antoine, duc de Gramont and sister of Agenor, duc de Gramont, who was Minister of Foreign Affairs for France in 1870. She died in 1876. After the death of his first wife, Malmesbury married a second time, on 1 November 1880, to Susan Hamilton, daughter of John Hamilton of Fyne Court, Somerset.

==Political career==

In 1841 he had only just been elected to the House of Commons for Wilton as a Conservative, when his father died and he succeeded to the peerage. Malmesbury served as Foreign Secretary under the Earl of Derby in 1852 and again from 1858 to 1859 and was also Lord Privy Seal under Derby and Benjamin Disraeli between 1866 and 1868 and under Disraeli between 1874 and 1876. In 1852 he was admitted to the Privy Council. He was regarded as an influential Tory of the old school in the House of Lords at a time when Lord Derby and Disraeli were, in their different ways, moulding the Conservatism of the period.

In his two brief terms as foreign secretary, Malmesbury pursued a cautious, Conservative policy. His friendship with the exiled Louis Napoleon helped lead to quick British acquiescence in the Prince-President&#x27;s decision to restore the Empire in 1852, but did not prevent Malmesbury from pursuing a policy relatively sympathetic to Austria during the crisis leading up to the Italian War of 1859. Malmesbury was particularly horrified by the behaviour of Cavour, and at the fact that a small country like Piedmont was able so easily to threaten the European peace.

His long life, and the publication of his &quot;Memoirs of an Ex-Minister&quot; in 1884, contributed to his reputation. The &quot;Memoirs&quot;, charmingly written, full of anecdote, and containing much interesting material for the history of the time, remain his chief title to remembrance. Lord Malmesbury also edited his grandfather&#x27;s &quot;Diaries and Correspondence&quot; (1844), and in 1870 published &quot;The First Lord Malmesbury and His Friends&quot;.

He was appointed Honorary Colonel of the Hampshire Militia Artillery on 22 June 1854, from which he resigned on 22 November 1884.

==Personal life==
Lord Malmesbury died childless in May 1889, aged 82, and was succeeded in the earldom by his nephew, Edward Harris.

==References==
Rex Factor Podcast. S1. Eps. 54-58 (56/57 specifically)

=== Citations ===

=== Bibliography ===

*Kidd, Charles, Williamson, David (editors). &quot;Debrett&#x27;s Peerage and Baronetage&quot; (1990 edition). New York: St Martin&#x27;s Press, 1990.
*

== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q321003" start="0" end="43" title="James Harris, 3rd Earl of Malmesbury" label="James Howard Harris, 3rd Earl of Malmesbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q506369" start="45" end="48" title="Order of the Bath" label="GCB"/>
<link wikidata="Q683120" start="50" end="52" title="Privy Council (United Kingdom)" label="PC"/>
<link wikidata="Q321003" start="91" end="110" title="James Harris, 3rd Earl of Malmesbury" label="Viscount FitzHarris"/>
<link wikidata="Q182688" start="161" end="174" title="Victorian era" label="Victorian era"/>
<link wikidata="Q6135609" start="290" end="326" title="James Harris, 2nd Earl of Malmesbury" label="James Harris, 2nd Earl of Malmesbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q192088" start="562" end="574" title="Eton College" label="Eton College"/>
<link wikidata="Q81170" start="597" end="618" title="Oriel College, Oxford" label="Oriel College, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q165581" start="1088" end="1111" title="Antoine-Geneviève-Héraclius-Agénor de Gramont" label="Antoine, duc de Gramont"/>
<link wikidata="Q585590" start="1126" end="1148" title="Agenor, duc de Gramont" label="Agenor, duc de Gramont"/>
<link wikidata="Q5511241" start="1361" end="1371" title="Fyne Court" label="Fyne Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q11005" start="1451" end="1467" title="British House of Commons" label="House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q8023356" start="1472" end="1478" title="Wilton (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Wilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="1484" end="1496" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371091" start="1573" end="1590" title="Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs (UK)" label="Foreign Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q237829" start="1601" end="1614" title="Edward Smith-Stanley, 14th Earl of Derby" label="Earl of Derby"/>
<link wikidata="Q910308" start="1664" end="1679" title="Lord Privy Seal" label="Lord Privy Seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q82006" start="1696" end="1713" title="Benjamin Disraeli" label="Benjamin Disraeli"/>
<link wikidata="Q683120" start="1809" end="1822" title="Privy Council of the United Kingdom" label="Privy Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q3433953" start="1858" end="1862" title="Tory" label="Tory"/>
<link wikidata="Q11007" start="1888" end="1902" title="House of Lords" label="House of Lords"/>
<link wikidata="Q7721" start="2143" end="2157" title="Napoleon III of France" label="Louis Napoleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q540978" start="2395" end="2414" title="Austro-Sardinian War" label="Italian War of 1859"/>
<link wikidata="Q166092" start="2474" end="2480" title="Camillo di Cavour" label="Cavour"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3070" end="3086" title="Colonel (United Kingdom)#Honorary Colonel" label="Honorary Colonel"/>
<link wikidata="Q132069852" start="3094" end="3121" title="Hampshire Militia Artillery" label="Hampshire Militia Artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q5343332" start="3303" end="3316" title="Edward Harris, 4th Earl of Malmesbury" label="Edward Harris"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="309096" wikidata="Q332789" url="?curid=309096" title="Edward Stanley, 15th Earl of Derby">
<text>Edward Henry Stanley, 15th Earl of Derby (21 July 182621 April 1893; known as [[Lord Stanley]] from 1851 to 1869) was a British statesman. He served as Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs twice, from 1866 to 1868 and from 1874 to 1878, and also twice as Colonial Secretary in 1858 and from 1882 to 1885.

==Background and education==
He was born to Edward Smith-Stanley, 14th Earl of Derby, who led the Conservative Party from 1846 to 1868 and served as Prime Minister three times, and Emma Caroline Bootle-Wilbraham, daughter of Edward Bootle-Wilbraham, 1st Baron Skelmersdale, and was the older brother of Frederick Arthur Stanley, 16th Earl of Derby, for whom the NHL&#x27;s Stanley Cup is named. The Stanleys were one of the richest landowning families in England. Lord Stanley, as he was styled before acceding to the earldom, was educated at Eton, Rugby and Trinity College, Cambridge, where he took a first in classics and became a member of the society known as the Cambridge Apostles.

==Political career==
In March 1848 he unsuccessfully contested the borough of Lancaster, and then made a long tour in the West Indies, Canada and the United States. During his absence, he was elected member for King&#x27;s Lynn, which he represented till October 1869, when he succeeded to the peerage. He took his place, as a matter of course, among the Conservatives, and delivered his maiden speech in May 1850 on the sugar duties. Just before, he had made a very brief tour in Jamaica and South America. In 1852 he went to India, and while travelling in that country, he was appointed under-secretary for foreign affairs in his father&#x27;s first administration. On 11 March 1853, he was commissioned a captain in the 3rd Royal Lancashire Militia.

From the outset of his career, he was known to be more politically sympathetic to the Liberals rather than the Conservatives, and in 1855 Lord Palmerston offered him the post of Secretary of State for the Colonies. He was much tempted by the proposal, and hurried down to Knowsley to consult his father, who called out when he entered the room, &quot;Halo, Stanley! what brings you here?—Has Dizzy cut his throat, or are you going to be married?&quot; When the object of his sudden appearance had been explained, the Conservative chief received the courteous suggestion of the prime minister with anything but favour, and the offer was declined. On 13 May 1856, he was appointed to the Royal Commission on the purchase of commissions in the British army. In his father&#x27;s second administration Lord Stanley held, at first, the office of Secretary of State for the Colonies (1858), but became President of the Board of Control on the resignation of Lord Ellenborough. He had the charge of the India Bill of 1858 in the House of Commons, became the first Secretary of State for India, and left behind him in the India Office an excellent reputation as a man of business.

After the revolution in Greece and the flight of King Otto, Queen Victoria&#x27;s second son, Prince Alfred, was the Greek people&#x27;s choice as their next king. After he declined, the idea arose of electing a great and wealthy English nobleman, in the open hope that although they might have to offer him a Civil List, he would decline to receive it. Lord Stanley was the favourite candidate. However, despite reports to the contrary, he was, in fact, never formally offered the crown.
===Foreign minister 1866-68 ===
After the fall of the Russell government in 1866 he became Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs in his father&#x27;s third administration. He compared his conduct in that great post to that of a man floating down a river and fending off from his vessel, as well as he could, the various obstacles it encountered. He enunciated the policy of Splendid isolation in 1866:
:it is the duty of the Government of this country, placed as it is with regard to geographical position, to keep itself upon terms of goodwill with all surrounding nations, but not to entangle itself with any single or monopolizing alliance with any one of them; above all to endeavour not to interfere needlessly and vexatiously with the internal affairs of any foreign country.&quot;

He arranged the collective guarantee of the neutrality of Luxembourg in 1867, likely to be a theatre of war with the conflict between France and Prussia growing ever more likely. He also negotiated a convention with the USA about the &quot;CSS Alabama&quot;, which, however, was not ratified, and refused to take any part in the troubles in Crete.

===Foreign Minister 1874-78===
In 1874 he again became Foreign Secretary in Disraeli&#x27;s government. In 1875 came the purchase of the controlling shares in the Suez Canal Company. By negotiations, Russia gave up substantial gains in the Balkans and a foothold in the Mediterranean. Britain gained control of Cyprus from the Ottomans as a naval base covering the Eastern Mediterranean. In exchange, Britain guaranteed the Asiatic territories of the Ottoman Empire. Britain did not do well in conflicts in Afghanistan and South Africa.

Derby acquiesced in Disraeli&#x27;s purchase of the Suez Canal shares, a measure then considered dangerous by many people, but ultimately most successful. He accepted the Andrassy Note, but declined to accede to the Berlin Memorandum. Derby&#x27;s conduct during the Eastern Crisis was mysterious to many of his contemporaries and for some time thereafter. Derby&#x27;s hope for peace with Russia led him (and his wife) to share Cabinet secrets with the Russian ambassador, Pyotr Shuvalov, in hopes of averting war with Russia. Robert Blake commented that &quot;Derby surely must be the only Foreign Secretary in British history to reveal the innermost secrets of the Cabinet to the ambassador of a foreign power in order to frustrate the presumed intentions of his own Prime Minister.&quot; Derby resigned in January 1878 when the Cabinet resolved to send the British fleet through the Dardanelles, but when that action soon proved unnecessary, Derby was allowed to withdraw his resignation. However, he resigned again and finally in the same year when the Cabinet agreed to call up the reserve.

By October 1879, it was clear enough that he had thrown in his lot with the Liberal Party, but it was not till March 1880 that he publicly announced this change of allegiance. He did not at first take office in the second Gladstone government, but became Colonial Secretary in December 1882, holding this position till the fall of that government in the summer of 1885. In 1886 the Liberal party split; Lord Derby became a Liberal Unionist, and took an active part in the general management of that party, leading it in the House of Lords till 1891, when Lord Hartington became Duke of Devonshire. In 1892 he presided over the Labour Commission.

He succeeded his father as Honorary Colonel of the 1st Lancashire Rifle Volunteer Corps (1st Volunteer Battalion, King&#x27;s (Liverpool Regiment) from 1888), being appointed on 21 September 1870. After his death he was succeeded by his son in turn.

He served as President of the first day of the 1881 Co-operative Congress.

==Personal life==
Lord Derby married Lady Mary, daughter of George Sackville-West, 5th Earl De La Warr and widow of James Gascoyne-Cecil, 2nd Marquess of Salisbury, in 1870. They had no children. Derby&#x27;s health never recovered from an attack of influenza which he had in 1891, and he died at Knowsley on 21 April 1893, aged 66. He was succeeded in the earldom by his younger brother, Frederick. Lady Derby died in December 1900.

==Notes==
==Further reading==
* Saintsbury, George. &quot;The earl of Derby&quot; (1892) online
* Wilson, Keith M., ed. &quot;British foreign secretaries and foreign policy: from Crimean War to First World War&quot; (Routledge Kegan &amp; Paul, 1987)

=== Primary sources===
* Derby, Edward Henry Stanley. &quot;Disraeli, Derby, and the Conservative Party: Journals and Memoirs of Edward Henry, Lord Stanley, 1849–1869&quot; (Harvester Press, 1978)

==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q332789" start="0" end="40" title="Edward Stanley, 15th Earl of Derby" label="Edward Henry Stanley, 15th Earl of Derby"/>
<link wikidata="Q332789" start="78" end="94" title="Edward Stanley, 15th Earl of Derby" label="[[Lord Stanley]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q174193" start="120" end="127" title="United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371091" start="152" end="190" title="Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs (UK)" label="Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2519998" start="257" end="275" title="Secretary of State for the Colonies" label="Colonial Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q237829" start="352" end="392" title="Edward Smith-Stanley, 14th Earl of Derby" label="Edward Smith-Stanley, 14th Earl of Derby"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="406" end="424" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q27541554" start="489" end="519" title="Emma Caroline Smith-Stanley, Countess of Derby" label="Emma Caroline Bootle-Wilbraham"/>
<link wikidata="Q5341948" start="533" end="580" title="Edward Bootle-Wilbraham, 1st Baron Skelmersdale" label="Edward Bootle-Wilbraham, 1st Baron Skelmersdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q222458" start="611" end="655" title="Frederick Stanley, 16th Earl of Derby" label="Frederick Arthur Stanley, 16th Earl of Derby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215892" start="670" end="680" title="NHL&amp;#x27;s" label="NHL&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q211872" start="681" end="692" title="Stanley Cup" label="Stanley Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q192088" start="851" end="855" title="Eton College" label="Eton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143281" start="857" end="862" title="Rugby School" label="Rugby"/>
<link wikidata="Q332342" start="867" end="893" title="Trinity College, Cambridge" label="Trinity College, Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028290" start="977" end="995" title="Cambridge Apostles" label="Cambridge Apostles"/>
<link wikidata="Q5195043" start="1065" end="1072" title="borough" label="borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q205905" start="1076" end="1085" title="Lancaster, England" label="Lancaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q669037" start="1120" end="1131" title="West Indies" label="West Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="1133" end="1139" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="1148" end="1161" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q6410993" start="1209" end="1225" title="King&amp;#x27;s Lynn (UK Parliament constituency)" label="King&amp;#x27;s Lynn"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="1353" end="1366" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q6735422" start="1386" end="1399" title="maiden speech" label="maiden speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q766" start="1479" end="1486" title="Jamaica" label="Jamaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q18" start="1491" end="1504" title="South America" label="South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="1525" end="1530" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q105453250" start="1721" end="1749" title="3rd Royal Lancashire Militia (The Duke of Lancaster&amp;#x27;s Own)" label="3rd Royal Lancashire Militia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6216" start="1838" end="1846" title="Liberalism" label="Liberals"/>
<link wikidata="Q193656" start="1890" end="1905" title="Henry John Temple, 3rd Viscount Palmerston" label="Lord Palmerston"/>
<link wikidata="Q2519998" start="1930" end="1965" title="Secretary of State for the Colonies" label="Secretary of State for the Colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q82006" start="2144" end="2149" title="Benjamin Disraeli" label="Dizzy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986735" start="2438" end="2454" title="Royal Commission" label="Royal Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q4379908" start="2462" end="2505" title="purchase of commissions in the British army" label="purchase of commissions in the British army"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241308" start="2648" end="2681" title="President of the Board of Control" label="President of the Board of Control"/>
<link wikidata="Q808614" start="2704" end="2721" title="Lord Ellenborough" label="Lord Ellenborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359529" start="2748" end="2766" title="Government of India Act 1858" label="India Bill of 1858"/>
<link wikidata="Q11005" start="2774" end="2790" title="British House of Commons" label="House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q639769" start="2809" end="2837" title="Secretary of State for India" label="Secretary of State for India"/>
<link wikidata="Q77067" start="2975" end="2984" title="Otto of Greece" label="King Otto"/>
<link wikidata="Q9439" start="2986" end="3007" title="Victoria of the United Kingdom" label="Queen Victoria&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q158143" start="3020" end="3033" title="Alfred, Duke of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha" label="Prince Alfred"/>
<link wikidata="Q206874" start="3236" end="3246" title="Civil List" label="Civil List"/>
<link wikidata="Q157259" start="3469" end="3476" title="John Russell, 1st Earl Russell" label="Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371091" start="3506" end="3544" title="Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs (UK)" label="Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1505242" start="3790" end="3808" title="Splendid isolation" label="Splendid isolation"/>
<link wikidata="Q597443" start="4445" end="4456" title="CSS Alabama" label="CSS Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q899" start="5144" end="5154" title="Suez Canal" label="Suez Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q313557" start="5263" end="5271" title="Julius Andrassy" label="Andrassy"/>
<link wikidata="Q778295" start="5566" end="5580" title="Pyotr Shuvalov" label="Pyotr Shuvalov"/>
<link wikidata="Q7342148" start="5620" end="5632" title="Robert Blake, Baron Blake" label="Robert Blake"/>
<link wikidata="Q622441" start="6266" end="6279" title="Liberal Party (UK)" label="Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q160852" start="6412" end="6421" title="William Ewart Gladstone" label="Gladstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754707" start="6613" end="6629" title="Liberal Unionist" label="Liberal Unionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q334063" start="6745" end="6760" title="Spencer Compton Cavendish, 8th Duke of Devonshire" label="Lord Hartington"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6864" end="6880" title="Colonel (United Kingdom)#Honorary Colonel" label="Honorary Colonel"/>
<link wikidata="Q85845274" start="6888" end="6924" title="1st Lancashire Rifle Volunteer Corps" label="1st Lancashire Rifle Volunteer Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q6411074" start="6951" end="6983" title="King&amp;#x27;s (Liverpool Regiment)" label="King&amp;#x27;s (Liverpool Regiment)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6594658" start="7101" end="7110" title="List of Presidents of Co-operative Congress" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q5137466" start="7140" end="7161" title="Co-operative Congress" label="Co-operative Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q18648958" start="7201" end="7210" title="Mary Catherine Stanley, Lady Derby" label="Lady Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q7614222" start="7224" end="7266" title="George Sackville-West, 5th Earl De La Warr" label="George Sackville-West, 5th Earl De La Warr"/>
<link wikidata="Q2479905" start="7280" end="7327" title="James Gascoyne-Cecil, 2nd Marquess of Salisbury" label="James Gascoyne-Cecil, 2nd Marquess of Salisbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423480" start="7461" end="7469" title="Knowsley Hall" label="Knowsley"/>
<link wikidata="Q222458" start="7553" end="7562" title="Frederick Stanley, 16th Earl of Derby" label="Frederick"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="309098" wikidata="Q332650" url="?curid=309098" title="Stafford Northcote, 1st Earl of Iddesleigh">
<text>Stafford Henry Northcote, 1st Earl of Iddesleigh (27 October 1818 – 12 January 1887), known as Sir Stafford Northcote, 8th Baronet from 1851 to 1885, was a British Conservative politician. He was Chancellor of the Exchequer between 1874 and 1880, First Lord of the Treasury between 1885 and 1886 and as Foreign Secretary between 1886 and 1887. 

According to Nigel Keohane, historians have portrayed him &quot;as a man who fell short of the ultimate achievement of being prime minister largely because of personal weakness, and lack of political virility and drive.&quot;

==Background and education==
Northcote (pronounced &quot;Northcut&quot;) was born at Portland Place, Marylebone, London, on 27 October 1818. He was the eldest son of Henry Stafford Northcote (1792–1850), eldest son of Sir Stafford Henry Northcote, 7th Baronet and Jacquetta Baring, a member of the Baring family. His mother was Agnes Mary (died 1840), daughter of Thomas Cockburn, a member of Clan Cockburn and Henrietta Colebrooke, natural daughter of Robert Colebrooke, MP. His paternal Northcote ancestors had long been settled in Devon, tracing their descent from Galfridas de Nordcote who settled there in 1103. The family home was situated at Pynes House northwest of Exeter. Northcote was educated at Eton and Balliol College, Oxford and was called to the bar, Inner Temple, in 1847.

==Early political career==
In 1843 Northcote became private secretary to William Ewart Gladstone at the Board of Trade. Northcote was afterwards legal secretary to the board and, after acting as one of the secretaries to the Great Exhibition of 1851, co-operated with Sir Charles Trevelyan in framing the Northcote–Trevelyan Report, which revolutionized the conditions of appointment to the Civil Service. He succeeded his grandfather, Sir Stafford Henry Northcote (1762–1851), as 8th baronet in 1851. He entered Parliament in 1855 as Conservative Member of Parliament for Dudley with the support of the influential local landowner Lord Ward. However, tensions between Northcote and Lord Ward soon arose, in particular over a vote over conflict with China in which the two men supported opposite sides in the vote. Northcote subsequently decided not to contest Dudley again and stood unsuccessfully for North Devon in 1857. He returned to Parliament the following year, when he was elected for Stamford in 1858, a seat that he exchanged in 1866 for North Devon. He was briefly Financial Secretary to the Treasury under the Earl of Derby from January to July 1859.

==Later political career==

Steadily supporting his party, he became President of the Board of Trade in 1866, Secretary of State for India in 1867 and Chancellor of the Exchequer in 1874. In 1870, during the interval between the last two appointments, he was the Governor of the Hudson&#x27;s Bay Company, North America&#x27;s oldest company (established by an English royal charter in 1670), when it sold the Northwest Territories to Canada. Northcote was one of the commissioners for the settlement of the Alabama Claims with the United States, culminating with the Treaty of Washington in 1871.

On Benjamin Disraeli&#x27;s elevation to the House of Lords as Earl of Beaconsfield in 1876, Northcote became Leader of the Conservatives in the Commons. As a finance minister, he largely continued the lines of policy laid down by Gladstone. However, he distinguished himself by his dealings with the debt, especially his introduction of the new sinking fund in 1876 by which he fixed the annual charge for the debt in such a way as to provide for a regular series of payments off the capital.

His temper as leader was, however, too gentle to satisfy the more ardent spirits among his own followers. Party cabals (in which Lord Randolph Churchill took a leading part) led to Northcote&#x27;s elevation to the Lords in 1885, when Lord Salisbury became prime minister. Taking the titles of Earl of Iddesleigh and Viscount St Cyres, he was included in the cabinet as First Lord of the Treasury. In Lord Salisbury&#x27;s 1886 ministry he became Foreign Secretary, but the arrangement was not a comfortable one, and his resignation had just been decided upon when on 12 January 1887, he died very suddenly at the First Lord of the Treasury&#x27;s official residence, 10 Downing Street.

==Other public positions==

Northcote was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society in 1875 and Lord Rector of Edinburgh University in 1883, in which capacity he addressed the students on the subject of &quot;Desultory Reading&quot;. From 1886 to 1887 he was also Lord Lieutenant of Devon. He was not a prolific or notable writer, but amongst his works were &quot;Twenty Years of Financial Policy&quot; (1862), a valuable study of Gladstonian finance, and &quot;Lectures and Essays&quot; (1887). His &quot;Life&quot; by Andrew Lang appeared in 1890. Northcote was appointed a CB in 1851 and a GCB in 1880 and was sworn of the Privy Council in 1866.
He was one of only two people to hold the office of First Lord of the Treasury without ever being Prime Minister.

==Family and personal life==

Northcote married Cecilia Frances Farrer (died 1910), daughter of Thomas Farrer and sister of Thomas Farrer, 1st Baron Farrer, in 1843. They had seven sons and three daughters. His eldest son, Walter, 2nd Earl of Iddesleigh, was a member of the House of Lords. His second son, Henry, 1st Baron Northcote, was Governor-General of Australia. Another son, Amyas, later became known as a writer of ghost stories.

In the aftermath of the British Expedition to Abyssinia, Northcote built up a small but prestigious collection of Ethiopian artefacts that is now in the British Museum.

The 1881 Census shows him living next door to Lord Randolph Churchill MP and family, at 30 St James Place, Westminster.

==Legacy==

The New Zealand suburbs of Northcote in Auckland, and Northcote in Christchurch are named after Northcote. As is the administrative headquarters of Exeter University, Northcote House.
The unincorperated community of Northcote, Minnesota was also named for him.

==References==

==Further reading==
* Cooke, A. B. “A Conservative Party Leader in Ulster: Sir Stafford Northcote’s Diary of a Visit to the Province, October 1883.” &quot;Proceedings of the Royal Irish Academy. Section C: Archaeology, Celtic Studies, History, Linguistics, Literature, &quot; vol. 75, (1975), pp. 61–84, online.
* Iddesleigh, Stafford Henry Northcote. &quot;Speech of the Rt. Hon. Sir Stafford Northcote, to the Working-Men’s Conservative Association of Edinburgh&quot; (Edinburgh Conservative Association, 1876), pp. 1–12, online

* Keohane, Nigel Thomas. &quot;The Lost Leader: Sir Stafford Northcote and the Leadership of the Conservative Party, 1876–85.&quot; &quot;Parliamentary History&quot; 27.3 (2008): 361–379.
* Lang, Andrew. &quot;Life, Letters, and Diaries of Sir Stafford Northcote, First Earl of Iddesleigh&quot; (1891) online
* Swartz, Marvin. &quot;The politics of British foreign policy in the era of Disraeli and Gladstone&quot; (London: Macmillan, 1985).

== External links ==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q332650" start="0" end="48" title="Stafford Northcote, 1st Earl of Iddesleigh" label="Stafford Henry Northcote, 1st Earl of Iddesleigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q332650" start="95" end="130" title="Stafford Northcote, 1st Earl of Iddesleigh" label="Sir Stafford Northcote, 8th Baronet"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="164" end="176" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q531471" start="196" end="223" title="Chancellor of the Exchequer" label="Chancellor of the Exchequer"/>
<link wikidata="Q609884" start="247" end="273" title="First Lord of the Treasury" label="First Lord of the Treasury"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371091" start="303" end="320" title="Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs (UK)" label="Foreign Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231999" start="658" end="672" title="Portland Place" label="Portland Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q808196" start="871" end="884" title="Baring family" label="Baring family"/>
<link wikidata="Q5975091" start="966" end="979" title="Cockburn (surname)" label="Clan Cockburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q378505" start="1006" end="1022" title="natural daughter" label="natural daughter"/>
<link wikidata="Q11834946" start="1026" end="1043" title="Robert Colebrooke" label="Robert Colebrooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q16958853" start="1062" end="1071" title="Northcote baronets" label="Northcote"/>
<link wikidata="Q23156" start="1107" end="1112" title="Devon" label="Devon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7263126" start="1222" end="1233" title="Pynes House" label="Pynes House"/>
<link wikidata="Q134672" start="1247" end="1253" title="Exeter" label="Exeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q192088" start="1281" end="1285" title="Eton College" label="Eton"/>
<link wikidata="Q805285" start="1290" end="1313" title="Balliol College, Oxford" label="Balliol College, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q5021687" start="1322" end="1339" title="called to the bar" label="called to the bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233784" start="1341" end="1353" title="Inner Temple" label="Inner Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q160852" start="1438" end="1461" title="William Ewart Gladstone" label="William Ewart Gladstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q273095" start="1590" end="1614" title="Great Exhibition of 1851" label="Great Exhibition of 1851"/>
<link wikidata="Q3249693" start="1633" end="1654" title="Sir Charles Trevelyan, 1st Baronet" label="Sir Charles Trevelyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4670580" start="1670" end="1696" title="Northcote–Trevelyan Report" label="Northcote–Trevelyan Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q282019" start="1850" end="1857" title="baronet" label="baronet"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="1900" end="1912" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q16707842" start="1913" end="1933" title="Member of Parliament (United Kingdom)" label="Member of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q126884241" start="1938" end="1944" title="Dudley (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Dudley"/>
<link wikidata="Q8019995" start="1997" end="2006" title="William Ward, 1st Earl of Dudley" label="Lord Ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q7597374" start="2359" end="2367" title="Stamford (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Stamford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032551" start="2414" end="2425" title="North Devon (UK Parliament constituency)" label="North Devon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5449647" start="2442" end="2477" title="Financial Secretary to the Treasury" label="Financial Secretary to the Treasury"/>
<link wikidata="Q237829" start="2488" end="2501" title="Edward Smith-Stanley, 14th Earl of Derby" label="Earl of Derby"/>
<link wikidata="Q27037814" start="2599" end="2630" title="President of the Board of Trade" label="President of the Board of Trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q639769" start="2640" end="2668" title="Secretary of State for India" label="Secretary of State for India"/>
<link wikidata="Q531471" start="2681" end="2708" title="Chancellor of the Exchequer" label="Chancellor of the Exchequer"/>
<link wikidata="Q76039" start="2809" end="2834" title="Hudson&amp;#x27;s Bay Company" label="Hudson&amp;#x27;s Bay Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q179876" start="2891" end="2898" title="Kingdom of England" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422253" start="2899" end="2912" title="royal charter" label="royal charter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7380243" start="2931" end="2961" title="Rupert&amp;#x27;s Land Act 1868" label="sold the Northwest Territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q591829" start="3038" end="3052" title="Alabama Claims" label="Alabama Claims"/>
<link wikidata="Q3536910" start="3098" end="3118" title="Treaty of Washington (1871)" label="Treaty of Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q82006" start="3132" end="3149" title="Benjamin Disraeli" label="Benjamin Disraeli"/>
<link wikidata="Q11007" start="3174" end="3188" title="House of Lords" label="House of Lords"/>
<link wikidata="Q7524588" start="3475" end="3487" title="sinking fund" label="sinking fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q314773" start="3753" end="3776" title="Lord Randolph Churchill" label="Lord Randolph Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q243705" start="3859" end="3873" title="Robert Gascoyne-Cecil, 3rd Marquess of Salisbury" label="Lord Salisbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q609884" start="3994" end="4020" title="First Lord of the Treasury" label="First Lord of the Treasury"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371091" start="4071" end="4088" title="Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs (UK)" label="Foreign Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q169101" start="4292" end="4309" title="10 Downing Street" label="10 Downing Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q15631401" start="4364" end="4391" title="Fellow of the Royal Society" label="Fellow of the Royal Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q7303224" start="4404" end="4439" title="Lord Rector of Edinburgh University" label="Lord Rector of Edinburgh University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3836789" start="4572" end="4596" title="Lord Lieutenant of Devon" label="Lord Lieutenant of Devon"/>
<link wikidata="Q506369" start="4884" end="4886" title="Order of the Bath" label="CB"/>
<link wikidata="Q506369" start="4901" end="4904" title="Order of the Bath" label="GCB"/>
<link wikidata="Q683120" start="4934" end="4947" title="Privy Council of the United Kingdom" label="Privy Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q7789533" start="5196" end="5227" title="Thomas Farrer, 1st Baron Farrer" label="Thomas Farrer, 1st Baron Farrer"/>
<link wikidata="Q47902373" start="5295" end="5325" title="Walter Northcote, 2nd Earl of Iddesleigh" label="Walter, 2nd Earl of Iddesleigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q333831" start="5379" end="5405" title="Henry Northcote, 1st Baron Northcote" label="Henry, 1st Baron Northcote"/>
<link wikidata="Q610669" start="5411" end="5440" title="Governor-General of Australia" label="Governor-General of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4749480" start="5455" end="5460" title="Amyas Northcote" label="Amyas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519335" start="5496" end="5509" title="Ghost story" label="ghost stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q743652" start="5536" end="5567" title="British Expedition to Abyssinia" label="British Expedition to Abyssinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6373" start="5665" end="5679" title="British Museum" label="British Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q314773" start="5728" end="5751" title="Lord Randolph Churchill" label="Lord Randolph Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q65684185" start="5773" end="5787" title="St James&amp;#x27;s Place" label="St James Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q7057753" start="5842" end="5851" title="Northcote, Auckland" label="Northcote"/>
<link wikidata="Q37100" start="5855" end="5863" title="Auckland" label="Auckland"/>
<link wikidata="Q54866235" start="5869" end="5878" title="Northcote, Christchurch" label="Northcote"/>
<link wikidata="Q20707296" start="6031" end="6051" title="Northcote, Minnesota" label="Northcote, Minnesota"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="309099" wikidata="Q1892125" url="?curid=309099" title="Maqam">
<text>Maqam, makam, maqaam or maqām (plural maqāmāt) may refer to:

== Musical structures ==
* Arabic maqam, melodic modes in traditional Arabic music
** Iraqi maqam, a genre of Arabic maqam music found in Iraq
* Persian maqam, a notion in Persian classical music
* Turkish makam, a Turkish system of melody types
** List of Turkish makams
* Muqam, a melody type from Uyghur culture
* Mugham, a music tradition of Azerbaijani cultures
* Shashmaqam (&quot;six maqams&quot;), a musical genre typical of Tajikistan and Uzbekistan
* Weekly Maqam, melody types used in weekly prayer services of Sephardic Jewish culture

===Individual maqamat===
*Hijaz (maqam)
*Rast (maqam)

==Other uses==
* Maqam (shrine), a tomb of a Muslim holy person
* Maqam (Sufism), any spiritual stage in the Sufi path
* Maqam, Iran, a village in Hormozgan Province, Iran
* Al-Maqam Mosque, Basra, Iraq
* MAQAM, a US-based production company specializing in Arabic and Middle Eastern media

==See also==
*
*Maqamat (disambiguation)
*&quot;Muqaam&quot;, 2022 Indian film</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1892125" start="0" end="5" title="Maqam" label="Maqam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1892125" start="7" end="12" title="Maqam" label="makam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1892125" start="14" end="20" title="Maqam" label="maqaam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1892125" start="24" end="29" title="Maqam" label="maqām"/>
<link wikidata="Q1892125" start="38" end="45" title="Maqam" label="maqāmāt"/>
<link wikidata="Q12826678" start="89" end="101" title="Arabic maqam" label="Arabic maqam"/>
<link wikidata="Q12193614" start="148" end="159" title="Iraqi maqam" label="Iraqi maqam"/>
<link wikidata="Q117305433" start="207" end="220" title="Persian maqam" label="Persian maqam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294557" start="260" end="273" title="Turkish makam" label="Turkish makam"/>
<link wikidata="Q6626909" start="311" end="333" title="List of Turkish makams" label="List of Turkish makams"/>
<link wikidata="Q2608710" start="336" end="341" title="Muqam" label="Muqam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474372" start="379" end="385" title="Mugham" label="Mugham"/>
<link wikidata="Q3091180" start="431" end="441" title="Shashmaqam" label="Shashmaqam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7979507" start="523" end="535" title="Weekly Maqam" label="Weekly Maqam"/>
<link wikidata="Q64924" start="636" end="649" title="Hijaz (maqam)" label="Hijaz (maqam)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7295237" start="651" end="663" title="Rast (maqam)" label="Rast (maqam)"/>
<link wikidata="Q35834230" start="682" end="696" title="Maqam (shrine)" label="Maqam (shrine)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1600162" start="731" end="745" title="Maqam (Sufism)" label="Maqam (Sufism)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4854371" start="786" end="797" title="Maqam, Iran" label="Maqam, Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q20410450" start="839" end="854" title="Al-Maqam Mosque" label="Al-Maqam Mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q17051110" start="870" end="875" title="MAQAM" label="MAQAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q6754260" start="972" end="996" title="Maqamat (disambiguation)" label="Maqamat (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q112701684" start="1004" end="1010" title="Muqaam" label="Muqaam"/>
</links>
</doc>
