<doc id="312905" wikidata="Q208484" url="?curid=312905" title="Lebanese Civil War">
<text>The Lebanese Civil War ( ) was a multifaceted armed conflict that took place from 1975 to 1990. It resulted in an estimated 150,000 fatalities and led to the exodus of almost one million people from Lebanon.

The religious diversity of the Lebanese people played a notable role in the lead-up to and during the conflict: Lebanese Christians and Lebanese Sunni Muslims comprised the majority in the coastal cities; Lebanese Shia Muslims were primarily based throughout southern Lebanon and in the Beqaa Valley in the east; and Druze and Christians populated the country&#x27;s mountainous areas. At the time, the Lebanese government was under the influence of elites within the Maronite Christian community. The link between politics and religion was reinforced under the French Mandate from 1920 to 1943, and the country&#x27;s parliamentary structure favoured a leading position for Lebanese Christians, who constituted the majority of the population. However, Lebanon&#x27;s Muslims comprised a large minority and the influx of thousands of Palestinians—first in 1948 and again in 1967—contributed to Lebanon&#x27;s demographic shift towards an eventual Muslim majority. Lebanon&#x27;s Christian-dominated government had been facing increasing opposition from Muslims, pan-Arabists, and left-wing groups. The Cold War also exerted a disintegrative effect on the country, closely linked to the political polarization that preceded the 1958 Lebanese crisis. Christians mostly sided with the Western world while Muslims, pan-Arabists, and leftists mostly sided with Soviet-aligned Arab countries.

Fighting between Lebanese Christian militias and Palestinian insurgents, mainly from the Palestine Liberation Organization, began in 1975 and generated an alliance between the Palestinians and Lebanese Muslims, pan-Arabists, and leftists. The conflict deepened as foreign powers, namely Syria, Israel, and Iran, became involved and supported or fought alongside different factions. Over the course of the conflict, these alliances shifted rapidly and unpredictably. While much of the fighting took place between opposing religious and ideological factions, there was significant conflict within some faith communities, especially amongst both Christians and Shias. Peacekeeping forces, such as the Multinational Force in Lebanon and the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon, were stationed in Lebanon during this time.

In 1989, the Taif Agreement marked the beginning of the end for the fighting as a committee appointed by the Arab League began to formulate solutions to the conflict. In March 1991, the Parliament of Lebanon passed an amnesty law that pardoned all political crimes that had been perpetrated prior to the law&#x27;s time of enactment. In May 1991, all of the armed factions that had been operating in Lebanon were dissolved, excluding Hezbollah, an Iran-backed Shia Islamist militia. Though the Lebanese Armed Forces slowly began to rebuild as Lebanon&#x27;s only major non-sectarian armed institution after the conflict, the federal government remained unable to challenge Hezbollah&#x27;s armed strength. Religious tensions, especially between Shias and Sunnis, persisted across Lebanon since the formal end of the hostilities in 1990.

==Background==
===Ottoman and European rule===
In 1860, a civil war between Druze and Maronites erupted in the Ottoman Mutasarrifate of Mount Lebanon. The war resulted in the massacre of about 10,000 Christians and at least 6,000 Druzes. 

World War I was hard for the Lebanese. Most of the Arabs fought in the Ottoman army against the British and French invaders. 

With the defeat and dissolution of the Ottoman Empire (1908–1922) the French invaders took control of the area under what they called the French Mandate for Syria and the Lebanon under the League of Nations. The French created the state of Greater Lebanon as a safe haven for the Maronites, but included a large Muslim population within the borders.

In 1926, Lebanon was declared a republic, and a constitution was adopted. However, the constitution was suspended in 1932. Various factions sought unity with Syria, or independence from the French. In 1936, the Maronite Phalange party was founded by Pierre Gemayel.

===Lebanese independence===
World War II and the 1940s brought great change to Lebanon and the Middle East. Lebanon was promised independence, which was achieved on 22 November 1943. Free French troops, who had invaded Lebanon in 1941 to rid Beirut of the Vichy French forces, left Lebanon in 1946. The Maronites assumed power over Lebanon and economy. A parliament was created in which both Muslims and Christians each had a set quota of seats. Accordingly, the President was to be a Maronite, the Prime Minister a Sunni Muslim and the Speaker of Parliament a Shia Muslim.

In 1947, the United Nations Partition Plan for Palestine led to civil war in Palestine, the end of Mandatory Palestine, and the Israeli Declaration of Independence on 14 May 1948. The ongoing civil war was transformed into a state conflict between Israel and the Arab states in the 1948 Arab–Israeli War. This led to Palestinian refugees crossing the border into Lebanon. 

In July 1958, Lebanon was threatened by a civil war between Maronite Christians and Muslims. President Camille Chamoun had attempted to break the stranglehold on Lebanese politics exercised by traditional political families in Lebanon. These families maintained their electoral appeal by cultivating strong client–patron relations with their local communities. Although he succeeded in sponsoring alternative political candidates to enter the elections in 1957, causing the traditional families to lose their positions, these families then embarked upon a war with Chamoun, referred to as the &quot;War of the Pashas&quot;.

In 1956, tensions with Egypt escalated when the non-aligned President, Camille Chamoun, did not break off diplomatic relations with the Western powers that attacked Egypt during the Suez Crisis, angering Egyptian President Gamal Abdel Nasser. This was during the Cold War and Chamoun has often been called pro-Western, though he had signed several trade deals with the Soviet Union (see Gendzier). Nasser had attacked Chamoun because of his suspected support for the U.S. led Baghdad Pact. Nasser felt that the pro-western Baghdad Pact posed a threat to Arab nationalism. 

President Chamoun looked to regional pacts to ensure protection from foreign armies: Lebanon historically had a small cosmetic army that was never effective in defending Lebanon&#x27;s territorial integrity, and this is why in later years the PLO guerrilla factions had found it easy to enter Lebanon and set up bases, as well as take over army barracks on the border with Israel as early as 1968. Early skirmishes saw the army lose control over its barracks to the PLO and lose many soldiers. Even prior to this, president Chamoun was aware of the country&#x27;s vulnerability to outside forces.

His Lebanese pan-Arabist Sunni Muslim Prime Minister Rashid Karami supported Nasser in 1956 and 1958. Lebanese Muslims pushed the government to join the newly created United Arab Republic, a country formed out of the unification of Syria and Egypt, while the majority of Lebanese and especially the Maronites wanted to keep Lebanon as an independent nation with its own independent parliament. President Camille Chamoun feared the toppling of his government and asked for U.S. intervention. At the time the United States was engaged in the Cold War. 

Chamoun asked for assistance proclaiming that Communists were going to overthrow his government. Chamoun was responding not only to the revolt of former political bosses, but also to the fact that both Egypt and Syria had taken the opportunity to deploy proxies into the Lebanese conflict. Thus the Arab Nationalist Movement (ANM), led by George Habash and later to become the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine (PFLP) and a faction of the PLO, were deployed to Lebanon by Nasser. 

The ANM were a clandestine militia implicated in attempted coups against both the Jordanian monarchy and the Iraqi president throughout the 1950s at Nasser&#x27;s bidding. The founding members of Fatah, including Yasser Arafat and Khalil Wazir, also flew to Lebanon to use the insurrection as a means by which a war could be fomented toward Israel. They participated in the fighting by directing armed forces against the government security in the city of Tripoli according to Yezid Sayigh&#x27;s work.

In 1958, President Chamoun was unable to convince the Maronite army commander, Fuad Chehab, to use the armed forces against Muslim demonstrators, fearing that getting involved in internal politics would split his small and weak multi-confessional force. The Phalange militia came to the president&#x27;s aid instead to bring a final end to the road blockades which were crippling the major cities. Encouraged by its efforts during this conflict, later that year, principally through violence and the success of general strikes in Beirut, the Phalange achieved what journalists dubbed the &quot;counterrevolution&quot;. By their actions the Phalangists brought down the government of Prime Minister Karami and secured for their leader, Pierre Gemayel, a position in the four-man cabinet that was subsequently formed.

Estimates of the Phalange&#x27;s membership by Yezid Sayigh and other academic sources put them at a few thousand. Non-academic sources tend to inflate the Phalanges membership. What should be kept in mind was that this insurrection was met with widespread disapproval by many Lebanese who wanted no part in the regional politics and many young men aided the Phalange in their suppression of the insurrection, especially as many of the demonstrators were little more than proxy forces hired by groups such as the ANM and Fatah founders as well as being hired by the defeated parliamentary bosses.

===Demographic tensions===
==== Palestinian insurgency in Lebanon ====
In the 1960s Lebanon was relatively calm, but this soon changed. Fatah and other Palestinian Liberation Organization factions had long been active among the 400,000 Palestinian refugees in Lebanese camps. Throughout the 1960s, the center for armed Palestinian activities had been in Jordan. They were forced to relocate after being evicted by King Hussein during the 1970 Black September in Jordan. Fatah and other Palestinian groups attempted to mount a coup in Jordan by incentivizing a split in the Jordanian army, something that the ANM had attempted to do a decade earlier by Nasser&#x27;s bidding. Jordan responded, and expelled the Palestinian forces into Lebanon. When they arrived, they created &quot;a State within the State&quot;. This action was not welcomed by the Lebanese government, and this shook Lebanon&#x27;s fragile sectarian balance.

Solidarity with the Palestinians was expressed by the Lebanese Sunni Muslims, with the aim to change the political system from one of consensus amongst different sects, towards one where their power share would increase. Certain groups in the Lebanese National Movement wished to bring about a more secular and democratic order, but as this group increasingly included Islamist groups, encouraged to join by the PLO, the more progressive demands of the initial agenda was dropped by January 1976. Islamists did not support a secular order in Lebanon and wished to bring about rule by Muslim clerics. 

These events, especially the role of Fatah and the Tripoli Islamist movement known as Tawhid, in changing the agenda being pursued by many groups, including Communists. This ragtag coalition has often been referred to as left-wing, but many participants were actually very conservative and had religious elements that did not share any broader ideological agenda. Rather, they were brought together by the short-term goal of overthrowing the established political order, each motivated by their own grievances.

These forces enabled the PLO / Fatah to transform the Western Part of Beirut into its stronghold. Fatah constituted 80% of the membership of the PLO and Fatah guerrillas now controlled most of its institutions. The PLO had taken over the heart of Sidon and Tyre in the early 1970s. It controlled great swathes of south Lebanon, in which the indigenous Shiite population had to suffer the humiliation of passing through PLO checkpoints and now they had worked their way by force into Beirut. 

The PLO did this with the assistance of so-called volunteers from Libya and Algeria shipped in through the ports it controlled, as well as a number of Sunni Lebanese groups who had been trained and armed by PLO/ Fatah and encouraged to declare themselves as separate militias. However, as Rex Brynen makes clear in his publication on the PLO, these militias were nothing more than &quot;shop-fronts&quot; or in Arabic &quot;Dakakin&quot; for Fatah, armed gangs with no ideological foundation and no organic reason for their existence, except the fact their individual members were put on the PLO/ Fatah payroll.

In February 1975, the strike by fishermen at Sidon could be considered the first important episode that set off the outbreak of hostilities. That event involved a specific issue: the attempt of former President Camille Chamoun, also the head of the Maronite-oriented National Liberal Party, to monopolize fishing along the coast of Lebanon. The injustices perceived by the fishermen evoked sympathy from many Lebanese, and reinforced the resentment and antipathy that were widely felt against the state and the economic monopolies. The demonstrations against the fishing company were quickly transformed into a political action supported by the political left and their allies in the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO). The state tried to suppress the demonstrators, and a sniper reportedly killed a popular figure in the city, the former Mayor of Sidon, Maarouf Saad.

Many non-academic sources claim a government sniper killed Saad; however, there is no evidence to support such a claim, and it appears that whoever had killed him had intended that what began as a small and quiet demonstration to evolve into something more. The sniper targeted Saad right at the end of the demonstration as it was dissipating. 

Farid Khazen, sourcing the local histories of Sidon academics and eyewitnesses, gives a run-down of the puzzling events of the day that based on their research. Khazen reveals, based on the Sidon academic&#x27;s work, that Saad was not in dispute with the fishing consortium made up of Yugoslav nationals. The Yugoslavian representatives in Lebanon had negotiated with the fisherman&#x27;s union to make the fishermen shareholders in the company. The company offered to modernize the fishermen&#x27;s equipment, buy their catch, and give their union an annual subsidy. 

Saad, as a union representative, and not the mayor of Sidon at the time as many erroneous sources claim, was offered a place on the company&#x27;s board. There has been some speculation that Saad&#x27;s attempts to narrow the differences between the fishermen and the consortium, and his acceptance of a place on the board made him a target of attack by the conspirator, who sought a full conflagration around the small protest. The events in Sidon were not contained for long. The government began to lose control of the situation in 1975.

==Political divide and sectarianism==

In the run-up to the war and its early stages, militias tried to be politically orientated non-sectarian forces, but due to the sectarian nature of Lebanese society, they inevitably gained their support from the same community as their leaders came from. In the long run almost all militias openly identified with a given community. The two main alliances were the Lebanese Front, consisting of nationalist Maronites who were against Palestinian militancy in Lebanon, and the Lebanese National Movement, which consisted of pro-Palestinian Leftists. The LNM dissolved after the Israeli invasion of 1982 and was replaced by the Lebanese National Resistance Front, known as &quot;Jammoul&quot; in Arabic.

Throughout the war most or all militias operated with little regard for human rights, and the sectarian character of some battles, made non-combatant civilians a frequent target.

===Finances===
As the war dragged on, the militias deteriorated ever further into mafia-style organizations, with many commanders turning to crime as their main occupation rather than fighting. Finances for the war effort were obtained in one or all of three ways:

# Outside support: Notably from Syria or Israel. Other Arab governments and Iran also provided considerable funds. Alliances would shift frequently.
# Local population: The militias, and the political parties they served, believed they had legitimate moral authority to raise taxes to defend their communities. Road checkpoints were a particularly common way to raise these (claimed) taxes. Such taxes were in principle viewed as legitimate by much of the population who identified with their community&#x27;s militia. However, many militia fighters would use taxes/customs as a pretext to extort money. Furthermore, many people did not recognize militia&#x27;s tax-raising authority, and viewed all militia money-raising activities as mafia-style extortion and theft.
# Smuggling: During the civil war, Lebanon turned into one of the world&#x27;s largest narcotics producers, with much of the hashish production centered in the Bekaa valley. However, much else was also smuggled, such as guns and supplies, all kinds of stolen goods, and regular trade—war or no war, Lebanon would not give up its role as the middleman in European-Arab business. Many battles were fought over Lebanon&#x27;s ports, to gain smugglers access to the sea routes.

===Cantons===

As central government authority disintegrated and rival governments claimed national authority, the various parties/militias started to create comprehensive state administrations in their territory. These were known as &quot;cantons&quot;, Swiss-like autonomous provinces. The best known was &quot;Marounistan&quot;, which was the Phalangist/Lebanese Forces territory. The Progressive Socialist Party&#x27;s territory was the &quot;Civil Administration of the Mountain&quot;, commonly known as the &quot;Jebel-el-Druze&quot;, a name which had formerly been used for a Druze state in Syria. The Marada area around Zghorta was known as the &quot;Northern Canton&quot;.

Wilton Wynn, a TIME correspondent, visited the East Beirut Christian canton in 1976, the same year as its foundation. He reported that compared to the villages outside of the canton, in Maronite towns and villages no garbage littered the streets, gas was one-fifth the price charged in West Beirut and the price of bread was controlled to levels comparable to pre-war pricing.

===Maronite Christians===
Maronite Christian militias acquired arms from Romania and Bulgaria as well as from West Germany, Belgium and Israel, and drew supporters from the larger Maronite population in the north of the country, they were generally right-wing in their political outlook, and all the major Christian militias were Maronite-dominated, and other Christian sects played a secondary role.

Initially, the most powerful of the Maronite militias was the National Liberal Party, locally known as &quot;Ahrar&quot;, who were politically led by the former president Camille Chamoun. The NLP had its own militia which was founded in 1968 and led by Camille&#x27;s son Dany Chamoun, the Tigers Militia.
Another party was the Kataeb Party, or Phalangists, which was founded by Pierre Gemayel in 1936. Kataeb similarly had its own militia which was officially formed in 1961, the Kataeb Regulatory Forces led by William Hawi until 1976 when Bachir Gemayel succeeded him. Kataeb Regulatory Forces merged with Tigers Militia and several minor groups (Al-Tanzim, Guardians of the Cedars, Lebanese Youth Movement, Tyous Team of Commandos) and formed an umbrella militia known as the Lebanese Forces (LF) which acted in unity, and were politically known as the Lebanese Front coalition. Before 1975, Maronite militias were reportedly supplied by weapons from Bulgaria, and by the onset of the war were receiving support from Iraq, Jordan, Pahlavi Iran, West Germany, Israel, and Saudi Arabia, who temporarily cut off their funding after Black Saturday. This funding enabled the newly formed Lebanese Forces militia to establish itself in Maronite-dominated strongholds, and rapidly transformed from an unorganized and poorly equipped militia into a fearsome armed group that now had its own armor, artillery, commando units (SADM), a small Navy, and a highly advanced Intelligence branch. Meanwhile, in the north, the Zgharta Liberation Army served as the private militia of the Franjieh family in Zgharta, which became allied with Syria after breaking with the Lebanese Front in 1978.

In 1980, after months of intra Christian clashes, the Tigers militia of Dany Chamoun split with the Lebanese Forces which was dominated by the Kataeb members. Led by Bachir Gemayel, Kataeb launched a surprise attack on the Tigers in what became known as the Safra massacre, which claimed the lives of up to 83 people, effectively bringing an end to the Tigers as a militia.
In 1985, under the leadership of Samir Geagea and Hobeika, the Lebanese Forces split from the Kataeb and other groups to form an independent militia by the name of Lebanese Forces. The Command Council then elected Hobeika to be LF President, and he appointed Geagea to be LF Chief of Staff. In January 1986, Geagea and Hobeika&#x27;s relationship broke down over Hobeika&#x27;s support for the pro-Syrian Tripartite Accord, and an internal civil war began. The Geagea-Hobeika Conflict resulted in 800 to 1000 casualties before Geagea secured himself as LF leader and Hobeika fled. Hobeika formed the Lebanese Forces – Executive Command which remained allied with Syria until the end of the war.

===Secularists===
Although several Lebanese militias claimed to be secular, most were little more than vehicles for sectarian interests. Still, there existed a number of non-religious groups, primarily but not exclusively of the left and/or Pan-Arab right.

Examples of this were the Lebanese Communist Party (LCP) and the more radical and independent Communist Action Organization (COA). Another notable example was the pan-Syrian Syrian Social Nationalist Party (SSNP), which promoted the concept of Greater Syria, in contrast to Pan-Arab or Lebanese nationalism. The SSNP was generally aligned with the Syrian government, although it did not ideologically approve of the Ba&#x27;athist government (however, this has changed recently, under Bashar Al-Assad, the SSNP having been allowed to exert political activity in Syria as well). The multi-confessional SSNP was led by Inaam Raad, a Catholic and Abdallah Saadeh, a Greek Orthodox. It was active in North Lebanon (Koura and Akkar), West Beirut (around Hamra Street), in Mount Lebanon (High Metn, Baabda, Aley and Chouf), in South Lebanon (Zahrani, Nabatieh, Marjayoun and Hasbaya) and the Beqqa Valley (Baalbeck, Hermel and Rashaya).

Another secular group was the South Lebanon Army (SLA), led by Saad Haddad. The SLA operated in South Lebanon in coordination with the Israelis, and worked for the Israeli-backed parallel government, called &quot;the Government of Free Lebanon&quot;. The SLA began as a split from the Army of Free Lebanon, a Maronite Christian faction within the Lebanese Army. Their initial goal was to be a bulwark against PLO raids and attacks into the Galilee, although they later focused on fighting Hezbollah. The officers tended to be mostly Christians, while the ordinary soldiers were an amalgam of Christians, Shiites, Druze and Sunnis. The SLA continued to operate after the civil war but collapsed after the Israeli army withdrew from South Lebanon in 2000. Many SLA soldiers fled to Israel, while others were captured in Lebanon and prosecuted for collaboration with Israel and treason.

Two competing Ba&#x27;ath movements were involved in the early stages of the war: a nationalist one known as &quot;pro-Iraqi&quot; headed by Abdul-Majeed Al-Rafei (Sunni) and Nicola Y. Ferzli (Greek Orthodox Christian), and a Marxist one known as &quot;pro-Syrian&quot; headed by Assem Qanso (Shiite).

The Kurdistan Workers&#x27; Party at the time had training camps in Lebanon, where they received support from the Syrians and the PLO. During the Israeli invasion, all PKK units were ordered to fight the Israeli forces. Eleven PKK fighters died in the conflict. Mahsum Korkmaz was the commander of all PKK forces in Lebanon.

The Armenian Marxist-Leninist militia ASALA was founded in PLO-controlled territory of West Beirut in 1975. This militia was led by revolutionary fighter Monte Melkonian and group-founder Hagop Hagopian. Closely aligned with the Palestinians, ASALA fought many battles on the side of the Lebanese National Movement and the PLO, most prominently against Israeli forces and their right-wing allies during the 1982 phase of the war. Melkonian was field commander during these battles, and assisted the PLO in its defense of West Beirut.

===Palestinians===

The Palestinian movement relocated most of its fighting strength to Lebanon at the end of 1970 after being expelled from Jordan in the events known as Black September. The umbrella organization, the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO)—by itself undoubtedly Lebanon&#x27;s most potent fighting force at the time—was little more than a loose confederation, but its leader, Yassir Arafat, controlled the PLO&#x27;s largest and most dominant faction, Fatah, effectively making him the strongman of the PLO. Arafat allowed little oversight to be exercised over PLO finances as he was the ultimate source for all decisions made in directing financial matters. 

Arafat&#x27;s control of funds, channeled directly to him by the oil producing countries like Saudi Arabia, Iraq, and Libya meant that he had little real functional opposition to his leadership and although ostensibly rival factions in the PLO existed, this masked a stable loyalty towards Arafat so long as he was able to dispense financial rewards to his followers and members of the PLO guerrilla factions.
Unlike the Lebanese, the Palestinians were not sectarian. Palestinian Christians similarly supported Arab Nationalism and fought with their Muslim compatriots against the Maronite Lebanese militias.

The PLO mainstream was represented by Arafat&#x27;s powerful Fatah, which waged guerrilla warfare but did not have a strong core ideology, except the claim to seek the liberation of Palestine. As a result, they gained broad appeal with a refugee population of moderately conservative Islamic values. The more ideological factions included George Habash&#x27;s Marxist-Leninist Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine (PFLP), and its splinter, the Democratic Front for the Liberation of Palestine (DFLP) of Nayef Hawatmeh. Both Habash and Hawatmeh were Christians.

Fatah was instrumental in splitting the DF from the PFLP in the early days of the PFLPs formation so as to diminish the appeal and competition the PFLP posed to Fatah. Lesser roles were played by the fractious Palestinian Liberation Front (PLF) and another split-off from the PFLP, the Syrian-aligned Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine - General Command (PFLP-GC). To complicate things, the rival Ba&#x27;athist countries of Syria and Iraq both set up Palestinian puppet organizations within the PLO. The as-Sa&#x27;iqa was a Syrian-controlled militia, paralleled by the Arab Liberation Front (ALF) under Iraqi command. The Syrian government could also count on the Syrian brigades of the Palestine Liberation Army (PLA), formally but not functionally the PLO&#x27;s regular army. Some PLA units sent by Egypt were under Arafat&#x27;s command.

When the war officially started in 1975, Palestinian armed manpower numbered roughly 21,000, divided into:
===Druze===

The small Druze sect, strategically and dangerously seated on the Chouf in central Lebanon, had no natural allies, and so were compelled to put much effort into building alliances. Under the leadership of the Jumblatt family, first Kamal Jumblatt (the LNM leader) and then his son Walid, the Progressive Socialist Party (PSP) () served as an effective Druze militia, building excellent ties to the Soviet Union mainly, and with Syria upon the withdrawal of Israel to the south of the country. However, many Druze in Lebanon at the time were also members of the Syrian Social Nationalist Party.

Under the leadership of Jumblatt, the PSP was a major political element in the Lebanese National Movement (LNM) which supported Lebanon&#x27;s Arab identity and sympathized with the Palestinians. Jumblatt built a militia, the People&#x27;s Liberation Army, which received financial support from the USSR and Libya, and boasted around 2,500 militiamen at the start of the war, increasing to 10,000 by early 1984 during the Mountain War. The militia played a small role in the actual combat, instead limiting itself to fighting in Mount Lebanon area. 

Its main adversaries were the Maronite Kataeb militia, and later the Lebanese Forces militia, which absorbed the Kataeb. The PSP suffered a major setback after the assassination of Kamal Jumblatt, who was then succeeded by his son Walid. From the Israeli withdrawal from the Chouf in 1983 to the end of the civil war, the PSP ran the Civil Administration of the Mountain in the area under its control. Tolls levied at PSP militia checkpoints provided a major source of income for the administration.

The PSP played an important role in the Mountain War under the lead of Walid Jumblatt. After the Israelis withdrew from Chouf, important battles took place between the PSP backed by PFLP-GC, Fatah al-Intifada and Syrian army, and the Lebanese Forces backed by Lebanese army and the Multinational Force. PSP armed members were accused of several massacres that took place during that war.

===Shia Muslims===

As Lebanon&#x27;s poorest community, Shiites lacked an initial organization of their own and therefore lent their numbers to a wide variety of parties and organizations. They effectively formed the popular base for Leftist parties.

Shiites formed a majority in Communist parties, including the LCP, Communist Action Organization and ASAP. Some Shiites also joined Baathist factions allied with Iraq (Socialist Arab Lebanon Vanguard Party) and Syria (Arab Socialist Baath Party), the Nasserist al-Mourabitoun (45% of membership), and the SSNP. Some Shiites also joined Palestinian factions and constituted sizeable numbers in the Fatah, the PFLP, and Arab Liberation Front. Shiite clerics commonly joined the underground secret Islamic Dawa Party, which later partook in the formation of Hezbollah.

In 1975, Musa Sadr publicly announced the establishment of the Movement of the Dispossessed (later known as Amal). Sadr adamantly opposed the in-fighting and criticized the neglect of Shiite areas by the government and traditional Shiite leaderships. A Palestinian supporter himself, Sadr criticized both Israeli and PLO actions in the South which had cost the lives of thousands of Shiite civilians. 
Amal quickly attracted the unrepresented Shiites and its armed ranks quickly grew to an estimated 1,500–3,000 or 6,000 according to SAVAK.

A radical turnover occurred following the Israeli invasion of Lebanon in 1982, with the establishment of Hezbollah. Hezbollah&#x27;s main objective was to end Israeli occupation and western influence in Lebanon, and its Islamic ideology attracted many young Shiites eager to fight the new occupation. By 1984, thousands of Shiites had been enlisted into Hezbollah as well as most of the important Shiite clergy, including Ragheb Harb. 
Dahieh, where most Shiites lived, became known as the party&#x27;s recruition hub, the Bekaa its training ground, and the South its operational ground. Support for Leftist and Palestinian groups declined, and many Shiites moved their support to their communal parties. In 1988, Hezbollah&#x27;s militia could boast a total of 25,000 fighters. By the 1990s, Hezbollah was the best organized Shia political party, and enjoyed the largest base of popular support.

==== Alawites ====
The Lebanese Alawites, followers of a sect of Shia Islam, were represented by the 1,000-strong Red Knights Militia of the Arab Democratic Party, which was pro-Syrian due to the Alawites being dominant in Syria, and mainly acted in Northern Lebanon around Tripoli.

===Sunni Muslims===
Some Sunni factions received support from Libya and Iraq, and a number of minor militias existed due to a general reluctance on the part of Sunnis to join military organisations throughout the civil war. The more prominent groups were secular and holding a Nasserist ideology, or otherwise having pan-Arab and Arab nationalist leanings. A few Islamist ones emerged at later stages of the war, such as the Tawhid Movement that took its base in Tripoli, and the Jama&#x27;a Islamiyya, which gave a Lebanese expression of the Muslim Brotherhood in terms of political orientations and practice. The main Sunni-led organization was the al-Mourabitoun, a major west Beirut based force. They were led by Ibrahim Kulaylat, fought with the Palestinians against the Israelis during the invasion of 1982. There was also the Popular Nasserist Organization in Sidon that was formed through the followers of Maarouf Saad, and who rallied later behind his son Mustafa Saad, and now are led by Usama Saad. The Sixth of February Movement was another pro-Palestinian Nasserist minor militia that sided with the PLO in the War of the Camps in the 1980s.

===Armenians===
The Armenian parties were Christian by religion but left-wing in outlook, and were therefore uneasy committing to either side of the fighting. As a result, the Armenian parties attempted, with some success, to follow a policy of militant neutrality, with their militias fighting only when required to defend the Armenian areas. However, it was not uncommon for individual Armenians to choose to fight in the Lebanese Forces, and a small number chose to fight on the other side for the Lebanese National Movement/Lebanese National Resistance Front.

The Beirut suburbs of Bourj Hamoud and Naaba were controlled by the Armenian Dashnak party. In September 1979, these were attacked by the Kataeb in an attempt to bring all Christian areas under Bashir Gemayel&#x27;s control. The Armenian Dashnak militia defeated the Kataeb attacks and retained control. The fighting led to 40 deaths.

The Armenian Revolutionary Federation in Lebanon refused to take sides in the conflict though its armed wing the Justice Commandos of the Armenian Genocide and the Armenian Secret Army for the Liberation of Armenia did carry out assassinations and operations during the war.

==Chronology of decisive events==
==First phase (1975–1977)==
===Sectarian violence and massacres===

Throughout the spring of 1975, minor clashes in Lebanon had been building up towards all-out conflict, with the Lebanese National Movement (LNM) pitted against the Phalange, and the ever-weaker national government wavering between the need to maintain order and cater to its constituency. On the morning of 13 April 1975, unidentified gunmen in a speeding car fired on a church in the Christian East Beirut suburb of Ain el-Rummaneh, killing four people, including two Maronite Phalangists. Hours later, Phalangists led by the Gemayels killed 30 Palestinians traveling in Ain el-Rummaneh. Citywide clashes erupted in response to this &quot;Bus Massacre&quot;. The Battle of the Hotels began in October 1975, and lasted until March in 1976.

On 6 December 1975, a day later known as Black Saturday, the killings of four Phalange members led Phalange to quickly and temporarily set up roadblocks throughout Beirut at which identification cards were inspected for religious affiliation. Many Palestinians or Lebanese Muslims passing through the roadblocks were killed immediately. Additionally, Phalange members took hostages and attacked Muslims in East Beirut. Muslim and Palestinian militias retaliated with force, increasing the total death count to between 200 and 600 civilians and militiamen. After this point, all-out fighting began between the militias.

On 18 January 1976 an estimated 1,000–1,500 people were killed by Maronite forces in the Karantina Massacre, followed two days later by a retaliatory strike on Damour by Palestinian militias. These two massacres prompted a mass exodus of Muslims and Christians, as people fearing retribution fled to areas under the control of their own sect. The ethnic and religious layout of the residential areas of the capital encouraged this process, and East and West Beirut were increasingly transformed into what was in effect Christian and Muslim Beirut. Also, the number of Maronite leftists who had allied with the LNM, and Muslim conservatives with the government, dropped sharply, as the war revealed itself as an utterly sectarian conflict. Another effect of the massacres was to bring in Yassir Arafat&#x27;s well-armed Fatah and thereby the Palestine Liberation Organisation on the side of the LNM, as Palestinian sentiment was by now completely hostile to the Maronite forces.

===1976 Syrian invasion===


On 22 January 1976, Syrian President Hafez al-Assad brokered a truce between the two sides, while covertly beginning to move Syrian troops into Lebanon under the guise of the Palestine Liberation Army in order to bring the PLO back under Syrian influence and prevent the disintegration of Lebanon. Despite this, the violence continued to escalate. In March 1976, Lebanese President Suleiman Frangieh requested that Syria formally intervene. Days later, Assad sent a message to the United States asking them not to interfere if he were to send troops into Lebanon.

On 8 May 1976, Elias Sarkis, who was supported by Syria, defeated Frangieh in a presidential election held by the Lebanese Parliament. However, Frangieh refused to step down. On 1 June 1976, 12,000 regular Syrian troops entered Lebanon and began conducting operations against Palestinian and leftist militias. This technically put Syria on the same side as Israel, as Israel had already begun to supply Maronite forces with arms, tanks, and military advisers in May 1976. Syria had its own political and territorial interests in Lebanon, which harbored cells of Sunni Islamists and anti-Ba&#x27;athist Muslim Brotherhood.

Since January, the Tel al-Zaatar refugee camp in East Beirut had been under siege by Maronite Christian militias. On 12 August 1976, supported by Syria, Maronite forces managed to overwhelm the Palestinian and leftist militias defending the camp. The Christian militia massacred 1,000–1,500 civilians, which unleashed heavy criticism against Syria from the Arab world.

On 19 October 1976, the Battle of Aishiya took place, when a combined force of PLO and a Communist militia attacked Aishiya, an isolated Maronite village in a mostly Muslim area. The Artillery Corps of the Israel Defense Forces fired 24 shells (66 kilograms of TNT each) from US-made 175-millimeter field artillery units at the attackers, repelling their first attempt. However, the PLO and Communists returned at night, when low visibility made Israeli artillery far less effective. The Maronite population of the village fled. They returned in 1982.

In October 1976, Syria accepted the proposal of the Arab League summit in Riyadh. This gave Syria a mandate to keep 40,000 troops in Lebanon as the bulk of an Arab Deterrent Force charged with disentangling the combatants and restoring calm. Other Arab nations were also part of the ADF, but they lost interest relatively soon, and Syria was again left in sole control, now with the ADF as a diplomatic shield against international criticism. The Civil War was officially paused at this point, and an uneasy quiet settled over Beirut and most of the rest of Lebanon. In the south, however, the climate began to deteriorate as a consequence of the gradual return of PLO combatants, who had been required to vacate central Lebanon under the terms of the Riyadh Accords.

During 1975–1977, 60,000 people were killed.

===Uneasy quiet===

The nation was now effectively divided, with southern Lebanon and the western half of Beirut becoming bases for the PLO and Muslim-based militias, and the Christians in control of East Beirut and the Christian section of Mount Lebanon. The main confrontation line in divided Beirut was known as the Green Line.

In East Beirut, in 1976, Maronite leaders of the National Liberal Party (NLP), the Kataeb Party and the Lebanese Renewal Party joined in the Lebanese Front, a political counterpoint to the LNM. Their militias—the Tigers, Kataeb Regulatory Forces (KRF) and Guardians of the Cedars—entered a loose coalition known as the Lebanese Forces, to form a military wing for the Lebanese Front. From the very beginning, the Kataeb and its Regulatory Forces&#x27; militia, under the leadership of Bashir Gemayel, dominated the LF. In 1977–80, through absorbing or destroying smaller militias, he both consolidated control and strengthened the LF into the dominant Maronite force.

In March the same year, Lebanese National Movement leader Kamal Jumblatt was assassinated. The murder was widely blamed on the Syrian government. While Jumblatt&#x27;s role as leader of the Druze Progressive Socialist Party was filled surprisingly smoothly by his son, Walid Jumblatt, the LNM disintegrated after his death. Although the anti-government pact of leftists, Shi&#x27;a, Sunni, Palestinians and Druze would stick together for some time more, their wildly divergent interests tore at opposition unity. Sensing the opportunity, Hafez al-Assad immediately began splitting up both the Maronite and Muslim coalitions in a game of divide and conquer.

==Second phase (1977–1982)==
===Hundred Days&#x27; War===

The Hundred Days&#x27; War was a sub-conflict within the Lebanese Civil War, which occurred in the Lebanese capital Beirut between February and April 1978.

The only political person who remained in East Beirut Achrafiyeh throughout was president Camille Chamoun, who refused to leave. It was fought between the Maronite forces and the Syrian troops of the Arab Deterrent Force (ADF). The Syrian troops shelled the Christian Beirut area of Achrafiyeh for 100 days. The conflict resulted in Syrian Army&#x27;s expulsion from East Beirut and the end of Arab Deterrent Force&#x27;s task in Lebanon and revealed the true intentions of the Syrians in Lebanon. The conflict resulted in 160 dead and 400 injured.

===1978 Israeli invasion===
PLO attacks from Lebanon into Israel in 1977 and 1978 escalated tensions between the countries. On 11 March 1978, eleven Fatah fighters landed on a beach in northern Israel and proceeded to hijack two buses full of passengers on the Haifa–Tel-Aviv road, shooting at passing vehicles in what became known as the Coastal Road massacre. They killed 37 and wounded 76 Israelis before being killed in a firefight with Israeli forces. Israel invaded Lebanon four days later in Operation Litani. The Israeli Army occupied most of the area south of the Litani River. The UN Security Council passed Resolution 425 calling for immediate Israeli withdrawal and creating the UN Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL), charged with attempting to establish peace.

===Israel&#x27;s &quot;Security Zone&quot; in Lebanon===
Israeli forces withdrew later in 1978, but retained control of the southern region by managing a wide security zone along the border. These positions were held by the South Lebanon Army (SLA), a Christian-Shi&#x27;a militia under the leadership of Major Saad Haddad backed by Israel. The Israeli Prime Minister, Likud&#x27;s Menachem Begin, compared the plight of the Christian minority in southern Lebanon (then about 5% of the population in SLA territory) to that of European Jews during World War II. The PLO routinely attacked Israel during the period of the cease-fire, with over 270 documented attacks. People in Galilee regularly had to leave their homes during these shellings. Documents captured in PLO headquarters after the invasion showed they had come from Lebanon. Arafat refused to condemn these attacks on the grounds that the cease-fire was only relevant to Lebanon.

Between June and August 1979 the IDF increased its artillery bombardments and air strikes on targets in Southern Lebanon resulting in the killing of around forty people and a mass exodus of civilians. On 27 June four Syrian planes were shot down over Southern Lebanon. One of them reportedly hit by Palestinian ground fire.

In April 1980 the presence of UNIFIL soldiers in the buffer zone led to the At Tiri incident.

===Day of the Long Knives===
The Safra massacre, known as the &quot;Day of the Long Knives&quot;, occurred in the coastal town Safra (north of Beirut) on 7 July 1980, as part of Bashir Gemayel&#x27;s effort to consolidate all the Maronite fighters under his leadership in the Lebanese Forces. The Phalangist forces launched a surprise attack on the Tigers Militia, which claimed the lives of 83 people, most of whom were normal citizens and not from the militia.

===Battle of Zahleh===

The first six months of 1981 brought Lebanon some of the worst violence since 1976. In the South, there was an increase in clashes between Haddad&#x27;s rebel militia and UNIFIL. This followed an agreement reached in Damascus between Lebanese President Élias Sarkis and United Nations officials on the deployment of Lebanese army soldiers into areas where UNIFIL forces where stationed. The agreement, which was reached in early March, was rejected by Haddad. On 16 March three Nigerian soldiers serving with UNIFIL were killed by artillery fire from Haddad&#x27;s forces.

Another factor was political activity in Israel ahead of elections in June which Prime Minister Menachem Begin and his Likud party were expected to lose. Begin publicly acknowledged that Israel had an alliance with Bashir Gemayel&#x27;s Phalange militia and would intervene if the Syrian Army attacked them. Defence Minister Rafael Eitan visited Jounieh on several occasions. In South Lebanon there were regular airstrikes around Nabatieh and Beaufort Castle. On the night of 9 April IDF commandos raided five different PLO positions in the South.

In Beirut sniper fire across the Green Line between East and West Beirut increased, climaxing in April with lengthy artillery exchanges. The main combatants were elements of the Lebanese Army and the Syrian ADF.

Across the mountains in Zahleh, the Christian town on the Western edge of the Beqaa Valley, the Phalangist militia had become dominant and were reinforcing outposts with artillery as well as opening a new road to the coast and their heartland. In early April clashes escalated around the town and the Syrian Army imposed a siege. There were also outbreaks of fighting in neighbouring Baalbek.

Meanwhile, in the South, on 19 April, Haddad&#x27;s militia shelled Sidon, killing sixteen civilians. Some reports stated that the attack was in response to a request from Bashir Gemayel in order to relieve the Syrian pressure on the Phalangists in Zahleh. On 27 April Syrian troops launched an offensive against the Phalagists&#x27; mountain outposts. The following day the Israeli Air Force shot down two Syrian helicopters near Zahleh. Despite this intervention the Syrians were able to take control of the mountain road and tighten the siege of the town. In response to the Israeli action the Syrians moved antiaircraft Sam 6 missiles into the Northern Beqaa. In Israel the missiles became a political issue. On 27 May Israeli commandos attacked a PFLP-GC missile site near Damour, South of Beirut. Four Libyan technicians were killed. Two Syrian soldiers were also killed when their truck and a civilian car were destroyed.
Begin later revealed that the United States was informed in advance of the raid. In early July the Syrians ended the three month long siege of Zahleh. The Phalangists&#x27; power in the town had been reduced but their alliance with Israel remained intact. The planned deployment of Government troops into the South was abandoned.

On 17 July 1981, Israeli aircraft bombed multi-story apartment buildings in Beirut that contained offices of PLO associated groups. The Lebanese delegate to the United Nations Security Council claimed that 300 civilians had been killed and 800 wounded. The bombing led to worldwide condemnation, and a temporary embargo on the export of U.S. aircraft to Israel.
In August 1981, defense minister Ariel Sharon began to draw up plans to attack PLO military infrastructure in West Beirut, where PLO headquarters and command bunkers were located.

==Third phase (1982–1984)==
===1982 Israeli invasion===

====Pretext====
On 3 June 1982, the Abu Nidal Organization, a splinter group of Fatah, attempted to assassinate Israeli ambassador Shlomo Argov in London. Israel carried out a retaliatory aerial attack on PLO and PFLP targets in West Beirut that led to over 100 casualties. The PLO responded by launching a counterattack from Lebanon with rockets and artillery, which constituted a clear violation of the ceasefire.

Meanwhile, on 5 June, the UN Security Council unanimously passed Resolution 508 calling for &quot;all the parties to the conflict to cease immediately and simultaneously all military activities within Lebanon and across the Lebanese-Israeli border and no later than 0600 hours local time on Sunday, 6 June 1982&quot;.

====Israeli alliance with Christian militias====

Israel launched Operation Peace for Galilee on 6 June 1982, attacking PLO bases in Lebanon. Israeli forces quickly drove into Lebanon, moving into East Beirut with the tacit support of Maronite leaders and militia. When the Israeli cabinet convened to authorize the invasion, Sharon described it as a plan to advance 40 kilometers into Lebanon, demolish PLO strongholds, and establish an expanded security zone that would put northern Israel out of range of PLO rockets.

Israeli chief of staff Rafael Eitan and Sharon had already ordered the invading forces to head straight for Beirut, in accord with Sharon&#x27;s plan from September 1981. The UN Security Council passed a further resolution on 6 June 1982, United Nations Security Council Resolution 509 demanding that Israel withdraw to the internationally recognized boundaries of Lebanon. On 8 June 1982, the United States vetoed a proposed resolution demanding that Israel withdraw.

====Siege of Beirut====
By 15 June 1982, Israeli units were entrenched outside Beirut. The United States called for PLO withdrawal from Lebanon, and Sharon began to order bombing raids of West Beirut, targeting some 16,000 PLO &quot;fedayeen&quot; who had retreated into fortified positions. Meanwhile, Arafat attempted through negotiations to salvage politically what was clearly a disaster for the PLO, an attempt which eventually succeeded once the multinational force arrived to evacuate the PLO.

====Ceasefire negotiations by the United Nations====
On 26 June, a UN Security Council resolution was proposed that &quot;demands the immediate withdrawal of the Israeli forces engaged round Beirut, to a distance of 10 kilometers from the periphery of that city, as a first step towards the complete withdrawal of Israeli forces from Lebanon, and the simultaneous withdrawal of the Palestinian armed forces from Beirut, which shall retire to the existing camps&quot;. 

The United States vetoed the resolution because it was &quot;a transparent attempt to preserve the PLO as a viable political force&quot;. However, President Reagan made an impassioned plea to Prime Minister Begin to end the siege. Begin called back within minutes informing the President that he had given the order to end the attack.

Amid escalating violence and civilian casualties, Philip Habib was sent to restore order, which he accomplished on 12 August on the heels of IDF&#x27;s intensive, day-long bombardment of West Beirut. The Habib-negotiated truce called for the withdrawal of both Israeli and PLO elements, as well as a multinational force composed of U.S. Marines along with French and Italian units that would ensure the departure of the PLO and protect defenseless civilians.

===International intervention===

On 21 August 1982, the first troops of a multinational force landed in Beirut to oversee the PLO withdrawal from Lebanon. U.S. mediation resulted in the evacuation of Syrian troops and PLO fighters from Beirut. The agreement provided for the deployment of a multinational force composed of U.S. Marines along with French, Italian and British units. However, Israel reported that some 2,000 PLO militants were hiding in Palestinian refugee camps on the outskirts of Beirut.

Bachir Gemayel was elected president on 23 August. He was assassinated on 14 September by Habib Tanious Shartouni, affiliated to the Syrian Social Nationalist Party.

===Sabra and Shatila massacre===

On 16–18 September 1982, Lebanese Phalangists, allied with the Israeli Defense Force, killed between 460 and 3,500 Lebanese and Palestinian Shiite civilians in the Shatila refugee camp and the adjacent Sabra neighborhood of Beirut. The Israelis had ordered their Phalangist allies to clear out PLO fighters. Soldiers loyal to Phalangist leader Elie Hobeika began slaughtering civilians, while Israeli forces blocked exits from Sabra and Shatila and illuminated the area with flares. IDF officials failed to act to stop the killings, and prevented the escapees from fleeing the Phalangists and aided them later by lighting the camps during night at their request.

Ten days later, the Israeli government set up the Kahan Commission to investigate the circumstances of the Sabra and Shatila massacre. In 1983, the commission published its findings that then-Defense Minister Ariel Sharon was personally responsible for the massacre and should resign. Under pressure, Sharon resigned as defense minister but remained in the government as a minister without portfolio.

===May 17 Agreement===
On 17 May 1983, Lebanon&#x27;s Amine Gemayel, Israel, and the United States signed an agreement on Israeli withdrawal conditioned on the departure of Syrian troops, reportedly after the US and Israel exerted severe pressure on Gemayel. The agreement stated that &quot;the state of war between Israel and Lebanon has been terminated and no longer exists&quot;. The agreement in effect amounted to a peace agreement with Israel, and was seen by many Lebanese Muslims as an attempt for Israel to gain a permanent hold on the Lebanese South. 

The 17 May Agreement was widely portrayed in the Arab world as an imposed surrender. Amine Gemayel was accused of acting as a Quisling President. Tensions in Lebanon hardened considerably. Syria strongly opposed the agreement and declined to discuss the withdrawal of its troops, effectively stalemating further progress.

===Mountain War===
In August 1983, Israel withdrew from the Chouf District in southeast of Beirut, removing the buffer between the Druze and the Maronite militias, and triggering another round of brutal fighting, the Mountain War. Israel did not intervene. By September 1983, the Druze had gained control over most of the Chouf, and Israeli forces had pulled out from all but the southern security zone.

In September 1983, following the Israeli withdrawal and the ensuing battles between the Lebanese Army and opposing factions for control of key terrain during the Mountain War, the Reagan White House approved the use of naval gunfire to subdue Druze and Syrian positions in order to give support to and protect the Lebanese Army, which was under severe duress.

===Iranian involvement and founding of Hezbollah===
In 1982, the Islamic Republic of Iran established a base in the Syrian-controlled Bekaa Valley in Lebanon. From that base, the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps (IRGC) &quot;founded, financed, trained and equipped Hezbollah to operate as a proxy army&quot; for Iran. The IRGC organized Hezbollah by drafting members from Shi&#x27;a groups resisting the Israeli occupation and from the main Shi&#x27;a movement, Nabih Berri&#x27;s Amal Movement. The group found inspiration for its revolutionary Islamism in the Iranian Revolution of 1979. With Iranian sponsorship and a large pool of disaffected Shi&#x27;a refugees from which to draw support, Hezbollah quickly grew into a strong, armed force.

==== Suicide bombings against Americans and Europeans in Lebanon ====

On 18 April 1983, a suicide bombing attack at the U.S. Embassy in West Beirut killed 63, beginning a series of attacks against U.S. and Western interests in Lebanon.

On 23 October 1983, a devastating Iranian-sponsored suicide bombing targeted the barracks of U.S. and French forces in Beirut, killing 241 American and 58 French servicemen. On 18 January 1984, American University of Beirut President Malcolm H. Kerr was murdered.

Anti-U.S. attacks continued even after U.S. forces withdrew, including a bombing of the U.S. embassy annex in East Beirut on 20 September 1984, which killed 24, including 2 U.S. servicemen.

On 1 July 1985, following the hijacking of a TWA aeroplane which eventually landed at Beirut airport, President Reagan issued a ban on all flights to and from Lebanon. The ban was lifted after 12 years.

===February 6 Intifada===

The &quot;February 6 uprising in West Beirut&quot; or the &quot;February 6 Intifada&quot;, was a battle where the parties of West Beirut, led by the Amal Movement, decisively defeated the Lebanese Army. The day started with the defection of many Muslim and Druze units to the militias, which was a major blow to the government and caused the army to virtually collapse.

==== U.S. disengagement from Lebanon ====
Following the uprising, the U.S. Marines&#x27; position in Lebanon became untenable, and they were looking ready to withdraw. Syria and Muslim groups had gained the upper hand, and stepped up pressure on Gemayel. On 5 March 1984, the Lebanese Government canceled the 17 May Agreement, and the Marines departed a few weeks later.

==Fourth phase (1984–1990)==
===War of the Camps===
Between 1985 and 1989, sectarian conflict worsened as various efforts at national reconciliation failed. Heavy fighting took place in the War of the Camps of 1985–86 as a Syrian-backed coalition headed by the Amal militia sought to rout the PLO from their Lebanese strongholds. Many Palestinians died, and Sabra and Shatila and Bourj el-Barajneh refugee camps were largely destroyed.

On 8 March 1985, a car bomb exploded in Bir al-Abid, south Beirut, killing 80 and injuring over 400.

On 8 August 1985, a summit was held in Damascus with President Amin Gemayel, Prime Minister Rachid Karami and Syrian President Hafez al-Assad attempting to end the fighting between Christian and Druze militias. There followed a series of car bombs in Beirut which were seen as intended to thwart any agreement. On 14 August a car exploded in a Christian district control by the Lebanese Forces. On 17 August another exploded beside a supermarket, also in a district under LF control. 55 people were killed. Two days later two car bombs went off in a Druze and a Shi&#x27;ite district of Beirut. The following day another car bomb exploded in Tripoli. An unknown group, the &quot;Black Brigades&quot;, claimed responsibility. 

The violence escalated with extensive artillery exchanges. It is estimated that in two weeks 300 people were killed. On 15 September, fighting broke out in Tripoli between Alawite and Sunni militias. 200,000 people fled the city. The harbour district was heavily bombarded. The arrival of the Syrian army a week later ended the violence which left 500 killed.

In late December 1985 an agreement was reached between the Syrians and their Lebanese allies to stabilise the situation in Lebanon. It was opposed by President Amin Gemayel and the Phalangist Party. On 15 January 1986 the pro-Syrian leader of the Lebanese Forces, Elie Hobeika, was overthrown. On 21 January, a car bomb killed 20 people in Furn ash-Shebbak, East Beirut. Over the next 10 days a further 5 smaller explosions occurred close to Phalagist targets.

In April 1986, following American airstrikes on Libya, three western hostages were executed and a new round of hostage taking started.

Major combat returned to Beirut in 1987, when Palestinians, leftists, and Druze fighters allied against Amal, eventually drawing further Syrian intervention. On 22 February 1987, eight thousand Syrian soldiers entered West Beirut to separate the rival militias. In the Shia district twenty-three men and four women were taken from a place of worship and shot and bayoneted to death. A crowd of fifty thousand attended their funeral with calls for revenge. Ayatollah Khomeini issued a fatwa forbidding attacks on Syrian forces.

===War of Brothers===
In 1988, Violent confrontations flared up again in Shiite areas between Amal and Hezbollah. In early May, Hezbollah launched a large-scale attack on Amal positions in the southern Beirut suburbs of Dahieh, and by May 11 seized 80% of the suburbs, emerging for the first time as a strong force in the capital.

On 2 January 1989, clashes erupted in Iqlim al-Tuffah in Southern Lebanon between the two sides without any significant territorial changes. Clashes re-erupted in December 1989 in Iqlim al-Tuffah, in which more than 3,500 Amal and Palestinian fighters clashed with 2,000 Hezbollah fighters in the region.

Most of the fighting toned down by December 28. Minor skirmishes took place later in 1990, but completely stopped by November 1990.

===Iraqi support for Christian anti-Shia factions===
Meanwhile, Prime Minister Rashid Karami, head of a government of national unity set up after the failed peace efforts of 1984, was assassinated on 1 June 1987. The assassination was accused on Samir Geagea in coordination with the Lebanese army, but the charge could not be proven. President Gemayel&#x27;s term of office expired in September 1988. Before stepping down, he appointed another Maronite Christian, Lebanese Armed Forces Commanding General Michel Aoun, as acting Prime Minister, contravening the National Pact.

Conflict in this period was exacerbated by increasing Iraqi involvement, as Saddam Hussein searched for proxy battlefields for the Iran–Iraq War. To counter Iran&#x27;s influence through Amal and Hezbollah, Iraq backed Maronite groups. Saddam Hussein helped Aoun and the Lebanese Forces led by Samir Geagea between 1988 and 1990.

Muslim groups rejected the violation of the National Pact and pledged support to Selim al-Hoss, a Sunni who had succeeded Karami. Lebanon was thus divided between a Maronite military government in East Beirut and a civilian government in West Beirut.

On 8 March 1989 Aoun started the blockade of illegal ports of Muslim militias. This touched off bloody exchanges of artillery fire that lasted for half a year. Six days later he launched what he termed a &quot;war of liberation&quot; against the Syrians and their Lebanese militia allies. As a result, Syrian pressure on his Lebanese Army and militia pockets in East Beirut grew. Still, Aoun persisted in the &quot;war of liberation&quot;, denouncing the government of Hafez al-Assad and claiming that he fought for Lebanon&#x27;s independence. 

While he seems to have had significant Maronite support for this, he was still perceived as a sectarian leader among others by the Muslim population, who distrusted his agenda. He was also plagued by the challenge to his legitimacy put forth by the Syrian-backed West Beirut government of Selim al-Hoss. Militarily, this war did not achieve its goal, and instead caused considerable damage to East Beirut and provoked massive emigration among the Christian population.

===Taif Agreement of 1989===
The Taif Agreement of 1989 marked the beginning of the end of the fighting. In January 1989, a committee appointed by the Arab League, chaired by Kuwait and including Saudi Arabia, Algeria, and Morocco, began to formulate solutions to the conflict. This led to a meeting of Lebanese parliamentarians in Ta&#x27;if, Saudi Arabia, where they agreed to the national reconciliation accord in October. The agreement provided a large role for Syria in Lebanese affairs. Returning to Lebanon, they ratified the agreement on 4 November and elected Rene Mouawad as president the following day. Military leader Michel Aoun in East Beirut refused to accept Mouawad, and denounced the Taif Agreement.

Mouawad was assassinated 17 days later in a car bombing in Beirut on 22 November as his motorcade returned from Lebanese independence day ceremonies. He was succeeded by Elias Hrawi, who remained in office until 1998. Aoun again refused to accept the election, and dissolved Parliament.

===Infighting in East Beirut===

On 16 January 1990, General Aoun ordered all Lebanese media to cease using terms like &quot;President&quot; or &quot;Minister&quot; to describe Hrawi and other participants in the Taif government. The Lebanese Forces (LF), led by Samir Geagea, which had grown into a rival power broker in the Christian East Beirut, responded by suspending all its broadcasts. Tension with the LF grew, as Aoun feared that the militia was planning to link up with the Hrawi administration.

On 31 January 1990, Lebanese Army forces loyal to Aoun attacked the LF positions in East Beirut, after Aoun had stated that it was in the national interest for the government to &quot;unify the weapons&quot;, i.e. that the LF must submit to his authority as acting head of state. The fighting continued until 8 March when Aoun announced a unilateral ceasefire and called for negotiations. During this period East Beirut saw levels of destruction and casualties that it had not experienced during the entire 15 years of civil war. Aoun&#x27;s forces had made no significant inroads on the areas under Geagea&#x27;s control.

In August 1990, the Lebanese Parliament, which did not heed Aoun&#x27;s order to dissolve, and the new president agreed on constitutional amendments embodying some of the political reforms envisioned at Taif. The National Assembly expanded to 128 seats and was for the first time divided equally between Christians and Muslims.

As Saddam Hussein focused his attention on Kuwait, Iraqi supplies to Aoun dwindled.

On 13 October 1990, Syria launched a major operation involving its army, air force (for the first time since Zahle&#x27;s siege in 1981) and Lebanese allies (mainly the Lebanese Army led by General Émile Lahoud) against Aoun&#x27;s stronghold around the presidential palace, where hundreds of Aoun supporters were killed. It cleared out the last Aounist pockets, cementing its hold on the capital. Aoun fled to the French Embassy in Beirut, and later into exile in Paris. He was not able to return until May 2005.

William Harris claims that the Syrian operation could not take place until Syria had reached an agreement with the United States, that in exchange for support against the Iraqi government of Saddam Hussein in the Gulf War, it would convince Israel not to attack Syrian aircraft approaching Beirut. Aoun claimed in 1990 that the United States &quot;has sold Lebanon to Syria&quot;.

===Lebanon&#x27;s amnesty law and Hezbollah&#x27;s hegemony===
In March 1991, parliament passed an amnesty law that pardoned all political crimes prior to its enactment. The amnesty was not extended to crimes perpetrated against foreign diplomats or certain crimes referred by the cabinet to the Higher Judicial Council. In May 1991, the militias, with the important exception of Hezbollah, were dissolved, and the Lebanese Armed Forces began to slowly rebuild themselves as Lebanon&#x27;s only major non-sectarian institution.

Some violence still occurred. In late December 1991 a car bomb, estimated at 220 pounds of TNT, exploded in the Muslim neighborhood of Basta. At least thirty people were killed, and 120 wounded, including former Prime Minister Shafik Wazzan, who was riding in a bulletproof car.

==Aftermath==
===Post-conflict Syrian occupation===
The post-war occupation of the country by Syrian Arab Republic was particularly politically disadvantageous to the Maronite population, as most of their leadership was driven into exile, or had been assassinated or jailed.

In 2005, the assassination of Rafik Hariri sparked the Cedar Revolution leading to Syrian military withdrawal from the country. Contemporary political alliances in Lebanon reflect the alliances of the Civil War as well as contemporary geopolitics. The March 14 Alliance brings together Maronite-dominated parties (Lebanese Forces, Kataeb, National Liberal Party, National Bloc, Independence Movement) and Sunni-dominated parties (Future Movement, Islamic Group) whereas the March 8 Alliance is led by the Shia-dominated Hezbollah and Amal parties, as well as assorted Maronite- and Sunni-dominated parties, the SSNP, Ba&#x27;athist and Nasserist parties. The Syrian civil war is also having a significant impact on contemporary political life.

===Long-term effects===
Since the end of the war, the Lebanese have conducted several elections, most of the militias have been weakened or disbanded, and the Lebanese Armed Forces (LAF) have extended central government authority over about two-thirds of the country. Following the cease-fire which ended 12 July 2006 Israeli-Lebanese conflict, the army has for the first time in over three decades moved to occupy and control the southern areas of Lebanon.

==Casualties==
It is estimated that around 150,000 people were killed, and another 100,000 permanently handicapped. In 1989, AP reported 150,000 dead over fourteen and a half years. Reuters gave a figure of 140,000. These figures, equating to 200 killed/week for fourteen years, are much higher than official figures of 35–40,000 dead.

Approximately 900,000 people, representing one-fifth of the pre-war population, were displaced from their homes. Perhaps a quarter of a million emigrated permanently.

=== Landmines and forced disappearances ===
Thousands of land mines remain buried in the previously contested areas. Some Western hostages kidnapped during the mid-1980s were held until June 1992. Lebanese victims of kidnapping and wartime &quot;disappeared&quot; number in the tens of thousands.

In the 15 years of strife, there were at least 3,641 car bombs, which left 4,386 people dead and thousands more injured.

== &quot;Lebanonization&quot; ==
Lebanonization is a pejorative political term, first used by Israeli president Shimon Peres in 1983, referring to Israeli minimization of its presence in Lebanon following the 1982 Israeli invasion of Lebanon, meaning the process of a country degenerating into a civil war or failed state in reference to the civil war.

==In popular culture==
* The British synthpop band The Human League released &quot;The Lebanon&quot;, a track about the Lebanese Civil war, and in particular the Sabra and Shatila massacre, in April 1984.
* English rock band Genesis″ 1986 song &quot;Domino&quot; describes the experiences of a man observing the war from a hotel room in Beirut; the titular dominoes act as metaphors for bombs falling on the Lebanese capital.
* The Argentinean rock/new wave band GIT wrote and recorded a song, in 1986, called &quot;Buenas noches, Beirut&quot; (&quot;Good Night, Beirut&quot;), about the Lebanese Civil War, include on their third eponymous studio album.
* &quot;Out of Life&quot; by Maroun Baghdadi, from 1991, was awarded the Jury Prize at the 1991 Cannes Film Festival.
* In 2009, Saleh Barakat curated &quot;The Road to Peace&quot; exhibition at Beirut Art Center. The exhibition featured paintings, photographs, drawings, prints and sculptures by Lebanese artists during the war. Its title comes from a series of prints by Aref Rayess that depict Lebanese survivors of war.
* &quot;Waltz with Bashir&quot;, a movie from 2008 that deals with the 1982 Israeli intervention and the Sabra and Shatila massacre.
* The 2010 Canadian film &quot;Incendies&quot; depicts the civil war and its aftermath. It is partly based on incidents in the life of the Lebanese writer Souha Bechara.
* 1995 children&#x27;s book, &quot;From Far Away&quot; by Robert Munsch, is based on a true story of a family of asylum seekers to Canada, from the perspective of a girl who does not speak English and is unfamiliar with Western culture and customs, although the conflict is not specifically indicated, it is heavily implied.
* The war is the subject of Nabil Kanso&#x27;s paintings &quot;The Vortices of Wrath&quot;, &quot;Lebanon&quot;, &quot;Endless Night&quot;, and &quot;Lebanon Summer 1982&quot;.
*The 2021 Lebanese-Canadian film &quot;Memory Box&quot; is based on co-director Joana Hadjithomas&#x27; notebooks and tapes made when she was a teenager in Beirut during the civil war in the 1980s.
* &quot;Beirut&quot; is a 2018 American political thriller film set in 1982 during the Lebanese Civil War.

==See also==

*History of Lebanon
*Palestinian insurgency in South Lebanon
*Israeli occupation of Lebanon
*Syrian occupation of Lebanon
*List of modern conflicts in the Middle East

== Explanatory notes==
==References==
==Further reading==
* Jean-Marc Aractingi, &quot;La Politique à mes trousses&quot; (Politics at My Heels), Editions l&#x27;Harmattan, Paris, 2006, Lebanon Chapter ().
*&quot;Al-Baath wa-Lubnân&quot; [Arabic only] (&quot;The Baath and Lebanon&quot;), NY Firzli, Beirut, Dar-al-Tali&#x27;a Books, 1973.
*&quot;The Iraq-Iran Conflict&quot;, NY Firzli, Paris, EMA, 1981. 
*Bregman, Ahron (2002). &quot;Israel&#x27;s Wars: A History Since 1947&quot;. London: Routledge. 
*Bregman, Ahron and El-Tahri, Jihan (1998). &quot;The Fifty Years War: Israel and the Arabs&quot;. London: BBC Books. Penguin Books. 
*&quot;The Breakdown of the State in Lebanon, 1967–1976&quot;. Khazen, Farid El (2000) ()
*&quot;The Bullet Collection&quot;, a book by Patricia Sarrafian Ward, is an excellent account of human experience during the Lebanese Civil War.
*&quot;Civil War in Lebanon, 1975–92&quot;. O&#x27;Ballance, Edgar (1998) ()
*&quot;Crossroads to Civil War: Lebanon 1958–1976&quot;. Salibi, Kamal S. (1976) ()
*&quot;Death of a country: The civil war in Lebanon&quot;. Bulloch, John (1977) ()
*&quot;Faces of Lebanon: Sects, Wars, and Global Extensions&quot; (Princeton Series on the Middle East) Harris, William W (1997) ()
*&quot;The Fateful Triangle: The United States, Israel, and the Palestinians&quot;. Noam Chomsky (1983, 1999) ()
*&quot;History of Syria Including Lebanon and Palestine, Vol. 2&quot;. Hitti Philip K. (2002) ()
*&quot;Lebanon: A Shattered Country: Myths and Realities of the Wars in Lebanon&quot;, Revised Edition Picard, Elizabeth (2002) ()
*&quot;Lebanon in Crisis: Participants and Issues (Contemporary Issues in the Middle East)&quot;. Haley P. Edward, Snider Lewis W. (1979) ()
*&quot;Lebanon: Fire and Embers: A History of the Lebanese Civil War&quot; by Hiro, Dilip (1993) ()
*&quot;Lebanon. The Fractured Country&quot;. Gilmour, David (1983) editions 1984, revised 1987. ()
*&quot;Pity the Nation: Lebanon at War&quot;. Fisk, Robert (2001) ()
*&quot;Syria and the Lebanese Crisis&quot;. Dawisha, A. I. (1980) ()
*&quot;Syria&#x27;s Terrorist War on Lebanon and the Peace Process&quot;. Deeb, Marius (2003) ()
*&quot;The War for Lebanon, 1970–1985&quot;. Rabinovich, Itamar (1985) ()
*&quot;The Lebanese War 1975–1985, a bibliographical survey&quot;, Abdallah Naaman, Maison Naaman pour la culture, Jounieh, Lebanon, 1985
*&quot;Palestine and the Arab-Israeli Conflict&quot;, fourth edition, Charles D. Smith (2001) () (paperback)
*&quot;Les otages libanais dans les prisons syriennes, jusqu&#x27;à quand?&quot; by Lina Murr Nehme
* Schulhofer-Wohl, Jonah. 2020. &quot;Quagmire in Civil War&quot;. Cambridge University Press

==External links==

*Center for Lebanese StudyOxford University
*Lebanon&#x27;s Forgotten Civil WarWashington Post Foreign Service 20 December 1999
*Pictures of Battle Scared BeirutTravel Adventures.
*sans titre/unitiledin &quot;Fillip&quot;
;Primary sources
*&quot;Another Battle of Beirut&quot; (&quot;Time&quot; magazine, 14 May 1973)
*&quot;The Palestinian Fedayeen&quot; (Declassified CIA Report, 1971)
*The Lebanese civil war and the Taef agreement
*Full Lebanese War Photo System
* A 15-episode documentary about the Lebanese Civil War, 1975–1990
*Bourj HammoudArs Madzounian</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q208484" start="4" end="22" title="Lebanese Civil War" label="Lebanese Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q822" start="199" end="206" title="Lebanon" label="Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2606511" start="240" end="255" title="Lebanese people" label="Lebanese people"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078438" start="321" end="340" title="Lebanese Christians" label="Lebanese Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q12183757" start="345" end="367" title="Lebanese Sunni Muslims" label="Lebanese Sunni Muslims"/>
<link wikidata="Q2777998" start="414" end="435" title="Lebanese Shia Muslims" label="Lebanese Shia Muslims"/>
<link wikidata="Q1480109" start="468" end="484" title="southern Lebanon" label="southern Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q202322" start="496" end="508" title="Beqaa Valley" label="Beqaa Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q18204558" start="526" end="531" title="Lebanese Druze" label="Druze"/>
<link wikidata="Q16191820" start="677" end="695" title="Maronite Christian" label="Maronite Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q130842" start="771" end="785" title="Greater Lebanon" label="French Mandate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7127437" start="1043" end="1055" title="Palestinians in Lebanon" label="Palestinians"/>
<link wikidata="Q13220089" start="1062" end="1069" title="1948 Palestinian expulsion and flight" label="in 1948"/>
<link wikidata="Q3062020" start="1080" end="1087" title="1967 Palestinian exodus" label="in 1967"/>
<link wikidata="Q193476" start="1271" end="1283" title="pan-Arabists" label="pan-Arabists"/>
<link wikidata="Q164597" start="1289" end="1298" title="left-wing" label="left-wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="1311" end="1319" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542222" start="1436" end="1456" title="1958 Lebanese crisis" label="1958 Lebanese crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q160381" start="1491" end="1504" title="Western world" label="Western world"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="1565" end="1571" title="Soviet" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q143487" start="1580" end="1594" title="Arab countries" label="Arab countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1822817" start="1614" end="1641" title="Lebanese Front" label="Lebanese Christian militias"/>
<link wikidata="Q7127419" start="1646" end="1668" title="Palestinian insurgency in South Lebanon" label="Palestinian insurgents"/>
<link wikidata="Q26683" start="1686" end="1719" title="Palestine Liberation Organization" label="Palestine Liberation Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q858" start="1884" end="1889" title="Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="1891" end="1897" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="1903" end="1907" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q2655595" start="2295" end="2325" title="Multinational Force in Lebanon" label="Multinational Force in Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q160805" start="2334" end="2373" title="United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon" label="United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q321936" start="2433" end="2447" title="Taif Agreement" label="Taif Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q7172" start="2529" end="2540" title="Arab League" label="Arab League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422275" start="2606" end="2627" title="Parliament of Lebanon" label="Parliament of Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q41053" start="2854" end="2863" title="Hezbollah" label="Hezbollah"/>
<link wikidata="Q112114970" start="2880" end="2901" title="Islamist Shi&amp;#x27;ism" label="Shia Islamist militia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074908" start="2914" end="2935" title="Lebanese Armed Forces" label="Lebanese Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q5749974" start="3093" end="3124" title="Hezbollah armed strength" label="Hezbollah&amp;#x27;s armed strength"/>
<link wikidata="Q6967059" start="3165" end="3181" title="Shias and Sunnis" label="Shias and Sunnis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3772246" start="3316" end="3353" title="1860 conflict in Lebanon" label="civil war between Druze and Maronites"/>
<link wikidata="Q11938128" start="3377" end="3390" title="Mutasarrifate" label="Mutasarrifate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3326429" start="3394" end="3407" title="Mount Lebanon Mutasarrifate" label="Mount Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="3498" end="3509" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3549" end="3554" title="Lebanese people#Arabization" label="Arabs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1837704" start="3634" end="3690" title="defeat and dissolution of the Ottoman Empire (1908–1922)" label="defeat and dissolution of the Ottoman Empire (1908–1922)"/>
<link wikidata="Q139708" start="3763" end="3803" title="French Mandate for Syria and the Lebanon" label="French Mandate for Syria and the Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q38130" start="3814" end="3831" title="League of Nations" label="League of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q130842" start="3865" end="3880" title="Greater Lebanon" label="Greater Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q502276" start="4196" end="4204" title="Kataeb Party" label="Phalange"/>
<link wikidata="Q467100" start="4226" end="4240" title="Pierre Gemayel" label="Pierre Gemayel"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="4271" end="4283" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q152582" start="4426" end="4437" title="Free French" label="Free French"/>
<link wikidata="Q69808" start="4499" end="4511" title="Vichy France" label="Vichy French"/>
<link wikidata="Q3244515" start="4635" end="4642" title="Islam in Lebanon" label="Muslims"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078438" start="4647" end="4657" title="Christianity in Lebanon" label="Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q12183757" start="4759" end="4764" title="Sunni Islam in Lebanon" label="Sunni"/>
<link wikidata="Q2777998" start="4804" end="4808" title="Shi&amp;#x27;a Islam in Lebanon" label="Shia"/>
<link wikidata="Q846795" start="4831" end="4874" title="United Nations Partition Plan for Palestine" label="United Nations Partition Plan for Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2379101" start="4882" end="4904" title="1947–48 Civil War in Mandatory Palestine" label="civil war in Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q193714" start="4917" end="4936" title="Mandatory Palestine" label="Mandatory Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q223732" start="4946" end="4981" title="Israeli Declaration of Independence" label="Israeli Declaration of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q49092" start="5100" end="5121" title="1948 Arab–Israeli War" label="1948 Arab–Israeli War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7127437" start="5135" end="5155" title="Palestinians in Lebanon" label="Palestinian refugees"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542222" start="5218" end="5243" title="1958 Lebanon crisis" label="threatened by a civil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q4988656" start="5252" end="5260" title="Maronite" label="Maronite"/>
<link wikidata="Q365971" start="5295" end="5310" title="Camille Chamoun" label="Camille Chamoun"/>
<link wikidata="Q49101" start="5999" end="6010" title="Suez Crisis" label="Suez Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q39524" start="6040" end="6058" title="Gamal Abdel Nasser" label="Gamal Abdel Nasser"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="6080" end="6088" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="6186" end="6198" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q379850" start="6293" end="6305" title="Baghdad Pact" label="Baghdad Pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q114213" start="6371" end="6387" title="Arab nationalism" label="Arab nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344225" start="7042" end="7055" title="Rashid Karami" label="Rashid Karami"/>
<link wikidata="Q170468" start="7156" end="7176" title="United Arab Republic" label="United Arab Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="7529" end="7537" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="7587" end="7596" title="Communist" label="Communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2452638" start="7840" end="7865" title="Arab Nationalist Movement" label="Arab Nationalist Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q298649" start="7880" end="7893" title="George Habash" label="George Habash"/>
<link wikidata="Q178888" start="8231" end="8236" title="Fatah" label="Fatah"/>
<link wikidata="Q34211" start="8248" end="8261" title="Yasser Arafat" label="Yasser Arafat"/>
<link wikidata="Q510981" start="8266" end="8278" title="Khalil Wazir" label="Khalil Wazir"/>
<link wikidata="Q168954" start="8491" end="8498" title="Tripoli, Lebanon" label="Tripoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q15452538" start="8512" end="8524" title="Yezid Sayigh" label="Yezid Sayigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q449407" start="8618" end="8629" title="Fuad Chehab" label="Fuad Chehab"/>
<link wikidata="Q502276" start="8797" end="8813" title="Kataeb Party" label="Phalange militia"/>
<link wikidata="Q467100" start="9274" end="9288" title="Pierre Gemayel" label="Pierre Gemayel"/>
<link wikidata="Q146906" start="10368" end="10380" title="Hussein of Jordan" label="King Hussein"/>
<link wikidata="Q154288" start="10397" end="10422" title="Black September in Jordan" label="Black September in Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4117226" start="10527" end="10541" title="Royal Jordanian Army" label="Jordanian army"/>
<link wikidata="Q163490" start="13955" end="13960" title="Sidon" label="Sidon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3273711" start="13962" end="13974" title="Maarouf Saad" label="Maarouf Saad"/>
<link wikidata="Q6510917" start="16101" end="16135" title="Lebanese National Resistance Front" label="Lebanese National Resistance Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q465727" start="16314" end="16327" title="non-combatant" label="non-combatant"/>
<link wikidata="Q18550" start="16440" end="16445" title="mafia" label="mafia"/>
<link wikidata="Q858" start="16656" end="16661" title="Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="16665" end="16671" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="16700" end="16704" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q6909090" start="16875" end="16890" title="moral authority" label="moral authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q940" start="17480" end="17489" title="narcotics" label="narcotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q151980" start="17518" end="17525" title="hashish" label="hashish"/>
<link wikidata="Q202322" start="17553" end="17565" title="Bekaa valley" label="Bekaa valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2311958" start="18102" end="18121" title="Canton (country subdivision)" label="&amp;quot;cantons&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q23058" start="18123" end="18133" title="Cantons of Switzerland" label="Swiss-like"/>
<link wikidata="Q12200602" start="18181" end="18192" title="Maronistan" label="Marounistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q113104" start="18256" end="18290" title="Progressive Socialist Party" label="Progressive Socialist Party&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q112939230" start="18315" end="18351" title="Civil Administration of the Mountain" label="Civil Administration of the Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q25739" start="18496" end="18503" title="Zghorta" label="Zghorta"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="18566" end="18570" title="Time (magazine)" label="TIME"/>
<link wikidata="Q12200602" start="18598" end="18626" title="East Beirut canton" label="East Beirut Christian canton"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="19002" end="19009" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q219" start="19014" end="19022" title="Bulgaria" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q4988656" start="19259" end="19267" title="Maronite" label="Maronite"/>
<link wikidata="Q365971" start="19502" end="19517" title="Camille Chamoun" label="Camille Chamoun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165211" start="19603" end="19615" title="Dany Chamoun" label="Dany Chamoun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779990" start="19621" end="19635" title="Tigers Militia" label="Tigers Militia"/>
<link wikidata="Q502276" start="19659" end="19671" title="Kataeb Party" label="Kataeb Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q467100" start="19710" end="19724" title="Pierre Gemayel" label="Pierre Gemayel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6374989" start="19812" end="19836" title="Kataeb Regulatory Forces" label="Kataeb Regulatory Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q4116097" start="19844" end="19856" title="William Hawi" label="William Hawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q315534" start="19873" end="19887" title="Bachir Gemayel" label="Bachir Gemayel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779990" start="19940" end="19954" title="Tigers Militia" label="Tigers Militia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2581864" start="19981" end="19990" title="Al-Tanzim" label="Al-Tanzim"/>
<link wikidata="Q798186" start="19992" end="20015" title="Guardians of the Cedars" label="Guardians of the Cedars"/>
<link wikidata="Q7921064" start="20017" end="20040" title="Lebanese Youth Movement" label="Lebanese Youth Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q7860597" start="20042" end="20065" title="Tyous Team of Commandos" label="Tyous Team of Commandos"/>
<link wikidata="Q17007878" start="20111" end="20126" title="Lebanese Forces (Militia)" label="Lebanese Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1822817" start="20188" end="20202" title="Lebanese Front" label="Lebanese Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q219" start="20286" end="20294" title="Bulgaria" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="20352" end="20356" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q810" start="20358" end="20364" title="Jordan" label="Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q107258515" start="20366" end="20378" title="Pahlavi Iran" label="Pahlavi Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q713750" start="20380" end="20392" title="West Germany" label="West Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q851" start="20406" end="20418" title="Saudi Arabia" label="Saudi Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q661994" start="20464" end="20478" title="Black Saturday (Lebanon)" label="Black Saturday"/>
<link wikidata="Q8070007" start="20845" end="20868" title="Zgharta Liberation Army" label="Zgharta Liberation Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q548748" start="20906" end="20914" title="Suleiman Franjieh" label="Franjieh"/>
<link wikidata="Q197116" start="20925" end="20932" title="Zgharta District" label="Zgharta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1822817" start="20989" end="21003" title="Lebanese Front" label="Lebanese Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q2905082" start="21272" end="21286" title="Safra massacre" label="Safra massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q733686" start="21421" end="21433" title="Samir Geagea" label="Samir Geagea"/>
<link wikidata="Q467879" start="21438" end="21445" title="Elie Hobeika" label="Hobeika"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146346" start="21552" end="21567" title="Lebanese Forces" label="Lebanese Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q7843236" start="21793" end="21810" title="Tripartite Accord (Lebanon)" label="Tripartite Accord"/>
<link wikidata="Q5529439" start="21849" end="21872" title="Geagea-Hobeika Conflict" label="Geagea-Hobeika Conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q17007885" start="21988" end="22023" title="Lebanese Forces – Executive Command" label="Lebanese Forces – Executive Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q216920" start="22151" end="22158" title="secularism" label="secular"/>
<link wikidata="Q193476" start="22325" end="22333" title="Pan-Arab" label="Pan-Arab"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349604" start="22368" end="22392" title="Lebanese Communist Party" label="Lebanese Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2905806" start="22436" end="22465" title="Communist Action Organization" label="Communist Action Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q767681" start="22516" end="22547" title="Syrian Social Nationalist Party" label="Syrian Social Nationalist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q13415123" start="22586" end="22599" title="Greater Syria" label="Greater Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q193476" start="22616" end="22624" title="Pan-Arab" label="Pan-Arab"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22959" end="22969" title="Inaam Raad" label="Inaam Raad"/>
<link wikidata="Q7104460" start="23005" end="23019" title="Greek Orthodox Christianity in Lebanon" label="Greek Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q2414816" start="23053" end="23058" title="Koura District" label="Koura"/>
<link wikidata="Q419697" start="23063" end="23068" title="Akkar" label="Akkar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3126585" start="23091" end="23103" title="Hamra Street" label="Hamra Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q246074" start="23129" end="23133" title="Metn" label="Metn"/>
<link wikidata="Q26454" start="23135" end="23141" title="Baabda" label="Baabda"/>
<link wikidata="Q26338" start="23143" end="23147" title="Aley" label="Aley"/>
<link wikidata="Q246999" start="23152" end="23157" title="Chouf" label="Chouf"/>
<link wikidata="Q26134" start="23187" end="23195" title="Nabatieh" label="Nabatieh"/>
<link wikidata="Q25659" start="23197" end="23206" title="Marjayoun" label="Marjayoun"/>
<link wikidata="Q594026" start="23211" end="23218" title="Hasbaya" label="Hasbaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q178835" start="23242" end="23250" title="Baalbeck" label="Baalbeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q26117" start="23252" end="23258" title="Hermel" label="Hermel"/>
<link wikidata="Q25914" start="23263" end="23270" title="Rashaya" label="Rashaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q929554" start="23304" end="23322" title="South Lebanon Army" label="South Lebanon Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2557585" start="23337" end="23348" title="Saad Haddad" label="Saad Haddad"/>
<link wikidata="Q4794304" start="23559" end="23579" title="Army of Free Lebanon" label="Army of Free Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074908" start="23621" end="23634" title="Lebanese Army" label="Lebanese Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q41053" start="23763" end="23772" title="Hezbollah" label="Hezbollah"/>
<link wikidata="Q2777998" start="23878" end="23885" title="Lebanese Shia Muslims" label="Shiites"/>
<link wikidata="Q18204558" start="23887" end="23892" title="Lebanese Druze" label="Druze"/>
<link wikidata="Q12183757" start="23897" end="23903" title="Lebanese Sunni Muslims" label="Sunnis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2582421" start="24173" end="24193" title="Ba&amp;#x27;athism" label="Ba&amp;#x27;ath movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q25302619" start="24268" end="24289" title="Socialist Arab Lebanon Vanguard Party" label="&amp;quot;pro-Iraqi&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q12183757" start="24323" end="24328" title="Sunni Islam in Lebanon" label="Sunni"/>
<link wikidata="Q7104460" start="24352" end="24376" title="Greek Orthodox Christianity in Lebanon" label="Greek Orthodox Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4783242" start="24406" end="24428" title="Arab Socialist Ba&amp;#x27;ath Party of Lebanon" label="&amp;quot;pro-Syrian&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2867013" start="24439" end="24450" title="Assem Qanso" label="Assem Qanso"/>
<link wikidata="Q2777998" start="24452" end="24458" title="Shi&amp;#x27;a Islam in Lebanon" label="Shiite"/>
<link wikidata="Q152220" start="24466" end="24495" title="Kurdistan Workers&amp;#x27; Party" label="Kurdistan Workers&amp;#x27; Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1885070" start="24724" end="24738" title="Mahsum Korkmaz" label="Mahsum Korkmaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q211930" start="24801" end="24817" title="Marxist-Leninist" label="Marxist-Leninist"/>
<link wikidata="Q720676" start="24826" end="24831" title="ASALA" label="ASALA"/>
<link wikidata="Q545875" start="24942" end="24957" title="Monte Melkonian" label="Monte Melkonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2394024" start="24976" end="24990" title="Hagop Hagopian (guerilla)" label="Hagop Hagopian"/>
<link wikidata="Q913025" start="25076" end="25102" title="Lebanese National Movement" label="Lebanese National Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q49103" start="25195" end="25216" title="1982 Lebanon War" label="1982 phase of the war"/>
<link wikidata="Q2617818" start="25294" end="25320" title="Siege of Beirut" label="its defense of West Beirut"/>
<link wikidata="Q201190" start="25347" end="25358" title="Palestinian people" label="Palestinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q810" start="25464" end="25470" title="Jordan" label="Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q154288" start="25494" end="25509" title="Black September in Jordan" label="Black September"/>
<link wikidata="Q26683" start="25542" end="25575" title="Palestine Liberation Organization" label="Palestine Liberation Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q170156" start="25687" end="25700" title="confederation" label="confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q34211" start="25718" end="25731" title="Yassir Arafat" label="Yassir Arafat"/>
<link wikidata="Q178888" start="25794" end="25799" title="Fatah" label="Fatah"/>
<link wikidata="Q851" start="26097" end="26109" title="Saudi Arabia" label="Saudi Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="26111" end="26115" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016" start="26121" end="26126" title="Libya" label="Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q3242924" start="26471" end="26493" title="Palestinian Christians" label="Palestinian Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q114213" start="26514" end="26530" title="Arab Nationalism" label="Arab Nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q178888" start="26674" end="26679" title="Fatah" label="Fatah"/>
<link wikidata="Q80895" start="26693" end="26710" title="guerrilla warfare" label="guerrilla warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q298649" start="26952" end="26965" title="George Habash" label="George Habash"/>
<link wikidata="Q212884" start="26990" end="27035" title="Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine" label="Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q818618" start="27066" end="27114" title="Democratic Front for the Liberation of Palestine" label="Democratic Front for the Liberation of Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q259190" start="27125" end="27139" title="Nayef Hawatmeh" label="Nayef Hawatmeh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422785" start="27394" end="27422" title="Palestinian Liberation Front" label="Palestinian Liberation Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q921699" start="27485" end="27548" title="Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine - General Command" label="Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine - General Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q2582421" start="27592" end="27606" title="Ba&amp;#x27;athism" label="Ba&amp;#x27;athist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745507" start="27700" end="27714" title="as-Sa&amp;#x27;iqa" label="as-Sa&amp;#x27;iqa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2467906" start="27766" end="27787" title="Arab Liberation Front" label="Arab Liberation Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q1279051" start="27884" end="27909" title="Palestine Liberation Army" label="Palestine Liberation Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="27999" end="28004" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q163943" start="28170" end="28175" title="Druze" label="Druze"/>
<link wikidata="Q246999" start="28226" end="28231" title="Chouf District" label="Chouf"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915792" start="28369" end="28384" title="Jumblatt Family of Lebanon" label="Jumblatt family"/>
<link wikidata="Q503850" start="28392" end="28406" title="Kamal Jumblatt" label="Kamal Jumblatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q913025" start="28412" end="28415" title="Lebanese National Movement" label="LNM"/>
<link wikidata="Q380437" start="28441" end="28446" title="Walid Jumblatt" label="Walid"/>
<link wikidata="Q113104" start="28452" end="28479" title="Progressive Socialist Party" label="Progressive Socialist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q767681" start="28721" end="28752" title="Syrian Social Nationalist Party" label="Syrian Social Nationalist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q28169577" start="28898" end="28911" title="Arab identity" label="Arab identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q25303231" start="28981" end="29010" title="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army (Lebanon)" label="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="29054" end="29058" title="Soviet Union" label="USSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016" start="29063" end="29068" title="Libya" label="Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q7784981" start="29177" end="29189" title="Mountain War (Lebanon)" label="Mountain War"/>
<link wikidata="Q333711" start="29284" end="29297" title="Mount Lebanon" label="Mount Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6374989" start="29345" end="29351" title="Kataeb Regulatory Forces" label="Kataeb"/>
<link wikidata="Q17007878" start="29375" end="29390" title="Lebanese Forces (Militia)" label="Lebanese Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q380437" start="29537" end="29542" title="Walid Jumblatt" label="Walid"/>
<link wikidata="Q112939230" start="29640" end="29676" title="Civil Administration of the Mountain" label="Civil Administration of the Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7784981" start="29847" end="29859" title="Mountain War (Lebanon)" label="Mountain War"/>
<link wikidata="Q246999" start="29927" end="29932" title="Chouf District" label="Chouf"/>
<link wikidata="Q921699" start="29989" end="29996" title="Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine – General Command" label="PFLP-GC"/>
<link wikidata="Q615239" start="29998" end="30015" title="Fatah al-Intifada" label="Fatah al-Intifada"/>
<link wikidata="Q849180" start="30020" end="30031" title="Syrian Armed Forces" label="Syrian army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074908" start="30067" end="30080" title="Lebanese Armed Forces" label="Lebanese army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2655595" start="30089" end="30108" title="Multinational Force in Lebanon" label="Multinational Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q2777998" start="30253" end="30260" title="Lebanese Shia Muslims" label="Shiites"/>
<link wikidata="Q164597" start="30431" end="30438" title="Left-wing politics" label="Leftist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="30478" end="30487" title="Communism" label="Communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349604" start="30511" end="30514" title="Lebanese Communist Party" label="LCP"/>
<link wikidata="Q2905806" start="30516" end="30545" title="Communist Action Organization in Lebanon" label="Communist Action Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q27628204" start="30550" end="30554" title="Arab Socialist Action Party – Lebanon" label="ASAP"/>
<link wikidata="Q2582421" start="30581" end="30589" title="Ba&amp;#x27;athism" label="Baathist"/>
<link wikidata="Q25302619" start="30617" end="30654" title="Socialist Arab Lebanon Vanguard Party" label="Socialist Arab Lebanon Vanguard Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q4783242" start="30667" end="30693" title="Arab Socialist Ba&amp;#x27;ath Party – Lebanon Region" label="Arab Socialist Baath Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1718017" start="30710" end="30724" title="al-Mourabitoun" label="al-Mourabitoun"/>
<link wikidata="Q767681" start="30754" end="30758" title="Syrian Social Nationalist Party" label="SSNP"/>
<link wikidata="Q26683" start="30785" end="30796" title="Palestine Liberation Organization" label="Palestinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q178888" start="30846" end="30851" title="Fatah" label="Fatah"/>
<link wikidata="Q212884" start="30857" end="30861" title="Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine" label="PFLP"/>
<link wikidata="Q2467906" start="30867" end="30888" title="Arab Liberation Front" label="Arab Liberation Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q6082421" start="30944" end="30962" title="Islamic Dawa Party in Lebanon" label="Islamic Dawa Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q41053" start="31004" end="31013" title="Hezbollah" label="Hezbollah"/>
<link wikidata="Q672145" start="31025" end="31034" title="Musa Sadr" label="Musa Sadr"/>
<link wikidata="Q452670" start="31079" end="31107" title="Amal Movement" label="Movement of the Dispossessed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1480109" start="31352" end="31357" title="Southern Lebanon" label="South"/>
<link wikidata="Q953108" start="31550" end="31555" title="SAVAK" label="SAVAK"/>
<link wikidata="Q49103" start="31600" end="31627" title="1982 Lebanon War" label="Israeli invasion of Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q41053" start="31663" end="31672" title="Hezbollah" label="Hezbollah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456640" start="31980" end="31991" title="Ragheb Harb" label="Ragheb Harb"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915324" start="31994" end="32000" title="Dahieh" label="Dahieh"/>
<link wikidata="Q202322" start="32081" end="32086" title="Bekaa valley" label="Bekaa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1480109" start="32116" end="32121" title="Southern Lebanon" label="South"/>
<link wikidata="Q209496" start="32488" end="32496" title="Alawites" label="Alawites"/>
<link wikidata="Q4783182" start="32570" end="32589" title="Red Knights Militia" label="Red Knights Militia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4783182" start="32597" end="32618" title="Arab Democratic Party, Lebanon" label="Arab Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q168954" start="32730" end="32737" title="Tripoli, Lebanon" label="Tripoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q12183757" start="32765" end="32770" title="Sunni Islam in Lebanon" label="Sunni"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016" start="32802" end="32807" title="Libya" label="Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="32812" end="32816" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813600" start="33017" end="33026" title="Nasserism" label="Nasserist"/>
<link wikidata="Q193476" start="33057" end="33065" title="pan-Arab" label="pan-Arab"/>
<link wikidata="Q114213" start="33070" end="33086" title="Arab nationalist" label="Arab nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q189746" start="33103" end="33111" title="Islamist" label="Islamist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3326561" start="33165" end="33180" title="Tawhid Movement" label="Tawhid Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q133207" start="33283" end="33301" title="Muslim Brotherhood" label="Muslim Brotherhood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1718017" start="33391" end="33405" title="al-Mourabitoun" label="al-Mourabitoun"/>
<link wikidata="Q3147512" start="33457" end="33473" title="Ibrahim Kulaylat" label="Ibrahim Kulaylat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7229717" start="33573" end="33603" title="Popular Nasserist Organization" label="Popular Nasserist Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q163490" start="33607" end="33612" title="Sidon" label="Sidon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3273711" start="33654" end="33666" title="Maarouf Saad" label="Maarouf Saad"/>
<link wikidata="Q7533214" start="33754" end="33780" title="Sixth of February Movement" label="Sixth of February Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2777811" start="33864" end="33880" title="War of the Camps" label="War of the Camps"/>
<link wikidata="Q2671703" start="33916" end="33924" title="Armenians in Lebanon" label="Armenian"/>
<link wikidata="Q913025" start="34397" end="34423" title="Lebanese National Movement" label="Lebanese National Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q6510917" start="34424" end="34458" title="Lebanese National Resistance Front" label="Lebanese National Resistance Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q318657" start="34538" end="34545" title="Dashnak" label="Dashnak"/>
<link wikidata="Q502276" start="34599" end="34605" title="Kataeb" label="Kataeb"/>
<link wikidata="Q315534" start="34655" end="34669" title="Bashir Gemayel" label="Bashir Gemayel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4793227" start="34801" end="34845" title="Armenian Revolutionary Federation in Lebanon" label="Armenian Revolutionary Federation in Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986022" start="34910" end="34952" title="Justice Commandos of the Armenian Genocide" label="Justice Commandos of the Armenian Genocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q720676" start="34961" end="35011" title="Armenian Secret Army for the Liberation of Armenia" label="Armenian Secret Army for the Liberation of Armenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q913025" start="35287" end="35313" title="Lebanese National Movement" label="Lebanese National Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q502276" start="35339" end="35347" title="Kataeb Party" label="Phalange"/>
<link wikidata="Q12200602" start="35570" end="35581" title="East Beirut" label="East Beirut"/>
<link wikidata="Q4988656" start="35644" end="35652" title="Maronite" label="Maronite"/>
<link wikidata="Q315534" start="35702" end="35710" title="Bashir Gemayel" label="Gemayels"/>
<link wikidata="Q201190" start="35721" end="35733" title="Palestinians" label="Palestinians"/>
<link wikidata="Q4166560" start="35815" end="35827" title="Bus Massacre" label="Bus Massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q4872937" start="35839" end="35859" title="Battle of the Hotels" label="Battle of the Hotels"/>
<link wikidata="Q661994" start="35957" end="35971" title="Black Saturday (Lebanon)" label="Black Saturday"/>
<link wikidata="Q502276" start="35994" end="36002" title="Kataeb Party" label="Phalange"/>
<link wikidata="Q332946" start="36058" end="36067" title="roadblock" label="roadblock"/>
<link wikidata="Q3820" start="36080" end="36086" title="Beirut" label="Beirut"/>
<link wikidata="Q1907402" start="36625" end="36643" title="Karantina Massacre" label="Karantina Massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351462" start="36674" end="36702" title="Damour massacre" label="retaliatory strike on Damour"/>
<link wikidata="Q3820" start="36989" end="37000" title="Beirut" label="West Beirut"/>
<link wikidata="Q164597" start="37113" end="37120" title="leftist" label="leftist"/>
<link wikidata="Q34211" start="37323" end="37336" title="Yassir Arafat" label="Yassir Arafat"/>
<link wikidata="Q178888" start="37355" end="37360" title="Fatah" label="Fatah"/>
<link wikidata="Q26683" start="37377" end="37410" title="Palestine Liberation Organisation" label="Palestine Liberation Organisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1279051" start="37719" end="37744" title="Palestine Liberation Army" label="Palestine Liberation Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="38466" end="38472" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q189746" start="38677" end="38686" title="Islamists" label="Islamists"/>
<link wikidata="Q133207" start="38711" end="38729" title="Muslim Brotherhood" label="Muslim Brotherhood"/>
<link wikidata="Q143487" start="39089" end="39099" title="Arab world" label="Arab world"/>
<link wikidata="Q26683" start="39181" end="39184" title="PLO" label="PLO"/>
<link wikidata="Q7172" start="39707" end="39718" title="Arab League" label="Arab League"/>
<link wikidata="Q3692" start="39729" end="39735" title="Riyadh" label="Riyadh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2293745" start="39814" end="39834" title="Arab Deterrent Force" label="Arab Deterrent Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q333711" start="40711" end="40724" title="Mount Lebanon" label="Mount Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916399" start="40789" end="40799" title="Green Line (Lebanon)" label="Green Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1851961" start="40851" end="40873" title="National Liberal Party (Lebanon)" label="National Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q502276" start="40885" end="40897" title="Kataeb Party" label="Kataeb Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q13257535" start="40906" end="40928" title="Lebanese Renewal Party" label="Lebanese Renewal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1822817" start="40943" end="40957" title="Lebanese Front" label="Lebanese Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779990" start="41015" end="41021" title="Tigers Militia (Lebanon)" label="Tigers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6374989" start="41023" end="41047" title="Kataeb Regulatory Forces" label="Kataeb Regulatory Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q798186" start="41058" end="41081" title="Guardians of the Cedars" label="Guardians of the Cedars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146346" start="41121" end="41136" title="Lebanese Forces" label="Lebanese Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q315534" start="41287" end="41301" title="Bashir Gemayel" label="Bashir Gemayel"/>
<link wikidata="Q913025" start="41495" end="41521" title="Lebanese National Movement" label="Lebanese National Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q503850" start="41529" end="41543" title="Kamal Jumblatt" label="Kamal Jumblatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q163943" start="41661" end="41666" title="Druze" label="Druze"/>
<link wikidata="Q113104" start="41667" end="41694" title="Progressive Socialist Party" label="Progressive Socialist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q380437" start="41740" end="41754" title="Walid Jumblatt" label="Walid Jumblatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q118725" start="42009" end="42023" title="Hafez al-Assad" label="Hafez al-Assad"/>
<link wikidata="Q4120294" start="42192" end="42214" title="Hundred Days&amp;#x27; War" label="Hundred Days&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3820" start="42304" end="42310" title="Beirut" label="Beirut"/>
<link wikidata="Q2293745" start="42545" end="42565" title="Arab Deterrent Force" label="Arab Deterrent Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q3068744" start="42678" end="42689" title="Syrian Army" label="Syrian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2293745" start="42739" end="42759" title="Arab Deterrent Force" label="Arab Deterrent Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q301448" start="43234" end="43255" title="Coastal Road massacre" label="Coastal Road massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121402" start="43394" end="43410" title="Operation Litani" label="Operation Litani"/>
<link wikidata="Q1674702" start="43416" end="43428" title="Israeli Army" label="Israeli Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q456415" start="43468" end="43480" title="Litani River" label="Litani River"/>
<link wikidata="Q37470" start="43486" end="43505" title="UN Security Council" label="UN Security Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642172" start="43513" end="43527" title="UN Security Council Resolution 425" label="Resolution 425"/>
<link wikidata="Q160805" start="43586" end="43613" title="UN Interim Force in Lebanon" label="UN Interim Force in Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q929554" start="43893" end="43911" title="South Lebanon Army" label="South Lebanon Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2557585" start="43980" end="43991" title="Saad Haddad" label="Saad Haddad"/>
<link wikidata="Q187009" start="44038" end="44043" title="Likud" label="Likud"/>
<link wikidata="Q130873" start="44051" end="44065" title="Menachem Begin" label="Menachem Begin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7127419" start="44248" end="44256" title="Palestinian insurgency in South Lebanon" label="attacked"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416238" start="44828" end="44834" title="Syrian Air Force" label="Syrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q17513497" start="45012" end="45028" title="At Tiri incident" label="At Tiri incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q2905082" start="45064" end="45078" title="Safra massacre" label="Safra massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q93352" start="45145" end="45150" title="coast" label="coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q3820" start="45174" end="45180" title="Beirut" label="Beirut"/>
<link wikidata="Q315534" start="45209" end="45223" title="Bashir Gemayel" label="Bashir Gemayel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146346" start="45307" end="45322" title="Lebanese Forces" label="Lebanese Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q502276" start="45328" end="45338" title="Phalangist" label="Phalangist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779990" start="45380" end="45394" title="Tigers Militia (Lebanon)" label="Tigers Militia"/>
<link wikidata="Q160805" start="45690" end="45696" title="UNIFIL" label="UNIFIL"/>
<link wikidata="Q3766" start="45736" end="45744" title="Damascus" label="Damascus"/>
<link wikidata="Q733875" start="45772" end="45784" title="Élias Sarkis" label="Élias Sarkis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="45789" end="45803" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074908" start="45835" end="45848" title="Lebanese army" label="Lebanese army"/>
<link wikidata="Q7032867" start="45997" end="46005" title="Nigerian Army" label="Nigerian"/>
<link wikidata="Q130873" start="46189" end="46203" title="Menachem Begin" label="Menachem Begin"/>
<link wikidata="Q187009" start="46212" end="46217" title="Likud" label="Likud"/>
<link wikidata="Q315534" start="46308" end="46322" title="Bashir Gemayel" label="Bashir Gemayel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057892" start="46330" end="46338" title="Phalange" label="Phalange"/>
<link wikidata="Q3068744" start="46374" end="46385" title="Syrian Army" label="Syrian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q365524" start="46418" end="46430" title="Rafael Eitan" label="Rafael Eitan"/>
<link wikidata="Q26155" start="46439" end="46446" title="Jounieh" label="Jounieh"/>
<link wikidata="Q462211" start="46505" end="46515" title="Israel Air Force" label="airstrikes"/>
<link wikidata="Q26134" start="46523" end="46531" title="Nabatieh" label="Nabatieh"/>
<link wikidata="Q476801" start="46536" end="46551" title="Beaufort Castle, Lebanon" label="Beaufort Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q58967" start="46577" end="46590" title="Israel Defence Force" label="IDF commandos"/>
<link wikidata="Q26683" start="46613" end="46616" title="Palestine Liberation Organisation" label="PLO"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916399" start="46675" end="46685" title="Green Line (Lebanon)" label="Green Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q2293745" start="46849" end="46852" title="Arab Deterrent Force" label="ADF"/>
<link wikidata="Q6923461" start="46866" end="46875" title="Mount Sannine" label="mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q26569" start="46879" end="46885" title="Zahleh" label="Zahleh"/>
<link wikidata="Q17009948" start="46891" end="46900" title="Lebanese Melkite Christians" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q202322" start="46933" end="46945" title="Beqaa Valley" label="Beqaa Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q502276" start="46951" end="46961" title="Phalangist" label="Phalangist"/>
<link wikidata="Q178835" start="47239" end="47246" title="Baalbek" label="Baalbek"/>
<link wikidata="Q163490" start="47317" end="47322" title="Sidon" label="Sidon"/>
<link wikidata="Q315534" start="47421" end="47435" title="Bashir Gemayel" label="Bashir Gemayel"/>
<link wikidata="Q462211" start="47624" end="47641" title="Israeli Air Force" label="Israeli Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q466704" start="47873" end="47878" title="Surface-to-air missile" label="Sam 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q921699" start="48001" end="48008" title="PFLP-GC" label="PFLP-GC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1158931" start="48027" end="48033" title="Damour" label="Damour"/>
<link wikidata="Q2910225" start="48483" end="48492" title="Israeli occupation of Southern Lebanon" label="the South"/>
<link wikidata="Q60206" start="48904" end="48916" title="Ariel Sharon" label="Ariel Sharon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638579" start="49145" end="49167" title="Abu Nidal Organization" label="Abu Nidal Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q178888" start="49189" end="49194" title="Fatah" label="Fatah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363874" start="49240" end="49252" title="Shlomo Argov" label="Shlomo Argov"/>
<link wikidata="Q37470" start="49552" end="49571" title="UN Security Council" label="UN Security Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q2159822" start="49591" end="49605" title="United Nations Security Council Resolution 508" label="Resolution 508"/>
<link wikidata="Q365524" start="50390" end="50402" title="Rafael Eitan" label="Rafael Eitan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2193531" start="50606" end="50652" title="United Nations Security Council Resolution 509" label="United Nations Security Council Resolution 509"/>
<link wikidata="Q989678" start="51070" end="51078" title="fedayeen" label="fedayeen"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="51966" end="51972" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q972052" start="52195" end="52207" title="Philip Habib" label="Philip Habib"/>
<link wikidata="Q11218" start="52477" end="52488" title="U.S. Marine" label="U.S. Marine"/>
<link wikidata="Q11218" start="52929" end="52941" title="United States Marines" label="U.S. Marines"/>
<link wikidata="Q622499" start="53070" end="53082" title="refugee camp" label="refugee camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q315534" start="53113" end="53127" title="Bachir Gemayel" label="Bachir Gemayel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2581845" start="53203" end="53226" title="Habib Tanious Shartouni" label="Habib Tanious Shartouni"/>
<link wikidata="Q767681" start="53246" end="53277" title="Syrian Social Nationalist Party" label="Syrian Social Nationalist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q467879" start="53658" end="53670" title="Elie Hobeika" label="Elie Hobeika"/>
<link wikidata="Q1721160" start="54028" end="54044" title="Kahan Commission" label="Kahan Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937160" start="54351" end="54377" title="minister without portfolio" label="minister without portfolio"/>
<link wikidata="Q328776" start="54434" end="54447" title="Amine Gemayel" label="Amine Gemayel"/>
<link wikidata="Q321851" start="54486" end="54498" title="17 May Agreement" label="an agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q7546863" start="55069" end="55077" title="Quisling" label="Quisling"/>
<link wikidata="Q246999" start="55326" end="55340" title="Chouf District" label="Chouf District"/>
<link wikidata="Q7784981" start="55483" end="55495" title="Mountain War (Lebanon)" label="Mountain War"/>
<link wikidata="Q41053" start="56298" end="56307" title="Hezbollah" label="Hezbollah"/>
<link wikidata="Q9585" start="56405" end="56415" title="Shi&amp;#x27;a" label="Shi&amp;#x27;a"/>
<link wikidata="Q704220" start="56495" end="56506" title="Nabih Berri" label="Nabih Berri"/>
<link wikidata="Q452670" start="56514" end="56527" title="Amal Movement" label="Amal Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q189746" start="56579" end="56587" title="Islamism" label="Islamism"/>
<link wikidata="Q126065" start="56595" end="56613" title="Iranian Revolution" label="Iranian Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q548057" start="56871" end="56913" title="April 1983 US Embassy bombing" label="suicide bombing attack at the U.S. Embassy"/>
<link wikidata="Q518303" start="57086" end="57107" title="1983 Beirut barracks bombing" label="targeted the barracks"/>
<link wikidata="Q204029" start="57252" end="57267" title="Malcolm H. Kerr" label="Malcolm H. Kerr"/>
<link wikidata="Q16146777" start="57356" end="57389" title="1984 United States embassy annex bombing" label="bombing of the U.S. embassy annex"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302456" start="57519" end="57522" title="TWA Flight 847" label="TWA"/>
<link wikidata="Q668329" start="57560" end="57574" title="Beirut airport" label="Beirut airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="57586" end="57592" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q452670" start="57854" end="57867" title="Amal Movement" label="Amal Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074908" start="57893" end="57906" title="Military of Lebanon" label="Lebanese Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2777811" start="58638" end="58654" title="War of the Camps" label="War of the Camps"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914745" start="58806" end="58823" title="Shatila refugee camp" label="Sabra and Shatila"/>
<link wikidata="Q2928491" start="58828" end="58845" title="Bourj el-Barajneh" label="Bourj el-Barajneh"/>
<link wikidata="Q622499" start="58846" end="58858" title="refugee camp" label="refugee camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q814848" start="58904" end="58912" title="1985 Beirut car bombing" label="car bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q328776" start="59050" end="59062" title="Amin Gemayel" label="Amin Gemayel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344225" start="59079" end="59092" title="Rachid Karami" label="Rachid Karami"/>
<link wikidata="Q118725" start="59114" end="59128" title="Hafez al-Assad" label="Hafez al-Assad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146346" start="59365" end="59380" title="Lebanese Forces" label="Lebanese Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q328776" start="60235" end="60247" title="Amin Gemayel" label="Amin Gemayel"/>
<link wikidata="Q502276" start="60256" end="60272" title="Kataeb Party" label="Phalangist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146346" start="60322" end="60337" title="Lebanese Forces" label="Lebanese Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q467879" start="60339" end="60351" title="Elie Hobeika" label="Elie Hobeika"/>
<link wikidata="Q922661" start="60585" end="60590" title="1986 United States bombing of Libya" label="Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q2156347" start="60648" end="60662" title="Lebanon hostage crisis" label="hostage taking"/>
<link wikidata="Q3068744" start="60867" end="60882" title="Syrian army" label="Syrian soldiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q9585" start="60942" end="60946" title="Shia" label="Shia"/>
<link wikidata="Q38823" start="61129" end="61147" title="Ayatollah Khomeini" label="Ayatollah Khomeini"/>
<link wikidata="Q179274" start="61157" end="61162" title="fatwa" label="fatwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q56063038" start="61232" end="61270" title="War of Brothers" label="Violent confrontations flared up again"/>
<link wikidata="Q452670" start="61295" end="61299" title="Amal Movement" label="Amal"/>
<link wikidata="Q41053" start="61304" end="61313" title="Hezbollah" label="Hezbollah"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915324" start="61421" end="61427" title="Dahieh" label="Dahieh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1480109" start="61590" end="61606" title="Southern Lebanon" label="Southern Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344225" start="62051" end="62064" title="Rashid Karami" label="Rashid Karami"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074908" start="62437" end="62458" title="Military of Lebanon" label="Lebanese Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q363392" start="62478" end="62489" title="Michel Aoun" label="Michel Aoun"/>
<link wikidata="Q748819" start="62534" end="62547" title="National Pact" label="National Pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="62604" end="62608" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q82664" start="62681" end="62694" title="Iran–Iraq War" label="Iran–Iraq War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316" start="62786" end="62800" title="Saddam Hussein" label="Saddam Hussein"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094707" start="62962" end="62975" title="Selim al-Hoss" label="Selim al-Hoss"/>
<link wikidata="Q7076868" start="63337" end="63366" title="War of Liberation (1989–1990)" label="&amp;quot;war of liberation&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146346" start="63406" end="63413" title="Lebanese Forces" label="militia"/>
<link wikidata="Q118725" start="63602" end="63616" title="Hafez al-Assad" label="Hafez al-Assad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094707" start="63969" end="63982" title="Selim al-Hoss" label="Selim al-Hoss"/>
<link wikidata="Q7172" start="64301" end="64312" title="Arab League" label="Arab League"/>
<link wikidata="Q817" start="64325" end="64331" title="Kuwait" label="Kuwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q851" start="64346" end="64358" title="Saudi Arabia" label="Saudi Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q262" start="64360" end="64367" title="Algeria" label="Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028" start="64373" end="64380" title="Morocco" label="Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q182640" start="64482" end="64492" title="Ta&amp;#x27;if" label="Ta&amp;#x27;if"/>
<link wikidata="Q851" start="64494" end="64506" title="Saudi Arabia" label="Saudi Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q471263" start="64719" end="64731" title="Rene Mouawad" label="Rene Mouawad"/>
<link wikidata="Q11244" start="64913" end="64921" title="car bomb" label="car bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q118272" start="65039" end="65050" title="Elias Hrawi" label="Elias Hrawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146346" start="65391" end="65406" title="Lebanese Forces" label="Lebanese Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q733686" start="65420" end="65432" title="Samir Geagea" label="Samir Geagea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316" start="66620" end="66634" title="Saddam Hussein" label="Saddam Hussein"/>
<link wikidata="Q7076868" start="66739" end="66754" title="October 13 Massacre" label="major operation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074908" start="66871" end="66884" title="Lebanese Armed Forces" label="Lebanese Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q206479" start="66900" end="66912" title="Émile Lahoud" label="Émile Lahoud"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="67388" end="67392" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316" start="67408" end="67422" title="Saddam Hussein" label="Saddam Hussein"/>
<link wikidata="Q37643" start="67430" end="67438" title="Gulf War" label="Gulf War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4354526" start="67698" end="67709" title="amnesty law" label="amnesty law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074908" start="68014" end="68035" title="Military of Lebanon" label="Lebanese Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q732533" start="68355" end="68368" title="Shafik Wazzan" label="Shafik Wazzan"/>
<link wikidata="Q858" start="68502" end="68507" title="Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q188863" start="68640" end="68645" title="exile" label="exile"/>
<link wikidata="Q192778" start="68714" end="68726" title="Rafik Hariri" label="Rafik Hariri"/>
<link wikidata="Q184310" start="68739" end="68755" title="Cedar Revolution" label="Cedar Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475084" start="68936" end="68953" title="March 14 Alliance" label="March 14 Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q636310" start="69158" end="69174" title="March 8 Alliance" label="March 8 Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q178810" start="69343" end="69359" title="Syrian civil war" label="Syrian civil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074908" start="69588" end="69609" title="Lebanese Armed Forces" label="Lebanese Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q49104" start="69742" end="69772" title="2006 Lebanon War" label="2006 Israeli-Lebanese conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q40469" start="70013" end="70015" title="Associated Press" label="AP"/>
<link wikidata="Q130879" start="70070" end="70077" title="Reuters" label="Reuters"/>
<link wikidata="Q178795" start="70450" end="70459" title="land mine" label="land mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2156347" start="70515" end="70541" title="Lebanon hostage crisis" label="Western hostages kidnapped"/>
<link wikidata="Q104881986" start="70846" end="70860" title="Lebanonization" label="Lebanonization"/>
<link wikidata="Q57410" start="70925" end="70937" title="Shimon Peres" label="Shimon Peres"/>
<link wikidata="Q49103" start="71022" end="71054" title="1982 Israeli invasion of Lebanon" label="1982 Israeli invasion of Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q8465" start="71109" end="71118" title="civil war" label="civil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q392160" start="71122" end="71134" title="failed state" label="failed state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1298934" start="71204" end="71212" title="synthpop" label="synthpop"/>
<link wikidata="Q730158" start="71218" end="71234" title="The Human League" label="The Human League"/>
<link wikidata="Q3099689" start="71244" end="71267" title="The Lebanon (song)" label="&amp;quot;The Lebanon&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q208199" start="71329" end="71355" title="Sabra and Shatila massacre" label="Sabra and Shatila massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q151012" start="71392" end="71399" title="Genesis (band)" label="Genesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1529154" start="71417" end="71423" title="Domino (Genesis song)" label="Domino"/>
<link wikidata="Q414" start="71599" end="71610" title="Argentina" label="Argentinean"/>
<link wikidata="Q187760" start="71611" end="71624" title="New wave music" label="rock/new wave"/>
<link wikidata="" start="71630" end="71633" title=":es:GIT" label="GIT"/>
<link wikidata="Q3140775" start="71830" end="71841" title="Out of Life" label="Out of Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q164200" start="71895" end="71905" title="Jury Prize (Cannes Film Festival)" label="Jury Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q264139" start="71913" end="71938" title="1991 Cannes Film Festival" label="1991 Cannes Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q7403898" start="71951" end="71964" title="Saleh Barakat" label="Saleh Barakat"/>
<link wikidata="Q4881376" start="72017" end="72034" title="Beirut Art Center" label="Beirut Art Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q4788740" start="72195" end="72206" title="Aref Rayess" label="Aref Rayess"/>
<link wikidata="Q160793" start="72254" end="72271" title="Waltz with Bashir" label="Waltz with Bashir"/>
<link wikidata="Q208199" start="72351" end="72377" title="Sabra and Shatila massacre" label="Sabra and Shatila massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1212650" start="72410" end="72419" title="Incendies" label="Incendies"/>
<link wikidata="Q273646" start="72534" end="72547" title="Souha Bechara" label="Souha Bechara"/>
<link wikidata="Q4280820" start="72607" end="72620" title="Robert Munsch" label="Robert Munsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="72680" end="72686" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q3120846" start="72902" end="72913" title="Nabil Kanso" label="Nabil Kanso"/>
<link wikidata="Q7773105" start="72931" end="72964" title="The Vortices of Wrath (Lebanon 1977)" label="&amp;quot;The Vortices of Wrath&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q17007908" start="72966" end="72985" title="Lebanon (painting)" label="&amp;quot;Lebanon&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5376182" start="72987" end="73012" title="Endless Night (painting)" label="&amp;quot;Endless Night&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q6511129" start="73024" end="73043" title="Lebanon Summer 1982" label="Lebanon Summer 1982"/>
<link wikidata="Q105440980" start="73084" end="73106" title="Memory Box (film)" label="&amp;quot;Memory Box&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q20747644" start="73131" end="73148" title="Joana Hadjithomas" label="Joana Hadjithomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q27958213" start="73257" end="73263" title="Beirut (film)" label="Beirut"/>
<link wikidata="Q622291" start="73289" end="73312" title="Political thriller" label="political thriller film"/>
<link wikidata="Q234541" start="73372" end="73390" title="History of Lebanon" label="History of Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7127419" start="73392" end="73431" title="Palestinian insurgency in South Lebanon" label="Palestinian insurgency in South Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2910225" start="73433" end="73462" title="Israeli occupation of Lebanon" label="Israeli occupation of Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q64876" start="73464" end="73492" title="Syrian occupation of Lebanon" label="Syrian occupation of Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4116408" start="73494" end="73537" title="List of modern conflicts in the Middle East" label="List of modern conflicts in the Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q402905" start="73946" end="73960" title="Bregman, Ahron" label="Bregman, Ahron"/>
<link wikidata="Q3066881" start="74240" end="74256" title="Farid Elias Khazen" label="Khazen, Farid El"/>
<link wikidata="Q5337401" start="74457" end="74479" title="O&amp;#x27;Ballance, Edgar" label="O&amp;#x27;Ballance, Edgar"/>
<link wikidata="Q324779" start="74547" end="74563" title="Salibi, Kamal S." label="Salibi, Kamal S."/>
<link wikidata="Q16744933" start="74633" end="74646" title="John Bulloch (journalist)" label="Bulloch, John"/>
<link wikidata="" start="74796" end="74865" title="The Fateful Triangle: The United States, Israel, and the Palestinians" label="The Fateful Triangle: The United States, Israel, and the Palestinians"/>
<link wikidata="Q9049" start="74873" end="74885" title="Noam Chomsky" label="Noam Chomsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q554718" start="74973" end="74988" title="Philip Khuri Hitti" label="Hitti Philip K."/>
<link wikidata="Q5276802" start="75349" end="75360" title="Hiro, Dilip" label="Hiro, Dilip"/>
<link wikidata="Q7526400" start="75416" end="75430" title="Sir David Gilmour, 4th Baronet" label="Gilmour, David"/>
<link wikidata="Q310900" start="75516" end="75528" title="Fisk, Robert" label="Fisk, Robert"/>
<link wikidata="Q701793" start="75750" end="75768" title="Rabinovich, Itamar" label="Rabinovich, Itamar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6550185" start="76110" end="76125" title="Lina Murr Nehme" label="Lina Murr Nehme"/>
<link wikidata="Q5448836" start="76450" end="76456" title="Fillip" label="Fillip"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="312906" wikidata="Q374834" url="?curid=312906" title="H. L. A. Hart">
<text>Herbert Lionel Adolphus Hart (; 18 July 190719 December 1992) was a British legal philosopher. One of the most influential legal theorists of the 20th century, he was instrumental in the development of the theory of legal positivism, which was popularised by his book, &quot;The Concept of Law&quot;. Hart&#x27;s contributions focused on the nature of law, the relationship between law and morality, and the analysis of legal rules and systems, introducing concepts such as the &quot;rule of recognition&quot; that have shaped modern legal thought.

Born in Harrogate, England, Hart received a first class honours degree in classical studies from New College, Oxford, before qualifying at the English bar. During World War II, Hart served in British intelligence, working with figures such as Alan Turing and Dick White. Following the war, Hart transitioned to academia, becoming Professor of Jurisprudence at the University of Oxford in 1952, a position he held until 1969.

In addition to his legal positivism, Hart engaged in important debates on the role of law in society, most famously with Patrick Devlin, Baron Devlin over the enforcement of morality through law, and with his successor at Oxford, Ronald Dworkin, on the nature of legal interpretation. Hart&#x27;s influence extended beyond his own work, mentoring legal thinkers the likes of Joseph Raz, John Finnis, Ronald Dworkin.

==Early life and education==
Herbert Lionel Adolphus Hart was born on 18 July 1907, the son of Rose Samson Hart and Simeon Hart, in Harrogate, to which his parents had moved from the East End of London. His father was a Jewish tailor of German and Polish origin; his mother, of Polish origin, daughter of successful retailers in the clothing trade, handled customer relations and the finances of their firm. Hart had an elder brother, Albert, and a younger sister, Sybil.

Hart was educated at Cheltenham College, Bradford Grammar School and at New College, Oxford. He took a first in classical greats in 1929. Hart became a barrister and practised successfully at the Chancery Bar from 1932 to 1940. He was good friends with Richard Wilberforce, Douglas Jay, and Christopher Cox, among others. He received a Harmsworth Scholarship to the Middle Temple and also wrote literary journalism for the periodical &quot;John O&#x27;London&#x27;s Weekly&quot;.

=== World War II ===
During the Second World War, Hart worked with MI5, a division of British military intelligence concerned with unearthing spies who had penetrated Britain, where he renewed Oxford friendships including working with the philosophers Gilbert Ryle and Stuart Hampshire. He worked closely with Dick White, later head of MI5 and then of MI6. Hart worked at Bletchley Park and was a colleague of the mathematician and codebreaker Alan Turing.

Hart&#x27;s war work took him on occasion to MI5 offices at Blenheim Palace, family home of the Dukes of Marlborough and the place where Winston Churchill had been born. He enjoyed telling the story that there he was able to read the diaries of Sarah Churchill, Duchess of Marlborough, wife of the founder of the dynasty John Churchill, 1st Duke of Marlborough. Hart&#x27;s wit and humanity are demonstrated by the fact that he particularly enjoyed the passage where Sarah reports that John had been away for a long time, had arrived suddenly, and &quot;enjoyed me straight way in his boots&quot;. Another incident at Blenheim that Hart enjoyed recounting was that he shared an office with one of the famous Cambridge spies, Anthony Blunt, a fellow member of MI5. Hart wondered which of the papers on his desk Blunt had managed to read and to pass on to his Soviet controllers.

Hart did not return to his legal practice after the war, preferring instead to accept the offer of a teaching fellowship (in philosophy, not law) at New College, Oxford. Hart cites J. L. Austin as particularly influential during this time. The two jointly taught from 1948 a seminar on &#x27;Legal and Moral Responsibility&#x27;. Among Hart&#x27;s publications at this time were the essays &#x27;A Logician&#x27;s Fairytale&#x27;, &#x27;Is There Knowledge by Acquaintance?&#x27;, &#x27;Law and Fact&#x27; and &#x27;The Ascription of Responsibility and Rights&#x27;.

== Academic career ==

In 1952, Hart was elected Professor of Jurisprudence at Oxford and was a fellow at University College, Oxford, from 1952 to 1973. It was in the summer of that year that he began writing his most famous book, &quot;The Concept of Law&quot;, though it was not published until 1961. In the interim, he published another major work, &quot;Causation in the Law&quot; (with Tony Honoré) (1959). He was president of the Aristotelian Society from 1959 to 1960. He gave the 1962 Master-Mind Lecture.

Hart married Jenifer Fischer Williams, a civil servant, later a senior civil servant, in the Home Office and, still later, Oxford historian at St Anne&#x27;s College (specialising in the history of the police). Jenifer Hart was, for some years in the mid-1930s and fading out totally by decade&#x27;s end, a &#x27;sleeper&#x27; member of the Communist Party of Great Britain. Three decades later she was interviewed by Peter Wright as having been in a position to have passed information to the Soviets, and to Wright, MI5&#x27;s official spy hunter, she explained her situation; Wright took no action. In fact her work as civil servant was in fields such as family policy and so would have been of no interest to the Soviets. The person who recruited her, Bernard Floud, interviewed by Wright shortly after, maintained that he was unable to remember ever having done so. Nor was her husband in a position to convey to her information of use, despite vague newspaper suggestions, given the sharp separation of his work from that of foreign affairs and its focus on German spies and British turncoats rather than on matters related to the Soviet ally. In fact, Hart was anticommunist.

The marriage contained &quot;incompatible personalities&quot;, though it lasted right to the end of their lives and gave joy to both at times. Hart did joke with his daughter at one point, however, that &quot;[t]he trouble with this marriage is that one of us doesn&#x27;t like sex and the other doesn&#x27;t like food&quot;, and according to Hart&#x27;s biographer, LSE law professor Nicola Lacey, Hart was, by his own account, a &quot;suppressed homosexual&quot;. Jenifer Hart was believed by her contemporaries to have had an affair of long duration with Isaiah Berlin, a close friend of Hart&#x27;s. In 1998, Jenifer Hart published &quot;Ask Me No More: An Autobiography&quot;. The Harts had four children, including, late in life, a son who was disabled, the umbilical cord wrapped around his neck having deprived his brain of oxygen. 

Hart&#x27;s granddaughter Mojo Mathers became New Zealand&#x27;s first deaf Member of Parliament in 2011.

There is a description of the Harts&#x27; household by the writer on religion Karen Armstrong, who lodged with them for a time to help take care of their disabled son. The description appears in her book &quot;The Spiral Staircase&quot;.

Hart retired from the Chair of Jurisprudence in 1969 and was succeeded by Ronald Dworkin. He subsequently became principal of Brasenose College, Oxford.

Hart died in Oxford on 19 December 1992, aged 85. He is buried there in Wolvercote Cemetery, which also contains Isaiah Berlin&#x27;s grave.
==Hart&#x27;s students==
Many of Hart&#x27;s former students have become important legal, moral, and political philosophers, including Brian Barry, Ronald Dworkin, John Finnis, John Gardner, Kent Greenawalt, Peter Hacker, David Hodgson, Neil MacCormick, Joseph Raz, Chin Liew Ten and William Twining. Hart also had a strong influence on the young John Rawls in the 1950s, when Rawls was a visiting scholar at Oxford shortly after finishing his PhD.

==Philosophical method==
Hart strongly influenced the application of methods in his version of Anglo-American positive law to jurisprudence and the philosophy of law in the English-speaking world. Influenced by John Austin, Ludwig Wittgenstein and Hans Kelsen, Hart brought the tools of analytic, and especially linguistic, philosophy to bear on the central problems of legal theory.

Hart&#x27;s method combined the careful analysis of twentieth-century analytic philosophy with the jurisprudential tradition of Jeremy Bentham, the great English legal, political, and moral philosopher. Hart&#x27;s conception of law had parallels to the Pure Theory of Law formulated by Austrian legal philosopher Hans Kelsen, though Hart rejected several distinctive features of Kelsen&#x27;s theory.

Significant in the differences between Hart and Kelsen was the emphasis on the British version of positive law theory which Hart was defending as opposed to the Continental version of positive law theory which Kelsen was defending. This was studied in the University of Toronto Law Journal in an article titled &quot;Leaving the Hart-Dworkin Debate&quot; which maintained that Hart insisted in his book &quot;The Concept of Law&quot; on the expansive reading of positive law theory to include philosophical and sociological domains of assessment rather than the more focused attention of Kelsen who considered Continental positive law theory as more limited to the domain of jurisprudence itself.

Hart drew, among others, on Glanville Williams who had demonstrated his legal philosophy in a five-part article, &quot;Language and the Law&quot; and in a paper, &quot;International Law and the Controversy Concerning the Word &#x27;Law&#x27;&quot;. In the paper on international law, he sharply attacked the many jurists and international lawyers who had debated whether international law was &quot;really&quot; law. They had been wasting everyone&#x27;s time, for the question was not a factual one, the many differences between municipal and international law being undeniable, but was simply one of conventional verbal usage, about which individual theorists could please themselves, but had no right to dictate to others.

This approach was to be refined and developed by Hart in the last chapter of &quot;The Concept of Law&quot; (1961), which showed how the use in respect of different social phenomena of an abstract word like &quot;law&quot; reflected the fact that these phenomena each shared, without necessarily all possessing in common, some distinctive features. Glanville had himself said as much when editing a student text on jurisprudence and he had adopted essentially the same approach to &quot;The Definition of Crime&quot;.

==&quot;The Concept of Law&quot;==

Hart&#x27;s most famous work is &quot;The Concept of Law&quot;, first published in 1961, and with a second edition (including a new postscript) published posthumously in 1994. The book emerged from a set of lectures that Hart began to deliver in 1952, and it is presaged by his Holmes lecture, &quot;Positivism and the Separation of Law and Morals&quot;, delivered at Harvard Law School. &quot;The Concept of Law&quot; developed a sophisticated view of legal positivism. Among the many ideas developed in this book are:
* A critique of John Austin&#x27;s theory that law is the command of the sovereign backed by the threat of punishment.
* A distinction between primary and secondary legal rules, such that a primary rule governs conduct, such as criminal law, and secondary rules govern the procedural methods by which primary rules are enforced, prosecuted and so on. Hart specifically enumerates three secondary rules; they are:
:* The Rule of Recognition, the rule by which any member of society may check to discover what the primary rules of the society are. In a simple society, Hart states, the recognition rule might only be what is written in a sacred book or what is said by a ruler. Hart claimed the concept of rule of recognition as an evolution from Hans Kelsen&#x27;s  ().
:* The Rule of Change, the rule by which existing primary rules might be created, altered or deleted.
:* The Rule of Adjudication, the rule by which the society might determine when a rule has been violated and prescribe a remedy.
* A distinction between the internal and external points of view of law and rules, close to (and influenced by) Max Weber&#x27;s distinction between legal and sociological perspectives in description of law.
* A concept of &quot;open-textured&quot; terms in law, along the lines of Wittgenstein and Waisman, and &quot;defeasible&quot; terms (later famously disavowed): both are ideas popular in Artificial intelligence and law
* A late reply (published as a postscript to the second edition) to Ronald Dworkin, a rights-oriented legal philosopher (and Hart&#x27;s successor at Oxford) who criticised Hart&#x27;s version of legal positivism in &quot;Taking Rights Seriously&quot; (1977), &quot;A Matter of Principle&quot; (1985) and &quot;Law&#x27;s Empire&quot; (1986).

==Other work==
With Tony Honoré, Hart wrote and published &quot;Causation in the Law&quot; (1959, second edition 1985), which is regarded as one of the important academic discussions of causation in the legal context. The early chapters deal philosophically with the concept of cause and are clearly the work of Hart, while later chapters deal with individual cases in English law and are clearly his co-author&#x27;s.

As a result of his famous debate (Hart–Devlin debate) with Patrick Devlin, Baron Devlin, on the role of the criminal law in enforcing moral norms, Hart wrote &quot;Law, Liberty and Morality&quot; (1963), which consisted of three lectures he gave at Stanford University. He also wrote &quot;The Morality of the Criminal Law&quot; (1965). Hart said that he believed Devlin&#x27;s view of Mill&#x27;s harm principle as it related to the decriminalisation of homosexuality was &quot;perverse&quot;. He later stated that he believed the reforms to the law regarding homosexuality that followed the Wolfenden report &quot;didn&#x27;t go far enough&quot;. Despite this, Hart reported later that he got on well personally with Devlin.

Hart gave lectures to the Labour Party on closing tax loopholes which were being used by the &quot;super-rich&quot;. Hart considered himself to be &quot;on the Left, the non-communist Left&quot;, and expressed animosity towards Margaret Thatcher.

==Writings==
* &quot;The Ascription of Responsibility and Rights&quot;, &quot;Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society&quot; (1949)
* &quot;Definition and Theory in Jurisprudence&quot; (1953)
* &quot;Causation in the Law&quot; (with Tony Honoré) (Clarendon Press, 1959)
* &quot;The Concept of Law&quot; (Clarendon Press, 1961; 2nd edn 1994; 3rd edn 2012)
* &quot;Law, Liberty and Morality&quot; (Stanford University Press, 1963)
* &quot;The Morality of the Criminal Law&quot; (Oxford University Press, 1964)
* &quot;Punishment and Responsibility&quot; (Oxford University Press, 1968)
* &quot;Essays on Bentham: Studies in Jurisprudence and Political Theory&quot; (Clarendon Press, 1982)
* &quot;Essays in Jurisprudence and Philosophy&quot; (Oxford University Press, 1983)

===&quot;Festschrift&quot;===
* &quot;Law, Morality, and Society: Essays in Honour of H. L. A. Hart&quot;, edited by P. M. S. Hacker and Joseph Raz (1977)

==See also==

* Hart–Dworkin debate
* Hart–Fuller debate
* Legal interpretivism
* Natural law
* Lon Fuller

==References==
==Sources==
* Nicola Lacey, &quot;A Life of H. L. A. Hart: The Nightmare and the Noble Dream&quot;, Oxford University Press: 2004 .
* Frederick Schauer, &quot;(Re)Taking Hart,&quot; 119 &quot;Harv. L. Rev.&quot; 852 (2006) (reviewing Lacey, &quot;A Life of H. L. A. Hart&quot;).
* Karen Armstrong, &quot;The Spiral Staircase&quot;, Harper Collins, 2004 
* Carlin Romano, &quot;A Philosopher&#x27;s Humanity&quot;, &quot;Chronicle of Higher Education&quot; vol. 51 (2005) (reviewing Lacey, &quot;A Life of H. L. A. Hart&quot;) link
* Matthew Kramer, &quot;H.L.A. Hart: The Nature of Law&quot;, Polity: 2018 .

==External links==

* Short Biography by Tony Honoré [Archived by Wayback Machine]
* Obituary: Professor Herbert Hart in &quot;The Independent&quot; by Zenon Bankowski
* Herbert Lionel Adolphus Hart 1970–1992 British Academy &quot;In Memoriam&quot; by Tony Honoré</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q374834" start="0" end="28" title="H. L. A. Hart" label="Herbert Lionel Adolphus Hart"/>
<link wikidata="Q4932206" start="76" end="93" title="legal philosopher" label="legal philosopher"/>
<link wikidata="Q644971" start="216" end="232" title="legal positivism" label="legal positivism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7727272" start="275" end="293" title="The Concept of Law" label="The Concept of Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376987" start="647" end="666" title="New College, Oxford" label="New College, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="713" end="725" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7251" start="793" end="804" title="Alan Turing" label="Alan Turing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5273546" start="809" end="819" title="Dick White" label="Dick White"/>
<link wikidata="Q19654371" start="880" end="906" title="Professor of Jurisprudence (University of Oxford)" label="Professor of Jurisprudence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033286" start="1097" end="1125" title="Patrick Devlin, Baron Devlin" label="Patrick Devlin, Baron Devlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q319803" start="1206" end="1220" title="Ronald Dworkin" label="Ronald Dworkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1380371" start="1351" end="1361" title="Joseph Raz" label="Joseph Raz"/>
<link wikidata="Q3312283" start="1363" end="1374" title="John Finnis" label="John Finnis"/>
<link wikidata="Q319803" start="1376" end="1390" title="Ronald Dworkin" label="Ronald Dworkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q215829" start="1525" end="1534" title="Harrogate" label="Harrogate"/>
<link wikidata="Q739700" start="1576" end="1594" title="East End of London" label="East End of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="1613" end="1616" title="Jew" label="Jew"/>
<link wikidata="Q467269" start="1887" end="1905" title="Cheltenham College" label="Cheltenham College"/>
<link wikidata="Q4954686" start="1907" end="1930" title="Bradford Grammar School" label="Bradford Grammar School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376987" start="1938" end="1957" title="New College, Oxford" label="New College, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q6647565" start="1978" end="1994" title="Literae Humaniores" label="classical greats"/>
<link wikidata="Q808967" start="2018" end="2027" title="barrister" label="barrister"/>
<link wikidata="Q1590405" start="2119" end="2138" title="Richard Wilberforce" label="Richard Wilberforce"/>
<link wikidata="Q5301661" start="2140" end="2151" title="Douglas Jay, Baron Jay" label="Douglas Jay"/>
<link wikidata="Q15895932" start="2157" end="2172" title="Christopher William Machell Cox" label="Christopher Cox"/>
<link wikidata="Q925942" start="2232" end="2245" title="Middle Temple" label="Middle Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q2143314" start="2306" end="2338" title="John O&amp;#x27;London&amp;#x27;s Weekly" label="John O&amp;#x27;London&amp;#x27;s Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="2379" end="2395" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q210175" start="2414" end="2417" title="MI5" label="MI5"/>
<link wikidata="Q313386" start="2599" end="2611" title="Gilbert Ryle" label="Gilbert Ryle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2486254" start="2616" end="2632" title="Stuart Hampshire" label="Stuart Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5273546" start="2657" end="2667" title="Dick White" label="Dick White"/>
<link wikidata="Q184560" start="2699" end="2702" title="MI6" label="MI6"/>
<link wikidata="Q155921" start="2719" end="2733" title="Bletchley Park" label="Bletchley Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q7251" start="2791" end="2802" title="Alan Turing" label="Alan Turing"/>
<link wikidata="Q208181" start="2865" end="2880" title="Blenheim Palace" label="Blenheim Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1264586" start="2901" end="2921" title="Dukes of Marlborough" label="Dukes of Marlborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="2942" end="2959" title="Winston Churchill" label="Winston Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q19176" start="3050" end="3089" title="Sarah Churchill, Duchess of Marlborough" label="Sarah Churchill, Duchess of Marlborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q153803" start="3126" end="3165" title="John Churchill, 1st Duke of Marlborough" label="John Churchill, 1st Duke of Marlborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q508392" start="3530" end="3543" title="Anthony Blunt" label="Anthony Blunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q272615" start="3865" end="3877" title="J. L. Austin" label="J. L. Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q19654371" start="4300" end="4326" title="Professor of Jurisprudence (University of Oxford)" label="Professor of Jurisprudence"/>
<link wikidata="Q81087" start="4357" end="4383" title="University College, Oxford" label="University College, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q7727272" start="4488" end="4506" title="The Concept of Law" label="The Concept of Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q4355816" start="4687" end="4707" title="Aristotelian Society" label="Aristotelian Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q18922382" start="4779" end="4803" title="Jenifer Hart" label="Jenifer Fischer Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q1819342" start="4909" end="4931" title="St Anne&amp;#x27;s College, Oxford" label="St Anne&amp;#x27;s College"/>
<link wikidata="Q592068" start="5108" end="5140" title="Communist Party of Great Britain" label="Communist Party of Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3124586" start="5185" end="5197" title="Peter Wright (MI5 officer)" label="Peter Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q4893133" start="5523" end="5536" title="Bernard Floud" label="Bernard Floud"/>
<link wikidata="Q205162" start="6509" end="6522" title="Isaiah Berlin" label="Isaiah Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6895114" start="6819" end="6831" title="Mojo Mathers" label="Mojo Mathers"/>
<link wikidata="Q256548" start="6978" end="6993" title="Karen Armstrong" label="Karen Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q319803" start="7213" end="7227" title="Ronald Dworkin" label="Ronald Dworkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q899030" start="7265" end="7290" title="Brasenose College, Oxford" label="Brasenose College, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q82162" start="7365" end="7384" title="Wolvercote Cemetery" label="Wolvercote Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q205162" start="7406" end="7419" title="Isaiah Berlin" label="Isaiah Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q911833" start="7569" end="7580" title="Brian Barry" label="Brian Barry"/>
<link wikidata="Q319803" start="7582" end="7596" title="Ronald Dworkin" label="Ronald Dworkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3312283" start="7598" end="7609" title="John Finnis" label="John Finnis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1700166" start="7611" end="7623" title="John Gardner (legal philosopher)" label="John Gardner"/>
<link wikidata="Q7273781" start="7625" end="7640" title="Kent Greenawalt" label="Kent Greenawalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q712696" start="7642" end="7654" title="Peter Hacker" label="Peter Hacker"/>
<link wikidata="Q5235070" start="7656" end="7669" title="David Hodgson (judge)" label="David Hodgson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2136132" start="7671" end="7686" title="Neil MacCormick" label="Neil MacCormick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1380371" start="7688" end="7698" title="Joseph Raz" label="Joseph Raz"/>
<link wikidata="Q5099490" start="7700" end="7713" title="Chin Liew Ten" label="Chin Liew Ten"/>
<link wikidata="Q16095913" start="7718" end="7733" title="William Twining" label="William Twining"/>
<link wikidata="Q172544" start="7781" end="7791" title="John Rawls" label="John Rawls"/>
<link wikidata="Q4932206" start="8032" end="8049" title="philosophy of law" label="philosophy of law"/>
<link wikidata="Q60837" start="8095" end="8106" title="John Austin (legal philosopher)" label="John Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q9391" start="8108" end="8127" title="Ludwig Wittgenstein" label="Ludwig Wittgenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q84165" start="8132" end="8143" title="Hans Kelsen" label="Hans Kelsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q60887" start="8397" end="8411" title="Jeremy Bentham" label="Jeremy Bentham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897975" start="8523" end="8541" title="Pure Theory of Law" label="Pure Theory of Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q84165" start="8583" end="8594" title="Hans Kelsen" label="Hans Kelsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5566655" start="9398" end="9416" title="Glanville Williams" label="Glanville Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q49122" start="11020" end="11038" title="Harvard Law School" label="Harvard Law School"/>
<link wikidata="Q60837" start="11188" end="11206" title="John Austin (legal philosopher)" label="John Austin&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q7378972" start="11592" end="11611" title="Rule of Recognition" label="Rule of Recognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q84165" start="11917" end="11928" title="Hans Kelsen" label="Hans Kelsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3777257" start="11936" end="11936" title="Basic norm" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q9387" start="12284" end="12293" title="Max Weber" label="Max Weber"/>
<link wikidata="Q10302162" start="12567" end="12598" title="Artificial intelligence and law" label="Artificial intelligence and law"/>
<link wikidata="Q319803" start="12667" end="12681" title="Ronald Dworkin" label="Ronald Dworkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7678354" start="12821" end="12844" title="Taking Rights Seriously" label="Taking Rights Seriously"/>
<link wikidata="Q24203107" start="12910" end="12927" title="Law&amp;#x27;s Empire" label="Law&amp;#x27;s Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q15488534" start="12963" end="12974" title="Tony Honoré" label="Tony Honoré"/>
<link wikidata="Q114608014" start="13397" end="13415" title="Hart–Devlin debate" label="Hart–Devlin debate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033286" start="13422" end="13450" title="Patrick Devlin, Baron Devlin" label="Patrick Devlin, Baron Devlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q41506" start="13612" end="13631" title="Stanford University" label="Stanford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q771738" start="13956" end="13972" title="Wolfenden report" label="Wolfenden report"/>
<link wikidata="Q2271714" start="14190" end="14200" title="ultra high-net-worth individual" label="super-rich"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416" start="14319" end="14336" title="Margaret Thatcher" label="Margaret Thatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q15488534" start="14571" end="14582" title="Tony Honoré" label="Tony Honoré"/>
<link wikidata="Q5675512" start="15283" end="15302" title="Hart–Dworkin debate" label="Hart–Dworkin debate"/>
<link wikidata="Q17021182" start="15305" end="15323" title="Hart–Fuller debate" label="Hart–Fuller debate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2779065" start="15326" end="15346" title="Interpretivism (legal)" label="Legal interpretivism"/>
<link wikidata="Q29524" start="15349" end="15360" title="Natural law" label="Natural law"/>
<link wikidata="Q286431" start="15363" end="15373" title="Lon Fuller" label="Lon Fuller"/>
<link wikidata="Q28800524" start="15404" end="15416" title="Nicola Lacey" label="Nicola Lacey"/>
<link wikidata="Q217595" start="15490" end="15513" title="Oxford University Press" label="Oxford University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q16510730" start="15524" end="15541" title="Frederick Schauer" label="Frederick Schauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365125" start="15582" end="15595" title="Harvard Law Review" label="Harv. L. Rev."/>
<link wikidata="Q256548" start="15671" end="15686" title="Karen Armstrong" label="Karen Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q5041300" start="15746" end="15759" title="Carlin Romano" label="Carlin Romano"/>
<link wikidata="Q73617" start="15810" end="15839" title="Chronicle of Higher Education" label="Chronicle of Higher Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q6790841" start="15923" end="15937" title="Matthew Kramer" label="Matthew Kramer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063239" start="15983" end="15989" title="Polity" label="Polity"/>
<link wikidata="Q11149" start="16126" end="16141" title="The Independent" label="The Independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q723551" start="16208" end="16223" title="British Academy" label="British Academy"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="312910" wikidata="Q30470787" url="?curid=312910" title="Chaff">
<text>Chaff (; ) is dry, scale-like plant material such as the protective seed casings of cereal grains, the scale-like parts of flowers, or finely chopped straw. Chaff cannot be digested by humans, but it may be fed to livestock, ploughed into soil, or burned.

==Etymology==

&quot;Chaff&quot; comes from Middle English , from Old English , related to Old High German &quot;&quot;, &quot;husk&quot;.

==Grain chaff==
In grasses (including cereals such as rice, barley, oats, and wheat), the ripe seed is surrounded by thin, dry, scaly bracts (called glumes, lemmas, and paleas), forming a dry husk (or hull) around the grain. Once it is removed, it is often referred to as chaff.

In wild cereals and in the primitive domesticated einkorn, emmer and spelt wheats, the husks enclose each seed tightly. Before the grain can be used, the husks must be removed.

The process of loosening the chaff from the grain so as to remove it is called &quot;threshing&quot; before &quot;drying&quot; – traditionally done by milling or pounding, making it finer like &quot;flour&quot;. Separating remaining loose chaff from the grain is called &quot;winnowing&quot; – traditionally done by repeatedly tossing the grain up into a light wind, which gradually blows the lighter chaff away. This method typically uses a broad, plate-shaped basket or similar receptacle to hold and collect the winnowed grain as it falls back down.

Domesticated grains such as durum and common wheat have been bred to have chaff that is easily removed. These varieties are known as &quot;free-threshing&quot; or &quot;naked&quot;.

Chaff should not be confused with bran, which is a finer, scaly material that is part of the grain itself.

==Straw chaff==
Chaff is also made by chopping straw (or sometimes coarse hay) into very short lengths, using a machine called a chaff cutter. Like grain chaff, it is used as animal feed and is a way of making coarse fodder more palatable for livestock.

==Coffee chaff==
&quot;Coffee chaff&quot; is produced from the so called &quot;silverskin&quot;, the thin inner-parchment layer on dried coffee beans, in the process of grinding coffee beans.

==Botany==
In botany, chaff refers to the thin receptacular bracts of many species in the sunflower family Asteraceae and related families. They are modified scale-like leaves surrounding single florets in the flower-head.

==Metaphor==
Chaff as a waste product from grain processing leads to a metaphorical use of the term, to refer to something seen as worthless. In the Bible, such use is found in Job 13:25, Isaiah 33:11, Psalm 83:13-15, and other places. Chaff also lends its name to a radar countermeasure, composed of small particles dropped from an aircraft.

==Use==
Hungarian engineer László Schremmer has discovered that the use of chaff-based filters can reduce the arsenic content of water to 3 microgram/litre. This is especially important in areas where the potable water is provided by filtering the water extracted from an underground aquifer.

==See also==
* Awn (botany)
* Bran
* Biomass
* Combine harvester
* Rice hulls
* Rice huller
* Sifting

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q30470787" start="0" end="5" title="Chaff" label="Chaff"/>
<link wikidata="Q14524280" start="68" end="80" title="husk" label="seed casings"/>
<link wikidata="Q12117" start="84" end="96" title="cereal grain" label="cereal grain"/>
<link wikidata="Q160066" start="150" end="155" title="straw" label="straw"/>
<link wikidata="Q211439" start="207" end="223" title="fodder" label="fed to livestock"/>
<link wikidata="Q11464" start="225" end="231" title="plough" label="plough"/>
<link wikidata="Q36395" start="301" end="315" title="Middle English" label="Middle English"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="323" end="334" title="Old English language" label="Old English"/>
<link wikidata="Q35218" start="348" end="363" title="Old High German" label="Old High German"/>
<link wikidata="Q43238" start="416" end="421" title="Poaceae" label="grass"/>
<link wikidata="Q12117" start="435" end="442" title="cereal" label="cereals"/>
<link wikidata="Q5090" start="451" end="455" title="rice" label="rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q11577" start="457" end="463" title="barley" label="barley"/>
<link wikidata="Q12104" start="465" end="469" title="oat" label="oats"/>
<link wikidata="Q15645384" start="475" end="480" title="wheat" label="wheat"/>
<link wikidata="Q729496" start="531" end="537" title="bracts" label="bracts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421859" start="546" end="552" title="glume" label="glumes"/>
<link wikidata="Q149316" start="554" end="560" title="Lemma (botany)" label="lemmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q149316" start="566" end="572" title="palea (botany)" label="paleas"/>
<link wikidata="Q14524280" start="589" end="593" title="husk" label="husk"/>
<link wikidata="Q161397" start="727" end="734" title="einkorn" label="einkorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q167339" start="736" end="741" title="emmer" label="emmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q158767" start="746" end="751" title="spelt" label="spelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369140" start="940" end="949" title="threshing" label="threshing"/>
<link wikidata="Q278061" start="969" end="975" title="drying" label="drying"/>
<link wikidata="Q36465" start="1054" end="1059" title="flour" label="flour"/>
<link wikidata="Q961751" start="1131" end="1140" title="winnowing" label="winnowing"/>
<link wikidata="Q618324" start="1437" end="1442" title="durum wheat" label="durum"/>
<link wikidata="Q161098" start="1447" end="1459" title="common wheat" label="common wheat"/>
<link wikidata="Q188672" start="1626" end="1630" title="bran" label="bran"/>
<link wikidata="Q160066" start="1747" end="1752" title="straw" label="straw"/>
<link wikidata="Q336989" start="1774" end="1777" title="hay" label="hay"/>
<link wikidata="Q446707" start="1829" end="1841" title="chaff cutter" label="chaff cutter"/>
<link wikidata="Q96966430" start="2124" end="2139" title="coffee grinder" label="grinding coffee"/>
<link wikidata="Q441" start="2162" end="2168" title="botany" label="botany"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2195" end="2207" title="List of plant morphology terms#Basic flower parts" label="receptacular"/>
<link wikidata="Q729496" start="2208" end="2214" title="bracts" label="bracts"/>
<link wikidata="Q25400" start="2255" end="2265" title="Asteraceae" label="Asteraceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q33971" start="2317" end="2323" title="leaves" label="leaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q2049965" start="2343" end="2349" title="floret" label="floret"/>
<link wikidata="Q18534" start="2443" end="2451" title="metaphor" label="metaphor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845" start="2521" end="2526" title="Bible" label="Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115049" start="2637" end="2659" title="Chaff (countermeasure)" label="a radar countermeasure"/>
<link wikidata="Q871" start="2826" end="2833" title="arsenic" label="arsenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q208791" start="3000" end="3007" title="aquifer" label="aquifer"/>
<link wikidata="Q655824" start="3025" end="3037" title="Awn (botany)" label="Awn (botany)"/>
<link wikidata="Q188672" start="3040" end="3044" title="Bran" label="Bran"/>
<link wikidata="Q18537" start="3047" end="3054" title="Biomass" label="Biomass"/>
<link wikidata="Q26886" start="3057" end="3074" title="Combine harvester" label="Combine harvester"/>
<link wikidata="Q286388" start="3077" end="3087" title="Rice hulls" label="Rice hulls"/>
<link wikidata="Q371996" start="3090" end="3101" title="Rice huller" label="Rice huller"/>
<link wikidata="Q381155" start="3104" end="3111" title="Sifting" label="Sifting"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="312912" wikidata="Q666694" url="?curid=312912" title="Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce">
<text>The Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce (CIBC; ) is a Canadian multinational banking and financial services corporation headquartered at CIBC Square in the Financial District of Toronto, Ontario. The Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce was formed through the 1961 merger of the Canadian Bank of Commerce (founded in 1867) and the Imperial Bank of Canada (founded in 1873), in the largest merger between chartered banks in Canadian history. It is one of two &quot;Big Five&quot; banks founded in Toronto, the other being the Toronto-Dominion Bank.

The bank has four strategic business units: Canadian Personal and Business Banking, Canadian Commercial Banking and Wealth Management, U.S. Commercial Banking and Wealth Management, and Capital Markets. It has international operations in the United States, the Caribbean, Asia, and United Kingdom. Globally, CIBC serves more than eleven million clients, and has over 40,000 employees. The company ranks at number 172 on the Forbes Global 2000 listing.

CIBC&#x27;s Institution Number (or bank number) is 010, and its SWIFT code is CIBCCATT.

== Predecessor banks ==

=== Imperial Bank of Canada ===
The Imperial Bank of Canada was founded in Toronto in 1873 by Henry Stark Howland. The bank set up its offices in the Exchange Building on Wellington Street, where it remained until 1936. That year, it moved to a new building at the corner of King and Bay, where CIBC would build Commerce Court West in 1973. Imperial acquired several banks, including the Niagara District Bank (1875), and Weyburn Security Bank (1931), and the Canadian operations of Barclays (1956). After the end of World War II, Imperial was the country&#x27;s fifth-largest bank, with assets under administration of approximately $270 billion.

=== Canadian Bank of Commerce ===
William McMaster founded the Canadian Bank of Commerce which opened on May 15, 1867, in Toronto as competition for the Bank of Montreal; by 1874 it had 24 branches. The Imperial Bank of Canada opened in Toronto on March 18, 1875, founded by former Commerce Vice-president Henry Stark Howland. By the end of 1895, the Canadian Bank of Commerce had grown to 58 branches and the Imperial Bank of Canada to 18. The 1896 gold strike in the Yukon prompted the Dominion Government to ask the Canadian Bank of Commerce to open a branch in Dawson City.

Wood, Gundy &amp; Company, the precursor of CIBC&#x27;s investment banking arm, opened its doors on February 1, 1905. During World War I, it took a prominent and active role in the organization of Victory Loans.

Acquisitions in the 1920s caused the Commerce Bank to become one of the strongest branch networks in Canada with over 700 local branches; and the bank opened international branches in Cuba, Jamaica, Barbados and Trinidad during the same period.

The Canadian Bank of Commerce opened its new head office in Toronto in 1931. An observation gallery on the 32nd floor attracted visitors who could get an aerial view of the city. At a height of , it was the tallest building in the Commonwealth of Nations until 1962 with the completion of CIBC Tower in Montreal. 

In 1936, the Commerce was the first Canadian bank to establish a personal loans department. Following World War II, both banks opened new branches. Although the banks had been barred from the mortgage business in 1871, the Canadian government now called upon them to provide mortgage services. So, in 1954, Canadian banks started offering mortgages for new construction.

== History of the bank ==

=== Merger of Imperial and Commerce ===
The origins of the Imperial–Commerce merger lay in the actions of Barclays Bank. Barclays began operating in Canada in 1929, but in 1956 sold its Canadian operations to the Imperial Bank. Barclays took payment partly in the form of Imperial stock. In 1960, without informing Imperial&#x27;s board, Barclays began buying additional Imperial stock on the open market. L. Stuart Mackersy, chairman of Imperial, believed Barclays was making a play to take over Imperial. Mackersy thought that a takeover of a small bank such as Imperial was inevitable, but preferred to work with domestic rather than British concerns. In October 1960, Mackersy approached Neil J. McKinnon, the president and chairman of the Commerce, with a proposal to merge the two banks. Their first meeting took place secretively at McKinnon&#x27;s house at 116 Dunvegan Road in Forest Hill, making the house the birthplace of the CIBC. According to Mackersy, within ten minutes he and McKinnon reached an agreement to merge their banks.

=== Operations of CIBC ===
On 1 June 1961, the Canadian Bank of Commerce and the Imperial Bank of Canada merged to form the Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce with over 1,200 branches across Canada. The new bank possessed the greatest resources and the most branches of any bank in the country.

In 1964, the bank operated a floating branch using the passenger vessel MV &quot;Jean Brilliant&quot; along the north shore of the St. Lawrence River in Quebec, billed as the only floating branch in Canada for 5000 customers. In 1967, both Canada and CIBC celebrated their centenaries and CIBC was the only chartered bank to have a branch on-site at Expo 67. Also at this time computerization began to change banking services and the Yonge and Bloor branch in Toronto was the first Canadian bank branch to update customer bank books via computer. This also marked the introduction of inter-branch banking. Before the decade was out, CIBC had introduced the first 24-hour cash dispenser, which would eventually become the ATM.

Following the merger, the new bank commissioned a new head office. While planning to retain Commerce Court North, the bank hired architect I. M. Pei to design a three-building complex. The result was Commerce Court consisting of a landscaped courtyard complementing the existing building and included the newly built Commerce Court West. When completed in 1973, the 57-storey building was the tallest in Canada, and the largest stainless-steel-clad building in the world.

Changes to federal and provincial regulations ending the separation of banks, investment dealers, trust companies and insurance companies came in 1987. CIBC quickly took advantage of this and became the first Canadian bank to operate an investment dealer, CIBC Securities, offering services to the public.

In 1988, CIBC acquired a majority interest in Wood Gundy which brought a well-respected name and reputation in underwriting. Shortly thereafter, the corporation merged Wood Gundy and CIBC Securities under the name CIBC Wood Gundy which became CIBC Oppenheimer in 1997 and later, CIBC World Markets.

In 1992, CIBC introduced automated telephone banking; in 1995 the bank launched its website, and shortly thereafter began offering banking services online. In 1996, CIBC formed HP Intria Items, alongside Hewlett-Packard and Fiserv Canada. In 2005, CIBC acquired the shares of the company from Fiserv Canada, resulting in Intria Items becoming a unit of CIBC. In 1998, CIBC joined with Loblaws to create President&#x27;s Choice Financial which it launched in 28 Ottawa area stores.

CIBC agreed to merge with the Toronto-Dominion Bank in 1998. However the Government of Canada, at the recommendation of the minister of finance, Paul Martin, blocked the merger – as well as another proposed by the Bank of Montreal with the Royal Bank of Canada – as not in the best interest of Canadians.

==== 21st century ====
In 2000, CIBC signed an agreement with the New York-based Aplettix Inc., a firm specializing in secure transaction systems in the banking sector; although the partnership was later abandoned for alternatives such as VeriSign.

The early 2000s saw the bank divest from its real estate and investments outside of its business strategy. In 2000, CIBC sold its 10 per cent stake to Rogers Media. CIBC was a minority shareholder in Major League Baseball&#x27;s Toronto Blue Jays, with partner Labatt&#x27;s Breweries from their inception in 1977. The CIBC Leadership Centre in King City, was sold to Benchmark Hospitality in 2001. In 2002, CIBC disbanded Amicus FSB, and sold its assets to E*Trade Bank. Amicus FSB was formed in 1999 in the United States with Winn Dixie and Safeway Inc. under the Marketplace Bank and Safeway Select Bank brands. In the same year, CIBC signed a 10-year agreement with TSYS of Columbus, Georgia to outsource credit card processing operations.

In 2004, the bank sold Juniper Financial Corporation to Barclays Bank. Juniper Financial was previously acquired by CIBC in 2001. The bank sold EDULINX Canada Corporation to Nelnet Canada Inc., the Canadian unit of Nelnet, Inc., in late 2004. Li Ka Shing was the largest foreign shareholder in the bank for over two decades, but in early 2005 he sold his portion (est. CA$1.2 billion) to establish a Canadian charity, the Li Ka Shing Foundation. CIBC was Li&#x27;s choice for financing many of his Canadian ventures, like Husky Energy. Li had reportedly backed personal and commercial banking head Holger Kluge to succeed Al Flood as CEO of CIBC in 1999.

CIBC sold its corporate and purchasing credit card business to U.S. Bank Canada in October 2006 which joined it with business charge cards it previously acquired from Royal Bank of Canada. In the same year, CIBC&#x27;s stock ticker symbol on the New York Stock Exchange changed from &quot;BCM&quot; to &quot;CM&quot; to bring it in line with the ticker symbol on the Toronto Stock Exchange. 

In December 2006, CIBC acquired majority control of its publicly held joint venture FirstCaribbean International Bank for just over US$1 billion, (Bds$2 billion), when it purchased the 43.7% stake owned by Barclays Bank. CIBC rebranded the division &quot;CIBC FirstCaribbean International Bank&quot; in 2011.

On February 12, 2009, the &quot;Trinidad and Tobago Express&quot; reported that CIBC was pursuing discussions to buy CL Financial&#x27;s stake in the Republic Bank of Trinidad and Tobago. As part of a &quot;bail out&quot; agreement of CL Financial by the government of Trinidad and Tobago during the 2007–2008 financial crisis, the corporation was required to sell Republic and other assets. CL Financial had yet to agree to a sale.

In February, 2010 CIBC became the first chartered bank in Canada to launch a mobile banking iPhone App. It surpassed 100,000 downloads in just over one month following launch, with over 1 million client logins to CIBC Mobile Banking since its introduction. Four months later, the bank announced it signed a deal to buy a CA$2.1-billion credit card portfolio from Citigroup&#x27;s Citibank Canada MasterCard business. Finally in October of that year, CIBC announced that it would be the first bank in Canada to introduce the internationally used Visa-branded debit card.

In April 2013, CIBC reached an agreement with Invesco to acquire Atlantic Trust, the company&#x27;s wealth management unit for US$210 million.

CIBC announced in June 2016 that it would acquire the Chicago-based commercial bank PrivateBancorp for US$3.8 billion. The sale completed in June 2017 and in August PrivateBank announced it would rebrand itself as CIBC Bank USA.

In April 2017, CIBC, announced it would move its headquarters to the Bay Park Centre under development by Hines Interests Limited Partnership and Ivanhoé Cambridge. Under the terms of its lease, the complex became CIBC Square. CIBC Square formally became CIBC&#x27;s principal office and headquarters on 1 November 2021. 

In November 2018, CBC reported that CIBC was among the top brands used in phishing attacks, with the bank seeing a surge in fake mail attempts that prior quarter by 600%.

=== Acquisitions ===
==Corporate activities and operations==
===North America===

* CIBC Mellon Global Securities Services: formed by CIBC and Mellon Bank Corp. (now Bank of New York Mellon) of Pittsburgh PA 1996 and Canada Trust&#x27;s (now TD Canada Trust) pension and custody business in 1997
* Canadian Eastern Finance Limited (CEF): formed by CIBC and Hutchison Whampoa of Hong Kong; includes CEF Capital Limited, CEF Investment Management Limited
* Soltrus Inc 2001: provider of digital trust services for businesses and consumers to communicate and transact over digital networks owned by CIBC, Telus Corp and VeriSign Inc.
* CIBC Bank USA 2017: Formerly the Chicago-based bank Privatebancorp (incorporated 1989 in Delaware) with operations in 13 states mainly in the East Coast. Business focus is in middle market commercial banking, personal and small business banking, as well as private banking and investment management services. Rebranded to CIBC Bank USA in September 2017.
* Simplii Financial: a direct banking subsidiary established in 2017 after CIBC and Loblaw mutually ended their joint venture to provide consumer banking products under the President&#x27;s Choice Financial brand. All PC Financial bank accounts, loans, and investment products were transferred to Simplii beginning November 1, 2017.

====Caribbean====
In 1920, Canadian Bank of Commerce established its first branches in the West Indies in Bridgetown, Barbados and in Kingston, Jamaica. The same year it also opened branches in Port of Spain, Trinidad and Havana, Cuba. Its first branch in Mexico City opened in 1910. In 1957, the bank opened a branch in Nassau, the Bahamas, and in the subsequent years expanded its operations in Jamaica.

Between 1963 and 1988, the bank expanded its branch network in Barbados opened branches in St. Vincent, Antigua, and St Lucia. In 1988, CIBC sold 45% of its shares in CIBC Jamaica via a public share issue. Between 1993 and 1996, the bank restructured its holdings in the Caribbean, with the incorporation of CIBC West Indies Holdings Limited and CIBC Caribbean Limited. CIBC West Indies Holdings then sold 30% of its shares to the public. In 1997, CIBC issued 5 million shares in CIBC Bahamas Limited to the public.

On October 31, 2001, Barclays and CIBC agreed to combine their Caribbean operations to establish FirstCaribbean International Bank. CIBC bought Barclays&#x27; stake in 2006 to give it control of approximately 92% of FirstCaribbean, which was rebranded as CIBC FirstCaribbean International Bank. In 2010, CIBC acquired a 22.5% equity of Butterfield Bank of Bermuda.

===Governance===
CIBC is well known for its publicized battles of succession to the top position of president and CEO (formerly styled chairman and CEO until 2003 when the positions were separated). When Al Flood became CEO, one of his first acts was to fire his chief rival Paul Cantor. In 1999, the company saw a competition between Wood Gundy (now CIBC World Markets) chief John S. Hunkin and Personal/Commercial banking head Holger Kluge, with Kluge retiring after Hunkin became chairman. In February 2004, Hunkin forced his friend and heir-apparent, David Kassie, to resign as chairman and CEO of World Markets after several scandals in the US. Both men had waived their bonuses in 2002 after that year produced the worst results in the history of the bank. Kassie afterwards founded Genuity Capital and was alleged to have raided 20 key employees from World Markets for his new startup, causing CIBC to file suit. Gerald T. McCaughey became Kassie&#x27;s replacement heading World Markets and in February 2004, was promoted to president and chief operating officer, assuring his succession as CEO. Shortly after assuming his position, McCaughey reportedly dismissed Jill Denham, vice chair of retail markets and a potential rival for the CEO post. Denham was reportedly a close ally of Hunkin and Kassie, and McCaughey wanted to build his own senior executive team.

Current executive team:

* Victor Dodig – President and chief executive officer
* Shawn Beber – Senior Executive Vice-President and Group Head, U.S. Region; President and CEO, CIBC Bank USA
* Frank Guse – Senior Executive Vice-President and Chief Risk Officer, CIBC
* Harry Culham – Senior Executive Vice President and Group Head, Capital Markets
* Jon Hountalas – Senior Executive Vice-President and Group Head, Canadian Banking
* Christina Kramer – Senior Executive Vice-President and Group Head, Technology, Infrastructure and Innovation
* Kikelomo Lawal – Executive Vice President and Chief Legal Officer
* Hratch Panossian – Senior Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer
* Sandy Sharman – Senior Executive Vice-President and Group Head, People, Culture and Brand
Current members of the board of directors:

* Katharine B. Stevenson (2011) – Chair of the board
* Ammar Aljoundi (2022) - President and Chief Executive Officer Agnico Eagle Mines Limited
* Charles J. G. Brindamour (2020) – Chief Executive Officer, Intact Financial Corporation
* Nanci E. Caldwell (2015) – corporate director
* Michelle L. Collins (2017) – president, Cambium LLC
* Luc Desjardins (2009) – president and chief executive officer, Superior Plus Corp.
* Victor G. Dodig (2014) – president and chief executive officer, CIBC
* Kevin J. Kelly (2013) – corporate director
* Christine E. Larsen (2016) – Corporate Director
* Bill Morneau (2022) - Corporate Director
* Mary Lou Maher (2021) – corporate director
* Martine Turcotte (2014) – corporate director
* Barry Zubrow (2015) – president, ITB LLC
==Sponsorships==

As a founding partner of the Toronto Blue Jays baseball club, CIBC was the team&#x27;s &quot;official bank&quot; until selling its ownership stake in 2000. Other sporting events sponsored by CIBC include the 2015 Pan American Games and 2015 Parapan American Games, in which it served as the lead partner. The partnership was announced on 27 October 2011, when CIBC formalized its partnership with the PANAM Toronto 2015 Organizing Committee.

CIBC has also partnered with a number of other Canadian corporations, such as Petro-Canada. As part of its purchase of MasterCard from Citibank Canada in 2010, CIBC acquired the co-branded Petro-Canada rewards credit card and continues to jointly market the card. From 1991 to 2014, CIBC was the primary issuer of credit cards as part of Air Canada&#x27;s loyalty program, Aeroplan. In 2009, the airline loyalty program announced that a new agreement with Toronto-Dominion Bank would be effective 1 January 2014, ending the relationship with CIBC. In 2013, an agreement was reached to allow CIBC to retain half of customers who had Aeroplan credit cards, and continue issuing Aeroplan credit cards as a secondary issuer to TD. In October 2019, CIBC partnered with Parkland Corporation on its Journie Rewards program for Chevron, Pioneer, Ultramar, and FasGas Plus.

CIBC is an industry partner of the University of Waterloo Stratford Campus.

As the successor of Privatebank, CIBC USA is a sponsor of Chicago Fire FC.

CIBC has supported Thompson Rivers University (TRU) for multiple years. CIBC has supported TRU students by providing financial awards, co-operative education programs, employment, and training positions. CIBC staff have also volunteered time to mentor TRU students. In return, TRU recognized CIBC as a distinguished alumni in 2014, awarding them with the Milestone Achievement Award for their contribution to TRU students and alumni.

CIBC is also a sponsor of the Northern Super League, Canada&#x27;s top women&#x27;s soccer league.

==Controversies==
===Employee defalcation===
A former employee embezzled several million dollars of CIBC funds during the 1970s and 1980s as part of a gambling related conspiracy.

===Unpaid employee overtime===
In June 2007, Dara Fresco, a Toronto teller, along with current and former non-management, non-unionized employees, who are or were tellers and other front-line customer service employees, working within Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce&#x27;s (CIBC) various retail branch offices across Canada; brought on a $600 million class-action lawsuit against their employer, CIBC, in regards to lack of overtime pay. &quot;Fresco v Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce&quot; alleges that class members are assigned heavier workloads than could be completed within their standard working hours. They were required or permitted to work overtime to meet the demands of their jobs and CIBC failed to pay for the overtime work in direct contravention of the Canada Labour Code under which they are regulated.

The Ontario Superior Court dismissed the suit June 18, 2012, stating the evidence &quot;provides no basis that there was, in fact, a systemic practice of unpaid overtime at CIBC.&quot; An employee of the Bank of Nova Scotia (Scotiabank) filed a similar suit which the Superior Court certified. Fresco and Scotiabank each appealed their adverse, and contradictory, rulings and the Ontario Court of Appeal ruled that both cases could proceed. Both banks appealed to the Supreme Court of Canada which on March 21, 2013, denied their requests and allowed the lawsuits to proceed.

In March 2020, the Ontario Superior Court of Justice granted summary judgment against CIBC, finding that its overtime and hours-of-work recording practices breached its overtime obligations to about 31,000 current and former employees. The court found that CIBC&#x27;s practice of not recording actual overtime hours and requiring managerial pre-approval for overtime pay was too restrictive and violated Labour Code provisions requiring overtime pay if employers &quot;require or permit&quot; it. In February 2022, the Court of Appeal for Ontario denied an appeal by CIBC and upheld the Superior Court&#x27;s decision. If not appealed, hearings to determine the quantum of damages are scheduled for September 2022. In January 2023, CIBC chose to pay CA$153 million to settle the suit.

===Enron===
On December 22, 2003, the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) fined CIBC US$80 million for its role in the manipulation of Enron financial statements. This consists of $37.5 million to repay ill-gotten gains, a $37.5 million penalty and $5 million in interest. The money is intended to be returned to Enron fraud victims pursuant to the Fair Fund provisions of Section 308(a) of the Sarbanes–Oxley Act of 2002.

The SEC also sued three of CIBC&#x27;s executives. CIBC Executive Vice President Daniel Ferguson and former CIBC executive director Mark Wolf agreed to settle for US$563,000 and US$60,000, respectively. Ian Schottlaender, former managing director in CIBC&#x27;s corporate leveraged finance group in New York initially contested the charges but on July 12, 2004, he agreed to pay US$528,750 as well as be barred from serving as an officer or director of a publicly traded company for a period of five years. Under these agreements the individuals neither admit nor deny wrongdoing.

The SEC complaint charges &quot;CIBC and the three executives with having helped Enron to mislead its investors through a series of complex structured finance transactions over a period of several years preceding Enron&#x27;s bankruptcy.&quot; The agreement reached between the SEC and CIBC permanently enjoins CIBC from violating the antifraud, books and records, and internal control provisions of the federal securities laws.

On August 2, 2005, CIBC paid US$2.4 billion to settle a class action lawsuit brought by a group of pension funds and investment managers, including the University of California, which claims that &quot;systematic fraud by Enron and its officers led to the loss of billions and the collapse of the company.&quot;

===Market timing===
On July 25, 2005, CIBC confirmed it would pay US$125 million to settle an investigation into its role in the 2003 Mutual-fund scandal. Linda Chatman Thomsen, director of the SEC&#x27;s division of enforcement, said, &quot;by knowingly financing customers&#x27; late trading and market timing, as well as providing financing in amounts far greater than the law allows, CIHI and World Markets boosted their customers&#x27; trading profits at the expense of long-term mutual fund shareholders.&quot; Under the settlement, CIBC neither admitted nor denied the allegations.

===Privacy===
On April 18, 2005, the privacy commissioner of Canada expressed disappointment in the way CIBC dealt with incidents involving the bank misdirecting faxes containing customers&#x27; personal information. One involved misdirecting faxes to a scrap yard operator in West Virginia from 2001 to 2004. The misdirected faxes contained the social insurance numbers, home addresses, phone numbers, and detailed bank account data of several hundred bank customers.

The second incident involved a Dorval businessman and allegedly took place from 2000 to 2004. In both cases, the commissioner noted that the bank did not inform the affected clients, whose personal information was compromised, until the incidents became public and an investigation was underway.

Within days of reports by CTV News and &quot;The Globe and Mail&quot;, CIBC management announced a directive that banned employees from using fax machines to transmit any documents containing confidential customer information.

On January 18, 2007, CIBC Asset Management announced that the personal information of about 470,000 current and former clients of Talvest Mutual Funds, a CIBC subsidiary, had gone missing. The information may have included client names, addresses, signatures, dates of birth, bank account numbers, beneficiary information and/or social insurance numbers. The incident stemmed from the disappearance of a hard drive containing information on &quot;the process used to open and administer&quot; customer accounts as it was traveling between the bank&#x27;s Montreal and Toronto offices. The privacy commissioner of Canada stated, &quot;Although I appreciate that the bank notified us of this incident and that it is working cooperatively with my Office, I am nevertheless deeply troubled, especially given the magnitude of this breach, which puts at risk the personal information of hundreds of thousands of Canadians.&quot; She immediately launched a privacy investigation.

===Visa cardholders===
On August 27, 2004, CIBC confirmed that it would settle a class-action lawsuit on behalf of CIBC Visa cardholders. The plaintiffs alleged that the conversion of foreign-currency transactions resulted in an undisclosed or inadequately disclosed mark-up. After approval by an Ontario Superior Court judge, CIBC announced October 15, 2004, that the settlement would result in the bank paying CA$13.85 million to its cardholders, $1 million to the United Way, $1.65 million to the Class Action Fund of the Law Society of Upper Canada, and $3 million in legal fees. The bank also announced that it has not admitted any liability and is settling to avoid further litigation with its cardholders.

===Voluntary refund of erroneous charges===
On May 20, 2004, CIBC announced that it would refund CA$24 million to some of its customers as a result of erroneous overdraft and mortgage charges which were discovered in the course of an internal review. &quot;This is being done as part of CIBC&#x27;s effort to correct its error and to ensure that it distributes to customers all of the money it received in error,&quot; the bank said.

In a similar incident, CIBC announced April 27, 2006 that it&#x27;s refunding an additional CA$27 million to about 200,000 clients who were overcharged for certain overdraft fees and other borrowing transactions, some of which date back to 1993. In cases where clients were undercharged, the bank decided not to seek reimbursement.

=== Discrimination claims ===
On 27 May 2022, CIBC&#x27;s London, UK office was sued after Zhuofang Wei, a former executive of the firm, accused the managers of sexual and racial discrimination. This is after the former executive was dismissed in March 2020 due to her objection of taking a new role without a pay increase. Wei sued CIBC for 800,000 pounds or $1million for lost earnings and damages. CIBC successfully defended the case, however the court was heavily critical of the conduct of senior members of CIBC London&#x27;s management team.

===FINTRAC Non-Compliance===
In 2023, CIBC was fined CA$1.3 million by Financial Transactions and Reports Analysis Centre of Canada for &quot;non-compliance with money laundering and terrorist financing measures&quot;.

== Leadership ==

=== President ===

# Neil John McKinnon, 1 June 1961 – 23 May 1963
# Jeffery Page Rein Wadsworth, 23 May 1963 – 8 December 1964
# William Masterton Currie, 8 December 1964 – 1 April 1968
# Lawrence George Greenwood, 1 April 1968 – 2 September 1971
# Jeffery Page Rein Wadsworth, 2 September 1971 – 11 December 1973
# Russell Edward Harrison, 11 December 1973 – 14 December 1976
# Robert Donald Fullerton, 14 December 1976 – March 1986&lt;br&gt;&quot;separate presidents for personal, corporate, and investment banking divisions&quot;, March 1986 – 1999
# John Stewart Hunkin, 7 August 2003 – 2 December 2004
# Gerald Thomas McCaughey, 2 December 2004 –15 September 2014
# Victor George Dodig, 15 September 2014 – 

=== Chairman of the Board ===

# Lindsay Stuart Mackersy, 1 June 1961 – 23 May 1963
# Neil John McKinnon, 23 May 1963 – 11 December 1973
# Jeffery Page Rein Wadsworth, 11 December 1973 – 14 December 1976
# Russell Edward Harrison, December 1976 – 17 January 1985
# Robert Donald Fullerton, 17 January 1985 – 7 June 1992
# Alvin Lloyd Flood, 7 June 1992 – 3 June 1999
# John Stewart Hunkin, 3 June 1999 – 7 August 2003
# William Albert Etherington, 7 August 2003 – 26 February 2009
# Charlies Sirois, 26 February 2009 – 23 April 2015
# John Paul Manley, 23 April 2015 – 8 April 2021
# Katharine Berghuis Stevenson, 8 April 2021 –

==See also==

* Big Five (banks)
* List of largest banks
* List of banks and credit unions in Canada
* List of banks in the Americas
* CIBC Wealth Management

==Notes==
==References==
==Further reading==
* &quot;A History of the Canadian Bank of Commerce: With an Account of the Other Banks Which Now Form Part of Its Organization&quot;
** 
** 

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q666694" start="4" end="38" title="Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce" label="Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce"/>
<link wikidata="Q666694" start="40" end="44" title="Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce" label="CIBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q161726" start="62" end="75" title="Multinational corporation" label="multinational"/>
<link wikidata="Q837171" start="88" end="106" title="financial services" label="financial services"/>
<link wikidata="Q29467888" start="136" end="147" title="CIBC Square" label="CIBC Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002871" start="155" end="173" title="Financial District, Toronto" label="Financial District"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="177" end="184" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="186" end="193" title="Ontario" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q18369801" start="276" end="301" title="Canadian Bank of Commerce" label="Canadian Bank of Commerce"/>
<link wikidata="Q6006379" start="328" end="351" title="Imperial Bank of Canada" label="Imperial Bank of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073700" start="455" end="475" title="Big Five banks of Canada" label="&amp;quot;Big Five&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194832" start="522" end="543" title="Toronto-Dominion Bank" label="Toronto-Dominion Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="788" end="801" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q664609" start="807" end="816" title="Caribbean" label="Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q48" start="818" end="822" title="Asia" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="828" end="842" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134743" start="970" end="988" title="Forbes Global 2000" label="Forbes Global 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q752797" start="1063" end="1073" title="SWIFT code" label="SWIFT code"/>
<link wikidata="Q28823399" start="1207" end="1226" title="Henry Stark Howland" label="Henry Stark Howland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7990303" start="1535" end="1556" title="Weyburn Security Bank" label="Weyburn Security Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q245343" start="1596" end="1604" title="Barclays" label="Barclays"/>
<link wikidata="Q8015495" start="1795" end="1811" title="William McMaster" label="William McMaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q806693" start="1914" end="1930" title="Bank of Montreal" label="Bank of Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q28823399" start="2067" end="2086" title="Henry Stark Howland" label="Henry Stark Howland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2009" start="2230" end="2235" title="Yukon" label="Yukon"/>
<link wikidata="Q372324" start="2326" end="2337" title="Dawson City" label="Dawson City"/>
<link wikidata="Q8032214" start="2340" end="2365" title="Wood, Gundy &amp;amp; Company" label="Wood, Gundy &amp;amp; Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="3030" end="3053" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q3533035" start="3088" end="3098" title="CIBC Tower" label="CIBC Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q245343" start="3619" end="3632" title="Barclays" label="Barclays Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q129431824" start="3919" end="3937" title="L. Stuart Mackersy" label="L. Stuart Mackersy"/>
<link wikidata="Q127455853" start="4205" end="4221" title="Neil J. McKinnon" label="Neil J. McKinnon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077160" start="4399" end="4410" title="Forest Hill, Toronto" label="Forest Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q134750" start="4986" end="5004" title="St. Lawrence River" label="St. Lawrence River"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="5008" end="5014" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344988" start="5205" end="5212" title="Expo 67" label="Expo 67"/>
<link wikidata="Q46868" start="5721" end="5730" title="I. M. Pei" label="I. M. Pei"/>
<link wikidata="Q8032214" start="6408" end="6418" title="Wood Gundy" label="Wood Gundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5011569" start="6576" end="6591" title="CIBC Wood Gundy" label="CIBC Wood Gundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5011573" start="6641" end="6659" title="CIBC World Markets" label="CIBC World Markets"/>
<link wikidata="Q80978" start="6866" end="6881" title="Hewlett-Packard" label="Hewlett-Packard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3257626" start="7047" end="7054" title="Loblaws" label="Loblaws"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241126" start="7065" end="7098" title="President&amp;#x27;s Choice Financial" label="President&amp;#x27;s Choice Financial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194832" start="7174" end="7195" title="Toronto-Dominion Bank" label="Toronto-Dominion Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q422404" start="7217" end="7237" title="Government of Canada" label="Government of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q3251818" start="7268" end="7287" title="Minister of Finance (Canada)" label="minister of finance"/>
<link wikidata="Q128529" start="7289" end="7300" title="Paul Martin" label="Paul Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q806693" start="7358" end="7374" title="Bank of Montreal" label="Bank of Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q735261" start="7384" end="7404" title="Royal Bank of Canada" label="Royal Bank of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2386987" start="7851" end="7863" title="Rogers Media" label="Rogers Media"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="7900" end="7921" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q650829" start="7929" end="7946" title="Toronto Blue Jays" label="Toronto Blue Jays"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422061" start="7961" end="7984" title="Labatt Brewing Company" label="Labatt&amp;#x27;s Breweries"/>
<link wikidata="Q7744608" start="8019" end="8041" title="The Kingbridge Centre" label="CIBC Leadership Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q5266894" start="8045" end="8054" title="King City, Ontario" label="King City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1264366" start="8228" end="8238" title="Winn Dixie" label="Winn Dixie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508234" start="8243" end="8255" title="Safeway Inc." label="Safeway Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q7671766" start="8370" end="8374" title="TSYS" label="TSYS"/>
<link wikidata="Q239870" start="8378" end="8395" title="Columbus, Georgia" label="Columbus, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6313583" start="8468" end="8497" title="Juniper Bank" label="Juniper Financial Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q245343" start="8501" end="8514" title="Barclays Bank" label="Barclays Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q6990264" start="8660" end="8672" title="Nelnet, Inc." label="Nelnet, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q20151" start="8688" end="8699" title="Li Ka Shing" label="Li Ka Shing"/>
<link wikidata="Q702049" start="8967" end="8979" title="Husky Energy" label="Husky Energy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9043" end="9055" title="Holger Kluge" label="Holger Kluge"/>
<link wikidata="Q739084" start="9164" end="9180" title="U.S. Bancorp" label="U.S. Bank Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q735261" start="9268" end="9288" title="Royal Bank of Canada" label="Royal Bank of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q13677" start="9347" end="9370" title="New York Stock Exchange" label="New York Stock Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q818723" start="9468" end="9490" title="Toronto Stock Exchange" label="Toronto Stock Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q4038776" start="9578" end="9611" title="FirstCaribbean International Bank" label="FirstCaribbean International Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917" start="9626" end="9629" title="United States dollar" label="US$"/>
<link wikidata="Q194351" start="9641" end="9645" title="Barbadian dollar" label="Bds$"/>
<link wikidata="Q7842386" start="9836" end="9863" title="Trinidad Express Newspapers" label="Trinidad and Tobago Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q5012812" start="9921" end="9933" title="CL Financial" label="CL Financial"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314386" start="9954" end="9967" title="Republic Bank" label="Republic Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q754" start="9971" end="9990" title="Trinidad and Tobago" label="Trinidad and Tobago"/>
<link wikidata="Q896666" start="10104" end="10130" title="2007–2008 financial crisis" label="2007–2008 financial crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2766" start="10330" end="10336" title="iPhone" label="iPhone"/>
<link wikidata="Q219508" start="10601" end="10610" title="Citigroup" label="Citigroup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093349" start="10618" end="10633" title="Citibank Canada" label="Citibank Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q489921" start="10634" end="10644" title="MasterCard" label="MasterCard"/>
<link wikidata="Q522617" start="10855" end="10862" title="Invesco" label="Invesco"/>
<link wikidata="Q666694" start="10874" end="10888" title="Atlantic Trust" label="Atlantic Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q54621319" start="11167" end="11180" title="CIBC Bank USA" label="CIBC Bank USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1619384" start="11289" end="11324" title="Hines Interests Limited Partnership" label="Hines Interests Limited Partnership"/>
<link wikidata="Q14943264" start="11329" end="11346" title="Ivanhoé Cambridge" label="Ivanhoé Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q29467888" start="11397" end="11408" title="CIBC Square" label="CIBC Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q5011566" start="11762" end="11800" title="CIBC Mellon" label="CIBC Mellon Global Securities Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q3305204" start="11821" end="11838" title="Mellon Bank Corp." label="Mellon Bank Corp."/>
<link wikidata="Q589288" start="11844" end="11867" title="Bank of New York Mellon" label="Bank of New York Mellon"/>
<link wikidata="Q165858" start="12280" end="12285" title="Telus" label="Telus"/>
<link wikidata="Q734338" start="12295" end="12303" title="VeriSign" label="VeriSign"/>
<link wikidata="Q54621319" start="12311" end="12324" title="CIBC Bank USA" label="CIBC Bank USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q54621319" start="12363" end="12377" title="Privatebancorp" label="Privatebancorp"/>
<link wikidata="Q39058426" start="12668" end="12685" title="Simplii Financial" label="Simplii Financial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227557" start="12689" end="12700" title="direct bank" label="direct bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241126" start="12839" end="12872" title="President&amp;#x27;s Choice Financial" label="President&amp;#x27;s Choice Financial"/>
<link wikidata="Q36168" start="13106" end="13116" title="Bridgetown" label="Bridgetown"/>
<link wikidata="Q34692" start="13134" end="13151" title="Kingston, Jamaica" label="Kingston, Jamaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q39178" start="13194" end="13207" title="Port of Spain" label="Port of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q128323" start="13209" end="13217" title="Trinidad" label="Trinidad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1563" start="13222" end="13228" title="Havana" label="Havana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1489" start="13256" end="13267" title="Mexico City" label="Mexico City"/>
<link wikidata="Q2467" start="13321" end="13327" title="Nassau, Bahamas" label="Nassau"/>
<link wikidata="Q778" start="13333" end="13340" title="Bahamas" label="Bahamas"/>
<link wikidata="Q379656" start="13498" end="13509" title="Saint Vincent (island)" label="St. Vincent"/>
<link wikidata="Q316390" start="13511" end="13518" title="Antigua" label="Antigua"/>
<link wikidata="Q760" start="13524" end="13532" title="St Lucia" label="St Lucia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4038776" start="14179" end="14217" title="CIBC FirstCaribbean International Bank" label="CIBC FirstCaribbean International Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q5002877" start="14260" end="14276" title="Butterfield Bank" label="Butterfield Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q23635" start="14280" end="14287" title="Bermuda" label="Bermuda"/>
<link wikidata="Q8032214" start="14625" end="14635" title="Wood Gundy" label="Wood Gundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q188628" start="16468" end="16486" title="board of directors" label="board of directors"/>
<link wikidata="Q21175197" start="17078" end="17090" title="Bill Morneau" label="Bill Morneau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185431" start="17480" end="17503" title="2015 Pan American Games" label="2015 Pan American Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q3178426" start="17508" end="17535" title="2015 Parapan American Games" label="2015 Parapan American Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208279" start="17793" end="17805" title="Petro Canada" label="Petro-Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2520581" start="18071" end="18078" title="loyalty marketing" label="loyalty"/>
<link wikidata="Q358570" start="18088" end="18096" title="Aeroplan" label="Aeroplan"/>
<link wikidata="Q54621598" start="18479" end="18499" title="Parkland Corporation" label="Parkland Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q319642" start="18535" end="18542" title="Chevron Corporation" label="Chevron"/>
<link wikidata="Q7196684" start="18544" end="18551" title="Pioneer Energy" label="Pioneer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3548078" start="18553" end="18561" title="Ultramar" label="Ultramar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7896599" start="18616" end="18655" title="University of Waterloo Stratford Campus" label="University of Waterloo Stratford Campus"/>
<link wikidata="Q308683" start="18716" end="18731" title="Chicago Fire FC" label="Chicago Fire FC"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551501" start="18753" end="18785" title="Thompson Rivers University" label="Thompson Rivers University (TRU)"/>
<link wikidata="Q121144555" start="19199" end="19220" title="Northern Super League" label="Northern Super League"/>
<link wikidata="Q16241067" start="20226" end="20244" title="Canada Labour Code" label="Canada Labour Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q3000987" start="20658" end="20681" title="Court of Appeal for Ontario" label="Ontario Court of Appeal"/>
<link wikidata="Q196615" start="20746" end="20769" title="Supreme Court of Canada" label="Supreme Court of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q7094918" start="20874" end="20907" title="Ontario Superior Court of Justice" label="Ontario Superior Court of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q3000987" start="21375" end="21402" title="Court of Appeal for Ontario" label="Court of Appeal for Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q953944" start="21680" end="21719" title="U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission" label="U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q327646" start="21787" end="21792" title="Enron" label="Enron"/>
<link wikidata="Q856418" start="22047" end="22065" title="Sarbanes–Oxley Act" label="Sarbanes–Oxley Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810265" start="22798" end="22816" title="structured finance" label="structured finance"/>
<link wikidata="Q4602143" start="23530" end="23554" title="2003 Mutual-fund scandal" label="2003 Mutual-fund scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q638154" start="24028" end="24058" title="Privacy Commissioner of Canada" label="privacy commissioner of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q141963" start="24492" end="24498" title="Dorval" label="Dorval"/>
<link wikidata="Q5014635" start="24784" end="24792" title="CTV News" label="CTV News"/>
<link wikidata="Q604525" start="24803" end="24821" title="The Globe and Mail" label="The Globe and Mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q7094918" start="26257" end="26279" title="Ontario Superior Court of Justice" label="Ontario Superior Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q2944379" start="26427" end="26437" title="United Way of Canada" label="United Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q677937" start="26485" end="26512" title="Law Society of Upper Canada" label="Law Society of Upper Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q5449682" start="28063" end="28123" title="Financial Transactions and Reports Analysis Centre of Canada" label="Financial Transactions and Reports Analysis Centre of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q127455853" start="28251" end="28269" title="Neil J. McKinnon" label="Neil John McKinnon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6106736" start="28299" end="28326" title="J. Page R. Wadsworth" label="Jeffery Page Rein Wadsworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q129497811" start="28360" end="28384" title="William M. Currie" label="William Masterton Currie"/>
<link wikidata="Q129497763" start="28419" end="28444" title="Lawrence G. Greenwood" label="Lawrence George Greenwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q6106736" start="28480" end="28507" title="J. Page R. Wadsworth" label="Jeffery Page Rein Wadsworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q127461379" start="28547" end="28570" title="Russell E. Harrison" label="Russell Edward Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q127523608" start="28610" end="28633" title="R. Donald Fullerton" label="Robert Donald Fullerton"/>
<link wikidata="Q129011743" start="28785" end="28804" title="John S. Hunkin" label="John Stewart Hunkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5549615" start="28840" end="28863" title="Gerald T. McCaughey" label="Gerald Thomas McCaughey"/>
<link wikidata="Q129431824" start="28978" end="29001" title="L. Stuart Mackersy" label="Lindsay Stuart Mackersy"/>
<link wikidata="Q127455853" start="29031" end="29049" title="Neil J. McKinnon" label="Neil John McKinnon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6106736" start="29084" end="29111" title="J. Page R. Wadsworth" label="Jeffery Page Rein Wadsworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q127461379" start="29151" end="29174" title="Russell E. Harrison" label="Russell Edward Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q127523608" start="29210" end="29233" title="R. Donald Fullerton" label="Robert Donald Fullerton"/>
<link wikidata="Q129007791" start="29267" end="29284" title="Al Flood" label="Alvin Lloyd Flood"/>
<link wikidata="Q129011743" start="29314" end="29333" title="John S. Hunkin" label="John Stewart Hunkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2960237" start="29428" end="29443" title="Charles Sirois" label="Charlies Sirois"/>
<link wikidata="Q1389967" start="29480" end="29496" title="John Manley" label="John Paul Manley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073700" start="29591" end="29607" title="Big Five (banks)" label="Big Five (banks)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3679682" start="29610" end="29631" title="List of largest banks" label="List of largest banks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2023551" start="29634" end="29675" title="List of banks and credit unions in Canada" label="List of banks and credit unions in Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q6607206" start="29678" end="29707" title="List of banks in the Americas" label="List of banks in the Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5011568" start="29710" end="29732" title="CIBC Wealth Management" label="CIBC Wealth Management"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="312915" wikidata="Q365323" url="?curid=312915" title="Adolph Dubs">
<text>Adolph Dubs (August 4, 1920 – February 14, 1979), also known as Spike Dubs, was an American diplomat who served as the United States Ambassador to Afghanistan from May 13, 1978, until his death in 1979. He was killed during a rescue attempt after his kidnapping.

==Career==
Dubs was born in Chicago, Illinois. A 1938 graduate of Carl Schurz High School, he graduated from Beloit College in 1942 with a degree in political science. While at Beloit, classmates, who said they did not want to refer to Dubs by the first name of an enemy dictator, gave him the nickname &quot;Spike&quot;, which stuck for the rest of his life. Dubs served in the United States Navy during World War II. Later, he completed graduate studies at Georgetown University and foreign service studies at Harvard University and Washington University in St. Louis. He subsequently entered the United States Foreign Service as a career diplomat, and his postings included Germany, Liberia, Canada, Yugoslavia, and the Soviet Union. He became a noted Soviet expert, and in 1973–74 he served as ranking charge d&#x27;affaires at the United States Embassy in Moscow.

At the time of his death he was married to his second wife Mary Anne Dubs, a Washington-based journalist. He was previously married for over 30 years to Jane Wilson Dubs (1922–1993), his college girlfriend from Beloit College, whom he married in 1945 and divorced in 1976. He had one daughter, Lindsay Dubs McLaughlin (1953–), who lives in West Virginia.

==Kidnapping and death==
In 1978, Dubs was appointed United States Ambassador to Afghanistan following the Saur Revolution, a coup d&#x27;état which brought the Soviet-aligned Khalq faction to power. He was being driven from his residence to the U.S. embassy shortly before 9 a.m. on February 14, 1979, on the same day that Iranian militants attacked the U.S. Embassy in Tehran, Iran, and just months before the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan. He was approaching the U.S. Cultural Center when four men stopped his armored black Chevrolet limousine. Some accounts say that the men were wearing Afghan police uniforms, while others state that only one of the four was wearing a police uniform. The men gestured to the car to open its windows, which were bulletproof, and the ambassador&#x27;s driver complied. The militants then threatened the driver with a pistol, forcing him to take Dubs to the Kabul Hotel in downtown Kabul. The abduction occurred within sight of Afghan police. Dubs was held in Room 117 on the first floor of the hotel, and the driver was sent to the U.S. embassy to tell the U.S. of the kidnapping.

At the hotel, the abductors allegedly demanded that the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan (DRA) release &quot;one or more religious or political prisoners.&quot; &quot;No demands were made of the American government, nor did the DRA ever give a complete or consistent account of the kidnappers&#x27; desires.&quot; Some accounts state that the militants demanded the exchange of Tahir Badakhshi, Badruddin Bahes (who may have already been dead), and Wasef Bakhtari.

The U.S. urged waiting in order not to endanger Dubs&#x27; life, but the Afghan police disregarded these pleas to negotiate and attacked on the advice of Soviet officers. The weapons and flak jackets used by the Afghans were provided by the Soviets, and the hotel lobby had multiple Soviet officials, including the KGB security chief, the lead Soviet advisor to the Afghan police, and the second secretary at the Soviet embassy. At the end of the morning, a shot was heard. Afghan police then stormed Room 117 with heavy automatic gunfire. After a short, intense firefight, estimated at 40 seconds to one minute, Dubs was found dead, killed by shots to the head. Two abductors died in the firefight, as well. An autopsy showed that he had been shot in the head from a distance of six inches. The other two abductors were captured alive but were shot shortly afterwards; their bodies were shown to U.S. officials before dusk.

The true identity and aims of the militants are uncertain, and the crime &quot;has never been satisfactorily explained&quot; although U.S., Afghan, and Soviet officials &quot;were all but eyewitnesses&quot; to it. The circumstances have been described as &quot;mysterious&quot; and &quot;still clouded.&quot; Several factors obscured the events, including the killing of the surviving captors, lack of forensic analysis of the scene, lack of access for U.S. investigators, and planting of evidence. Soviet or Afghan conspiracy was not proven.

Some attribute responsibility for the kidnapping and murder to the leftist anti-Pashtun group Settam-e-Melli, but others consider that to be dubious, pointing to a former Kabul policeman who has claimed that at least one kidnapper was part of the Parcham faction of the People&#x27;s Democratic Party of Afghanistan. Disinformation that was spread in the Soviet and Afghan press after the murder blamed the incident on the CIA, Hafizullah Amin, or both. Anthony Arnold suggested that &quot;it was obvious that only one power… would benefit from the murder—the Soviet Union,&quot; as the death of the ambassador &quot;irrevocably poisoned&quot; the U.S.–Afghan relationship, &quot;leaving the USSR with a monopoly of great power influence over&quot; the Nur Muhammad Taraki government. Carter&#x27;s national security adviser Zbigniew Brzezinski stated that Dubs&#x27; death &quot;was a tragic event which involved either Soviet ineptitude or collusion&quot;, while the Afghan handling of the incident was &quot;inept.&quot; The Taraki government refused U.S. requests for an investigation into the death.

The Carter administration was outraged by the murder of the ambassador and by the conduct of the Afghan government, and began to disengage from Afghanistan and express sympathy with Afghan regime opponents. The incident hastened the decline in U.S.–Afghan relations, causing the United States to make a fundamental reassessment of its policy. In reaction to Dubs&#x27; murder, the U.S. immediately cut planned humanitarian aid of $15 million by half and canceled all planned military aid of $250,000, and the U.S. terminated all economic support by December 1979, when the Soviet occupation of the country was complete. The Afghan government aimed to diminish the U.S. presence in Afghanistan and restricted the number of Peace Corps volunteers and cultural exchange programs. On July 23, the State Department announced the withdrawal of non-essential U.S. embassy staff from Kabul and the majority of the diplomats as security deteriorated, and the U.S. only had some 20 staff members in Kabul by December. Dubs was not replaced by a new ambassador, and a chargé d&#x27;affaires led the skeleton staff at the embassy.

The death of Dubs was listed as a &quot;Significant Terrorist Incident&quot; by the State Department. Documents released from the Soviet KGB archives by Vasily Mitrokhin in the 1990s showed that the Afghan government clearly authorized the assault despite forceful demands for peaceful negotiations by the U.S., and that KGB adviser Sergei Bakhturin may have recommended the assault, as well as the execution of a kidnapper before U.S. experts could interrogate him. The Mitrokhin archives also indicate that the fourth kidnapper escaped and the body of a freshly killed prisoner served as a substitute for the U.S. inspection. Other questions remain unanswered.

According to Mitrokhin, the Soviets were alarmed by Dubs becoming U.S. ambassador to Afghanistan. Worried Dubs knew the region deeply and had CIA ties, they saw his appointment as a U.S. attempt to sway the new Afghan government and prevent them from aligning with the USSR. A KGB agent in Kabul in August 1978, Viliov G. Osadchy expressed deep concern about Dubs becoming ambassador. Not only did they perceive him as knowledgeable and potentially linked to the CIA, but they also feared he would leverage his understanding of the USSR and foreign policy to influence Afghan leaders. This, they saw as &quot;one of the most dangerous aspects&quot; of Dubs&#x27; activities. The agent further claimed the US embassy, led by Dubs, was actively using propaganda among civilians and intellectuals to paint the USSR as an occupying force aiming to expand its influence to neighbouring countries.

Mitrokhin writes that Dubs was kidnapped in Kabul on 14 February 1979 by unknown assailants and held hostage at the Hotel Kabul. They demanded the release of two already-executed members of Settam-e-Melli group, sparking confusion. Following Soviet advice, Amin ordered a brutal armed raid using Soviet equipment. Dubs and two attackers were killed, one captured, and another escaped despite the attackers being outgunned.

During the Dubs kidnapping event, Soviet officials at the hotel (Bakhturin, security assistant Yu. I. Kutepov, secretaries including A. S. Klushnikov, and an advisor) pushed for a forceful solution. They wanted to avoid negotiations, media attention, and any American involvement. After the deadly raid, they even staged evidence by planting a gun and preventing bullet shell collection. It seems they aimed to control the narrative and hide potential involvement or responsibility.

Fearing US scrutiny, Soviet officials (Osadchy and another Soviet advisor) met with Amin to craft a cover story for Dubs&#x27; death. The plan involved condolences, lowered flags, staged photos of dead &quot;terrorists,&quot; and eliminating potential witnesses.

After toppling Amin, the Soviets spun a new tale about Dubs&#x27; death:

*    Dubs was kidnapped by Shiite Muslims opposing Amin&#x27;s brutal regime.
*    The &quot;terrorists&quot; forced Dubs to confess US ties to Amin, aiming to expose their collaboration.
*    Amin, acting as an American/CIA puppet, ordered an unnecessary raid, leading to Dubs&#x27; death.
*    The &quot;terrorists&quot; were killed or eliminated to silence potential witnesses proving Amin&#x27;s CIA ties

This rewrite paints Amin as the villain for suppressing Muslims and colluding with the US, blames him for Dubs&#x27; death, and justifies silencing potential truth-tellers. It paints the Soviets as righteous liberators rectifying Amin&#x27;s mistakes.

Dubs is buried at Arlington National Cemetery, in Arlington, Virginia.

==Memorials==
Dubs is commemorated by the American Foreign Service Association with a plaque in the Truman Building in Washington, D.C., and by a memorial in Kabul.

Camp Dubs, named after Dubs, was a U.S. military camp at the Darul Aman Palace in southwest Kabul.

==See also==

* Ambassadors of the United States killed in office
* List of kidnappings
* List of solved missing persons cases
* List of unsolved murders

==References==
==External links==
*&quot;The Last Ambassador to Afghanistan&quot;, &quot;Beloit College Magazine&quot;, 2002.
*&quot;Death Behind a Keyhole: Protests over a perverse tragedy in Afghanistan&quot;. &quot;Time&quot;. February 26, 1979.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q365323" start="0" end="11" title="Adolph Dubs" label="Adolph Dubs"/>
<link wikidata="Q365323" start="64" end="74" title="Adolph Dubs" label="Spike Dubs"/>
<link wikidata="Q30056287" start="119" end="158" title="United States Ambassador to Afghanistan" label="United States Ambassador to Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="292" end="299" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204" start="301" end="309" title="Illinois" label="Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q5040786" start="330" end="353" title="Carl Schurz High School" label="Carl Schurz High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q2904557" start="373" end="387" title="Beloit College" label="Beloit College"/>
<link wikidata="Q36442" start="413" end="430" title="political science" label="political science"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="529" end="543" title="Hitler" label="enemy dictator"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="643" end="661" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="669" end="681" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q333886" start="723" end="744" title="Georgetown University" label="Georgetown University"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="776" end="794" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q777403" start="799" end="833" title="Washington University in St. Louis" label="Washington University in St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3480437" start="863" end="892" title="United States Foreign Service" label="United States Foreign Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q193391" start="905" end="913" title="diplomat" label="diplomat"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="941" end="948" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014" start="950" end="957" title="Liberia" label="Liberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="959" end="965" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q36704" start="967" end="977" title="Yugoslavia" label="Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="987" end="999" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q217713" start="1070" end="1092" title="charge d&amp;#x27;affaires" label="charge d&amp;#x27;affaires"/>
<link wikidata="Q722374" start="1100" end="1131" title="Embassy of the United States in Moscow" label="United States Embassy in Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371" start="1474" end="1487" title="West Virginia" label="West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q30056287" start="1543" end="1582" title="United States Ambassador to Afghanistan" label="United States Ambassador to Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341539" start="1597" end="1612" title="Saur Revolution" label="Saur Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q3773370" start="1666" end="1671" title="Khalq" label="Khalq"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1832" end="1873" title="Iran hostage crisis#First attempt" label="attacked the U.S. Embassy in Tehran, Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q83085" start="1902" end="1932" title="Soviet invasion of Afghanistan" label="Soviet invasion of Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q29570" start="2018" end="2027" title="Chevrolet" label="Chevrolet"/>
<link wikidata="Q6344450" start="2386" end="2397" title="Kabul Serena Hotel" label="Kabul Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q476757" start="2667" end="2701" title="Democratic Republic of Afghanistan" label="Democratic Republic of Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7675493" start="2991" end="3006" title="Tahir Badakhshi" label="Tahir Badakhshi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2550328" start="3062" end="3076" title="Wasef Bakhtari" label="Wasef Bakhtari"/>
<link wikidata="Q80919" start="3394" end="3397" title="KGB" label="KGB"/>
<link wikidata="Q7456857" start="4643" end="4657" title="Settam-e-Melli" label="Settam-e-Melli"/>
<link wikidata="Q4273348" start="4796" end="4803" title="Parcham" label="Parcham"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="4972" end="4975" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="CIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q63831" start="4977" end="4992" title="Hafizullah Amin" label="Hafizullah Amin"/>
<link wikidata="Q299559" start="5302" end="5321" title="Nur Muhammad Taraki" label="Nur Muhammad Taraki"/>
<link wikidata="Q168041" start="5374" end="5393" title="Zbigniew Brzezinski" label="Zbigniew Brzezinski"/>
<link wikidata="Q4689214" start="5899" end="5920" title="Afghanistan–United States relations" label="U.S.–Afghan relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q458620" start="6377" end="6388" title="Peace Corps" label="Peace Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q463328" start="6928" end="6944" title="Vasily Mitrokhin" label="Vasily Mitrokhin"/>
<link wikidata="Q216344" start="10259" end="10286" title="Arlington National Cemetery" label="Arlington National Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q107126" start="10291" end="10310" title="Arlington, Virginia" label="Arlington, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743829" start="10355" end="10391" title="American Foreign Service Association" label="American Foreign Service Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1586762" start="10413" end="10428" title="Truman Building" label="Truman Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="10432" end="10448" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q5838" start="10471" end="10476" title="Kabul" label="Kabul"/>
<link wikidata="Q902222" start="10540" end="10557" title="Darul Aman Palace" label="Darul Aman Palace"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10595" end="10644" title="Ambassadors of the United States#Ambassadors killed in office" label="Ambassadors of the United States killed in office"/>
<link wikidata="Q6624633" start="10647" end="10666" title="List of kidnappings" label="List of kidnappings"/>
<link wikidata="Q107874056" start="10669" end="10705" title="List of solved missing persons cases" label="List of solved missing persons cases"/>
<link wikidata="Q108907593" start="10708" end="10732" title="List of unsolved murders (20th century)" label="List of unsolved murders"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="10952" end="10956" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="312916" wikidata="Q127241" url="?curid=312916" title="Blue Jay (disambiguation)">
<text>The [[blue jay]] is a species of bird that is native to North America.

Blue Jay or Blue Jays may also refer to:
==Animals==
* &quot;Graphium evemon&quot;, a species of butterfly found in South-east Asia
* A general term for American jays, most of which have largely blue plumage

==People and characters==
* The nickname of child prodigy composer Jay Greenberg
* Mascot for Raytown Senior High School
* Mascot for Guthrie High School
* The Blue Jay, a name for the character Mortimer Folchart in the novel &quot;Inkheart&quot;
* Blue Jay (comics), a diminutive DC Comics superhero
* BlueJay, an animator and comedic-documentary style youtuber based in the United States

==Places==
* Blue Jay, California, U.S.
* Blue Jay, Ohio, U.S.
* Blue Jay, Pennsylvania, U.S.; a place in Pennsylvania
* Blue Jay, West Virginia, U.S.
* Blue Jays Way, Toronto, Ontario, Canada; the street in Toronto that Rogers Centre, the stadium that is home to the Toronto Blue Jays and the Toronto Argonauts, is addressed to

==Sports==
* Toronto Blue Jays, a Major League Baseball team based in Toronto, Ontario, Canada, and 4 of its minor league affiliates:
** Dunedin Blue Jays, of the Advanced-A Florida State League, based in Dunedin, Florida
** Gulf Coast Blue Jays, of the Rookie-level Gulf Coast League, also based in Dunedin
** Bluefield Blue Jays, of the Rookie-level Appalachian League, based in Bluefield, Virginia
** Dominican Summer League Blue Jays, of the Rookie-level Dominican Summer League, based in Boca Chica, Dominican Republic
* A short-lived name for the Philadelphia Phillies in the 1940s
* Johns Hopkins Blue Jays, the mascot and teams of Johns Hopkins University
* Creighton Bluejays, nickname for students, faculty, and alumni of Creighton University and its sports teams
* Minnesota West Bluejays, nickname for student, faculty and alumni of Minnesota West Community and Technical College and its sports teams
* Nippon Blue Jays, a Brazilian baseball club whose name is derived from the MLB Blue Jays

==Media, entertainment, arts==
* The Blue Jays, a short-lived (1961–62) Los Angeles based doo wop quartet
* Bluejay Books, an independent publishing house run by James Frenkel
* &quot;Blue Jay&quot; (film), a 2016 film starring Mark Duplass and Sarah Paulson
* &quot;Blue Jays&quot; (album), a 1975 album by Justin Hayward and John Lodge

==Other uses==
* Blue Jay missile, a code name used during development of the de Havilland Firestreak missile
* Blue Jay (dinghy), a class of sailboat used primarily in the north-eastern United States
* BlueJ, a Java development environment
* &quot;Operation Blue Jay&quot;, the code name for the construction of Thule Air Base in Greenland
* Pixel 6a, an Android mid-range smartphone released in 2022, also known as &quot;bluejay&quot;

==See also==

* &quot;Blue Jay Way&quot;, a 1967 song by The Beatles
* Blue (disambiguation)
* J (disambiguation)
* Jay (disambiguation)
* jay bird (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q127241" start="4" end="16" title="Blue Jay (disambiguation)" label="[[blue jay]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q127241" start="72" end="80" title="Blue Jay (disambiguation)" label="Blue Jay"/>
<link wikidata="Q127241" start="84" end="93" title="Blue Jay (disambiguation)" label="Blue Jays"/>
<link wikidata="Q9199451" start="133" end="148" title="Graphium evemon" label="Graphium evemon"/>
<link wikidata="Q10968813" start="234" end="237" title="jay" label="jay"/>
<link wikidata="Q322525" start="348" end="361" title="Jay Greenberg (composer)" label="Jay Greenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q3421339" start="375" end="401" title="Raytown Senior High School" label="Raytown Senior High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5621770" start="415" end="434" title="Guthrie High School (Oklahoma)" label="Guthrie High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458903" start="513" end="521" title="Inkheart" label="Inkheart"/>
<link wikidata="Q3641161" start="530" end="547" title="Blue Jay (comics)" label="Blue Jay (comics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q885742" start="685" end="705" title="Blue Jay, California" label="Blue Jay, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q4929279" start="714" end="728" title="Blue Jay, Ohio" label="Blue Jay, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="737" end="759" title="Blue Jay, Pennsylvania" label="Blue Jay, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="" start="767" end="790" title="List of places in Pennsylvania: B" label="a place in Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q4929280" start="793" end="816" title="Blue Jay, West Virginia" label="Blue Jay, West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q76318" start="893" end="906" title="Rogers Centre" label="Rogers Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q650829" start="1015" end="1032" title="Toronto Blue Jays" label="Toronto Blue Jays"/>
<link wikidata="Q5314961" start="1139" end="1156" title="Dunedin Blue Jays" label="Dunedin Blue Jays"/>
<link wikidata="Q5617432" start="1227" end="1247" title="Gulf Coast Blue Jays" label="Gulf Coast Blue Jays"/>
<link wikidata="Q4930297" start="1313" end="1332" title="Bluefield Blue Jays" label="Bluefield Blue Jays"/>
<link wikidata="Q5290826" start="1406" end="1439" title="Dominican Summer League Blue Jays" label="Dominican Summer League Blue Jays"/>
<link wikidata="Q650840" start="1555" end="1576" title="Philadelphia Phillies" label="Philadelphia Phillies"/>
<link wikidata="Q6268012" start="1592" end="1615" title="Johns Hopkins Blue Jays" label="Johns Hopkins Blue Jays"/>
<link wikidata="Q5184000" start="1668" end="1686" title="Creighton Bluejays" label="Creighton Bluejays"/>
<link wikidata="Q6868628" start="1847" end="1893" title="Minnesota West Community and Technical College" label="Minnesota West Community and Technical College"/>
<link wikidata="Q124618417" start="1917" end="1933" title="Nippon Blue Jays" label="Nippon Blue Jays"/>
<link wikidata="Q7718782" start="2040" end="2053" title="The Blue Jays" label="The Blue Jays"/>
<link wikidata="Q6134259" start="2115" end="2128" title="Bluejay Books" label="Bluejay Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q27958185" start="2185" end="2212" title="Blue Jay (film)" label="&amp;quot;Blue Jay&amp;quot; (film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1820444" start="2268" end="2297" title="Blue Jays (album)" label="&amp;quot;Blue Jays&amp;quot; (album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q127054" start="2363" end="2379" title="Blue Jay missile" label="Blue Jay missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q4929285" start="2458" end="2475" title="Blue Jay (dinghy)" label="Blue Jay (dinghy)"/>
<link wikidata="Q885584" start="2549" end="2554" title="BlueJ" label="BlueJ"/>
<link wikidata="Q7096829" start="2595" end="2613" title="Operation Blue Jay" label="Operation Blue Jay"/>
<link wikidata="Q111973243" start="2689" end="2697" title="Pixel 6a" label="Pixel 6a"/>
<link wikidata="Q674779" start="2806" end="2818" title="Blue Jay Way" label="Blue Jay Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q224283" start="2855" end="2876" title="Blue (disambiguation)" label="Blue (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q21071" start="2879" end="2897" title="J (disambiguation)" label="J (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q246366" start="2900" end="2920" title="Jay (disambiguation)" label="Jay (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q100250505" start="2923" end="2948" title="jay bird (disambiguation)" label="jay bird (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="312917" wikidata="Q228573" url="?curid=312917" title="Dole">
<text>Dole may refer to:

==Places==
* Dole, Ceredigion, Wales
* Dole, Idrija, Slovenia
* Dole, Jura, France
** Arrondissement of Dole
* Dole (Kladanj), a village at the entity line of Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina-Republika Srpska
* Dole, Ljubuški, Bosnia and Herzegovina
* Dole, Metlika, southeastern Slovenia
* Dole, Nepal
* Dole, Šentjur, eastern Slovenia
* La Dôle, a mountain in Switzerland

==Other uses==
* Dole (surname), including a list of people with the name
* Dole Constituency, a parliamentary constituency in Zanzibar
* Dole Food Company, a US agricultural corporation
* Unemployment benefits
* Welfare spending
** &quot;Cura Annonae&quot;, Roman subsidized grain supply
* Charity (practice), giving food, clothing or money in England (mostly obsolete); examples include
* Department of Labor and Employment (Philippines)
* Dole Air Race, ill-fated 1927 air race

==See also==
* Dhole
* Dhol
* Dule (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q228573" start="0" end="4" title="Dole" label="Dole"/>
<link wikidata="Q15987288" start="33" end="49" title="Dole, Ceredigion" label="Dole, Ceredigion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2336826" start="59" end="71" title="Dole, Idrija" label="Dole, Idrija"/>
<link wikidata="Q205586" start="84" end="94" title="Dole, Jura" label="Dole, Jura"/>
<link wikidata="Q701143" start="106" end="128" title="Arrondissement of Dole" label="Arrondissement of Dole"/>
<link wikidata="Q3033883" start="131" end="145" title="Dole (Kladanj)" label="Dole (Kladanj)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3033882" start="235" end="249" title="Dole, Ljubuški" label="Dole, Ljubuški"/>
<link wikidata="Q2489606" start="276" end="289" title="Dole, Metlika" label="Dole, Metlika"/>
<link wikidata="Q5288910" start="315" end="326" title="Dole, Nepal" label="Dole, Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2024247" start="329" end="342" title="Dole, Šentjur" label="Dole, Šentjur"/>
<link wikidata="Q675628" start="363" end="370" title="La Dôle" label="La Dôle"/>
<link wikidata="Q29358597" start="416" end="430" title="Dole (surname)" label="Dole (surname)"/>
<link wikidata="Q180822" start="475" end="492" title="Dole Constituency" label="Dole Constituency"/>
<link wikidata="Q492747" start="537" end="554" title="Dole Food Company" label="Dole Food Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q311255" start="588" end="609" title="Unemployment benefits" label="Unemployment benefits"/>
<link wikidata="Q12002092" start="612" end="628" title="Welfare spending" label="Welfare spending"/>
<link wikidata="Q495053" start="638" end="650" title="Cura Annonae" label="Cura Annonae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077064" start="690" end="708" title="Charity (practice)" label="Charity (practice)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3545661" start="790" end="838" title="Department of Labor and Employment (Philippines)" label="Department of Labor and Employment (Philippines)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5288914" start="841" end="854" title="Dole Air Race" label="Dole Air Race"/>
<link wikidata="Q132585" start="896" end="901" title="Dhole" label="Dhole"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207707" start="904" end="908" title="Dhol" label="Dhol"/>
<link wikidata="Q398073" start="911" end="932" title="Dule (disambiguation)" label="Dule (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="312918" wikidata="Q257345" url="?curid=312918" title="Lisbon (disambiguation)">
<text>[[Lisbon]] is the capital city of Portugal.

Lisbon may also refer to:
==Places==

=== Portugal ===
*Lisbon District, a district along the western coast

=== United States ===
*Lisbon, Connecticut, a New England town
*Lisbon, Florida
*Lisbon, Illinois
*Lisbon, Indiana
*Lisbon, Iowa
*Lisbon, Louisiana
*Lisbon, Maine, a New England town
**Lisbon (CDP), Maine, within the town
*Lisbon, Maryland
*Lisbon, Missouri
*Lisbon, New Hampshire, a New England town
**Lisbon (CDP), New Hampshire, within the town
*Lisbon, New York
*Lisbon, North Dakota
*Lisbon, Clark County, Ohio
*Lisbon, Ohio (Columbiana County)
*Lisbon, Juneau County, Wisconsin, a town
*Lisbon, Waukesha County, Wisconsin, a town

==Other uses==
*&quot;Lisbon&quot; (album), a 2010 album by the Walkmen
*&quot;Lisbon&quot; (1956 film), a 1956 film by Ray Milland
*&quot;Lisbon&quot; (1999 film), a 1999 Argentine-Spanish thriller
*Grand Lisboa, a hotel in Macau, China
*&quot;Lisbon Antigua&quot;, the title song from the film &quot;Lisbon&quot;
*Lisbon Treaty, signed by the EU member states on 13 December 2007, and entered into force on 1 December 2009
*Lisbon Strategy, a central element of the European Union&#x27;s economic strategy
*Lisbon Convention, an international convention of the Council of Europe elaborated together with UNESCO
*Lisbon Declaration, a treaty signed between countries of the European Union and the African Union
*Lisbon Lions, Celtic FC squad of 1967
*Teresa Lisbon, a fictional character on the American TV crime drama &quot;The Mentalist&quot;
*Treaty of Lisbon, a treaty of the European Union
*Lisbon, the first movement of &quot;Lincolnshire Posy&quot;
*&quot;Lisbon&quot;, an episode of the television series &quot;The Crown&quot;

==See also==
* Lisbon Township (disambiguation)
* New Lisbon (disambiguation)
* Lisburn</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q257345" start="0" end="10" title="Lisbon (disambiguation)" label="[[Lisbon]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q257345" start="45" end="51" title="Lisbon (disambiguation)" label="Lisbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q207199" start="101" end="116" title="Lisbon District" label="Lisbon District"/>
<link wikidata="Q2723823" start="177" end="196" title="Lisbon, Connecticut" label="Lisbon, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q1881610" start="218" end="233" title="Lisbon, Florida" label="Lisbon, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q1839979" start="235" end="251" title="Lisbon, Illinois" label="Lisbon, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q21197818" start="253" end="268" title="Lisbon, Indiana" label="Lisbon, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1841398" start="270" end="282" title="Lisbon, Iowa" label="Lisbon, Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3106140" start="284" end="301" title="Lisbon, Louisiana" label="Lisbon, Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2384470" start="303" end="316" title="Lisbon, Maine" label="Lisbon, Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q107007283" start="339" end="358" title="Lisbon (CDP), Maine" label="Lisbon (CDP), Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6558604" start="377" end="393" title="Lisbon, Maryland" label="Lisbon, Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q20657956" start="395" end="411" title="Lisbon, Missouri" label="Lisbon, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q2310637" start="413" end="434" title="Lisbon, New Hampshire" label="Lisbon, New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q38249826" start="457" end="484" title="Lisbon (CDP), New Hampshire" label="Lisbon (CDP), New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3709864" start="503" end="519" title="Lisbon, New York" label="Lisbon, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q748348" start="521" end="541" title="Lisbon, North Dakota" label="Lisbon, North Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q16894220" start="543" end="569" title="Lisbon, Clark County, Ohio" label="Lisbon, Clark County, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016603" start="571" end="583" title="Lisbon, Ohio" label="Lisbon, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q6558602" start="605" end="637" title="Lisbon, Juneau County, Wisconsin" label="Lisbon, Juneau County, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6558608" start="647" end="681" title="Lisbon, Waukesha County, Wisconsin" label="Lisbon, Waukesha County, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6558611" start="707" end="733" title="Lisbon (album)" label="&amp;quot;Lisbon&amp;quot; (album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3203631" start="764" end="794" title="Lisbon (1956 film)" label="&amp;quot;Lisbon&amp;quot; (1956 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1659455" start="824" end="854" title="Lisbon (1999 film)" label="&amp;quot;Lisbon&amp;quot; (1999 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033099" start="891" end="903" title="Grand Lisboa" label="Grand Lisboa"/>
<link wikidata="Q17097294" start="936" end="950" title="Lisbon Antigua" label="Lisbon Antigua"/>
<link wikidata="Q52843" start="1007" end="1020" title="Lisbon Treaty" label="Lisbon Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q963114" start="1117" end="1132" title="Lisbon Strategy" label="Lisbon Strategy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546127" start="1200" end="1217" title="Lisbon Convention" label="Lisbon Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q4607849" start="1305" end="1323" title="Lisbon Declaration" label="Lisbon Declaration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1827911" start="1404" end="1416" title="Lisbon Lions" label="Lisbon Lions"/>
<link wikidata="Q2414597" start="1443" end="1456" title="Teresa Lisbon" label="Teresa Lisbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q52843" start="1538" end="1554" title="Treaty of Lisbon" label="Treaty of Lisbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6551267" start="1624" end="1641" title="Lincolnshire Posy" label="Lincolnshire Posy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1711" end="1720" title="The Crown (season 2)#Episodes" label="The Crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1827876" start="1743" end="1775" title="Lisbon Township (disambiguation)" label="Lisbon Township (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q414881" start="1778" end="1805" title="New Lisbon (disambiguation)" label="New Lisbon (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1828035" start="1808" end="1815" title="Lisburn" label="Lisburn"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="312919" wikidata="Q454082" url="?curid=312919" title="Lee Ann Womack">
<text>Lee Ann Womack (; born August 19, 1966) is an American singer and songwriter. She has charted 23 times on the American &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot Country Songs charts; her highest peaking single there is her crossover signature song, &quot;I Hope You Dance&quot;. Five of her singles made top 10 on the country music charts of the defunct &quot;RPM&quot; magazine in Canada.

Born in Jacksonville, Texas, Womack was signed by Decca Records Nashville in 1996. When she emerged as a contemporary country artist in 1997, her material drew critical comparisons to Dolly Parton and Tammy Wynette, except for the way Womack&#x27;s music mixed an old-fashioned style with contemporary elements. That year, she had her first top 10 hits with &quot;The Fool&quot; and &quot;You&#x27;ve Got to Talk to Me&quot;. After two albums with Decca, she released her first MCA Nashville album, 2000&#x27;s &quot;I Hope You Dance&quot;; it had an entirely different sound, using pop music elements instead of traditional country. It was not until the release of &quot;There&#x27;s More Where That Came From&quot; in 2005 that Womack returned to recording traditional country music. She recorded a total of five albums with MCA before releasing a series of independent albums, first on Sugar Hill Records and then on ATO Records; these albums include a new sound which blended country and Americana.

Four of Womack&#x27;s studio albums have received a Gold certification or higher by the Recording Industry Association of America, with her most commercially successful album &quot;I Hope You Dance&quot; being certified triple-platinum in the United States and platinum in Canada. In addition, she has received five Academy of Country Music Awards, six Country Music Association Awards, and one Grammy Award. Womack is married to record producer Frank Liddell, and was previously married to songwriter and musician Jason Sellers; her daughter with the latter, Aubrie Sellers, is also a country music artist.

==Early life==
Lee Ann Womack was born on August 19, 1966, in Jacksonville, Texas to Ann (née Gothard) and Aubrey Womack. Aubrey worked as a high school principal and disc jockey for KEBE and KOOI, while Ann worked as a schoolteacher. Womack&#x27;s older sister, Judy, eventually became an attorney in Houston.

At an early age she was interested in country music; Aubrey often took his daughter to KEBE with him to help choose records to play on the air. As a child, Womack studied the piano and later graduated from Jacksonville High School in 1984. After graduating, Womack attended South Plains Junior College in Levelland, Texas. The college was one of the first in the United States to offer country music degrees, and soon she began touring as a member of the college band, Country Caravan. A year later, Womack left the college and after an agreement with her parents, she enrolled at Belmont College (now Belmont University) in Nashville, Tennessee, where she studied the commercial aspect of the music business and interned at the artists and repertoire (A&amp;R) department of the MCA Nashville label. At the 1988 Miss Tennessee pageant in Jackson, Tennessee, Womack won the non-finalist talent award as Miss Nashville; one year later, she was the third runner-up at the Miss Texas State Railroad pageant in Tyler, Texas. In July 1990, she participated in the Miss Texas pageant in Fort Worth, Texas, as Miss Northeast Texas. It was also at this point that Womack dropped out of Belmont and married Jason Sellers.

Womack spent a few years raising her daughter Aubrie before she reentered the music business in the mid-1990s. In 1995 she began performing her music in songwriting demos and at showcase concerts where talent scouts for major country music labels and publishers were present. One of these scouts, Pat McMakin, signed her to Sony/ATV Music Publishing&#x27;s Tree International Publishing imprint after listening to &quot;Am I the Only Thing That You&#x27;ve Done Wrong&quot;, a song which Womack and Sellers co-wrote; it would later be included in her debut album. Womack wrote songs with some popular Nashville songwriters, including country singers Bill Anderson and Ricky Skaggs, who would later record her composition, &quot;I Don&#x27;t Remember Forgetting&quot; for his 1997 album &quot;Life is a Journey&quot;. After divorcing Sellers around that time, Womack decided to pursue a career as a country music artist. She auditioned for MCA chairman, Bruce Hinton, who praised her talents. Shortly afterward, she accepted a contract from MCA&#x27;s sister label Decca Nashville in 1996.

==Music career==
===Early years: 1997–1999===
Womack released her self-titled debut album on Decca in May 1997. This was also her first to be produced by the label&#x27;s then-senior vice president and frequent songwriting collaborator Mark Wright, best known for his work with Gary Allan and Mark Chesnutt. Of the album&#x27;s 11 songs, Ricky Skaggs and his wife Sharon White sang backing vocals on its lead single &quot;Never Again, Again&quot;, while Chesnutt collaborated with Womack on the track &quot;Make Memories with Me&quot;. &quot;Never Again, Again&quot; peaked at number 23 on &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot Country Songs that month. It led to the release of the album&#x27;s second single, &quot;The Fool&quot; shortly afterward. More successful than her first single, &quot;The Fool&quot; peaked at number two on the country charts. It was later followed by &quot;You&#x27;ve Got to Talk to Me&quot; and &quot;Buckaroo&quot;, respectively charting at number 2 and number 34. &quot;The Fool&quot; and &quot;You&#x27;ve Got to Talk to Me&quot; both made top 10 on &quot;RPM&quot; Country Tracks, then the main country music chart published in Canada. Rating the album &quot;A&quot;, Alanna Nash of &quot;Entertainment Weekly&quot; wrote that &quot;This native of Jacksonville, Tex., has more heart than any other new female country singer, and a passel of traditional-sounding songs that may just be good enough to turn Nashville&#x27;s commercial tide.&quot; Thom Owens of AllMusic thought Wright&#x27;s production was &quot;slick [and] professional&quot; and noted that Womack &quot;certainly has a voice that can make the mediocre sound appealing, which results in a winning debut.&quot; The album&#x27;s commercial success also led to the first of several industry award nominations for Womack. The Academy of Country Music awarded her as Top New Female Vocalist. The Country Music Association nominated her for the Horizon Award between 1997 and 1998.

Womack&#x27;s second and final Decca release was 1998&#x27;s &quot;Some Things I Know&quot;, which was also produced by Wright. Womack co-wrote two of the album&#x27;s 11 tracks. The album produced a total of four singles, three of which made the Top 40 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; country singles charts. First was &quot;A Little Past Little Rock&quot;, one of the songs which Sellers sang backing vocals on, and then &quot;I&#x27;ll Think of a Reason Later&quot;. Both singles became the most successful singles on the album with a number two peak on the country charts. They were followed by &quot;(Now You See Me) Now You Don&#x27;t&quot; and a cover of Buddy Miller&#x27;s &quot;Don&#x27;t Tell Me&quot;. Also included on this album were collaborations with Vince Gill and Joe Diffie on &quot;I Keep Forgetting&quot; and a cover of George Jones&#x27; &quot;I&#x27;d Rather Have What We Had&quot;, respectively. &quot;Some Things I Know&quot; was promoted through shows through October to November before Womack&#x27;s second daughter Anna Lise Liddell was born in January 1999. That month, Womack won Favorite Country New Artist from the American Music Awards and moved to MCA Nashville Records after Decca Nashville closed its doors. Eight months later, &quot;Lee Ann Womack&quot; was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA) for shipments of one million copies; &quot;Some Things I Know&quot; was also certified gold for shipments of 500,000 copies.

===Pop crossover success: 2000–2004===
Womack&#x27;s first MCA studio album and third overall was 2000&#x27;s &quot;I Hope You Dance&quot; which met with major success. Contributing songwriters to &quot;I Hope You Dance&quot; once again included Womack, Sellers, and Miller; another contributing writer was Lonesome River Band member Ronnie Bowman. The album produced a total of four singles, which made the Top 40 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; country singles charts. The album was led off by the single &quot;I Hope You Dance&quot;, a collaboration with the country music band Sons of the Desert. It became the most successful single off the album with a number 1 peak on the &quot;Billboard&quot; country singles chart and a number 14 peak on the Hot 100 charts, representing Womack&#x27;s and Sons of the Desert&#x27;s highest peaks on those charts. It was followed by a cover of Rodney Crowell&#x27;s &quot;Ashes by Now&quot;, &quot;Why They Call it Falling&quot;, and a cover of Miller&#x27;s &quot;Does My Ring Burn Your Finger&quot;. Also included on this album was a cover of Don Williams&#x27; &quot;Lord, I Hope This Day Is Good&quot;. &quot;I Hope You Dance&quot; won the Country Music Association&#x27;s &quot;Song of the Year&quot; and &quot;Single of the Year&quot; awards. &quot;I Hope You Dance&quot; also earned Womack&#x27;s first Grammy Award nomination at the 43rd Annual Grammy Awards in February 2001, in the categories of Best Country Album and Best Female Country Vocal Performance. In 2002, &quot;I Hope You Dance&quot; was certified triple-platinum by the RIAA for shipments of 3 million copies. In Canada, the album was certified double-platinum by the Canadian Recording Industry Association (now Music Canada), a certification which at the time honored shipments of 200,000 copies in that country.

In August 2002, MCA released Womack&#x27;s fourth studio album, &quot;Something Worth Leaving Behind&quot;. It was led off by the single &quot;Something Worth Leaving Behind&quot;, which charted at 20 on Hot Country Songs. Its follow up was &quot;Forever Everyday&quot;, which peaked at number 37 on Hot Country Songs that year. On this album, Womack co-produced with Wright, her husband Frank Liddell, and Mike McCarthy. Writing for &quot;USA Today&quot;, Brian Mansfiled described it as the tenth worst album of 2002, saying &quot;Womack&#x27;s ill-advised crossover ploy and a makeover that made her look like Britney Spears&#x27; mother made one of Nashville&#x27;s most respected singers the butt of jokes.&quot; David Cantwell of &quot;No Depression&quot; said &quot;The results, no matter which side of the pop-twang divide you&#x27;re on, will likely be very disappointing.&quot; Conversely, Stephen Thomas Erlewine of AllMusic thought the album &quot;was a sure fit for Womack to move into the country mainstream for good.&quot; Thom Jurek, also of AllMusic, said in a retrospective review that the album &quot;cemented Womack&#x27;s place in the country music pantheon by pushing her own boundaries as an artist further than ever before.&quot; Womack told Mario Tarradell of &quot;The Dallas Morning News&quot; in 2005, &quot;I tried...to please everybody with that record...myself, radio, the listeners, everybody who loved &#x27;Never Again, Again&#x27; and everybody who loved &#x27;I Hope You Dance.&#x27; And it just didn&#x27;t work. It backfired.&quot; That September, Womack contributed to the theme song for the PBS animated TV series adaptation of &quot;The Berenstain Bears&quot;. One month later, she released her first Christmas album, &quot;The Season for Romance&quot;; among this album&#x27;s new songs were the title track and &quot;Forever Christmas Eve&quot;. She also collaborated with Willie Nelson on his single, &quot;Mendocino County Line,&quot; which peaked at 22 on Hot Country Songs. The single won a Grammy and Country Music award that year. In early 2003, she played Haylie Adams in a guest appearance on the popular CBS television series &quot;The District&quot;.

In 2004, Womack performed &quot;I Hope You Dance&quot; at the Republican National Convention, in which George W. Bush was nominated for his second term as President of the United States. The other performers that night included Sara Evans and Larry Gatlin. She also collaborated with Red Dirt Music band Cross Canadian Ragweed on their hit &quot;Sick and Tired&quot; in 2004. Also that year, she released her first &quot;Greatest Hits&quot; compilation, which included two new songs; &quot;The Wrong Girl&quot; and &quot;Time for Me to Go&quot;, the former released as a single. The &quot;Greatest Hits&quot; album was also certified gold by the RIAA in December 2008.

===&quot;There&#x27;s More Where That Came From&quot; and hiatus: 2005–2012===

In 2005, she released her fifth studio album aimed at traditional country music entitled &quot;There&#x27;s More Where That Came From.&quot;
Many people in the music industry called the album, &quot;a return to tradition,&quot; featuring songs about drinking and cheating with a distinctive older country twang, mixing strings and steel guitar. The album won the Country Music Association&#x27;s &quot;Album of the Year&quot; award in 2005. Erlewine praised the album&#x27;s production and songs, comparing it to those released by Loretta Lynn, Barbara Mandrell, and Dolly Parton in the 1970s. He would later say it was &quot;not only the best album that Lee Ann Womack has yet made, but one that does suggest that there is indeed more where this came from.&quot; The lead single, &quot;I May Hate Myself in the Morning&quot; was a Top 10 hit in 2005, and also won &quot;Single of the Year&quot; by the CMA later that year. Two additional singles were released from the album in 2005 that became minor hits: &quot;He Oughta Know That by Now&quot; and &quot;Twenty Years and Two Husbands Ago&quot;, the latter co-written by Womack. Also included on the album are covers of Reba McEntire&#x27;s &quot;Waiting for the Sun to Shine&quot; and George Jones&#x27; &quot;Just Someone I Used to Know&quot;. The album was released on vinyl LP as well as CD.

Womack has also appeared on specials on Country Music Television (CMT), including their &quot;100 Greatest Duets&quot;, which featured Womack singing a collaboration with Kenny Rogers on a cover of Rogers and Dottie West&#x27;s 1978 single &quot;Every Time Two Fools Collide&quot;. Womack replaced West during that show because of West&#x27;s fatal car accident in September 1991. Womack&#x27;s other honors includes being listed at No. 17 on CMT&#x27;s 2002 special of their countdown of the &quot;40 Greatest Women of Country Music&quot;.

In 2006, Womack announced plans to release her next studio album on Mercury Nashville Records. The lead single &quot;Finding My Way Back Home&quot;, her only work for Mercury, was released in the late summer of that year. It reached a peak of No. 37 on &quot;Hot Country Songs&quot;. The album was rescheduled into 2007, because Womack found more songs that she wanted to record, however it was never released and Womack left Mercury in favor of MCA. Also in 2007, Womack collaborated with Joe Nichols on &quot;If I Could Only Fly&quot; from his album &quot;Real Things&quot; and recorded Steve Dorff&#x27;s &quot;Love Will Still Be There&quot; for the soundtrack of the film &quot;September Dawn&quot;.

Womack&#x27;s sixth studio album and last for MCA, &quot;Call Me Crazy&quot;, was released on October 21, 2008. The album, released on vinyl and CD, produced by Tony Brown; it has been described as a dark album with plenty of songs about drinking and losing love. Womack co-wrote four of the album&#x27;s 12 songs. &quot;Call Me Crazy&quot; charted only two singles in the United States: &quot;Last Call&quot; and &quot;Solitary Thinkin&#x27;&quot;, which reached top 40 on Hot Country Songs. Also included on the album were covers of Jim Lauderdale&#x27;s &quot;The King of Broken Hearts&quot; and Ashley Gearing&#x27;s &quot;I Found It in You&quot;, as well as a collaboration with George Strait on &quot;Everything But Quits&quot;, one of the songs which Womack co-wrote. One track, &quot;The Bees,&quot; features backing vocals from Keith Urban. At the 51st Annual Grammy Awards in 2009, &quot;Last Call&quot; was nominated for Best Female Country Vocal Performance; one year later, &quot;Call Me Crazy&quot; was also nominated for Best Country Album, with &quot;Everything But Quits&quot; and &quot;Solitary Thinkin&#x27;&quot; being Womack&#x27;s final nominations for Best Country Collaboration with Vocals and Best Female Country Vocal Performance, respectively.

In October 2009, Womack released a cover of Trent Willmon&#x27;s &quot;There Is a God&quot;, as the lead-off single to her then-upcoming seventh studio album which never surfaced. The song peaked at number 32 on &quot;Hot Country Songs&quot; in early 2010. Womack has revealed a few of the songs she had recorded for the album, including &quot;Talking Behind Your Back&quot;, as well as &quot;You Do Until You Don&#x27;t&quot;.

In October 2010, Womack recorded &quot;Liars Lie&quot; for the soundtrack of the film &quot;Country Strong&quot;. Womack also collaborated with Alan Jackson on a cover of Johnny Cash&#x27;s &quot;Ring of Fire&quot;, which was released that December as a single from his compilation album, &quot;34 Number Ones&quot;. His version of the song was a minor hit, charting to number 45 on Hot Country Songs. Though Womack is featured on the song, she was not given credit on the charts.

In August 2012, Womack announced her departure from MCA Nashville.

===Americana transition and return to music: 2014–present===
In April 2014, Womack signed with Sugar Hill Records, an imprint of Rounder Records. Her first album for the label, &quot;The Way I&#x27;m Livin&#x27;&quot;, was released September 23, 2014. Half of this album consists of cover songs including The Wrights&#x27; &quot;The Way I&#x27;m Livin&#x27;&quot;, Hayes Carll&#x27;s &quot;Chances Are&quot;, Buddy Miller&#x27;s &quot;Don&#x27;t Listen to the Wind&quot;, Neil Young&#x27;s &quot;Out on the Weekend&quot;, Bruce Robison&#x27;s &quot;Not Forgotten You&quot; and Kenny Price&#x27;s &quot;Tomorrow Night in Baltimore&quot;. Rating the album four out of four stars, Mansfield compared the album to &quot;Dolly Parton&#x27;s finest&quot;. He also said that &quot;Her run-ins with the devil may seem uncomfortably specific, but the swelling steel guitars carry her as if on angels&#x27; wings.&quot; Erlewine said that the album &quot;plays like a classic album: it&#x27;s a record where the sum is greater than the individual parts&quot;.

Her second album for Sugar Hill, a vinyl extended play album of cover songs called &quot;Trouble in Mind&quot;, was released in 2015. At the 57th Annual Grammy Awards that year, &quot;The Way I&#x27;m Livin&quot;&#x27; was nominated for Best Country Album; one year later, &quot;Chances Are&quot; was also nominated for Best Country Solo Performance. Womack also received two Americana Music Awards nominations for Album of the Year and Artist of the Year and her first CMA Female Vocalist of the Year nomination in ten years.

In September 2014, Womack collaborated with American R&amp;B singer John Legend for an episode of &quot;CMT Crossroads&quot;. Ahead of her 2015 tour in support of &quot;The Way I&#x27;m Livin&quot;&#x27;, Womack appeared at the C2C: Country to Country festival in the UK.

On August 15, 2017, Womack announced her new album &quot;The Lonely, the Lonesome &amp; the Gone&quot;, which was released on October 27 through ATO Records. The project included 14 songs that were recorded largely at SugarHill Recording Studios in Houston, Texas. Womack co-wrote six of the album&#x27;s songs including the singles &quot;All the Trouble&quot;, &quot;Sunday&quot; and &quot;Hollywood&quot;; the album also included covers of the 1961 Harlan Howard standard &quot;He Called Me Baby&quot;, Lefty Frizzell&#x27;s &quot;Long Black Veil&quot;, Brent Cobb&#x27;s &quot;Shine On Rainy Day&quot; and George Jones&#x27; &quot;Take the Devil Out of Me&quot;. Jurek said that the album &quot;provides listeners an exceptionally well-rounded portrait of both the mature writer and the iconic singer. What Womack delivers has little to do with Nashville -- a plus -- in favor of polished yet hardcore Texas Americana.&quot; &quot;The Lonely, the Lonesome &amp; the Gone&quot; and &quot;All the Trouble&quot; received Grammy Award nominations for Best Americana Album and Best American Roots Song, respectively, in 2019.

==Personal life==
At Belmont, Womack met and married country singer-songwriter Jason Sellers in 1990; they divorced in 1996 during the production of &quot;Lee Ann Womack&quot;. Together they had a daughter named Aubrie Sellers (b. February 1991). In January 1999, Womack had a second daughter, and first child with record producer Frank Liddell; they married later that year on November 6, 1999.

==Discography==

;Studio albums
* &quot;Lee Ann Womack&quot; (1997)
* &quot;Some Things I Know&quot; (1998)
* &quot;I Hope You Dance&quot; (2000)
* &quot;Something Worth Leaving Behind&quot; (2002)
* &quot;The Season for Romance&quot; (2002)
* &quot;There&#x27;s More Where That Came From&quot; (2005)
* &quot;Call Me Crazy&quot; (2008)
* &quot;The Way I&#x27;m Livin&#x27;&quot; (2014)
* &quot;The Lonely, the Lonesome &amp; the Gone&quot; (2017)

==Awards==

== Filmography ==
=== Television ===
=== Films ===
==Footnotes==
==References==
==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q454082" start="0" end="14" title="Lee Ann Womack" label="Lee Ann Womack"/>
<link wikidata="Q485240" start="125" end="134" title="Billboard (magazine)" label="Billboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q862771" start="141" end="158" title="Hot Country Songs" label="Hot Country Songs"/>
<link wikidata="Q504635" start="207" end="216" title="crossover (music)" label="crossover"/>
<link wikidata="Q5977651" start="239" end="255" title="I Hope You Dance" label="I Hope You Dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344164" start="344" end="347" title="RPM (magazine)" label="RPM"/>
<link wikidata="Q685644" start="383" end="402" title="Jacksonville, Texas" label="Jacksonville, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q557632" start="425" end="438" title="Decca Records" label="Decca Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q180453" start="559" end="571" title="Dolly Parton" label="Dolly Parton"/>
<link wikidata="Q234017" start="576" end="589" title="Tammy Wynette" label="Tammy Wynette"/>
<link wikidata="Q7734697" start="739" end="747" title="The Fool (Lee Ann Womack song)" label="The Fool"/>
<link wikidata="Q8056741" start="764" end="793" title="You&amp;#x27;ve Got to Talk to Me" label="You&amp;#x27;ve Got to Talk to Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q4043197" start="853" end="866" title="MCA Nashville" label="MCA Nashville"/>
<link wikidata="Q5977649" start="892" end="908" title="I Hope You Dance (album)" label="I Hope You Dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7782578" start="1047" end="1085" title="There&amp;#x27;s More Where That Came From" label="There&amp;#x27;s More Where That Came From"/>
<link wikidata="Q2386070" start="1264" end="1282" title="Sugar Hill Records (bluegrass label)" label="Sugar Hill Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q128280" start="1295" end="1306" title="ATO Records" label="ATO Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407862" start="1367" end="1376" title="Americana (music)" label="Americana"/>
<link wikidata="Q200863" start="1467" end="1508" title="Recording Industry Association of America" label="Recording Industry Association of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q337308" start="1695" end="1726" title="Academy of Country Music Awards" label="Academy of Country Music Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137234" start="1732" end="1764" title="Country Music Association Awards" label="Country Music Association Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="1774" end="1786" title="Grammy Award" label="Grammy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q5487955" start="1825" end="1838" title="Frank Liddell" label="Frank Liddell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6163457" start="1894" end="1907" title="Jason Sellers" label="Jason Sellers"/>
<link wikidata="Q22343738" start="1939" end="1953" title="Aubrie Sellers" label="Aubrie Sellers"/>
<link wikidata="Q685644" start="2050" end="2069" title="Jacksonville, Texas" label="Jacksonville, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2507958" start="2078" end="2081" title="née" label="née"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056391" start="2141" end="2150" title="principal (school)" label="principal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6328278" start="2171" end="2175" title="KEBE" label="KEBE"/>
<link wikidata="Q6335097" start="2180" end="2184" title="KOOI" label="KOOI"/>
<link wikidata="Q37226" start="2208" end="2221" title="schoolteacher" label="schoolteacher"/>
<link wikidata="Q6117977" start="2506" end="2530" title="Jacksonville High School (Jacksonville, Texas)" label="Jacksonville High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7568230" start="2574" end="2601" title="South Plains College" label="South Plains Junior College"/>
<link wikidata="Q970608" start="2605" end="2621" title="Levelland, Texas" label="Levelland, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4884341" start="2881" end="2896" title="Belmont College" label="Belmont College"/>
<link wikidata="Q23197" start="2925" end="2945" title="Nashville, Tennessee" label="Nashville, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q610225" start="3029" end="3051" title="artists and repertoire" label="artists and repertoire"/>
<link wikidata="Q4043197" start="3080" end="3093" title="MCA Nashville" label="MCA Nashville"/>
<link wikidata="Q6877542" start="3113" end="3127" title="Miss Tennessee" label="Miss Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q985409" start="3139" end="3157" title="Jackson, Tennessee" label="Jackson, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q499169" start="3307" end="3319" title="Tyler, Texas" label="Tyler, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q637468" start="3359" end="3369" title="Miss Texas" label="Miss Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6163457" start="3498" end="3511" title="Jason Sellers" label="Jason Sellers"/>
<link wikidata="Q22343738" start="3560" end="3566" title="Aubrie Sellers" label="Aubrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q333040" start="3838" end="3863" title="Sony/ATV Music Publishing" label="Sony/ATV Music Publishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q25231018" start="3871" end="3900" title="Tree International Publishing" label="Tree International Publishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q861913" start="4164" end="4177" title="Bill Anderson (singer)" label="Bill Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347095" start="4182" end="4194" title="Ricky Skaggs" label="Ricky Skaggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q557632" start="4578" end="4593" title="Decca Nashville" label="Decca Nashville"/>
<link wikidata="Q6512975" start="4670" end="4693" title="Lee Ann Womack (album)" label="self-titled debut album"/>
<link wikidata="Q6770445" start="4840" end="4851" title="Mark Wright (record producer)" label="Mark Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494805" start="4882" end="4892" title="Gary Allan" label="Gary Allan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1899982" start="4897" end="4910" title="Mark Chesnutt" label="Mark Chesnutt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7774607" start="4968" end="4980" title="Sharon White (singer)" label="Sharon White"/>
<link wikidata="Q7003867" start="5026" end="5044" title="Never Again, Again" label="Never Again, Again"/>
<link wikidata="Q485240" start="5200" end="5209" title="Billboard (magazine)" label="Billboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q862771" start="5216" end="5233" title="Hot Country Songs" label="Hot Country Songs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7734697" start="5309" end="5317" title="The Fool (Lee Ann Womack song)" label="The Fool"/>
<link wikidata="Q8056741" start="5478" end="5507" title="You&amp;#x27;ve Got to Talk to Me" label="You&amp;#x27;ve Got to Talk to Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q28451231" start="5524" end="5532" title="Buckaroo (song)" label="Buckaroo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344164" start="5682" end="5685" title="RPM (magazine)" label="RPM"/>
<link wikidata="Q4708267" start="5795" end="5806" title="Alanna Nash" label="Alanna Nash"/>
<link wikidata="Q275033" start="5816" end="5836" title="Entertainment Weekly" label="Entertainment Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q31181" start="6086" end="6094" title="AllMusic" label="AllMusic"/>
<link wikidata="Q337316" start="6415" end="6439" title="Academy of Country Music" label="Academy of Country Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137230" start="6484" end="6509" title="Country Music Association" label="Country Music Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q7559495" start="6637" end="6655" title="Some Things I Know" label="Some Things I Know"/>
<link wikidata="Q4657845" start="6893" end="6918" title="A Little Past Little Rock" label="A Little Past Little Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q5966045" start="6996" end="7029" title="I&amp;#x27;ll Think of a Reason Later" label="I&amp;#x27;ll Think of a Reason Later"/>
<link wikidata="Q4544838" start="7172" end="7207" title="(Now You See Me) Now You Don&amp;#x27;t" label="(Now You See Me) Now You Don&amp;#x27;t"/>
<link wikidata="Q2395959" start="7229" end="7241" title="Buddy Miller" label="Buddy Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q105972771" start="7255" end="7273" title="Don&amp;#x27;t Tell Me (Lee Ann Womack song)" label="Don&amp;#x27;t Tell Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q924232" start="7334" end="7344" title="Vince Gill" label="Vince Gill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1691384" start="7349" end="7359" title="Joe Diffie" label="Joe Diffie"/>
<link wikidata="Q508202" start="7408" end="7420" title="George Jones" label="George Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q207601" start="7714" end="7735" title="American Music Awards" label="American Music Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q4043197" start="7749" end="7770" title="MCA Nashville Records" label="MCA Nashville Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q200863" start="7888" end="7929" title="Recording Industry Association of America" label="Recording Industry Association of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q5977651" start="8179" end="8195" title="I Hope You Dance" label="I Hope You Dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q6671747" start="8370" end="8389" title="Lonesome River Band" label="Lonesome River Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q37321058" start="8397" end="8410" title="Ronnie Bowman" label="Ronnie Bowman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5977651" start="8573" end="8589" title="I Hope You Dance (song)" label="I Hope You Dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q3490715" start="8641" end="8659" title="Sons of the Desert (band)" label="Sons of the Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q180072" start="8812" end="8819" title="Billboard Hot 100" label="Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q704683" start="8946" end="8960" title="Rodney Crowell" label="Rodney Crowell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5288100" start="9067" end="9096" title="Does My Ring Burn Your Finger" label="Does My Ring Burn Your Finger"/>
<link wikidata="Q908569" start="9147" end="9159" title="Don Williams" label="Don Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q6678873" start="9172" end="9201" title="Lord, I Hope This Day Is Good" label="Lord, I Hope This Day Is Good"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="9412" end="9424" title="Grammy Award" label="Grammy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q777063" start="9443" end="9468" title="43rd Annual Grammy Awards" label="43rd Annual Grammy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q550619" start="9788" end="9800" title="Music Canada" label="Music Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q7560193" start="9961" end="9991" title="Something Worth Leaving Behind" label="Something Worth Leaving Behind"/>
<link wikidata="Q7560194" start="10034" end="10064" title="Something Worth Leaving Behind (song)" label="Something Worth Leaving Behind"/>
<link wikidata="Q27813919" start="10138" end="10154" title="Forever Everyday" label="Forever Everyday"/>
<link wikidata="Q5487955" start="10279" end="10292" title="Frank Liddell" label="Frank Liddell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6847876" start="10298" end="10311" title="Mike McCarthy (producer)" label="Mike McCarthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q39681" start="10331" end="10340" title="USA Today" label="USA Today"/>
<link wikidata="Q504635" start="10450" end="10459" title="Crossover music" label="crossover"/>
<link wikidata="Q11975" start="10504" end="10518" title="Britney Spears" label="Britney Spears"/>
<link wikidata="Q3036419" start="10525" end="10531" title="Lynne Spears" label="mother"/>
<link wikidata="Q1994499" start="10627" end="10652" title="No Depression (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;No Depression&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q976031" start="10791" end="10814" title="Stephen Thomas Erlewine" label="Stephen Thomas Erlewine"/>
<link wikidata="Q31181" start="10818" end="10826" title="AllMusic" label="AllMusic"/>
<link wikidata="Q16200163" start="11565" end="11585" title="The Berenstain Bears (2002 TV series)" label="The Berenstain Bears"/>
<link wikidata="Q7762861" start="11656" end="11678" title="The Season for Romance" label="The Season for Romance"/>
<link wikidata="Q206112" start="11807" end="11820" title="Willie Nelson" label="Willie Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="12047" end="12050" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q468257" start="12075" end="12087" title="The District (TV series)" label="The District"/>
<link wikidata="Q361909" start="12158" end="12188" title="Republican National Convention" label="Republican National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="12199" end="12213" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q463989" start="12324" end="12334" title="Sara Evans" label="Sara Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371798" start="12339" end="12351" title="Larry Gatlin" label="Larry Gatlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5188245" start="12400" end="12422" title="Cross Canadian Ragweed" label="Cross Canadian Ragweed"/>
<link wikidata="Q5601180" start="12517" end="12530" title="Greatest Hits (Lee Ann Womack album)" label="Greatest Hits"/>
<link wikidata="Q7782578" start="12941" end="12979" title="There&amp;#x27;s More Where That Came From" label="There&amp;#x27;s More Where That Came From"/>
<link wikidata="Q2617520" start="13177" end="13189" title="steel guitar" label="steel guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q272931" start="13377" end="13389" title="Loretta Lynn" label="Loretta Lynn"/>
<link wikidata="Q292373" start="13391" end="13407" title="Barbara Mandrell" label="Barbara Mandrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q180453" start="13413" end="13425" title="Dolly Parton" label="Dolly Parton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5978427" start="13633" end="13665" title="I May Hate Myself in the Morning" label="I May Hate Myself in the Morning"/>
<link wikidata="Q5688891" start="13860" end="13886" title="He Oughta Know That by Now" label="He Oughta Know That by Now"/>
<link wikidata="Q229430" start="14018" end="14031" title="Reba McEntire" label="Reba McEntire"/>
<link wikidata="Q22043638" start="14109" end="14136" title="Just Someone I Used to Know" label="Just Someone I Used to Know"/>
<link wikidata="Q179636" start="14235" end="14259" title="Country Music Television" label="Country Music Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q217160" start="14366" end="14378" title="Kenny Rogers" label="Kenny Rogers"/>
<link wikidata="Q243124" start="14404" end="14415" title="Dottie West" label="Dottie West"/>
<link wikidata="Q5417623" start="14441" end="14469" title="Every Time Two Fools Collide (song)" label="Every Time Two Fools Collide"/>
<link wikidata="Q4043197" start="14805" end="14830" title="Mercury Nashville Records" label="Mercury Nashville Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q105730527" start="14854" end="14878" title="Finding My Way Back Home" label="Finding My Way Back Home"/>
<link wikidata="Q777990" start="15227" end="15238" title="Joe Nichols" label="Joe Nichols"/>
<link wikidata="Q7301076" start="15295" end="15306" title="Real Things (Joe Nichols album)" label="Real Things"/>
<link wikidata="Q3498907" start="15326" end="15337" title="Steve Dorff" label="Steve Dorff"/>
<link wikidata="Q3283693" start="15419" end="15433" title="September Dawn" label="September Dawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5021544" start="15499" end="15512" title="Call Me Crazy" label="Call Me Crazy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7821969" start="15603" end="15613" title="Tony Brown (record producer)" label="Tony Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q6494155" start="15836" end="15845" title="Last Call (Lee Ann Womack song)" label="Last Call"/>
<link wikidata="Q27814156" start="15862" end="15884" title="Solitary Thinkin&amp;#x27;" label="Solitary Thinkin&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1169621" start="15977" end="15991" title="Jim Lauderdale" label="Jim Lauderdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q4805440" start="16041" end="16055" title="Ashley Gearing" label="Ashley Gearing"/>
<link wikidata="Q366584" start="16126" end="16139" title="George Strait" label="George Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q315547" start="16279" end="16290" title="Keith Urban" label="Keith Urban"/>
<link wikidata="Q1481140" start="16299" end="16324" title="51st Annual Grammy Awards" label="51st Annual Grammy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q7838478" start="16758" end="16771" title="Trent Willmon" label="Trent Willmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7782751" start="16785" end="16799" title="There Is a God" label="There Is a God"/>
<link wikidata="Q5177429" start="17206" end="17216" title="Country Strong (soundtrack)" label="soundtrack"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137254" start="17235" end="17249" title="Country Strong" label="Country Strong"/>
<link wikidata="Q42775" start="17314" end="17325" title="Johnny Cash" label="Johnny Cash"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473718" start="17339" end="17351" title="Ring of Fire (song)" label="Ring of Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q4635382" start="17438" end="17452" title="34 Number Ones" label="34 Number Ones"/>
<link wikidata="Q2386070" start="17788" end="17806" title="Sugar Hill Records (bluegrass label)" label="Sugar Hill Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q18164723" start="17876" end="17904" title="The Way I&amp;#x27;m Livin&amp;#x27;" label="The Way I&amp;#x27;m Livin&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3523449" start="17998" end="18009" title="The Wrights (duo)" label="The Wrights"/>
<link wikidata="Q106040740" start="18022" end="18050" title="The Way I&amp;#x27;m Livin&amp;#x27; (song)" label="The Way I&amp;#x27;m Livin&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2227993" start="18058" end="18069" title="Hayes Carll" label="Hayes Carll"/>
<link wikidata="Q2395959" start="18102" end="18114" title="Buddy Miller" label="Buddy Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q633" start="18165" end="18175" title="Neil Young" label="Neil Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q96397871" start="18189" end="18207" title="Out on the Weekend" label="Out on the Weekend"/>
<link wikidata="Q4978219" start="18215" end="18228" title="Bruce Robison" label="Bruce Robison"/>
<link wikidata="Q6391185" start="18270" end="18281" title="Kenny Price" label="Kenny Price"/>
<link wikidata="Q169930" start="18785" end="18798" title="extended play" label="extended play"/>
<link wikidata="Q22075240" start="18833" end="18848" title="Trouble in Mind (EP)" label="Trouble in Mind"/>
<link wikidata="Q18130804" start="18885" end="18910" title="57th Annual Grammy Awards" label="57th Annual Grammy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q4745579" start="19120" end="19142" title="Americana Music Honors &amp;amp; Awards" label="Americana Music Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q28382637" start="19214" end="19245" title="Country Music Association Award for Female Vocalist of the Year" label="CMA Female Vocalist of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q850412" start="19325" end="19332" title="contemporary R&amp;amp;B" label="R&amp;amp;B"/>
<link wikidata="Q44857" start="19340" end="19351" title="John Legend" label="John Legend"/>
<link wikidata="Q4809158" start="19376" end="19390" title="CMT Crossroads" label="CMT Crossroads"/>
<link wikidata="" start="19500" end="19523" title="C2C: Country to Country" label="C2C: Country to Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q39061186" start="19602" end="19641" title="The Lonely, the Lonesome &amp;amp; the Gone" label="The Lonely, the Lonesome &amp;amp; the Gone"/>
<link wikidata="Q128280" start="19690" end="19701" title="ATO Records" label="ATO Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q7634721" start="19763" end="19790" title="SugarHill Recording Studios" label="SugarHill Recording Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q16555" start="19794" end="19801" title="Houston" label="Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q105972788" start="19884" end="19899" title="All the Trouble" label="All the Trouble"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585461" start="19996" end="20009" title="Harlan Howard" label="Harlan Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q119130976" start="20025" end="20042" title="She Called Me Baby" label="He Called Me Baby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347215" start="20050" end="20064" title="Lefty Frizzell" label="Lefty Frizzell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6163457" start="20749" end="20762" title="Jason Sellers" label="Jason Sellers"/>
<link wikidata="Q22343738" start="20882" end="20896" title="Aubrie Sellers" label="Aubrie Sellers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5487955" start="21001" end="21014" title="Frank Liddell" label="Frank Liddell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6512975" start="21107" end="21121" title="Lee Ann Womack (album)" label="Lee Ann Womack"/>
<link wikidata="Q7559495" start="21143" end="21161" title="Some Things I Know" label="Some Things I Know"/>
<link wikidata="Q5977649" start="21183" end="21199" title="I Hope You Dance (album)" label="I Hope You Dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7560193" start="21221" end="21251" title="Something Worth Leaving Behind" label="Something Worth Leaving Behind"/>
<link wikidata="Q7762861" start="21273" end="21295" title="The Season for Romance" label="The Season for Romance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7782578" start="21317" end="21355" title="There&amp;#x27;s More Where That Came From" label="There&amp;#x27;s More Where That Came From"/>
<link wikidata="Q5021544" start="21377" end="21390" title="Call Me Crazy" label="Call Me Crazy"/>
<link wikidata="Q18164723" start="21412" end="21440" title="The Way I&amp;#x27;m Livin&amp;#x27;" label="The Way I&amp;#x27;m Livin&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q39061186" start="21462" end="21501" title="The Lonely, the Lonesome &amp;amp; the Gone" label="The Lonely, the Lonesome &amp;amp; the Gone"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="312923" wikidata="Q440030" url="?curid=312923" title="Fairlawn">
<text>Fairlawn may refer to:

Places in the United States (by state)
* Fairlawn, Florida 
*Fairlawn (Lexington, Kentucky), listed on the National Register of Historic Places in Fayette County, Kentucky
* Fairlawn, Massachusetts 
*Fairlawn (Worcester, Massachusetts), listed on the National Register of Historic Places in Worcester County, Massachusetts
* Fairlawn, Nevada
* Fairlawn, Ohio
* Fairlawn, Pennsylvania 
* Fairlawn, Rhode Island 
*Fairlawn, Pulaski County, Virginia
*Fair Lawn, New Jersey
*Fairlawn, Covington, Virginia, a neighborhood in the independent city of Covington, Virginia
* Fairlawn (Washington, D.C.), a neighborhood of Washington, D.C.

==See also==
* Fair Lawn (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q440030" start="0" end="8" title="Fairlawn" label="Fairlawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q440030" start="24" end="51" title="Fairlawn" label="Places in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q2749961" start="65" end="82" title="Fairlawn, Florida" label="Fairlawn, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="85" end="115" title="Fairlawn (Lexington, Kentucky)" label="Fairlawn (Lexington, Kentucky)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6976040" start="117" end="195" title="National Register of Historic Places listings in Fayette County, Kentucky" label="listed on the National Register of Historic Places in Fayette County, Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="198" end="221" title="Fairlawn, Massachusetts" label="Fairlawn, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5430518" start="224" end="259" title="Fairlawn (Worcester, Massachusetts)" label="Fairlawn (Worcester, Massachusetts)"/>
<link wikidata="Q19880438" start="349" end="365" title="Fairlawn, Nevada" label="Fairlawn, Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2372620" start="368" end="382" title="Fairlawn, Ohio" label="Fairlawn, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="385" end="407" title="Fairlawn, Pennsylvania" label="Fairlawn, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q5430513" start="411" end="433" title="Fairlawn, Rhode Island" label="Fairlawn, Rhode Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376028" start="436" end="470" title="Fairlawn, Pulaski County, Virginia" label="Fairlawn, Pulaski County, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q607666" start="472" end="493" title="Fair Lawn, New Jersey" label="Fair Lawn, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="495" end="524" title="Fairlawn, Covington, Virginia" label="Fairlawn, Covington, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q511908" start="568" end="587" title="Covington, Virginia" label="Covington, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5430516" start="590" end="617" title="Fairlawn (Washington, D.C.)" label="Fairlawn (Washington, D.C.)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393005" start="670" end="696" title="Fair Lawn (disambiguation)" label="Fair Lawn (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="312926" wikidata="Q1393005" url="?curid=312926" title="Fair Lawn">
<text>Fair Lawn is the name of several places in the United States of America:

*Fair Lawn, Connecticut
*Fair Lawn, New Jersey
**Radburn-Fair Lawn Station, Fair Lawn, New Jersey, listed on the NRHP in New Jersey
**Broadway-Fair Lawn Station, Fair Lawn, New Jersey
*Fair Lawn (Cold Spring, New York), listed on the NRHP in New York

==See also==
*Fairlawn (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1393005" start="0" end="9" title="Fair Lawn" label="Fair Lawn"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="75" end="97" title="Fair Lawn, Connecticut" label="Fair Lawn, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q607666" start="99" end="120" title="Fair Lawn, New Jersey" label="Fair Lawn, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7280014" start="123" end="148" title="Radburn (NJT station)" label="Radburn-Fair Lawn Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q6976998" start="173" end="205" title="List of RHPs in NJ" label="listed on the NRHP in New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q4972389" start="208" end="234" title="Broadway (NJT station)" label="Broadway-Fair Lawn Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q5429847" start="259" end="292" title="Fair Lawn (Cold Spring, New York)" label="Fair Lawn (Cold Spring, New York)"/>
<link wikidata="Q440030" start="340" end="365" title="Fairlawn (disambiguation)" label="Fairlawn (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="312931" wikidata="Q111019" url="?curid=312931" title="Santa Maria">
<text>Santa Maria, Sta. Maria or Santa María is a title of Mary, mother of Jesus, in languages such as Italian, Portuguese and Spanish.

It may also refer to:

==Arts and entertainment==

===Music ===
* &quot;Santa Maria&quot; (Tatjana song), released 1995 
* &quot;Santa Maria&quot; (Kenshi Yonezu song), released 2013
* &quot;Santa Maria&quot;, 1976 song by Canadian rock band Trooper
* &quot;Santa Maria&quot;, 1980 song by Guido &amp; Maurizio De Angelis, a.k.a. Oliver Onions
* &quot;Santa Maria&quot;, 1999 song by German band In Extremo
* &quot;Santa Maria&quot;, 2001 song by Gotan Project
* &quot;Santa Maria&quot;, 2001 song by The Frames
* &quot;Santa María&quot;, a 2019 song by Bad Gyal featuring Busy Signal

===Other media===
* &quot;Santa Maria&quot; (operetta) by Oscar Hammerstein I
* &quot;Santa Maria&quot;, early title of the 2017 film &quot;Richie&quot;

==Churches==

===Italy===

====Florence====
* Florence Cathedral or Basilica di Santa Maria del Fiore
* Santa Maria degli Angeli, Florence
* Santa Maria dei Candeli
* Santa Maria del Carmine, Florence
* Santa Maria Novella, basilica

====Rome====
* Basilica di Santa Maria Maggiore
* Basilica of Santa Maria del Popolo
* Basilica of Santa Maria in Ara Coeli
* Santa Francesca Romana, Rome, or Santa Maria Nova
* Santa Maria dei Miracoli and Santa Maria in Montesanto
* Santa Maria della Consolazione
* Santa Maria della Pace
* Santa Maria della Pietà in Camposanto dei Teutonici
* Santa Maria di Loreto, Rome
* Santa Maria in Cosmedin
* Santa Maria in Trastevere
* Santa Maria in Via Lata
* Santa Maria Maddalena
* Santa Maria sopra Minerva

====Venice====
* Abbazia della Misericordia or Santa Maria dell&#x27;Abbazia della Misericordia
* Gesuati, or Santa Maria del Rosario
* Santa Maria dei Miracoli, Venice
* Santa Maria della Salute
* Santa Maria Formosa
* Santa Maria Gloriosa dei Frari, Basilica
* Santa Maria Zobenigo or Santa Maria del Giglio

====Other places in Italy====

* Santa Maria del Regno, Ardara
* Papal Basilica of Saint Mary of the Angels in Assisi
* Santa Maria Maggiore, Bergamo
* Church of Santa Maria Assunta (Esine)
* Sant&#x27;Angelo (Milan) or Santa Maria degli Angeli
* Santa Maria presso San Satiro, Milan
* Santa Maria di Montedoro, Montefiascone
* Santa Maria in Strada, Monza
* Santa Maria degli Angeli, Murano
* Santa Maria e San Donato, Murano
* Santa Donna Regina Nuova or Santa Maria Donna Regina Nuova, Naples
* Santa Maria della Catena, Naples
* Santa Maria di Costantinopoli, Naples
* Santa Maria Donna Regina Vecchia, Naples
* Martorana or Church of Santa Maria dell&#x27;Ammiraglio, Palermo
* Santa Maria del Carmine, Pavia
* Santa Maria di Canepanova, Pavia
* Santa Maria della Catena, Palermo
* Santa Maria della Spina, Pisa
* Santa Maria delle Carceri, Prato
* Santa Maria in Organo, Verona

===Portugal===
* Church of Santa Maria do Olival, a church in Tomar
* Jerónimos Monastery#Church of Santa Maria, a church in Lisbon

===Spain===

====Asturias====
* Church of Santa María de Celón
* Church of Santa María de Junco
* Santa María de la Corte
* Church of Santa María de Llas
* Church of Santa María de Sabada
* Church of Santa María de Sariegomuerto
* Church of Santa María de Villanueva

====Other places in Spain====
* Church of Santa María de Bendones
* Colegiata de Santa María la Mayor (Toro)
* Santa María de Melque, Toledo
* Santa María del Naranco, Oviedo

===United States===
* Iglesia San Isidro Labrador y Santa María de la Cabeza, Sabana Grande, Puerto Rico

==People==
* Antonia Santa María (born 1982), Chilean actress
* Cara Santa Maria (born 1983), American science educator and blogger
* Domingo Santa María (1825–1889), Chilean president
* Jodi Sta. Maria (born 1982), Filipina actress

==Places==
===Argentina===
* Santa María, Catamarca
* Santa María Department (disambiguation), two departments in Argentina
* Santa María de Punilla
* Santa María, Misiones
* Santa María, Salta
* Santa María del Buen Ayre, old name of Buenos Aires
* Santa María Centro, Santa Fe
* Santa María Norte, Santa Fe

===Brazil===
* Santa Maria, Federal District
* Santa Maria, Rio Grande do Norte
* Santa Maria, Rio Grande do Sul
* Santa Maria das Barreiras, Pará
* Santa Maria da Boa Vista, Pernambuco
* Santa Maria do Cambucá, Pernambuco
* Santa Maria do Herval, Rio Grande do Sul
* Santa Maria de Itabira, Minas Gerais
* Santa Maria de Jetibá, Espírito Santo 
* Santa Maria Madalena, Rio de Janeiro
* Santa Maria do Oeste, Paraná
* Santa Maria do Pará, Pará
* Santa Maria do Salto, Minas Gerais
* Santa Maria da Serra, São Paulo
* Santa Maria do Suaçuí, Minas Gerais 
* Santa Maria do Tocantins, Tocantins
* Santa Maria da Vitória, Bahia

===Cape Verde===
* Santa Maria, Cape Verde

===Chile===
* Santa María, Chile

===Colombia===
* Santa María, Huila
* Santa María, Boyacá

===El Salvador===
* Santa María, Usulután

===Guatemala===
* Santa María Cahabón
* Santa María Chiquimula
* Santa María de Jesús
* Santa María Ixhuatán
* Santa María Visitación
* Santa María (volcano)

===Italy===
* Santa Maria Nuova, Marche, a &quot;comune&quot; in Marche
* Santa Maria di Castellabate, a town in Campania
* Santa Maria degli Angeli, Assisi

===Malta===
* Tigné Point, originally known as &quot;Punta di Santa Maria&quot;

===Mexico===
* Misión Santa María de los Ángeles, Baja California
* Santa María de los Ángeles, Jalisco
* Santa María del Oro, Durango
* Santa María del Oro, Nayarit
* Santa María del Río, San Luis Potosí
* Santa María, Oaxaca (disambiguation), several places

===Panama===
* Santa María District, Panama
* Santa María, Herrera

===Paraguay===
* Santa María, Paraguay, a city and district

===Peru===
* Santa María District, Huaura, a district in Huaura province
* Santa María del Mar (Peru), a district in Lima province

===Philippines===
* Santa Maria, Bulacan, a first-class urban municipality in the province of Bulacan
* Santa Maria, Davao Occidental
* Santa Maria, Ilocos Sur
* Santa Maria, Isabela
* Santa Maria, Laguna
* Santa Maria, Pangasinan
* Santa Maria, Romblon

===Portugal===
* Santa Maria (Tavira), a civil parish in the municipality of Tavira
* Sé, Santa Maria e Meixedo, a civil parish in the municipality of Bragança
* Cabo de Santa Maria (Faro), a cape south of Faro; the southernmost point of mainland Portugal
* Santa Maria Island, in the eastern group of the Azores

===Romania===
* Sântă Măria, a river in Sălaj County
* Sântă Măria, a village in the commune Sânmihaiu Almașului, Sălaj County

===Spain===

====Barcelona====
* Santa Maria de Besora, Osona 
* L&#x27;Esquirol, Osona, known as Santa Maria de Corcó until 2014
* Santa Maria de Martorelles 
* Santa Maria de Merlès 
* Santa Maria de Miralles
* Santa Maria de Palautordera
* Santa Maria del Mar, Barcelona
* Santa Maria d&#x27;Oló

====Burgos====
* Santa María del Campo
* Santa María del Invierno
* Santa María del Mercadillo
* Santa María Ribarredonda

====Other places in Spain====
* El Pla de Santa Maria, Tarragona
* El Puerto de Santa María, Cádiz
* Santa María de Guía de Gran Canaria, Canary Islands
* Santa María de Sando, Salamanca
* Santa María del Páramo, León
* Santa María La Antigua, Valladolid

===Switzerland===
* Santa Maria in Calanca
* Santa Maria Val Müstair

===United States===
* Santa Maria, California
* Santa Maria, Texas
* Santa Maria Estate, U.S. Virgin Islands
* Santa Maria Valley AVA, California wine region

===Vanuatu===
* Gaua, formerly known as Santa Maria Island

==Transport==
* &quot;Santa María&quot; (ship), used by Christopher Columbus
* Spanish frigate &quot;Santa María&quot;
* Santa María (Mexibús), a BRT station in Tultitlán, Mexico
* &quot;Santa Maria&quot;, a cruise liner hijacked in 1961
* AL-60B-1 Santa Maria, variant of the Aermacchi AL-60

==Other uses==
* Santa Maria (building), a skyscraper in Miami, Florida, United States
* Santa Maria (crater), on Mars
* Sta. Maria F.C., a football club

==See also==
* List of churches consecrated to Santa Maria Assunta
* Maria Maddalena (disambiguation)
* Marie-Madeleine (disambiguation)
* Maria Magdalena (disambiguation)
* Mary Magdalene (disambiguation)
* Santa Maria Airport (disambiguation)
* Santa Maria Island (disambiguation)
* Santa María la Real (disambiguation)
* Santa Maria River (disambiguation)
* Santamaria (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q111019" start="0" end="11" title="Santa Maria" label="Santa Maria"/>
<link wikidata="Q111019" start="13" end="23" title="Santa Maria" label="Sta. Maria"/>
<link wikidata="Q111019" start="27" end="38" title="Santa Maria" label="Santa María"/>
<link wikidata="Q345" start="53" end="74" title="Mary, mother of Jesus" label="Mary, mother of Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7419669" start="197" end="235" title="Santa Maria (Tatjana song)" label="&amp;quot;Santa Maria&amp;quot; (Tatjana song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q15115680" start="254" end="298" title="Santa Maria (Kenshi Yonezu song)" label="&amp;quot;Santa Maria&amp;quot; (Kenshi Yonezu song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q13434222" start="373" end="380" title="Trooper (band)" label="Trooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q242073" start="421" end="452" title="Guido &amp;amp; Maurizio De Angelis" label="Guido &amp;amp; Maurizio De Angelis"/>
<link wikidata="Q326034" start="527" end="537" title="In Extremo" label="In Extremo"/>
<link wikidata="Q746955" start="578" end="591" title="Gotan Project" label="Gotan Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550391" start="632" end="642" title="The Frames" label="The Frames"/>
<link wikidata="Q25432114" start="685" end="693" title="Bad Gyal" label="Bad Gyal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7419668" start="737" end="771" title="Santa Maria (operetta)" label="&amp;quot;Santa Maria&amp;quot; (operetta)"/>
<link wikidata="Q25209439" start="857" end="863" title="Richie (film)" label="Richie"/>
<link wikidata="Q191739" start="917" end="935" title="Florence Cathedral" label="Florence Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q3275023" start="975" end="1009" title="Santa Maria degli Angeli, Florence" label="Santa Maria degli Angeli, Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q3674025" start="1012" end="1035" title="Santa Maria dei Candeli" label="Santa Maria dei Candeli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042634" start="1038" end="1071" title="Santa Maria del Carmine, Florence" label="Santa Maria del Carmine, Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q51175" start="1074" end="1093" title="Santa Maria Novella" label="Santa Maria Novella"/>
<link wikidata="Q186282" start="1120" end="1152" title="Basilica di Santa Maria Maggiore" label="Basilica di Santa Maria Maggiore"/>
<link wikidata="Q869513" start="1155" end="1189" title="Basilica of Santa Maria del Popolo" label="Basilica of Santa Maria del Popolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q318660" start="1192" end="1228" title="Basilica of Santa Maria in Ara Coeli" label="Basilica of Santa Maria in Ara Coeli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091640" start="1231" end="1259" title="Santa Francesca Romana, Rome" label="Santa Francesca Romana, Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q45730389" start="1283" end="1337" title="Santa Maria dei Miracoli and Santa Maria in Montesanto" label="Santa Maria dei Miracoli and Santa Maria in Montesanto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256299" start="1340" end="1370" title="Santa Maria della Consolazione" label="Santa Maria della Consolazione"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514683" start="1373" end="1395" title="Santa Maria della Pace" label="Santa Maria della Pace"/>
<link wikidata="Q519310" start="1398" end="1449" title="Santa Maria della Pietà in Camposanto dei Teutonici" label="Santa Maria della Pietà in Camposanto dei Teutonici"/>
<link wikidata="Q461997" start="1452" end="1479" title="Santa Maria di Loreto, Rome" label="Santa Maria di Loreto, Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q609293" start="1482" end="1505" title="Santa Maria in Cosmedin" label="Santa Maria in Cosmedin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137391" start="1508" end="1533" title="Santa Maria in Trastevere" label="Santa Maria in Trastevere"/>
<link wikidata="Q846559" start="1536" end="1559" title="Santa Maria in Via Lata" label="Santa Maria in Via Lata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1817386" start="1562" end="1583" title="Santa Maria Maddalena" label="Santa Maria Maddalena"/>
<link wikidata="Q823685" start="1586" end="1611" title="Santa Maria sopra Minerva" label="Santa Maria sopra Minerva"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059409" start="1630" end="1656" title="Abbazia della Misericordia" label="Abbazia della Misericordia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093909" start="1711" end="1718" title="Gesuati" label="Gesuati"/>
<link wikidata="Q533680" start="1749" end="1781" title="Santa Maria dei Miracoli, Venice" label="Santa Maria dei Miracoli, Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q52531" start="1784" end="1808" title="Santa Maria della Salute" label="Santa Maria della Salute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813687" start="1811" end="1830" title="Santa Maria Formosa" label="Santa Maria Formosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q224961" start="1833" end="1863" title="Santa Maria Gloriosa dei Frari" label="Santa Maria Gloriosa dei Frari"/>
<link wikidata="Q220811" start="1876" end="1896" title="Santa Maria Zobenigo" label="Santa Maria Zobenigo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537739" start="1957" end="1978" title="Santa Maria del Regno" label="Santa Maria del Regno"/>
<link wikidata="Q4706745" start="1989" end="2041" title="Papal Basilica of Saint Mary of the Angels in Assisi" label="Papal Basilica of Saint Mary of the Angels in Assisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001128" start="2044" end="2073" title="Santa Maria Maggiore, Bergamo" label="Santa Maria Maggiore, Bergamo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3673285" start="2076" end="2113" title="Church of Santa Maria Assunta (Esine)" label="Church of Santa Maria Assunta (Esine)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256546" start="2116" end="2140" title="Sant&amp;#x27;Angelo (Milan)" label="Sant&amp;#x27;Angelo (Milan)"/>
<link wikidata="Q589462" start="2171" end="2200" title="Santa Maria presso San Satiro" label="Santa Maria presso San Satiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q3674067" start="2210" end="2234" title="Santa Maria di Montedoro" label="Santa Maria di Montedoro"/>
<link wikidata="Q3674145" start="2252" end="2280" title="Santa Maria in Strada, Monza" label="Santa Maria in Strada, Monza"/>
<link wikidata="Q3585423" start="2283" end="2315" title="Santa Maria degli Angeli, Murano" label="Santa Maria degli Angeli, Murano"/>
<link wikidata="Q2545358" start="2318" end="2342" title="Santa Maria e San Donato" label="Santa Maria e San Donato"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256212" start="2353" end="2377" title="Santa Donna Regina Nuova" label="Santa Donna Regina Nuova"/>
<link wikidata="Q719084" start="2422" end="2454" title="Santa Maria della Catena, Naples" label="Santa Maria della Catena, Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q718751" start="2457" end="2486" title="Santa Maria di Costantinopoli" label="Santa Maria di Costantinopoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256210" start="2497" end="2529" title="Santa Maria Donna Regina Vecchia" label="Santa Maria Donna Regina Vecchia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1644597" start="2540" end="2549" title="Martorana" label="Martorana"/>
<link wikidata="Q3585428" start="2607" end="2637" title="Santa Maria del Carmine, Pavia" label="Santa Maria del Carmine, Pavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3472709" start="2640" end="2665" title="Santa Maria di Canepanova" label="Santa Maria di Canepanova"/>
<link wikidata="Q632192" start="2675" end="2708" title="Santa Maria della Catena, Palermo" label="Santa Maria della Catena, Palermo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426967" start="2711" end="2734" title="Santa Maria della Spina" label="Santa Maria della Spina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1714149" start="2743" end="2775" title="Santa Maria delle Carceri, Prato" label="Santa Maria delle Carceri, Prato"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052661" start="2778" end="2807" title="Santa Maria in Organo, Verona" label="Santa Maria in Organo, Verona"/>
<link wikidata="Q267013" start="2826" end="2857" title="Church of Santa Maria do Olival" label="Church of Santa Maria do Olival"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2879" end="2920" title="Jerónimos Monastery#Church of Santa Maria" label="Jerónimos Monastery#Church of Santa Maria"/>
<link wikidata="Q5117159" start="2974" end="3004" title="Church of Santa María de Celón" label="Church of Santa María de Celón"/>
<link wikidata="Q5117157" start="3007" end="3037" title="Church of Santa María de Junco" label="Church of Santa María de Junco"/>
<link wikidata="Q5117165" start="3040" end="3063" title="Santa María de la Corte" label="Santa María de la Corte"/>
<link wikidata="Q5117158" start="3066" end="3095" title="Church of Santa María de Llas" label="Church of Santa María de Llas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5117161" start="3098" end="3129" title="Church of Santa María de Sabada" label="Church of Santa María de Sabada"/>
<link wikidata="Q5117162" start="3132" end="3170" title="Church of Santa María de Sariegomuerto" label="Church of Santa María de Sariegomuerto"/>
<link wikidata="Q4269165" start="3173" end="3208" title="Church of Santa María de Villanueva" label="Church of Santa María de Villanueva"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570099" start="3242" end="3275" title="Church of Santa María de Bendones" label="Church of Santa María de Bendones"/>
<link wikidata="Q5142770" start="3278" end="3318" title="Colegiata de Santa María la Mayor (Toro)" label="Colegiata de Santa María la Mayor (Toro)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545312" start="3321" end="3342" title="Santa María de Melque" label="Santa María de Melque"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246842" start="3353" end="3376" title="Santa María del Naranco" label="Santa María del Naranco"/>
<link wikidata="Q5117098" start="3408" end="3462" title="Iglesia San Isidro Labrador y Santa María de la Cabeza" label="Iglesia San Isidro Labrador y Santa María de la Cabeza"/>
<link wikidata="Q5697599" start="3505" end="3524" title="Antonia Santa María" label="Antonia Santa María"/>
<link wikidata="Q4795230" start="3556" end="3572" title="Cara Santa Maria" label="Cara Santa Maria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323" start="3626" end="3645" title="Domingo Santa María" label="Domingo Santa María"/>
<link wikidata="Q6207902" start="3679" end="3694" title="Jodi Sta. Maria" label="Jodi Sta. Maria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012407" start="3755" end="3777" title="Santa María, Catamarca" label="Santa María, Catamarca"/>
<link wikidata="Q535176" start="3780" end="3819" title="Santa María Department (disambiguation)" label="Santa María Department (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3949202" start="3852" end="3874" title="Santa María de Punilla" label="Santa María de Punilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q2238097" start="3877" end="3898" title="Santa María, Misiones" label="Santa María, Misiones"/>
<link wikidata="Q7419744" start="3901" end="3919" title="Santa María, Salta" label="Santa María, Salta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1486" start="3961" end="3973" title="Buenos Aires" label="Buenos Aires"/>
<link wikidata="Q22999123" start="3976" end="3994" title="Santa María Centro" label="Santa María Centro"/>
<link wikidata="Q9074100" start="4007" end="4024" title="Santa María Norte" label="Santa María Norte"/>
<link wikidata="Q3949105" start="4051" end="4080" title="Santa Maria, Federal District" label="Santa Maria, Federal District"/>
<link wikidata="Q1954847" start="4083" end="4115" title="Santa Maria, Rio Grande do Norte" label="Santa Maria, Rio Grande do Norte"/>
<link wikidata="Q740833" start="4118" end="4148" title="Santa Maria, Rio Grande do Sul" label="Santa Maria, Rio Grande do Sul"/>
<link wikidata="Q2009212" start="4151" end="4176" title="Santa Maria das Barreiras" label="Santa Maria das Barreiras"/>
<link wikidata="Q2010898" start="4185" end="4209" title="Santa Maria da Boa Vista" label="Santa Maria da Boa Vista"/>
<link wikidata="Q2013573" start="4224" end="4246" title="Santa Maria do Cambucá" label="Santa Maria do Cambucá"/>
<link wikidata="Q379483" start="4261" end="4282" title="Santa Maria do Herval" label="Santa Maria do Herval"/>
<link wikidata="Q1789237" start="4304" end="4326" title="Santa Maria de Itabira" label="Santa Maria de Itabira"/>
<link wikidata="Q616486" start="4343" end="4364" title="Santa Maria de Jetibá" label="Santa Maria de Jetibá"/>
<link wikidata="Q2013108" start="4384" end="4420" title="Santa Maria Madalena, Rio de Janeiro" label="Santa Maria Madalena, Rio de Janeiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1995037" start="4423" end="4443" title="Santa Maria do Oeste" label="Santa Maria do Oeste"/>
<link wikidata="Q1901157" start="4454" end="4473" title="Santa Maria do Pará" label="Santa Maria do Pará"/>
<link wikidata="Q1749736" start="4482" end="4502" title="Santa Maria do Salto" label="Santa Maria do Salto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759992" start="4519" end="4539" title="Santa Maria da Serra" label="Santa Maria da Serra"/>
<link wikidata="Q385048" start="4553" end="4574" title="Santa Maria do Suaçuí" label="Santa Maria do Suaçuí"/>
<link wikidata="Q522587" start="4592" end="4616" title="Santa Maria do Tocantins" label="Santa Maria do Tocantins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761852" start="4630" end="4652" title="Santa Maria da Vitória" label="Santa Maria da Vitória"/>
<link wikidata="Q497445" start="4680" end="4703" title="Santa Maria, Cape Verde" label="Santa Maria, Cape Verde"/>
<link wikidata="Q187991" start="4719" end="4737" title="Santa María, Chile" label="Santa María, Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1575656" start="4756" end="4774" title="Santa María, Huila" label="Santa María, Huila"/>
<link wikidata="Q2434307" start="4777" end="4796" title="Santa María, Boyacá" label="Santa María, Boyacá"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154932" start="4818" end="4839" title="Santa María, Usulután" label="Santa María, Usulután"/>
<link wikidata="Q332147" start="4859" end="4878" title="Santa María Cahabón" label="Santa María Cahabón"/>
<link wikidata="Q2402472" start="4881" end="4903" title="Santa María Chiquimula" label="Santa María Chiquimula"/>
<link wikidata="Q119252" start="4906" end="4926" title="Santa María de Jesús" label="Santa María de Jesús"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748654" start="4929" end="4949" title="Santa María Ixhuatán" label="Santa María Ixhuatán"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748668" start="4952" end="4974" title="Santa María Visitación" label="Santa María Visitación"/>
<link wikidata="Q204657" start="4977" end="4998" title="Santa María (volcano)" label="Santa María (volcano)"/>
<link wikidata="Q124858" start="5014" end="5039" title="Santa Maria Nuova, Marche" label="Santa Maria Nuova, Marche"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548190" start="5074" end="5101" title="Santa Maria di Castellabate" label="Santa Maria di Castellabate"/>
<link wikidata="Q938802" start="5124" end="5156" title="Santa Maria degli Angeli, Assisi" label="Santa Maria degli Angeli, Assisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7801673" start="5172" end="5183" title="Tigné Point" label="Tigné Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q6875738" start="5254" end="5287" title="Misión Santa María de los Ángeles" label="Misión Santa María de los Ángeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991008" start="5307" end="5333" title="Santa María de los Ángeles" label="Santa María de los Ángeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q18419392" start="5345" end="5373" title="Santa María del Oro, Durango" label="Santa María del Oro, Durango"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001105" start="5376" end="5404" title="Santa María del Oro, Nayarit" label="Santa María del Oro, Nayarit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3846862" start="5407" end="5443" title="Santa María del Río, San Luis Potosí" label="Santa María del Río, San Luis Potosí"/>
<link wikidata="Q7419742" start="5446" end="5482" title="Santa María, Oaxaca (disambiguation)" label="Santa María, Oaxaca (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3711451" start="5515" end="5543" title="Santa María District, Panama" label="Santa María District, Panama"/>
<link wikidata="Q18403144" start="5546" end="5566" title="Santa María, Herrera" label="Santa María, Herrera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1749350" start="5585" end="5606" title="Santa María, Paraguay" label="Santa María, Paraguay"/>
<link wikidata="Q3313775" start="5642" end="5670" title="Santa María District, Huaura" label="Santa María District, Huaura"/>
<link wikidata="Q959971" start="5704" end="5730" title="Santa María del Mar (Peru)" label="Santa María del Mar (Peru)"/>
<link wikidata="Q54768" start="5781" end="5801" title="Santa Maria, Bulacan" label="Santa Maria, Bulacan"/>
<link wikidata="Q314980" start="5865" end="5894" title="Santa Maria, Davao Occidental" label="Santa Maria, Davao Occidental"/>
<link wikidata="Q12692" start="5897" end="5920" title="Santa Maria, Ilocos Sur" label="Santa Maria, Ilocos Sur"/>
<link wikidata="Q50175" start="5923" end="5943" title="Santa Maria, Isabela" label="Santa Maria, Isabela"/>
<link wikidata="Q75943" start="5946" end="5965" title="Santa Maria, Laguna" label="Santa Maria, Laguna"/>
<link wikidata="Q42055" start="5968" end="5991" title="Santa Maria, Pangasinan" label="Santa Maria, Pangasinan"/>
<link wikidata="Q174717" start="5994" end="6014" title="Santa Maria, Romblon" label="Santa Maria, Romblon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2181054" start="6033" end="6053" title="Santa Maria (Tavira)" label="Santa Maria (Tavira)"/>
<link wikidata="Q15261142" start="6102" end="6127" title="Sé, Santa Maria e Meixedo" label="Sé, Santa Maria e Meixedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5015746" start="6178" end="6204" title="Cabo de Santa Maria (Faro)" label="Cabo de Santa Maria (Faro)"/>
<link wikidata="Q217262" start="6274" end="6292" title="Santa Maria Island" label="Santa Maria Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q5571143" start="6346" end="6357" title="Sântă Măria" label="Sântă Măria"/>
<link wikidata="Q12725182" start="6423" end="6442" title="Sânmihaiu Almașului" label="Sânmihaiu Almașului"/>
<link wikidata="Q13835" start="6491" end="6512" title="Santa Maria de Besora" label="Santa Maria de Besora"/>
<link wikidata="Q13837" start="6523" end="6538" title="L&amp;#x27;Esquirol" label="L&amp;#x27;Esquirol"/>
<link wikidata="Q15455" start="6590" end="6616" title="Santa Maria de Martorelles" label="Santa Maria de Martorelles"/>
<link wikidata="Q15541" start="6620" end="6641" title="Santa Maria de Merlès" label="Santa Maria de Merlès"/>
<link wikidata="Q15970" start="6645" end="6668" title="Santa Maria de Miralles" label="Santa Maria de Miralles"/>
<link wikidata="Q15456" start="6671" end="6698" title="Santa Maria de Palautordera" label="Santa Maria de Palautordera"/>
<link wikidata="Q908802" start="6701" end="6731" title="Santa Maria del Mar, Barcelona" label="Santa Maria del Mar, Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q16735" start="6734" end="6756" title="Santa Maria d&amp;#x27;Oló" label="Santa Maria d&amp;#x27;Oló"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641301" start="6775" end="6796" title="Santa María del Campo" label="Santa María del Campo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641378" start="6799" end="6823" title="Santa María del Invierno" label="Santa María del Invierno"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641197" start="6826" end="6852" title="Santa María del Mercadillo" label="Santa María del Mercadillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1656711" start="6855" end="6879" title="Santa María Ribarredonda" label="Santa María Ribarredonda"/>
<link wikidata="Q267805" start="6913" end="6934" title="El Pla de Santa Maria" label="El Pla de Santa Maria"/>
<link wikidata="Q203040" start="6948" end="6972" title="El Puerto de Santa María" label="El Puerto de Santa María"/>
<link wikidata="Q986359" start="6982" end="7017" title="Santa María de Guía de Gran Canaria" label="Santa María de Guía de Gran Canaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1905427" start="7036" end="7056" title="Santa María de Sando" label="Santa María de Sando"/>
<link wikidata="Q68561" start="7070" end="7092" title="Santa María del Páramo" label="Santa María del Páramo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2880180" start="7101" end="7123" title="Santa María La Antigua" label="Santa María La Antigua"/>
<link wikidata="Q65569" start="7157" end="7179" title="Santa Maria in Calanca" label="Santa Maria in Calanca"/>
<link wikidata="Q659972" start="7182" end="7205" title="Santa Maria Val Müstair" label="Santa Maria Val Müstair"/>
<link wikidata="Q643953" start="7229" end="7252" title="Santa Maria, California" label="Santa Maria, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q978540" start="7255" end="7273" title="Santa Maria, Texas" label="Santa Maria, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7419680" start="7276" end="7315" title="Santa Maria Estate, U.S. Virgin Islands" label="Santa Maria Estate, U.S. Virgin Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1669646" start="7318" end="7340" title="Santa Maria Valley AVA" label="Santa Maria Valley AVA"/>
<link wikidata="Q583383" start="7382" end="7386" title="Gaua" label="Gaua"/>
<link wikidata="Q107900" start="7442" end="7472" title="Santa María (ship)" label="&amp;quot;Santa María&amp;quot; (ship)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6138862" start="7505" end="7544" title="Spanish frigate Santa María" label="Spanish frigate &amp;quot;Santa María&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q110269822" start="7547" end="7568" title="Santa María (Mexibús)" label="Santa María (Mexibús)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1632038" start="7647" end="7663" title="Santa Maria hijacking" label="hijacked in 1961"/>
<link wikidata="Q381141" start="7703" end="7718" title="Aermacchi AL-60" label="Aermacchi AL-60"/>
<link wikidata="Q3472677" start="7737" end="7759" title="Santa Maria (building)" label="Santa Maria (building)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2348509" start="7809" end="7829" title="Santa Maria (crater)" label="Santa Maria (crater)"/>
<link wikidata="Q24185060" start="7841" end="7856" title="Sta. Maria F.C." label="Sta. Maria F.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q2223021" start="7890" end="7941" title="List of churches consecrated to Santa Maria Assunta" label="List of churches consecrated to Santa Maria Assunta"/>
<link wikidata="Q16876434" start="7944" end="7976" title="Maria Maddalena (disambiguation)" label="Maria Maddalena (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q15839241" start="7979" end="8011" title="Marie-Madeleine (disambiguation)" label="Marie-Madeleine (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6760959" start="8014" end="8046" title="Maria Magdalena (disambiguation)" label="Maria Magdalena (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q366293" start="8049" end="8080" title="Mary Magdalene (disambiguation)" label="Mary Magdalene (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16882635" start="8083" end="8119" title="Santa Maria Airport (disambiguation)" label="Santa Maria Airport (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3802868" start="8122" end="8157" title="Santa Maria Island (disambiguation)" label="Santa Maria Island (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7419773" start="8160" end="8196" title="Santa María la Real (disambiguation)" label="Santa María la Real (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q9072101" start="8199" end="8233" title="Santa Maria River (disambiguation)" label="Santa Maria River (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q409544" start="8236" end="8263" title="Santamaria (disambiguation)" label="Santamaria (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="312932" wikidata="Q2831159" url="?curid=312932" title="Albert F. Sabo">
<text>Albert F. Sabo (December 21, 1920 – May 8, 2002) was an American lawyer and judge of the Philadelphia County Court of Common Pleas. He is known for presiding over the 1982 murder trial of Mumia Abu-Jamal. Sabo served as a judge from 1974 until his retirement in 1998.

Born in Philadelphia in a family with Slovak origins, Sabo grew up in the Northern Liberties neighborhood and graduated from Roman Catholic High School in 1938. He earned two degrees from the University of Pennsylvania: a bachelor&#x27;s degree in economics from the Wharton School in 1942 and a law degree from the University of Pennsylvania Law School in 1948. Sabo was a World War II veteran and part of the United States Army Air Forces.

Sabo served as county undersheriff for 16 years before being elected to the bench. For 15 years while on the bench, Sabo exclusively heard homicide cases. Sabo presided over 31 cases that resulted in the imposition of the death penalty, which was reported in 1992 by &quot;The Philadelphia Inquirer&quot; to be the most in the state. In 1995, in the time before Abu-Jamal was scheduled to be executed, Sabo had 24-hour security due to angry, offensive faxes and calls directed to him. On September 15, 1995, Sabo denied Abu-Jamal a retrial.

In 2000, the stenographer at the Abu-Jamal trial, Terri Maurer-Carter, signed an affidavit stating that during the trial she overheard the judge saying of the defendant, &quot;Yeah and I&#x27;m gonna help &#x27;em fry the nigger.&quot;

Sabo died in 2002 of heart failure. At the time of his death, he was living in the Mount Airy neighborhood of Philadelphia.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2831159" start="0" end="14" title="Albert F. Sabo" label="Albert F. Sabo"/>
<link wikidata="Q692218" start="56" end="68" title="American law" label="American law"/>
<link wikidata="Q16533" start="76" end="81" title="judge" label="judge"/>
<link wikidata="Q496900" start="89" end="108" title="Philadelphia County, Pennsylvania" label="Philadelphia County"/>
<link wikidata="Q17110093" start="109" end="130" title="Pennsylvania Courts of Common Pleas" label="Court of Common Pleas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5153897" start="167" end="184" title="Commonwealth of Pennsylvania v. Mumia Abu-Jamal" label="1982 murder trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q156133" start="188" end="203" title="Mumia Abu-Jamal" label="Mumia Abu-Jamal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="277" end="289" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q171336" start="307" end="313" title="Slovaks" label="Slovak"/>
<link wikidata="Q7058627" start="343" end="361" title="Northern Liberties, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania" label="Northern Liberties"/>
<link wikidata="Q7361849" start="394" end="420" title="Roman Catholic High School (Philadelphia)" label="Roman Catholic High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q49117" start="461" end="487" title="University of Pennsylvania" label="University of Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329269" start="536" end="550" title="Wharton School" label="Wharton School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7896088" start="585" end="622" title="University of Pennsylvania Law School" label="University of Pennsylvania Law School"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="643" end="655" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q741723" start="680" end="709" title="United States Army Air Forces" label="United States Army Air Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q149086" start="851" end="859" title="homicide" label="homicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435124" start="934" end="947" title="Capital punishment in the United States" label="death penalty"/>
<link wikidata="Q600111" start="985" end="1010" title="The Philadelphia Inquirer" label="The Philadelphia Inquirer"/>
<link wikidata="Q181754" start="1512" end="1525" title="heart failure" label="heart failure"/>
<link wikidata="Q6919296" start="1574" end="1584" title="Mount Airy, Philadelphia" label="Mount Airy"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="312933" wikidata="Q23340" url="?curid=312933" title="Tenrec">
<text>A tenrec () is a mammal belonging to any species within the afrotherian family Tenrecidae, which is endemic to Madagascar. Tenrecs are a very diverse group, as a result of adaptive radiation, and exhibit convergent evolution, some resemble hedgehogs, shrews, opossums, rats, and mice. They occupy aquatic, arboreal, terrestrial, and fossorial environments. Some of these species, including the greater hedgehog tenrec, can be found in the Madagascar dry deciduous forests. However, the speciation rate in this group has been higher in humid forests.

All tenrecs are believed to descend from a common ancestor that lived 29–37 million years ago after rafting over from Africa. The split from their closest relatives, African otter shrews, is estimated to have occurred about 47–53 million years ago.

==Etymology==

The word &quot;tenrec&quot; is borrowed, via French, from the Malagasy word (variant of ), which refers to the tailless tenrec (&quot;Tenrec ecaudatus&quot;); it has been speculated that the Malagasy word is related to .

==Evolution==

Tenrecs are believed to have evolved from a single species that colonized Madagascar between 42 and 25 million years ago. The question of how this family reached Madagascar is still unresolved, but the leading hypothesis suggests a small number of individuals may have found themselves on floating vegetation and crossed the Mozambique Channel, which separates Madagascar from southeastern Africa. The Tenrecidae family is one of only four extant terrestrial mammal lineages to have colonized and diversified on Madagascar.

Once established on Madagascar, tenrecs diversified to occupy various niches on the island. Many evolved resemblances to familiar but unrelated mammals that are not found on Madagascar. For instance, the two species of hedgehog tenrec possess coats of hardened spines and the ability to roll into a ball when threatened, characteristics similar to those of true hedgehogs. This example, along with others, demonstrates convergent evolution; it has provided evolutionary biologists with opportunities to study adaptation over evolutionary timescales.

==Characteristics==

Tenrecs are small mammals of variable body form. The smallest species are the size of shrews, with a body length of around , and weighing just , while the largest, the common or tailless tenrec, is in length, and can weigh over . Although they may resemble shrews, hedgehogs, or opossums, they are not closely related to any of these groups, their closest relatives being the otter shrews, and after that other African insectivorous mammals including golden moles and elephant shrews. The common ancestry of these animals, which are classified together in the clade Afrotheria, was not recognized until the late 1990s. Continuing work on the molecular and morphological diversity of afrotherian mammals has provided ever increasing support for their common ancestry.

Tenrecs are among the few terrestrial mammals that echolocate. 
Unusual among placental mammals, the rectum and urogenital tracts of tenrecs share a common opening, or cloaca which is a feature more commonly seen in birds, reptiles, and amphibians. They have a low body temperature, sufficiently low that they do not require a scrotum to cool their sperm as do most other mammals.

All species appear to be at least somewhat omnivorous, with invertebrates forming the largest part of their diets. One species, &quot;Microgale mergulus&quot;, is semiaquatic (similar to the lifestyle of their closest relatives, the otter shrews). All of the species, semiaquatic or not, appear to have evolved from a single, common ancestor with the otter shrews comprising the next, most-closely related mammalian species. While the fossil record of tenrecs is scarce, at least some specimens from the early Miocene of Kenya show close affinities to living species from Madagascar, such as &quot;Geogale aurita&quot;.

Most species are nocturnal and have poor eyesight. Their other senses are well developed, however and they have especially sensitive whiskers. As with many of their other features, the dental formula of tenrecs varies greatly between species; they can have from 32 to 42 teeth in total. Unusual for mammals, the permanent dentition in tenrecs tends not to completely erupt until well after adult body size has been reached. This is one of several anatomical features shared by elephants, hyraxes, sengis, and golden moles (but apparently not aardvarks), consistent with their descent from a common ancestor.

Tenrecs have a gestation period of 50 to 64 days, and give birth to a number of relatively undeveloped young. While the otter shrews have just two young per litter, the tailless tenrec can have as many as 32, and females possess up to 29 teats, more than any other mammal. Some tenrec species are social, living in multigenerational family groups with over a dozen individuals.

==Interaction with humans==

In the island nation of Mauritius, and also on the Comoran island of Mayotte, some of the inhabitants eat tenrec meat, although it is difficult to obtain (as it is not sold in shops or markets) and difficult to prepare correctly.

The lesser hedgehog tenrec (&quot;Echinops telfairi&quot;) is one of 16 mammalian species that will have its genome sequenced as part of the Mammalian Genome Project. It is increasingly popular in the pet trade, and in the future may serve as an important model organism in biomedicine, as it is only distantly related to the mice, rats, guinea pigs, and rhesus macaques which comprise the most common research animals.

==Threats==

Of the 31 species assessed, 24 (77%) are categorized by the IUCN Red List as Least Concern, 1 species as Data Deficient, 4 species as Vulnerable, and 2 species as Endangered.

The conservation status of many tenrec species is of concern due to an increase of threats within the last 50 years. The main threats facing tenrecs include habitat loss due to deforestation, fragmentation and degradation, hunting, incidental capture, and climate change. Slash-and-burn agriculture, as well as commercial logging and mining of metals is negatively affecting tenrec species that inhabit forests. Five of the six threatened Tenrec species are dependent on forest habitats.

==Conservation==

As of 2022, conservation of the tenrec population is not being prioritized. Because most tenrecs are dependent on forest habitats, conservation efforts would need to include a focus on reduction in deforestation on Madagascar as well as habitat restoration. Current conservation efforts include that of the Madagascar Ankizy Fund, started by a paleontological team from Stony Brook University to improve access to health care and education facilities for villagers in remote areas of Madagascar. A healthy and educated local human population will, in the long term, benefit the Malagasy fauna, such as tenrecs.

==Species==

The three subfamilies, eight genera, and 31 extant species of tenrecs are

FAMILY TENRECIDAE
* Subfamily Geogalinae
** Genus &quot;Geogale&quot;
*** Large-eared tenrec (&quot;Geogale aurita&quot;)
* Subfamily Oryzorictinae
** Genus &quot;Microgale&quot;
*** Short-tailed shrew tenrec (&quot;Microgale brevicaudata&quot;)
*** Cowan&#x27;s shrew tenrec (&quot;Microgale cowani&quot;)
*** Drouhard&#x27;s shrew tenrec (&quot;Microgale drouhardi&quot;)
*** Dryad shrew tenrec (&quot;Microgale dryas&quot;)
*** Pale shrew tenrec (&quot;Microgale fotsifotsy&quot;)
*** Gracile shrew tenrec (&quot;Microgale gracilis&quot;)
*** Grandidier&#x27;s shrew tenrec &quot;(Microgale grandidieri)&quot;
*** Naked-nosed shrew tenrec (&quot;Microgale gymnorhyncha&quot;)
*** Jenkins&#x27;s shrew tenrec (&quot;Microgale jenkinsae&quot;)
*** Northern shrew tenrec (&quot;Microgale jobihely&quot;)
*** Lesser long-tailed shrew tenrec (&quot;Microgale longicaudata&quot;)
*** &quot;Microgale macpheei&quot; (extinct)
*** Major&#x27;s long-tailed tenrec (&quot;Microgale majori&quot;)
*** Web-footed tenrec (&quot;Microgale mergulus&quot;)
*** Montane shrew tenrec (&quot;Microgale monticola&quot;)
*** Nasolo&#x27;s shrew tenrec (&quot;Microgale nasoloi&quot;)
*** Pygmy shrew tenrec (&quot;Microgale parvula&quot;)
*** Greater long-tailed shrew tenrec (&quot;Microgale principula&quot;)
*** Least shrew tenrec (&quot;Microgale pusilla&quot;)
*** Shrew-toothed shrew tenrec (&quot;Microgale soricoides&quot;)
*** Taiva shrew tenrec (&quot;Microgale taiva&quot;)
*** Thomas&#x27;s shrew tenrec (&quot;Microgale thomasi&quot;)
** Genus &quot;Nesogale&quot;
*** Dobson&#x27;s shrew tenrec (&quot;Nesogale dobsoni&quot;)
*** Talazac&#x27;s shrew tenrec (&quot;Nesogale talazaci&quot;)
** Genus &quot;Oryzorictes&quot;
*** Mole-like rice tenrec (&quot;Oryzorictes hova&quot;)
*** Four-toed rice tenrec (&quot;Oryzorictes tetradactylus&quot;)
* Subfamily Tenrecinae
** Tribe Setiferini
*** Genus &quot;Echinops&quot;
**** Lesser hedgehog tenrec (&quot;Echinops telfairi&quot;)
*** Genus &quot;Setifer&quot;
**** Greater hedgehog tenrec (&quot;Setifer setosus&quot;)
** Tribe Tenrecini
*** Genus &quot;Hemicentetes&quot;
**** Highland streaked tenrec (&quot;Hemicentetes nigriceps&quot;)
**** Lowland streaked tenrec (&quot;Hemicentetes semispinosus&quot;)
*** Genus &quot;Tenrec&quot;
**** Common tenrec (&quot;Tenrec ecaudatus&quot;)

==See also==
* List of mammals of Madagascar

==References==


==External links==

* Bizarre mammals filmed calling using their quills at BBC Online, video with commentary by Sir David Attenborough
* Podcast about hibernation which focusses on tenrecs in the last third.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q23340" start="2" end="8" title="Tenrec" label="tenrec"/>
<link wikidata="Q7377" start="17" end="23" title="mammal" label="mammal"/>
<link wikidata="Q27399" start="60" end="70" title="afrotheria" label="afrotheria"/>
<link wikidata="Q35409" start="72" end="78" title="Family (biology)" label="family"/>
<link wikidata="Q23340" start="79" end="89" title="Tenrec" label="Tenrecidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019" start="111" end="121" title="Madagascar" label="Madagascar"/>
<link wikidata="Q200312" start="204" end="224" title="convergent evolution" label="convergent evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q6120" start="240" end="248" title="hedgehog" label="hedgehog"/>
<link wikidata="Q41631" start="251" end="256" title="shrew" label="shrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q21834" start="259" end="266" title="opossum" label="opossum"/>
<link wikidata="Q26018" start="269" end="272" title="rat" label="rat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2751034" start="279" end="283" title="mouse" label="mice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756633" start="297" end="304" title="Aquatic animal" label="aquatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q767024" start="306" end="314" title="arboreal" label="arboreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3248864" start="316" end="327" title="Terrestrial animal" label="terrestrial"/>
<link wikidata="Q2850019" start="333" end="342" title="fossorial" label="fossorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q717929" start="394" end="417" title="greater hedgehog tenrec" label="greater hedgehog tenrec"/>
<link wikidata="Q285831" start="439" end="471" title="Madagascar dry deciduous forests" label="Madagascar dry deciduous forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q3079260" start="535" end="548" title="Madagascar lowland forests" label="humid forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q787296" start="651" end="658" title="Oceanic dispersal" label="rafting"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="669" end="675" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q33135586" start="725" end="736" title="otter shrew" label="otter shrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="861" end="867" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q7930" start="878" end="886" title="Malagasy language" label="Malagasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q852769" start="927" end="942" title="tailless tenrec" label="tailless tenrec"/>
<link wikidata="Q165100" start="1378" end="1396" title="Mozambique Channel" label="Mozambique Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6120" start="1940" end="1948" title="hedgehog" label="hedgehog"/>
<link wikidata="Q852769" start="2328" end="2343" title="tailless tenrec" label="tailless tenrec"/>
<link wikidata="Q33135586" start="2526" end="2537" title="otter shrew" label="otter shrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q23351" start="2601" end="2612" title="golden mole" label="golden mole"/>
<link wikidata="Q9324400" start="2618" end="2632" title="elephant shrew" label="elephant shrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q713623" start="2710" end="2715" title="clade" label="clade"/>
<link wikidata="Q27399" start="2716" end="2726" title="Afrotheria" label="Afrotheria"/>
<link wikidata="Q6921783" start="2969" end="2979" title="Animal echolocation" label="echolocate"/>
<link wikidata="Q25833" start="2996" end="3012" title="placental mammal" label="placental mammal"/>
<link wikidata="Q158716" start="3019" end="3025" title="rectum" label="rectum"/>
<link wikidata="Q4712977" start="3030" end="3046" title="genitourinary system" label="urogenital tract"/>
<link wikidata="Q19035" start="3086" end="3092" title="cloaca" label="cloaca"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113" start="3134" end="3138" title="bird" label="bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q10811" start="3141" end="3148" title="reptile" label="reptile"/>
<link wikidata="Q10908" start="3155" end="3164" title="amphibian" label="amphibian"/>
<link wikidata="Q190259" start="3183" end="3199" title="body temperature" label="body temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q174471" start="3245" end="3252" title="scrotum" label="scrotum"/>
<link wikidata="Q17145" start="3267" end="3272" title="sperm" label="sperm"/>
<link wikidata="Q164509" start="3343" end="3353" title="omnivore" label="omnivorous"/>
<link wikidata="Q43806" start="3360" end="3372" title="invertebrate" label="invertebrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q30715289" start="3463" end="3474" title="semiaquatic" label="semiaquatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q76267" start="3810" end="3817" title="Miocene" label="Miocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q309179" start="3938" end="3947" title="nocturnal" label="nocturnal"/>
<link wikidata="Q913572" start="4054" end="4062" title="vibrissa" label="whiskers"/>
<link wikidata="Q641973" start="4106" end="4120" title="dentition" label="dental formula"/>
<link wikidata="Q53099" start="4409" end="4414" title="hyrax" label="hyrax"/>
<link wikidata="Q9324400" start="4418" end="4423" title="sengi" label="sengi"/>
<link wikidata="Q23351" start="4430" end="4441" title="golden mole" label="golden mole"/>
<link wikidata="Q46212" start="4463" end="4471" title="aardvark" label="aardvark"/>
<link wikidata="Q28627" start="4545" end="4554" title="gestation" label="gestation"/>
<link wikidata="Q474780" start="4650" end="4661" title="Giant Otter Shrew" label="otter shrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q206718" start="4768" end="4772" title="teat" label="teat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027" start="4962" end="4971" title="Mauritius" label="Mauritius"/>
<link wikidata="Q17063" start="5007" end="5014" title="Mayotte" label="Mayotte"/>
<link wikidata="Q613836" start="5173" end="5195" title="lesser hedgehog tenrec" label="lesser hedgehog tenrec"/>
<link wikidata="Q380546" start="5278" end="5294" title="DNA sequencing" label="genome sequenced"/>
<link wikidata="Q2273828" start="5310" end="5334" title="Mammalian Genome Project" label="Mammalian Genome Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q32059" start="5663" end="5676" title="IUCN Red List" label="IUCN Red List"/>
<link wikidata="Q169940" start="5956" end="5969" title="deforestation" label="deforestation"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="6035" end="6049" title="climate change" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q622543" start="6051" end="6065" title="Slash-and-burn" label="Slash-and-burn"/>
<link wikidata="Q969850" start="6656" end="6678" title="Stony Brook University" label="Stony Brook University"/>
<link wikidata="Q523970" start="7016" end="7026" title="Geogalinae" label="Geogalinae"/>
<link wikidata="Q523970" start="7042" end="7049" title="Geogale" label="Geogale"/>
<link wikidata="Q523970" start="7060" end="7078" title="Large-eared tenrec" label="Large-eared tenrec"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142030" start="7120" end="7133" title="Oryzorictinae" label="Oryzorictinae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773950" start="7149" end="7158" title="Microgale" label="Microgale"/>
<link wikidata="Q783928" start="7169" end="7194" title="Short-tailed shrew tenrec" label="Short-tailed shrew tenrec"/>
<link wikidata="Q2462480" start="7236" end="7261" title="Cowan&amp;#x27;s shrew tenrec" label="Cowan&amp;#x27;s shrew tenrec"/>
<link wikidata="Q2252437" start="7297" end="7325" title="Drouhard&amp;#x27;s shrew tenrec" label="Drouhard&amp;#x27;s shrew tenrec"/>
<link wikidata="Q2463363" start="7364" end="7382" title="Dryad shrew tenrec" label="Dryad shrew tenrec"/>
<link wikidata="Q664522" start="7417" end="7434" title="Pale shrew tenrec" label="Pale shrew tenrec"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094239" start="7474" end="7494" title="Gracile shrew tenrec" label="Gracile shrew tenrec"/>
<link wikidata="Q6839538" start="7532" end="7562" title="Microgale grandidieri" label="Grandidier&amp;#x27;s shrew tenrec"/>
<link wikidata="Q2462440" start="7603" end="7627" title="Naked-nosed shrew tenrec" label="Naked-nosed shrew tenrec"/>
<link wikidata="Q2700154" start="7669" end="7696" title="Jenkins&amp;#x27;s shrew tenrec" label="Jenkins&amp;#x27;s shrew tenrec"/>
<link wikidata="Q1808048" start="7735" end="7756" title="Northern shrew tenrec" label="Northern shrew tenrec"/>
<link wikidata="Q2330745" start="7794" end="7825" title="Lesser long-tailed shrew tenrec" label="Lesser long-tailed shrew tenrec"/>
<link wikidata="Q6839540" start="7873" end="7891" title="Microgale macpheei" label="Microgale macpheei"/>
<link wikidata="Q2217343" start="7912" end="7943" title="Major&amp;#x27;s long-tailed tenrec" label="Major&amp;#x27;s long-tailed tenrec"/>
<link wikidata="Q497943" start="7979" end="7996" title="Web-footed tenrec" label="Web-footed tenrec"/>
<link wikidata="Q2098317" start="8034" end="8054" title="Montane shrew tenrec" label="Montane shrew tenrec"/>
<link wikidata="Q2636652" start="8093" end="8119" title="Nasolo&amp;#x27;s shrew tenrec" label="Nasolo&amp;#x27;s shrew tenrec"/>
<link wikidata="Q2606581" start="8156" end="8174" title="Pygmy shrew tenrec" label="Pygmy shrew tenrec"/>
<link wikidata="Q2110281" start="8211" end="8243" title="Greater long-tailed shrew tenrec" label="Greater long-tailed shrew tenrec"/>
<link wikidata="Q2257154" start="8283" end="8301" title="Least shrew tenrec" label="Least shrew tenrec"/>
<link wikidata="Q2230866" start="8338" end="8364" title="Shrew-toothed shrew tenrec" label="Shrew-toothed shrew tenrec"/>
<link wikidata="Q2721506" start="8404" end="8422" title="Taiva shrew tenrec" label="Taiva shrew tenrec"/>
<link wikidata="Q960598" start="8457" end="8483" title="Thomas&amp;#x27;s shrew tenrec" label="Thomas&amp;#x27;s shrew tenrec"/>
<link wikidata="Q31836539" start="8531" end="8539" title="Nesogale" label="Nesogale"/>
<link wikidata="Q2606216" start="8550" end="8576" title="Dobson&amp;#x27;s shrew tenrec" label="Dobson&amp;#x27;s shrew tenrec"/>
<link wikidata="Q3856978" start="8612" end="8639" title="Talazac&amp;#x27;s shrew tenrec" label="Talazac&amp;#x27;s shrew tenrec"/>
<link wikidata="Q601858" start="8687" end="8698" title="Oryzorictes" label="Oryzorictes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1762812" start="8709" end="8730" title="Mole-like rice tenrec" label="Mole-like rice tenrec"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765480" start="8766" end="8787" title="Four-toed rice tenrec" label="Four-toed rice tenrec"/>
<link wikidata="Q382001" start="8840" end="8850" title="Tenrecinae" label="Tenrecinae"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8860" end="8870" title="Setiferini" label="Setiferini"/>
<link wikidata="Q613836" start="8887" end="8895" title="Echinops (tenrec)" label="Echinops"/>
<link wikidata="Q613836" start="8907" end="8929" title="Lesser hedgehog tenrec" label="Lesser hedgehog tenrec"/>
<link wikidata="Q717929" start="8978" end="8985" title="Setifer" label="Setifer"/>
<link wikidata="Q717929" start="8997" end="9020" title="Greater hedgehog tenrec" label="Greater hedgehog tenrec"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9060" end="9069" title="Tenrecini" label="Tenrecini"/>
<link wikidata="Q794713" start="9086" end="9098" title="Hemicentetes" label="Hemicentetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1762455" start="9110" end="9134" title="Highland streaked tenrec" label="Highland streaked tenrec"/>
<link wikidata="Q265167" start="9177" end="9200" title="Lowland streaked tenrec" label="Lowland streaked tenrec"/>
<link wikidata="Q852769" start="9257" end="9263" title="Tenrec (genus)" label="Tenrec"/>
<link wikidata="Q852769" start="9275" end="9288" title="Common tenrec" label="Common tenrec"/>
<link wikidata="Q1924098" start="9336" end="9365" title="List of mammals of Madagascar" label="List of mammals of Madagascar"/>
<link wikidata="Q183337" start="9500" end="9518" title="David Attenborough" label="David Attenborough"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="312935" wikidata="Q11773214" url="?curid=312935" title="Herbert Hart">
<text>Herbert Hart may refer to:

* H. L. A. Hart (1907–1992), British legal philosopher
* Herbert Hart (cricketer) (1859–1895), English cricketer
* Herbert Hart (general) (1882–1968), New Zealand Military Forces officer
* Herbert L. Hart (1897–1988), American college football player and coach</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q374834" start="30" end="43" title="H. L. A. Hart" label="H. L. A. Hart"/>
<link wikidata="Q5734370" start="85" end="109" title="Herbert Hart (cricketer)" label="Herbert Hart (cricketer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q12790910" start="143" end="165" title="Herbert Hart (general)" label="Herbert Hart (general)"/>
<link wikidata="Q55613657" start="217" end="232" title="Herbert L. Hart" label="Herbert L. Hart"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="312937" wikidata="Q139958" url="?curid=312937" title="Fusarium oxysporum">
<text>Fusarium oxysporum (Schlecht as emended by Snyder and Hansen), an ascomycete fungus, comprises all the species, varieties and forms recognized by Wollenweber and Reinking within an infrageneric grouping called section Elegans. It is part of the family Nectriaceae.

Although their predominant role in native soils may be as harmless or even beneficial plant endophytes or soil saprophytes, many strains within the &quot;F. oxysporum&quot; complex are soil borne pathogens of plants, especially in agricultural settings.

==Taxonomy==
While the species, as defined by Snyder and Hansen, has been widely accepted for more than 50 years, more recent work indicates this taxon is actually a genetically heterogeneous polytypic morphospecies, whose strains represent some of the most abundant and widespread microbes of the global soil microflora.

==Genome==
The &quot;&quot; family of transposable elements was first discovered by Daboussi &quot;et al.&quot;, 1992 in several &quot;formae speciales&quot; and Davière &quot;et al.&quot;, 2001 and Langin &quot;et al.&quot;, 2003 have since found them in most strains at copy numbers as high as 100.

==Habitat==
These diverse and adaptable fungi have been found in soils ranging from the Sonoran Desert, to tropical and temperate forest, grasslands and soils of the tundra. &quot;F. oxysporum&quot; strains are ubiquitous soil inhabitants that have the ability to exist as saprophytes, and degrade lignin and complex carbohydrates associated with soil debris. They are pervasive plant endophytes that can colonize plant roots and may even protect plants or form the basis of disease suppression.

Because the hosts of a given &quot;forma specialis&quot; usually are closely related, many have assumed that members of a &quot;forma specialis&quot; are also closely related and descended from a common ancestor. However, results from research conducted on &quot;Fusarium oxysporum&quot; f. sp. &quot;cubense&quot; forced scientists to question these assumptions. Researchers used anonymous, single-copy restriction fragment length polymorphsims (RFLPs) to identify 10 clonal lineages from a collection of &quot;F. oxysporum&quot; f.sp. &quot;cubense&quot; from across the world. These results showed that pathogens of banana causing Panama disease could be as closely related to other host&#x27;s pathogens, such as melon or tomato, as they are to each other. Exceptional amounts of genetic diversity within &quot;F. oxysporum&quot; f.sp. &quot;cubense&quot; were deduced from the high level of chromosomal polymorphisms found among strains, random amplified polymorphic DNA fingerprints and from the number and geographic distribution of vegetative compatibility groups.

==Pathogen==
Presented with the wide-ranging occurrence of &quot;F. oxysporum&quot; strains that are nonpathogenic, it is reasonable to conclude that certain pathogenic forms were descended from originally nonpathogenic ancestors. Given the association of these fungi with plant roots, a form that is able to grow beyond the cortex and into the xylem could exploit this ability and hopefully gain an advantage over fungi that are restricted to the cortex.

The progression of a fungus into vascular tissue may elicit an immediate host response, successfully restricting the invader; or an otherwise ineffective or delayed response, reducing the vital water-conducting capacity and induce wilting. On the other hand, the plant might be able to tolerate limited growth of the fungus within xylem vessels, preceded by an endophytic association. In this case, any further changes in the host or parasite could disturb the relationship, in a way that fungal activities or a host response would result in the generation of disease symptoms.

Pathogenic strains of &quot;F. oxysporum&quot; have been studied for more than 100 years. The host range of these fungi is broad and includes animals, ranging from arthropods to humans, as well as plants, including a range of both gymnosperms and angiosperms. While collectively, plant pathogenic &quot;F. oxysporum&quot; strains have a broad host range, individual isolates usually cause disease only in a narrow range of plant species. This observation has led to the idea of &quot;special form&quot; or &quot;forma specialis&quot; in &quot;F. oxysporum&quot;. &quot;Formae speciales&quot; have been defined as &quot;…an informal rank in Classification… used for parasitic fungi characterized from a physiological standpoint (e.g. by the ability to cause disease in particular hosts) but scarcely or not at all from a morphological standpoint.&quot; Exhaustive host range studies have been conducted for relatively few &quot;formae speciales&quot; of &quot;F. oxysporum&quot;. For more information on &quot;Fusarium oxysporum&quot; as a plant pathogen, see Fusarium wilt and Koa wilt.

Different strains of &quot;F. oxysporum&quot; have been used for the purpose of producing nanomaterials (especially Silver nanoparticles).

==&quot;Agent Green&quot; in Colombia==

In 2000, the government of Colombia proposed dispersing strains of &quot;Crivellia&quot; and &quot;Fusarium oxysporum&quot;, also known as Agent Green, as a biological weapon to forcibly eradicate coca and other illegal crops. The weaponized strains were developed by the US government, who originally conditioned their approval of Plan Colombia on the use of this weapon, but ultimately withdrew the condition. In February 2001, the EU Parliament issued a declaration specifically against the use of these biological agents in warfare.

==Gold interactions==
The fungus has the ability to dissolve gold, then precipitate it onto its surface, encrusting itself with gold. This phenomenon was first observed in Boddington, West Australia. As a result of this discovery, &quot;F. oxysporum&quot; is currently being evaluated as a possible way to help detect hidden underground gold reserves. It also is used to manufacture gold nanoparticles.

==&quot;Formae speciales&quot;==

* &quot;Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. albedinis&quot;
* &quot;Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. asparagi&quot;
* &quot;Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. batatas&quot;
* &quot;Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. betae&quot;
* &quot;Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. cattleyae&quot;
* &quot;Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. cannabis&quot;
* &quot;Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. cepae&quot;
* &quot;Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. ciceris&quot;
* &quot;Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. citri&quot;
* &quot;Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. coffea&quot;
* &quot;Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. cubense&quot;
* &quot;Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. cyclaminis&quot;
* &quot;Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. herbemontis&quot;
* &quot;Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. dianthi&quot;
* &quot;Fusarium oxysporum f. sp. fragariae&quot;
* &quot;Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. gladioli&quot;
* &quot;Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. koae&quot;
* &quot;Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. lactucae&quot;
* &quot;Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. lentis&quot;
* &quot;Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. lilli&quot;
* &quot;Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. lini&quot;
* &quot;Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. lycopersici&quot;
* &quot;Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. medicaginis&quot;
* &quot;Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. melonis&quot;
* &quot;Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. momordicae&quot;
* &quot;Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. nicotianae&quot;
* &quot;Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. niveum&quot;
* &quot;Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. palmarum&quot;
* &quot;Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. passiflorae&quot;
* &quot;Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. perniciosum&quot;
* &quot;Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. phaseoli&quot;
* &quot;Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. pisi&quot;
* &quot;Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. radicis-lycopersici&quot;
* &quot;Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. ricini&quot;
* &quot;Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. strigae&quot;
* &quot;Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. tuberosi&quot;
* &quot;Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. tulipae&quot;
* &quot;Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. vasinfectum&quot;
== See also ==

* Mycoherbicide

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q174726" start="66" end="76" title="ascomycete" label="ascomycete"/>
<link wikidata="Q2119178" start="252" end="263" title="Nectriaceae" label="Nectriaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q260335" start="358" end="367" title="endophyte" label="endophyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q23001591" start="377" end="388" title="Saprotroph" label="saprophytes"/>
<link wikidata="Q105721151" start="451" end="481" title="Soil borne pathogen" label="soil borne pathogens of plants"/>
<link wikidata="Q16521" start="667" end="672" title="taxon" label="taxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q121438" start="882" end="902" title="transposable element" label="transposable element"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501491" start="1116" end="1128" title="copy number variation" label="copy numbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q189429" start="1234" end="1248" title="Sonoran Desert" label="Sonoran Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q3079197" start="1266" end="1282" title="temperate forest" label="temperate forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q23001591" start="1419" end="1430" title="Saprotroph" label="saprophytes"/>
<link wikidata="Q184817" start="1444" end="1450" title="lignin" label="lignin"/>
<link wikidata="Q260335" start="1531" end="1540" title="endophyte" label="endophyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q3825509" start="1678" end="1693" title="forma specialis" label="forma specialis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5509901" start="1900" end="1957" title="Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. cubense" label="&amp;quot;Fusarium oxysporum&amp;quot; f. sp. &amp;quot;cubense&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q857299" start="2047" end="2088" title="Restriction fragment length polymorphism" label="restriction fragment length polymorphsims"/>
<link wikidata="Q5509901" start="2149" end="2199" title="Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. cubense" label="&amp;quot;F. oxysporum&amp;quot; f.sp. &amp;quot;cubense&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q503" start="2262" end="2268" title="banana" label="banana"/>
<link wikidata="Q3240031" start="2277" end="2291" title="Panama disease" label="Panama disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q170065" start="3753" end="3763" title="Pathogenic" label="Pathogenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q221673" start="3847" end="3857" title="host range" label="host range"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360" start="3917" end="3926" title="arthropod" label="arthropod"/>
<link wikidata="Q133712" start="3984" end="3994" title="gymnosperm" label="gymnosperm"/>
<link wikidata="Q25314" start="4000" end="4010" title="angiosperm" label="angiosperm"/>
<link wikidata="Q3825509" start="4265" end="4280" title="forma specialis" label="forma specialis"/>
<link wikidata="Q183252" start="4573" end="4586" title="morphology (biology)" label="morphological"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475267" start="4812" end="4825" title="Fusarium wilt" label="Fusarium wilt"/>
<link wikidata="Q20720275" start="4830" end="4838" title="Koa wilt" label="Koa wilt"/>
<link wikidata="Q905762" start="4957" end="4977" title="Silver nanoparticles" label="Silver nanoparticles"/>
<link wikidata="Q739" start="5049" end="5057" title="Colombia" label="Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q107480082" start="5095" end="5104" title="Crivellia" label="Crivellia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2742406" start="5179" end="5196" title="biological weapon" label="biological weapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1702988" start="5354" end="5367" title="Plan Colombia" label="Plan Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q897" start="5621" end="5625" title="gold" label="gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q20399842" start="6006" end="6040" title="Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. albedinis" label="Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. albedinis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5509892" start="6055" end="6088" title="Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. asparagi" label="Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. asparagi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5509893" start="6103" end="6135" title="Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. batatas" label="Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. batatas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5509894" start="6150" end="6180" title="Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. betae" label="Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. betae"/>
<link wikidata="Q5509898" start="6195" end="6229" title="Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. cattleyae" label="Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. cattleyae"/>
<link wikidata="Q5509895" start="6244" end="6277" title="Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. cannabis" label="Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. cannabis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6292" end="6322" title="Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. cepae" label="Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. cepae"/>
<link wikidata="Q5509899" start="6337" end="6369" title="Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. ciceris" label="Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. ciceris"/>
<link wikidata="Q5509896" start="6384" end="6414" title="Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. citri" label="Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. citri"/>
<link wikidata="Q5509900" start="6429" end="6460" title="Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. coffea" label="Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. coffea"/>
<link wikidata="Q5509901" start="6475" end="6507" title="Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. cubense" label="Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. cubense"/>
<link wikidata="Q5509902" start="6522" end="6557" title="Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. cyclaminis" label="Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. cyclaminis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6572" end="6608" title="Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. herbemontis" label="Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. herbemontis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5509903" start="6623" end="6655" title="Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. dianthi" label="Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. dianthi"/>
<link wikidata="Q65090775" start="6670" end="6705" title="Fusarium oxysporum f. sp. fragariae" label="Fusarium oxysporum f. sp. fragariae"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6720" end="6753" title="Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. gladioli" label="Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. gladioli"/>
<link wikidata="Q20720275" start="6768" end="6797" title="Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. koae" label="Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. koae"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6812" end="6845" title="Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. lactucae" label="Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. lactucae"/>
<link wikidata="Q5509904" start="6860" end="6891" title="Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. lentis" label="Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. lentis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6906" end="6936" title="Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. lilli" label="Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. lilli"/>
<link wikidata="Q5509905" start="6951" end="6980" title="Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. lini" label="Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. lini"/>
<link wikidata="Q5509906" start="6995" end="7031" title="Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. lycopersici" label="Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. lycopersici"/>
<link wikidata="Q5509907" start="7046" end="7082" title="Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. medicaginis" label="Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. medicaginis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7097" end="7129" title="Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. melonis" label="Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. melonis"/>
<link wikidata="Q30673598" start="7144" end="7179" title="Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. momordicae" label="Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. momordicae"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7194" end="7229" title="Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. nicotianae" label="Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. nicotianae"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7244" end="7275" title="Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. niveum" label="Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. niveum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7290" end="7323" title="Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. palmarum" label="Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. palmarum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7338" end="7374" title="Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. passiflorae" label="Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. passiflorae"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7389" end="7425" title="Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. perniciosum" label="Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. perniciosum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7440" end="7473" title="Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. phaseoli" label="Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. phaseoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q5509908" start="7488" end="7517" title="Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. pisi" label="Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. pisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5509909" start="7532" end="7576" title="Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. radicis-lycopersici" label="Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. radicis-lycopersici"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7591" end="7622" title="Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. ricini" label="Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. ricini"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7637" end="7669" title="Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. strigae" label="Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. strigae"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7684" end="7717" title="Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. tuberosi" label="Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. tuberosi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7732" end="7764" title="Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. tulipae" label="Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. tulipae"/>
<link wikidata="Q5509913" start="7779" end="7815" title="Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. vasinfectum" label="Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. vasinfectum"/>
<link wikidata="Q6947133" start="7840" end="7853" title="Mycoherbicide" label="Mycoherbicide"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="312940" wikidata="Q101680" url="?curid=312940" title="Pinaceae">
<text>The Pinaceae (), or pine family, are conifer trees or shrubs, including many of the well-known conifers of commercial importance such as cedars, firs, hemlocks, piñons, 
larches, pines and spruces. The family is included in the order Pinales, formerly known as Coniferales. Pinaceae have distinctive cones with woody scales bearing typically two ovules, and are supported as monophyletic by both morphological trait and genetic analysis. They are the largest extant conifer family in species diversity, with between 220 and 250 species (depending on taxonomic opinion) in 11 genera, and the second-largest (after Cupressaceae) in geographical range, found in most of the Northern Hemisphere, with the majority of the species in temperate climates, but ranging from subarctic to tropical. The family often forms the dominant component of boreal, coastal, and montane forests. One species, &quot;Pinus merkusii&quot;, grows just south of the equator in Southeast Asia. Major centres of diversity are found in the mountains of southwest China, Mexico, central Japan, and California.

==Description==
Members of the family Pinaceae are trees (rarely shrubs) growing from tall, mostly evergreen (except the deciduous &quot;Larix&quot; and &quot;Pseudolarix&quot;), resinous, monoecious, with subopposite or whorled branches, and spirally arranged, linear (needle-like) leaves. The embryos of Pinaceae have three to 24 cotyledons.

The female cones are large and usually woody, long, with numerous spirally arranged scales, and two winged seeds on each scale. The male cones are small, long, and fall soon after pollination; pollen dispersal is by wind. Seed dispersal is mostly by wind, but some species have large seeds with reduced wings, and are dispersed by birds. Analysis of Pinaceae cones reveals how selective pressure has shaped the evolution of variable cone size and function throughout the family. Variation in cone size in the family has likely resulted from the variation of seed dispersal mechanisms available in their environments over time. All Pinaceae with seeds weighing less than 90 milligrams are seemingly adapted for wind dispersal. Pines having seeds larger than 100 mg are more likely to have benefited from adaptations that promote animal dispersal, particularly by birds. Pinaceae that persist in areas where tree squirrels are abundant do not seem to have evolved adaptations for bird dispersal.

Boreal conifers have many adaptions for winter. The narrow conical shape of northern conifers, and their downward-drooping limbs help them shed snow, and many of them seasonally alter their biochemistry to make them more resistant to freezing, called &quot;hardening&quot;.

==Classification==

Classification of the subfamilies and genera of Pinaceae has been subject to debate in the past. Pinaceae ecology, morphology, and history have all been used as the basis for methods of analyses of the family. An 1891 publication divided the family into two subfamilies, using the number and position of resin canals in the primary vascular region of the young taproot as the primary consideration. In a 1910 publication, the family was divided into two tribes based on the occurrence and type of long–short shoot dimorphism.

A more recent classification divided the subfamilies and genera based on the consideration of features of ovulate cone anatomy among extant and fossil members of the family. Below is an example of how the morphology has been used to classify Pinaceae. 
The 11 genera are grouped into four subfamilies, based on the microscopical anatomy and the morphology of the cones, pollen, wood, seeds, and leaves:

* Subfamily Pinoideae (&quot;Pinus&quot;): cones are biennial, rarely triennial, with each year&#x27;s scale-growth distinct, forming an umbo on each scale, the cone scale base is broad, concealing the seeds fully from abaxial (below the phloem vessels) view, the seed is without resin vesicles, the seed wing holds the seed in a pair of claws, leaves have primary stomatal bands adaxial (above the xylem) or equally on both surfaces.
* Subfamily Piceoideae (&quot;Picea&quot;): cones are annual, without a distinct umbo, the cone scale base is broad, concealing the seeds fully from abaxial view, seed is without resin vesicles, blackish, the seed wing holds the seed loosely in a cup, leaves have primary stomatal bands adaxial (above the xylem) or equally on both surfaces.
* Subfamily Laricoideae (&quot;Larix&quot;, &quot;Pseudotsuga&quot;, and &quot;Cathaya&quot;): cones are annual, without a distinct umbo, the cone scale base is broad, concealing the seeds fully from abaxial view, the seed is without resin vesicles, whitish, the seed wing holds the seed tightly in a cup, leaves have primary stomatal bands abaxial only.
* Subfamily Abietoideae (&quot;Abies&quot;, &quot;Cedrus&quot;, &quot;Pseudolarix&quot;, &quot;Keteleeria&quot;, &quot;Nothotsuga&quot;, and &quot;Tsuga&quot;): cones are annual, without a distinct umbo, the cone scale base is narrow, with the seeds partly visible in abaxial view, the seed has resin vesicles, the seed wing holds the seed tightly in a cup, leaves have primary stomatal bands abaxial only.

=== Phylogeny ===
A revised 2018 phylogeny places &quot;Cathaya&quot; as sister to the pines rather than in the Laricoidae subfamily with &quot;Larix&quot; and &quot;Pseudotsuga&quot;.

Multiple molecular studies indicate that in contrast to previous classifications placing it outside the conifers, Gnetophyta may in fact be the sister group to the Pinaceae, with both lineages having diverged during the early-mid Carboniferous. This is known as the &quot;gnepine&quot; hypothesis.

=== Evolutionary history ===
Pinaceae is estimated to have diverged from other conifer groups during the late Carboniferous ~313 million years ago. Various possible stem-group relatives have been reported from as early as the Late Permian (Lopingian) The extinct conifer cone genus &quot;Schizolepidopsis&quot; likely represent stem-group members of the Pinaceae, the first good records of which are in the Middle-Late Triassic, with abundant records during the Jurassic across Eurasia. The oldest crown group (descendant of the last common ancestor of all living species) member of Pinaceae is the cone &quot;Eathiestrobus&quot;, known from the Upper Jurassic (lower Kimmeridgian, 157.3-154.7 million years ago) of Scotland, which likely belongs to the pinoid grouping of the family. Pinaceae rapidly radiated during the Early Cretaceous. Members of the modern genera &quot;Pinus&quot; (pines), &quot;Picea&quot; (spruce) and &quot;Cedrus&quot; (cedar) first appear during the Early Cretaceous. The extinct Cretaceous genera &quot;Pseudoaraucaria&quot; and &quot;Obirastrobus&quot; appear to be members of Abietoideae, while &quot;Pityostrobus&quot; appears to be non-monophyletic, containing many disparately related members of Pinaceae. While Pinaceae, and indeed all of its subfamilies, substantially predate the break up of the super-continent Pangea, its distribution was limited to northern Laurasia. During the Cenozoic, Pinaceae had higher rates of species turnover than Southern Hemisphere conifers, thought to be driven by range shifts in response to glacial cycles.

== Defense mechanisms ==
External stresses on plants have the ability to change the structure and composition of forest ecosystems. Common external stress that &quot;Pinaceae&quot; experience are herbivore and pathogen attack which often leads to tree death. In order to combat these stresses, trees need to adapt or evolve defenses against these stresses. &quot;Pinaceae&quot; have evolved myriad mechanical and chemical defenses, or a combination of the two, in order to protect themselves against antagonists. &quot;Pinaceae&quot; have the ability to up-regulate a combination of constitutive mechanical and chemical strategies to further their defenses.

&quot;Pinaceae&quot; defenses are prevalent in the bark of the trees. This part of the tree contributes a complex defensive boundary against external antagonists. Constitutive and induced defenses are both found in the bark.

=== Constitutive defenses ===
Constitutive defenses are typically the first line of defenses used against antagonists and can include sclerified cells, lignified periderm cells, and secondary compounds such as phenolics and resins. Constitutive defenses are always expressed and offer immediate protection from invaders but could also be defeated by antagonists that have evolved adaptations to these defense mechanisms. One of the common secondary compounds used by &quot;Pinaceae&quot; are phenolics or polyphenols. These secondary compounds are preserved in vacuoles of polyphenolic parenchyma cells (PP) in the secondary phloem.

=== Induced defenses ===
Induced defense responses need to be activated by certain cues, such as herbivore damage or other biotic signals.

A common induced defense mechanism used by &quot;Pinaceae&quot; is resins. Resins are also one of the primary defenses used against attack. Resins are short term defenses that are composed of a complex combination of volatile mono- (C10) and sesquiterpenes (C15) and nonvolatile diterpene resin acids (C20). They are produced and stored in specialized secretory areas known as resin ducts, resin blisters, or resin cavities. Resins have the ability to wash away, trap, fend off antagonists, and are also involved in wound sealing. They are an effective defense mechanism because they have toxic and inhibitory effects on invaders, such as insects or pathogens. Resins could have developed as an evolutionary defense against bark beetle attacks. One well researched resin present in &quot;Pinaceae&quot; is oleoresin. Oleoresin had been found to be a valuable part of the conifer defense mechanism against biotic attacks. They are found in secretory tissues in tree stems, roots, and leaves. Oleoresin is also needed in order to classify conifers.

=== Active research: methyl jasmonate ===
The topic of defense mechanisms within family &quot;Pinaceae&quot; is a very active area of study with numerous studies being conducted. Many of these studies use methyl jasmonate (MJ) as an antagonist. Methyl jasmonate is known to be able to induce defense responses in the stems of multiple &quot;Pinaceae&quot; species. It has been found that MJ stimulated the activation of PP cells and formation of xylem traumatic resin ducts (TD). These are structures that are involved in the release of phenolics and resins, both forms of defense mechanism.

== References ==
==External links==

* Arboretum de Villardebelle French Arboretum of conifers around the world 
* Gymnosperm Database – Pinaceae
* Pinaceae on the web page of the Tree-of-Life project
* 40 Pine Trees From Around the World by The Spruce
* , covers Californian species and much of western North America
* Pinaceae in Flora of North America
* Pinus in USDA Plants Database</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q101680" start="4" end="12" title="Pinaceae" label="Pinaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q101680" start="20" end="31" title="Pinaceae" label="pine family"/>
<link wikidata="Q132825" start="37" end="44" title="conifer" label="conifer"/>
<link wikidata="Q128550" start="137" end="143" title="Cedrus" label="cedars"/>
<link wikidata="Q25350" start="145" end="148" title="fir" label="fir"/>
<link wikidata="Q739430" start="151" end="159" title="Tsuga" label="hemlocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476258" start="161" end="167" title="Pinyon_pine" label="piñons"/>
<link wikidata="Q25618" start="170" end="175" title="larch" label="larch"/>
<link wikidata="Q12024" start="179" end="183" title="pine" label="pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q26782" start="189" end="195" title="spruce" label="spruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000370" start="234" end="241" title="Pinales" label="Pinales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000370" start="261" end="272" title="Coniferales" label="Coniferales"/>
<link wikidata="Q380138" start="346" end="352" title="Ovule" label="ovules"/>
<link wikidata="Q210958" start="375" end="387" title="monophyletic" label="monophyletic"/>
<link wikidata="Q183252" start="396" end="409" title="Morphology (biology)" label="morphological"/>
<link wikidata="Q8269924" start="550" end="559" title="Taxonomy (biology)" label="taxonomic"/>
<link wikidata="Q146037" start="613" end="625" title="Cupressaceae" label="Cupressaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q39061" start="671" end="690" title="Northern Hemisphere" label="Northern Hemisphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q69564" start="837" end="843" title="Boreal forest" label="boreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141462" start="858" end="872" title="montane forest" label="montane forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q209326" start="894" end="908" title="Pinus merkusii" label="Pinus merkusii"/>
<link wikidata="Q23538" start="940" end="947" title="equator" label="equator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502751" start="973" end="993" title="centre of diversity" label="centres of diversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190484" start="1024" end="1039" title="southwest China" label="southwest China"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="1068" end="1078" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q10884" start="1132" end="1136" title="tree" label="tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q42295" start="1146" end="1151" title="shrub" label="shrub"/>
<link wikidata="Q190489" start="1180" end="1189" title="evergreen" label="evergreen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131316" start="1202" end="1211" title="deciduous" label="deciduous"/>
<link wikidata="Q25618" start="1218" end="1223" title="Larix" label="Larix"/>
<link wikidata="Q2664288" start="1240" end="1251" title="Pseudolarix" label="Pseudolarix"/>
<link wikidata="Q145205" start="1260" end="1265" title="resin" label="resin"/>
<link wikidata="Q66368485" start="1270" end="1280" title="monoecious" label="monoecious"/>
<link wikidata="Q193026" start="1413" end="1422" title="cotyledon" label="cotyledon"/>
<link wikidata="Q22710" start="1437" end="1442" title="conifer cone" label="cones"/>
<link wikidata="Q40763" start="1533" end="1537" title="seed" label="seed"/>
<link wikidata="Q858243" start="2332" end="2345" title="tree squirrel" label="tree squirrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q12024" start="3659" end="3668" title="Pinoideae" label="Pinoideae"/>
<link wikidata="Q12024" start="3676" end="3681" title="Pinus" label="Pinus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3866" end="3873" title="abaxial" label="abaxial"/>
<link wikidata="Q185138" start="3885" end="3891" title="phloem" label="phloem"/>
<link wikidata="Q26782" start="4094" end="4104" title="Piceoideae" label="Piceoideae"/>
<link wikidata="Q26782" start="4112" end="4117" title="Picea" label="Picea"/>
<link wikidata="Q11784565" start="4436" end="4447" title="Laricoideae" label="Laricoideae"/>
<link wikidata="Q25618" start="4455" end="4460" title="Larix" label="Larix"/>
<link wikidata="Q158771" start="4474" end="4485" title="Pseudotsuga" label="Pseudotsuga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543178" start="4503" end="4510" title="Cathaya" label="Cathaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q2821616" start="4791" end="4802" title="Abietoideae" label="Abietoideae"/>
<link wikidata="Q25350" start="4810" end="4815" title="Abies" label="Abies"/>
<link wikidata="Q128550" start="4829" end="4835" title="Cedrus" label="Cedrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2664288" start="4849" end="4860" title="Pseudolarix" label="Pseudolarix"/>
<link wikidata="Q132109" start="4874" end="4884" title="Keteleeria" label="Keteleeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q63255706" start="4898" end="4908" title="Nothotsuga" label="Nothotsuga"/>
<link wikidata="Q739430" start="4926" end="4931" title="Tsuga" label="Tsuga"/>
<link wikidata="Q309147" start="5487" end="5497" title="Gnetophyta" label="Gnetophyta"/>
<link wikidata="Q133738" start="5603" end="5616" title="Carboniferous" label="Carboniferous"/>
<link wikidata="Q133738" start="5782" end="5795" title="Carboniferous" label="Carboniferous"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462809" start="5837" end="5847" title="stem-group" label="stem-group"/>
<link wikidata="Q76402" start="5903" end="5910" title="Permian" label="Permian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077390" start="5912" end="5921" title="Lopingian" label="Lopingian"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5960" end="5976" title="Schizolepidopsis" label="Schizolepidopsis"/>
<link wikidata="Q47158" start="6091" end="6099" title="Triassic" label="Triassic"/>
<link wikidata="Q45805" start="6134" end="6142" title="Jurassic" label="Jurassic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462809" start="6170" end="6181" title="crown group" label="crown group"/>
<link wikidata="Q105081991" start="6282" end="6295" title="Eathiestrobus" label="Eathiestrobus"/>
<link wikidata="Q733565" start="6340" end="6352" title="Kimmeridgian" label="Kimmeridgian"/>
<link wikidata="Q752187" start="6494" end="6510" title="Early Cretaceous" label="Early Cretaceous"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6704" end="6719" title="Pseudoaraucaria" label="Pseudoaraucaria"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6736" end="6748" title="Obirastrobus" label="Obirastrobus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6804" end="6816" title="Pityostrobus" label="Pityostrobus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4398" start="7021" end="7027" title="Pangaea" label="Pangea"/>
<link wikidata="Q132033" start="7070" end="7078" title="Laurasia" label="Laurasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2249329" start="7364" end="7381" title="Forest ecology" label="forest ecosystems"/>
<link wikidata="Q59099" start="7447" end="7456" title="herbivore" label="herbivore"/>
<link wikidata="Q170065" start="7461" end="7469" title="pathogen" label="pathogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5090452" start="7862" end="7881" title="Chemical defense" label="chemical strategies"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8073" end="8085" title="Constitutive defense" label="Constitutive"/>
<link wikidata="Q17101587" start="8090" end="8106" title="Inducible plant defenses against herbivory" label="induced defenses"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8166" end="8186" title="Constitutive defense" label="Constitutive defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q407142" start="8346" end="8355" title="Phenols" label="phenolics"/>
<link wikidata="Q127702" start="8697" end="8704" title="vacuole" label="vacuole"/>
<link wikidata="Q270524" start="8722" end="8738" title="Parenchyma" label="parenchyma cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q185138" start="8751" end="8767" title="Phloem" label="secondary phloem"/>
<link wikidata="Q17101587" start="8795" end="8810" title="Inducible plant defenses against herbivory" label="Induced defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q32528" start="9136" end="9140" title="Monoterpene" label="mono"/>
<link wikidata="Q80218" start="9152" end="9165" title="sesquiterpene" label="sesquiterpene"/>
<link wikidata="Q59447" start="9189" end="9198" title="diterpene" label="diterpene"/>
<link wikidata="Q720458" start="9634" end="9645" title="bark beetle" label="bark beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2019407" start="9716" end="9725" title="oleoresin" label="oleoresin"/>
<link wikidata="Q132825" start="9781" end="9788" title="Pinophyta" label="conifer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3500367" start="9815" end="9829" title="Biotic stress" label="biotic attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q123524278" start="9849" end="9866" title="Plant secretory tissue" label="secretory tissues"/>
<link wikidata="Q26840883" start="10163" end="10179" title="methyl jasmonate" label="methyl jasmonate"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="312943" wikidata="Q961734" url="?curid=312943" title="Blacklight">
<text>A blacklight, also called a UV-A light, Wood&#x27;s lamp, or ultraviolet light, is a lamp that emits long-wave (UV-A) ultraviolet light and very little visible light. One type of lamp has a violet filter material, either on the bulb or in a separate glass filter in the lamp housing, which blocks most visible light and allows through UV, so the lamp has a dim violet glow when operating. Blacklight lamps which have this filter have a lighting industry designation that includes the letters &quot;BLB&quot;. This stands for &quot;blacklight blue&quot;. A second type of lamp produces ultraviolet but does not have the filter material, so it produces more visible light and has a blue color when operating. These tubes are made for use in &quot;bug zapper&quot; insect traps, and are identified by the industry designation &quot;BL&quot;. This stands for &quot;blacklight&quot;.

Blacklight sources may be specially designed fluorescent lamps, mercury-vapor lamps, light-emitting diodes (LEDs), lasers, or incandescent lamps. In medicine, forensics, and some other scientific fields, such a light source is referred to as a Wood&#x27;s lamp, named after Robert Williams Wood, who invented the original Wood&#x27;s glass UV filters.

Although many other types of lamp emit ultraviolet light with visible light, blacklights are essential when UV-A light without visible light is needed, particularly in observing fluorescence, the colored glow that many substances emit when exposed to UV. They are employed for decorative and artistic lighting effects, diagnostic and therapeutic uses in medicine, the detection of substances tagged with fluorescent dyes, rock-hunting, scorpion-hunting, the detection of counterfeit money, the curing of plastic resins, attracting insects and the detection of refrigerant leaks affecting refrigerators and air conditioning systems. Strong sources of long-wave ultraviolet light are used in tanning beds.

== Medical hazard ==
UV-A presents a potential hazard when eyes and skin are exposed, especially to high power sources. According to the World Health Organization, UV-A is responsible for the initial tanning of skin and it contributes to skin ageing and wrinkling. UV-A may also contribute to the progression of skin cancers. Additionally, UV-A can have negative effects on eyes in both the short-term and long-term.

==Types==
===Fluorescent===

Fluorescent blacklight tubes are typically made in the same fashion as normal fluorescent tubes except that a phosphor that emits UVA light instead of visible white light is used on the inside of the tube. The type most commonly used for blacklights, designated blacklight blue or &quot;BLB&quot; by the industry, has a dark blue filter coating on the tube, which filters out most visible light, so that fluorescence effects can be observed. These tubes have a dim violet glow when operating. They should not be confused with &quot;blacklight&quot; or &quot;BL&quot; tubes, which have no filter coating, and have a brighter blue color. These are made for use in &quot;bug zapper&quot; insect traps where the emission of visible light does not interfere with the performance of the product. The phosphor typically used for a near 368 to 371 nanometer emission peak is either europium-doped strontium fluoride (:) or europium-doped strontium borate (:) while the phosphor used to produce a peak around 350 to 353 nanometres is lead-doped barium silicate (:). &quot;Blacklight blue&quot; lamps peak at 365 nm.
Manufacturers use different numbering systems for blacklight tubes. Philips&#x27; is becoming outdated (as of 2010), while the (German) Osram system is becoming dominant outside North America. The following table lists the tubes generating blue, UVA and UVB, in order of decreasing wavelength of the most intense peak. Approximate phosphor compositions, major manufacturer&#x27;s type numbers and some uses are given as an overview of the types available. &quot;Peak&quot; position is approximated to the nearest 10 nm. &quot;Width&quot; is the measure between points on the shoulders of the peak that represent 50% intensity.

====Bug zappers====

Another class of UV fluorescent bulb is designed for use in bug zappers. Insects are attracted to the UV light, which they are able to see, and are then electrocuted by the device. These bulbs use the same UV-A emitting phosphor blend as the filtered blacklight, but since they do not need to suppress visible light output, they do not use a purple filter material in the bulb. Plain glass blocks out less of the visible mercury emission spectrum, making them appear light blue-violet to the naked eye. These lamps are referred to by the designation &quot;blacklight&quot; or &quot;BL&quot; in some North American lighting catalogs. These types are not suitable for applications which require the low visible light output of &quot;BLB&quot; tubes lamps.

===Incandescent===
A blacklight may also be formed by simply using a UV filter coating such as Wood&#x27;s glass on the envelope of a common incandescent bulb. This was the method that was used to create the very first blacklight sources. Although incandescent bulbs are a cheaper alternative to fluorescent tubes, they are exceptionally inefficient at producing UV light since most of the light emitted by the filament is visible light which must be blocked. Due to its black body spectrum, an incandescent light radiates less than 0.1% of its energy as UV light. Incandescent UV bulbs, due to the necessary absorption of the visible light, become very hot during use. This heat is, in fact, encouraged in such bulbs, since a hotter filament increases the proportion of UVA in the black-body radiation emitted. This high running-temperature reduces the life of the lamp from a typical 1,000 hours to around 100 hours.

===Mercury vapor===

High-power mercury vapor blacklight lamps are made in power ratings of 100 to 1,000 watts. These do not use phosphors, but rely on the intensified and slightly broadened 350–375 nm spectral line of mercury from high pressure discharge at between , depending upon the specific type. These lamps use envelopes of Wood&#x27;s glass or similar optical filter coatings to block out all the visible light and also the short wavelength (UVC) lines of mercury at 184.4 and 253.7 nm, which are harmful to the eyes and skin. A few other spectral lines, falling within the pass band of the Wood&#x27;s glass between 300 and 400 nm, contribute to the output.
These lamps are used mainly for theatrical purposes and concert displays. They are more efficient UVA producers per unit of power consumption than fluorescent tubes.

===LED===
Ultraviolet light can be generated by some light-emitting diodes, but wavelengths shorter than 380 nm are uncommon, and the emission peaks are broad, so only the very lowest energy UV photons are emitted, within predominant not visible light.

==Safety==
Although blacklights produce light in the UV range, their spectrum is mostly confined to the longwave UVA region, that is, UV radiation nearest in wavelength to visible light, with low frequency and therefore relatively low energy. While low, there is still some power of a conventional blacklight in the UVB range. UVA is the safest of the three spectra of UV light, although high exposure to UVA has been linked to the development of skin cancer in humans. The relatively low energy of UVA light does not cause sunburn. It can damage collagen fibers, so may accelerate skin aging and cause wrinkles. It can also degrade vitamin A in the skin.

UVA light has been shown to cause DNA damage, but not directly, like UVB and UVC. Due to its longer wavelength, it is absorbed less and reaches deeper into skin layers, where it produces reactive chemical intermediates such as hydroxyl and oxygen radicals, which in turn can damage DNA and result in a risk of melanoma. The weak output of blacklights is not sufficient to cause DNA damage or cellular mutations in the way that direct summer sunlight can, although there are reports that overexposure to the type of UV radiation used for creating artificial suntans on sunbeds can cause DNA damage, photo-aging (damage to the skin from prolonged exposure to sunlight), toughening of the skin, suppression of the immune system, cataract formation and skin cancer.

UV-A can have negative effects on eyes in both the short-term and long-term.

==Uses==
Ultraviolet radiation is invisible to the human eye, but illuminating certain materials with UV radiation causes the emission of visible light, causing these substances to glow with various colors. This is called &quot;fluorescence&quot;, and has many practical uses. Blacklights are required to observe fluorescence, since other types of ultraviolet lamps emit visible light which drowns out the dim fluorescent glow.

===Medical applications===

A Wood&#x27;s lamp is a diagnostic tool used in dermatology by which ultraviolet light is shone (at a wavelength of approximately 365 nanometers) onto the skin of the patient; a technician then observes any subsequent fluorescence. For example, porphyrins—associated with some skin diseases—will fluoresce pink. Though the technique for producing a source of ultraviolet light was devised by Robert Williams Wood in 1903 using &quot;Wood&#x27;s glass&quot;, it was in 1925 that the technique was used in dermatology by Margarot and Deveze for the detection of fungal infection of hair. It has many uses, both in distinguishing fluorescent conditions from other conditions and in locating the precise boundaries of the condition.
It is also helpful in diagnosing:
* Fungal infections. Some forms of tinea, such as &quot;Trichophyton tonsurans&quot;, do not fluoresce.
* Bacterial infections
**&quot;Corynebacterium minutissimum&quot; is coral red
**&quot;Pseudomonas&quot; is yellow-green
* &quot;Cutibacterium acnes&quot;, a bacterium involved in acne causation, exhibits an orange glow under a Wood&#x27;s lamp.

A Wood&#x27;s lamp may be used to rapidly assess whether an individual is suffering from ethylene glycol poisoning as a consequence of antifreeze ingestion. Manufacturers of ethylene glycol-containing antifreezes commonly add fluorescein, which causes the patient&#x27;s urine to fluoresce under Wood&#x27;s lamp.

===Diagnosis===
Wood&#x27;s lamp is useful in diagnosing conditions such as tuberous sclerosis and erythrasma (caused by &quot;Corynebacterium minutissimum&quot;, see above). Additionally, detection of porphyria cutanea tarda can sometimes be made when urine turns pink upon illumination with Wood&#x27;s lamp. Wood&#x27;s lamps have also been used to differentiate hypopigmentation from depigmentation such as with vitiligo. A vitiligo patient&#x27;s skin will appear yellow-green or blue under the Wood&#x27;s lamp. Its use in detecting melanoma has been reported.

===Security and authentication===

Blacklight is commonly used to authenticate oil paintings, antiques and banknotes. It can also differentiate real currency from counterfeit notes because, in many countries, legal banknotes have fluorescent symbols on them that only show under a blacklight. In addition, the paper used for printing money does not contain any of the brightening agents which cause commercially available papers to fluoresce under blacklight. Both of these features make illegal notes easier to detect and more difficult to successfully counterfeit. The same security features can be applied to identification cards such as passports or driver&#x27;s licenses.

Other security applications include the use of pens containing a fluorescent ink, generally with a soft tip, that can be used to &quot;invisibly&quot; mark items. If the objects that are so marked are subsequently stolen, a blacklight can be used to search for these security markings. At some amusement parks, nightclubs and at other, day-long (or night-long) events, a fluorescent mark is rubber stamped onto the wrist of a guest who can then exercise the option of leaving and being able to return again without paying another admission fee.

===Biology===

Fluorescent materials are also very widely used in numerous applications in molecular biology, often as &quot;tags&quot; which bind themselves to a substance of interest (for example, DNA), so allowing their visualization.

Thousands of moth and insect collectors all over the world use various types of blacklights to attract moth and insect specimens for photography and collecting. It is one of the preferred light sources for attracting insects and moths at night. They can illuminate animal excreta, such as urine and vomit, that is not always visible to the naked eye.

===Fault detection===

Blacklight is used extensively in non-destructive testing. Fluorescing fluids are applied to metal structures and illuminated, allowing easy detection of cracks and other weaknesses.

If a leak is suspected in a refrigerator or an air conditioning system, a UV tracer dye can be injected into the system along with the compressor lubricant oil and refrigerant mixture. The system is then run in order to circulate the dye across the piping and components and then the system is examined with a blacklight lamp. Any evidence of fluorescent dye then pinpoints the leaking part which needs replacement.

===Art and decor===


Blacklight is used to illuminate pictures painted with fluorescent colors, particularly on black velvet, which intensifies the illusion of self-illumination. The use of such materials, often in the form of tiles viewed in a sensory room under UV light, is common in the United Kingdom for the education of students with profound and multiple learning difficulties. Such fluorescence from certain textile fibers, especially those bearing optical brightener residues, can also be used for recreational effect, as seen, for example, in the opening credits of the James Bond film &quot;A View to a Kill&quot;. Blacklight puppetry is performed in a blacklight theater.

===Mineral identification===

Blacklights are a common tool for rock-hunting and identification of minerals by their fluorescence. The most common minerals and rocks that glow under UV light are fluorite, calcite, aragonite, opal, apatite, chalcedony, corundum (ruby and sapphire), scheelite, selenite, smithsonite, sphalerite, sodalite. The first person to observe fluorescence in minerals was George Stokes in 1852. He noted the ability of fluorite to produce a blue glow when illuminated with ultraviolet light and called this phenomenon “fluorescence” after the mineral fluorite. Lamps used to visualise seams of fluorite and other fluorescent minerals are commonly used in mines but they tend to be on an industrial scale. The lamps need to be short wavelength to be useful for this purpose and of scientific grade. UVP range of hand held UV lamps are ideal for this purpose and are used by Geologists to identify the best sources of fluorite in mines or potential new mines. Some transparent selenite crystals exhibit an “hourglass” pattern under UV light that is not visible in natural light. These crystals are also phosphorescent. Limestone, marble, and travertine can glow because of calcite presence. Granite, syenite, and granitic pegmatite rocks can also glow.

===Curing resins===
UV light can be used to harden particular glues, resins and inks by causing a photochemical reaction inside those substances. This process of hardening is called ‘curing’. UV curing is adaptable to printing, coating, decorating, stereolithography, and in the assembly of a variety of products and materials. In comparison to other technologies, curing with UV energy may be considered a low-temperature process, a high-speed process, and is a solventless process, as cure occurs via direct polymerization rather than by evaporation. Originally introduced in the 1960s, this technology has streamlined and increased automation in many industries in the manufacturing sector. A primary advantage of curing with ultraviolet light is the speed at which a material can be processed. Speeding up the curing or drying step in a process can reduce flaws and errors by decreasing time that an ink or coating spends wet. This can increase the quality of a finished item, and potentially allow for greater consistency. Another benefit to decreasing manufacturing time is that less space needs to be devoted to storing items which can not be used until the drying step is finished.
Because UV energy has unique interactions with many different materials, UV curing allows for the creation of products with characteristics not achievable via other means. This has led to UV curing becoming fundamental in many fields of manufacturing and technology, where changes in strength, hardness, durability, chemical resistance, and many other properties are required.

===Cockpit lighting, LSD testing and tanning===

One of the innovations for night and all-weather flying used by the US, UK, Japan and Germany during World War II was the use of UV interior lighting to illuminate the instrument panel, giving a safer alternative to the radium-painted instrument faces and pointers, and an intensity that could be varied easily and without visible illumination that would give away an aircraft&#x27;s position. This went so far as to include the printing of charts that were marked in UV-fluorescent inks, and the provision of UV-visible pencils and slide rules such as the E6B.

They may also be used to test for LSD, which fluoresces under blacklight while common substitutes such as 25I-NBOMe do not.

Strong sources of long-wave ultraviolet light are used in tanning beds.

==See also==
* Blacklight poster
* List of light sources

==Footnotes==
==References==
==External links==
* 
* 
* http://mississippientomologicalmuseum.org.msstate.edu/collecting.preparation.methods/Blacklight.traps.htm</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q961734" start="2" end="12" title="Blacklight" label="blacklight"/>
<link wikidata="Q961734" start="28" end="38" title="Blacklight" label="UV-A light"/>
<link wikidata="Q961734" start="40" end="56" title="Blacklight" label="Wood&amp;#x27;s lamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q961734" start="61" end="78" title="Blacklight" label="ultraviolet light"/>
<link wikidata="Q815738" start="85" end="89" title="lamp (fixture)" label="lamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q11391" start="112" end="116" title="UV-A" label="UV-A"/>
<link wikidata="Q11391" start="118" end="135" title="ultraviolet light" label="ultraviolet light"/>
<link wikidata="Q9128" start="152" end="165" title="visible light" label="visible light"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134091" start="197" end="203" title="light filter" label="filter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326541" start="745" end="755" title="bug zapper" label="bug zapper"/>
<link wikidata="Q182925" start="925" end="941" title="fluorescent lamp" label="fluorescent lamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q370387" start="944" end="962" title="mercury-vapor lamp" label="mercury-vapor lamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q25504" start="965" end="986" title="light-emitting diodes" label="light-emitting diodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q38867" start="995" end="1001" title="lasers" label="lasers"/>
<link wikidata="Q47616" start="1006" end="1023" title="incandescent lamp" label="incandescent lamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q11190" start="1029" end="1037" title="medicine" label="medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q495304" start="1039" end="1048" title="forensics" label="forensics"/>
<link wikidata="Q550926" start="1154" end="1174" title="Robert Williams Wood" label="Robert Williams Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q2437156" start="1202" end="1219" title="Wood&amp;#x27;s glass" label="Wood&amp;#x27;s glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q191807" start="1411" end="1423" title="fluorescence" label="fluorescence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2448456" start="1637" end="1652" title="fluorescent dye" label="fluorescent dye"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535038" start="1655" end="1667" title="rockhound" label="rock-hunting"/>
<link wikidata="Q854851" start="1704" end="1721" title="counterfeit money" label="counterfeit money"/>
<link wikidata="Q266790" start="1793" end="1804" title="refrigerant" label="refrigerant"/>
<link wikidata="Q37828" start="1821" end="1833" title="refrigerator" label="refrigerator"/>
<link wikidata="Q173725" start="1839" end="1855" title="air conditioning" label="air conditioning"/>
<link wikidata="Q646347" start="1923" end="1934" title="tanning bed" label="tanning bed"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="2075" end="2100" title="World Health Organization" label="World Health Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q182925" start="2463" end="2479" title="fluorescent tube" label="fluorescent tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q11248330" start="2495" end="2503" title="phosphor" label="phosphor"/>
<link wikidata="Q191807" start="2789" end="2801" title="fluorescence" label="fluorescence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326541" start="3053" end="3063" title="bug zapper" label="bug zapper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396" start="3259" end="3267" title="europium" label="europium"/>
<link wikidata="Q421174" start="3274" end="3292" title="strontium fluoride" label="strontium fluoride"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3315" end="3331" title="strontium borate" label="strontium borate"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3421" end="3436" title="barium silicate" label="barium silicate"/>
<link wikidata="Q310481" start="3628" end="3633" title="Osram" label="Osram"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326541" start="4201" end="4211" title="bug zapper" label="bug zapper"/>
<link wikidata="Q3587621" start="4294" end="4305" title="electrocute" label="electrocute"/>
<link wikidata="Q2437156" start="4991" end="5008" title="Wood&amp;#x27;s glass" label="Wood&amp;#x27;s glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q47616" start="5037" end="5054" title="incandescent bulb" label="incandescent bulb"/>
<link wikidata="Q161424" start="5367" end="5377" title="black body" label="black body"/>
<link wikidata="Q370387" start="5848" end="5861" title="mercury vapor" label="mercury vapor"/>
<link wikidata="Q25504" start="6704" end="6724" title="light-emitting diode" label="light-emitting diode"/>
<link wikidata="Q3198" start="6845" end="6852" title="photons" label="photons"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7243" end="7282" title="Ultraviolet#Harmful effects" label="safest of the three spectra of UV light"/>
<link wikidata="Q192102" start="7352" end="7363" title="skin cancer" label="skin cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q649717" start="7429" end="7436" title="sunburn" label="sunburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q26868" start="7452" end="7460" title="collagen" label="collagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074" start="7487" end="7491" title="skin" label="skin"/>
<link wikidata="Q349185" start="7508" end="7515" title="wrinkle" label="wrinkle"/>
<link wikidata="Q18225" start="7538" end="7547" title="vitamin A" label="vitamin A"/>
<link wikidata="Q210538" start="7596" end="7606" title="DNA damage" label="DNA damage"/>
<link wikidata="Q41364" start="7662" end="7672" title="wavelength" label="wavelength"/>
<link wikidata="Q5259911" start="7718" end="7729" title="skin layers" label="skin layers"/>
<link wikidata="Q427071" start="7789" end="7797" title="hydroxyl radical" label="hydroxyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q185056" start="7802" end="7816" title="oxygen radical" label="oxygen radical"/>
<link wikidata="Q180614" start="7872" end="7880" title="melanoma" label="melanoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q42918" start="7963" end="7971" title="mutation" label="mutation"/>
<link wikidata="Q646347" start="8130" end="8137" title="sunbeds" label="sunbeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q191807" start="8631" end="8643" title="fluorescence" label="fluorescence"/>
<link wikidata="Q171171" start="8908" end="8919" title="dermatology" label="dermatology"/>
<link wikidata="Q11391" start="8929" end="8946" title="ultraviolet light" label="ultraviolet light"/>
<link wikidata="Q191807" start="9078" end="9090" title="fluorescence" label="fluorescence"/>
<link wikidata="Q422926" start="9105" end="9115" title="porphyrins" label="porphyrins"/>
<link wikidata="Q550926" start="9252" end="9272" title="Robert Williams Wood" label="Robert Williams Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q2437156" start="9293" end="9310" title="Wood&amp;#x27;s glass" label="Wood&amp;#x27;s glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q171171" start="9364" end="9375" title="dermatology" label="dermatology"/>
<link wikidata="Q464067" start="9625" end="9642" title="Mycosis" label="Fungal infections"/>
<link wikidata="Q1909343" start="9658" end="9663" title="tinea" label="tinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q5928559" start="9679" end="9701" title="Trichophyton tonsurans" label="Trichophyton tonsurans"/>
<link wikidata="Q10876" start="9729" end="9738" title="Bacterial" label="Bacterial"/>
<link wikidata="Q3281265" start="9758" end="9786" title="Corynebacterium minutissimum" label="Corynebacterium minutissimum"/>
<link wikidata="Q131143" start="9814" end="9825" title="Pseudomonas" label="Pseudomonas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2442109" start="9856" end="9875" title="Cutibacterium acnes" label="Cutibacterium acnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q79928" start="9907" end="9911" title="acne" label="acne"/>
<link wikidata="Q3153687" start="10063" end="10088" title="ethylene glycol poisoning" label="ethylene glycol poisoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q503288" start="10109" end="10119" title="antifreeze" label="antifreeze"/>
<link wikidata="Q410922" start="10200" end="10211" title="fluorescein" label="fluorescein"/>
<link wikidata="Q191807" start="10254" end="10263" title="Fluorescence" label="fluoresce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362721" start="10365" end="10383" title="tuberous sclerosis" label="tuberous sclerosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q939261" start="10388" end="10398" title="erythrasma" label="erythrasma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479497" start="10491" end="10514" title="porphyria cutanea tarda" label="porphyria cutanea tarda"/>
<link wikidata="Q180152" start="10705" end="10713" title="vitiligo" label="vitiligo"/>
<link wikidata="Q180614" start="10828" end="10836" title="melanoma" label="melanoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q174705" start="10936" end="10949" title="oil paintings" label="oil paintings"/>
<link wikidata="Q472760" start="10951" end="10958" title="antique" label="antique"/>
<link wikidata="Q47433" start="10964" end="10972" title="banknote" label="banknote"/>
<link wikidata="Q502918" start="11020" end="11031" title="counterfeit" label="counterfeit"/>
<link wikidata="Q43812" start="11498" end="11507" title="passports" label="passports"/>
<link wikidata="Q205647" start="11511" end="11533" title="driver&amp;#x27;s licenses" label="driver&amp;#x27;s licenses"/>
<link wikidata="Q194195" start="11830" end="11844" title="amusement park" label="amusement park"/>
<link wikidata="Q622425" start="11847" end="11856" title="nightclub" label="nightclub"/>
<link wikidata="Q644099" start="11927" end="11939" title="rubber stamp" label="rubber stamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q11426" start="12789" end="12794" title="metal" label="metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q37828" start="12908" end="12920" title="refrigerator" label="refrigerator"/>
<link wikidata="Q173725" start="12927" end="12943" title="air conditioning" label="air conditioning"/>
<link wikidata="Q243519" start="13416" end="13422" title="velvet" label="velvet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7451139" start="13543" end="13555" title="sensory room" label="sensory room"/>
<link wikidata="Q902175" start="13756" end="13774" title="optical brightener" label="optical brightener"/>
<link wikidata="Q844" start="13879" end="13889" title="James Bond" label="James Bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q332368" start="13901" end="13917" title="A View to a Kill" label="A View to a Kill"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13925" end="13942" title="Puppet#Black light puppet" label="Blacklight puppet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535038" start="14048" end="14060" title="rockhound" label="rock-hunting"/>
<link wikidata="Q7946" start="14083" end="14090" title="mineral" label="mineral"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="16962" end="16969" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="16977" end="16989" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128" start="17096" end="17102" title="radium" label="radium"/>
<link wikidata="Q14674" start="17397" end="17404" title="pencils" label="pencils"/>
<link wikidata="Q190667" start="17409" end="17420" title="slide rules" label="slide rules"/>
<link wikidata="Q4809210" start="17433" end="17436" title="E6B" label="E6B"/>
<link wikidata="Q23118" start="17473" end="17476" title="Lysergic acid diethylamide" label="LSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q4632141" start="17545" end="17554" title="25I-NBOMe" label="25I-NBOMe"/>
<link wikidata="Q646347" start="17622" end="17633" title="tanning bed" label="tanning bed"/>
<link wikidata="Q4923111" start="17652" end="17669" title="Blacklight poster" label="Blacklight poster"/>
<link wikidata="Q65037198" start="17672" end="17693" title="List of light sources" label="List of light sources"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="312944" wikidata="Q569447" url="?curid=312944" title="Anse-Bertrand">
<text>Anse-Bertrand (; ) is a commune in Guadeloupe, an overseas region and department of France in the Lesser Antilles.

The inhabitants in Anse-Bertrand are called Ansois.

==Geography==
Anse-Bertrand is located in northern Grande-Terre. The town is , north-north-east of Pointe-à-Pitre. The Atlantic Ocean face the town and produces high waves for professional surfers. The town is located on a limestone plateau where rolling hills are located eastwards.

Some settlements depend on the commune of Anse-Bertrand, such as:
* La Berthaudiere
* Massioux
* Pressec

===Climate===
Like any other Eastern Caribbean town, Anse-Bertrand experiences quite evenly spread rainfall during the year, with a wetter season between July and November which coincides with hurricane season. The town receives below 1500 mm of rainfall. Tropical heat is the norm, bringing constant high temperatures, especially during the summer.

Trade winds, called alizés, blow from the north-east and often temper the climate.

==History==
This village was the last refuge of Carib Amerindians in Grande-Terre (Carib Territory).

==Population==
==Economy==
The economy rests primarily on agriculture, particularly on sugar cane. There was sugar cultivation in the 1800s, but it ended. It is endowed with a rich past whose remnants you can see through a number of windmills scattered over the commune such as Habitation La Mahaudière. The beach, Anse Bertrand, is great for surfing on Grade-Terre. There are hotels southwards, toward Pointe-a-Pitre.

==Sights==
In Anse-Bertrand the landscape is scenic, especially places such as &quot;Pointe de la Grande Vigie&quot; situated at the most northernmost part of the archipelago.

Point Large Watchtower is located on the northern point of the Guadeloupe. High cliffs up to 80 meters tall, plunges in the Atlantic Ocean in perpetual movement. Here nature impresses by its beauty and its violence. By good weather, seen on La Désirade (50 km), Antigua (70 km) and Montserrat (80 km).

Carry Hell is encircled by cliffs, a small calm and limpid water, arm of the sea to the turquoise reflections, gently comes to die on a white sand beach. With far the ocean continues to thunder. The paradise with the doors of the hell…

There are other serene beaches such as Plage de la Chapelle, Anse Laborde (1.1 miles, north), Anse Pistolet &amp; Anse du Souffleur (2.8 miles, south-west).

Saint Jacques horse racecourse, is nearby and bets can be placed and you can have a great time with the locals.

Le Chau de Feuilles, a French restaurant is nearby.

==Education==
Public preschools and primary schools include:
* Ecole primaire Guéry
* Ecole primaire Macaille
* Ecole élémentaire Jules Plaisance
* Ecole maternelle Campêche
* Ecole maternelle Adela Deschamps

Public junior high schools include:
* Collège Fernand Ballin

== Personalities ==
* Dominik Bernard, a French actor and stage director.
* Yohann Gène (1981-), a French professional road bicycle racer.
* Serge Nubret (1938-), a former professional bodybuilder, bodybuilding federation leader, movie actor and author, awarded bodybuilding titles including : &quot;1970 IFBB Mr. Europe&quot;, &quot;1976 NABBA Mr. Universe (Pro.)&quot; and &quot;1977 WBBG Mr. World (Pro.)&quot;.
* Lilian Thuram (1972-), a retired professional football defender, winner with the French national team of the 1998 FIFA World Cup .

==Sister city==
In November 1994, Anse-Bertrand became a sister city to the city of Columbus, Ohio, United States.

==See also==
*Communes of the Guadeloupe department

==References==
==External links==

* Office de tourisme d&#x27;Anse Bertrand — Official site of Anse-Bertrand Tourism Board.
* Site du Conseil général de la Guadeloupe. – Official site of Guadeloupe General Council.
* Site du collège Fernand Balin d&#x27;Anse Bertrand – Official site of Anse-Bertrand Fernand Balin&#x27;s Senior High School.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q569447" start="0" end="13" title="Anse-Bertrand" label="Anse-Bertrand"/>
<link wikidata="Q484170" start="24" end="31" title="Communes of France" label="commune"/>
<link wikidata="Q17012" start="35" end="45" title="Guadeloupe" label="Guadeloupe"/>
<link wikidata="Q202216" start="50" end="65" title="overseas region" label="overseas region"/>
<link wikidata="Q202216" start="70" end="80" title="Overseas department" label="department"/>
<link wikidata="Q93259" start="98" end="113" title="Lesser Antilles" label="Lesser Antilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q527799" start="220" end="232" title="Grande-Terre, Guadeloupe" label="Grande-Terre"/>
<link wikidata="Q335322" start="268" end="282" title="Pointe-à-Pitre" label="Pointe-à-Pitre"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="288" end="302" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="Atlantic Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q159992" start="358" end="364" title="surfer" label="surfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6461221" start="522" end="537" title="La Berthaudiere" label="La Berthaudiere"/>
<link wikidata="Q6784781" start="540" end="548" title="Massioux" label="Massioux"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241655" start="551" end="558" title="Pressec" label="Pressec"/>
<link wikidata="Q664609" start="597" end="606" title="Caribbean" label="Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q7925" start="659" end="667" title="rainfall" label="rainfall"/>
<link wikidata="Q8092" start="753" end="762" title="hurricane" label="hurricane"/>
<link wikidata="Q160603" start="911" end="921" title="Trade wind" label="Trade wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q27106" start="1043" end="1048" title="Island Caribs" label="Carib"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="1049" end="1060" title="Amerindians" label="Amerindians"/>
<link wikidata="Q527799" start="1064" end="1076" title="Grande-Terre, Guadeloupe" label="Grande-Terre"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="1155" end="1166" title="agriculture" label="agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q36940" start="1184" end="1194" title="sugar cane" label="sugar cane"/>
<link wikidata="Q38720" start="1330" end="1338" title="windmill" label="windmill"/>
<link wikidata="Q588604" start="1602" end="1627" title="Pointe de la Grande Vigie" label="Pointe de la Grande Vigie"/>
<link wikidata="Q33837" start="1680" end="1691" title="archipelago" label="archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="1818" end="1832" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="Atlantic Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024682" start="1935" end="1946" title="La Désirade" label="La Désirade"/>
<link wikidata="Q316390" start="1956" end="1963" title="Antigua" label="Antigua"/>
<link wikidata="Q13353" start="1976" end="1986" title="Montserrat" label="Montserrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q3034887" start="2852" end="2867" title="Dominik Bernard" label="Dominik Bernard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3387717" start="2888" end="2902" title="stage director" label="stage director"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338844" start="2906" end="2917" title="Yohann Gène" label="Yohann Gène"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="2929" end="2935" title="France" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q3609" start="2949" end="2967" title="road bicycle racer" label="road bicycle racer"/>
<link wikidata="Q438521" start="2971" end="2983" title="Serge Nubret" label="Serge Nubret"/>
<link wikidata="Q124100" start="3015" end="3026" title="bodybuilder" label="bodybuilder"/>
<link wikidata="Q482980" start="3076" end="3082" title="author" label="author"/>
<link wikidata="Q511252" start="3135" end="3139" title="International Federation of BodyBuilding &amp;amp; Fitness" label="IFBB"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3175" end="3194" title="Universe Championships#Winners" label="Mr. Universe (Pro.)"/>
<link wikidata="Q180326" start="3247" end="3260" title="Lilian Thuram" label="Lilian Thuram"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="3293" end="3301" title="association football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q336286" start="3302" end="3310" title="defender (association football)" label="defender"/>
<link wikidata="Q47774" start="3328" end="3334" title="France national football team" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q101730" start="3356" end="3375" title="1998 FIFA World Cup" label="1998 FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q184711" start="3436" end="3447" title="sister city" label="sister city"/>
<link wikidata="Q16567" start="3463" end="3477" title="Columbus, Ohio" label="Columbus, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q502145" start="3509" end="3546" title="Communes of the Guadeloupe department" label="Communes of the Guadeloupe department"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="312945" wikidata="Q550616" url="?curid=312945" title="Lucius Clodius Macer">
<text>Lucius Clodius Macer was a &quot;legatus&quot; of the Roman Empire in Africa during the reign of Nero. He revolted in May 68, cutting off the food supply of Rome, possibly at the instigation of Calvia Crispinilla. Although encouraged by Galba, Macer raised a legion Legio I &quot;Macriana liberatrix&quot; in addition to the Legio III &quot;Augusta&quot; that he already commanded, presumably raising suspicion that Macer also harbored imperial ambitions. In October 68, Galba had him killed by the procurator Trebonius Garutianus. Papirus, the centurion of Mucianus, was implicated in his assassination.

Macer produced denarii which are extremely rare today. Only about 85 have been found, of which only 20 bear his portrait. He uses the formulaic abbreviation S C (senatus consulto) on his denarii; this otherwise had only rarely appeared on Roman silver coins since about 40 BC. Scholars speculate that this, and his decision to portray himself without a laurel wreath or a diadem, as evidence that he portrayed his revolt as being against Nero, and not the senate.

== Sources ==
* Plutarch, &quot;Galba&quot; 6,1f.
* Tacitus, &quot;Histories&quot; 1,37,3; 1,7,1; 2,97,2; 4,49,4.

== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q550616" start="0" end="20" title="Lucius Clodius Macer" label="Lucius Clodius Macer"/>
<link wikidata="Q212624" start="33" end="40" title="legatus" label="legatus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="54" end="66" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q181238" start="70" end="76" title="Africa (Roman province)" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413" start="97" end="101" title="Nero" label="Nero"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="157" end="161" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q454108" start="194" end="212" title="Calvia Crispinilla" label="Calvia Crispinilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414" start="237" end="242" title="Galba" label="Galba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760019" start="266" end="305" title="Legio I Macriana liberatrix" label="Legio I &amp;quot;Macriana liberatrix&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434231" start="325" end="354" title="Legio III Augusta" label="Legio III &amp;quot;Augusta&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q499165" start="499" end="509" title="Procurator (ancient Rome)" label="procurator"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="510" end="530" title="Trebonius Garutianus" label="Trebonius Garutianus"/>
<link wikidata="Q521520" start="558" end="566" title="Gaius Licinius Mucianus" label="Mucianus"/>
<link wikidata="Q187776" start="621" end="628" title="denarius" label="denarii"/>
<link wikidata="Q130614" start="1062" end="1068" title="Roman Senate" label="senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q41523" start="1087" end="1095" title="Plutarch" label="Plutarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2161" start="1123" end="1130" title="Tacitus" label="Tacitus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247073" start="1138" end="1147" title="Histories (Tacitus)" label="Histories"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="312950" wikidata="Q1128516" url="?curid=312950" title="Mahadeva">
<text>Mahadeva may refer to:

==Religion==
*Mahadeva, a title of the Hindu god Shiva
**Parashiva, a form of Shiva
**Parameshwara (god), a form of Shiva
*Para Brahman, a Hindu deity
*Adi-Buddha, in Buddhism, the &quot;First Buddha&quot; or the &quot;Primordial Buddha&quot;
*Mahadeva (Buddhism), founder of the Caitika school of Indian Buddhism or a literary figure associated with 5 points of contention in some Theravada works
*Taidi, in Chinese folk religion

== People with the name ==
*Mahadeva (Buddhism), founder of the Caitika school of Indian Buddhism or a literary figure associated with 5 points of contention in some Theravada works
*Mahadeva (Kakatiya dynasty), 12th-century ruler of India
*Mahadeva of Devagiri, a 13th-century ruler of the Yadava dynasty of India
*Mahadeva (undertaker), a recipient of the Chief Minister&#x27;s gold medal from the city of Bangalore, India
*Mahadeva Iyer Ganapati (1903–1976), Indian engineer
*Arunachalam Mahadeva (1885–1969), Ceylon Tamil lawyer, politician and diplomat
*Baku Mahadeva (1921–2013), Sri Lankan Tamil civil servant
*Devanur Mahadeva (born 1948), Indian writer and public intellectual
*Kumar Mahadeva, Sri Lankan American businessman
*S. Mahadeva (1893–?), Ceylon Tamil civil engineer
*Mahadeva Subramania Mani (1908–2003), Indian entomologist

==Places==
*Mahadeva, Barabanki, Nepal
*Mahadeva, Kosi, Nepal
*Mahadeva, Sagarmatha, Nepal

==See also==
* Mahadev (disambiguation)
* Mahadevan (disambiguation)
* Mahadevi, Hindu goddess
* &quot;Mahadevi&quot; (film), 1957 Indian film by Sundar Rao Nadkarni
*&quot;Bolton v Mahadeva&quot;, an English contract law case</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1128516" start="0" end="8" title="Mahadeva" label="Mahadeva"/>
<link wikidata="Q11378" start="73" end="78" title="Shiva" label="Shiva"/>
<link wikidata="Q4345036" start="81" end="90" title="Parashiva" label="Parashiva"/>
<link wikidata="Q4344933" start="110" end="128" title="Parameshwara (god)" label="Parameshwara (god)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3363102" start="147" end="159" title="Para Brahman" label="Para Brahman"/>
<link wikidata="Q356964" start="176" end="186" title="Adi-Buddha" label="Adi-Buddha"/>
<link wikidata="Q6732763" start="268" end="287" title="Mahadeva (Buddhism)" label="Mahadeva (Buddhism)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2928436" start="423" end="428" title="Taidi" label="Taidi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6732763" start="484" end="503" title="Mahadeva (Buddhism)" label="Mahadeva (Buddhism)"/>
<link wikidata="Q113592310" start="639" end="666" title="Mahadeva (Kakatiya dynasty)" label="Mahadeva (Kakatiya dynasty)"/>
<link wikidata="Q55621747" start="697" end="717" title="Mahadeva of Devagiri" label="Mahadeva of Devagiri"/>
<link wikidata="Q7844676" start="772" end="793" title="Mahadeva (undertaker)" label="Mahadeva (undertaker)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6732758" start="882" end="904" title="Mahadeva Iyer Ganapati" label="Mahadeva Iyer Ganapati"/>
<link wikidata="Q4802196" start="935" end="955" title="Arunachalam Mahadeva" label="Arunachalam Mahadeva"/>
<link wikidata="Q15297654" start="1015" end="1028" title="Baku Mahadeva" label="Baku Mahadeva"/>
<link wikidata="Q12434032" start="1074" end="1090" title="Devanur Mahadeva" label="Devanur Mahadeva"/>
<link wikidata="Q6443489" start="1143" end="1157" title="Kumar Mahadeva" label="Kumar Mahadeva"/>
<link wikidata="Q7387674" start="1192" end="1203" title="S. Mahadeva" label="S. Mahadeva"/>
<link wikidata="Q6732757" start="1243" end="1267" title="Mahadeva Subramania Mani" label="Mahadeva Subramania Mani"/>
<link wikidata="Q15243680" start="1314" end="1333" title="Mahadeva, Barabanki" label="Mahadeva, Barabanki"/>
<link wikidata="Q6732756" start="1342" end="1356" title="Mahadeva, Kosi" label="Mahadeva, Kosi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6732767" start="1365" end="1385" title="Mahadeva, Sagarmatha" label="Mahadeva, Sagarmatha"/>
<link wikidata="Q6732744" start="1409" end="1433" title="Mahadev (disambiguation)" label="Mahadev (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1884744" start="1436" end="1462" title="Mahadevan (disambiguation)" label="Mahadevan (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4682614" start="1465" end="1473" title="Mahadevi" label="Mahadevi"/>
<link wikidata="Q12986943" start="1491" end="1518" title="Mahadevi (film)" label="&amp;quot;Mahadevi&amp;quot; (film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4940255" start="1567" end="1584" title="Bolton v Mahadeva" label="Bolton v Mahadeva"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="312953" wikidata="Q6571836" url="?curid=312953" title="List of German guided weapons of World War II">
<text>During World War II, Nazi Germany developed many missiles and precision-guided munition systems.

These included the first cruise missile, the first short-range ballistic missile, the first guided surface-to-air missiles, and the first anti-ship missiles.

== Organizations ==
* Peenemünde rocket test site

==People involved==
* Wernher von Braun
* Walter Dornberger
* Walter Thiel
* Max Kramer
* Herbert A. Wagner

==Models==

=== Surface-to-surface missiles ===
The V1, which may be seen as the first cruise missile, was used operationally against London and Antwerp. The V-2 ballistic missile was used operationally against London, Antwerp, and other targets. The Rheinbote was fired against Antwerp.
* V-1 flying bomb
* V-2 rocket
* Rheinbote
* A4b

=== Surface-to-air missiles ===
Germany developed a number of surface-to-air missile systems, none of which was used operationally:
* Enzian (Gentian)
* Rheintochter (Rhine Daughter) - (an air-to-air variant was also planned)
* Henschel Hs 117 &quot;Schmetterling&quot; (Butterfly) - radio-controlled (an air-to-air variant was also planned)
* Wasserfall (Waterfall)
* Feuerlilie (Fire Lily)

=== Air-to-air missiles ===
As with the surface-to-air missiles above, these were never used operationally:
* Henschel Hs 298
* Ruhrstahl X-4 (actively wire-guided; anti-tank variants of this were also designed, such as the X-7)

=== Anti-ship missiles ===
Anti-ship missiles were used operationally against allied shipping in 1943, notably in the Mediterranean Sea, guided by the &quot;Funkgerät&quot; FuG 203 &quot;Kehl&quot; series of MCLOS radio guidance systems aboard the deploying aircraft:
* Fritz X armored, anti-ship gravity PGM
* Henschel Hs 293 air-to-ship, rocket-boosted gliding guided bomb

=== Air-to-surface weapons ===
The Mistel composite aircraft configuration was used (with almost no effects) on the front lines both on western and eastern front. This system was composed by a bomber filled with explosive, coupled to a fighter plane: the pilot in the fighter plane flew the two coupled airplanes up to near the target, then he disconnected the aircraft and commanded the bomber to crash onto the target by radio control.

== See also ==
*List of military aircraft of Germany
*List of World War II military aircraft of Germany
*List of RLM aircraft designations
*List of missiles

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="7" end="19" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="21" end="33" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q974850" start="49" end="57" title="missile" label="missiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q32050" start="62" end="87" title="precision-guided munition" label="precision-guided munition"/>
<link wikidata="Q181860" start="123" end="137" title="cruise missile" label="cruise missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q400704" start="149" end="178" title="short-range ballistic missile" label="short-range ballistic missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q466704" start="197" end="219" title="surface-to-air missile" label="surface-to-air missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q643532" start="236" end="253" title="anti-ship missile" label="anti-ship missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q490398" start="279" end="289" title="Peenemünde" label="Peenemünde"/>
<link wikidata="Q57384" start="330" end="347" title="Wernher von Braun" label="Wernher von Braun"/>
<link wikidata="Q60546" start="350" end="367" title="Walter Dornberger" label="Walter Dornberger"/>
<link wikidata="Q77440" start="370" end="382" title="Walter Thiel" label="Walter Thiel"/>
<link wikidata="Q88628" start="385" end="395" title="Max Kramer" label="Max Kramer"/>
<link wikidata="Q86097" start="398" end="415" title="Herbert A. Wagner" label="Herbert A. Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q181860" start="504" end="518" title="cruise missile" label="cruise missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="551" end="557" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q12892" start="562" end="569" title="Antwerp" label="Antwerp"/>
<link wikidata="Q179348" start="579" end="596" title="ballistic missile" label="ballistic missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q153348" start="707" end="722" title="V-1 (flying bomb)" label="V-1 flying bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q174640" start="725" end="735" title="V-2 rocket" label="V-2 rocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413972" start="738" end="747" title="Rheinbote" label="Rheinbote"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="750" end="753" title="Aggregate (rocket family)#A4b/A9" label="A4b"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346037" start="889" end="895" title="Enzian missile" label="Enzian"/>
<link wikidata="Q144682" start="897" end="904" title="Gentiana" label="Gentian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140813" start="908" end="920" title="Rheintochter" label="Rheintochter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545104" start="983" end="998" title="Henschel Hs 117" label="Henschel Hs 117"/>
<link wikidata="Q620347" start="1099" end="1109" title="Wasserfall" label="Wasserfall"/>
<link wikidata="Q632475" start="1124" end="1134" title="Feuerlilie" label="Feuerlilie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2009036" start="1258" end="1273" title="Henschel Hs 298" label="Henschel Hs 298"/>
<link wikidata="Q264828" start="1276" end="1289" title="Ruhrstahl X-4" label="Ruhrstahl X-4"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="1496" end="1513" title="Mediterranean Sea" label="Mediterranean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q22115601" start="1525" end="1582" title="Kehl-Strasbourg radio control link" label="the &amp;quot;Funkgerät&amp;quot; FuG 203 &amp;quot;Kehl&amp;quot; series"/>
<link wikidata="Q251859" start="1586" end="1591" title="MCLOS" label="MCLOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425385" start="1648" end="1655" title="Fritz X" label="Fritz X"/>
<link wikidata="Q32050" start="1683" end="1686" title="precision guided munition" label="PGM"/>
<link wikidata="Q586159" start="1689" end="1704" title="Henschel Hs 293" label="Henschel Hs 293"/>
<link wikidata="Q20825921" start="1718" end="1732" title="Walter HWK 109-507" label="rocket-boosted"/>
<link wikidata="Q626371" start="1789" end="1795" title="Mistel" label="Mistel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5156746" start="1796" end="1814" title="composite aircraft" label="composite aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q895895" start="2209" end="2245" title="List of military aircraft of Germany" label="List of military aircraft of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q769226" start="2247" end="2296" title="List of World War II military aircraft of Germany" label="List of World War II military aircraft of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q875223" start="2298" end="2331" title="List of RLM aircraft designations" label="List of RLM aircraft designations"/>
<link wikidata="Q3244242" start="2333" end="2349" title="List of missiles" label="List of missiles"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="312959" wikidata="Q7919397" url="?curid=312959" title="Velvet Glove">
<text>The Velvet Glove was a short-range semi-active radar homing air-to-air missile designed by CARDE (today DRDC Valcartier) and produced by Canadair starting in 1953. 131 Velvet Gloves had been completed when the program was terminated in 1956, officially because of concerns about its ability to be launched at supersonic speeds from the Avro Arrow then under design, but also from the design being overtaken by developments in the United States.

==Design and construction==
Small scale work on what would become the Velvet Glove started in 1948 at CARDE, and by 1951 the plans were advanced enough to put forth the design as armament on the Avro CF-100 &quot;Canuck&quot; fighter that was then entering service with the Royal Canadian Air Force (RCAF). Canadair was selected as the manufacturer, and Westinghouse was commissioned to build the radar guidance unit. The final missile design was about long and just under a foot in diameter. It used four fins at the tail for steering, and was guided by a semi-active radar located behind a conical nose cone. Westinghouse&#x27;s microwave radar proximity fuze fired the warhead.

==Testing==
To test the aerodynamics of the missile, instead of building an expensive supersonic wind tunnel, CARDE used a method developed by Gerald Bull and others of firing sabot-equipped test models down a specially-constructed range. The models were fired through a series of stations located at intervals, each equipped with a metal-coated &quot;jump card&quot;. The position and shape of the resulting holes in the cards indicated whether or not the missile was flying stably. The metallic coating on the cards triggered a timer, to measure velocity. One of the stations was also equipped for Schlieren photography, to make a permanent record of shock waves around the model. To reconcile conflicting needs for high pressure to burn the propellant efficiently, and lower pressure to accelerate the model and sabot without destroying them, the gun used a high–low system chamber. A drilled plate limited the rate at which the propellant gases reached the round. This basic design would be key to Project HARP and many of Bull&#x27;s later concepts.

In 1952 ground-launched testing started at the Picton Range, a small test site set up outside Picton, Ontario, near the RCAF base at Trenton, Ontario. Air launches from a CF-100 started in 1954, with the aircraft flying from Trenton to fire over Picton. The site was later used to launch models of the Avro Arrow for aerodynamics testing. Testing of the Velvet Glove then moved to an operational setting at Cold Lake, Alberta. By this point the Arrow was slated to replace the CF-100 within a few years, and the RCAF had always demanded that it fire the much more advanced active-radar Sparrow II missile under design for the United States Navy. Interest in the Velvet Glove waned, as the Sparrow outperformed it in all ways.

==Cancellation==
The cancellation of the program led to serious questions in the House of Commons of Canada. Development had cost a total of $24 million () which the Department of National Defence attempted to justify as money well spent on the training of the specialists involved in the project. The opposition pointed out that this amounted to $60,000 per specialist, which was considered excessive.

The Sparrow II ran into lengthy delays, and the United States Navy eventually gave up on the design, turning to the simpler semi-active radar homing Sparrow III. Options for the Arrow were studied, including taking over the Sparrow II program at Canadair, turning to the Falcon/rocket mix being used by contemporary United States Air Force interceptors, or restarting the Velvet Glove project. There were concerns that the Velvet Glove would be difficult to launch at supersonic speeds and therefore representing a risk to the aircraft, likely due to its small control surfaces not having enough authority. In the end Canadair was instructed to take over the Sparrow II, ending development of the Velvet Glove for good. When the Arrow project was later canceled, work on the Sparrow II also ceased. The Picton Range closed in 1957.

The National Air Force Museum of Canada in Trenton, Ontario has a full-sized model of the Velvet Glove missile, as well as an actual test model with sabot.
The latter was designed to be fired from a medium artillery barrel (smooth-bored to ).

==References==
===Notes===

===Bibliography===
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7919397" start="4" end="16" title="Velvet Glove" label="Velvet Glove"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187984" start="35" end="59" title="semi-active radar homing" label="semi-active radar homing"/>
<link wikidata="Q243249" start="60" end="78" title="air-to-air missile" label="air-to-air missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q5206023" start="91" end="96" title="CARDE" label="CARDE"/>
<link wikidata="Q429877" start="137" end="145" title="Canadair" label="Canadair"/>
<link wikidata="Q221337" start="309" end="319" title="supersonic" label="supersonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q735176" start="336" end="346" title="Avro Arrow" label="Avro Arrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q5206023" start="548" end="553" title="CARDE" label="CARDE"/>
<link wikidata="Q791488" start="641" end="652" title="Avro CF-100" label="Avro CF-100"/>
<link wikidata="Q25456" start="720" end="744" title="Royal Canadian Air Force" label="Royal Canadian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q429877" start="753" end="761" title="Canadair" label="Canadair"/>
<link wikidata="Q632404" start="800" end="812" title="Westinghouse Electric Corporation" label="Westinghouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q47528" start="843" end="848" title="radar" label="radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q333133" start="1093" end="1107" title="proximity fuze" label="proximity fuze"/>
<link wikidata="Q333195" start="1214" end="1236" title="supersonic wind tunnel" label="supersonic wind tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q364988" start="1271" end="1282" title="Gerald Bull" label="Gerald Bull"/>
<link wikidata="Q1580802" start="1304" end="1309" title="Sabot (firearms)" label="sabot"/>
<link wikidata="Q521426" start="1728" end="1749" title="Schlieren photography" label="Schlieren photography"/>
<link wikidata="Q5760092" start="1989" end="2004" title="high–low system" label="high–low system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322029" start="2130" end="2142" title="Project HARP" label="Project HARP"/>
<link wikidata="Q7191105" start="2278" end="2293" title="Picton, Ontario" label="Picton, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739754" start="2317" end="2333" title="Trenton, Ontario" label="Trenton, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q735176" start="2486" end="2496" title="Avro Arrow" label="Avro Arrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017691" start="2591" end="2609" title="Cold Lake, Alberta" label="Cold Lake, Alberta"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2770" end="2780" title="AIM-7 Sparrow#Sparrow II" label="Sparrow II"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="2810" end="2828" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q383590" start="2992" end="3018" title="House of Commons of Canada" label="House of Commons of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3464" end="3475" title="AIM-7 Sparrow#Sparrow III" label="Sparrow III"/>
<link wikidata="Q293765" start="3586" end="3592" title="AIM-4 Falcon" label="Falcon"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223" start="3631" end="3654" title="United States Air Force" label="United States Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q6970239" start="4152" end="4187" title="National Air Force Museum of Canada" label="National Air Force Museum of Canada"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="312962" wikidata="Q8018710" url="?curid=312962" title="William Stamps Farish II">
<text>William Stamps Farish II (February 23, 1881 – November 29, 1942) was a pioneer in East Texas oilfield development, president of Standard Oil and a founding member and president of the American Petroleum Institute. He was a member of the influential Farish family.

== Early life ==
Farish was born in Mayersville, Mississippi the son of William Stamps Farish I (1843–1899) and Katherine Maude Power (1860–1931) and the grandnephew of Jefferson Davis. He attended school at St. Thomas Hall, an Episcopal preparatory school at Holly Springs, Mississippi. The school was founded in 1844 by a New Yorker, the Reverend Francis Lister Hawks (1798–1866). A brilliant, winsome, and sometimes controversial Episcopal priest and educator, Hawks attracted motivated students from all over the Episcopal Diocese of Mississippi. Hawks&#x27;s vision for the school in Holly Springs was derived in part from W.A. Muhlenberg&#x27;s successful schools on Long Island. In 1847, Hawks left Mississippi to become the first President of the University of Louisiana in New Orleans (now the Tulane University of Louisiana).

== Career ==
After receiving a law degree from the University of Mississippi in 1900, he practiced law for three months at Clarksdale, Mississippi, before moving to Beaumont, Texas, when oil was discovered at the Spindletop oilfield. He became supervisor of wells for Texas Oil Fields, Limited, an English syndicate. The next year he organized the Brown-Farish Oil Company, which did contract drilling and traded in oil. The firm became bankrupt at Brown&#x27;s death, but Farish succeeded in borrowing money to pay creditors. By 1904 Farish and Robert Lee Blaffer had formed a partnership to do contract drilling and lease trading. The next year Blaffer and Farish moved to Houston to be nearer the Humble field.

In 1915, Farish became president of the Gulf Coast Producers Association and subsequently was named president of the Texas-Louisiana Oil and Gas Association. In March 1917, he and others organized the Humble Oil and Refining Company. As vice president, Farish was in charge of production, advancing industry technology and helping the company expand rapidly. In 1918, he raised the profile of Humble, serving on the Petroleum Committee of the Council for National Defense. When Humble grew short of capital for expansion, Farish turned to industry executives he had met. He negotiated with Walter Teagle, head of Standard Oil of New Jersey (later Exxon Corporation), which paid $17 million for a slight majority of Humble in 1919, and Humble gained a market for its oil and financial backing to build in Baytown, Texas one of the world&#x27;s largest refineries.

Farish served as vice president for five years and in 1922 became president. The Houston company, which remained surprisingly autonomous, became Jersey Standard&#x27;s largest operating unit. In 1926, Farish became a founder and president of the American Petroleum Institute, taking a leadership position in oil conservation. In 1933, he became chairman of the board of Standard Oil Company of New Jersey, which held substantial stock interest in Humble, and in 1937, he became president of Standard. At the beginning of World War II, Farish was a member of the National Petroleum Industry War Council.

=== World War II controversy ===

Farish had been a principal in a partnership between a Standard Oil/General Motors owned company, Ethyl Gasoline Corporation, and the German company I.G. Farben. This jointly owned venture, Ethyl GmbH, was involved with the creation of the Auschwitz labor camp on June 14, 1940, to produce artificial rubber from coal and they also built then operated tetraethyllead plants in Germany.

On March 25, 1942, U.S. Assistant Attorney General Thurman Arnold announced that Farish, along with other officers of Standard Oil and related companies, pleaded &quot;no contest&quot; in the criminal courts of Newark, New Jersey to criminally conspiring with the Nazi government in Germany. As part of a plea bargain, the charges were dropped in exchange for Standard Oil releasing its German patents and paying fines totaling about $50,000.

William Stamps Farish was fined $1,000 while similar fines were levied against Standard Oil -- $5,000 each for the parent company and for several subsidiaries. This did not interfere with the millions of dollars that Farish had profited as a large stockholder, chairman and president of Standard Oil. He was described by Senator Harry Truman in public as approaching &#x27;treason&#x27; for profiting from the Nazi war machine and withholding patents from the US government.

=== Lazy F Ranch ===
William Stamps Farish II founded Lazy F Ranch in Texas. After his death in 1942, his widow and daughter took over the running of the operation. Under Lazy F colors, Martha Gerry bred and raced a number of Thoroughbred racehorses the most famous of which was Forego who raced between 1973 and 1978. Voted United States Horse of the Year three years in a row and a U.S. Racing Hall of Fame inductee, Forego was ranked #8 in The Blood-Horse magazine list of the Top 100 U.S. Racehorses of the 20th Century.

== Personal life ==
On June 1, 1911, he married Libbie Randon Rice in Houston. Libbie was a cousin of the first wife of Jefferson Davis, Sarah Knox Taylor, daughter of President Zachary Taylor, and a granddaughter of Walter Browne Botts, a founder of the international law firm of Baker-Botts. (Farish&#x27;s great-grandfather, Hazelwood M. Farish (1809–1851), married Jane Lucinda Davis (1821–51), youngest sister of Jefferson Davis, President of the CSA.) Together, W.S. and Libbie Rice Farish had a son and a daughter:

* William Stamps Farish Jr. was in the US Air Force during World War II and was the father of William Stamps Farish III (b. 1939).
* Martha Farish (1918–2007), who married Edward Harriman Gerry (1914–2003), in 1939. Gerry was the son of Robert Livingston Gerry Sr. (1877–1957) and Cornelia Averell Harriman (1884–1966), the daughter of railroad executive E. H. Harriman and his wife Mary Williamson Averell.

Farish resided in the Shadyside community, developed by his friend, Joseph S. Cullinan.

William Stamps Farish II died at the age of 61 on November 29, 1942, in Millbrook, New York, while visiting friends; he was buried in Houston. Farish had established the W. S. Farish Co. in 1929 to manage the family assets, which were valued by Forbes in 1992 at $400 million. The holdings include the Farish Fund foundation, providing millions for charitable causes. W. S. Farish Co., today is headed by grandson Will III, and still operates in Houston.

== See also ==
*William Stamps Farish III (grandson)
*William Stamps Farish IV (great grandson)

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q8018710" start="0" end="24" title="William Stamps Farish II" label="William Stamps Farish II"/>
<link wikidata="Q375791" start="128" end="140" title="Standard Oil" label="Standard Oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q466043" start="184" end="212" title="American Petroleum Institute" label="American Petroleum Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q2387079" start="301" end="325" title="Mayersville, Mississippi" label="Mayersville, Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="337" end="360" title="William Stamps Farish I" label="William Stamps Farish I"/>
<link wikidata="Q162269" start="434" end="449" title="Jefferson Davis" label="Jefferson Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q682443" start="493" end="502" title="Episcopal Church (United States)" label="Episcopal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2273202" start="525" end="551" title="Holly Springs, Mississippi" label="Holly Springs, Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138384" start="1153" end="1178" title="University of Mississippi" label="University of Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q990145" start="1225" end="1248" title="Clarksdale, Mississippi" label="Clarksdale, Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q128282" start="1267" end="1282" title="Beaumont, Texas" label="Beaumont, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2602814" start="1315" end="1325" title="Spindletop" label="Spindletop"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1648" end="1666" title="Robert Lee Blaffer" label="Robert Lee Blaffer"/>
<link wikidata="Q9005394" start="2018" end="2049" title="Humble Oil and Refining Company" label="Humble Oil and Refining Company"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2233" end="2288" title="Petroleum Committee of the Council for National Defense" label="Petroleum Committee of the Council for National Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q7964484" start="2407" end="2420" title="Walter Teagle" label="Walter Teagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q156238" start="2430" end="2456" title="Standard Oil of New Jersey" label="Standard Oil of New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q156238" start="2464" end="2469" title="Exxon" label="Exxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q812646" start="2621" end="2635" title="Baytown, Texas" label="Baytown, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q466043" start="2927" end="2955" title="American Petroleum Institute" label="American Petroleum Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q114001197" start="3051" end="3085" title="Standard Oil Company of New Jersey" label="Standard Oil Company of New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2112884" start="3417" end="3443" title="Ethyl Gasoline Corporation" label="Ethyl Gasoline Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q156152" start="3468" end="3479" title="I.G. Farben" label="I.G. Farben"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3509" end="3519" title="Ethyl GmbH" label="Ethyl GmbH"/>
<link wikidata="Q7341" start="3559" end="3568" title="Auschwitz" label="Auschwitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q266210" start="3671" end="3685" title="tetraethyllead" label="tetraethyllead"/>
<link wikidata="Q7799336" start="3757" end="3771" title="Thurman Arnold" label="Thurman Arnold"/>
<link wikidata="Q25395" start="3917" end="3935" title="Newark, New Jersey" label="Newark, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="3970" end="3974" title="Nazi" label="Nazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="4093" end="4099" title="Germany" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q11613" start="4479" end="4491" title="Harry Truman" label="Harry Truman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="4696" end="4701" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q210826" start="4852" end="4864" title="Thoroughbred" label="Thoroughbred"/>
<link wikidata="Q187916" start="4865" end="4875" title="horse racing" label="racehorses"/>
<link wikidata="Q289324" start="4905" end="4911" title="Forego" label="Forego"/>
<link wikidata="Q2962946" start="4951" end="4982" title="Eclipse Award for Horse of the Year" label="United States Horse of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q6974502" start="5010" end="5034" title="National Museum of Racing and Hall of Fame" label="U.S. Racing Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325149" start="5069" end="5093" title="The Blood-Horse magazine" label="The Blood-Horse magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q885051" start="5106" end="5149" title="Blood-Horse magazine List of the Top 100 U.S. Racehorses of the 20th Century" label="Top 100 U.S. Racehorses of the 20th Century"/>
<link wikidata="Q16555" start="5222" end="5229" title="Houston" label="Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q458286" start="5289" end="5306" title="Sarah Knox Taylor" label="Sarah Knox Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q11896" start="5330" end="5344" title="Zachary Taylor" label="Zachary Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5369" end="5388" title="Walter Browne Botts" label="Walter Browne Botts"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5677" end="5702" title="William Stamps Farish Jr." label="William Stamps Farish Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q11223" start="5714" end="5726" title="US Air Force" label="US Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q3568965" start="5769" end="5794" title="William Stamps Farish III" label="William Stamps Farish III"/>
<link wikidata="Q6774392" start="5808" end="5821" title="Martha F. Gerry" label="Martha Farish"/>
<link wikidata="Q7346946" start="5912" end="5939" title="Robert L. Gerry Sr." label="Robert Livingston Gerry Sr."/>
<link wikidata="Q1292518" start="6030" end="6044" title="E. H. Harriman" label="E. H. Harriman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6780964" start="6058" end="6081" title="Mary Williamson Averell" label="Mary Williamson Averell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7460963" start="6106" end="6115" title="Shadyside, Houston" label="Shadyside"/>
<link wikidata="Q6286737" start="6152" end="6170" title="Joseph S. Cullinan" label="Joseph S. Cullinan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3568965" start="6645" end="6670" title="William Stamps Farish III" label="William Stamps Farish III"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6683" end="6707" title="William Stamps Farish IV" label="William Stamps Farish IV"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="312963" wikidata="Q878241" url="?curid=312963" title="Camel (cigarette)">
<text>Camel is an American brand of cigarettes, currently owned and manufactured by the R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company in the United States and by Japan Tobacco outside the U.S.

Most recently Camel cigarettes contain a blend of Turkish tobacco and Virginia tobacco. Winston-Salem, North Carolina, the city where R. J. Reynolds was founded, is nicknamed &quot;Camel City&quot; because of the brand&#x27;s popularity.

==History==

In 1913, Richard Joshua &quot;R. J.&quot; Reynolds, founder of the company that still bears his name, innovated the packaged cigarette. Prior cigarette smokers had rolled their own, which tended to obscure the potential for a national market for a pre-packaged product. Reynolds worked to develop a more appealing flavor, creating the Camel cigarette, which he so named because it used Turkish tobacco in imitation of then-fashionable Egyptian cigarettes. Reynolds priced them below competitors, and within a year, he had sold 425 million packs.

Camel cigarettes were originally blended to have a milder taste than established brands. They were advance-promoted by a careful advertising campaign that included &quot;teasers&quot; simply stating &quot;the Camels are coming&quot;, a play on the old Scottish folk song &quot;The Campbells Are Coming&quot;. Another promotion was &quot;Old Joe&quot;, a circus camel driven through towns to attract attention and distribute free cigarettes. The brand&#x27;s slogan, used for decades, was &quot;I&#x27;d walk a mile for a Camel!&quot;

The iconic style of Camel is the original unfiltered cigarette sold in a soft pack, known as Camel Straights or Regulars. Its popularity peaked through the brand&#x27;s use by famous personalities such as news broadcaster Edward R. Murrow, whose usage of them was so heavy and so public that the smoking of a Camel no-filter became his trademark.

In Europe, Camel is also a brand of cigarette rolling papers and loose cigarette tobacco, maintaining a top 20 roll-your-own rank in Northern Europe with yearly expansion into Southern and Eastern Europe according to the European Subsidiary&#x27;s annual report.

In 1999, Japan Tobacco International gained ownership of the rights to sell Camel outside the United States. The tobacco blend of the non-American Camel contains less Oriental tobacco and a higher proportion of Burley.

On July 1, 2000, an &quot;Oriental&quot; variety of Camel was introduced, followed by Turkish Gold, a regular cigarette, in 2000, and Turkish Jade, a menthol, in 2001. In 2005 Camel added its name on the cigarette paper and changed the filter color and design on its Oriental version, which was subsequently discontinued, but then reinstated. Also in 2005, Turkish Silvers were introduced, an ultralight version positioned in strength below Turkish Gold &quot;lights&quot; and &quot;full flavor&quot; Turkish Royal. Various Camel Crush and Camel Click cigarettes have also been created and are some of the most popular Camel variants being sold.

In 2012, Camel was surpassed by Pall Mall as R. J. Reynolds&#x27; most popular brand.

In June 2012, Camel Filters were discontinued in the United Kingdom.

In 2013, Camel celebrated its 100th anniversary. Professor Robert N. Proctor of Stanford University commented on the occasion with an editorial in the &quot;Los Angeles Times&quot;, noting that over the last century, Camel sold over 4 trillion cigarettes and &quot;have probably caused about 4 million deaths.&quot; In the same editorial, Proctor also stated that about half as many cigarettes are being sold to Americans in 2013 than in 1981.

==Marketing==
===Graphic design===

The photograph used for the Camel design was taken on September 29, 1913, by Andrew Jackson Farrell, a Winston-Salem based photographer. Farrell and Mr. R. C. Haberkern of the Reynolds Tobacco Company went to the Barnum &amp; Bailey Circus to photograph a camel and a dromedary to use in the design for a &quot;brand of Turkish Cigarettes which we [Reynolds Tobacco] are about to put on the market.&quot;

* &quot;The label&#x27;s background of temples, minarets, an oasis, and pyramids was much like it is today, but the camel in the foreground was a pathetic, one-humped beast with short, pointed ears, two-pronged hoofs and a drooping neck. Is this a camel? the Reynolds people asked each other. Consulting the &quot;Encyclopedia Britannica&quot;, they learned that a one-humped dromedary could indeed be called a camel, although no one was too pleased with the creature&#x27;s looks. Luckily, Barnum &amp; Bailey came to town. Monday, September 29, 1913, Roy C. Haberkern, Reynolds&#x27; young secretary, went to investigate. With a photographer (Andrew Jackson Farrell), he visited the circus menagerie and found not only a dromedary, but a two-humped camel as well. When the animal&#x27;s boss refused permission to photograph them, Haberkern pointed out that Reynolds had always closed offices and factories for the circus, a practice that could easily be discontinued. The trainer relented, but demanded a written release from the company. Haberkern raced back to the closed office building, climbed through a window, wrote the agreement, and signed Reynolds&#x27; name to it. Back at the fairgrounds the circus man conceded and brought out the two animals. The camel posed willingly, but Old Joe, the dromedary, wouldn&#x27;t hold still. The trainer gave him a slap on the nose. Old Joe raised his tail, threw back his ears and closed his eyes as the shutter snapped. From that photograph an improved label was designed and Old Joe became the most famous dromedary in the world.&quot;

The Reynolds company commissioned Fred Otto Kleesattel in 1913 to draw the original artwork. The signature scene on most Camel cigarette packs shows a single dromedary, the smallest of the three species of camel, standing on desert sand, with pyramids and palm trees in the background. The back features bazaars and mosques. On European and some other non-U.S. versions, the desert motifs have been replaced by health warnings. On others, Kleesattel included &quot;Manneken Pis&quot;, a historical figure of Brussels.

Known as &quot;Fritz&quot;, Kleesattel was a highly sought after graphic designer living in Louisville, Kentucky. He was hired through his company, Klee Ad Art, to design the packaging for the new Camel cigarettes&#x27; line. Klee Ad Art was also integral in devising designs for Four Roses Distillery, Heaven Hill Distilleries, and many other now immediately recognizable U.S. brands. While serving in the U.S. Army during World War I, Kleesattel worked as a camouflage artist, disguising buildings, vehicles, and other potential targets by making them blend with their surroundings.

===Ad campaigns===

In an apparent attempt to counter Lucky Strike&#x27;s popular &quot;It&#x27;s Toasted&quot; campaign, Camel went in the opposite direction by boasting that Camel was a &quot;fresh&quot; cigarette &quot;never parched or toasted.&quot;

In 1936, Camel used the slogan &quot;For digestion&#x27;s sake – smoke Camels.&quot; The ads ran from 1936 to 1939. In 1951, over a decade after the ad campaign ended, the FTC issued a cease-and-desist order prohibiting R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company (RJR) from claiming that Camels aided digestion in any respect.

In 1941, Camel installed a billboard on the east side of Times Square, New York. Designed by Douglas Leigh, this showed a smoking man, with steam coming from his mouth every few seconds to represent cigarette smoke. The man depicted was replaced periodically (during World War 2, the billboard showed servicemen in uniform). The billboard became a famous landmark and remained in place until 1966.

In 1946, Camel advertised their cigarettes as being the favorite choice among doctors &quot;from every branch of medicine&quot;, making smokers believe it was safe to smoke them. The slogan &quot;More doctors smoke Camels than any other cigarette&quot; became the mainstay of Camel advertising until 1952. Ads featuring the slogan were seen in a range of media, including medical journals such as the &quot;Journal of the American Medical Association&quot;, television commercials, popular radio programs such as &quot;Abbott and Costello&quot; and magazines such as &quot;Life&quot; and &quot;Time&quot;. The slogan was claimed to be based on surveys by &quot;three leading independent research organizations&quot;; however, these surveys were conducted by R. J. Reynolds&#x27;s advertising agency, the William Esty Company, and included free cigarettes for the doctors who were interviewed.

In late 1987, RJR created &quot;Joe Camel&quot; as a brand mascot. In 1991, the American Medical Association published a report stating that 5- and 6-year-olds could more easily recognize Joe Camel than Mickey Mouse, Fred Flintstone, Bugs Bunny, or even Barbie. This led the association to ask RJR to terminate the Joe Camel campaign. RJR declined, but further appeals followed in 1993 and 1994. On July 10, 1997, the Joe Camel campaign was retired and replaced with a more adult campaign which appealed to the desires of its mid-20s target market. Camel paid millions of dollars to settle lawsuits accusing them of using Joe Camel to market smoking to children.

===Camel Cash===
&quot;Camel Cash&quot;, or &quot;C-Note&quot;, was a promotional ticket stuck to the back of filtered varieties of Camel cigarettes. It was made to vaguely resemble currency and could be exchanged for items from the Camel Cash catalog. It could not be used, however, to purchase Camel tobacco products.

The artwork changed many times over the years, and in the past included the face of Joe Camel, much in the same way as presidents are featured on American currency; later designs just used a Camel silhouette like the one on the Camel logo, after Joe Camel was discontinued. Camel Cash redemption expired on March 31, 2007, angering some smokers who had been saving up the &quot;cash&quot; for years only to find it worthless.

====Break free adventure====
In 2010, R. J. Reynolds planned to sell Camel packs showing one of 10 locations to be visited by the Camel mascot, including Seattle, Washington; Austin, Texas; San Francisco; Las Vegas; New Orleans; Bonneville Salt Flats; Sturgis, South Dakota; Route 66; and the Williamsburg neighborhood of Brooklyn. The Winston-Salem package showed a tobacco field and the city&#x27;s skyline, including the former R. J. Reynolds headquarters. During a 10-week period, visitors to a website were asked to guess which city would be next. Matthew Myers, president of Campaign for Tobacco-Free Kids, accused the company of targeting children once again, saying, &quot;The new campaign cynically uses the names and images of trendy U.S. destinations ... in an attempt to make Camel cigarettes cool again.&quot; David Howard of R. J. Reynolds emphasized the campaign was geared toward adults and pointed out only adults could access the website.

New York City health commissioner Thomas Farley and the National Association of Attorneys General both sent Reynolds letters asking that the campaign be stopped. The organization said that it violated the 1998 tobacco settlement. Reynolds denied that children were being targeted and said the campaign did not go against the settlement. Other cities and states also stated their objections, including San Francisco and Seattle.

==&#x27;Hidden&#x27; camel images==
According to a legend, the artist who drew the image of the camel was Belgian and did not like the marketing manager of Camel so he introduced a design of Manneken Pis (a bronze statue of a very typical urinating child from Belgium). When examined closely, some people claim to see a man with an erection in the shadows on the camel&#x27;s left leg. Another legend says the leg image is a nude woman. Some people claim that you can see the image of a baboon or another type of monkey on the back of the dromedary, some even say that you can see eagles near the head and a fish in the central area. It is considered unlikely that these images were drawn on purpose, rather they are the product of the shading of the drawing.

==Sponsorship==

===Formula One===

Camel has been a sponsor of various Formula One teams since :

* AGS () - The logos were placed on the side of the cars, and on the drivers&#x27; helmets. In races where tobacco sponsorship was forbidden, the Camel name was replaced with the Camel logo instead.

* Benetton Formula 1 (, ) - In the 1988-89 seasons, Camel was a smaller sponsor and the logos were displayed on the side of the car and on the side of the drivers&#x27; helmets only. Camel became the main sponsor from the season until the season, and the logos were more prominently shown on the car. In races where tobacco sponsorship was forbidden, the Camel name was either replaced with blue gaps, the Camel logo, or the &quot;Benetton&quot; name instead.

* Larrousse F1 () - The logos were displayed on the top of the nose section, right in the front of the driver, on the side of the car and on the drivers&#x27; helmets.

* Team Lotus ()

* Minardi () - The logos were shown on the side of the car.

* Tyrrell Racing () - In 1988, the logos were displayed on the top of the car, on the front of the nose, on the top side of the rear wing and on the driver&#x27;s helmets because it was a minor sponsor, but in 1989 Camel was the main sponsor and the logos were more prominently shown. In races where tobacco sponsorship was forbidden, the Camel name was replaced with the Camel logo instead.

* Williams F1 () - The logos were shown on top of the car, on the top and side of the nose, right in front of the driver and on the driver&#x27;s helmets. In races where tobacco sponsorship was forbidden, the Camel name was replaced with either the Camel logo or with &quot;Williams&quot; instead.

===Camel Trophy===

Camel organised the Camel Trophy, a vehicle-oriented competition that was held annually between 1980 and 2000. It was best known for its use of Land Rover vehicles over challenging terrain.

==See also==
* Egyptian cigarette industry
* Camel Trophy

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q878241" start="0" end="5" title="Camel (cigarette)" label="Camel"/>
<link wikidata="Q431289" start="21" end="26" title="brand" label="brand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1578" start="30" end="39" title="cigarette" label="cigarette"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759032" start="82" end="112" title="R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company" label="R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q898568" start="141" end="154" title="Japan Tobacco" label="Japan Tobacco"/>
<link wikidata="Q4357899" start="223" end="238" title="Turkish tobacco" label="Turkish tobacco"/>
<link wikidata="Q907713" start="243" end="259" title="Virginia tobacco" label="Virginia tobacco"/>
<link wikidata="Q49227" start="261" end="290" title="Winston-Salem, North Carolina" label="Winston-Salem, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2123813" start="434" end="475" title="R. J. Reynolds" label="Richard Joshua &amp;quot;R. J.&amp;quot; Reynolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759032" start="488" end="525" title="R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company" label="the company that still bears his name"/>
<link wikidata="Q4357899" start="811" end="826" title="Turkish tobacco" label="Turkish tobacco"/>
<link wikidata="Q20870982" start="860" end="879" title="Egyptian cigarette industry" label="Egyptian cigarettes"/>
<link wikidata="Q17104347" start="1249" end="1273" title="The Campbells Are Coming" label="The Campbells Are Coming"/>
<link wikidata="Q8015188" start="1466" end="1499" title="William Martin Armistead" label="I&amp;#x27;d walk a mile for a Camel!"/>
<link wikidata="Q353935" start="1729" end="1745" title="Edward R. Murrow" label="Edward R. Murrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q199344" start="1901" end="1914" title="rolling paper" label="rolling paper"/>
<link wikidata="Q397401" start="2128" end="2155" title="Japan Tobacco International" label="Japan Tobacco International"/>
<link wikidata="Q848998" start="3018" end="3027" title="Pall Mall (cigarette)" label="Pall Mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q41506" start="3223" end="3242" title="Stanford University" label="Stanford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q71516" start="3892" end="3901" title="dromedary" label="dromedary"/>
<link wikidata="Q219760" start="5923" end="5929" title="bazaar" label="bazaar"/>
<link wikidata="Q152072" start="6084" end="6096" title="Manneken Pis" label="Manneken Pis"/>
<link wikidata="Q240" start="6127" end="6135" title="Brussels" label="Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q43668" start="6230" end="6250" title="Louisville, Kentucky" label="Louisville, Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q5694665" start="6441" end="6465" title="Heaven Hill Distilleries" label="Heaven Hill Distilleries"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="6562" end="6573" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q753556" start="6778" end="6790" title="Lucky Strike" label="Lucky Strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q786713" start="7151" end="7154" title="Federal Trade Commission" label="FTC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759032" start="7199" end="7229" title="R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company" label="R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q11259" start="7352" end="7364" title="Times Square" label="Times Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q5301725" start="7388" end="7401" title="Douglas Leigh" label="Douglas Leigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470970" start="8101" end="8144" title="JAMA" label="Journal of the American Medical Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q23679" start="8213" end="8232" title="Abbott and Costello" label="Abbott and Costello"/>
<link wikidata="Q463198" start="8267" end="8271" title="Life (magazine)" label="Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="8288" end="8292" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q8008672" start="8498" end="8518" title="William Esty Company" label="William Esty Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1691355" start="8620" end="8629" title="Joe Camel" label="Joe Camel"/>
<link wikidata="Q18670161" start="8647" end="8653" title="mascot" label="mascot"/>
<link wikidata="Q465697" start="8668" end="8696" title="American Medical Association" label="American Medical Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q11934" start="8791" end="8803" title="Mickey Mouse" label="Mickey Mouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q614889" start="8805" end="8820" title="Fred Flintstone" label="Fred Flintstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q183102" start="8822" end="8832" title="Bugs Bunny" label="Bugs Bunny"/>
<link wikidata="Q167447" start="8842" end="8848" title="Barbie" label="Barbie"/>
<link wikidata="Q550687" start="9302" end="9308" title="United States one-hundred-dollar bill" label="C-Note"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042783" start="9322" end="9340" title="promotional merchandise" label="promotional ticket"/>
<link wikidata="Q18670161" start="10136" end="10142" title="mascot" label="mascot"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083" start="10154" end="10173" title="Seattle, Washington" label="Seattle, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q16559" start="10175" end="10188" title="Austin, Texas" label="Austin, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="10190" end="10203" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q2624848" start="10205" end="10214" title="Las Vegas Valley" label="Las Vegas"/>
<link wikidata="Q34404" start="10216" end="10227" title="New Orleans" label="New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1081023" start="10229" end="10250" title="Bonneville Salt Flats" label="Bonneville Salt Flats"/>
<link wikidata="Q989280" start="10252" end="10273" title="Sturgis, South Dakota" label="Sturgis, South Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q79934" start="10275" end="10283" title="U.S. Route 66" label="Route 66"/>
<link wikidata="Q771572" start="10293" end="10330" title="Williamsburg, Brooklyn" label="Williamsburg neighborhood of Brooklyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q55606508" start="10581" end="10611" title="Campaign for Tobacco-Free Kids" label="Campaign for Tobacco-Free Kids"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="10958" end="10971" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q23058869" start="10992" end="11005" title="Thomas Farley (physician)" label="Thomas Farley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6970606" start="11014" end="11055" title="National Association of Attorneys General" label="National Association of Attorneys General"/>
<link wikidata="Q17112596" start="11163" end="11186" title="Tobacco Master Settlement Agreement" label="1998 tobacco settlement"/>
<link wikidata="Q152072" start="11578" end="11590" title="Manneken Pis" label="Manneken Pis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="12220" end="12231" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q171487" start="12249" end="12252" title="Automobiles Gonfaronnaises Sportives" label="AGS"/>
<link wikidata="Q171329" start="12449" end="12467" title="Benetton Formula" label="Benetton Formula 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q172958" start="12910" end="12922" title="Larrousse" label="Larrousse F1"/>
<link wikidata="Q173996" start="13079" end="13089" title="Team Lotus" label="Team Lotus"/>
<link wikidata="Q142381" start="13096" end="13103" title="Minardi" label="Minardi"/>
<link wikidata="Q171992" start="13157" end="13171" title="Tyrrell Racing" label="Tyrrell Racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q171337" start="13550" end="13561" title="Williams Grand Prix Engineering" label="Williams F1"/>
<link wikidata="Q20870982" start="14073" end="14100" title="Egyptian cigarette industry" label="Egyptian cigarette industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028463" start="14103" end="14115" title="Camel Trophy" label="Camel Trophy"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="312964" wikidata="Q3158961" url="?curid=312964" title="Jacques Gaffarel">
<text>Jacques Gaffarel () (1601–1681) was a French scholar and astrologer. He followed the family tradition of studying medicine, and then became a priest, but mainly developed his interests in the fields of natural history and Oriental occultism, gaining fluency in the Hebrew, Persian, and Arabic languages.

His most famous work is &quot;&quot; (&quot;Unheard-of Curiosities concerning Talismanical Sculpture of the Persians, the horoscope of the Patriarchs, and the reading of the Stars), which was published in French in 1629 (and translated into English in 1650, by Edmund Chilmead). Gaffarel included in his work two large folding plates of &quot;the Celestial Constellations expressed by Hebrew characters&quot;, and asserted that the letters of the Hebrew alphabet could be interpreted from the constellations and that the heavens could be read as if a book.

His book enjoyed phenomenal success. René Descartes read it with interest and the French physician and mathematician Pierre Gassendi (1592–1655) defended it. &quot;Unheard-of Curiosities&quot; was one of 1,500 books in the Library of Sir Thomas Browne and one of the varied sources of his encyclopaedia entitled Pseudodoxia Epidemica. Browne alludes to Gaffarel&#x27;s astrology in The Garden of Cyrus thus:

:&quot;Could we satisfy our selves in the position of the lights above, or discover the wisdom of that order so invariably maintained in the fixed stars of heaven...we might abate...the strange Cryptography of Gaffarell in his Starrie Booke of Heaven.&quot;

Gaffarel contributed to the debate between Marin Mersenne and Robert Fludd.

On the other hand, the Sorbonne rejected Gaffarel&#x27;s work and ridiculed him; however, he gained the protection of the powerful Cardinal Richelieu, who made him his librarian and sent him off first to Italy, then to Greece and Asia to retrieve rare books (reportedly including manuscripts by Pico della Mirandola).

==Works==
* Abdita divinae Cabalae mysteria contra Sophistarum logomachiam defensa. H. Blagaeart, Paris 1625.
* Profonds mystères de la Cabale divine. Beaudelot, Paris 1912.
* Nihil, fere nihil, minus nihilo: seu de ente, non ente, et medio inter ens et non ens (= Positiones. Vol. 26). Pinelli, Venice 1634.
* Quaestio pacifica, num orta in religione dissidia componi et conciliari possint per humanas rationes et philosophorum (= Principia. Vol. 44). C. Du Mesnil, Paris 1645.
* Le Monde sousterrein, ou Description historique et philosophique de tous les plus beaux antres et de toutes les plus belles grottes de la terre. C. Du Mesnil, Paris 1654.

== References ==
==External links==

* Examples of Gaffarel&#x27;s astrological writing
** Charab in the Stars
** The Dial of Achaz
* CELESTIAL ALPHABET EVENT

==Bibliography==
* Hiro Hirai (ed.), &quot;Jacques Gaffarel between Magic and Science&quot; (Rome: Serra, 2014). 

* Saverio Campanini, &quot;Eine späte Apologie der Kabbala. Die Abdita divinae Cabalae Mysteria des Jacques Gaffarel&quot;, in T. Frank – U. Kocher – U. Tarnow (edd.), &quot;Topik und Tradition. Prozesse der Neuordnung von Wissensüberlieferungen des 13. bis 17. Jahrhunderts&quot;, Göttingen 2007, pp. 325–351.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3158961" start="0" end="16" title="Jacques Gaffarel" label="Jacques Gaffarel"/>
<link wikidata="Q34362" start="57" end="67" title="Astrology" label="astrologer"/>
<link wikidata="Q484591" start="202" end="217" title="natural history" label="natural history"/>
<link wikidata="Q205653" start="222" end="230" title="Oriental" label="Oriental"/>
<link wikidata="Q178934" start="231" end="240" title="occultism" label="occultism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9288" start="265" end="271" title="Hebrew language" label="Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q9168" start="273" end="280" title="Persian language" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="413" end="419" title="Persia" label="Persia"/>
<link wikidata="Q188518" start="427" end="436" title="horoscope" label="horoscope"/>
<link wikidata="Q171692" start="444" end="454" title="Patriarchs" label="Patriarchs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5339379" start="566" end="581" title="Edmund Chilmead" label="Edmund Chilmead"/>
<link wikidata="Q8928" start="662" end="675" title="Constellation" label="Constellation"/>
<link wikidata="Q33513" start="752" end="767" title="Hebrew alphabet" label="Hebrew alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q8928" start="798" end="811" title="constellation" label="constellation"/>
<link wikidata="Q9191" start="900" end="914" title="René Descartes" label="René Descartes"/>
<link wikidata="Q192315" start="980" end="995" title="Pierre Gassendi" label="Pierre Gassendi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6542695" start="1086" end="1114" title="Library of Sir Thomas Browne" label="Library of Sir Thomas Browne"/>
<link wikidata="Q6037862" start="1175" end="1196" title="Pseudodoxia Epidemica" label="Pseudodoxia Epidemica"/>
<link wikidata="Q7735837" start="1245" end="1264" title="The Garden of Cyrus" label="The Garden of Cyrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q188663" start="1574" end="1588" title="Marin Mersenne" label="Marin Mersenne"/>
<link wikidata="Q453697" start="1593" end="1605" title="Robert Fludd" label="Robert Fludd"/>
<link wikidata="Q209842" start="1631" end="1639" title="University of Paris" label="Sorbonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q26702" start="1739" end="1757" title="Cardinal Richelieu" label="Cardinal Richelieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="1827" end="1833" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q182128" start="1903" end="1923" title="Pico della Mirandola" label="Pico della Mirandola"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="312967" wikidata="Q607548" url="?curid=312967" title="Legio XX Valeria Victrix">
<text>Legio XX Valeria Victrix, in English the Twentieth Victorious Valeria Legion, was a legion of the Imperial Roman army.

The origin of the Legion&#x27;s name is unclear and there are various theories, but the legion may have gained its title &quot;Valeria Victrix&quot; from a victory it achieved during the Great Illyrian revolt under the command of the general Marcus Valerius Messalla Messallinus. The legion had a boar as its emblem.

==History==
The legion was probably founded shortly after 31 BC by the emperor Augustus.

XX &quot;Valeria victrix&quot; was probably part of the large Roman force that fought in the Cantabrian Wars in Hispania from 25 to 19 BC.

The legion then moved to Burnum in Illyricum at the beginning of the Pannonian uprising (&quot;Bellum Batonianum&quot;) in AD 6. It is recorded operating against the Marcomanni in AD 6 in the army of Tiberius.

In Illyria they were led by the governor of Illyricum, Marcus Valerius Messalla Messallinus, who may have given his clan (&quot;gens&quot;) name &quot;Valeria&quot; to the legion. Although understrength, they managed to defeat the rebels led by Bato of the Daesitiates. In one battle the legion cut through the enemy lines, was surrounded, and cut its way out again.

After the disaster of Varus in AD 9, XX &quot;Valeria Victrix&quot; moved to Germania Inferior and was based at Oppidum Ubiorum, then moved to Novaesium at the site of modern Neuss during Tiberius&#x27; reign.

The legion was one of the four with which Claudius invaded Britain in 43 AD. It was also one of the legions that defeated Caratacus at the Battle of Caer Caradoc, after which, from the AD 50s, it was encamped at Camulodunum, with a few units at Kingsholm in Gloucester.

Around AD 55 under The command of Manlius Valens it moved to Usk, in an unsuccessful attempt to pacify the Silures, a tribe very resistant to the imposition of Roman rule in Wales. But the legion suffered defeat, resulting in Valens’ replacement as legate In AD 60 or 61 the Twentieth helped put down the revolt of queen Boudica, after outflanking the Ordovices it took part in the second Roman invasion of Anglesey which destroyed the Celtic Druids and their religious practices. In AD 66, the legion was transferred to the much more passive Viroconium (Wroxeter). It may also have occupied Gloucester (Glevum) at this time.


In the year of the four emperors, the legion sided with Vitellius. Some units went with him to Rome. In AD 78–84, the legion was part of Gnaeus Julius Agricola&#x27;s campaigns in northern Britannia and Caledonia, and built the base at Inchtuthill. In AD 88 the legion returned south and occupied Castra Deva (Deva Victrix), where it remained based for at least two centuries.

The Twentieth was among the legions involved with the construction of Hadrian&#x27;s Wall, and the discovery of stone altars commemorating their work in Caledonia suggests that they had some role in building the Antonine Wall.

The legion probably went on campaign in 196 under Decimus Clodius Albinus into Gaul, and would have suffered heavy losses in Gaul before returning to Britain.

During the Carausian Revolt, which established the Britannic Empire under Carausius and Allectus in the 280s and 290s, the XX &quot;Valeria Victrix&quot; was still active. No further information is known after this period and scholars believe Legio XX was still stationed in Britain when Constantine III pulled the bulk of the military forces from there in the year 407 for his doomed campaign on the continent.

This legion has been much studied; at least 250 members of the legion have been identified in surviving inscriptions.

== Attested members ==
==Fiction==

Legio XX &quot;Valeria Victrix&quot; and their final days in Deva (Chester) in the early AD 400s form the backdrop to the Tom Stevens mythic fiction genre novel &quot;The Cauldron&quot; (special edition) with the story&#x27;s protagonist Valerian—the Praefectus and Chief Centurion—defending the city with the rump of the legion against the incursions of Hibernian pirates as the &quot;Dark Ages&quot; settle on Britannia. The movie &quot;Victrix! The Valiant of Albion&quot; is in production and features an adaptation of Stevens&#x27; novel.

Legio XX &quot;Valeria Victrix&quot; was the legion featured in the novel &quot;Eagle in the Snow&quot;; author Wallace Breem postulates that they were annihilated by the Germanic invasion of 406.

Several of the main characters in the early novels of Jack Whyte&#x27;s &quot;A Dream of Eagles&quot; series were former members of Legio XX &quot;Valeria Victrix&quot;.

Gaius Petreius Ruso, protagonist of &quot;Medicus&quot; by Ruth Downie, is a military doctor in Britannia attached to Legio XX.

Legio XX &quot;Valeria Victrix&quot; lends its name to the character Valeria Matuchek in Poul Anderson&#x27;s &quot;Operation Chaos&quot; and its sequel &quot;Operation Luna&quot;; her mother is said to describe this legion as the last to leave Britain—&quot;the last that stood against Chaos&quot;.

The first person narrator of Stephen Vincent Benét&#x27;s short story &quot;The Last of the Legions&quot; is the senior centurion of the &quot;Valeria Victrix&quot;, who recounts the events and the impressions of soldiers and populace surrounding the departure of the legion from Britain.

Legion Company of the U.S. Army&#x27;s 1st battalion, 503rd Infantry Regiment, 173rd Airborne Brigade stationed in Vicenza, Italy is named after Legio XX. They chose this name for the paratroopers&#x27; ability to fight fiercely behind enemy lines.

Legio XX Valeria Victrix features in the six-novel series &quot;Soldier of Rome: The Artorian Chronicles&quot; by James Mace.

Legio XX Valeria Victrix is mentioned in Sir Arthur Conan Doyle’s short story &quot;Through the Veil&quot;.

==See also==
*List of Roman legions

==References==
==External links==
*livius.org account of XX &quot;Valeria Victrix&quot;
*LEGIO XX, Maryland (USA) re-enactment group</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q607548" start="0" end="24" title="Legio XX Valeria Victrix" label="Legio XX Valeria Victrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q607548" start="41" end="76" title="Legio XX Valeria Victrix" label="Twentieth Victorious Valeria Legion"/>
<link wikidata="Q163323" start="84" end="90" title="Roman legion" label="legion"/>
<link wikidata="Q8772741" start="98" end="117" title="Imperial Roman army" label="Imperial Roman army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265861" start="307" end="328" title="Great Illyrian revolt" label="Great Illyrian revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1232435" start="362" end="398" title="Marcus Valerius Messalla Messallinus" label="Marcus Valerius Messalla Messallinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q58697" start="417" end="421" title="boar" label="boar"/>
<link wikidata="Q112110" start="429" end="435" title="emblem" label="emblem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405" start="517" end="525" title="Augustus" label="Augustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340107" start="621" end="636" title="Cantabrian Wars" label="Cantabrian Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q186513" start="640" end="648" title="Hispania" label="Hispania"/>
<link wikidata="Q548862" start="693" end="699" title="Burnum" label="Burnum"/>
<link wikidata="Q753824" start="703" end="712" title="Illyricum (Roman province)" label="Illyricum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265861" start="737" end="755" title="Great Illyrian revolt" label="Pannonian uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q209851" start="834" end="844" title="Marcomanni" label="Marcomanni"/>
<link wikidata="Q1407" start="868" end="876" title="Tiberius" label="Tiberius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1232435" start="934" end="970" title="Marcus Valerius Messalla Messallinus" label="Marcus Valerius Messalla Messallinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429412" start="1030" end="1037" title="Valeria (gens)" label="Valeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2417655" start="1124" end="1147" title="Bato I" label="Bato of the Daesitiates"/>
<link wikidata="Q214765" start="1269" end="1274" title="Publius Quinctilius Varus" label="Varus"/>
<link wikidata="Q152136" start="1324" end="1341" title="Germania Inferior" label="Germania Inferior"/>
<link wikidata="Q365" start="1359" end="1374" title="Oppidum Ubiorum" label="Oppidum Ubiorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2948" start="1422" end="1427" title="Neuss" label="Neuss"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411" start="1500" end="1508" title="Claudius" label="Claudius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258062" start="1509" end="1524" title="Roman invasion of Britain" label="invaded Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q335073" start="1580" end="1589" title="Caratacus" label="Caratacus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2521439" start="1597" end="1619" title="Battle of Caer Caradoc" label="Battle of Caer Caradoc"/>
<link wikidata="Q630604" start="1670" end="1681" title="Camulodunum" label="Camulodunum"/>
<link wikidata="Q360974" start="1716" end="1726" title="Glevum" label="Gloucester"/>
<link wikidata="Q602000" start="1790" end="1793" title="Burrium" label="Usk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127109" start="1836" end="1843" title="Silures" label="Silures"/>
<link wikidata="Q184634" start="2050" end="2057" title="Boudica" label="Boudica"/>
<link wikidata="Q768052" start="2081" end="2090" title="Ordovices" label="Ordovices"/>
<link wikidata="Q3850909" start="2111" end="2144" title="Roman conquest of Anglesey" label="second Roman invasion of Anglesey"/>
<link wikidata="Q35966" start="2165" end="2171" title="Celts" label="Celtic"/>
<link wikidata="Q131081" start="2172" end="2177" title="Druid" label="Druid"/>
<link wikidata="Q263031" start="2189" end="2208" title="Ancient Celtic religion" label="religious practices"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361580" start="2272" end="2282" title="Viroconium" label="Viroconium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1848222" start="2284" end="2292" title="Wroxeter" label="Wroxeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q170497" start="2321" end="2331" title="Gloucester" label="Gloucester"/>
<link wikidata="Q360974" start="2333" end="2339" title="Glevum" label="Glevum"/>
<link wikidata="Q470596" start="2364" end="2389" title="year of the four emperors" label="year of the four emperors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417" start="2413" end="2422" title="Vitellius" label="Vitellius"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="2452" end="2456" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q272082" start="2494" end="2516" title="Gnaeus Julius Agricola" label="Gnaeus Julius Agricola"/>
<link wikidata="Q2309575" start="2593" end="2604" title="Inchtuthill" label="Inchtuthill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2450247" start="2667" end="2679" title="Deva Victrix" label="Deva Victrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q57357" start="2805" end="2824" title="Hadrian&amp;#x27;s Wall" label="Hadrian&amp;#x27;s Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048625" start="2888" end="2897" title="Caledonia" label="Caledonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q210957" start="2947" end="2960" title="Antonine Wall" label="Antonine Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q237960" start="3013" end="3036" title="Decimus Clodius Albinus" label="Decimus Clodius Albinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q38060" start="3042" end="3046" title="Gaul" label="Gaul"/>
<link wikidata="Q680766" start="3134" end="3150" title="Carausian Revolt" label="Carausian Revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q680766" start="3174" end="3190" title="Britannic Empire" label="Britannic Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q317232" start="3197" end="3206" title="Carausius" label="Carausius"/>
<link wikidata="Q311556" start="3211" end="3219" title="Allectus" label="Allectus"/>
<link wikidata="Q209793" start="3411" end="3426" title="Constantine III (usurper)" label="Constantine III"/>
<link wikidata="Q6949160" start="3825" end="3839" title="mythic fiction" label="mythic fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q3201637" start="4316" end="4333" title="Eagle in the Snow" label="Eagle in the Snow"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565455" start="4348" end="4361" title="Wallace Breem" label="Wallace Breem"/>
<link wikidata="Q369469" start="4488" end="4498" title="Jack Whyte" label="Jack Whyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q4656586" start="4512" end="4529" title="A Dream of Eagles" label="A Dream of Eagles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2177596" start="4664" end="4675" title="Ruth Downie" label="Ruth Downie"/>
<link wikidata="Q220883" start="4823" end="4836" title="Poul Anderson" label="Poul Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3883945" start="4850" end="4865" title="Operation Chaos (novel)" label="Operation Chaos"/>
<link wikidata="Q7097249" start="4893" end="4907" title="Operation Luna" label="Operation Luna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348138" start="5064" end="5085" title="Stephen Vincent Benét" label="Stephen Vincent Benét"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="5347" end="5356" title="United States Army" label="U.S. Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q4639795" start="5379" end="5402" title="503rd Infantry Regiment (United States)" label="503rd Infantry Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q198679" start="5404" end="5426" title="173rd Airborne Brigade Combat Team" label="173rd Airborne Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q6537" start="5440" end="5447" title="Vicenza" label="Vicenza"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="5449" end="5454" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q35610" start="5747" end="5765" title="Arthur Conan Doyle" label="Arthur Conan Doyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334983" start="5825" end="5846" title="List of Roman legions" label="List of Roman legions"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="312968" wikidata="Q1226597" url="?curid=312968" title="Dino (given name)">
<text>Dino is a male given name.

The name is popular among Italians, where it means &quot;little sword&quot; or &quot;little bear.&quot;

In the Balkans, Dino is popular among Bosniaks and Croats in the former Yugoslav nations. Among Bosniaks, the name is derived from the Arabic word دين (din), meaning &quot;faith.&quot; It is similar to other popular names in this group, such as Edin and Adin. It is often used as a nickname for males with &quot;din&quot; in their name, as seen with Sabahudin &quot;Dino&quot; Bilalović. This region also has a female equivalent: Dina, which is similar to Edina, another popular female name in the region.

==Given name==
* Dino (fl.m c. 360–340 BC) or Dinon, ancient Greek historian
* Dino (Italian singer) (Eugenio Zambelli, 1948)
* Dino, real name Gilles Benizio, of French comic duo Shirley and Dino
* Dino (footballer, born 1917), full name Oswaldo Rodolfo da Silva, Brazilian football midfielder
* Dino (footballer, born 1978), full name Dino Gonçalo Castro Jorge, Brazilian football defender
* Dino (American singer) (Dean Esposito, born 1963), American DJ, singer-songwriter, and record producer
* Dino Abazović (born 1972), Bosnian sociologist and professor
* Dino Abbrescia (born 1966), Italian actor
* Dino Acconci, member of Hong Kong–based rock band Soler
* Dino Adriano (1943–2018), British businessman
* Dino Agote (born 1996), Chilean footballer
* Dino Alfieri (1886–1966), Italian fascist politician and diplomat
* Dino Andrade (born 1963), American voice actor
* Dino Arslanagić (born 1993), Belgian professional footballer of Bosnian descent
* Dino Asciolla, member of the string group Quartetto Italiano
* Dino Attanasio (born 1925), Belgian author of comics
* Dino Babers (born 1961), American football coach
* Dino Baggio (born 1971), Italian former professional footballer
* Dino Ballacci (1924–2013), Italian football player and manager
* Dino Ballarin (1925–1949), Italian footballer
* Dino Bardot (born 1972), Scottish musician and songwriter
* Dino Barsotti (1903–1985), Italian rower
* Dino Basaldella (1909–1977), Italian sculptor and painter
* Dino Battaglia (1923–1983), Italian comic artist
* Dino Bauk (born 1972), Slovenian lawyer and writer
* Dino Beganovic (born 2004), Swedish-Bosnian racing driver
* Dino Belosevic (born 1985), Croatian kickboxer
* Dino Bergens (born 1969), Dutch-Surinamese basketball player
* Dino Bertolo (born 1953), French racing cyclist
* Dino Beširović (born 1994), Portuguese-born Bosnian professional footballer
* Dino Betti van der Noot (born 1936), Italian jazz composer
* Dino Bevab (born 1993), Bosnian footballer
* Dino Bisanovic (born 1990), Bosnian footballer
* Dino Boffo (born 1952), Italian journalist
* Dino Borgioli (1891–1960), Italian lyric tenor
* Dino Bouterse (born 1972), son of former President of Suriname
* Dino Bovoli (1914–1988), Italian professional footballer and coach
* Dino Bravo (1948–1993), Italian-Canadian professional wrestler and promoter
* Dino Brugioni (1921–2015), American imagery analyst and bomb damage assessor
* Dino Bruni (born 1932), Italian road cyclist
* Dino Butorac (born 1990), Croatian basketball player
* Dino Buzzati (1906–1972), Italian writer and painter
* Dino Campana (1885–1932), Italian visionary poet
* Dino Campanella, member of American rock band Dredg
* Dino Casanova (1967–2002), American professional wrestler
* Dino Cassio (1934–2012), Italian actor and singer
* Dino Castagno (born 1993), Argentine professional footballer
* Dino Cazares (born 1969), guitarist for Divine Heresy and former guitarist for Fear Factory
* Dino Cellini (1914–1978), American gangster of Italian descent
* Dino Chiozza (1912–1972), American MLB player
* Dino Ciani (1941–1974), Italian pianist
* Dino Ciccarelli (born 1960), Canadian retired NHL player
* Dino Cinel, Italian-American historian, professor, and Roman Catholic priest
* Dino Claudio Sanchez, Filipino incumbent politician
* Dino Compagni (c. 1255–1324), Italian historical writer and political figure
* Dino Costa, American radio personality
* Dino Costantini (born 1940), Italian equestrian
* Dino Crescentini (1947–2008), Sammarinese bobsledder
* Dino Daa (born 1984), Filipino professional basketball player
* Dino da Costa (1931–2020), Brazilian-Italian former footballer
* Dino Danelli (1944–2022), American drummer
* Dino De Antoni (1936–2019), Italian Roman Catholic archbishop
* Dino De Poli (1929–2020), Italian lawyer and politician
* Dino De Zordo (born 1937), Italian ski jumper
* Dino Delevski (born 1976), American soccer player of Macedonian descent
* Dino Delmastro (born 1996), Argentine badminton player
* Dino del Garbo (c. 1280–1327), Italian medieval physician and philosopher
* Dino Dibra (1975–2000), Australian suspected murderer and a homicide victim
* Dino Di Luca (1903–1991), Italian actor of stage, screen, and television
* Dino Dines (1944–2004), British keyboarder
* Dino Dini (born 1965), creator of football video games
* Dino Djiba (born 1985), Senegalese former professional footballer
* Dino Djulbic (born 1983), Bosnian-Australian footballer
* Dino Dolmagić (born 1994), Serbian footballer
* Dino Don (1925–2007), Italian operatic baritone
* Dino Drpic (born 1981), Croatian professional footballer
* Dino Durbuzovic (born 1956), Bosnian professional football manager and former player
* Dino Duva (born 1958), American boxing promoter
* Dino Dvornik (1964–2008), Croatian singer-songwriter, music producer, actor, and reality television star
* Dino Ebel (born 1966), American baseball coach
* Dino Esposito (born 1965), Italian consultant, author, and MSDN magazine columnist
* Dino Eze (born 1984), Nigerian former footballer
* Dino Falconi (1902–1990), Italian screenwriter and film director
* Dino Fava (born 1977), Italian footballer
* Dino Fazlic (born 1991), German footballer
* Dino Fekaris (born 1945), Greek-American music producer and songwriter
* Dino Felicetti (born 1970), Italian-Canadian retired professional ice hockey player
* Dino Ferari, Italian drummer
* Dino Ferrari (1914–2000), Italian painter
* Dino Ferruzzi (born 1892), Italian equestrian
* Dino Fetscher (born 1988), Welsh actor
* Dino Formaggio (1914–2008), Italian philosopher, art critic, and academic
* Dino Gabriel, Italian-born Anglican bishop of Natal
* Dino Galparoli (born 1957), retired Italian footballer
* Dino Galvani (1890–1960), Italian actor
* Dino Gardner (born 1993), Canadian soccer player
* Dino Gaudio (born 1957), former American college basketball coach
* Dino Gavric (born 1989), Croatian footballer
* Dino Giarrusso (born 1974), Italian television personality and politician
* Dino Gifford (1917–2013), Italian professional footballer
* Dino Gillarduzzi (born 1975), Italian speed skater
* Dino Grandi (1895–1988), 1st Conte di Mordano, Italian Fascist politician
* Dino Hackett (born 1964), former American NFL player
* Dino Halilović (born 1998), Croatian footballer
* Dino Hall (born 1955), former American NFL player
* Dino Hamidović (born 1996), Bosnian handball player
* Dino Hamzić (born 1988), Bosnian professional footballer
* Dino Hotić (born 1995), Slovenian footballer
* Dino Imperial (born 1988), Filipino actor, Club MC, commercial model, and radio DJ
* Dino Innocenti (1913–1971), Italian ice hockey player
* Dino Islamović (born 1994), Swedish footballer
* Dino Jelusić (born 1992), Croatian rock singer, musician, and songwriter
* Dino Kartsonakis (born 1942), pianist who plays Christian-influenced music
* Dino Kessler (born 1966), former Swiss professional ice hockey player
* Dino Klisura (born 1999), Bosnian musician and producer
* Dino Kluk (born 1991), professional Croatian footballer
* Dino Kotopoulis (1932–2020), American artist
* Dino Kovacec (born 1993), Croatian footballer
* Dino Kovacevic (born 1999), Austrian footballer
* Dino Kraspedon (1905–1985), Brazilian author
* Dino Kresinger (born 1982), Croatian footballer
* Dino Lalvani (born 1973), British businessman, chairman, and CEO
* Dino Lamb (born 1998), English rugby union player
* Dino Lanaro (1909–1998), Italian painter
* Dino Lee (born 1993), Taiwanese singer, composer, musician, and actor
* Dino Lenny, Italian DJ, singer, record producer, and record label owner
* Dino Liviero (1938–1970), Italian road racing cyclist
* Dino Lombardi (born 1990), Italian motorcycle racer
* Dino Lopez (born 1969), Canadian retired soccer player
* Dino Lucchetta (born 1968), Italian rowing coxswain
* Dino Maamria (born 1974), Tunisian football manager and former player
* Dino Maiuri (1916–1984), Italian screenwriter, film director, and producer
* Dino Mangiero (born 1958), retired professional American football player
* Dino Marcan (born 1991), Croatian professional tennis player
* Dino Marino (born 1985), former Italian footballer
* Dino Martens (1894–1970), Italian painter and glass artist
* Dino Martin (1920–1999), American professional basketball player and coach
* Dino Martinovic (born 1990), Slovenian footballer
* Dino Mascotto (born 1932), former Canadian professional hockey player and AHL player
* Dino Mattessich, Croatian-American university administrator and former college lacrosse coach and player
* Dino Medjedovic (born 1989), Bosnian footballer
* Dino Melaye (born 1974), Nigerian politician
* Dino Menardi (1923–2014), Italian ice hockey player
* Dino Meneghin (born 1950), Italian former professional basketball player
* Dino Mennillo (born 1975), Australian retired soccer player and current occupational therapist
* Dino Merlin (Edin Dervišhalidović, born 1962), Bosnian singer-songwriter
* Dino Mikanović (born 1994), Croatian footballer
* Dino Minichiello (born 1968), Canadian fashion designer and entrepreneur
* Dino Molinaro, band member of Ikon
* Dino Monduzzi (1922–2006), Italian prelate of the Catholic Church
* Dino Moras (born 1944), French biochemist and research director
* Dino Morea (born 1975), Indian model and actor
* Dino Morelli (born 1973), former racing driver
* Dino Muric (born 1990), Slovenian professional basketball player
* Dino Nardin (1932–2010), Italian rower
* Dino Natali, American stage- and television-actor
* Dino Ndlovu (born 1990), South African professional footballer
* Dino Pagliari (born 1957), Italian professional former footballer and manager
* Dino Patti Djalal (born 1965), former Indonesian Ambassador to the US
* Dino Pedriali (1950–2021), Italian photographer
* Dino Pedrone, American former President of Davis College
* Dino Perić (born 1994), Croatian professional footballer
* Dino Perrone Compagni (1879–1950), Italian fascist, military personnel, and politician
* Dino Philipson (1889–1972), Italian lawyer and politician 
* Dino Philyaw (born 1970), retired American professional football player
* Dino Piero Giarda (born 1936), Italian economist and academic
* Dino Pita (born 1988), Bosnian-Swedish basketball player
* Dino Pogolotti (1879–1923), Italian real estate entrepreneur
* Dino Pompanin (1930–2015), Italian alpine skier
* Dino Porrini (born 1953), Italian former cyclist
* Dino Prižmić (born 2005), Croatian tennis player
* Dino Quattrocecere (born 1973), South African figure skater
* Dino Rada (born 1967), Croatian former professional basketball player
* Dino Radončić (born 1999), Montenegrin professional basketball player
* Dino Radoš (born 1991), Croatian professional basketball player
* Dino Ramic (born 1988), American soccer player
* Dino Rešidbegović (born 1975), Bosnian contemporary classic/electronic/experimental music composer
* Dino Restelli (1924–2006), American professional baseball player
* Dino Reyes Chua (born 1980), Filipino businessman and politician
* Dino Risi (1916–2008), Italian film director
* Dino Rondani (1868–1951), Italian socialist politician, lawyer, and parliamentarian
* Dino Rora (1945–1966), Italian swimmer
* Dino Rossi (born 1959), American politician and businessman
* Dino Sani (born 1932), Brazilian former footballer and coach
* Dino Sanlorenzo (1930–2020), Italian politician
* Dino Santana (1940–2010), Brazilian actor
* Dino Šarac (born 1990), Serbian footballer
* Dino Sefir (born 1988), Ethiopian long-distance runner
* Dino Segre (1893–1975), Italian writer
* Dino Seremet (born 1980), retired Slovenian footballer
* Dino Sete Cordas (1918–2006), Brazilian guitar player
* Dino Sex, member of the American punk rock band the Murder Junkies
* Dino Shafeek (1930–1984), Bangladeshi-British comedy actor
* Dino Sinovcic (born 1992), Croatian Paralympic swimmer
* Dino Skender (born 1983), Croatian professional football manager
* Dino Skorup (born 1999), Croatian professional footballer
* Dino Slavić (born 1992), Croatian handball player
* Dino Sokolovic (born 1988), Croatian Paralympic alpine skier
* Dino Spadetto (born 1950), retired Italian professional footballer
* Dino Staffa (1906–1977), Italian Cardinal of the Roman Catholic Church
* Dino Stancic (born 1992), Slovenian footballer
* Dino Stecher (born 1964), Swiss ice hockey coach and former player
* Dino Stiglec (born 1990), Croatian professional footballer
* Dino Tadello (born 1954), former Italian mountain runner and masters athlete
* Dino Tavarone (born 1942), Italian-Canadian actor
* Dino Terragni (1927–1979), Italian entrepreneur and inventor
* Dino Toppmoller (born 1980), German football manager and former player
* Dino Toso (1969–2008), Italian-Dutch engineer
* Dino Turcato (born 1946), Italian weightlifter
* Dino Urbani (1882–1958), Italian fencer
* Dino Valls (born 1959), Spanish painter
* Dino Vasso (born 1987), American football coach
* Dino Verde (1922–2004), Italian author, lyricist, playwright, and screenwriter
* Dino Verzini (born 1943), retired Italian track cyclist
* Dino Visser (born 1989), South African footballer
* Dino Waldren (born 1991), American rugby union player
* Dino Wells (born 1970), American actor, writer, boxer, and filmmaker
* Dino Wieser (born 1989), Swiss professional ice hockey player
* Dino Williams (born 1990), Jamaican international footballer
* Dino Yannopoulos (1919–2003), Metropolitan Opera director
* Dino Zamparelli (born 1992), British racing driver
* Dino Zandegù (born 1940), Italian former cyclist
* Dino Zoff (born 1942), Italian former football goalkeeper
* Dino Zonić, Bosnian composer and conductor
* Dino Zucchi (1927–2011), Italian basketball player

==Nickname==
Dino is also a nickname for Agostino, Constantinos, Alfredino, etc.

* Dino De Laurentiis (1919–2010), Italian film producer
* Dino Armas (born 1941), Uruguayan theater director and writer
* Alfredo Ferrari (1932–1956), Italian automotive engineer, Enzo Ferrari&#x27;s son
* Dino Saluzzi (born 1935), Argentine musician
* Dino Stamatopoulos (born 1964), American television comedy writer, actor, and producer
* Dino (born Lee Chan, 1999), South Korean singer and member of Seventeen
* Nickname of Dean Bandiera (1926–2020), Canadian football player
* Nickname of Dean Martin (1917–1995), American singer, actor, and comedian
* Nickname of Dean Paul Martin (1951–1987), American singer and actor, Dean Martin&#x27;s son
* Nickname of Sabahudin Bilalovic (1960–2003), Bosnian professional basketball player

==Fictional characters==
* Dino Ortolani, in the HBO drama series &quot;Oz&quot;, played by Jon Seda
* Dino Zerilli, in the crime drama series &quot;The Sopranos&quot;, played by Andy Davoli
* Dino (The Flintstones), Fred and Wilma Flintstone&#x27;s pet dinosaur

==See also==
* Dinos (disambiguation)
* Dino (surname)

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1226597" start="0" end="4" title="Dino (given name)" label="Dino"/>
<link wikidata="Q50001" start="54" end="62" title="Italians" label="Italians"/>
<link wikidata="Q23522" start="140" end="147" title="Balkans" label="Balkans"/>
<link wikidata="Q940348" start="171" end="179" title="Bosniaks" label="Bosniaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q167420" start="184" end="190" title="Croats" label="Croats"/>
<link wikidata="Q36704" start="205" end="213" title="Yugoslavia" label="Yugoslav"/>
<link wikidata="Q21482819" start="378" end="382" title="Edin" label="Edin"/>
<link wikidata="Q28457883" start="387" end="391" title="Adin (first name)" label="Adin"/>
<link wikidata="Q628060" start="483" end="519" title="Sabahudin Bilalović" label="Sabahudin &amp;quot;Dino&amp;quot; Bilalović"/>
<link wikidata="Q905581" start="563" end="567" title="Dina" label="Dina"/>
<link wikidata="Q512920" start="589" end="594" title="Edina (given name)" label="Edina"/>
<link wikidata="Q260951" start="686" end="691" title="Dinon" label="Dinon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3707883" start="719" end="740" title="Dino (Italian singer)" label="Dino (Italian singer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3482339" start="820" end="836" title="Shirley and Dino" label="Shirley and Dino"/>
<link wikidata="Q10342366" start="839" end="867" title="Dino (footballer, born 1917)" label="Dino (footballer, born 1917)"/>
<link wikidata="Q109283017" start="937" end="965" title="Dino (footballer, born 1978)" label="Dino (footballer, born 1978)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5278484" start="1034" end="1056" title="Dino (American singer)" label="Dino (American singer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q51240386" start="1139" end="1152" title="Dino Abazović" label="Dino Abazović"/>
<link wikidata="Q3028382" start="1202" end="1216" title="Dino Abbrescia" label="Dino Abbrescia"/>
<link wikidata="Q839043" start="1246" end="1258" title="Dino Acconci" label="Dino Acconci"/>
<link wikidata="Q54849814" start="1304" end="1316" title="Dino Adriano" label="Dino Adriano"/>
<link wikidata="Q22958338" start="1352" end="1362" title="Dino Agote" label="Dino Agote"/>
<link wikidata="Q2669755" start="1397" end="1409" title="Dino Alfieri" label="Dino Alfieri"/>
<link wikidata="Q5278485" start="1465" end="1477" title="Dino Andrade" label="Dino Andrade"/>
<link wikidata="Q5260622" start="1514" end="1529" title="Dino Arslanagić" label="Dino Arslanagić"/>
<link wikidata="Q930494" start="1596" end="1609" title="Dino Asciolla" label="Dino Asciolla"/>
<link wikidata="Q722208" start="1659" end="1673" title="Dino Attanasio" label="Dino Attanasio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5278486" start="1714" end="1725" title="Dino Babers" label="Dino Babers"/>
<link wikidata="Q328770" start="1765" end="1776" title="Dino Baggio" label="Dino Baggio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024153" start="1831" end="1844" title="Dino Ballacci" label="Dino Ballacci"/>
<link wikidata="Q969288" start="1896" end="1909" title="Dino Ballarin" label="Dino Ballarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q47202577" start="1944" end="1955" title="Dino Bardot" label="Dino Bardot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811731" start="2004" end="2017" title="Dino Barsotti" label="Dino Barsotti"/>
<link wikidata="Q3707887" start="2047" end="2062" title="Dino Basaldella" label="Dino Basaldella"/>
<link wikidata="Q1226608" start="2107" end="2121" title="Dino Battaglia" label="Dino Battaglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q65920476" start="2158" end="2167" title="Dino Bauk" label="Dino Bauk"/>
<link wikidata="Q88223519" start="2211" end="2225" title="Dino Beganovic" label="Dino Beganovic"/>
<link wikidata="Q16223588" start="2271" end="2285" title="Dino Belosevic" label="Dino Belosevic"/>
<link wikidata="Q16197562" start="2320" end="2332" title="Dino Bergens" label="Dino Bergens"/>
<link wikidata="Q41671245" start="2383" end="2395" title="Dino Bertolo" label="Dino Bertolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q50946672" start="2433" end="2447" title="Dino Beširović" label="Dino Beširović"/>
<link wikidata="Q913242" start="2511" end="2534" title="Dino Betti van der Noot" label="Dino Betti van der Noot"/>
<link wikidata="Q10553766" start="2572" end="2582" title="Dino Bevab" label="Dino Bevab"/>
<link wikidata="Q19278316" start="2617" end="2631" title="Dino Bisanovic" label="Dino Bisanovic"/>
<link wikidata="Q671797" start="2666" end="2676" title="Dino Boffo" label="Dino Boffo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5278487" start="2711" end="2724" title="Dino Borgioli" label="Dino Borgioli"/>
<link wikidata="Q2750706" start="2760" end="2773" title="Dino Bouterse" label="Dino Bouterse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1465572" start="2825" end="2836" title="Dino Bovoli" label="Dino Bovoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q374827" start="2894" end="2904" title="Dino Bravo" label="Dino Bravo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5278488" start="2972" end="2985" title="Dino Brugioni" label="Dino Brugioni"/>
<link wikidata="Q332182" start="3051" end="3061" title="Dino Bruni" label="Dino Bruni"/>
<link wikidata="Q18637219" start="3098" end="3110" title="Dino Butorac" label="Dino Butorac"/>
<link wikidata="Q242095" start="3153" end="3165" title="Dino Buzzati" label="Dino Buzzati"/>
<link wikidata="Q2271183" start="3208" end="3220" title="Dino Campana" label="Dino Campana"/>
<link wikidata="Q284408" start="3259" end="3274" title="Dino Campanella" label="Dino Campanella"/>
<link wikidata="Q5232956" start="3313" end="3326" title="Dino Casanova" label="Dino Casanova"/>
<link wikidata="Q1226614" start="3373" end="3384" title="Dino Cassio" label="Dino Cassio"/>
<link wikidata="Q65029850" start="3425" end="3438" title="Dino Castagno" label="Dino Castagno"/>
<link wikidata="Q944494" start="3488" end="3500" title="Dino Cazares" label="Dino Cazares"/>
<link wikidata="Q5278489" start="3582" end="3594" title="Dino Cellini" label="Dino Cellini"/>
<link wikidata="Q5278490" start="3647" end="3659" title="Dino Chiozza" label="Dino Chiozza"/>
<link wikidata="Q2289394" start="3695" end="3705" title="Dino Ciani" label="Dino Ciani"/>
<link wikidata="Q905708" start="3737" end="3752" title="Dino Ciccarelli" label="Dino Ciccarelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q5278492" start="3796" end="3806" title="Dino Cinel" label="Dino Cinel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5278491" start="3875" end="3895" title="Dino Claudio Sanchez" label="Dino Claudio Sanchez"/>
<link wikidata="Q716994" start="3929" end="3942" title="Dino Compagni" label="Dino Compagni"/>
<link wikidata="Q5278493" start="4008" end="4018" title="Dino Costa" label="Dino Costa"/>
<link wikidata="Q92204590" start="4049" end="4064" title="Dino Costantini" label="Dino Costantini"/>
<link wikidata="Q3707899" start="4099" end="4115" title="Dino Crescentini" label="Dino Crescentini"/>
<link wikidata="Q47541777" start="4154" end="4162" title="Dino Daa" label="Dino Daa"/>
<link wikidata="Q585082" start="4218" end="4231" title="Dino da Costa" label="Dino da Costa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5278497" start="4283" end="4295" title="Dino Danelli" label="Dino Danelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q532382" start="4328" end="4342" title="Dino De Antoni" label="Dino De Antoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q10266483" start="4392" end="4404" title="Dino De Poli" label="Dino De Poli"/>
<link wikidata="Q474664" start="4450" end="4463" title="Dino De Zordo" label="Dino De Zordo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5278499" start="4498" end="4511" title="Dino Delevski" label="Dino Delevski"/>
<link wikidata="Q27854118" start="4572" end="4586" title="Dino Delmastro" label="Dino Delmastro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1226654" start="4629" end="4643" title="Dino del Garbo" label="Dino del Garbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5278502" start="4705" end="4715" title="Dino Dibra" label="Dino Dibra"/>
<link wikidata="Q16549770" start="4783" end="4795" title="Dino Di Luca" label="Dino Di Luca"/>
<link wikidata="Q3395408" start="4858" end="4868" title="Dino Dines" label="Dino Dines"/>
<link wikidata="Q952867" start="4903" end="4912" title="Dino Dini" label="Dino Dini"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404996" start="4960" end="4970" title="Dino Djiba" label="Dino Djiba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1100551" start="5028" end="5040" title="Dino Djulbic" label="Dino Djulbic"/>
<link wikidata="Q16236098" start="5086" end="5099" title="Dino Dolmagić" label="Dino Dolmagić"/>
<link wikidata="Q5293004" start="5134" end="5142" title="Dino Don" label="Dino Don"/>
<link wikidata="Q955490" start="5184" end="5194" title="Dino Drpic" label="Dino Drpic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5278560" start="5243" end="5258" title="Dino Durbuzovic" label="Dino Durbuzovic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268025" start="5330" end="5339" title="Dino Duva" label="Dino Duva"/>
<link wikidata="Q1226635" start="5380" end="5392" title="Dino Dvornik" label="Dino Dvornik"/>
<link wikidata="Q5278507" start="5487" end="5496" title="Dino Ebel" label="Dino Ebel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5278509" start="5536" end="5549" title="Dino Esposito" label="Dino Esposito"/>
<link wikidata="Q5278508" start="5621" end="5629" title="Dino Eze" label="Dino Eze"/>
<link wikidata="Q1226624" start="5672" end="5684" title="Dino Falconi" label="Dino Falconi"/>
<link wikidata="Q331599" start="5739" end="5748" title="Dino Fava" label="Dino Fava"/>
<link wikidata="Q81926392" start="5783" end="5794" title="Dino Fazlic" label="Dino Fazlic"/>
<link wikidata="Q26924370" start="5828" end="5840" title="Dino Fekaris" label="Dino Fekaris"/>
<link wikidata="Q16977519" start="5901" end="5915" title="Dino Felicetti" label="Dino Felicetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q5278511" start="5987" end="5998" title="Dino Ferari" label="Dino Ferari"/>
<link wikidata="Q785110" start="6018" end="6030" title="Dino Ferrari" label="Dino Ferrari"/>
<link wikidata="Q90919349" start="6062" end="6075" title="Dino Ferruzzi" label="Dino Ferruzzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q51287556" start="6110" end="6123" title="Dino Fetscher" label="Dino Fetscher"/>
<link wikidata="Q3391858" start="6151" end="6165" title="Dino Formaggio" label="Dino Formaggio"/>
<link wikidata="Q20981562" start="6227" end="6239" title="Dino Gabriel" label="Dino Gabriel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3707918" start="6281" end="6295" title="Dino Galparoli" label="Dino Galparoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q5278513" start="6338" end="6350" title="Dino Galvani" label="Dino Galvani"/>
<link wikidata="Q5278514" start="6380" end="6392" title="Dino Gardner" label="Dino Gardner"/>
<link wikidata="Q5278515" start="6431" end="6442" title="Dino Gaudio" label="Dino Gaudio"/>
<link wikidata="Q9207605" start="6499" end="6510" title="Dino Gavric" label="Dino Gavric"/>
<link wikidata="Q50221206" start="6546" end="6560" title="Dino Giarrusso" label="Dino Giarrusso"/>
<link wikidata="Q3707920" start="6622" end="6634" title="Dino Gifford" label="Dino Gifford"/>
<link wikidata="Q4913768" start="6682" end="6698" title="Dino Gillarduzzi" label="Dino Gillarduzzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q353201" start="6735" end="6746" title="Dino Grandi" label="Dino Grandi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5278517" start="6811" end="6823" title="Dino Hackett" label="Dino Hackett"/>
<link wikidata="Q17629148" start="6866" end="6880" title="Dino Halilović" label="Dino Halilović"/>
<link wikidata="Q5278516" start="6916" end="6925" title="Dino Hall" label="Dino Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q96774847" start="6968" end="6982" title="Dino Hamidović" label="Dino Hamidović"/>
<link wikidata="Q18424173" start="7022" end="7033" title="Dino Hamzić" label="Dino Hamzić"/>
<link wikidata="Q16236781" start="7081" end="7091" title="Dino Hotić" label="Dino Hotić"/>
<link wikidata="Q5278519" start="7128" end="7141" title="Dino Imperial" label="Dino Imperial"/>
<link wikidata="Q64006312" start="7213" end="7227" title="Dino Innocenti" label="Dino Innocenti"/>
<link wikidata="Q17437190" start="7269" end="7283" title="Dino Islamović" label="Dino Islamović"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251466" start="7318" end="7330" title="Dino Jelusić" label="Dino Jelusić"/>
<link wikidata="Q5278520" start="7393" end="7409" title="Dino Kartsonakis" label="Dino Kartsonakis"/>
<link wikidata="Q16196533" start="7470" end="7482" title="Dino Kessler" label="Dino Kessler"/>
<link wikidata="Q108555689" start="7542" end="7554" title="Dino Klisura" label="Dino Klisura"/>
<link wikidata="Q17417800" start="7600" end="7609" title="Dino Kluk" label="Dino Kluk"/>
<link wikidata="Q16092826" start="7658" end="7673" title="Dino Kotopoulis" label="Dino Kotopoulis"/>
<link wikidata="Q24068752" start="7705" end="7717" title="Dino Kovacec" label="Dino Kovacec"/>
<link wikidata="Q63143304" start="7753" end="7767" title="Dino Kovacevic" label="Dino Kovacevic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5278521" start="7803" end="7817" title="Dino Kraspedon" label="Dino Kraspedon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5278522" start="7850" end="7864" title="Dino Kresinger" label="Dino Kresinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q52005160" start="7900" end="7912" title="Dino Lalvani" label="Dino Lalvani"/>
<link wikidata="Q106179029" start="7967" end="7976" title="Dino Lamb" label="Dino Lamb"/>
<link wikidata="Q27909773" start="8019" end="8030" title="Dino Lanaro" label="Dino Lanaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q16905392" start="8062" end="8070" title="Dino Lee" label="Dino Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q3707926" start="8134" end="8144" title="Dino Lenny" label="Dino Lenny"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089611" start="8208" end="8220" title="Dino Liviero" label="Dino Liviero"/>
<link wikidata="Q905701" start="8264" end="8277" title="Dino Lombardi" label="Dino Lombardi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5278524" start="8318" end="8328" title="Dino Lopez" label="Dino Lopez"/>
<link wikidata="Q47396240" start="8375" end="8389" title="Dino Lucchetta" label="Dino Lucchetta"/>
<link wikidata="Q5278525" start="8429" end="8441" title="Dino Maamria" label="Dino Maamria"/>
<link wikidata="Q177700" start="8501" end="8512" title="Dino Maiuri" label="Dino Maiuri"/>
<link wikidata="Q5278527" start="8578" end="8591" title="Dino Mangiero" label="Dino Mangiero"/>
<link wikidata="Q5278528" start="8653" end="8664" title="Dino Marcan" label="Dino Marcan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5278529" start="8716" end="8727" title="Dino Marino" label="Dino Marino"/>
<link wikidata="Q5278530" start="8769" end="8781" title="Dino Martens" label="Dino Martens"/>
<link wikidata="Q3707934" start="8830" end="8841" title="Dino Martin" label="Dino Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q16233378" start="8907" end="8922" title="Dino Martinovic" label="Dino Martinovic"/>
<link wikidata="Q19518285" start="8959" end="8972" title="Dino Mascotto" label="Dino Mascotto"/>
<link wikidata="Q5278531" start="9046" end="9061" title="Dino Mattessich" label="Dino Mattessich"/>
<link wikidata="Q15857336" start="9153" end="9168" title="Dino Medjedovic" label="Dino Medjedovic"/>
<link wikidata="Q21063207" start="9203" end="9214" title="Dino Melaye" label="Dino Melaye"/>
<link wikidata="Q3707935" start="9250" end="9262" title="Dino Menardi" label="Dino Menardi"/>
<link wikidata="Q557954" start="9304" end="9317" title="Dino Meneghin" label="Dino Meneghin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5278532" start="9379" end="9392" title="Dino Mennillo" label="Dino Mennillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q310679" start="9476" end="9487" title="Dino Merlin" label="Dino Merlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q14594792" start="9551" end="9565" title="Dino Mikanović" label="Dino Mikanović"/>
<link wikidata="Q16732644" start="9601" end="9617" title="Dino Minichiello" label="Dino Minichiello"/>
<link wikidata="Q2620883" start="9676" end="9689" title="Dino Molinaro" label="Dino Molinaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1226645" start="9713" end="9726" title="Dino Monduzzi" label="Dino Monduzzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3028396" start="9781" end="9791" title="Dino Moras" label="Dino Moras"/>
<link wikidata="Q368447" start="9847" end="9857" title="Dino Morea" label="Dino Morea"/>
<link wikidata="Q5278535" start="9896" end="9908" title="Dino Morelli" label="Dino Morelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q3707937" start="9945" end="9955" title="Dino Muric" label="Dino Muric"/>
<link wikidata="Q47491483" start="10012" end="10023" title="Dino Nardin" label="Dino Nardin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5278537" start="10053" end="10064" title="Dino Natali" label="Dino Natali"/>
<link wikidata="Q5278538" start="10105" end="10116" title="Dino Ndlovu" label="Dino Ndlovu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3707942" start="10170" end="10183" title="Dino Pagliari" label="Dino Pagliari"/>
<link wikidata="Q12481562" start="10250" end="10267" title="Dino Patti Djalal" label="Dino Patti Djalal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094507" start="10322" end="10335" title="Dino Pedriali" label="Dino Pedriali"/>
<link wikidata="Q5278540" start="10372" end="10384" title="Dino Pedrone" label="Dino Pedrone"/>
<link wikidata="Q24004755" start="10431" end="10441" title="Dino Perić" label="Dino Perić"/>
<link wikidata="Q3707948" start="10490" end="10511" title="Dino Perrone Compagni" label="Dino Perrone Compagni"/>
<link wikidata="Q3028399" start="10579" end="10593" title="Dino Philipson" label="Dino Philipson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5278539" start="10640" end="10652" title="Dino Philyaw" label="Dino Philyaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q2054889" start="10714" end="10731" title="Dino Piero Giarda" label="Dino Piero Giarda"/>
<link wikidata="Q6050775" start="10778" end="10787" title="Dino Pita" label="Dino Pita"/>
<link wikidata="Q5278541" start="10837" end="10851" title="Dino Pogolotti" label="Dino Pogolotti"/>
<link wikidata="Q50379356" start="10900" end="10913" title="Dino Pompanin" label="Dino Pompanin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3707953" start="10950" end="10962" title="Dino Porrini" label="Dino Porrini"/>
<link wikidata="Q106102103" start="11001" end="11013" title="Dino Prižmić" label="Dino Prižmić"/>
<link wikidata="Q723061" start="11052" end="11070" title="Dino Quattrocecere" label="Dino Quattrocecere"/>
<link wikidata="Q142214" start="11114" end="11123" title="Dino Rada" label="Dino Rada"/>
<link wikidata="Q21206534" start="11186" end="11199" title="Dino Radončić" label="Dino Radončić"/>
<link wikidata="Q59782453" start="11258" end="11268" title="Dino Radoš" label="Dino Radoš"/>
<link wikidata="Q43236926" start="11324" end="11334" title="Dino Ramic" label="Dino Ramic"/>
<link wikidata="Q18351850" start="11373" end="11390" title="Dino Rešidbegović" label="Dino Rešidbegović"/>
<link wikidata="Q5278542" start="11474" end="11487" title="Dino Restelli" label="Dino Restelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q5005702" start="11541" end="11556" title="Dino Reyes Chua" label="Dino Reyes Chua"/>
<link wikidata="Q53034" start="11608" end="11617" title="Dino Risi" label="Dino Risi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5278543" start="11655" end="11667" title="Dino Rondani" label="Dino Rondani"/>
<link wikidata="Q3707954" start="11741" end="11750" title="Dino Rora" label="Dino Rora"/>
<link wikidata="Q5278544" start="11782" end="11792" title="Dino Rossi" label="Dino Rossi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2266089" start="11844" end="11853" title="Dino Sani" label="Dino Sani"/>
<link wikidata="Q5278546" start="11907" end="11922" title="Dino Sanlorenzo" label="Dino Sanlorenzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5278547" start="11957" end="11969" title="Dino Santana" label="Dino Santana"/>
<link wikidata="Q16233542" start="12001" end="12011" title="Dino Šarac" label="Dino Šarac"/>
<link wikidata="Q4161939" start="12046" end="12056" title="Dino Sefir" label="Dino Sefir"/>
<link wikidata="Q970679" start="12103" end="12113" title="Dino Segre" label="Dino Segre"/>
<link wikidata="Q5278552" start="12144" end="12156" title="Dino Seremet" label="Dino Seremet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1226603" start="12201" end="12217" title="Dino Sete Cordas" label="Dino Sete Cordas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7752677" start="12257" end="12265" title="Dino Sex" label="Dino Sex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185321" start="12326" end="12338" title="Dino Shafeek" label="Dino Shafeek"/>
<link wikidata="Q106834208" start="12387" end="12400" title="Dino Sinovcic" label="Dino Sinovcic"/>
<link wikidata="Q65720660" start="12444" end="12456" title="Dino Skender" label="Dino Skender"/>
<link wikidata="Q104146998" start="12511" end="12522" title="Dino Skorup" label="Dino Skorup"/>
<link wikidata="Q28037423" start="12571" end="12582" title="Dino Slavić" label="Dino Slavić"/>
<link wikidata="Q50662986" start="12623" end="12637" title="Dino Sokolovic" label="Dino Sokolovic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3707961" start="12686" end="12699" title="Dino Spadetto" label="Dino Spadetto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1226653" start="12755" end="12766" title="Dino Staffa" label="Dino Staffa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3707962" start="12828" end="12840" title="Dino Stancic" label="Dino Stancic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3028403" start="12877" end="12889" title="Dino Stecher" label="Dino Stecher"/>
<link wikidata="Q19571936" start="12946" end="12958" title="Dino Stiglec" label="Dino Stiglec"/>
<link wikidata="Q42278056" start="13007" end="13019" title="Dino Tadello" label="Dino Tadello"/>
<link wikidata="Q3028400" start="13086" end="13099" title="Dino Tavarone" label="Dino Tavarone"/>
<link wikidata="Q70780329" start="13138" end="13151" title="Dino Terragni" label="Dino Terragni"/>
<link wikidata="Q877918" start="13201" end="13216" title="Dino Toppmoller" label="Dino Toppmoller"/>
<link wikidata="Q2735489" start="13274" end="13283" title="Dino Toso" label="Dino Toso"/>
<link wikidata="Q48813251" start="13322" end="13334" title="Dino Turcato" label="Dino Turcato"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641590" start="13371" end="13382" title="Dino Urbani" label="Dino Urbani"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421699" start="13413" end="13423" title="Dino Valls" label="Dino Valls"/>
<link wikidata="Q105471079" start="13455" end="13465" title="Dino Vasso" label="Dino Vasso"/>
<link wikidata="Q1226644" start="13505" end="13515" title="Dino Verde" label="Dino Verde"/>
<link wikidata="Q9207606" start="13586" end="13598" title="Dino Verzini" label="Dino Verzini"/>
<link wikidata="Q78238373" start="13644" end="13655" title="Dino Visser" label="Dino Visser"/>
<link wikidata="Q42039227" start="13696" end="13708" title="Dino Waldren" label="Dino Waldren"/>
<link wikidata="Q5278555" start="13752" end="13762" title="Dino Wells" label="Dino Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q1226647" start="13823" end="13834" title="Dino Wieser" label="Dino Wieser"/>
<link wikidata="Q5278556" start="13887" end="13900" title="Dino Williams" label="Dino Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q28531017" start="13950" end="13966" title="Dino Yannopoulos" label="Dino Yannopoulos"/>
<link wikidata="Q547172" start="14010" end="14025" title="Dino Zamparelli" label="Dino Zamparelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q492405" start="14063" end="14075" title="Dino Zandegù" label="Dino Zandegù"/>
<link wikidata="Q180661" start="14114" end="14123" title="Dino Zoff" label="Dino Zoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q5278558" start="14174" end="14184" title="Dino Zonić" label="Dino Zonić"/>
<link wikidata="Q3707976" start="14219" end="14230" title="Dino Zucchi" label="Dino Zucchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q296796" start="14355" end="14373" title="Dino De Laurentiis" label="Dino De Laurentiis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1226600" start="14411" end="14421" title="Dino Armas" label="Dino Armas"/>
<link wikidata="Q645598" start="14475" end="14490" title="Alfredo Ferrari" label="Alfredo Ferrari"/>
<link wikidata="Q1226650" start="14559" end="14571" title="Dino Saluzzi" label="Dino Saluzzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5278553" start="14606" end="14624" title="Dino Stamatopoulos" label="Dino Stamatopoulos"/>
<link wikidata="Q20779386" start="14695" end="14699" title="Dino (South Korean singer)" label="Dino"/>
<link wikidata="Q18162585" start="14781" end="14794" title="Dean Bandiera" label="Dean Bandiera"/>
<link wikidata="Q215359" start="14847" end="14858" title="Dean Martin" label="Dean Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1181118" start="14923" end="14939" title="Dean Paul Martin" label="Dean Paul Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q628060" start="15017" end="15036" title="Sabahudin Bilalovic" label="Sabahudin Bilalovic"/>
<link wikidata="Q597213" start="15117" end="15130" title="Dino Ortolani" label="Dino Ortolani"/>
<link wikidata="Q23633" start="15139" end="15142" title="HBO" label="HBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q739780" start="15162" end="15164" title="Oz (TV series)" label="Oz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343857" start="15182" end="15190" title="Jon Seda" label="Jon Seda"/>
<link wikidata="Q13443156" start="15193" end="15205" title="Dino Zerilli" label="Dino Zerilli"/>
<link wikidata="Q23628" start="15239" end="15251" title="The Sopranos" label="The Sopranos"/>
<link wikidata="Q5278483" start="15283" end="15305" title="Dino (The Flintstones)" label="Dino (The Flintstones)"/>
<link wikidata="Q614889" start="15307" end="15311" title="Fred Flintstone" label="Fred"/>
<link wikidata="Q614240" start="15316" end="15332" title="Wilma Flintstone" label="Wilma Flintstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1226689" start="15369" end="15391" title="Dinos (disambiguation)" label="Dinos (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q21487801" start="15394" end="15408" title="Dino (surname)" label="Dino (surname)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="312969" wikidata="Q1425385" url="?curid=312969" title="Fritz X">
<text>Fritz X was a German guided anti-ship glide bomb used during World War II. Developed alongside the Henschel Hs 293, &quot;Fritz X&quot; was one of the first precision guided weapons deployed in combat. &quot;Fritz X&quot; was a nickname used both by Allied and &quot;Luftwaffe&quot; personnel. Alternative names include Ruhrstahl SD 1400 X, Kramer X-1, PC 1400X or FX 1400 (the latter, along with the unguided PC 1400 &quot;Fritz&quot; nickname, is the origin for the name &quot;Fritz X&quot;).

== History ==
&quot;Fritz X&quot; was a further development of the PC 1400 (&quot;Panzersprengbombe, Cylindrisch&quot; 1,400 kg) armour-piercing high-explosive bomb, itself bearing the nickname &quot;Fritz&quot;. It was a penetration weapon intended to be used against armoured targets such as heavy cruisers and battleships. It was given a more aerodynamic nose, four stub wings, and a box-shaped tail unit consisting of a roughly 12-sided annular set of fixed surfaces and a cruciform tail with thick surfaces within the annulus, which contained the &quot;Fritz X&quot;″s aerodynamic controls.

The &quot;Luftwaffe&quot; recognised the difficulty of hitting moving ships during the Spanish Civil War. German engineer Max Kramer, who worked at the &quot;Deutsche Versuchsanstalt für Luftfahrt&quot; (&quot;DVL&quot;), had been experimenting since 1938 with remote-controlled free-falling bombs and in 1939 fitted radio-controlled spoilers. In 1940, was invited to join the development, since they already had experience in the development and production of unguided bombs.

&quot;Fritz X&quot; was guided by a Kehl-Straßburg radio control link, which sent signals to the movable spoilers in the thick vertical and horizontal tail fin surfaces, within the annular tail fin structure. This control system was also used for the unarmoured, rocket-boosted Henschel Hs 293 anti-ship ordnance, first deployed on 25 August 1943. The &quot;Straßburg&quot; receiver antenna installations on the &quot;Fritz X&quot; were aerodynamically integrated into the trailing edge of the annular surfaces of the tail fin, non-metallically encapsulated within four &quot;bulged&quot; sections in the trailing edge. This design feature of the &quot;FuG&quot; 230 &quot;Straßburg&quot; receiver installation is like the Azon (US contemporary guided bomb), which had its receiving antennas placed in the four diagonal struts bracing the fixed sections of its tail fins.

Minimum launch height was – although was preferred – and a range of was necessary. As it was an MCLOS-guidance ordnance design, the operator had to keep the bomb in sight at all times (a tail flare was provided, as with the Azon, to assist the operator in tracking the weapon) and the control aircraft had to hold course, which made evading gunfire or fighters impossible. Approximately 1,400 examples, including trial models, were produced.

== Control setup ==

The Fritz X possessed a spoiler-based control setup on its tailfin unit, using three sets of aerodynamic control spoiler systems, with two of them giving control in the pitch and yaw axes, differentially operating and constantly oscillating rapidly under direct control from the &quot;Kehl-Straßburg&quot; radio control link. The roll control setup, operating autonomously and not under control from the deploying aircraft, oscillated similarly to those under the externally controlled sets, and were on the outboard sections of the horizontal tailfin surfaces within the annular set of outer tailfin surfaces. These were like the American Azon ordnance&#x27;s aileron control surfaces in their purpose, commanded by an internal gyroscope in the tail&#x27;s central housing in both the Azon and Fritz X, to keep the ordnance level during its trajectory. The inboard set of spoiler surfaces in the tailfin&#x27;s horizontal surfaces, which used a set of wing fence-like flat surfaces for airflow separation from the autonomous roll control spoilers, controlled the pitch angle after release and were controlled by the radio control link, giving the Fritz X&#x27;s bombardier in the deploying aircraft the ability to control the range of the drop, a capability that the Azon did not have. The yaw control spoilers housed in the vertical tailfin surfaces were also under control through the radio link, and had similar &quot;fence&quot; surfaces to guide airflow over them. All three spoiler surface sets barely protruded from the surface during operation, with the pair of spoiler systems under external control having a degree of &quot;proportionality&quot; in their operation by varying the &quot;dwell time&quot; spent on one side or the other during their rapid rate of oscillation from side to side when a control input was sent to them.

== Combat procedure ==

The Fritz X was steered by the bombardier in the launching aircraft over a radio link between the aircraft&#x27;s &quot;Kehl&quot; transmitter and the weapon&#x27;s &quot;Straßburg&quot; receiver. The bombardier had to be able to see the target at all times, and like the Azon, the Fritz X had a flare in the tail so it could be seen from the controlling aircraft for its MCLOS-form guidance to control it properly. The disadvantage with this — in comparison to fully autonomous-guidance glide bombs like the operational U.S. Navy&#x27;s &quot;Bat&quot; radar-homing glide bomb, used against Japan in 1944–45 — were that the aircraft had to be flown towards the target on a steady course and that as the missile neared its target it became possible to misguide it by jamming its radio channel.

Unlike the Hs 293, which was deployed against merchant ships and light escort warships, the Fritz X was intended to be used against armoured ships such as heavy cruisers and battleships. The Fritz X had to be released at least from the target. The plane had to decelerate immediately after bomb release so the bombardier could see the bomb and guide it; this deceleration was achieved by making a steep climb and then levelling out. The bombardier could make a maximum correction of in range and in bearing. The bomber was vulnerable to fighter attack and ship-based air defence weapons while maintaining a slow, steady course so the bombardier could maintain visual contact to guide the bomb. When working properly, the missile was able to pierce 130 mm (5.1 in) of armor.

Accuracy is the main reason for developing a weapon system of this kind, rather than continuing to use unguided bombs. A skilled bombardier could guide 50% of the bombs to within a 15 m (50 ft) radius of the aiming point, and about 90% hit within a 30 m (100 ft) radius (other sources say 60% hits within 4.6 metre radius).

== Usage in combat ==

The only Luftwaffe unit to deploy the Fritz X was &quot;Gruppe&quot; III of &quot;Kampfgeschwader&quot; 100 &quot;Wiking&quot; (Viking), designated III./KG 100; the bomber wing itself evolved as the larger-sized descendant of the earlier &quot;Kampfgruppe 100&quot; unit in mid-December 1941. This unit employed the medium range Dornier Do 217K-2 bomber on almost all of its attack missions; in a few cases near the end of its deployment history, Dornier Do 217K-3 and M-11 variants were also used. The Fritz X had been initially tested with a Heinkel He 111 bomber, but was never taken into combat by this aircraft. A few special variants of the troublesome Heinkel He 177A &quot;Greif&quot; long-range bomber were equipped with the &quot;Kehl&quot; transmitter and proper bombracks to carry the Fritz X, and it is thought that this combination might have seen limited combat service, at least with the combinations known to have been involved in test drops. It was found that the launch aircraft had to &quot;toss&quot; the bomb slightly, climbing and then descending, to keep it in view ahead.

The Fritz X was first deployed on 21 July 1943 in a raid on Augusta harbour in Sicily. Several attacks around Sicily and Messina followed, but no confirmed hits were made and it appears the Allies were unaware that the large bombs being dropped were radio-guided weapons.

On 9 September, the &quot;Luftwaffe&quot; achieved their greatest success with the weapon. After Pietro Badoglio publicly announced the Italian armistice with the Allies on 8 September 1943, the Italian fleet had left La Spezia and headed to Tunisia. To prevent the ships from falling into Allied hands, six Do 217K-2s from III. &quot;Gruppe&quot; of KG 100 (III/KG 100) took off, each carrying a single Fritz X. The Italian battleship , flagship of the Italian fleet, received two hits and one near miss, and sank after her magazines exploded. 1,393 men, including Admiral Carlo Bergamini, died. Her sister ship, &quot;Italia&quot;, was also seriously damaged but reached Tunisia.

The American light cruiser was hit by Fritz Xs at 10:00 AM on 11 September 1943 during the invasion of Salerno, and was forced to retire to the United States for eight months of repairs. A single Fritz X passed through the roof of &quot;C&quot; turret and killed the turret crew and a damage control party when it exploded in the lower ammunition-handling room. The blast tore a large hole in the ship&#x27;s bottom, opened a seam in her side, and blew out all fires in her boiler rooms. &quot;Savannah&quot; lay dead in the water with her forecastle nearly awash, and eight hours elapsed before her boilers were relit, allowing the ship to get under way for Malta. USS &quot;Savannah&quot; lost 197 crewmen in this attack. Fifteen other sailors were seriously wounded, and four more were trapped in a watertight compartment for 60 hours. These four sailors were rescued when &quot;Savannah&quot; had arrived at Grand Harbor, Valletta, Malta on 12 September.

&quot;Savannah&quot;″s sister ship, , had been targeted earlier the same morning. The Fritz X just missed the ship, exploding about 15 metres away. Damage was minimal.

The Royal Navy&#x27;s light cruiser was hit by a Fritz X off Salerno at 14:40 on 13 September. The Fritz X passed through seven decks and straight through her keel, exploding underwater just under the keel. The concussive shock of the Fritz X&#x27;s underwater detonation close to &quot;Uganda&quot;″s hull extinguished all her boiler fires, and resulted in sixteen men being killed, with &quot;Uganda&quot; taking on 1,300 tons of water. &quot;Uganda&quot; was towed to Malta for repairs.

Two merchant ships may have been hit by Fritz X bombs at Salerno, though the evidence is uncertain. SS &quot;Bushrod Washington&quot; was hit by a glide bomb, either a Fritz X or a Hs 293, on 14 September while offloading a cargo of fuel. SS &quot;James W. Marshall&quot; was set on fire by a conventional bomb, Hs 293 or Fritz X on 15 September. As with &quot;Bushrod Washington&quot;, the nature of the weapon that damaged &quot;James W. Marshall&quot; is uncertain. A witness aboard a ship nearby, Joseph A. Yannacci, attributes the attack to Ju 87 &quot;Stuka&quot; dive bombers, which were too small to carry glide bombs. An attack with a Fritz X cannot be ruled out, but there is at least an equal case that, if a glide bomb was involved, it was an Hs 293 from II./KG 100; Luftwaffe records show that II./KG 100, armed only with Hs 293 glide bombs, was active over Salerno that day.

KG 100 achieved another success with Fritz X while the British battleship was providing gunfire support at Salerno on 16 September. One bomb penetrated six decks before exploding in number 4 boiler room. This explosion put out all fires and blew out the double bottom. A second Fritz X near-missed &quot;Warspite&quot;, holing her at the waterline. She took on a total of 5,000 tonnes of water and lost steam and consequently all power, both to the ship herself and to all her systems, but although the damage had been considerable, &quot;Warspite&quot;″s casualties amounted to only nine killed and fourteen wounded. She was towed to Malta by tugs and , then returned to Britain via Gibraltar and was out of action for nearly 9 months; she was never completely repaired, but returned to action to bombard German positions in Normandy during Operation Overlord.

The last Fritz X attack at Salerno lightly damaged the US light cruiser &quot;Philadelphia&quot; with two near misses on 17 September. This attack is sometimes reported as taking place on 18 September but US Navy records show the cruiser &quot;Philadelphia&quot; departed Salerno the night of 17/18 September. According to Luftwaffe records, III./KG 100, the Luftwaffe unit armed with the Fritz X, flew its last mission on 17 September. Other ships damaged by Fritz-X included Dutch sloop and British destroyer .

=== Electronic countermeasures ===
The control system used by the Fritz X relied on radio contact between the bomb and the guidance unit, and was susceptible to electronic countermeasures. After the initial attacks in August 1943, the Allies went to considerable effort to develop jamming devices. These were first deployed in late September 1943, too late for Salerno. The system met with some success, but proved cumbersome and easily overwhelmed if large numbers of weapons were deployed simultaneously.

In early 1944, as the US Army was engaged in the Battle of Anzio, the United Kingdom began to deploy its Type 650 transmitter, which employed a different approach to interfering with the FuG 203/230 radio link on a Fritz X, by jamming the Straßburg receiver&#x27;s intermediate frequency (IF) section. The FuG 230 receiver&#x27;s IF section operated at 3 MHz, and the Type 650 appears to have been quite successful in interfering with Fritz X ordnance deployments, especially because the operator did not have to attempt to find which of the eighteen selected Kehl-Straßburg command frequencies were in use and then manually tune the jamming transmitter to one of them. The Type 650 automatically defeated the receiver, regardless which radio frequency had been selected for a missile.

By the time of the Normandy landings, a combination of Allied air supremacy (keeping the Luftwaffe&#x27;s bombers at bay) and ship-mounted jammers meant that the Fritz X had no significant effect on the invasion fleet. Some accounts report that the Norwegian destroyer was hit by a Fritz X at dawn on D-Day. This is unlikely, as III./KG 100, the unit which had carried the Fritz X into combat, had largely been re-equipped with the Hs 293 by that time for its anti-ship missions, and the attack on &quot;Svenner&quot; occurred before the first glide bombers launched their assaults on the Normandy beaches.

The Fritz X has been credited as responsible for the loss of the hospital ship at Salerno as well as the destroyer and the light cruiser at Anzio, but these ships were hit by Hs 293s, as demonstrated by the nature of the damage inflicted, as well as by reports from witnesses (in the case of &quot;Janus&quot;, either an Hs 293 or a conventional torpedo was responsible).

==Operators==
*Luftwaffe (Nazi Germany)

== See also ==
* List of World War II guided missiles of Germany
* Kramer X4- Max Kramer&#x27;s air-to-air guided missile
* Ki-147
* Ki-148
* Ohka
* Project Pigeon
* Gargoyle
* GB-4
* GB-8
* VB-3 Razon
* Hs 293

==References==
Explanatory notes
Citations
==External links==

* |The Development of precision guided Bombs
* USAAF-captured (1946) German wartime film on details of the Fritz X bomb
* The Dawn of the Smart Bomb
* German guided weapons of World War II
* Smithsonian National Air and Space Museum 
* National Museum of the U.S. Air Force
* Ruhrstahl AG Fritz-X – Royal Air Force Museum, Cosford (UK)
* &quot;How Radio-Controlled Bombs Were Jammed&quot;, C.I.C. (Combat Information Center), U.S. Office of the Chief of Naval Operations, Dec. 1945.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1425385" start="0" end="7" title="Fritz X" label="Fritz X"/>
<link wikidata="Q680879" start="38" end="48" title="glide bomb" label="glide bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="61" end="73" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q586159" start="99" end="114" title="Henschel Hs 293" label="Henschel Hs 293"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425385" start="320" end="339" title="Fritz X" label="Ruhrstahl SD 1400 X"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425385" start="341" end="351" title="Fritz X" label="Kramer X-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425385" start="353" end="361" title="Fritz X" label="PC 1400X"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425385" start="365" end="372" title="Fritz X" label="FX 1400"/>
<link wikidata="Q65080667" start="563" end="570" title="PC 1400" label="PC 1400"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564009" start="1103" end="1112" title="Luftwaffe" label="Luftwaffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859" start="1180" end="1197" title="Spanish Civil War" label="Spanish Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q88628" start="1215" end="1225" title="Max Kramer" label="Max Kramer"/>
<link wikidata="Q157332" start="1251" end="1289" title="Deutsche Versuchsanstalt für Luftfahrt" label="Deutsche Versuchsanstalt für Luftfahrt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436167" start="1410" end="1423" title="radio-control" label="radio-control"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760097" start="1427" end="1434" title="Spoiler (aeronautics)" label="spoiler"/>
<link wikidata="Q22115601" start="1607" end="1640" title="Kehl-Strasbourg radio control link" label="Kehl-Straßburg radio control link"/>
<link wikidata="Q586159" start="1849" end="1864" title="Henschel Hs 293" label="Henschel Hs 293"/>
<link wikidata="Q4033121" start="2294" end="2298" title="Azon" label="Azon"/>
<link wikidata="Q251859" start="2540" end="2545" title="MCLOS" label="MCLOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545843" start="3861" end="3871" title="wing fence" label="wing fence"/>
<link wikidata="Q628261" start="5070" end="5075" title="flare" label="flare"/>
<link wikidata="Q251859" start="5146" end="5151" title="MCLOS" label="MCLOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q810680" start="5295" end="5351" title="Bat (guided bomb)" label="U.S. Navy&amp;#x27;s &amp;quot;Bat&amp;quot; radar-homing glide bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454201" start="6447" end="6460" title="unguided bomb" label="unguided bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q821993" start="6768" end="6799" title="Kampfgeschwader 100" label="&amp;quot;Kampfgeschwader&amp;quot; 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q16988624" start="6936" end="6951" title="Kampfgruppe 100" label="Kampfgruppe 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q126966" start="7021" end="7035" title="Dornier Do 217" label="Dornier Do 217"/>
<link wikidata="Q154532" start="7236" end="7250" title="Heinkel He 111" label="Heinkel He 111"/>
<link wikidata="Q316321" start="7351" end="7365" title="Heinkel He 177" label="Heinkel He 177"/>
<link wikidata="Q194005" start="7850" end="7857" title="Augusta, Sicily" label="Augusta"/>
<link wikidata="Q13666" start="7911" end="7918" title="Messina" label="Messina"/>
<link wikidata="Q200085" start="8160" end="8175" title="Pietro Badoglio" label="Pietro Badoglio"/>
<link wikidata="Q196502" start="8199" end="8232" title="Armistice between Italy and Allied armed forces" label="Italian armistice with the Allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q8611" start="8281" end="8290" title="La Spezia" label="La Spezia"/>
<link wikidata="Q948" start="8305" end="8312" title="Tunisia" label="Tunisia"/>
<link wikidata="Q110051611" start="8588" end="8596" title="Magazine (artillery)" label="magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q325645" start="8637" end="8652" title="Carlo Bergamini (admiral)" label="Carlo Bergamini"/>
<link wikidata="Q262899" start="8677" end="8695" title="Italian battleship Littorio" label="&amp;quot;Italia&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1447505" start="8833" end="8856" title="Operation Avalanche (World War II)" label="the invasion of Salerno"/>
<link wikidata="Q357447" start="9286" end="9296" title="forecastle" label="forecastle"/>
<link wikidata="Q220899" start="9658" end="9670" title="Grand Harbor" label="Grand Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q23800" start="9672" end="9687" title="Valletta, Malta" label="Valletta, Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="9879" end="9889" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q582062" start="10034" end="10038" title="keel" label="keel"/>
<link wikidata="Q586159" start="10547" end="10553" title="Henschel Hs 293" label="Hs 293"/>
<link wikidata="Q26795" start="10912" end="10935" title="Junkers Ju 87" label="Ju 87 &amp;quot;Stuka&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410" start="11940" end="11949" title="Gibraltar" label="Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q8641370" start="12098" end="12116" title="Operation Overlord" label="Operation Overlord"/>
<link wikidata="Q928235" start="12602" end="12607" title="sloop-of-war" label="sloop"/>
<link wikidata="Q849203" start="12794" end="12820" title="electronic countermeasures" label="electronic countermeasures"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128361" start="12914" end="12921" title="Radio jamming" label="jamming"/>
<link wikidata="Q696844" start="13190" end="13205" title="Battle of Anzio" label="Battle of Anzio"/>
<link wikidata="Q244948" start="13406" end="13428" title="intermediate frequency" label="intermediate frequency"/>
<link wikidata="Q499193" start="13716" end="13735" title="Carrier frequency" label="command frequencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q16470" start="13947" end="13964" title="Operation Neptune" label="Normandy landings"/>
<link wikidata="Q898788" start="13990" end="14003" title="air supremacy" label="air supremacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q586159" start="14360" end="14366" title="Henschel Hs 293" label="Hs 293"/>
<link wikidata="Q15888" start="14601" end="14614" title="hospital ship" label="hospital ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083" start="14618" end="14625" title="Salerno" label="Salerno"/>
<link wikidata="Q241717" start="14676" end="14681" title="Anzio" label="Anzio"/>
<link wikidata="Q165363" start="14882" end="14889" title="torpedo" label="torpedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564009" start="14924" end="14933" title="Luftwaffe" label="Luftwaffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6571836" start="14967" end="15014" title="List of World War II guided missiles of Germany" label="List of World War II guided missiles of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q264828" start="15017" end="15026" title="Kramer X4" label="Kramer X4"/>
<link wikidata="Q2353955" start="15074" end="15080" title="Kawasaki Ki-147 I-Go Type1 – Ko" label="Ki-147"/>
<link wikidata="Q6379796" start="15083" end="15089" title="Ki-148" label="Ki-148"/>
<link wikidata="Q635990" start="15092" end="15096" title="Ohka" label="Ohka"/>
<link wikidata="Q898068" start="15099" end="15113" title="Project Pigeon" label="Project Pigeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q626343" start="15116" end="15124" title="LBD-1 Gargoyle" label="Gargoyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5512915" start="15127" end="15131" title="GB-4" label="GB-4"/>
<link wikidata="Q5512917" start="15134" end="15138" title="GB-8" label="GB-8"/>
<link wikidata="Q4006916" start="15141" end="15151" title="VB-3 Razon" label="VB-3 Razon"/>
<link wikidata="Q586159" start="15154" end="15160" title="Hs 293" label="Hs 293"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="312976" wikidata="Q641632" url="?curid=312976" title="Nüwa">
<text>Nüwa, also read Nügua, is a mother goddess, culture hero, and/or member of the Three Sovereigns of Chinese mythology. She is a goddess in Chinese folk religion, Chinese Buddhism, Confucianism and Taoism. She is credited with creating humanity and repairing the Pillar of Heaven.

As creator of mankind, she molded humans individually by hand with yellow clay. In other stories where she fulfills this role, she only created nobles and/or the rich out of yellow soil. The stories vary on the other details about humanity&#x27;s creation, but it was a tradition commonly believed in ancient China that she created commoners from brown mud. A story holds that she was tired when she created &quot;the rich and the noble&quot;, so all others, or &quot;cord-made people&quot;, were created from her &quot;dragg[ing] a string through mud&quot;.

In the &quot;Huainanzi&quot;, there is a description of a great battle between deities that broke the pillars supporting Heaven and caused great devastation. There was great flooding, and Heaven had collapsed. Nüwa was the one who patched the holes in Heaven with five colored stones, and she used the legs of a tortoise to mend the pillars.

There are many instances of her in literature across China which detail her in creation stories, and today, she remains a figure important to Chinese culture. She is one of the most venerated Chinese goddesses alongside Guanyin and Mazu.

In Chinese mythology, the goddess Nüwa is a legendary progenitor of all human beings. She also creates a magic stone. Her husband Fu Xi is suggested to be the progenitor of divination and the patron saint of numbers.

==Name==
The character &quot;nü&quot; () is a common prefix on the names of goddesses. The proper name is &quot;wa&quot;, also read as &quot;gua&quot; (). The Chinese character is unique to this name. Birrell translates it as &#x27;lovely&#x27;, but notes that it &quot;could be construed as &#x27;frog, which is consistent with her aquatic myth. In Chinese, the word for &#x27;whirlpool&#x27; is &quot;wo&quot; (), which shares the same pronunciation with the word for &#x27;snail&#x27; (). These characters all have their right side constructed by the word &quot;wa&quot; (), which can be translated as &#x27;spiral&#x27; or &#x27;helix&#x27; as noun, and as &#x27;spin&#x27; or &#x27;rotate&#x27; when as verb, to describe the &#x27;helical movement&#x27;. This mythical meaning has also been symbolically pictured as compasses in the hand which can be found on many paintings and portraits associated with her.

Her reverential name is Wahuang ().

==Description==

The &quot;Huainanzi&quot; relates Nüwa to the time when Heaven and Earth were in disruption:

The catastrophes were supposedly caused by the battle between the deities Gonggong and Zhuanxu (an event that was mentioned earlier in the &quot;Huainanzi&quot;), the five-colored stones symbolize the five Chinese elements (wood, fire, earth, metal, and water), the black dragon was the essence of water and thus cause of the floods, Ji Province serves metonymically for the central regions (the Sinitic world). Following this, the &quot;Huainanzi&quot; tells about how the sage-rulers Nüwa and Fuxi set order over the realm by following the Way () and its potency ().

The &quot;Classic of Mountains and Seas&quot;, dated between the Warring States period and the Han dynasty, describes Nüwa&#x27;s intestines as being scattered into ten spirits.

In &quot;Liezi&quot; (c. 475 – 221 BC), Chapter 5 &quot;Questions of Tang&quot; (), author Lie Yukou describes Nüwa repairing the original imperfect heaven using five-colored stones, and cutting the legs off a tortoise to use as struts to hold up the sky.

In &quot;Songs of Chu&quot; (c. 340 – 278 BC), Chapter 3 &quot;Asking Heaven&quot; (), author Qu Yuan writes that Nüwa molded figures from the yellow earth, giving them life and the ability to bear children. After demons fought and broke the pillars of the heavens, Nüwa worked unceasingly to repair the damage, melting down the five-coloured stones to mend the heavens.

In &quot;Shuowen Jiezi&quot; (c. 58 – 147 AD), China&#x27;s earliest dictionary, under the entry for Nüwa author Xu Shen describes her as being both the sister and the wife of Fuxi. Nüwa and Fuxi were pictured as having snake-like tails interlocked in an Eastern Han dynasty mural in the Wuliang Temple in Jiaxiang county, Shandong province.

In &quot;Duyi Zhi&quot; (; c. 846 – 874 AD), Volume 3, author Li Rong gives this description.

There are stories that have her as the &quot;consort&quot; of Fuxi rather than his sister.

In &quot;Yuchuan Ziji&quot; ( c. 618 – 907 AD), Chapter 3 (), author Lu Tong describes Nüwa as the wife of Fuxi.

In &quot;Siku Quanshu&quot;, Sima Zhen (679–732) provides commentary on the prologue chapter to Sima Qian&#x27;s &quot;Shiji&quot;, &quot;Supplemental to the Historic Record: History of the Three August Ones&quot;, wherein it is found that the Three August Ones are Nüwa, Fuxi, and Shennong; Fuxi and Nüwa have the same last name, Feng (; Hmong: Faj).

In the collection &quot;Four Great Books of Song&quot; (c. 960 – 1279 AD), compiled by Li Fang and others, Volume 78 of the book &quot;Imperial Readings of the Taiping Era&quot; contains a chapter &quot;Customs by Yingshao of the Han Dynasty&quot; in which it is stated that there were no men when the sky and the earth were separated. Thus Nüwa used yellow clay to make people. But the clay was not strong enough so she put ropes into the clay to make the bodies erect. It is also said that she prayed to gods to let her be the goddess of marital affairs. Variations of this story exist.

In Ming dynasty myths about the transition from the Shang dynasty to the Zhou dynasty, Nüwa made evil decisions that ultimately benefited China, such as sending a fox spirit to encourage the debauchery of King Zhou, which led to him being deposed. Other tales have her and Fuxi as exclusively the &quot;great gentle protectors of humanity&quot; unwilling to use subterfuge.

Nüwa and Fuxi were also thought to be gods of silk.

== Iconography of Fuxi and Nüwa ==
The iconography of Fuxi and Nüwa vary in physical appearance depending on the time period and also shows regional differences. In Chinese tomb murals and iconography, Fuxi and Nüwa generally have snake-like bodies and human face or head.

Nüwa is often depicted holding a compass or multiple compasses, which were a traditional Chinese symbol of a dome-like sky. She was also thought to be an embodiment of the stars and the sky or a star god.

Fuxi and Nüwa can be depicted as individual figures arranged as a symmetrical pair or they can be depicted in double figures with intertwined snake-like bodies. Their snake-like tails can also be depicted stretching out towards each other. This is similar to the representation of Rahu and Ketu in Indian astrology. 

Fuxi and Nüwa can also appear individually on separate tomb bricks. They generally hold or embrace the sun or moon discs containing the images of a bird (or a three-legged crow) or a toad (sometimes a hare) which are the sun and moon symbolism respectively, and/or each holding a try square or a pair of compasses, or holding a longevity mushroom () plant. Fuxi and Nüwa holding the sun and the moon appears as early as the late Western Han dynasty. Other physical appearance variation, such as lower snake-like body shape (e.g. thick vs thin tails), depictions of legs (i.e. legs found along the snake-like body) and wings (e.g. wings with feathers which protrude from their backs as found in late Western Han Xinan (新安) Tomb or smaller quills found on their shoulders), and in hats and hairstyles, also exist.

In the Luoyang regions murals dating to the late Western Han dynasty, Fuxi and Nüwa are generally depicted as individual figures, each one found at each side of the central ridge of tomb chambers as found in the Bu Qianqiu Tomb. They can also be found without intertwining tails from the stone murals of the same period. Since the middle of the Eastern Han dynasty, their tails started to intertwine.

In the Gansu murals dating to the Wei and Western Jin period, one of the most typical features of Fuxi is the &quot;mountain-hat&quot; () which looks like a three-peaked cap while Nüwa is depicted wearing various hairstyles characteristic of Han women. Both deities dressed in wide-sleeved clothing, which reflects typical Han clothing style also commonly depicted in Han dynasty art.

==Legends==
===Appearance in &quot;Fengshen Yanyi&quot;===
Nüwa is featured within the famed Ming dynasty novel &quot;Fengshen Bang&quot;. As featured within this novel, Nüwa is revered since Xia dynasty for creating the five-colored stones to mend the heavens, which tilted after Gonggong toppled one of the heavenly pillars, Mount Buzhou. Shang Rong asked King Zhou of Shang to pay her a visit as a sign of deep respect. Upon seeing her statue, Zhou was completely overcome with lust at the sight of the beautiful ancient goddess Nüwa. He wrote an erotic poem on a neighboring wall and took his leave. When Nüwa later returned to her temple after visiting the Yellow Emperor, she saw the foulness of Zhou&#x27;s words. In her anger, she swore that the Shang dynasty would end in payment for his offense. In her rage, Nüwa personally ascended to the palace in an attempt to kill the king, but was suddenly struck back by two large beams of red light.

After Nüwa realized that King Zhou was already destined to rule the kingdom for twenty-six more years, Nüwa summoned her three subordinates—the Thousand-Year Vixen (later becoming Daji), the Jade Pipa, and the Nine-Headed Pheasant. With these words, Nüwa brought destined chaos to the Shang dynasty, &quot;The luck Cheng Tang won six hundred years ago is dimming. I speak to you of a new mandate of heaven which sets the destiny for all. You three are to enter King Zhou&#x27;s palace, where you are to bewitch him. Whatever you do, do not harm anyone else. If you do my bidding, and do it well, you will be permitted to reincarnate as human beings.&quot; With these words, Nüwa was never heard of again, but was still a major indirect factor towards the Shang dynasty&#x27;s fall.

=== Creation of humanity ===

Pangu was said to be the creation god in Chinese mythology. He was a giant sleeping within an egg of chaos. As he awoke, he stood up and divided the sky and the earth. Pangu then died after standing up, and his body turned into rivers, mountains, plants, animals, and everything else in the world, among which is a powerful being known as Huaxu (華胥). Huaxu gave birth to a twin brother and sister, Fuxi and Nüwa. Fuxi and Nüwa are said to be creatures that have faces of human and bodies of snakes.

Nüwa created humanity due to her loneliness, which grew more intense over time. She molded yellow earth or, in other versions, yellow clay into the shape of people. These individuals later became the wealthy nobles of society, because they had been created by Nüwa&#x27;s own hands. However, the majority of humanity was created when Nüwa dragged string across mud to mass-produce them, which she did because creating every person by hand was too time- and energy-consuming. This creation story gives an aetiological explanation for the social hierarchy in ancient China. The nobility believed that they were more important than the mass-produced majority of humanity, because Nüwa took time to create them, and they had been directly touched by her hand. In another version of the creation of humanity, Nüwa and Fuxi were survivors of a great flood. By the command of the God of the heaven, they were married and Nüwa had a child which was a ball of meat. This ball of meat was cut into small pieces, and the pieces were scattered across the world, which then became humans.

Nüwa was born three months after her brother, Fuxi, whom she later took as her husband; this marriage is the reason why Nüwa is credited with inventing the idea of marriage.

Before the two of them got married, they lived on mount K&#x27;un-lun. A prayer was made after the two became guilty of falling for each other. The prayer is as follows,

&quot;Oh Heaven, if Thou wouldst send us forth as man and wife, then make all the misty vapor gather. If not, then make all the misty vapor disperse.&quot;

Misty vapor then gathered after the prayer signifying the two could marry. When intimate, the two made a fan out of grass to screen their faces which is why during modern day marriages, the couple hold a fan together. By connecting, the two were representative of Yin and Yang; Fuxi being connected to Yang and masculinity along Nüwa being connected to Yin and femininity. This is further defined with Fuxi receiving a carpenter&#x27;s square which symbolizes his identification with the physical world because a carpenter&#x27;s square is associated with straight lines and squares leading to a more straightforward mindset. Meanwhile, Nüwa was given a compass to symbolize her identification with the heavens because a compass is associated with curves and circles leading to a more abstract mindset. With the two being married, it symbolized the union between heaven and Earth. Other versions have Nüwa invent the compass rather than receive it as a gift. In addition, the system of male and female sex, the yang-yin philosophy, is expressed here in a complex way: first as Fuxi and Nüwa, then as a compass (masculine) and a square (feminine), and thirdly, as Nüwa (woman) with a compass (man) and Fuxi (man) with a square (woman).

===Nüwa Mends the Heavens===
Nüwa Mends the Heavens () is a well-known theme in Chinese culture. The courage and wisdom of Nüwa inspired the ancient Chinese to control nature&#x27;s elements and has become a favorite subject of Chinese poets, painters, and sculptors, along with so many poetry and arts like novels, films, paintings, and sculptures; e.g. the sculptures that decorate Nanshan and Ya&#x27;an.

The Huainanzi tells an ancient story about how the four pillars that support the sky crumbled inexplicably. Other sources have tried to explain the cause, i.e. the battle between Gong Gong and Zhuanxu or Zhurong. Unable to accept his defeat, Gong Gong deliberately banged his head onto Mount Buzhou (不周山) which was one of the four pillars. Half of the sky fell which created a gaping hole and the Earth itself was cracked; the Earth&#x27;s axis mundi was tilted into the southeast while the sky rose into the northwest. This is said to be the reason why the western region of China is higher than the eastern and that most of its rivers flow towards the southeast. This same explanation is applied to the Sun, Moon, and stars which moved into the northwest. A wildfire burnt the forests and led the wild animals to run amok and attack the innocent peoples, while the water which was coming out from the earth&#x27;s crack didn&#x27;t seem to be slowing down.

Nüwa pitied the humans she had made and attempted to repair the sky. She gathered five colored-stones (red, yellow, blue, black, and white) from the riverbed, melted them and used them to patch up the sky: since then the sky (clouds) have been colorful. She then killed a giant turtle (or tortoise), some version named the tortoise as Ao, cut off the four legs of the creature to use as new pillars to support the sky. But Nüwa didn&#x27;t do it perfectly because the unequal length of the legs made the sky tilt. After the job was done, Nüwa drove away the wild animals, extinguished the fire, and controlled the flood with a huge amount of ashes from the burning reeds and the world became as peaceful as it was before.

===Empress Nüwa===
Many Chinese know well their Three Sovereigns and Five Emperors, i.e. the early leaders of humanity as well as culture heroes according to the Northern Chinese belief. But the lists vary and depend on the sources used. One version includes Nüwa as one of the Three Sovereigns, who reigned after Fuxi and before Shennong.

The myth of the Three Sovereigns sees the three as demigod figures, and the myth is used to stress the importance of an imperial reign. The variation between sources stems from China being generally divided before the Qin and Han dynasties, and the version with Fuxi, Shennong, and Nüwa was used to emphasize rule and structure.

In her matriarchal reign, she battled against a neighboring tribal chief, defeated him, and took him to the peak of a mountain. Defeated by a woman, the chief felt ashamed to be alive and banged his head on the heavenly bamboo to kill himself and for revenge. His act tore a hole in the sky and made a flood hit the whole world. The flood killed all people except Nüwa and her army which was protected by her divinity. After that, Nüwa patched the sky with five colored-stones until the flood receded.

==Popular culture==
* The Ming dynasty fantasy novel &quot;Investiture of the Gods&quot; (1567) has Nüwa being an instigator of the Shang dynasty&#x27;s collapse, as she sent the fox demon Daji to corrupt King Zhou for the latter verbally desecrating her statue at a temple.
* The Qing dynasty novel &quot;Dream of the Red Chamber&quot; (1754) narrates how Nüwa gathered 36,501 stones to patch the sky but left one unused. The unused stone plays an important role in the novel&#x27;s storyline.
* A goddess Nüwa statue named &quot;Sky Patching&quot; by Yuan Xikun was exhibited at Times Square, New York City, on 19 April 2012 to celebrate Earth Day (2012), symbolized the importance of protecting the ozone layer. Previously, this 3.9 meter tall statue was exhibited on Beijing and now is placed on Vienna International Centre, Vienna since 21 November 2012.
* The story of Nüwa patching the sky was being retold by Carol Chen in her book &quot;Goddess Nuwa Patches Up the Sky&quot; (2014) which was illustrated by Meng Xianlong.
* In Shin Megami Tensei 5, Nuwa (voiced by Ayana Taketatsu) is the partner to Shohei Yakumo (voiced by Tomokazu Sugita) as two of the main characters who aid the protagonist.
* In the &quot;Gremlins&quot; animated series, Nuwa (voiced by Sandra Oh) is portrayed as the creator of the Mogwai species that Gizmo originated from and fell into a depression when the humans could not properly coexist with them.

==See also==
* Flood Mythology of China

== Explanatory notes==
== Citations ==
== General bibliography ==
*.

==Further reading==

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q641632" start="0" end="4" title="Nüwa" label="Nüwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q641632" start="16" end="21" title="Nüwa" label="Nügua"/>
<link wikidata="Q334486" start="28" end="42" title="mother goddess" label="mother goddess"/>
<link wikidata="Q977690" start="44" end="56" title="culture hero" label="culture hero"/>
<link wikidata="Q201727" start="79" end="95" title="Three Sovereigns and Five Emperors" label="Three Sovereigns"/>
<link wikidata="Q210677" start="99" end="116" title="Chinese mythology" label="Chinese mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074275" start="138" end="159" title="Chinese folk religion" label="Chinese folk religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q847618" start="161" end="177" title="Chinese Buddhism" label="Chinese Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9581" start="179" end="191" title="Confucianism" label="Confucianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9598" start="196" end="202" title="Taoism" label="Taoism"/>
<link wikidata="Q635155" start="225" end="233" title="creator deity" label="creating"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364799" start="271" end="277" title="Tian" label="Heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q134737" start="424" end="430" title="nobles" label="nobles"/>
<link wikidata="Q590337" start="853" end="862" title="Huainanzi" label="Huainanzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q715162" start="1403" end="1410" title="Guanyin" label="Guanyin"/>
<link wikidata="Q418226" start="1415" end="1419" title="Mazu" label="Mazu"/>
<link wikidata="Q210677" start="1425" end="1442" title="Chinese mythology" label="Chinese mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q205985" start="1448" end="1455" title="goddess" label="goddess"/>
<link wikidata="Q2329919" start="1476" end="1486" title="progenitor" label="progenitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q81741" start="1527" end="1532" title="magic (paranormal)" label="magic"/>
<link wikidata="Q236972" start="1552" end="1557" title="Fu Xi" label="Fu Xi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043197" start="1595" end="1605" title="divination" label="divination"/>
<link wikidata="Q11563" start="1630" end="1636" title="number" label="number"/>
<link wikidata="Q590337" start="2620" end="2629" title="Huainanzi" label="Huainanzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q242756" start="2778" end="2786" title="Gonggong" label="Gonggong"/>
<link wikidata="Q198180" start="2791" end="2798" title="Zhuanxu" label="Zhuanxu"/>
<link wikidata="Q218652" start="2905" end="2926" title="Wuxing (Chinese philosophy)" label="five Chinese elements"/>
<link wikidata="Q17020006" start="3038" end="3049" title="Ji Province" label="Ji Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q190277" start="3079" end="3094" title="Zhongyuan" label="central regions"/>
<link wikidata="Q236972" start="3199" end="3203" title="Fuxi" label="Fuxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q190393" start="3242" end="3249" title="Tao" label="the Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179705" start="3257" end="3268" title="De (Chinese)" label="its potency"/>
<link wikidata="Q844278" start="3284" end="3313" title="Classic of Mountains and Seas" label="Classic of Mountains and Seas"/>
<link wikidata="Q185063" start="3339" end="3360" title="Warring States period" label="Warring States period"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209" start="3369" end="3380" title="Han dynasty" label="Han dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q434429" start="3462" end="3467" title="Liezi" label="Liezi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984064" start="3544" end="3553" title="Lie Yukou" label="Lie Yukou"/>
<link wikidata="Q8063" start="3628" end="3634" title="stones" label="stones"/>
<link wikidata="Q2373471" start="3663" end="3671" title="ao (turtle)" label="tortoise"/>
<link wikidata="Q874601" start="3719" end="3731" title="Chuci" label="Songs of Chu"/>
<link wikidata="Q5694896" start="3773" end="3786" title="Heavenly Questions" label="Asking Heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q313330" start="3804" end="3811" title="Qu Yuan" label="Qu Yuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072348" start="4091" end="4104" title="Shuowen Jiezi" label="Shuowen Jiezi"/>
<link wikidata="Q559731" start="4195" end="4202" title="Xu Shen" label="Xu Shen"/>
<link wikidata="Q236972" start="4258" end="4262" title="Fuxi" label="Fuxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209" start="4337" end="4356" title="Eastern Han dynasty" label="Eastern Han dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q18384142" start="4434" end="4442" title="Duyizhi" label="Duyi Zhi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4621" end="4633" title="Yuchuan Ziji" label="Yuchuan Ziji"/>
<link wikidata="Q855752" start="4681" end="4688" title="Lu Tong" label="Lu Tong"/>
<link wikidata="Q699477" start="4735" end="4747" title="Siku Quanshu" label="Siku Quanshu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2150798" start="4755" end="4764" title="Sima Zhen" label="Sima Zhen"/>
<link wikidata="Q9372" start="4822" end="4831" title="Sima Qian" label="Sima Qian"/>
<link wikidata="Q272530" start="4845" end="4850" title="Shiji" label="Shiji"/>
<link wikidata="Q201727" start="4970" end="4987" title="Three August Ones and Five Emperors" label="Three August Ones"/>
<link wikidata="Q313336" start="5008" end="5016" title="Shennong" label="Shennong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273580" start="5103" end="5127" title="Songsi Dashu" label="Four Great Books of Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q253490" start="5166" end="5173" title="Li Fang (Song dynasty)" label="Li Fang"/>
<link wikidata="Q586049" start="5214" end="5250" title="Taiping Yulan" label="Imperial Readings of the Taiping Era"/>
<link wikidata="Q42302" start="5519" end="5523" title="clay" label="clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q128938" start="5721" end="5734" title="Shang dynasty" label="Shang dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q35216" start="5742" end="5754" title="Zhou dynasty" label="Zhou dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="5807" end="5812" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424792" start="5832" end="5842" title="fox spirit" label="fox spirit"/>
<link wikidata="Q470072" start="5874" end="5883" title="King Zhou of Shang" label="King Zhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q34735" start="6404" end="6411" title="compass" label="compass"/>
<link wikidata="Q950298" start="6858" end="6862" title="Rahu" label="Rahu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367259" start="6867" end="6871" title="Ketu (mythology)" label="Ketu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323130" start="7043" end="7047" title="Three-legged crow" label="bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q569316" start="7175" end="7185" title="try square" label="try square"/>
<link wikidata="Q103896" start="7199" end="7208" title="Compass (drawing tool)" label="compasses"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209" start="7757" end="7776" title="Han dynasty" label="Western Han dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209" start="8053" end="8072" title="Han dynasty" label="Eastern Han dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q320930" start="8144" end="8147" title="Cao Wei" label="Wei"/>
<link wikidata="Q7352" start="8152" end="8163" title="Jin dynasty (266–420)" label="Western Jin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327357" start="8433" end="8451" title="Hanfu" label="Han clothing style"/>
<link wikidata="Q9903" start="8589" end="8601" title="Ming dynasty" label="Ming dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336310" start="8614" end="8627" title="Investiture of the Gods" label="Fengshen Bang"/>
<link wikidata="Q169705" start="8688" end="8699" title="Xia dynasty" label="Xia dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q242756" start="8777" end="8785" title="Gonggong" label="Gonggong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1005956" start="8823" end="8835" title="Mount Buzhou" label="Mount Buzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q7488355" start="8837" end="8847" title="Shang Rong" label="Shang Rong"/>
<link wikidata="Q470072" start="8854" end="8872" title="King Zhou of Shang" label="King Zhou of Shang"/>
<link wikidata="Q29201" start="9158" end="9172" title="Yellow Emperor" label="Yellow Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q128938" start="9250" end="9263" title="Shang dynasty" label="Shang dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q470072" start="9474" end="9483" title="King Zhou of Shang" label="King Zhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377681" start="9629" end="9633" title="Daji" label="Daji"/>
<link wikidata="Q5928377" start="9640" end="9649" title="Pipa Jing" label="Jade Pipa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089259" start="9659" end="9679" title="Jiutou Zhiji Jing" label="Nine-Headed Pheasant"/>
<link wikidata="Q471820" start="9764" end="9774" title="Cheng Tang" label="Cheng Tang"/>
<link wikidata="Q875377" start="9837" end="9854" title="mandate of heaven" label="mandate of heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q245395" start="10262" end="10267" title="Pangu" label="Pangu"/>
<link wikidata="Q210677" start="10303" end="10320" title="Chinese mythology" label="Chinese mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q9511624" start="10601" end="10606" title="Huaxu" label="Huaxu"/>
<link wikidata="Q156318" start="11266" end="11278" title="Etiology" label="aetiological"/>
<link wikidata="Q841628" start="11299" end="11315" title="social hierarchy" label="social hierarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q236972" start="11575" end="11579" title="Fuxi" label="Fuxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q236972" start="11885" end="11889" title="Fuxi" label="Fuxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q187871" start="12070" end="12083" title="Kunlun Mountains" label="K&amp;#x27;un-lun"/>
<link wikidata="Q62744" start="12606" end="12618" title="Yin and yang" label="Yin and Yang"/>
<link wikidata="Q236972" start="12620" end="12624" title="Fuxi" label="Fuxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q62744" start="12644" end="12648" title="Yin and yang" label="Yang"/>
<link wikidata="Q62744" start="12695" end="12698" title="Yin and yang" label="Yin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3275823" start="12761" end="12784" title="Steel square" label="carpenter&amp;#x27;s square"/>
<link wikidata="Q34735" start="12996" end="13003" title="compass" label="compass"/>
<link wikidata="Q645917" start="13658" end="13673" title="Culture of China" label="Chinese culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q49757" start="13814" end="13819" title="poets" label="poets"/>
<link wikidata="Q11629" start="13821" end="13829" title="painters" label="painters"/>
<link wikidata="Q11634" start="13835" end="13844" title="sculptors" label="sculptors"/>
<link wikidata="Q533836" start="13962" end="13969" title="Nanshan District, Shenzhen" label="Nanshan"/>
<link wikidata="Q427557" start="13974" end="13984" title="Yaan" label="Ya&amp;#x27;an"/>
<link wikidata="Q590337" start="13991" end="14000" title="Huainanzi" label="Huainanzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q242756" start="14166" end="14175" title="Gonggong" label="Gong Gong"/>
<link wikidata="Q198180" start="14180" end="14187" title="Zhuanxu" label="Zhuanxu"/>
<link wikidata="Q198249" start="14191" end="14198" title="Zhurong" label="Zhurong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1005956" start="14273" end="14285" title="Mount Buzhou" label="Mount Buzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421259" start="14427" end="14437" title="axis mundi" label="axis mundi"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="14563" end="14568" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q2776556" start="15029" end="15086" title="Color in Chinese culture" label="five colored-stones (red, yellow, blue, black, and white)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2373471" start="15282" end="15284" title="Ao (turtle)" label="Ao"/>
<link wikidata="Q201727" start="15718" end="15752" title="Three Sovereigns and Five Emperors" label="Three Sovereigns and Five Emperors"/>
<link wikidata="Q977690" start="15800" end="15814" title="culture heroes" label="culture heroes"/>
<link wikidata="Q210677" start="15828" end="15855" title="Chinese mythology" label="the Northern Chinese belief"/>
<link wikidata="Q236972" start="15984" end="15988" title="Fuxi" label="Fuxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q313336" start="16000" end="16008" title="Shennong" label="Shennong"/>
<link wikidata="Q9903" start="16870" end="16882" title="Ming dynasty" label="Ming dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336310" start="16903" end="16926" title="Investiture of the Gods" label="Investiture of the Gods"/>
<link wikidata="Q128938" start="16976" end="16989" title="Shang dynasty" label="Shang dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424792" start="17023" end="17032" title="hulijing" label="fox demon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377681" start="17033" end="17037" title="Daji" label="Daji"/>
<link wikidata="Q470072" start="17049" end="17058" title="King Zhou of Shang" label="King Zhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q2111921" start="17083" end="17094" title="desecrating" label="desecrating"/>
<link wikidata="Q8733" start="17125" end="17137" title="Qing dynasty" label="Qing dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q8265" start="17150" end="17174" title="Dream of the Red Chamber" label="Dream of the Red Chamber"/>
<link wikidata="Q4533486" start="17397" end="17407" title="Yuan Xikun" label="Yuan Xikun"/>
<link wikidata="Q11259" start="17425" end="17437" title="Times Square" label="Times Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="17439" end="17452" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q124473" start="17484" end="17493" title="Earth Day" label="Earth Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q79995" start="17546" end="17557" title="ozone layer" label="ozone layer"/>
<link wikidata="Q956" start="17615" end="17622" title="Beijing" label="Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q686431" start="17644" end="17671" title="Vienna International Centre" label="Vienna International Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="17673" end="17679" title="Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q44379841" start="17880" end="17900" title="Shin Megami Tensei 5" label="Shin Megami Tensei 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204576" start="17918" end="17933" title="Ayana Taketatsu" label="Ayana Taketatsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q579296" start="17978" end="17993" title="Tomokazu Sugita" label="Tomokazu Sugita"/>
<link wikidata="Q65053253" start="18059" end="18079" title="Gremlins (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Gremlins&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q40337" start="18113" end="18122" title="Sandra Oh" label="Sandra Oh"/>
<link wikidata="Q21600281" start="18298" end="18322" title="Flood Mythology of China" label="Flood Mythology of China"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="312977" wikidata="Q177969" url="?curid=312977" title="Matt Biondi">
<text>Matthew Nicholas Biondi (born October 8, 1965) is an American former competitive swimmer and water polo player. As a swimmer, he is an eleven-time Olympic medalist, and former world record-holder in five events. Biondi competed in the Summer Olympic Games in 1984, 1988 and 1992, winning a total of eleven medals (eight gold, two silver and one bronze). During his career, he set three individual world records in the 50-meter freestyle and four in the 100-meter freestyle.

At the 1988 Olympic Games in Seoul, Biondi won five gold medals, setting world records in the 50-meter freestyle and three relay events.

Biondi is a member of the International Swimming Hall of Fame and the United States Olympic Hall of Fame.

== Early life and athletics ==
Biondi started his aquatics career as a swimmer and water polo player in his hometown of Moraga, California. As he moved into his teens, his incredible abilities as a sprint swimmer began to emerge. Though he did not start swimming year-round until he started at Campolindo High School, by his senior year in 1983 Biondi was the top prep sprinter in America with a national high school record of 20.40 seconds in the 50-yard freestyle.

== College and international career ==

=== 1983–84 freshman year ===
Biondi accepted a scholarship to attend the University of California, Berkeley, to swim under Head Coach Nort Thornton and play water polo for coach Pete Cutino, and enrolled in fall of 1983. In his first year, he played on Berkeley&#x27;s NCAA championship water polo team, and made the consolation finals at the 1984 NCAA Swimming Championships, finishing in ninth place in the 50-yard freestyle and 7th place in both the 100 and 200-yard freestyle events (until 1985 only the top six swimmers advanced to the championship finals) along with a fourth-place finish as part of the 400-yard freestyle relay and a second place in the 800 free relay.

=== 1984 Olympics ===
In the summer of 1984, Biondi surprised the swimming community by qualifying for a spot on the United States 4×100-meter freestyle relay at the 1984 Los Angeles Olympics with his fourth-place finish in the 100-meter freestyle at the Olympic Trials held in Indianapolis. He also finished 18th in the preliminaries of the 200-meter freestyle, failing to advance to the finals. At the Los Angeles Olympics, Biondi swam the third leg of the relay, entering the water in second place just barely behind the team from Australia. Thanks to his 49.67 second split time, the U.S. had taken a four-tenths of a second lead by the time that Biondi turned over the race to anchor swimmer Rowdy Gaines. The U.S. won the gold medal in Olympic and World Record time.

=== Post-Olympics NCAA swimming and water polo ===
In 1985, fresh off of his 1984 Olympics success, Biondi won the 100 and 200-yard freestyle events at the NCAA Championships, setting NCAA and American Records in each event, and contributed relay legs on Cal&#x27;s victorious 400 and 800-yard freestyle relays, with the 400 free relay team also setting NCAA and American records. He finished second to Tom Jager of UCLA in the 50-yard freestyle and was part of Cal&#x27;s second place 400-yard medley relay team. Thanks in large part to Biondi&#x27;s efforts, the Cal team finished fourth overall in the team standings.

The next season, 1986, Biondi swept the sprint freestyles, repeating his 1985 victories in the 100 and 200, and adding a win in the 50 with new NCAA and American records in the event. Cal once again finished first in the 400 and 800 free relays with Biondi anchoring both, but once again fell short in the 400 medley relay finishing third. By virtue of his three individual victories, Biondi tied with Stanford&#x27;s Pablo Morales for high-point scorer in the meet in which Cal finished runner-up to Stanford for the team title.

In his final collegiate season, 1987, Biondi repeated as winner in the 50, 100, and 200-yard freestyle events, breaking his own NCAA and American records in all three. Having broken the 50 free record in both his preliminary heat and again in the final, he became the first swimmer to break four individual NCAA and American records in the same meet. Once again Cal repeated as champions in the 400 and 800 freestyle relays, yet again they finished third in the 400 medley relay, and for the second straight year Biondi shared the high-point individual title with Morales. The Bears finished fifth in the team standings. For his career, Biondi won eight individual NCAA titles and swam on six winning relays. He broke individual NCAA and American records seven times, and was named the NCAA Swimmer of the Year in 1985, 1986, and 1987.

In his other sport, Biondi was named to an All-American College Water Polo team four times: a third-team selection in 1983, 1985, and 1987, and a second-team selection in 1984. Biondi&#x27;s Cal Water Polo teams won NCAA Championships in 1983, 1984, and 1987, and Biondi was voted the team&#x27;s most valuable player in 1985.

=== International swimming, 1985–88 ===
Biondi set the first of his twelve individual swimming world records in 1985. He was the first man to swim the 100-meter freestyle faster than 49 seconds, and by 1988 he owned the ten fastest times swum in that event and held the world record for nearly nine years. He won a total 24 U.S. Championships in the 50, 100, and 200-meter freestyle events, as well as the 100 butterfly. In two World Championships (1986 and 1991), Biondi won 11 medals including six gold. During his career, he was a finalist for the James E. Sullivan Award, the UPI Sportsman of the Year, the U.S. Olympic Committee Sportsman of the Year, and selected twice as the &quot;Swimming World magazine&quot; Male Swimmer of the World, in 1986 and 1988.

At the National Championships on August 6, 1985, Biondi set the world record in the 100-meter freestyle twice in a single day, swimming a 49.24 in the prelims and a 48.95 in the finals. On the following day, he won the 200-meter freestyle with an American record time of 1:47.89.

Later that month at the 1985 Pan Pacific Swimming Championships in Tokyo, Biondi won the 50-meter and 100-meter freestyle, and finished second to teammates Mike Heath and Pablo Morales, respectively, in the 200-meter freestyle and 100-meter butterfly. He won three additional gold medals as a member of all three winning American relay teams. The 4×100-meter free relay team of Scott McCadam, Mike Heath, Paul Wallace, and Biondi set a world record of 3:17.08, and the 4×100-meter medley relay team of Rick Carey, John Moffet, Pablo Morales, and Biondi set a world record of 3:38.28.

Biondi improved his world record in the 100-meter freestyle to 48.74 in June 1986 at the World Championship Trials.

At the 1986 World Aquatics Championships in Madrid, Biondi won seven medals: three gold, one silver, and three bronze. He won gold in the 100-meter freestyle with a time of 48.94, breaking the 49-second barrier for the third time. Individually, he also won a silver medal in the 100-meter butterfly, and bronze medals in the 50-meter and 200-meter freestyle. He won two additional gold medals as a member of the 4×100-meter freestyle and 4×100-meter medley relays, and a third bronze medal as a member of the 4×200-meter freestyle relay.

Returning to the US National Team for the fourth consecutive year, Biondi won four gold medals at the 1987 Pan Pacific Swimming Championships in Brisbane, Australia, in the 100-meter freestyle and as a member of all three winning American relay teams. In addition, he won silver in the 50-meter freestyle and bronze in the 100-meter butterfly.

At the 1988 Olympic Trials, Biondi qualified to compete in seven events: the three relays, and individually in the 50-, 100-, and 200-meter freestyle and the 100-meter butterfly. He set the world record in the 100-meter freestyle for the fourth time (48.42), and broke his own American record in the 200-meter freestyle (1:47.72).

=== 1988 Olympics ===
Biondi won five gold, one silver, and one bronze medal at the 1988 Seoul Olympics, setting four world records and an Olympic record.

In his first event, the 200-meter freestyle, Biondi faced reigning Olympic Champion, World Champion, and world record-holder Michael Gross. Biondi swam a good race, with a time of 1:47.99, but finished with a bronze medal behind Australian Duncan Armstrong, who won gold with a new world record, and Anders Holmertz of Sweden, who earned the silver.

Biondi&#x27;s finished second in his next event, the 100-meter butterfly, by the narrowest possible margin. In the finals, he was caught between strokes as he approached the finishing wall. He chose to glide rather than take another stroke, and was edged out by Anthony Nesty of Suriname by just one one-hundredth (0.01) of a second. Biondi&#x27;s silver medal time of 53.01 was a personal best.

Later that day, Biondi anchored the 4×200-meter freestyle relay, joined by teammates Troy Dalbey, Matt Cetlinski, and Doug Gjertsen. The American team won gold, setting a world record of 7:12.51. Biondi entered the water with the U.S. team in second place .82 seconds behind the East German team, but passed them by swimming the fastest split time of the race with a 1:46.44, which at the time was also the fastest ever 200 freestyle relay split. This started Biondi&#x27;s remarkable streak of five gold medals in five days of Olympic swimming, each a world or Olympic record.

In the 100-meter freestyle, Biondi won his first individual Olympic gold, setting a new Olympic record of 48.63. This was the second-fastest 100-meter freestyle of all time, eclipsed only by Biondi&#x27;s effort at the Olympic trials the prior month. Teammate Chris Jacobs won silver, delivering the first one-two finish for the American swim team at the 1988 Olympics.

Next up was the 4×100-meter freestyle relay, in which Biondi was joined by teammates Jacobs, Troy Dalbey, and Tom Jager. The American team won gold with another world record, 3:16.53, anchored by Biondi&#x27;s blistering split of 47.81.

In his fourth individual event, Biondi faced Jager in the 50-meter freestyle. It was the Olympic debut of the event, in which both Biondi and Jager had previously set world records. It was another one-two finish for the Americans, with Biondi winning gold in a world-record time of 22.14, and Jager winning silver.

The Olympic swimming competition concluded with the 4×100-meter medley relay. Biondi swam the butterfly leg, joined by teammates David Berkoff (backstroke), Richard Schroeder (breaststroke), and Chris Jacobs (freestyle). The American men set another world record of 3:36.93 to complete their gold-medal sweep in the relays.

For his accomplishments in 1988, Biondi was named the United Press International Athlete of the Year, the US Olympic Committee Athlete of the Year, and the Swimming World Swimmer of the Year.

=== 1992 Olympics ===
At the 1992 Olympics in Barcelona, Biondi won two more gold medals in relays and a silver in the 50-meter freestyle. Following the 1992 Olympics, Biondi retired, which he attributed to multiple factors including lack of financial assistance.

=== World Championships ===
Biondi competed at the World Championships in 1986 and 1991, winning six gold medals.

In 1986, he won three gold medals, one silver and three bronzes to set a record of seven medals at one World Championship meet. This record has since been matched by Michael Phelps, and passed by Caeleb Dressel with eight medals.

== Personal life ==
Biondi graduated from the University of California, Berkeley, in 1988 with a Bachelor of Arts degree in Political Economy of Industrialized Societies (PEIS).

Biondi married Kirsten Metzger in her home state of Hawaii in 1995. They have three children: Nathaniel (Nate), born in 1998, who swam for the UC Berkeley men&#x27;s swimming program from 2018–2021; Lucas, born in 2002; and Makena, born in 2007. They divorced in 2014. Kirsten still resides in Hawaii.

Kirsten Biondi persuaded her husband to continue his education, and he earned his master&#x27;s degree in education in 2000 at Lewis and Clark College in Portland, Oregon.

In recent years, Biondi has worked as a school teacher and swimming coach in Hawaii. , he teaches math and coaches at Sierra Canyon School in the Los Angeles neighborhood of Chatsworth.

Biondi has become active within the masters swimming community, launching an annual masters competition that bears his name. The Matt Biondi Masters Classic was held for the first time on March 23, 2014, in Simi Valley, California. The competition is a one-day, short course yards meet held in conjunction with Biondi&#x27;s masters club, the Conejo Valley Multisport Masters.

== See also ==

* Bay Area Sports Hall of Fame
* List of multiple Olympic gold medalists
* List of multiple Olympic gold medalists at a single Games
* List of multiple Olympic medalists at a single Games
* List of multiple Olympic gold medalists in one event
* List of multiple Summer Olympic medalists
* List of Olympic medalists in swimming (men)
* List of University of California, Berkeley alumni
* List of World Aquatics Championships medalists in swimming (men)
* World record progression 50 metres freestyle
* World record progression 100 metres freestyle
* World record progression 4 × 100 metres freestyle relay
* World record progression 4 × 100 metres medley relay
* World record progression 4 × 200 metres freestyle relay

== References ==
== External links ==
* 
* 

&lt;br&gt;


|-



|-

&lt;br&gt;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q177969" start="0" end="23" title="Matt Biondi" label="Matthew Nicholas Biondi"/>
<link wikidata="Q159821" start="235" end="255" title="Summer Olympic Games" label="Summer Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q843676" start="259" end="263" title="Swimming at the 1984 Summer Olympics" label="1984"/>
<link wikidata="Q265002" start="265" end="269" title="Swimming at the 1988 Summer Olympics" label="1988"/>
<link wikidata="Q832016" start="274" end="278" title="Swimming at the 1992 Summer Olympics" label="1992"/>
<link wikidata="Q744713" start="639" end="674" title="International Swimming Hall of Fame" label="International Swimming Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q7890852" start="683" end="717" title="United States Olympic Hall of Fame" label="United States Olympic Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707" start="803" end="813" title="water polo" label="water polo"/>
<link wikidata="Q594122" start="840" end="858" title="Moraga, California" label="Moraga, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q5028490" start="1014" end="1036" title="Campolindo High School" label="Campolindo High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q168756" start="1302" end="1336" title="University of California, Berkeley" label="University of California, Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7053492" start="1363" end="1376" title="Nort Thornton" label="Nort Thornton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7174857" start="1407" end="1418" title="Peter J. Cutino" label="Pete Cutino"/>
<link wikidata="Q271805" start="1498" end="1502" title="National Collegiate Athletic Association" label="NCAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7656649" start="2038" end="2065" title="Swimming at the 1984 Summer Olympics - Men&amp;#x27;s 4 x 100 metre freestyle relay" label="4×100-meter freestyle relay"/>
<link wikidata="Q8456" start="2073" end="2098" title="1984 Summer Olympics" label="1984 Los Angeles Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q148297" start="2441" end="2450" title="Australia at the 1984 Summer Olympics" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q459259" start="2604" end="2616" title="Rowdy Gaines" label="Rowdy Gaines"/>
<link wikidata="Q685026" start="3084" end="3093" title="Tom Jager" label="Tom Jager"/>
<link wikidata="Q726281" start="3721" end="3734" title="Pablo Morales" label="Pablo Morales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202761" start="5150" end="5169" title="world record progression 100 metres freestyle" label="100-meter freestyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2720648" start="5550" end="5573" title="James E. Sullivan Award" label="James E. Sullivan Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q493845" start="5579" end="5582" title="UPI" label="UPI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418438" start="5610" end="5632" title="U.S. Olympic Committee" label="U.S. Olympic Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2603450" start="5688" end="5711" title="Swimming World magazine" label="Swimming World magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2955723" start="6069" end="6108" title="1985 Pan Pacific Swimming Championships" label="1985 Pan Pacific Swimming Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q584097" start="6754" end="6787" title="1986 World Aquatics Championships" label="1986 World Aquatics Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q875666" start="7388" end="7427" title="1987 Pan Pacific Swimming Championships" label="1987 Pan Pacific Swimming Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q265002" start="8047" end="8066" title="Swimming at the 1988 Summer Olympics" label="1988 Seoul Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7656692" start="8143" end="8162" title="Swimming at the 1988 Summer Olympics - Men&amp;#x27;s 200 metre freestyle" label="200-meter freestyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q57404" start="8244" end="8257" title="Michael Gross (swimmer)" label="Michael Gross"/>
<link wikidata="Q652850" start="8359" end="8375" title="Duncan Armstrong" label="Duncan Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q2171385" start="8419" end="8434" title="Anders Holmertz" label="Anders Holmertz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7656686" start="8523" end="8542" title="Swimming at the 1988 Summer Olympics - Men&amp;#x27;s 100 metre butterfly" label="100-meter butterfly"/>
<link wikidata="Q433137" start="8732" end="8745" title="Anthony Nesty" label="Anthony Nesty"/>
<link wikidata="Q730" start="8749" end="8757" title="Suriname" label="Suriname"/>
<link wikidata="Q7656703" start="8903" end="8930" title="Swimming at the 1988 Summer Olympics - Men&amp;#x27;s 4 x 200 metre freestyle relay" label="4×200-meter freestyle relay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342607" start="8952" end="8963" title="Troy Dalbey" label="Troy Dalbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q6788472" start="8965" end="8979" title="Matt Cetlinski" label="Matt Cetlinski"/>
<link wikidata="Q3714594" start="8985" end="8998" title="Doug Gjertsen" label="Doug Gjertsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7656684" start="9453" end="9472" title="Swimming at the 1988 Summer Olympics - Men&amp;#x27;s 100 metre freestyle" label="100-meter freestyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2278243" start="9706" end="9718" title="Chris Jacobs (swimmer)" label="Chris Jacobs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7656699" start="9833" end="9860" title="Swimming at the 1988 Summer Olympics - Men&amp;#x27;s 4 x 100 metre freestyle relay" label="4×100-meter freestyle relay"/>
<link wikidata="Q685026" start="9927" end="9936" title="Tom Jager" label="Tom Jager"/>
<link wikidata="Q7656701" start="10113" end="10131" title="Swimming at the 1988 Summer Olympics - Men&amp;#x27;s 50 metre freestyle" label="50-meter freestyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7656700" start="10423" end="10447" title="Swimming at the 1988 Summer Olympics - Men&amp;#x27;s 4 x 100 metre medley relay" label="4×100-meter medley relay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1173739" start="10500" end="10513" title="David Berkoff" label="David Berkoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q7328928" start="10528" end="10545" title="Richard Schroeder" label="Richard Schroeder"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889073" start="10750" end="10796" title="United Press International Athlete of the Year Award" label="United Press International Athlete of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866778" start="10802" end="10842" title="USOC Athlete of the Year" label="US Olympic Committee Athlete of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546244" start="10852" end="10886" title="List of Swimming World Swimmers of the Year" label="Swimming World Swimmer of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q273469" start="11205" end="11224" title="FINA World Aquatics Championships" label="World Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q39562" start="11435" end="11449" title="Michael Phelps" label="Michael Phelps"/>
<link wikidata="Q21005673" start="11465" end="11479" title="Caeleb Dressel" label="Caeleb Dressel"/>
<link wikidata="Q168756" start="11546" end="11580" title="University of California, Berkeley" label="University of California, Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q4227955" start="12109" end="12132" title="Lewis and Clark College" label="Lewis and Clark College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7511346" start="12273" end="12293" title="Sierra Canyon School" label="Sierra Canyon School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020942" start="12329" end="12339" title="Chatsworth, Los Angeles" label="Chatsworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q4873930" start="12738" end="12766" title="Bay Area Sports Hall of Fame" label="Bay Area Sports Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q915373" start="12769" end="12808" title="List of multiple Olympic gold medalists" label="List of multiple Olympic gold medalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q5238387" start="12811" end="12868" title="List of multiple Olympic gold medalists at a single Games" label="List of multiple Olympic gold medalists at a single Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q6629541" start="12871" end="12923" title="List of multiple Olympic medalists at a single Games" label="List of multiple Olympic medalists at a single Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q16149039" start="12926" end="12978" title="List of multiple Olympic gold medalists in one event" label="List of multiple Olympic gold medalists in one event"/>
<link wikidata="Q52459737" start="12981" end="13022" title="List of multiple Summer Olympic medalists" label="List of multiple Summer Olympic medalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078515" start="13025" end="13068" title="List of Olympic medalists in swimming (men)" label="List of Olympic medalists in swimming (men)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6603037" start="13071" end="13120" title="List of University of California, Berkeley alumni" label="List of University of California, Berkeley alumni"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141442" start="13123" end="13187" title="List of World Aquatics Championships medalists in swimming (men)" label="List of World Aquatics Championships medalists in swimming (men)"/>
<link wikidata="Q783440" start="13190" end="13234" title="World record progression 50 metres freestyle" label="World record progression 50 metres freestyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202761" start="13237" end="13282" title="World record progression 100 metres freestyle" label="World record progression 100 metres freestyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135532" start="13285" end="13340" title="World record progression 4 × 100 metres freestyle relay" label="World record progression 4 × 100 metres freestyle relay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188561" start="13343" end="13395" title="World record progression 4 × 100 metres medley relay" label="World record progression 4 × 100 metres medley relay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135718" start="13398" end="13453" title="World record progression 4 × 200 metres freestyle relay" label="World record progression 4 × 200 metres freestyle relay"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="312984" wikidata="Q586159" url="?curid=312984" title="Henschel Hs 293">
<text>The Henschel Hs 293 was a World War II German radio-guided glide bomb. It is the first operational anti-shipping missile, first used unsuccessfully on 25 August 1943 and then with increasing success over the next year, damaging or sinking at least 25 ships. Allied efforts to jam the radio control link were increasingly successful despite German efforts to counter them. The weapon remained in use through 1944 when it was also used as an air-to-ground weapon to attack bridges to prevent the Allied breakout after D-Day, but proved almost useless in this role.

== Development ==


The Hs 293 project started in 1940, based on the &quot;Gustav Schwartz Propellerwerke&quot; pure glide bomb designed in 1939. The Schwartz design did not have a terminal guidance system; instead, it used an autopilot to maintain a straight course. It was intended to be launched from a bomber at sufficient distance to keep the aircraft out of range of anti-aircraft fire. A Henschel team, under Herbert Wagner, developed it the following year by adding a Walter HWK 109-507 rocket engine underneath, providing thrust for ten seconds. This allowed the bomb to be used from a lower altitude and at an increased range. Some examples used a BMW 109-511 engine, with of thrust.

The first flight attempts took place between May and September 1940, with unpowered drops from Heinkel He 111 aircraft; the first Walter rocket motor-powered tests had been conducted by the end of 1940.

The weapon consisted of a modified standard 500 kilogram &quot;Sprengbombe-Cylindrisch&quot;-class SC 500 &quot;general purpose&quot; bomb with an added &quot;Kopfring&quot; on the nose for maritime use, to help ensure a relatively perpendicular axis of impact, with a thin metal shell and a high explosive charge inside, equipped with a rocket engine beneath the bomb, a pair of aileron-fitted wings, and the receiving FuG 230 component of the &quot;Kehl-Straßburg&quot; MCLOS guidance and control system, shared with the contemporary Fritz X gravity-propulsion, PGM armour-piercing bomb. The elevator was operated with an electrically powered jackscrew as the only proportional control, while the ailerons were operated with solenoids. Remote flight control was provided through the &quot;Kehl-Straßburg&quot; link, with the Hs 293&#x27;s control setup having no movable rudder on the ventral tailfin. The 109-507 monopropellant booster rocket provided for only a short burst of speed making range dependent on the launch altitude. 

The Hs 293 was intended to destroy unarmoured ships, unlike the Fritz X. Five coloured flares were attached to the rear of the weapon to make it visible at a distance to the operator. During night operations flashing lights instead of flares were used.

After the missile was launched, the bomber flew parallel to the target so as to be able to maintain a slant line of sight.

===Electronic countermeasures===
The Allies put considerable effort into developing devices which jammed the radio link between &quot;Kehl&quot; transmitter and &quot;Straßburg&quot; receiver. Jammers aboard U.S. Navy destroyer escorts were ineffective at first, as the frequencies selected for jamming were incorrect. On balance, the probability that a Hs 293 launched (and seen as responding to operator guidance) would strike a target (or achieve a damage-inflicting near-miss) was about the same at the Battle of Anzio as it was during Operation Avalanche.

As attacks were taking place at Anzio, the United Kingdom began to deploy its Type 650 transmitter which employed a different approach to interfering with the FuG 203/230 radio link, by jamming the &quot;Straßburg&quot; receiver&#x27;s intermediate frequency section, which operated at 3 MHz. This appears to have been quite successful, especially because the operator did not have to attempt to find which of the eighteen selected &quot;Kehl-Straßburg&quot; command frequencies were in use and then manually tune the jamming transmitter to one of them. The Type 650 defeated the receiver no matter which radio frequency had been selected.

Following several intelligence coups, including a capture of an intact Hs 293 at Anzio and recovery of important components of the &quot;Kehl&quot; transmitter from a crashed Heinkel He 177 on Corsica, the Allies were able to develop far more effective countermeasures, in time for the invasion of Normandy and Operation Dragoon. These included AIL&#x27;s Type MAS jammer, which employed sophisticated signals to defeat the Kehl transmission and to take over command of the Hs 293, steering it into the sea via a sequence of right-turn commands. In contrast to the experience at Anzio, the jammers seemed to have had a major impact on operations after April 1944, with significant degradation observed in the probability that a Hs 293 missile could achieve a hit or damaging near miss.

To improve control of the weapon and reduce vulnerability of the launching aircraft, wire-guided Hs 293B and television-guided Hs 293D variants were planned; neither was operational before the war ended. There was also a tailless delta winged Hs 293F. In addition, there was a Hs 293H air-to-air model. Over 1,000 were built, from 1942 onwards. The closest Allied weapon system in function and purpose to the Hs 293 series was the US Navy&#x27;s Bat unpowered, autonomously radar-guided unit.

=== Later developments ===
The Hs 293 served as the basis for a number of developments, none completed. These included the Hs 294, &quot;designed specifically to penetrate the water and strike a ship below the waterline&quot;, with a long, conical shaped forebody and a pair of the Hs 293A&#x27;s standard Walter HWK 109-507 booster engines at the wing roots; the Hs 295, with longer fuselage, larger warhead and Hs 294 wings; the Hs 296, with Hs 294 afterparts, Hs 295 warhead and Hs 293 &quot;Kehl-Straßurg&quot; MCLOS control systems.

== Operational history ==

On 25 August 1943, an Hs 293 was used in the first successful attack by a guided missile, striking the sloop ; the warhead did not detonate, and the damage was minimal. On 27 August, the sinking of the British sloop by a squadron of 18 Dornier Do 217 carrying Hs 293s led to anti-U-boat patrols in the Bay of Biscay being temporarily suspended. On 26 November, an Hs 293 sank the troop transport killing over 1,000 personnel.

Other ships sunk or damaged by the Hs 293 include:
* , Tribal-class destroyer (heavily damaged by confirmed hit with &quot;Egret&quot; in Bay of Biscay 27 August 1943)
* Italian destroyer &quot;Ugolino Vivaldi&quot; (heavily damaged and scuttled off Sardinia on 10 September 1943)
* SS &quot;Bushrod Washington&quot; (sunk 14 September 1943 during Operation Avalanche)
* SS &quot;Delius&quot; (damaged)
* , Hunt-class destroyer. (heavily damaged and scuttled)
* SS &quot;Elihu Yale&quot; (sunk off Anzio during Operation Shingle 16 February 1944 – &quot;LCT 3&quot;5 alongside was also destroyed)
* (damaged off Anzio during Operation Shingle 15 February 1944)
* SS &quot;Hiram S. Maxim&quot; (damaged)
* , I-class destroyer leader (sunk)
* SS &quot;James W. Marshall&quot; (damaged 15 September 1943 during Operation Avalanche and subsequently used as part of the Mulberry harbour – possibly hit by a &quot;Fritz X&quot;)
* , J-class destroyer (sunk—possibly by an Hs 293, Fritz X or a torpedo)
* (damaged off Anzio during Operation Shingle 23 January 1944)
* SS &quot;John Banvard&quot; (damaged)
* (slightly damaged with &quot;Bideford&quot; in Bay of Biscay 25 August 1943)
* (sunk)
* (sunk during Operation Dragoon)
* (sunk—probably by an Hs 293, official report states &quot;aerial torpedo&quot;)
* MV &quot;Marsa&quot; (sunk)
* (damaged)
* (damaged—possibly by an Hs 293 or a mine)
* , a hospital ship carrying Red Cross markings at the time. (heavily damaged and later scuttled by US Navy destroyer )
* (damaged—possibly by an Hs 293)
* (damaged slightly, later written off)
* SS &quot;Samite&quot; (damaged)
* (sunk off Anzio during Operation Shingle 29 January 1944)
* SS &quot;Selvik&quot; (damaged)
* (sunk off Anzio during Operation Shingle 29 January 1944)
* (slightly damaged 6 November 1943 while escorting Mediterranean convoy KMF-25A) although more likely a torpedo was the cause)

Although designed for use against ships, it was also used in Normandy in early August 1944 to attack bridges over the Sée and Sélune rivers. One bridge was slightly damaged for the loss of six of the attacking aircraft. The attack on 7 August 1944 at Pontaubault, by Do 217 of III./KG 100, was the first usage of a standoff missile against a land target. On 12 April 1945 Hs 293A bombs were used once more, against bridges on the Oder, by Do 217 bombers of KG 200.

The Hs 293 was carried on Heinkel He 111, Heinkel He 177, Focke-Wulf Fw 200, and Dornier Do 217 planes. Only the He 177 (of I and II.&quot;Gruppen&quot;/KG 40), certain variants of the Fw 200 (of III./KG 40) and the Do 217 (of II./KG 100 and III./KG 100) used the Hs 293 operationally in combat.

== Variants ==

* Hs 293A-0, the first production version.
* Hs 293A-1, main production version 
* Hs 293A-2, steel construction rather than aluminium.
* Hs 293A-v5 A-1 with shortened wings.
* Hs 293B wire-guided to prevent jamming; although jamming would eventually make the Hs 293 ineffective, it was never put into production.
* Hs 293C (production version designated Hs 293A-2) had the detachable warhead of the Hs 294.
* Hs 293D was television-guided, with a large Yagi antenna transmitting back to the launch aircraft. Seventy were built and tested, but it was never used operationally.
* Hs 293E, an experimental model to test spoiler controls as a replacement to ailerons; never put into series production. This modification was put into the final version of the Hs 293A-2 but by then the Luftwaffe had no aircraft available for anti-shipping operations and it was never deployed.
* Hs 293F, a tailless delta-wing variant; never got further than the design phase.
* Hs 293H, an experimental variant designed to be launched from one aircraft and controlled from another. Abandoned because allied air superiority had reached the point where it was felt that the second aircraft would be unable to remain in the vicinity of the ship for long enough. Used the Schmidding solid-fuel rocket motor. It was also considered as an anti-aircraft missile.
* Hs 293-U6, the short wingspan variant, fitted with a solid fuel motor and intended for launching from the Arado Ar 234 jet bomber at 720 km/h (447 mph). The missile did not proceed past the design stage.

==Operators==
*Luftwaffe

==See also==
* List of World War II guided missiles of Germany
* Azon - gravity-propulsion American 1,000 lb. laterally-steerable guided ordnance
* Henschel Hs 294 – further development of the Hs 293
* Kampfgeschwader 100, the pioneering PGM-deployment bomber wing of the Luftwaffe

== Notes ==
==References== 

==Bibliography==

==External links==

* Smithsonian NASM&#x27;s Hs 293A-1 page 
* The Dawn of the Smart Bomb
* Video about the Hs293d
* German guided air to ground weapons in WW2
* &quot;How Radio-Controlled Bombs Were Jammed&quot;, C.I.C. (Combat Information Center), U.S. Office of the Chief of Naval Operations, Dec. 1945.
* &quot; &quot;Rocket Glider Bomb Is New Nazi Weapon&quot; &quot;, December 1943, Popular Science One of the first public articles on the Hs 293, including speculation as to what it looked like and how it operated.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q586159" start="4" end="19" title="Henschel Hs 293" label="Henschel Hs 293"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="26" end="38" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="39" end="45" title="Nazi Germany" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052449" start="46" end="58" title="Command guidance" label="radio-guided"/>
<link wikidata="Q680879" start="59" end="69" title="glide bomb" label="glide bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q643532" start="99" end="120" title="anti-shipping missile" label="anti-shipping missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q16470" start="516" end="521" title="D-Day" label="D-Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q680879" start="681" end="691" title="glide bomb" label="glide bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q220858" start="791" end="800" title="autopilot" label="autopilot"/>
<link wikidata="Q86739852" start="937" end="950" title="anti-aircraft artillery" label="anti-aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q163580" start="959" end="967" title="Henschel" label="Henschel"/>
<link wikidata="Q86097" start="980" end="994" title="Herbert A. Wagner" label="Herbert Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q20825921" start="1040" end="1058" title="Walter HWK 109-507" label="Walter HWK 109-507"/>
<link wikidata="Q335225" start="1059" end="1072" title="rocket engine" label="rocket engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q154532" start="1354" end="1368" title="Heinkel He 111" label="Heinkel He 111"/>
<link wikidata="Q65078182" start="1520" end="1601" title="SC500 bomb" label="&amp;quot;Sprengbombe-Cylindrisch&amp;quot;-class SC 500 &amp;quot;general purpose&amp;quot; bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q22115601" start="1908" end="1934" title="Kehl-Strasbourg radio control link" label="&amp;quot;Kehl-Straßburg&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q251859" start="1935" end="1940" title="MCLOS" label="MCLOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425385" start="1999" end="2006" title="Fritz X" label="Fritz X"/>
<link wikidata="Q32050" start="2027" end="2030" title="Precision-guided munition" label="PGM"/>
<link wikidata="Q252451" start="2057" end="2065" title="elevator (aircraft)" label="elevator"/>
<link wikidata="Q15118690" start="2108" end="2117" title="jackscrew" label="jackscrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q509379" start="2162" end="2169" title="aileron" label="aileron"/>
<link wikidata="Q245739" start="2190" end="2198" title="solenoid" label="solenoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128361" start="2975" end="2981" title="Radio jamming" label="jammed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1499623" start="3095" end="3111" title="destroyer escort" label="destroyer escort"/>
<link wikidata="Q696844" start="3384" end="3399" title="Battle of Anzio" label="Battle of Anzio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1447505" start="3417" end="3436" title="Operation Avalanche (World War II)" label="Operation Avalanche"/>
<link wikidata="Q244948" start="3675" end="3697" title="intermediate frequency" label="intermediate frequency"/>
<link wikidata="Q499193" start="3898" end="3917" title="carrier frequency" label="command frequencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q4488757" start="4098" end="4110" title="Intelligence (information gathering)" label="intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q316321" start="4255" end="4269" title="Heinkel He 177" label="Heinkel He 177"/>
<link wikidata="Q14112" start="4273" end="4280" title="Corsica" label="Corsica"/>
<link wikidata="Q8641370" start="4366" end="4386" title="invasion of Normandy" label="invasion of Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q221111" start="4391" end="4408" title="Operation Dragoon" label="Operation Dragoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q850097" start="5097" end="5107" title="delta wing" label="delta wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q810680" start="5313" end="5316" title="Bat (guided bomb)" label="Bat"/>
<link wikidata="Q820585" start="5484" end="5490" title="Henschel Hs 294" label="Hs 294"/>
<link wikidata="Q20825921" start="5667" end="5685" title="Walter HWK 109-507" label="Walter HWK 109-507"/>
<link wikidata="Q126966" start="6163" end="6177" title="Dornier Do 217" label="Dornier Do 217"/>
<link wikidata="Q428661" start="6207" end="6213" title="U-boat" label="U-boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q41573" start="6229" end="6242" title="Bay of Biscay" label="Bay of Biscay"/>
<link wikidata="Q41573" start="6492" end="6505" title="Bay of Biscay" label="Bay of Biscay"/>
<link wikidata="Q4002948" start="6524" end="6569" title="Italian destroyer Ugolino Vivaldi" label="Italian destroyer &amp;quot;Ugolino Vivaldi&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462" start="6604" end="6612" title="Sardinia" label="Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1447505" start="6702" end="6721" title="Operation Avalanche (World War II)" label="Operation Avalanche"/>
<link wikidata="Q696844" start="6865" end="6882" title="Operation Shingle" label="Operation Shingle"/>
<link wikidata="Q696844" start="6979" end="6996" title="Operation Shingle" label="Operation Shingle"/>
<link wikidata="Q426875" start="7219" end="7235" title="Mulberry harbour" label="Mulberry harbour"/>
<link wikidata="Q696844" start="7378" end="7395" title="Operation Shingle" label="Operation Shingle"/>
<link wikidata="Q41573" start="7502" end="7515" title="Bay of Biscay" label="Bay of Biscay"/>
<link wikidata="Q221111" start="7556" end="7573" title="Operation Dragoon" label="Operation Dragoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q15888" start="7749" end="7762" title="hospital ship" label="hospital ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q696844" start="7996" end="8013" title="Operation Shingle" label="Operation Shingle"/>
<link wikidata="Q696844" start="8090" end="8107" title="Operation Shingle" label="Operation Shingle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="8177" end="8190" title="Mediterranean" label="Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q15878" start="8315" end="8323" title="Normandy" label="Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247758" start="8372" end="8375" title="Sée" label="Sée"/>
<link wikidata="Q776590" start="8380" end="8386" title="Sélune" label="Sélune"/>
<link wikidata="Q860644" start="8505" end="8516" title="Pontaubault" label="Pontaubault"/>
<link wikidata="Q7598659" start="8569" end="8585" title="standoff missile" label="standoff missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q552" start="8684" end="8688" title="Oder" label="Oder"/>
<link wikidata="Q569407" start="8711" end="8717" title="KG 200" label="KG 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q154532" start="8746" end="8760" title="Heinkel He 111" label="Heinkel He 111"/>
<link wikidata="Q316321" start="8762" end="8776" title="Heinkel He 177" label="Heinkel He 177"/>
<link wikidata="Q157485" start="8778" end="8795" title="Focke-Wulf Fw 200" label="Focke-Wulf Fw 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q126966" start="8801" end="8815" title="Dornier Do 217" label="Dornier Do 217"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9455" end="9472" title="television guidance#German efforts" label="television-guided"/>
<link wikidata="Q745829" start="9487" end="9499" title="Yagi antenna" label="Yagi antenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760097" start="9651" end="9658" title="spoiler (aeronautics)" label="spoiler"/>
<link wikidata="Q509379" start="9688" end="9695" title="aileron" label="aileron"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564009" start="9814" end="9823" title="Luftwaffe" label="Luftwaffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q157335" start="10477" end="10489" title="Arado Ar 234" label="Arado Ar 234"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564009" start="10591" end="10600" title="Luftwaffe" label="Luftwaffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6571836" start="10617" end="10664" title="List of World War II guided missiles of Germany" label="List of World War II guided missiles of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q4033121" start="10667" end="10671" title="Azon" label="Azon"/>
<link wikidata="Q820585" start="10750" end="10765" title="Henschel Hs 294" label="Henschel Hs 294"/>
<link wikidata="Q821993" start="10804" end="10823" title="Kampfgeschwader 100" label="Kampfgeschwader 100"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="312987" wikidata="Q1691355" url="?curid=312987" title="Joe Camel">
<text>Joe Camel (also called Old Joe) was an advertising mascot used by the R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company (RJR) for their cigarette brand Camel. The character was created in 1974 for a French advertising campaign, and was redesigned for the American market in 1988. He appeared in magazine advertisements, clothing, and billboards among other print media and merchandise.

In 1991, the &quot;Journal of the American Medical Association&quot; (&quot;JAMA&quot;) published research indicating that the Joe Camel ad campaign was appealing to children. They found that Joe Camel and the Disney Channel logo were recognized equally among six-year-olds, high school students were more familiar with him than adults, and that Camel&#x27;s market share among youth smokers had sharply risen. The research led RJR to a lawsuit in California, and a formal complaint from the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) for &quot;unfair practices&quot; by exposing children to smoking. RJR denied the accusations that they were marketing towards children, but voluntarily ended the campaign in 1997 after increased litigation and pressure from American federal agencies.

== Description ==
Joe Camel is an anthropomorphic camel who smokes cigarettes. He lacks many typical camelid traits such as a hump, hooves, or tail, appearing as a muscular humanoid with a camel&#x27;s head. He is often outfitted in masculine wear like tuxedos, T-shirts, and hard hats, and is typically in a &quot;heroic pose&quot;, surrounded by women or in a bar. 

With television advertisements for cigarettes outlawed in the United States before Joe Camel&#x27;s debut, the character was often seen on billboards, magazines, clothing, and other promotional displays. Early advertisements often depicted Joe alongside the motto &quot;Smooth character.&quot; Camel brand owner, R. J. Reynolds (RJR), also ran promotions in which customers could redeem &quot;Camel Cash&quot; vouchers for Joe Camel gear including clothing, watches, mugs, lighters, and shower curtains.

Some critics claimed that Joe&#x27;s nose was drawn in a phallic fashion, as to suggest that smoking is a virile pursuit. This was dismissed by its designer.

==History==

=== Background ===
Camel is the oldest cigarette brand in the United States. Camel cigarettes were first released by RJR in 1913 featuring a plain camel drawing, known as &quot;Old Joe&quot;, on the package. The camel theme was chosen because the cigarettes used Turkish tobacco, and Americans associated the animal with exotic Asian countries. The original drawing was made by Belgian artist Fred Otto Kleesattel, who had based it on a dromedary named Old Joe in the traveling Barnum &amp; Bailey Circus. For the next 60 years, RJR employed a series of marketing campaigns for the Camel brand; one notable campaign launched in 1946 maintained that doctors smoked Camels more than any other cigarette. Camel was the leading brand in the early 1950s, but had dropped to sixth place by 1985. Philip Morris had also eclipsed RJR&#x27;s market share by 1985 (35.8 to 31.7%), due primarily to the success of Marlboro.

=== Character creation ===

The character Joe Camel was created in 1974 by British artist Nicholas Price for a French advertising campaign for Camel cigarettes. The new Joe Camel character was subsequently used in advertising in other countries throughout the 1970s. This European iteration of Joe Camel was first seen in the United States in 1988 when Greensboro, North Carolina company Trone Advertising used the character in promotional materials created for the Camel brand&#x27;s 75th anniversary.

The American version of Joe Camel was created later by art designer Mike Salisbury working on contract for the brand&#x27;s main agency, McCann-Erickson New York. The intent of the campaign was to compete with Marlboro and its successful Marlboro Man campaign. Salisbury was contacted because of his film advertisements and retro style; McCann wanted his help to depict masculine heroes in old action films, like Humphrey Bogart and Gary Cooper, smoking Camels. Early advertisements were not successful because the audience was not familiar with films of that era, even after giving the characters camel heads. It was not until they gave the camel a look inspired by James Bond and James &quot;Sonny&quot; Crockett that they had a positive test response. Salisbury gave Joe expressive eyebrows like Sean Connery (Bond), and hair like Don Johnson (Sonny). The campaign promoted a &quot;hip&quot; lifestyle, which was typical advertising practice for the industry since the 1920s.

The success of the campaign made the character a key part of Camel&#x27;s advertising. &quot;The New York Times&quot; wrote that Joe Camel was successful in changing the public&#x27;s perception of a brand quickly, a typically difficult feat. They also wrote that the campaign helped protect Camel from the 5-8% annual decrease that full-price cigarette brand sales were feeling at the time as cheaper brands grew. Furthermore, the campaign had continued despite RJR changing advertisement agencies from McCann, to Young &amp; Rubicam, and finally to Mezzina/Brown Inc.. 

=== &quot;JAMA&quot; studies and Mangini lawsuit ===

In December 1991, the &quot;Journal of the American Medical Association&quot; (&quot;JAMA&quot;) published a study in which young children were asked to match brand logos with products. The study showed that among children age six, 91.3% matched Joe Camel with cigarettes, nearly the same amount who matched the Disney Channel logo with Mickey Mouse. The researchers concluded that RJR (at the time operating as RJR Nabisco) was just as effective at reaching children as the Disney Channel. In the same &quot;JAMA&quot; volume, another study was published comparing how well Joe Camel was recognized among high school students versus adults over age 21. The study concluded that high school students were more likely to recognize Joe Camel (97.7% vs 72.2%), understand the product being advertised (97.5% vs. 67%), and identity the Camel brand (93.6% vs 57.7%). The study concluded that the Joe Camel campaign was far more successful at advertising to children than adults. The authors also wrote that Camel&#x27;s share of smokers under 18 had risen from 0.5% to 32.8% during the campaign&#x27;s three years at that point.

Among those who read the &quot;JAMA&quot; papers was San Francisco-based family law attorney Janet Mangini. In 1992, she sued RJR as a private citizen, challenging the company for targeting minors with the campaign. In her complaint, Mangini alleged that Camel sales to teenagers increased from $6 million to $476 million over the four years since the campaign began. RJR attempted to dismiss the lawsuit, saying that only the federal government could regulate its advertising, but a California state court reviewed the case, and in 1994 permitted Mangini to proceed with the lawsuit. RJR attempted to appeal to the United States Supreme Court to have the case thrown out, but their request was turned away.

The &quot;JAMA&quot; studies did have their critics. The &quot;Journal of Advertising&quot; published a study in September 1994 in which five university professors, who specialized in marketing and advertising, criticized the ethical standards of the studies. By evaluating the papers against academic research standards, the reviewers identified major flaws with regards to reliability and validity, and accused the DiFranza study of using pre-determined results. The designer of Joe Camel, Mike Salisbury, said there was never any intent to attract children. He explained that RJR rejected some designs on the grounds they would appeal too much to children, and that there was a conscious effort to make him look like a 30-year old.

=== Federal Trade Commission complaint ===
In response to the &quot;JAMA&quot; studies, the American Heart Association, American Lung Association, and American Cancer Society wrote a joint letter in 1991 to the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) asking them to force RJR to end the Joe Camel campaign. The FTC investigated the case for two years, but in 1994 decided not to act after three of five commissioners could not find sufficient evidence that RJR violated federal law. After President Bill Clinton appointed new FTC chairman, Robert Pitofsky, and member Christine Varney, the FTC announced in February 1997 they would re-examine the case.

On May 28, 1997, the FTC concluded that the Joe Camel campaign was targeted to youth and requested a court order to end the campaign. In the complaint, the FTC alleged that RJR was exploring ways to appeal to younger smokers and &quot;first usual brand&quot; smokers as early as 1984. They concluded that the health injuries to children from smoking were not &quot;reasonably avoidable&quot; given children&#x27;s inability to understand the consequences of smoking. They concluded that the campaign violated federal law as an &quot;unfair practice&quot; under Section 5 of the Federal Trade Commission Act, which prohibits ‘‘unfair or deceptive acts or practices in or affecting commerce.’’

=== End of the campaign ===
By March 1997, Joe Camel was already absent from Camel advertisements as a temporary measure by RJR while federal litigation was in progress. RJR officially ended the Joe Camel campaign on July 10, 1997. The move came just weeks after the FTC complaint in May, and shortly after RJR and other tobacco companies agreed to pay a $368.5 billion settlement to states seeking to recover costs due to tobacco-related illnesses. Additionally, the tobacco industry and 40 state attorney generals had just settled on a ban on the use of cartoon figures in cigarette ads, though the settlement had yet to be ratified by Congress or seen support from President Clinton.

Joe Camel was phased out of point-of-purchase advertising, followed soon by billboards and print ads. The campaign closure increased interest in Joe Camel memorabilia. The campaign was replaced with the &quot;What you&#x27;re looking for&quot; campaign which used the original plain camel from the pack design. In September, RJR agreed to pay $10 million to San Francisco and the other California cities and counties who intervened in the Mangini litigation. The money was earmarked primarily to fund anti-smoking efforts targeted at youth.

== Legacy ==
The Joe Camel campaign has been suspected of inspiring similar ad campaigns. In late 1991, Brown &amp; Williamson ran marketing tests for a revival of their penguin mascot, Willie, for their Kool cigarette brand. The character had appeared in Kool advertisements from 1933 to 1960. &quot;The New York Times&quot; noted that the campaign was likely influenced by Joe Camel. Anti-smoking groups criticized the test campaign. Also, anti-drinking groups accused Anheuser-Busch of similar practices in 2004 for their &quot;Bud-weis-er&quot; frogs, and groups fighting childhood obesity criticized Ronald McDonald and other characters for promoting unhealthy foods. Litigation proceedings used the precedence of the Joe Camel to further their case. In 1996, &quot;Adbusters&quot; magazine published a subvertisement called &quot;Joe Chemo&quot;, featuring a bedridden and dying Joe Camel. The parody was developed in collaboration with psychology professor Scott Plous, who initially proposed the concept. The character was shared in the advertisement trade magazine &quot;Adweek.&quot;

The success and effect of the Joe Camel campaign has been assessed by academics in retrospect. A paper in the &quot;International Journal of Advertising&quot; in 2010 found that campaign brought consumer attention to the brand and may have helped in the short term, but that the eventual negative publicity may have reinforced negative attitudes towards smoking. They noted that Joe Camel campaign was not as successful as the Marlboro Man, and Newport had no comparable mascot or spokesperson, yet achieved a similar market share and as young a demographic as Camel.

==References==
==External links==

* Joe Camel at Don Markstein&#x27;s Toonopedia. Archived from the original on October 8, 2016.
* A gallery of Joe Camel advertisements.
* Joe Chemo, an anti-smoking website based on an &quot;Adbusters&quot; character
* Internal documents produced in the &quot;Mangini vs. RJ Reynolds Tobacco Company&quot; trial</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1691355" start="0" end="9" title="Joe Camel" label="Joe Camel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1691355" start="23" end="30" title="Joe Camel" label="Old Joe"/>
<link wikidata="Q18670161" start="51" end="57" title="mascot" label="mascot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759032" start="70" end="100" title="R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company" label="R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q878241" start="133" end="138" title="Camel (cigarette)" label="Camel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470970" start="387" end="430" title="Journal of the American Medical Association" label="Journal of the American Medical Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q178837" start="578" end="592" title="Disney Channel" label="Disney Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q786713" start="860" end="884" title="Federal Trade Commission" label="Federal Trade Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q132987" start="1177" end="1192" title="anthropomorphic" label="anthropomorphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7375" start="1193" end="1198" title="camel" label="camel"/>
<link wikidata="Q135022" start="1244" end="1251" title="camelid" label="camelid"/>
<link wikidata="Q4668625" start="1396" end="1402" title="tuxedo" label="tuxedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257397" start="1558" end="1587" title="Public Health Cigarette Smoking Act" label="outlawed in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759032" start="1825" end="1839" title="R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company" label="R. J. Reynolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q168552" start="2074" end="2081" title="Phallus" label="phallic"/>
<link wikidata="Q878241" start="2208" end="2213" title="Camel (cigarette)" label="Camel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4357899" start="2452" end="2467" title="Turkish tobacco" label="Turkish tobacco"/>
<link wikidata="Q71516" start="2626" end="2635" title="dromedary" label="dromedary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2642430" start="2667" end="2693" title="Barnum &amp;amp; Bailey Circus" label="Barnum &amp;amp; Bailey Circus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1852556" start="2979" end="2992" title="Philip Morris International" label="Philip Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q15075" start="3092" end="3100" title="Marlboro" label="Marlboro"/>
<link wikidata="Q49238" start="3456" end="3482" title="Greensboro, North Carolina" label="Greensboro, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779040" start="3744" end="3768" title="McCann-Erickson" label="McCann-Erickson New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q15075" start="3817" end="3825" title="Marlboro" label="Marlboro"/>
<link wikidata="Q917388" start="3845" end="3857" title="Marlboro Man" label="Marlboro Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q16390" start="4020" end="4035" title="Humphrey Bogart" label="Humphrey Bogart"/>
<link wikidata="Q93957" start="4040" end="4051" title="Gary Cooper" label="Gary Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q844" start="4274" end="4284" title="James Bond" label="James Bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q13590241" start="4289" end="4321" title="James &amp;quot;Sonny&amp;quot; Crockett" label="James &amp;quot;Sonny&amp;quot; Crockett"/>
<link wikidata="Q4573" start="4406" end="4418" title="Sean Connery" label="Sean Connery"/>
<link wikidata="Q309788" start="4441" end="4452" title="Don Johnson" label="Don Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="4680" end="4698" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q100927743" start="5102" end="5121" title="Young &amp;amp; Rubicam" label="Young &amp;amp; Rubicam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470970" start="5242" end="5285" title="Journal of the American Medical Association" label="Journal of the American Medical Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q178837" start="5526" end="5540" title="Disney Channel" label="Disney Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q11934" start="5551" end="5563" title="Mickey Mouse" label="Mickey Mouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q3294930" start="5626" end="5637" title="RJR Nabisco" label="RJR Nabisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q4686773" start="6151" end="6174" title="advertising to children" label="advertising to children"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="6955" end="6982" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="United States Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q6294736" start="7111" end="7133" title="Journal of Advertising" label="Journal of Advertising"/>
<link wikidata="Q464880" start="7876" end="7902" title="American Heart Association" label="American Heart Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q446094" start="7904" end="7929" title="American Lung Association" label="American Lung Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q463665" start="7935" end="7958" title="American Cancer Society" label="American Cancer Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q786713" start="7995" end="8019" title="Federal Trade Commission" label="Federal Trade Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124" start="8274" end="8286" title="Bill Clinton" label="Bill Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7348922" start="8315" end="8330" title="Robert Pitofsky" label="Robert Pitofsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q5110899" start="8343" end="8359" title="Christine A. Varney" label="Christine Varney"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440467" start="9007" end="9035" title="Federal Trade Commission Act of 1914" label="Federal Trade Commission Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="9760" end="9768" title="United States Congress" label="Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q2926338" start="10456" end="10478" title="Brown &amp;amp; Williamson" label="Brown &amp;amp; Williamson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810468" start="10556" end="10560" title="Kool (cigarette)" label="Kool"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="10653" end="10671" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q125074" start="10823" end="10837" title="Anheuser-Busch" label="Anheuser-Busch"/>
<link wikidata="Q643190" start="11160" end="11174" title="Subvertising" label="subvertisement"/>
<link wikidata="Q974135" start="11192" end="11197" title="Chemotherapy" label="Chemo"/>
<link wikidata="Q16734588" start="11316" end="11327" title="Scott Plous" label="Scott Plous"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134747" start="11432" end="11438" title="Adweek" label="Adweek"/>
<link wikidata="Q4686737" start="11563" end="11599" title="International Journal of Advertising" label="International Journal of Advertising"/>
<link wikidata="Q7018751" start="11892" end="11899" title="Newport (cigarette)" label="Newport"/>
<link wikidata="Q5293067" start="12066" end="12097" title="Don Markstein&amp;#x27;s Toonopedia" label="Don Markstein&amp;#x27;s Toonopedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1993575" start="12242" end="12251" title="Adbusters" label="Adbusters"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="312989" wikidata="Q192818" url="?curid=312989" title="Bettino Craxi">
<text>Benedetto &quot;Bettino&quot; Craxi ( ; ; ; 24 February 1934 – 19 January 2000) was an Italian politician and statesman, leader of the Italian Socialist Party (PSI) from 1976 to 1993, and the 45th prime minister of Italy from 1983 to 1987. He was the first PSI member to become prime minister and the second from a socialist party to hold the office. He led the third-longest government in the Italian Republic and he is considered one of the most powerful and prominent politicians of the First Italian Republic.

Craxi was involved in investigations conducted by judges in Milan, eventually being convicted for political corruption and illicit financing of the PSI. He always rejected the charges of corruption while admitting to the illegal funding that permitted costly political activity, the PSI being less financially powerful than the two larger parties, Christian Democracy (DC) and the Italian Communist Party (PCI). Craxi&#x27;s government and party were also supported by future Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi, a media magnate and personal friend of Craxi.

Craxi maintained strong links with many leaders of the Western European left, including François Mitterrand, Felipe González, Andreas Papandreou, and Mário Soares, and was one of the main representatives of Western European socialism. Craxi&#x27;s supporters especially praised his foreign policy, which was assertive and often led to confrontations with the United States, on issues such as Palestinian territories, terrorism, and Craxi&#x27;s close relations with Arab socialist governments.

Craxi was often nicknamed by his detractors (&#x27;The Big Boar&#x27;) due to his physical size. This name was given him by his long-time ally and rival at the same time, DC leader Giulio Andreotti.

== Early life ==
Craxi was born in Milan on 24 February 1934. His father Vittorio Craxi was a Sicilian lawyer and anti-fascist who was persecuted by the regime of Benito Mussolini while his mother Maria Ferrari was a housewife from Sant&#x27;Angelo Lodigiano. During World War II, the young Craxi was sent to the Catholic college Edmondo De Amicis due to his unruly character and to protect him from fascist violence in retaliation for his father&#x27;s anti-fascist activities.

After the war, his father assumed the role of vice-prefect in Milan and then the prefect in Como, where he moved with his family in 1945. A few months later, Craxi returned to college, first in Como and then in Cantù, where he considered entering a seminary. Craxi&#x27;s father stood in the 1948 Italian general election for the Popular Democratic Front, a political alliance between the Italian Socialist Party (PSI) and the Italian Communist Party (PCI). He campaigned for his father and later joined the PSI at the age of 17.

== Early political career ==

Craxi was precocious and rose to many levels of public office at an early age. Meanwhile, he attended the faculty of Law in University of Milan and then the faculty of Political Science in Urbino, Craxi founded the &quot;Socialist University Nucleus&quot; joining the &quot;New University&quot; group and adhering to the CUDI (Italian Democratic University Centre), the student group that supported the left-wing forces.

During this period he engaged for the first time in public speaking, organizing conferences, debates, and film screenings, and in 1956 he became part of the PSI Provincial Committee in Milan, and leader of the Socialist Youth Federation.

In 1956, following the Soviet invasion of Hungary, Craxi with a group of loyalists committed himself to the detachment of the Socialist Party from its pro-Communist policy, but he failed: his proposal to associate the Socialist Youth Movement with the International Organisation of Democratic Youth was rejected.

In November 1956 he was elected town councillor in Sant&#x27;Angelo Lodigiano (birthplace of his mother), and in 1957 he was elected to the Central Committee of the PSI representing the autonomist current of Pietro Nenni.

In 1958 the party sent him to Sesto San Giovanni as a responsible of the organization; in November 1960 he was elected city councilor in Milan with more than 1,000 preferences and became assessor in the junta of Gino Cassinis.

In 1961 he was excluded from the Central Committee of the Socialist Party by the new Secretary Francesco De Martino. In 1963 he was appointed leader of the Milan Provincial Secretariat of the PSI and in 1965 Craxi became a member of the National Leadership. Meanwhile, in November 1964, he was re-elected city councillor in Milan, continuing his public commitment as assessor for Charity and Assistance in the council of Pietro Bucalossi.

In 1966, with the formation of the Unified Socialist Party, a political alliance between the Socialist Party and the Social Democratic Party, Craxi became provincial secretary of the PSU in Milan, along with by the social democrat Enrico Rizzi and Renzo Peruzzotti.

In 1968 general election Craxi was elected for the first time at the Chamber of Deputies with 23,788 votes, in the constituency of Milan–Pavia. In 1970 after the end of the PSU alliance, Craxi became Vice Secretary of the PSI, as proposed by Giacomo Mancini.

During this period he was a strong supporters of the Organic Centre-left coalition, between the Christian Democrats of Aldo Moro and Amintore Fanfani, the Socialists of Pietro Nenni, the Social Democrats of Giuseppe Saragat and the Republicans of Ugo La Malfa.

In 1972 with the re-election of Francesco De Martino as National Secretary of the Socialist Party during the Genoa Congress, Craxi was confirmed with Giovanni Mosca in the role of Deputy Secretary, receiving the commission to treat the international relations of the party. As the representative of PSI at the Socialist International, Craxi formed ties with some of the main European future leaders, like Willy Brandt, Felipe González, François Mitterrand, Mário Soares, Michel Rocard and Andreas Papandreou.

As responsible for the PSI foreign policy he supported, also financially, some socialist parties banned by the dictatorships of their respective countries, including the Spanish Socialist Workers Party, the Panhellenic Socialist Movement and the Chilean Socialist Party of Salvador Allende, of whom Craxi was a personal friend.

== Secretary of the PSI ==
In 1976 the Secretary Francesco De Martino wrote an article in the Socialist newspaper &quot;Avanti!&quot; that caused the fall of the government Aldo Moro and the subsequent snap election, which saw an impressive growth of the Italian Communist Party led by a young leader, Enrico Berlinguer, while the Christian Democracy managed to remain the majority party on just a few votes. Instead for the PSI, those elections were a crushing defeat: the votes went down under the threshold of 10%. De Martino, pointing to a new alliance with the Communists, was forced to resign and opened a serious crisis within the party.
Craxi was appointed to the vacant position of National Secretary of the party, ending years of factional fighting within the PSI. Ironically, the &quot;old guard&quot; saw him as short-lived leader, allowing each faction time to regroup. However, he was able to consolidate power and implement his policies. In particular, he sought and managed to distance the party from the Communists, bringing it into an alliance with Christian Democracy and other centrist parties, while maintaining a leftist and reformist profile.

Craxi always opposed the Historic Compromise policy of Moro and Berlinguer, a political alliance and an accommodation between the Christian Democrats and the Communists; the alliance would inevitably make the Socialists politically irrelevant. He outlined for a line of alternation between the DC and the left wing, represented by his party, due to the close relations between the PCI and the Soviet Union.

On the morning of 16 March 1978, the day on which the new cabinet led by Giulio Andreotti was supposed to have undergone a confidence vote in the Italian Parliament, the car of Aldo Moro, former prime minister and then president of DC was assaulted by a group of Red Brigades terrorists in Via Fani in Rome. Firing automatic weapons, the terrorists killed Moro&#x27;s bodyguards and kidnapped him. Craxi was the only political leader, together with Amintore Fanfani and Marco Pannella, to declare himself available to a &quot;humanitarian solution&quot; that would allow the liberation of Christian Democrat statesman, drawing heavy criticism on the so-called &quot;party of firmness&quot;, primarily driven by the Communists. On 9 May 1978 Moro&#x27;s body was found in the trunk of a Renault 4 in Via Caetani after 55 days of imprisonment, during which Moro was submitted to a political trial by the so-called &quot;people&#x27;s court&quot; set up by the Brigate Rosse and the Italian government was asked for an exchange of prisoners.

In 1978 Craxi decided to change the party logo. He chose a red carnation to represent the new course of the party, in honour of the Carnation Revolution in Portugal. The party shrank the size of the old hammer and sickle in the lower part of the symbol. It was eventually eliminated altogether in 1985.
In July 1978, following the resignation of President Giovanni Leone, after a lengthy parliamentary battle, Craxi was able to bring together a large number of votes, electing Sandro Pertini, as new President; Pertini was the first Socialist to hold this position. Pertini was also supported by the Communists, which considered the old Socialist partisan not conducive to the &quot;new course&quot; of Craxi.

Craxi, on the one hand explicitly distanced himself from Leninism referring to forms of authoritarian socialism, and on the other he showed support to the civil society movements and to the battles for civil rights, mainly proposed by the Radical Party, he oversaw its image through the media.

As the leader of PSI, he tried to undermine the Communist Party, which until then had been continuously increasing its votes in elections, and to consolidate the PSI as a modern, strongly pro-European reformist social-democratic party, with deep roots in the democratic left-wing. This strategy called for ending most of the party&#x27;s historical traditions as a working-class trade union based party and attempting to gain new support among white-collar and public sector employees. At the same time, the PSI increased its presence in the big state-owned enterprises, and became heavily involved in corruption and illegal party funding which would eventually result in the &quot;Mani pulite&quot; investigations.

Even if the PSI never became a serious electoral challenger either to the PCI or the Christian Democrats, its pivotal position in the political arena allowed it to claim the post of Prime Minister for Craxi after the 1983 general election. The electoral support for the Christian Democrats was significantly weakened, leaving it with 32.9% of the vote, compared to the 38.3% it gained in 1979. The PSI, which had obtained only 11%, threatened to leave the parliamentary majority unless Craxi was made Prime Minister. The Christian Democrats accepted this compromise to avoid a new election. Craxi became the first Socialist in the history of the Italian Republic to be appointed Prime Minister, and the third member of a social democratic party in the history of unified Italy to hold the post.

== Prime Minister of Italy ==

Craxi led the third longest-lived government of Italy during the republican era (after the II and IV Silvio Berlusconi cabinets) and had strong influence in Italian politics throughout the 1980s; for a time, he was a close ally of two key figures of Christian Democracy, Giulio Andreotti and Arnaldo Forlani, in a loose cross-party alliance often dubbed CAF (from the first letter of the surname &quot;C&quot;raxi-&quot;A&quot;ndreotti-&quot;F&quot;orlani). Craxi had a firm grasp on a party previously troubled by factionalism, and tried to distance it from the Communists and to bring it closer to Christian Democrats and other parties; his objective was to create an Italian version of European reformist socialist parties, like the German SPD or the French Socialist Party. The Italian Socialist Party reached its post-war apex when it increased its share of votes in the general election of 1987. However, the Italian Socialist Party never outgrew the much larger Italian Communist Party, whose highly charismatic leader, Enrico Berlinguer, was a fierce adversary of Craxi&#x27;s policies through the years.

The main dynamic of Italian post-war politics was to find a way to keep the Italian Communist Party out of power. This led to the constant formation of political alliances between parties keen on keeping the Communists at bay. Things were further complicated by the fact that many parties had internal currents that would have welcomed the Communists in the governing coalition, in particular, within Christian Democracy, the largest party in Italy from 1945 until the end of the First Republic.

=== Domestic policy ===
During Craxi&#x27;s tenure as Prime Minister, Italy became the fifth largest industrial nation and gained entry into the G7 Group of most industrialised nations. However, inflation was often in the double digits. Against trade union resistance, the Craxi government reacted by abolishing wage-price indexation (a mechanism known as &quot;scala mobile&quot; or &quot;escalator&quot;), under which wages had been increased automatically in line with inflation. Abolishing the escalator system did help reduce inflation, which was also falling in other major countries, but in the long term it inevitably increased industrial action as workers had to bargain for better salaries. In any event, the victory of the &quot;No&quot; campaign in the referendum called by the Italian Communist Party was a major victory for Craxi. During his premiership, the Socialist Party gained popularity. He successfully boosted the country&#x27;s GNP and controlled inflation.
In domestic policy, a number of reforms were initiated during Craxi&#x27;s time in office. In 1984, solidarity contracts (work-sharing arrangements to avoid redundancies) were introduced, while restrictions on part-time employment were relaxed. In the field of family welfare, legislation was enacted in 1984 and 1986 that changed the family allowance system &quot;so that people most in need received larger amounts and coverage was progressively reduced to the point of termination once certain income levels were exceeded.&quot;

==== Concordate with the Vatican ====
In 1984, Craxi signed an agreement with the Vatican City that revised the Lateran Treaty. Among other things, both sides declared: &quot;The principle of the Catholic religion as the sole religion of the Italian State, originally referred to by the Lateran Pacts, shall be considered to be no longer in force&quot;. The Church&#x27;s position as the sole state-supported religion of Italy was also ended, replacing the state financing with a personal income tax called the &quot;otto per mille&quot;, to which other religious groups, Christian and non-Christian, also have access.

The revised concordat regulated the conditions under which civil effects are accorded to church marriages and to ecclesiastical declarations of nullity of marriages. Abolished articles included those concerning state recognition of knighthoods and titles of nobility conferred by the Holy See, the undertaking by the Holy See to confer ecclesiastical honours on those authorized to perform religious functions at the request of the State or the Royal Household, and the obligation of the Holy See to enable the Italian government to present political objections to the proposed appointment of diocesan bishops.

Craxi was not a Catholic: he defined himself as a &quot;laical Christian, like Giuseppe Garibaldi.&quot;

=== Foreign policy ===

In the international arena, Craxi helped dissidents and Socialist parties throughout the world to organise and become independent. Notable recipients of his logistical help were the Spanish Socialist Workers&#x27; Party (PSOE) during Francisco Franco&#x27;s dictatorship and dramatist Jiři Pelikan, in the former Czechoslovakia. Rare footage of Craxi trying to lay flowers at the tomb of Salvador Allende has been unearthed from RAI&#x27;s (Radiotelevisione Italiana) archives.

There is also evidence that part of Craxi&#x27;s illegally earned money was given in secret to leftist political opposition in Uruguay during the military dictatorship, to Solidarity in the period of Jaruzelski rule in Poland and to Yasser Arafat and his Palestine Liberation Organization because of Craxi&#x27;s sympathy for the Palestinian cause. He also played a role in the 1987 seizure of power in Tunisia by Zine el Abidine Ben Ali.

==== Sigonella crisis ====

Internationally, Craxi is perhaps best remembered for an incident in October 1985, when he refused the request of US President Ronald Reagan to extradite the hijackers of the cruise ship Achille Lauro. After protracted negotiations, the hijackers were given safe passage to Egypt by plane. Three United States Navy F-14&#x27;s forced the plane down to the United States Naval Air Facility (NAF) of Sigonella. According to the version of political circles in Washington, Craxi first gave the United States Forces permission to detain the terrorists, but he later reneged on the deal. He ordered Italian troops to surround the US Forces protecting the plane.
This move was supposedly dictated both by security concerns about terrorists targeting Italy if the United States had had it their way and by the Italian tradition of diplomacy with the Arab world. Craxi&#x27;s decisive character may have been relevant in this resolution. Though the Americans demanded that the Italian authorities extradite Abu Abbas of the PLO, Craxi stood firm on the grounds that the crime had been perpetrated on Italian soil, over which the Italian Republic had sole jurisdiction. Craxi rejected the US extradition order and let Abu Abbas – chief of the hijackers, present on the plane – flee to Yugoslavia; the four hijackers were later found guilty, and sentenced to prison terms for hijacking and the murder of a Jewish American citizen, Leon Klinghoffer. Abbas was later also convicted in Italy &quot;in absentia&quot; and eventually died of &quot;natural causes&quot;, shortly after being taken prisoner by American forces in the aftermath of the 2003 invasion of Iraq. This episode earned Craxi an article in &quot;The Economist&quot; titled &quot;Europe&#x27;s strong man&quot; and a standing ovation in the Senate of the Republic, which included his Communist opponents.

==== US attack on Libya ====
According to Giulio Andreotti, Italy&#x27;s foreign minister at the time (and 42nd Prime Minister of Italy) and Abdel Rahman Shalgham (Libya&#x27;s Foreign Minister from 2000 until 2009), Craxi was the person who telephoned Libyan leader Muammar al-Gaddafi to warn him of the impending American Operation El Dorado Canyon retaliatory air-strikes against Libya on 15 April 1986. This permitted Gaddafi and his family to evacuate their residence in the Bab al-Azizia compound moments before the bombs dropped. Shalgham&#x27;s statement was also confirmed by Margherita Boniver, foreign affairs chief of Craxi&#x27;s Socialist Party at the time.

For the Libyan attack, Craxi&#x27;s government denied the United States any rights of military overflight, as did France and Spain. For the United States, this precluded the use of European continental bases, forcing the US Air Force component to take off from RAF Upper Heyford, United Kingdom, be flown around France and Spain, over Portugal and through the Straits of Gibraltar, adding 1,300 miles (2,100 km) each way and requiring multiple aerial refuellings.

=== Resignation ===
In April 1987, the Secretary of the Christian Democracy Ciriaco De Mita decided to drop his support for Craxi&#x27;s government. This caused the immediate fall of the cabinet and the formation of a new government led by the long-time Christian Democratic politician Amintore Fanfani. Even though Fanfani was a close friend and ally of Craxi, he did not participate in the swearing in ceremony, sending the Undersecretary to the Presidency of the Council Giuliano Amato.

== After the premiership ==
In the 1987 general election the PSI won 14.3% of the vote, a good result but less good than what Craxi hoped, and this time it was the Christian Democrats&#x27; turn to govern. From 1987 to 1992 the PSI participated in four governments, allowing Giulio Andreotti to take power in 1989 and to govern until 1992. The Socialists held a strong balance of power, which made them more powerful than the Christian Democrats, who had to depend on it to form a majority in Parliament. The PSI kept tight control of this advantage.

The alternative which Craxi had wanted so much was taking shape: the idea of a &quot;Social Unity&quot; with the other left-wing political parties, including the PCI, proposed by Craxi in 1989 after the fall of communism. He believed that the collapse of communism in eastern Europe had undermined the PCI and made Social Unity inevitable. In fact, the PSI was in line to become Italy&#x27;s second largest party and to become the dominant force of a new left-wing coalition opposed to a Christian Democrat-led one. This did not actually happen because of the rise of Lega Nord and the &quot;Tangentopoli&quot; scandals.

== Involvement in &quot;Tangentopoli&quot; ==
The last main turning point of Craxi&#x27;s career began in February 1992, when Socialist MP Mario Chiesa was arrested by police while taking a 7 million lira bribe from a cleaning service firm. Chiesa sought Craxi&#x27;s protection for nearly a month, but Craxi accused him of casting a shadow on the &quot;most honest party in Italy&quot;. Feeling marginalised and unjustly singled out, Chiesa divulged everything he knew to the prosecutors. His revelations brought half of the Milan Socialists and industrialists under investigation; even Paolo Pillitteri, Craxi&#x27;s own brother-in-law and mayor of Milan, was investigated despite his parliamentary immunity. As a consequence, a team of Milanese judges began investigating specifically the party&#x27;s financing system.

In July 1992, Craxi finally realised the situation was serious and that he himself was going to be hit by the unfolding scandal. He made an appeal before the Chamber of Deputies in which he claimed that everyone knew of the widespread irregularities in the public financing of Italian parties, accused the deputies of hypocrisy and cowardice, and called for all MPs to protect the Socialists from prosecution as a show of solidarity. However, his call was ignored.

Craxi received his first prosecution notice in December 1992. More followed in January and February, at which point the Court of Milan explicitly asked Parliament to authorise Craxi&#x27;s prosecution for bribery and corruption (at the time, Italian MPs were immune from prosecution unless authorised by Parliament). The authorisation was denied on 29 April 1993 after Craxi gave an emotional speech. However, upon coming out of the Hotel Raphael, where he lived, he received a salvo of coins that members of the Democratic Party of the Left and the right-wing Italian Social Movement threw at him as a sign of their disgust. From a traditional stadium chant, they started to jump and sing: &quot;He who does not jump is a Socialist!&quot; Some of the students waved 1,000-lire bills, singing &quot;Bettino, do you want these too?&quot; (&quot;Bettino, vuoi pure queste?&quot;) to the tune of Guantanamera.

=== Facing the judges ===
In December 1993, after his prosecution was finally authorised, Craxi was called to testify alongside Cristian Democracy (DC) party secretary Arnaldo Forlani before Justice Antonio Di Pietro. Questions were asked about the so-called ENIMONT &#x27;super-bribe&#x27; which the PSI and DC had jointly received and democratically shared. Forlani evasively asked what a bribe was while Craxi, after admitting to the charges brought against himself and other parties, stated that the bribes were &quot;the cost of politics.&quot; Craxi, noting that the legal process had accelerated in his case, claimed that his prosecution was politically motivated.

In May 1994, he fled to Tunis in order to escape jail. His political career ended in less than two years. Italy&#x27;s entire political class, including people like Andreotti and Forlani, was to follow suit soon. The CAF (the Craxi-Andreotti-Forlani axis), which had made a pact to revive the Pentapartito (an alliance of five parties: DC, PSI, Italian Republican Party, Italian Liberal Party, Italian Democratic Socialist Party) of the 1980s and apply it to the 1990s, was doomed to be crushed by the popular vote as well as by the judges.

The set of anti-corruption investigations carried out by the Milan judges came to be collectively called Mani pulite (&quot;clean hands&quot;). No party was spared but in some parties, corruption had become more endemic than elsewhere, either because of more opportunity or internal ethics. To this day, some people, especially those who were close to Craxi argue that some parties like the Italian Communist Party (PCI) were left untouched, while the leaders of the ruling coalition and in particular Craxi were wiped off the political map.

The judges in Milan were put under scrutiny several times by different governments, especially Silvio Berlusconi&#x27;s first government in 1994, but no evidence of any misconduct was ever found. Furthermore, public opinion was much less concerned about foreign financing than about the misappropriation of their money by corrupt politicians. In the end, the Socialist party went from 14% of the vote to a virtual nil. An ironic note was that the disgraced remnant of the party was excluded from Parliament by the minimum 4% threshold introduced by Craxi himself during one of his previous governments.

During the &quot;Mani pulite&quot; period, Craxi tried to use a daring defence tactic: he maintained that all parties needed and took money illegally, however they could get it, to finance their activities. His defence was therefore not to declare himself innocent, but everybody guilty. While this was basically the truth, most citizens distrusted politicians, and Craxi&#x27;s defence got no sympathy from the citizens and may have even served to enrage them further. Some bribes didn&#x27;t go to the parties at all. They went to the personal wallets of the politicians who happened to take them.

In 2012, Di Pietro admitted that Craxi was right when during the Enimont trials he accused the PCI to have received illegal funding from the Soviet Union. Craxi&#x27;s sentences seemed to him &quot;criminally relevant&quot;, but Di Pietro omitted to investigate that crime.

=== Criticism of his lifestyle ===

Craxi&#x27;s lifestyle was perceived to be inappropriate for the secretary of a party with so many alleged financial problems: he lived in the Raphael, an expensive hotel in Rome&#x27;s centre, and had a large villa in Hammamet, Tunisia. As the Mani Pulite investigations were to uncover in the 1990s, personal corruption was endemic in Italian society; while many politicians, including Craxi, would justify corruption with the necessities of democracy, political leaders at many levels enjoyed a lifestyle that should have been well out of their reach, while most parties continued having financial problems. Rino Formica, a prominent member of the Socialist Party in those years, wittily said that &quot;the convent is poor, but the friars are rich&quot;.

Furthermore, Craxi&#x27;s arrogant character won him many enemies; one of his most condemned actions was blaming corruption in the socialist party on treasurer Vincenzo Balzamo, just after the latter&#x27;s death, in order to clear himself of any accusation. Craxi&#x27;s friends included Siad Barre, president of Somalia; Yasser Arafat, leader of PLO; and Ben Ali, president of Tunisia. The latter provided protection to Craxi when he escaped from Italy.

Craxi&#x27;s entourage was famously criticised by Formica as a &quot;court of midgets and dancers&quot; (&quot;corte di nani e ballerine&quot;), indicating the often ludicrous and immoral traits of a system based on personal acquaintance rather than merit. Among the friends of Craxi&#x27;s to receive smaller and larger favours, Silvio Berlusconi is perhaps the most known: he received many favours, especially regarding his media empire, and had a decree named after him (&quot;Decreto Berlusconi&quot;) long before he entered politics. Other figures were Craxi&#x27;s mistresses Ania Pieroni, who owned a TV station in the Rome area, and Sandra Milo, who had a skyrocketing career in the state-owned TV channels RAI.

Craxi was also known for never apologising, as a matter of principle; most Italians expected an apology after the corrupt system had been exposed. Craxi never apologised, stating he had done nothing that everybody else had not been doing, and that he was being unjustly singled out and persecuted.

=== Judgements of the European Court of Human Rights ===
All three appeals by Craxi to the Strasbourg court complained that his defence was not able to refute in court the accusations made by various defendants of related crimes, in violation of the adversarial principle proclaimed in article 6, paragraph 3, letter d of the European Convention of Human Rights. The European Court ruled in his favour in the case of wiretapped conversations illegally made public.

== Decline and dissolution of the PSI ==

Craxi resigned as party Secretary in February 1993. Between 1992 and 1993, most members of the party left politics and three Socialist deputies committed suicide. Craxi was succeeded by two Socialist trade unionists, first Giorgio Benvenuto and then by Ottaviano Del Turco. In the December 1993 provincial and municipal elections the PSI was virtually wiped out, receiving around 3% of the vote. In Milan, where the PSI had won 20% in 1990, the PSI received a mere 2%, which was not even enough to elect a councillor. Del Turco tried in vain to regain credibility for the party.

In the 1994 general election, what was left of PSI allied itself to the Alliance of Progressives dominated by the post-communist incarnation of the PCI, the Democratic Party of the Left (PDS). Del Turco quickly changed the party symbol to reinforce the idea of innovation. However, this did not stop the PSI gaining only 2.2% of the votes compared to 13.6% in 1992. The PSI got 16 deputies and 14 senators elected, down from 92 deputies and 49 senators of 1992. Most of them came from the left wing of the party, as Del Turco himself did. Most Socialists joined other political forces, mainly Forza Italia, the new party led by Silvio Berlusconi, the Patto Segni and Democratic Alliance.

The party was disbanded on 13 November 1994 after two years, in which almost all of its longtime leaders, especially Craxi, were involved in Tangentopoli and decided to leave politics. The 100-year-old party closed down, partially thanks to its leaders for their personalisation of the PSI.

== Craxism ==
&quot;Craxism&quot; (Italian: &quot;Craxismo&quot;) was and to some extent remains an Italian political ideology based on Craxi&#x27;s thought. It was the informal ideology of the PSI from 1976 to 1994.

=== Origins and features ===
Although the term is considered derogatory today, Craxism was based on a synthesis of socialism, social democracy, and social liberalism, or the Italian liberal-socialist tradition. Under Craxi, the PSI supported Third-Worldism, was pro-Arab and environmentalist, and supported the modern welfare state, and was also pro-Atlanticist, pro-Europeanist, placed a strong defense of territorial sovereignty (e.g. the Sigonella crisis), and was more conservative on issues such as abortion and war on drugs.

Under Craxi, the PSI moved closer to the centre-left and political centre, much to ally with Christian Democracy and other moderate parties that formed a coalition called &quot;Pentapartito&quot;, which ensured a stable majority to govern.

=== Critics ===
Today, Craxism is often considered a derogatory term describing a corrupt politician, although some favourably welcome him; this is the case of those who, following the dissolution of the PSI, joined the newly formed Forza Italia of Silvio Berlusconi (centre-right coalition) but also a part of those who formed the Italian Socialists, small party adhering to the Alliance of Progressives of Achille Occhetto (centre-left coalition).

Craxism has led to the change of the whole of European socialism, together with Felipe González (PSOE), François Mitterrand (PS), and Helmut Schmidt (SPD) during the 1980s. In addition, along with these other figures, it inspired the overhaul and the policies of Tony Blair&#x27;s Labour Party, José Luis Rodríguez Zapatero&#x27;s PSOE, and Andreas Papandreou&#x27;s PASOK.

In Italy, the main critics of Craxism, as well as the figure of Craxi, are the former Communists (including most members of the Democratic Party) and some left-leaning press media (&quot;Il Fatto Quotidiano&quot;, &quot;il manifesto&quot;, &quot;L&#x27;Espresso&quot;, and &quot;la Repubblica&quot;), while the biggest supporters are on the centre-left the refounded Italian Socialist Party of Riccardo Nencini, which includes his son Bobo Craxi, and various politicians of the centre-right like Berlusconi, Renato Brunetta, Maurizio Sacconi, and Stefano Caldoro, including his daughter, Stefania Craxi.

== Death and legacy ==

All this resulted in him being considered the symbol of political corruption. Craxi escaped the laws he had once contributed to make, by fleeing to Hammamet, Tunisia, in 1994; he remained a fugitive there, protected by the government of Zine El Abidine Ben Ali, his personal friend. He repeatedly declared himself innocent but never returned to Italy where he had been sentenced to 27 years in jail because of his corruption crimes; of these, 9 years and 8 months were upheld on appeal.

Craxi died on 19 January 2000, at the age of 65, from complications of diabetes. Prime Minister and Democrats of the Left leader Massimo D&#x27;Alema proposed a state funeral, which was not accepted by Craxi&#x27;s family who accused the government of preventing his return to Italy to undergo a delicate surgery at San Raffaele Hospital in Milan.

Craxi&#x27;s funeral took place at the Cathedral of St. Vincent de Paul in Tunis and saw a large participation of the local population. Former PSI militants and other Italians arrived in Tunisia to make the last greetings to their leader. His supporters came outside the Tunisian cathedral and targeted Lamberto Dini and Marco Minniti, representatives of the Italian government, with insults and a launch of coins. Craxi&#x27;s tomb is in the small Christian cemetery in Hammamet. According to some sources it is orientated towards Italy; following a 2017 survey, this was revealed to be erroneous.

== Electoral history ==

== References ==
== Further reading ==

== External links ==
* Craxi Foundation website </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q192818" start="0" end="9" title="Bettino Craxi" label="Benedetto"/>
<link wikidata="Q192818" start="16" end="23" title="Bettino Craxi" label="Bettino"/>
<link wikidata="Q192818" start="30" end="35" title="Bettino Craxi" label="Craxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q590750" start="135" end="158" title="Italian Socialist Party" label="Italian Socialist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q796897" start="197" end="220" title="Prime Minister of Italy" label="prime minister of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="315" end="324" title="Socialism" label="socialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="394" end="410" title="Italy" label="Italian Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2602944" start="490" end="512" title="First Italian Republic" label="First Italian Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q490" start="575" end="580" title="Milan" label="Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q10858400" start="613" end="633" title="political corruption" label="political corruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q815348" start="863" end="882" title="Christian Democracy (Italy)" label="Christian Democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q461886" start="896" end="919" title="Italian Communist Party" label="Italian Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q11860" start="1006" end="1023" title="Silvio Berlusconi" label="Silvio Berlusconi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2038" start="1160" end="1179" title="François Mitterrand" label="François Mitterrand"/>
<link wikidata="Q156799" start="1181" end="1196" title="Felipe González" label="Felipe González"/>
<link wikidata="Q219256" start="1198" end="1216" title="Andreas Papandreou" label="Andreas Papandreou"/>
<link wikidata="Q156781" start="1222" end="1234" title="Mário Soares" label="Mário Soares"/>
<link wikidata="Q407199" start="1464" end="1487" title="Palestinian territories" label="Palestinian territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q7283" start="1489" end="1498" title="terrorism" label="terrorism"/>
<link wikidata="Q624284" start="1538" end="1552" title="Arab socialism" label="Arab socialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q50005" start="1748" end="1764" title="Giulio Andreotti" label="Giulio Andreotti"/>
<link wikidata="Q490" start="1802" end="1807" title="Milan" label="Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q40554819" start="1861" end="1869" title="Sicilian people" label="Sicilian"/>
<link wikidata="Q210189" start="1881" end="1893" title="anti-fascist" label="anti-fascist"/>
<link wikidata="Q23559" start="1930" end="1946" title="Benito Mussolini" label="Benito Mussolini"/>
<link wikidata="Q42220" start="1999" end="2025" title="Sant&amp;#x27;Angelo Lodigiano" label="Sant&amp;#x27;Angelo Lodigiano"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="2034" end="2046" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="2080" end="2088" title="Catholic" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q240576" start="2097" end="2114" title="Edmondo De Amicis" label="Edmondo De Amicis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6223" start="2167" end="2174" title="fascist" label="fascist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1308" start="2339" end="2343" title="Como" label="Como"/>
<link wikidata="Q36295" start="2458" end="2463" title="Cantù" label="Cantù"/>
<link wikidata="Q632933" start="2539" end="2568" title="1948 Italian general election" label="1948 Italian general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q2246167" start="2577" end="2601" title="Popular Democratic Front (Italy)" label="Popular Democratic Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q590750" start="2636" end="2659" title="Italian Socialist Party" label="Italian Socialist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q461886" start="2674" end="2697" title="Italian Communist Party" label="Italian Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q46210" start="2932" end="2951" title="University of Milan" label="University of Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2759" start="2997" end="3003" title="Urbino" label="Urbino"/>
<link wikidata="Q164597" start="3211" end="3220" title="left-wing" label="left-wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q164348" start="3492" end="3518" title="Soviet invasion of Hungary" label="Soviet invasion of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q42220" start="3834" end="3860" title="Sant&amp;#x27;Angelo Lodigiano" label="Sant&amp;#x27;Angelo Lodigiano"/>
<link wikidata="Q539486" start="3991" end="4003" title="Pietro Nenni" label="Pietro Nenni"/>
<link wikidata="Q43005" start="4036" end="4054" title="Sesto San Giovanni" label="Sesto San Giovanni"/>
<link wikidata="Q302754" start="4218" end="4231" title="Gino Cassinis" label="Gino Cassinis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379919" start="4329" end="4349" title="Francesco De Martino" label="Francesco De Martino"/>
<link wikidata="Q3388096" start="4655" end="4671" title="Pietro Bucalossi" label="Pietro Bucalossi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3896817" start="4709" end="4732" title="Unified PSI–PSDI" label="Unified Socialist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q665335" start="4791" end="4814" title="Italian Democratic Socialist Party" label="Social Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1381509" start="4944" end="4965" title="1968 Italian general election" label="1968 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q841424" start="5010" end="5029" title="Chamber of Deputies (Italy)" label="Chamber of Deputies"/>
<link wikidata="Q490" start="5072" end="5077" title="Milan" label="Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6259" start="5078" end="5083" title="Pavia" label="Pavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3762167" start="5183" end="5198" title="Giacomo Mancini" label="Giacomo Mancini"/>
<link wikidata="Q3664681" start="5254" end="5273" title="Organic Centre-left" label="Organic Centre-left"/>
<link wikidata="Q815348" start="5297" end="5316" title="Christian Democracy (Italy)" label="Christian Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q171834" start="5320" end="5329" title="Aldo Moro" label="Aldo Moro"/>
<link wikidata="Q273228" start="5334" end="5350" title="Amintore Fanfani" label="Amintore Fanfani"/>
<link wikidata="Q539486" start="5370" end="5382" title="Pietro Nenni" label="Pietro Nenni"/>
<link wikidata="Q665335" start="5388" end="5404" title="Italian Democratic Socialist Party" label="Social Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q1238" start="5408" end="5424" title="Giuseppe Saragat" label="Giuseppe Saragat"/>
<link wikidata="Q767560" start="5433" end="5444" title="Italian Republican Party" label="Republicans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248333" start="5448" end="5460" title="Ugo La Malfa" label="Ugo La Malfa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379919" start="5495" end="5515" title="Francesco De Martino" label="Francesco De Martino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1449" start="5572" end="5577" title="Genoa" label="Genoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q159454" start="5773" end="5796" title="Socialist International" label="Socialist International"/>
<link wikidata="Q2514" start="5868" end="5880" title="Willy Brandt" label="Willy Brandt"/>
<link wikidata="Q156799" start="5882" end="5897" title="Felipe González" label="Felipe González"/>
<link wikidata="Q2038" start="5899" end="5918" title="François Mitterrand" label="François Mitterrand"/>
<link wikidata="Q156781" start="5920" end="5932" title="Mário Soares" label="Mário Soares"/>
<link wikidata="Q12946" start="5934" end="5947" title="Michel Rocard" label="Michel Rocard"/>
<link wikidata="Q219256" start="5952" end="5970" title="Andreas Papandreou" label="Andreas Papandreou"/>
<link wikidata="Q138198" start="6143" end="6174" title="Spanish Socialist Workers Party" label="Spanish Socialist Workers Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q203934" start="6180" end="6210" title="Panhellenic Socialist Movement" label="Panhellenic Socialist Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q823648" start="6219" end="6242" title="Chilean Socialist Party" label="Chilean Socialist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q440" start="6246" end="6262" title="Salvador Allende" label="Salvador Allende"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379919" start="6351" end="6371" title="Francesco De Martino" label="Francesco De Martino"/>
<link wikidata="Q790207" start="6422" end="6429" title="Avanti!" label="Avanti!"/>
<link wikidata="Q171834" start="6475" end="6484" title="Aldo Moro" label="Aldo Moro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1791557" start="6504" end="6517" title="1976 Italian general election" label="snap election"/>
<link wikidata="Q461886" start="6557" end="6580" title="Italian Communist Party" label="Italian Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q164995" start="6604" end="6621" title="Enrico Berlinguer" label="Enrico Berlinguer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1620962" start="7494" end="7513" title="Historic Compromise" label="Historic Compromise"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="7862" end="7874" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q50005" start="7950" end="7966" title="Giulio Andreotti" label="Giulio Andreotti"/>
<link wikidata="Q21406588" start="8000" end="8010" title="confidence and supply" label="confidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117578" start="8023" end="8041" title="Italian Parliament" label="Italian Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q171834" start="8054" end="8063" title="Aldo Moro" label="Aldo Moro"/>
<link wikidata="Q194019" start="8140" end="8152" title="Red Brigades" label="Red Brigades"/>
<link wikidata="Q7283" start="8153" end="8163" title="terrorists" label="terrorists"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="8179" end="8183" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q273228" start="8326" end="8342" title="Amintore Fanfani" label="Amintore Fanfani"/>
<link wikidata="Q47651" start="8347" end="8361" title="Marco Pannella" label="Marco Pannella"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142905" start="8652" end="8657" title="Trunk (automobile)" label="trunk"/>
<link wikidata="Q247716" start="8663" end="8672" title="Renault 4" label="Renault 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q158984" start="8980" end="8989" title="carnation" label="carnation"/>
<link wikidata="Q193245" start="9049" end="9069" title="Carnation Revolution" label="Carnation Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q45" start="9073" end="9081" title="Portugal" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235" start="9273" end="9287" title="Giovanni Leone" label="Giovanni Leone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233" start="9394" end="9408" title="Sandro Pertini" label="Sandro Pertini"/>
<link wikidata="Q155059" start="9685" end="9693" title="Leninism" label="Leninism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2704736" start="9867" end="9880" title="Radical Party (Italy)" label="Radical Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3781399" start="10111" end="10123" title="pro-European" label="pro-European"/>
<link wikidata="Q178790" start="10302" end="10313" title="trade union" label="trade union"/>
<link wikidata="Q921474" start="10605" end="10616" title="Mani pulite" label="Mani pulite"/>
<link wikidata="Q687917" start="10857" end="10878" title="1983 Italian general election" label="1983 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1725410" start="11028" end="11032" title="1979 Italian general election" label="1979"/>
<link wikidata="Q11860" start="11568" end="11585" title="Silvio Berlusconi" label="Silvio Berlusconi"/>
<link wikidata="Q815348" start="11717" end="11736" title="Christian Democracy (Italy)" label="Christian Democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q50005" start="11738" end="11754" title="Giulio Andreotti" label="Giulio Andreotti"/>
<link wikidata="Q434786" start="11759" end="11774" title="Arnaldo Forlani" label="Arnaldo Forlani"/>
<link wikidata="Q49768" start="12210" end="12213" title="Social Democratic Party of Germany" label="SPD"/>
<link wikidata="Q170972" start="12228" end="12243" title="Socialist Party (France)" label="Socialist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q461886" start="12436" end="12459" title="Italian Communist Party" label="Italian Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q164995" start="12494" end="12511" title="Enrico Berlinguer" label="Enrico Berlinguer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13061" end="13075" title="History of Italy as a Republic#The First Republic" label="First Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1764511" start="13223" end="13225" title="G7" label="G7"/>
<link wikidata="Q2038409" start="13401" end="13411" title="indexation" label="indexation"/>
<link wikidata="Q461886" start="13868" end="13891" title="Italian Communist Party" label="Italian Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14029" end="14032" title="Measures of national income and output#Gross National Product" label="GNP"/>
<link wikidata="Q35865" start="14048" end="14057" title="inflation" label="inflation"/>
<link wikidata="Q237" start="14674" end="14686" title="Vatican City" label="Vatican City"/>
<link wikidata="Q193270" start="14704" end="14718" title="Lateran Treaty" label="Lateran Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q382870" start="15109" end="15123" title="Eight per thousand" label="otto per mille"/>
<link wikidata="Q138198" start="16136" end="16173" title="Spanish Socialist Workers&amp;#x27; Party" label="Spanish Socialist Workers&amp;#x27; Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q29179" start="16188" end="16204" title="Francisco Franco" label="Francisco Franco"/>
<link wikidata="Q33946" start="16267" end="16281" title="Czechoslovakia" label="Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q440" start="16342" end="16358" title="Salvador Allende" label="Salvador Allende"/>
<link wikidata="Q19616" start="16383" end="16386" title="RAI" label="RAI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003" start="16605" end="16615" title="Solidarity (Polish trade union)" label="Solidarity"/>
<link wikidata="Q55834" start="16633" end="16643" title="Wojciech Jaruzelski" label="Jaruzelski"/>
<link wikidata="Q34211" start="16666" end="16679" title="Yasser Arafat" label="Yasser Arafat"/>
<link wikidata="Q26683" start="16688" end="16721" title="Palestine Liberation Organization" label="Palestine Liberation Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q201190" start="16763" end="16774" title="Palestinian people" label="Palestinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q204487" start="16847" end="16870" title="Zine el Abidine Ben Ali" label="Zine el Abidine Ben Ali"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="17028" end="17041" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q340233" start="17088" end="17101" title="MS Achille Lauro" label="Achille Lauro"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="17175" end="17180" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="17197" end="17215" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q34945" start="17216" end="17220" title="Grumman F-14 Tomcat" label="F-14"/>
<link wikidata="Q938394" start="17299" end="17308" title="Sigonella" label="Sigonella"/>
<link wikidata="Q143487" start="17744" end="17754" title="Arab world" label="Arab world"/>
<link wikidata="Q334775" start="17900" end="17909" title="Abu Abbas" label="Abu Abbas"/>
<link wikidata="Q26683" start="17917" end="17920" title="Palestine Liberation Organization" label="PLO"/>
<link wikidata="Q210603" start="18084" end="18095" title="extradition" label="extradition"/>
<link wikidata="Q334775" start="18110" end="18119" title="Abu Abbas" label="Abu Abbas"/>
<link wikidata="Q36704" start="18177" end="18187" title="Yugoslavia" label="Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q678551" start="18297" end="18312" title="Jewish American" label="Jewish American"/>
<link wikidata="Q603096" start="18322" end="18338" title="Leon Klinghoffer" label="Leon Klinghoffer"/>
<link wikidata="Q336289" start="18386" end="18397" title="trial in absentia" label="in absentia"/>
<link wikidata="Q107802" start="18533" end="18554" title="2003 invasion of Iraq" label="2003 invasion of Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q180089" start="18602" end="18615" title="The Economist" label="The Economist"/>
<link wikidata="Q633872" start="18696" end="18718" title="Italian Senate" label="Senate of the Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q50005" start="18803" end="18819" title="Giulio Andreotti" label="Giulio Andreotti"/>
<link wikidata="Q307822" start="18902" end="18923" title="Abdel Rahman Shalgham" label="Abdel Rahman Shalgham"/>
<link wikidata="Q19878" start="19028" end="19046" title="Muammar al-Gaddafi" label="Muammar al-Gaddafi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19050" end="19054" title="1986 United States bombing of Libya#Libyan" label="warn"/>
<link wikidata="Q922661" start="19085" end="19111" title="Operation El Dorado Canyon" label="Operation El Dorado Canyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q797535" start="19241" end="19254" title="Bab al-Azizia" label="Bab al-Azizia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3846928" start="19346" end="19364" title="Margherita Boniver" label="Margherita Boniver"/>
<link wikidata="Q7275649" start="19695" end="19712" title="RAF Upper Heyford" label="RAF Upper Heyford"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="19714" end="19728" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q36124" start="19794" end="19814" title="Strait of Gibraltar" label="Straits of Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q316226" start="19975" end="19990" title="Ciriaco De Mita" label="Ciriaco De Mita"/>
<link wikidata="Q3111987" start="20023" end="20046" title="Craxi II Cabinet" label="Craxi&amp;#x27;s government"/>
<link wikidata="Q273228" start="20185" end="20201" title="Amintore Fanfani" label="Amintore Fanfani"/>
<link wikidata="Q202209" start="20373" end="20387" title="Giuliano Amato" label="Giuliano Amato"/>
<link wikidata="Q518800" start="20425" end="20446" title="1987 Italian general election" label="1987 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q50005" start="20665" end="20681" title="Giulio Andreotti" label="Giulio Andreotti"/>
<link wikidata="Q47750" start="21510" end="21519" title="Lega Nord" label="Lega Nord"/>
<link wikidata="Q921474" start="21534" end="21546" title="Tangentopoli" label="Tangentopoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q968986" start="21703" end="21715" title="Mario Chiesa (politician)" label="Mario Chiesa"/>
<link wikidata="Q490" start="22090" end="22095" title="Milan" label="Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q911554" start="22111" end="22125" title="industrialists" label="industrialists"/>
<link wikidata="Q320289" start="22546" end="22565" title="Chamber of Deputies" label="Chamber of Deputies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294923" start="23367" end="23395" title="Democratic Party of the Left" label="Democratic Party of the Left"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126102" start="23415" end="23438" title="Italian Social Movement" label="Italian Social Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q204992" start="23627" end="23631" title="Italian lira" label="lire"/>
<link wikidata="Q835454" start="23747" end="23759" title="Guantanamera" label="Guantanamera"/>
<link wikidata="Q815348" start="23890" end="23908" title="Christian Democracy (Italy)" label="Cristian Democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q434786" start="23930" end="23945" title="Arnaldo Forlani" label="Arnaldo Forlani"/>
<link wikidata="Q47547" start="23961" end="23978" title="Antonio Di Pietro" label="Antonio Di Pietro"/>
<link wikidata="Q3572" start="24459" end="24464" title="Tunis" label="Tunis"/>
<link wikidata="Q921474" start="25082" end="25093" title="Mani pulite" label="Mani pulite"/>
<link wikidata="Q461886" start="25368" end="25391" title="Italian Communist Party" label="Italian Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q11860" start="25615" end="25632" title="Silvio Berlusconi" label="Silvio Berlusconi"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="26866" end="26878" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q339535" start="27255" end="27263" title="Hammamet, Tunisia" label="Hammamet"/>
<link wikidata="Q921474" start="27281" end="27292" title="Mani Pulite" label="Mani Pulite"/>
<link wikidata="Q3432264" start="27647" end="27659" title="Rino Formica" label="Rino Formica"/>
<link wikidata="Q209828" start="28085" end="28095" title="Siad Barre" label="Siad Barre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045" start="28110" end="28117" title="Somalia" label="Somalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q34211" start="28119" end="28132" title="Yasser Arafat" label="Yasser Arafat"/>
<link wikidata="Q26683" start="28144" end="28147" title="PLO" label="PLO"/>
<link wikidata="Q204487" start="28153" end="28160" title="Zine El Abidine Ben Ali" label="Ben Ali"/>
<link wikidata="Q948" start="28175" end="28182" title="Tunisia" label="Tunisia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11860" start="28583" end="28600" title="Silvio Berlusconi" label="Silvio Berlusconi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2408038" start="28835" end="28847" title="Ania Pieroni" label="Ania Pieroni"/>
<link wikidata="Q291915" start="28894" end="28905" title="Sandra Milo" label="Sandra Milo"/>
<link wikidata="Q19616" start="28968" end="28971" title="RAI" label="RAI"/>
<link wikidata="Q6602" start="29364" end="29374" title="Strasbourg" label="Strasbourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q183191" start="29599" end="29634" title="European Convention of Human Rights" label="European Convention of Human Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q2248891" start="30004" end="30021" title="Giorgio Benvenuto" label="Giorgio Benvenuto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535927" start="30034" end="30053" title="Ottaviano Del Turco" label="Ottaviano Del Turco"/>
<link wikidata="Q520749" start="30368" end="30389" title="1994 Italian general election" label="1994 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q369707" start="30433" end="30457" title="Alliance of Progressives" label="Alliance of Progressives"/>
<link wikidata="Q969021" start="30475" end="30489" title="Post-Communism" label="post-communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294923" start="30518" end="30546" title="Democratic Party of the Left" label="Democratic Party of the Left"/>
<link wikidata="Q215350" start="30954" end="30966" title="Forza Italia" label="Forza Italia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11860" start="30989" end="31006" title="Silvio Berlusconi" label="Silvio Berlusconi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2754931" start="31012" end="31023" title="Patto Segni" label="Patto Segni"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747585" start="31028" end="31047" title="Democratic Alliance (Italy)" label="Democratic Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="31675" end="31684" title="socialism" label="socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q121254" start="31686" end="31702" title="social democracy" label="social democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q201712" start="31708" end="31725" title="social liberalism" label="social liberalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1822939" start="31742" end="31759" title="liberal-socialist" label="liberal-socialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q613875" start="31802" end="31816" title="Third-Worldism" label="Third-Worldism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2855609" start="31835" end="31851" title="environmentalist" label="environmentalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q192451" start="31878" end="31891" title="welfare state" label="welfare state"/>
<link wikidata="Q388698" start="31910" end="31921" title="Atlanticist" label="Atlanticist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377153" start="31927" end="31938" title="Europeanist" label="Europeanist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2279051" start="32001" end="32017" title="Sigonella crisis" label="Sigonella crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q8452" start="32064" end="32072" title="abortion" label="abortion"/>
<link wikidata="Q185517" start="32077" end="32089" title="war on drugs" label="war on drugs"/>
<link wikidata="Q737014" start="32133" end="32144" title="centre-left" label="centre-left"/>
<link wikidata="Q6587194" start="32149" end="32165" title="political centre" label="political centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q815348" start="32185" end="32204" title="Christian Democracy (Italy)" label="Christian Democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q839354" start="32269" end="32281" title="Pentapartito" label="Pentapartito"/>
<link wikidata="Q215350" start="32566" end="32578" title="Forza Italia" label="Forza Italia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11860" start="32582" end="32599" title="Silvio Berlusconi" label="Silvio Berlusconi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5059248" start="32601" end="32623" title="Centre-right coalition (Italy)" label="centre-right coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q2248370" start="32665" end="32683" title="Italian Socialists" label="Italian Socialists"/>
<link wikidata="Q369707" start="32713" end="32737" title="Alliance of Progressives" label="Alliance of Progressives"/>
<link wikidata="Q340239" start="32741" end="32757" title="Achille Occhetto" label="Achille Occhetto"/>
<link wikidata="Q25048178" start="32759" end="32780" title="Centre-left coalition (Italy)" label="centre-left coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q220945" start="32830" end="32848" title="Party of European Socialists" label="European socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q156799" start="32864" end="32879" title="Felipe González" label="Felipe González"/>
<link wikidata="Q138198" start="32881" end="32885" title="PSOE" label="PSOE"/>
<link wikidata="Q2038" start="32888" end="32907" title="François Mitterrand" label="François Mitterrand"/>
<link wikidata="Q170972" start="32909" end="32911" title="Socialist Party (France)" label="PS"/>
<link wikidata="Q2516" start="32918" end="32932" title="Helmut Schmidt" label="Helmut Schmidt"/>
<link wikidata="Q49768" start="32934" end="32937" title="SPD" label="SPD"/>
<link wikidata="Q9545" start="33047" end="33057" title="Tony Blair" label="Tony Blair"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="33065" end="33077" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q41395" start="33079" end="33107" title="José Luis Rodríguez Zapatero" label="José Luis Rodríguez Zapatero"/>
<link wikidata="Q219256" start="33125" end="33143" title="Andreas Papandreou" label="Andreas Papandreou"/>
<link wikidata="Q203934" start="33151" end="33156" title="PASOK" label="PASOK"/>
<link wikidata="Q47729" start="33287" end="33303" title="Democratic Party (Italy)" label="Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051087" start="33346" end="33365" title="Il Fatto Quotidiano" label="Il Fatto Quotidiano"/>
<link wikidata="Q642381" start="33379" end="33391" title="il manifesto" label="il manifesto"/>
<link wikidata="Q371314" start="33405" end="33420" title="L&amp;#x27;Espresso" label="L&amp;#x27;Espresso"/>
<link wikidata="Q85329" start="33438" end="33451" title="la Repubblica" label="la Repubblica"/>
<link wikidata="Q281745" start="33526" end="33549" title="Italian Socialist Party (2007)" label="Italian Socialist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2307679" start="33553" end="33569" title="Riccardo Nencini" label="Riccardo Nencini"/>
<link wikidata="Q2246709" start="33594" end="33604" title="Bobo Craxi" label="Bobo Craxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2573947" start="33667" end="33682" title="Renato Brunetta" label="Renato Brunetta"/>
<link wikidata="Q303466" start="33684" end="33700" title="Maurizio Sacconi" label="Maurizio Sacconi"/>
<link wikidata="Q390378" start="33747" end="33761" title="Stefania Craxi" label="Stefania Craxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q10858400" start="33844" end="33864" title="political corruption" label="political corruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q339535" start="33936" end="33953" title="Hammamet, Tunisia" label="Hammamet, Tunisia"/>
<link wikidata="Q204487" start="34025" end="34048" title="Zine El Abidine Ben Ali" label="Zine El Abidine Ben Ali"/>
<link wikidata="Q12206" start="34347" end="34355" title="diabetes" label="diabetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q541679" start="34376" end="34397" title="Democrats of the Left" label="Democrats of the Left"/>
<link wikidata="Q47602" start="34405" end="34425" title="Massimo D&amp;#x27;Alema" label="Massimo D&amp;#x27;Alema"/>
<link wikidata="Q3145229" start="34592" end="34613" title="San Raffaele Hospital" label="San Raffaele Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296514" start="34664" end="34696" title="Cathedral of St. Vincent de Paul" label="Cathedral of St. Vincent de Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q208100" start="34928" end="34941" title="Lamberto Dini" label="Lamberto Dini"/>
<link wikidata="Q3557346" start="34946" end="34959" title="Marco Minniti" label="Marco Minniti"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="312990" wikidata="Q270066" url="?curid=312990" title="7 World Trade Center">
<text>7 World Trade Center (7 WTC, WTC-7, or Tower 7) is an office building constructed as part of the new World Trade Center in Lower Manhattan, New York City. The tower is located on a city block bounded by Greenwich, Vesey, Washington, and Barclay Streets on the east, south, west, and north, respectively. 7 World Trade Center was developed by Larry Silverstein, who holds a ground lease for the site from the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, and designed by Skidmore, Owings &amp; Merrill.

The building was constructed to replace the original structure on the site, part of the original World Trade Center. The previous structure, completed in 1987, was destroyed in the September 11 attacks in 2001. Construction of the new Trade Center began in 2002 and was completed on May 23, 2006. The building is tall (plus one underground floor), making it the 64th-tallest in New York. It is built on a smaller footprint than the original; a small park across Greenwich Street occupies space that was part of the original building&#x27;s footprint.

The current building&#x27;s design emphasizes safety, with a reinforced concrete core, wider stairways, and thicker fireproofing on steel columns. It also incorporates numerous green design features. The building received the U.S. Green Building Council&#x27;s Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) Gold certification and was part of the council&#x27;s pilot program for Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design – Core and Shell Development (LEED-CS).
==History==

The original 7 World Trade Center was a 47-story skyscraper with a red granite facade. It opened in 1987 as part of the original World Trade Center building complex. The September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks caused the collapse of the World Trade Center; falling debris from the collapsing 110-story Twin Towers destroyed or severely damaged nearby buildings, including 7 World Trade Center, which collapsed shortly thereafter.


===Construction===

The construction phase of the new 7 World Trade Center began on May 7, 2002, with the installation of a fence around the construction site. Restoring the Consolidated Edison substation was an urgent priority to meet power demands of Lower Manhattan; the utility stated that it needed to replace four of the ten destroyed transformers by 2003. Because 7 World Trade Center is separate from the main World Trade Center site, Larry Silverstein required approval only from the landowner, the Port Authority, before he could rebuild the tower. Construction of the power substation was completed in October 2003, and the substation went into service in May 2004.

Work next proceeded on the office tower itself. An unusual approach was used in constructing the building; erecting the steel frame before adding the concrete core. This approach allowed the construction schedule to be shortened by a few months. By July 2005, American Express Financial Advisors was planning to lease of space, making it the building&#x27;s first tenant. Although Silverstein intended for the building&#x27;s design to attract tenants, he wanted occupants to pay to lease space by 2005, which &quot;New York&quot; magazine called &quot;easily the highest price in lower Manhattan&quot;.

Construction was completed in 2006 at a cost of $700 million. Though Silverstein received $861 million from insurance on the old building, he owed more than $400 million on its mortgage. Costs to rebuild were covered by $475 million in Liberty Bonds, which provide tax-exempt financing to help stimulate rebuilding in Lower Manhattan and insurance money that remained after other expenses.

A triangular park was created between the extended Greenwich Street and West Broadway by David Childs with Ken Smith and his colleague, Annie Weinmayr, of Ken Smith Landscape Architect. The park comprises an open central plaza with a fountain and flanking groves of sweetgum trees and boxwood shrubs. At the center of the fountain, sculptor Jeff Koons created a stainless steel sculpture called &quot;Balloon Flower (Red)&quot;.

===Completion and early years===
====2000s====
The building was officially opened on May 23, 2006. The opening was marked by a free concert featuring Suzanne Vega, Citizen Cope, Bill Ware Vibes, Brazilian Girls, Ollabelle, Pharaoh&#x27;s Daughter, Ronan Tynan (of the Irish Tenors), and special guest Lou Reed. Prior to its opening, in March 2006, the new building was used as a filming location for the movie &quot;Perfect Stranger&quot;.

The building was 10 percent leased by August 2006. Several of the unoccupied upper floors were used for events such as charity lunches, fashion shows, and black-tie galas. Silverstein Properties allowed space in the new building to be used for these events as a means to draw people to see the building. From September 8 to October 7, 2006, the work of photographer Jonathan Hyman was displayed in &quot;An American Landscape&quot;, a free exhibit hosted by the World Trade Center Memorial Foundation, on the 45th floor of 7 World Trade Center. The exhibit consisted of 63 photographs that captured Americans&#x27; responses after the September 11 attacks.

In September 2006, Moody&#x27;s signed a 20-year lease for 15 floors at 7 World Trade Center; prior to Moody&#x27;s lease, only eight floors had been occupied. Other tenants that had signed leases in 7 World Trade Center in its first two years included ABN AMRO, Ameriprise Financial Inc., DRW Trading Group, publisher Mansueto Ventures, and the New York Academy of Sciences. Silverstein Properties also had offices and the Silver Suites executive office suites at 7 World Trade Center. Architectural and engineering firms working on 1 World Trade Center, 150 Greenwich Street, 175 Greenwich Street, and 200 Greenwich Street also set up offices in the building. Two-thirds of the building&#x27;s office space had been leased by April 2007. After ABN AMRO was acquired by the Royal Bank of Scotland, forex services provider FXDD subleased some of the Royal Bank of Scotland&#x27;s space in 2009.

====2010s to present====
The law firm WilmerHale signed at the building in April 2011. The building became fully leased that September after MSCI agreed to occupy on the top floor; other tenants at the time included FXDD, WilmerHale, and the bank WestLB. Following this, Silverstein announced in 2012 that he would refinance the building with a $452.8 million Liberty bond issue and a $125 million commercial mortgage-backed security loan. At the time, the building was valued at $940 million, in large part because it was fully occupied. FXDD subleased its space to engineering company Permasteelisa in 2015 and artificial intelligence firm IPsoft in 2016. The building was 94.8 percent occupied by 2017. By then, roughly three-quarters of the space was occupied by four tenants, including Moody&#x27;s, the Royal Bank of Scotland, and WilmerHale.

Wedding planning company Zola and the building&#x27;s own architecture firm Skidmore, Owings &amp; Merrill both leased space at 7 WTC in early 2019. This was followed in July 2019 by luxury drink brand Moët Hennessy and media company AccuWeather. After Mansueto Ventures and three other firms leased space at 7 WTC in April 2022, the building was 97 percent occupied. Shortly afterward, Silverstein Properties refinanced the property with a $458 million loan from Goldman Sachs.
== Architecture ==
The new 7 World Trade Center has 52 stories and is tall. The building has 42 floors of leasable space, starting at the 11th floor, and a total of of office space. The first ten floors house an electrical substation which provides power to much of Lower Manhattan. The office tower has a narrower footprint at ground level than did its predecessor, so the course of Greenwich Street could be restored to reunite TriBeCa and the Financial District. The original building, on the other hand, had bordered West Broadway on the east, necessitating the destruction of Greenwich Street between Barclay Street and the northern border of the World Trade Center superblock.

===Facade===

David Childs of Skidmore, Owings and Merrill worked in conjunction with glass artist and designer James Carpenter to create a design that uses ultra-clear, low-iron glass to provide reflectivity and light. There are stainless-steel spandrels behind the glass to help reflect sunlight. The spandrels are textured and are curved in a manner that reflects light both from each story&#x27;s window sills and from the sky. On the lower stories, there are panels with steel triangular prisms. There are 130,000 prisms in total, which are tilted at different angles to reflect natural light from the sky. The window panes on the upper floors are high and are made of white glass with low concentrations of iron. Stainless steel used in the facade is molybdenum-containing Type 316, which provides improved resistance to corrosion.

The new 7 World Trade Center was built above the Con Edison substation. When the current building was constructed, the transformer vaults were rearranged into an shell at the building&#x27;s base. To enclose the power substation and improve its aesthetics, the base of the building has a curtain wall with stainless steel louvers that provide ventilation for the machinery. The transformers each weigh and are tall. There are also radiators with vertical cooling blades facing the street, which in turn cool down the transformers.

There is a cable-net glass wall on the eastern elevation of the facade, just above the Greenwich Street entrance. This cable-net wall measures across. During the day, the curtain wall reflects light, while at night it is illuminated by blue and white LED lights. The curtain wall has 220,000 LEDs; at night, the prisms on the facade reflect light from each LED onto the street. The curtain wall around the lobby uses heavily laminated, heat-strengthened glass that meets high standards for blast resistance. At night, a large cube of light above the lobby also emanates blue light, while during the day it provides white light to the lobby, and at dusk, it transitions to violet and back to blue.

=== Features ===

Inside the main lobby, artist Jenny Holzer created an LED installation with glowing text moving across wide plastic panels. The wall measures wide and tall. Holzer worked with Klara Silverstein, the wife of Larry Silverstein, to select poetry for the art installation. The wall of the lobby is structurally fortified as a security measure. On the upper stories, some tenants customized the design of their spaces. The space occupied by Mansueto Ventures was designed to maximize natural light exposure and has an open floor plan. The 40th-floor space used by the New York Academy of Sciences was designed by H3 Hardy Collaboration Architecture and includes a reception lobby with an openwork screen; a 296-seat event room; and a horizontal mural.

7 World Trade Center is equipped with Otis destination elevators to reduce dwell times and travel times. After pressing their destination floor number on a keypad in the lobby, passengers are directed to specific elevators that will stop at the selected floor; the elevator cabs do not contain buttons. The elevator system is integrated with the lobby key-card system, which can identify the floor on which an employee works, then automatically call an elevator for that floor.

WSP Cantor Seinuk served as structural engineer on the project, while Jaros, Baum &amp; Bolles was the MEP engineer. Nearly 30 percent of structural steel used in the building consists of recycled steel. Rainwater is collected and used for irrigation of the park and to cool the building. Along with other sustainable design features, the building is designed to allow in plenty of natural light, power is metered to tenants to encourage them to conserve energy, the heating steam is reused to generate some power for the building, and recycled materials are used for insulation and interior materials.

The building was promoted as one of the safest skyscrapers in the U.S. upon its completion According to Silverstein Properties, it &quot;incorporate[s] a host of life-safety enhancements that will become the prototype for new high-rise construction.&quot; The building has reinforced-concrete and fireproofed elevator and stairway access shafts. The original building used only drywall to line these shafts. The stairways are wider than in the original building to permit faster egress.

==See also==

* List of tallest buildings in New York City
* World Trade Center in popular culture

==References==
==External links==

* 7 World Trade Center at SilversteinProperties.com
* 7 World Trade Center on CTBUH Skyscraper Center</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q270066" start="0" end="20" title="7 World Trade Center" label="7 World Trade Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q270066" start="22" end="27" title="7 World Trade Center" label="7 WTC"/>
<link wikidata="Q270066" start="29" end="34" title="7 World Trade Center" label="WTC-7"/>
<link wikidata="Q270066" start="39" end="46" title="7 World Trade Center" label="Tower 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q20861677" start="101" end="119" title="World Trade Center (2001–present)" label="World Trade Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q11253" start="123" end="138" title="Lower Manhattan" label="Lower Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="140" end="153" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1592975" start="214" end="219" title="Vesey Street" label="Vesey"/>
<link wikidata="Q4105528" start="221" end="231" title="Washington Street (Manhattan)" label="Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q463668" start="342" end="359" title="Larry Silverstein" label="Larry Silverstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q3007688" start="373" end="385" title="ground rent" label="ground lease"/>
<link wikidata="Q908666" start="408" end="449" title="Port Authority of New York and New Jersey" label="Port Authority of New York and New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q459464" start="467" end="497" title="Skidmore, Owings &amp;amp; Merrill" label="Skidmore, Owings &amp;amp; Merrill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2030757" start="540" end="574" title="7 World Trade Center (1987–2001)" label="the original structure on the site"/>
<link wikidata="Q11235" start="588" end="615" title="World Trade Center (1973–2001)" label="original World Trade Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="681" end="701" title="September 11 attacks" label="September 11 attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q838997" start="862" end="886" title="List of tallest buildings in New York City" label="64th-tallest in New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q184190" start="1113" end="1132" title="reinforced concrete" label="reinforced concrete"/>
<link wikidata="Q523256" start="1229" end="1241" title="Sustainable design" label="green design"/>
<link wikidata="Q1521623" start="1313" end="1358" title="LEED" label="Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design"/>
<link wikidata="Q2030757" start="1541" end="1570" title="7 World Trade Center (1987–2001)" label="original 7 World Trade Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q11303" start="1586" end="1596" title="skyscraper" label="skyscraper"/>
<link wikidata="Q41177" start="1608" end="1615" title="granite" label="granite"/>
<link wikidata="Q11235" start="1666" end="1684" title="World Trade Center (1973–2001)" label="World Trade Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="1707" end="1744" title="September 11 attacks" label="September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q62179" start="1756" end="1790" title="collapse of the World Trade Center" label="collapse of the World Trade Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q11235" start="1837" end="1848" title="World Trade Center (1973–2001)" label="Twin Towers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2030757" start="1907" end="1927" title="7 World Trade Center (1987–2001)" label="7 World Trade Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127536" start="2141" end="2160" title="Consolidated Edison" label="Consolidated Edison"/>
<link wikidata="Q1692282" start="2385" end="2408" title="World Trade Center site" label="World Trade Center site"/>
<link wikidata="Q463668" start="2410" end="2427" title="Larry Silverstein" label="Larry Silverstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q908666" start="2475" end="2489" title="Port Authority of New York and New Jersey" label="Port Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q194360" start="2905" end="2940" title="American Express Financial Advisors" label="American Express Financial Advisors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1822997" start="3486" end="3499" title="Liberty bond" label="Liberty Bonds"/>
<link wikidata="Q183543" start="3907" end="3915" title="Liquidambar" label="sweetgum"/>
<link wikidata="Q158703" start="3926" end="3933" title="Buxus" label="boxwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q297525" start="3982" end="3992" title="Jeff Koons" label="Jeff Koons"/>
<link wikidata="Q236112" start="4221" end="4233" title="Suzanne Vega" label="Suzanne Vega"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093404" start="4235" end="4247" title="Citizen Cope" label="Citizen Cope"/>
<link wikidata="Q903185" start="4266" end="4281" title="Brazilian Girls" label="Brazilian Girls"/>
<link wikidata="Q7088249" start="4283" end="4292" title="Ollabelle" label="Ollabelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2910468" start="4294" end="4317" title="Pharaoh&amp;#x27;s Daughter" label="Pharaoh&amp;#x27;s Daughter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7365483" start="4319" end="4330" title="Ronan Tynan" label="Ronan Tynan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7742569" start="4339" end="4351" title="The Irish Tenors" label="Irish Tenors"/>
<link wikidata="Q189080" start="4372" end="4380" title="Lou Reed" label="Lou Reed"/>
<link wikidata="Q930430" start="4487" end="4503" title="Perfect Stranger (film)" label="Perfect Stranger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136137" start="4974" end="5012" title="National September 11 Memorial &amp;amp; Museum" label="World Trade Center Memorial Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4159021" start="5189" end="5201" title="Moody&amp;#x27;s Investors Service" label="Moody&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q287471" start="5423" end="5431" title="ABN AMRO" label="ABN AMRO"/>
<link wikidata="Q2843129" start="5433" end="5453" title="Ameriprise Financial" label="Ameriprise Financial"/>
<link wikidata="Q106091493" start="5460" end="5477" title="DRW Trading Group" label="DRW Trading Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q6211110" start="5489" end="5506" title="Mansueto Ventures" label="Mansueto Ventures"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069131" start="5516" end="5544" title="New York Academy of Sciences" label="New York Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q2286590" start="5546" end="5568" title="Silverstein Properties" label="Silverstein Properties"/>
<link wikidata="Q11245" start="5704" end="5724" title="One World Trade Center" label="1 World Trade Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351208" start="5726" end="5746" title="4 World Trade Center" label="150 Greenwich Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q941908" start="5748" end="5768" title="3 World Trade Center" label="175 Greenwich Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127212" start="5774" end="5794" title="2 World Trade Center" label="200 Greenwich Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q160126" start="5945" end="5967" title="Royal Bank of Scotland" label="Royal Bank of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q66076" start="5969" end="5974" title="Foreign exchange market" label="forex"/>
<link wikidata="Q16839476" start="5993" end="5997" title="FXDD" label="FXDD"/>
<link wikidata="Q8022698" start="6104" end="6114" title="Wilmer Cutler Pickering Hale and Dorr" label="WilmerHale"/>
<link wikidata="Q768773" start="6207" end="6211" title="MSCI" label="MSCI"/>
<link wikidata="Q153301" start="6313" end="6319" title="WestLB (Landesbank)" label="WestLB"/>
<link wikidata="Q7886321" start="6464" end="6499" title="commercial mortgage-backed security" label="commercial mortgage-backed security"/>
<link wikidata="Q600746" start="6653" end="6666" title="Permasteelisa" label="Permasteelisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q48973338" start="6708" end="6714" title="IPsoft" label="IPsoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q675585" start="6857" end="6869" title="Moody&amp;#x27;s Corporation" label="Moody&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q59788069" start="6941" end="6945" title="Zola (company)" label="Zola"/>
<link wikidata="Q504998" start="7118" end="7131" title="Moët Hennessy" label="Moët Hennessy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2822885" start="7150" end="7161" title="AccuWeather" label="AccuWeather"/>
<link wikidata="Q193326" start="7380" end="7393" title="Goldman Sachs" label="Goldman Sachs"/>
<link wikidata="Q766014" start="7825" end="7832" title="Tribeca" label="TriBeCa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050048" start="7841" end="7859" title="Financial District, Manhattan" label="Financial District"/>
<link wikidata="Q1173984" start="8093" end="8105" title="David Childs" label="David Childs"/>
<link wikidata="Q459464" start="8109" end="8137" title="Skidmore, Owings &amp;amp; Merrill" label="Skidmore, Owings and Merrill"/>
<link wikidata="Q244556" start="8325" end="8333" title="spandrel" label="spandrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391592" start="8480" end="8491" title="window sill" label="window sill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053" start="8836" end="8846" title="molybdenum" label="molybdenum"/>
<link wikidata="Q172587" start="9224" end="9239" title="stainless steel" label="stainless steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2554375" start="9240" end="9246" title="louver" label="louver"/>
<link wikidata="Q184784" start="9497" end="9506" title="Elevation (architecture)" label="elevation"/>
<link wikidata="Q25504" start="9701" end="9704" title="Light-emitting diode" label="LED"/>
<link wikidata="Q270388" start="10196" end="10208" title="Jenny Holzer" label="Jenny Holzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859462" start="10849" end="10857" title="openwork" label="openwork"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134069" start="10952" end="10956" title="Otis Worldwide" label="Otis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10957" end="10978" title="elevator#Destination control system" label="destination elevators"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333162" start="11393" end="11410" title="WSP Cantor Seinuk" label="WSP Cantor Seinuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q29096882" start="11463" end="11487" title="Jaros, Baum &amp;amp; Bolles" label="Jaros, Baum &amp;amp; Bolles"/>
<link wikidata="Q184190" start="12270" end="12289" title="reinforced concrete" label="reinforced-concrete"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059476" start="12294" end="12305" title="fireproofing" label="fireproofed"/>
<link wikidata="Q372852" start="12375" end="12382" title="drywall" label="drywall"/>
<link wikidata="Q838997" start="12501" end="12543" title="List of tallest buildings in New York City" label="List of tallest buildings in New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q8036346" start="12546" end="12583" title="World Trade Center in popular culture" label="World Trade Center in popular culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q372245" start="12698" end="12703" title="Council on Tall Buildings and Urban Habitat" label="CTBUH"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="312991" wikidata="Q65566" url="?curid=312991" title="Josef Kammhuber">
<text>Josef Kammhuber (August 19, 1896 – January 25, 1986) was a career officer who served in the Imperial German Army, the Luftwaffe of Nazi Germany and the post-World War II German Air Force. During World War II, he was the first general of night fighters in the Luftwaffe.

Kammhuber created the night fighter defense system, the so-called Kammhuber Line, but the detailed knowledge of the system provided to the Royal Air Force by British military intelligence allowed them to render it ineffective. Personal battles between him and Erhard Milch, director of the Reich Air Ministry, led to his dismissal in 1943. After the war, he joined the Bundeswehr, the armed forces of West Germany serving as the first Inspector of the Air Force.

==Career==
Josef Kammhuber was born in Tüßling, Bavaria, the son of a farmer. At the outbreak of World War I Kammhuber was 18 and joined a Bavarian engineer battalion. He participated in the Battle of Verdun in 1916 and was promoted to Second Lieutenant in 1917. He remained in Germany&#x27;s post-war army, and in 1925 was promoted to First Lieutenant. Between October 1926 and September 1928, he received division-level leadership training. From 1 May to 30 September 1930, he was sent to the USSR for pilot training at the Lipetsk fighter-pilot school. On his return, Kammhuber joined the staff of General Walter Wever, chief of staff of the Luftwaffe prior to World War II.

Kammhuber returned to active duty in February 1939 and was assigned as chief-of-staff of &quot;Luftflotte 2&quot;. On January 11, 1940, he was reprimanded by Adolf Hitler personally because of the Mechelen Incident. He was then transferred to the Western Front where he became commander of &quot;KG 51&quot;. On 3 June 1940, he flew with the wing (possibly on Operation Paula). He was shot down and briefly became a prisoner of war. Kammhuber was released upon the Armistice of 22 June 1940. In July 1940 he was placed in command of coordinating flak, searchlight and radar units at Luftwaffe&#x27;s General Staff. The result was the &quot;XII. Fliegerkorps&quot; (12th Air Corps), a new dedicated night-fighting command, created on 1 August 1940. He reached the rank of Generalleutnant by October 1941 and General der Flieger on 1 January 1943.

===Defence of the Reich===
He organised the night fighting units into a chain known to the British as the Kammhuber Line, which was a series of radar stations with overlapping coverage. The stations were layered three deep from Denmark to the middle of France, each covering a zone about long (north-south) and wide (east-west). Each control centre was known as a &quot;Himmelbett&quot; (four-poster bed) zone, consisting of a Freya radar with a range of about , a number of searchlights spread through the cell, and one primary and one backup night fighter assigned to the cell. Royal Air Force (RAF) bombers flying into Germany or France would have to cross the line at some point and the radar would direct a searchlight to illuminate the aircraft. Once this had happened, other manually controlled searchlights would also pick up the aeroplane and the night fighter would be directed to intercept the illuminated bomber. Demands by &quot;Bürgermeister&quot;s in Germany led to the recall of the searchlights to the major cities.
Later versions of the &quot;Himmelbett&quot; added two Würzburg radars, with a range of about . Unlike the early-warning Freya radar, Würzburgs were accurate (and complex) tracking radars. One would be locked onto the night fighter as soon as it entered the cell. After the Freya picked up a target the second Würzburg would lock onto it, thereby allowing controllers in the &quot;Himmelbett&quot; center to get continual readings on the positions of both aircraft, controlling them to a visual interception. To aid in this, a number of the night fighters were fitted with a short-range infrared device known as &#x27;Spanner anlage&#x27; but these proved almost useless in practice.

Another tactic that proved effective was to send their own planes to England while the raids were taking off or landing. Radio operators listening to the RAF bomber frequencies were able to recognize the start of a raid and the raiding force of about 30 night fighters would be sent over the RAF airbases to shoot down the bombers as they took off or landed. By the beginning of October the night intruder force had claimed a hundred kills but on October 13, Hitler ordered the force sent to the Mediterranean, despite their success.

British intelligence soon discovered the nature of the Kammhuber Line and started studying ways to defeat it. RAF Bomber Command sent aircraft one at a time to force the defenses to be spread as far apart as possible, meaning that any one aircraft would have to deal with little concentrated flak. The &quot;Himmelbett&quot; centers were only dealing with perhaps one or two planes at a time, making their job much easier. At the urging of R. V. Jones, Bomber Command planned attacks against a target at a time, sending all of the bombers in a &quot;bomber stream&quot;, carefully positioned to fly down the middle of a cell. The Himmelbett centers were faced with hundreds of bombers, countering with only a few aircraft of their own. So successful was this tactic that the success rate of the night fighters dropped almost to zero.

===Technological battle===
Kammhuber started looking for solutions, and the result was the two-prong concept of &quot;Wilde Sau&quot; (&quot;wild boar&quot;) and &quot;Zahme Sau&quot; (&quot;tame boar&quot;). In the former, day fighters would be sent up and look for the enemy aircraft from the light of flares dropped from light bombers, searchlights set to a wide beam or illuminating lower clouds, or the fires on the ground below. The &quot;Wilde Sau&quot; force scored their most notable success during Operation Hydra (the British operation against the V-weapon centre), at Peenemünde on 17 August 1943. De Havilland Mosquito bombers had dropped target marker flares over Berlin and most of the night fighter force was sent there. When it was realized what was really happening, most of these aircraft were too far away and too slow to intercept the raid. However, the Focke-Wulf Fw 190s being flown by the &quot;Wilde Sau&quot; forces were able to reach them, and about 30 planes entered the third and last wave of the stream and shot down 29 of the 40 Avro Lancaster bombers lost on that raid.

&quot;Zahme Sau&quot; envisioned freeing the night fighters (now equipped with radar for the final stages of the interception) from the &quot;Himmelbett&quot; cells and allowing them to attack on their own. This was not all that easy, given the capabilities of the current generation of radars, but newer systems being developed would greatly increase the detection range and angles. In this role the existing cells created as part of the original Kammhuber Line would be used primarily for early warning and vectoring the planes to the stream.

At the same time Kammhuber continued to press for a new dedicated nightfighter design, eventually selecting the Heinkel He 219 &quot;Uhu&quot; after seeing it demonstrated in 1942. However Milch had decided to cancel the &quot;Uhu&quot;, and conflict arose between the two. As a result, in 1943 Kammhuber was transferred to &quot;Luftflotte 5&quot; in Norway, in command of a handful of outdated planes. After the reorganization of the &quot;Luftwaffe&quot; in Scandinavia and the dissolution of &quot;Luftflotte 5&quot;, he became commanding general of the &quot;Luftwaffe&quot; in Norway (September–October 1944). In 1945 Kammhuber was re-appointed to command of the night fighters, at this point a largely ceremonial position considering the state of the Third Reich at that time.

==Postwar==

After Germany&#x27;s capitulation in May 1945, Kammhuber was held by the United States, but he was released in April 1948 without charges being brought against him. He wrote a series of monographs for the US Department of Defense on the conduct of the German defenses against the RAF and USAAF. These were later collected into book form (listed under References). In 1953 he published a definitive work on what he learned during the war as &quot;Problems in the Conduct of a Day and Night Defensive Air War&quot;. He later spent time in Argentina, helping to train the air force under Juan Perón..

Josef Kammhuber returned to Germany and joined the German Air Force while it was being formed. He was promoted to &quot;Inspekteur der Luftwaffe&quot;, serving in that role between 1956 and 1962. Following the 1961 F-84 Thunderstreak incident, when two West German Republic F-84F Thunderstreaks strayed into East German airspace and flew to West Berlin, Kammhuber and his superior, the West German Minister of Defence, Franz-Josef Strauß, relieved &quot;Oberstleutnant&quot; Siegfried Barth, commander of the pilots&#x27; unit, of his command. After protests, three official investigations and a formal complaint by Barth against Strauß, the former was reinstated in his position. Kammhuber was the only inspector of a branch of the German Armed Forces to achieve the rank of (full) General in this office, although actually designated as a Lieutenant General, because of his services to the development of the post-war Air Force. He retired shortly after the crash of a Starfighter formation on 19 June 1962 near Nörvenich.

Kammhuber died on January 25, 1986, aged 89 in Munich and is buried there.

==Awards==
*Iron Cross 1914, 1st and 2nd class
*Military Merit, 4th class with Swords (Bavaria)
*Clasp to the Iron Cross, 1st and 2nd class
*Pilot/Observer Badge In Gold with Diamonds
*Honour Cross of the World War 1914/1918
*Knight&#x27;s Cross of the Iron Cross on 9 July 1941 as &quot;Generalmajor&quot; and commander of the 1. Nachtjagd-Division
*Grand Officer of the Order of Merit of the Italian Republic 10 March 1958
*Legion of Merit, Commander (2 August 1961)
*Great Cross of Merit of the Federal Republic of Germany with Star and Sash, (21 August 1962)

==References==
===Citations===
===Bibliography===
* 
* 
* Wolfgang Schmidt, &quot;&quot;Seines Wertes bewusst&quot;! General Josef Kammhuber&quot;, in: Helmut R. Hammerich / Rudolf J. Schlaffer (eds.), &quot;Militärische Aufbaugenerationen der Bundeswehr 1955 bis 1970. Ausgewählte Biografien&quot;, München, Oldenbourg Wissenschaftsverlag 2011, pp. 351–381.
*Kammhuber, Joseph, and David C. Isby (eds.); &quot;Fighting the Bombers: The Luftwaffe&#x27;s Struggle Against the Allied Bomber Offensive&quot;, Greenhill Books, 2003. .</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q65566" start="0" end="15" title="Josef Kammhuber" label="Josef Kammhuber"/>
<link wikidata="Q313422" start="92" end="112" title="Imperial German Army" label="Imperial German Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564009" start="118" end="127" title="Luftwaffe" label="Luftwaffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="131" end="143" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q56013" start="170" end="186" title="German Air Force" label="German Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="195" end="207" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q83460" start="226" end="233" title="General officer" label="general"/>
<link wikidata="Q180087" start="237" end="250" title="night fighter" label="night fighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q283965" start="337" end="351" title="Kammhuber Line" label="Kammhuber Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="410" end="425" title="Royal Air Force" label="Royal Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q57169" start="531" end="543" title="Erhard Milch" label="Erhard Milch"/>
<link wikidata="Q698081" start="561" end="579" title="Reich Air Ministry" label="Reich Air Ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q56010" start="640" end="650" title="Bundeswehr" label="Bundeswehr"/>
<link wikidata="Q713750" start="672" end="684" title="West Germany" label="West Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1664614" start="706" end="732" title="Inspector of the Air Force" label="Inspector of the Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q2465297" start="774" end="781" title="Tüßling" label="Tüßling"/>
<link wikidata="Q980" start="783" end="790" title="Bavaria" label="Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="832" end="843" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q130847" start="926" end="942" title="Battle of Verdun" label="Battle of Verdun"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="1230" end="1234" title="Soviet Union" label="USSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q662071" start="1261" end="1289" title="Lipetsk fighter-pilot school" label="Lipetsk fighter-pilot school"/>
<link wikidata="Q62236" start="1344" end="1356" title="Walther Wever (general)" label="Walter Wever"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564009" start="1380" end="1389" title="Luftwaffe" label="Luftwaffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q699708" start="1509" end="1521" title="Luftflotte 2" label="Luftflotte 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="1572" end="1584" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q452157" start="1611" end="1628" title="Mechelen Incident" label="Mechelen Incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q216184" start="1661" end="1674" title="Western Front (World War II)" label="Western Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q3192516" start="1704" end="1721" title="Kampfgeschwader 51" label="&amp;quot;KG 51&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2078945" start="1774" end="1789" title="Operation Paula" label="Operation Paula"/>
<link wikidata="Q179637" start="1830" end="1845" title="prisoner of war" label="prisoner of war"/>
<link wikidata="Q170360" start="1879" end="1904" title="Armistice of 22 June 1940" label="Armistice of 22 June 1940"/>
<link wikidata="Q3570364" start="2048" end="2077" title="12th Air Corps (Germany)" label="&amp;quot;XII. Fliegerkorps&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3100519" start="2185" end="2200" title="Generalleutnant" label="Generalleutnant"/>
<link wikidata="Q552023" start="2221" end="2240" title="General der Flieger" label="General der Flieger"/>
<link wikidata="Q47528" start="2405" end="2410" title="radar" label="radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q283965" start="2631" end="2641" title="Himmelbett" label="Himmelbett"/>
<link wikidata="Q3256522" start="2648" end="2665" title="Four poster bed" label="(four-poster bed)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455960" start="2688" end="2699" title="Freya radar" label="Freya radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q180087" start="2805" end="2818" title="night fighter" label="night fighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="2841" end="2856" title="Royal Air Force" label="Royal Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q177529" start="3203" end="3216" title="Bürgermeister" label="Bürgermeister"/>
<link wikidata="Q1849277" start="3349" end="3363" title="Würzburg radar" label="Würzburg radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q11388" start="3881" end="3889" title="infrared" label="infrared"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235891" start="4624" end="4642" title="RAF Bomber Command" label="RAF Bomber Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q367200" start="4954" end="4965" title="Reginald Victor Jones" label="R. V. Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q891906" start="5064" end="5077" title="bomber stream" label="bomber stream"/>
<link wikidata="Q321421" start="5467" end="5476" title="Wilde Sau" label="Wilde Sau"/>
<link wikidata="Q9385964" start="5517" end="5526" title="Zahme Sau" label="Zahme Sau"/>
<link wikidata="Q15264163" start="5857" end="5872" title="Operation Hydra (1943)" label="Operation Hydra"/>
<link wikidata="Q490398" start="5929" end="5939" title="Peenemünde" label="Peenemünde"/>
<link wikidata="Q221344" start="5959" end="5980" title="De Havilland Mosquito" label="De Havilland Mosquito"/>
<link wikidata="Q34775" start="6224" end="6241" title="Focke-Wulf Fw 190" label="Focke-Wulf Fw 190"/>
<link wikidata="Q203622" start="6409" end="6423" title="Avro Lancaster" label="Avro Lancaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q276529" start="7110" end="7124" title="Heinkel He 219" label="Heinkel He 219"/>
<link wikidata="Q702684" start="7328" end="7340" title="Luftflotte 5" label="Luftflotte 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="7756" end="7767" title="Third Reich" label="Third Reich"/>
<link wikidata="Q700924" start="7817" end="7841" title="End of World War II in Europe" label="capitulation in May 1945"/>
<link wikidata="Q11209" start="8001" end="8025" title="United States Department of Defense" label="US Department of Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q741723" start="8084" end="8089" title="United States Army Air Forces" label="USAAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q93330" start="8381" end="8391" title="Juan Perón" label="Juan Perón"/>
<link wikidata="Q56013" start="8446" end="8462" title="German Air Force" label="German Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1664614" start="8515" end="8539" title="Inspekteur der Luftwaffe" label="Inspekteur der Luftwaffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4570329" start="8605" end="8637" title="1961 F-84 Thunderstreak incident" label="1961 F-84 Thunderstreak incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q2101666" start="8660" end="8688" title="Republic F-84F Thunderstreak" label="Republic F-84F Thunderstreak"/>
<link wikidata="Q16957" start="8703" end="8714" title="East Germany" label="East German"/>
<link wikidata="Q56036" start="8736" end="8747" title="West Berlin" label="West Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q493353" start="8781" end="8812" title="Federal Ministry of Defence (Germany)" label="West German Minister of Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q44620" start="8814" end="8832" title="Franz-Josef Strauß" label="Franz-Josef Strauß"/>
<link wikidata="Q10371378" start="8870" end="8885" title="Siegfried Barth" label="Siegfried Barth"/>
<link wikidata="Q159881" start="9366" end="9377" title="Lockheed F-104 Starfighter" label="Starfighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q200068" start="9409" end="9418" title="Nörvenich" label="Nörvenich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726" start="9468" end="9474" title="Munich" label="Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q154554" start="9509" end="9519" title="Iron Cross" label="Iron Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q690107" start="9545" end="9559" title="Military Merit Order (Bavaria)" label="Military Merit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754284" start="9594" end="9617" title="Clasp to the Iron Cross" label="Clasp to the Iron Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q566694" start="9638" end="9658" title="Pilot/Observer Badge" label="Pilot/Observer Badge"/>
<link wikidata="Q120758" start="9682" end="9721" title="Honour Cross of the World War 1914/1918" label="Honour Cross of the World War 1914/1918"/>
<link wikidata="Q165558" start="9723" end="9760" title="Knight&amp;#x27;s Cross of the Iron Cross" label="Knight&amp;#x27;s Cross of the Iron Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059569" start="9869" end="9907" title="Order of Merit of the Italian Republic" label="Order of Merit of the Italian Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q724443" start="9923" end="9938" title="Legion of Merit" label="Legion of Merit"/>
<link wikidata="Q21164" start="9967" end="10022" title="Great Cross of Merit of the Federal Republic of Germany" label="Great Cross of Merit of the Federal Republic of Germany"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="312993" wikidata="Q2873019" url="?curid=312993" title="400-series highways">
<text>The 400-series highways are a network of controlled-access highways in the Canadian province of Ontario, forming a special subset of the provincial highway system. They are analogous to the Interstate Highway System in the United States or the Autoroute system of neighbouring Quebec, and are regulated by the Ministry of Transportation of Ontario (MTO). The 400-series designations were introduced in 1952, although Ontario had been constructing divided highways for two decades prior. Initially, only Highways 400, 401 and 402 were numbered; other designations followed in the subsequent decades. To this day, not all controlled-access highways in Ontario are a part of the 400-series highway network. The network is situated almost entirely in Southern Ontario, although Highway 400 extends into the more remote northern portion of the province.

Modern 400-series highways have high design standards, speed limits of , with a limit on select stretches, and various collision avoidance and traffic management systems. The design of 400-series highways has set the precedent for a number of innovations used throughout North America, including the parclo interchange and a modified Jersey barrier design known as the Ontario Tall Wall. As a result, they currently experience one of the lowest accident and fatality rates comparative to traffic volume in North America.

== History ==
When the 400-series designations were first applied to Ontario freeways in 1952,
several divided highways had already been opened in Southern Ontario.
Originally inspired by German Autobahns, Minister of Highways Thomas McQuesten planned a network of &quot;Dual Highways&quot; across the southern half of the province during the 1930s.
The Queen Elizabeth Way (QEW) was first, an upgrade to the partially constructed Middle Road in 1934.
McQuesten also sought out the economic opportunities that came with linking Toronto to Detroit and New York state by divided roadways with interchanges at major crossroads. Although he no longer served as Minister of Highways by the onset of World War II, his ambitious plans would come to fruition in the following decades as Highways 400, 401, 402, 403 (between Woodstock and Hamilton), and 405.

The construction boom following the war resulted in many new freeway construction projects in the province. The Toronto–Barrie Highway (Highway 400), Trans-Provincial Highway (Highway 401),
a short expansion of Highway 7 approaching the Blue Water Bridge in Sarnia (Highway 402),
and an expansion of Highway 27 (eventually designated as Highway 427 by the mid-1970s) into part of the Toronto Bypass were all underway or completed by the early 1950s. Seeking a way to distinguish the controlled-access freeways from the existing two-lane King&#x27;s Highways, the Department of Highways created the 400-series designations in 1952. By the end of the year, Highway 400, 401, and 402 were numbered, although they were only short stubs of their current lengths. Highway 401 was assembled across the province in a patchwork fashion,
becoming fully navigable between Windsor and the Quebec border on November 10, 1964;
Highway 400 was extended north to Coldwater on Christmas Eve 1959;
Highway 402 was extended to London between 1972 and 1982.

In addition to this network backbone, plans for additional 400-series highways were initiated by the late 1950s, comprising the Chedoke Expressway (Highway 403) through Hamilton;
the Don Valley Parkway Extension (Highway 404) northward from the soon-to-be constructed Toronto expressway;
Highway 405 to connect with the American border near St. Catharines;
Highway 406 south from St. Catharines to Welland;
Highway 407 encircling the Greater Toronto Area (GTA), though not built for another 40 years;
Highway 409 to connect Highway 401 with Toronto International Airport;
and The Queensway (Highway 417) through Ottawa.
The first sections of these freeways were opened in 1963,
1977,
1963, 1965,
1997,
1974,
and 1960,
respectively.

Throughout the 1960s and 1970s, additional freeways were planned or built, including Highway 427 in Toronto,
Highway 403 through Mississauga,
Highway 410 north to Brampton and Highway 416 to connect Highways 401 and 417.
Highway 420 was designated in Niagara Falls,
though it had been built as part of the QEW in 1941. Other major works included the skyway bridges along the QEW and the expansion of Highway 401 through most of Toronto into twelve-lane collector–express systems.

By the mid-1980s, the network had more-or-less taken its current shape, with only Highways 407, 412, 416 and 418 yet to be built.
Instead, emphasis was placed on expanding existing routes to accommodate increasing traffic volumes. However, extensions of Highway 400 towards Parry Sound,
Highway 403 between Woodstock and Hamilton,
Highway 404 towards Newmarket,
and Highway 427 towards Vaughan were underway.
By the end of the decade, construction of Highway 407 and Highway 416 had begun,
and Highway 410 was expanded from two to four lanes.

Highways 407 and 416 opened in the late 1990s.
Until early 2015, Highways 407 and 416 were the most-recently designated (and constructed) freeways in Ontario. This has changed with the construction of Highways 412 and 418. In addition to these new additions to the 400-series network, several extensions of existing freeways have been built or are underway, including Highway 410 north of Brampton in 2009,
Highway 400 to north of Parry Sound in 2010,
Highway 417 to Arnprior in 2012,
Highway 404 to Keswick in 2014,
Highway 401 through Windsor in 2015,
and four-laning Highway 406 to Welland in late 2015.

== Design standards ==
The 400-series highways always have a minimum 4 lane cross-section with grade separation at all junctions. Interchanges tend to be spaced at least 1.5 kilometres apart in urban areas unless there are basket weave ramps or collector lanes to facilitated shorter merge distances. In rural areas, interchanges tend to be spaced at least 3 kilometres apart, although exceptions exist. When the cross-section of highway is larger than 10 lanes, the road is usually arranged into a local–express lane system, which exist on sections of Highways 400, 401, 403, 404 and 427. On all but a few interchanges in the whole system, ramps merge freely on the highway except if there are ramp meters in use, and stop or yield controlled ramps are rare. An interchange with stop-controlled ramps onto Highway 400 at Canal Road is currently scheduled for replacement.

While older freeways have some lapses in safety features, contemporary 400-series highways have design speeds of , speed limits ranging from to , various collision avoidance and traffic management systems, and several design standards adopted throughout North America.
Of note are the Ontario Tall Wall median barrier and the Parclo A-4 interchange design, the latter which became standard in the design for the widening of Highway 401 through Toronto in 1962. The Institute of Traffic Engineers subsequently recommended this design to replace the cloverleaf interchange throughout North America.
Ontario highways rank fourth in North America for fatality rates, with 0.61 fatalities per 10,000 licensed drivers in 2017. However, this also includes two-lane provincial highways.
On May 1, 2019, the government of Ontario was looking towards raising the speed limits of the 400-series highways up to Jeff Yurek, Transportation Minister at that time had stated that &quot;The 400-series highways were built for, I believe, a speed limit of 120 km/h safely.&quot;
A trial was set up on three stretches of highways on September 26, 2019, to test the viability of increasing speed limits. 
The three trialed sections along with three more sections were permanently changed to the higher speed limit on April 22, 2022, and two more sections were trialed. The two trialed sections were made permanent along with 10 more sections on July 12, 2024. On October 2, 2024, Premier Doug Ford mentioned in a press conference that he had directed Transportation Minister Prabmeet Sarkaria to raise the speed limit on all remaining 400-series highway sections “where it is safe to do so”.

Conforming with the &quot;Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices&quot;, Ontario utilizes green signs for guidance purposes, including distances to nearby interchanges and destinations.
Generally, blue signage is used to list services and attractions at upcoming exits, known as Tourism-Oriented Directional Signing.
However, several exceptions exist, notably blue guidance signage for toll highways such as Highway 407, in addition to the collector lanes of highways.
The baseline standard for the construction of or expansion to a freeway in Ontario is an average daily traffic count of 10,000 vehicles per day. However, other factors are considered as well, particularly future traffic volume forecasts. To promote economic development in a disadvantaged region (e.g., the current extension of Highway 400 to Northern Ontario), a 400-series highway may be built where the existing highway&#x27;s traffic counts fall below 10,000.

The MTO plans and finances the construction and maintenance of the King&#x27;s Highway system, which includes the 400-series network.
The system includes of freeways. Highway 401 is the longest freeway at , in addition to being the widest and busiest road in Canada. Highway 420 is the shortest of the routes at .

There are four examples of 400 series standard highways in Ontario that are not signed as such. The Gardiner Expressway between Highway 427 and Parklawn Road was originally built as a section of QEW (Hwy 451) and therefore is built to 400-series standards but lost its QEW designation after being downloaded to the City of Toronto. The section of Highway 7 between the town of Carleton Place and its junction with Highway 417 is also built to 400-series standards, but a 400-series designation has yet to be applied. Highway 69 between Sudbury and Key River is built to 400-series standards in anticipation of it becoming part of Highway 400 once the gap between the two freeways is filled. Highway 115 north of Highway 35/Highway115 concurrency and Peterborough is also built to 400-series standards, however a 400-series designation has yet to be applied. Most other freeways and expressways in Ontario that lack a 400-series designation have lower construction standards, lower design speeds and lower speed limits.

== High-occupancy vehicle lanes ==
The MTO began planning for the use of high-occupancy vehicle (HOV) lanes with the HOV Opportunities Study, contracted to McCormick Rankin in 2001. This led to the test trial of three HOV lanes in the GTA in December 2005: southbound Highway 404 between Highway 7 and Highway 401, with a dedicated HOV ramp built to connect with westbound Highway 401, and Highway 403 in both directions between Highway 407 and Highway 401 in Mississauga.
Since then, HOV lanes have been opened on several 400-series freeways around the Golden Horseshoe and National Capital Region. In May 2007, the MTO introduced a multibillion-dollar Horseshoe Network Project, which included plans to incorporate HOV lanes into numerous 400-series highways.

By then, work was already advanced on several projects, including the northbound HOV lane on Highway 404 (that opened on July 23, 2007) and an HOV lane along both directions of Highway 403 between Highway 407 and Highway 401. A third pair of HOV lanes has since been introduced to the QEW/403 through Oakville, and a fourth individual HOV lane travels eastbound on Highway 417 from just west of Eagleson Road in Ottawa to just east of Moodie Drive.

More than of HOV lanes are currently proposed for construction by 2031. Future plans include extending existing HOV lanes and introducing them to other 400-series freeways.
, two projects have been confirmed: Highway 410 between Highway 401 and Queen Street in Brampton, and Highway 427 between Highway 409 and Highway 7. The MTO has stated that HOV lanes will only be introduced through new construction and that no general-purpose lanes will be converted. The general goals of the project are to help increase highway efficiency (an HOV lane is claimed by the Ontario government to have the ability to move as many people as four general-purpose lanes), reduce congestion, conserve energy and help protect the environment.

During the 2015 Pan American Games and 2015 Parapan American Games held in Toronto, several HOV lanes had their minimum requirements increased from two passengers to three, and some highways had their general-purpose lanes temporarily converted to HOV lanes to accommodate increased traffic. These temporary restrictions lasted from June 29 to August 18.

2021 saw several new HOV lanes opened. The southbound HOV lane on Highway400 between King Road and Major Mackenzie Drive was opened on September11, 2021; while the northbound lane opened two months later on November11. The Highway427 extension, which opened on September18, included an HOV lane north of Finch Avenue.

=== Future HOV lanes ===
The following table lists planned expansions to the HOV network by 2031.

== Planned extensions and new routes ==
== Existing network ==







== Gallery ==
== See also ==
* List of provincial highways in Ontario
* 100-Series Highways of Nova Scotia
* 400-series Highways of British Columbia
* Quebec Autoroutes

== References ==

=== Sources ===
=== Bibliography ===
* 
* 


== External links ==

* Ontario Ministry of Transportation 
* Highway Construction Programs 
* Photographs and history on the 400-Series Highways (and other provincial highways, too)
* &quot;Dirt Roads to Freeways ... And All That &quot;, ca. 1978, Archives of Ontario YouTube Channel</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2873019" start="4" end="23" title="400-series highways" label="400-series highways"/>
<link wikidata="Q46622" start="41" end="66" title="controlled-access highway" label="controlled-access highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="75" end="83" title="Canada" label="Canadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="96" end="103" title="Ontario" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q5760022" start="137" end="162" title="Ontario Provincial Highway Network" label="provincial highway system"/>
<link wikidata="Q94247" start="190" end="215" title="Interstate Highway System" label="Interstate Highway System"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="223" end="236" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q2873026" start="244" end="260" title="Autoroutes of Quebec" label="Autoroute system"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="277" end="283" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q3315416" start="310" end="347" title="Ministry of Transportation of Ontario" label="Ministry of Transportation of Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q2872844" start="512" end="515" title="Ontario Highway 400" label="400"/>
<link wikidata="Q449996" start="517" end="520" title="Ontario Highway 401" label="401"/>
<link wikidata="Q2872843" start="525" end="528" title="Ontario Highway 402" label="402"/>
<link wikidata="Q128996333" start="620" end="657" title="List of controlled-access highways in Ontario" label="controlled-access highways in Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033752" start="747" end="763" title="Southern Ontario" label="Southern Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q2872844" start="774" end="785" title="Ontario Highway 400" label="Highway 400"/>
<link wikidata="Q2066392" start="815" end="823" title="Northern Ontario" label="northern"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077350" start="905" end="916" title="speed limit" label="speed limit"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="1121" end="1134" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q2338869" start="1150" end="1168" title="partial cloverleaf interchange" label="parclo interchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q2300314" start="1184" end="1198" title="Jersey barrier" label="Jersey barrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q320008" start="1567" end="1575" title="Reichsautobahn" label="Autobahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7792356" start="1599" end="1615" title="Thomas McQuesten" label="Thomas McQuesten"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133822" start="1726" end="1745" title="Queen Elizabeth Way" label="Queen Elizabeth Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q16440989" start="1803" end="1814" title="The Middle Road" label="Middle Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q12439" start="1911" end="1918" title="Detroit" label="Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="1923" end="1937" title="New York (state)" label="New York state"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="2066" end="2078" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q885931" start="2460" end="2477" title="Blue Water Bridge" label="Blue Water Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2740208" start="3170" end="3179" title="Coldwater, Ontario" label="Coldwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q133116" start="3431" end="3439" title="Hamilton, Ontario" label="Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q449995" start="3445" end="3463" title="Don Valley Parkway" label="Don Valley Parkway"/>
<link wikidata="Q126805" start="3603" end="3617" title="St. Catharines" label="St. Catharines"/>
<link wikidata="Q424773" start="3660" end="3667" title="Welland" label="Welland"/>
<link wikidata="Q242066" start="3803" end="3832" title="Toronto Pearson International Airport" label="Toronto International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q2648502" start="4448" end="4465" title="collector–express" label="collector–express"/>
<link wikidata="Q2219667" start="4750" end="4761" title="Parry Sound, Ontario" label="Parry Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642364" start="4783" end="4792" title="Woodstock, Ontario" label="Woodstock"/>
<link wikidata="Q52999" start="4827" end="4836" title="Newmarket, Ontario" label="Newmarket"/>
<link wikidata="Q7985004" start="5221" end="5233" title="Ontario Highway 412" label="Highways 412"/>
<link wikidata="Q5328264" start="5238" end="5241" title="Ontario Highway 418" label="418"/>
<link wikidata="Q543997" start="5487" end="5495" title="Arnprior, Ontario" label="Arnprior"/>
<link wikidata="Q6395263" start="5520" end="5527" title="Keswick, Ontario" label="Keswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q2648502" start="6127" end="6145" title="local–express lanes" label="local–express lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q228229" start="6323" end="6333" title="ramp meter" label="ramp meter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492162" start="6598" end="6610" title="design speed" label="design speed"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241055" start="6617" end="6628" title="Speed limits in Canada" label="speed limit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2300314" start="6787" end="6804" title="Ontario Tall Wall" label="Ontario Tall Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2338869" start="6828" end="6838" title="Partial cloverleaf interchange" label="Parclo A-4"/>
<link wikidata="Q6040957" start="6967" end="6997" title="Institute of Traffic Engineers" label="Institute of Traffic Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6175309" start="7401" end="7411" title="Jeff Yurek" label="Jeff Yurek"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300478" start="7970" end="7979" title="Doug Ford" label="Doug Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q55081051" start="8057" end="8074" title="Prabmeet Sarkaria" label="Prabmeet Sarkaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q800352" start="8201" end="8242" title="Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices" label="Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8456" end="8492" title="Tourism-Oriented Directional Signing" label="Tourism-Oriented Directional Signing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2872859" start="8585" end="8596" title="Ontario Highway 407" label="Highway 407"/>
<link wikidata="Q2648502" start="8617" end="8632" title="express-collector" label="collector lanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1932823" start="8735" end="8762" title="Average annual daily traffic" label="average daily traffic count"/>
<link wikidata="Q2066392" start="8989" end="9005" title="Northern Ontario" label="Northern Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494126" start="9526" end="9545" title="Gardiner Expressway" label="Gardiner Expressway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3443958" start="9773" end="9782" title="Highway 7 (Ontario)" label="Highway 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041701" start="9803" end="9817" title="Carleton Place" label="Carleton Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q2024663" start="9943" end="9953" title="Ontario Highway 69" label="Highway 69"/>
<link wikidata="Q2754179" start="10117" end="10128" title="Ontario Highway 115" label="Highway 115"/>
<link wikidata="Q285496" start="10519" end="10541" title="high-occupancy vehicle" label="high-occupancy vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10602" end="10618" title="McCormick Rankin" label="McCormick Rankin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535009" start="11000" end="11016" title="Golden Horseshoe" label="Golden Horseshoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q668850" start="11021" end="11044" title="National Capital Region (Canada)" label="National Capital Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q5325386" start="11604" end="11617" title="Eagleson Road" label="Eagleson Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930" start="11621" end="11627" title="Ottawa" label="Ottawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185431" start="12396" end="12419" title="2015 Pan American Games" label="2015 Pan American Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q3178426" start="12424" end="12451" title="2015 Parapan American Games" label="2015 Parapan American Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="12460" end="12467" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q913449" start="13260" end="13298" title="List of provincial highways in Ontario" label="List of provincial highways in Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q4545982" start="13301" end="13335" title="100-series highways (Nova Scotia)" label="100-Series Highways of Nova Scotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q60739883" start="13338" end="13377" title="400-series highways (British Columbia)" label="400-series Highways of British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2873026" start="13380" end="13397" title="Autoroute (Quebec)" label="Quebec Autoroutes"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="312995" wikidata="Q7315354" url="?curid=312995" title="Reset button technique">
<text>The reset button technique (based on the idea of &quot;status quo ante&quot;) is a plot device for interrupting continuity in works of fiction. The reset button device is used to return all characters and situations to the &quot;status&quot; &quot;quo&quot; prior to some major change. It can be employed in the middle of a program to negate some portion of what came before. It is often used in science fiction television series, animated series, soap operas, and comic books. The reset button technique accommodates dramatic changes to characters and the fictional universe that might otherwise invalidate the show&#x27;s premise with respect to future episodes or other plot details. For example, writers may use the device to improve the audience&#x27;s experience of the lead character&#x27;s death, which is usually impossible without effectively ending the work or significantly altering its course.

==One-off use==

The effective use of this device in productions where it is not typically featured relies heavily on the audience&#x27;s suspension of disbelief until the precise moment when the reset button technique is employed. The successful execution of this technique needs the introduction of plot developments that significantly alter the course of the show, without indicating that continuity will be disrupted. Often employed as a plot twist, the reset button technique serves to undo all the preceding events of an episode. This device draws inspiration from science fiction and metaphysical concepts and is frequently included in those genres.

Examples of the reset button technique include dream sequences, alternate-history flashbacks, parallel universes, alternate realities, alternate timelines, daydreams, time travel, and hallucinations. In one trope that uses this technique (typically in science fiction or fantasy), a character will find themselves in a situation that seems familiar, but during the episode, some things seem odd. Then one or more major events happen, such as the death of a lead character. By the end of the episode or story arc, the character realizes that they have been placed in a copy of their normal surroundings, usually to try to obtain information from them, and that the mastermind behind the plan made a few mistakes in fashioning the copied environment.

One popular example of the reset button technique is the 1986 season premiere of &quot;Dallas&quot; in which it is revealed that Bobby Ewing&#x27;s death in the previous season was merely a dream in the mind of one of the characters. This was parodied in the &quot;Da Boom&quot; episode of &quot;Family Guy&quot;. In comics, the Spider-Man storyline &quot;Spider-Man: One More Day&quot; undid the marriage of Peter Parker and Mary Jane Watson, drawing criticism due to the continuity issues, with some critics even comparing it to &quot;Dallas&quot;.

However, when used appropriately, it can be devastating in terms of its effect. Near the end of the series finale of &quot;Newhart&quot;, innkeeper Dick Loudon (portrayed by Bob Newhart) is struck on the head and knocked unconscious. The scene switches abruptly to Dr. Bob Hartley, the character Newhart portrayed in his earlier series, &quot;The Bob Newhart Show&quot;, waking up in bed next to his wife Emily (portrayed by Suzanne Pleshette). Hartley describes the strange dream he has just had about running a Vermont inn, which Emily blames on the Japanese food he ate before going to bed. The entirety of &quot;Newhart&quot; is thus established to be part of Hartley&#x27;s dream.

==Use as a frequent plot device==

In many series, the reset button trope is used as a standard, and frequently explicit, plot device.

Implicit usage of the technique can be seen in episodic fiction, such as when the results of episodes regularly cause what would seem to be massive changes in the status of characters and their world; however, it is understood by the audience that subsequent episodes will not consider such events. An example is &quot;South Park&quot;, in which the character of Kenny dies in almost every episode in early seasons, only to reappear in future episodes without explanation.

&quot;The Simpsons&quot; is one show that generally uses this technique, while occasionally introducing lasting continuity changes. Creator Matt Groening referred to this flexibility as a &quot;rubber band reality&quot;.

Shows using the reset-button technique sometimes point out, as a form of self-referential humor, their own use of the device.

Alluding to the trope, the CBBC television series &quot;Hounded&quot; features a literal reset button that, at the end of each episode, rewinds the entire day&#x27;s events back to the beginning.

== See also ==
* Canon (fiction)
* &quot;Deus ex machina&quot;
* Retroactive continuity
* Reboot (fiction)

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7315354" start="4" end="26" title="Reset button technique" label="reset button technique"/>
<link wikidata="Q201610" start="55" end="65" title="status quo" label="status quo"/>
<link wikidata="Q841154" start="83" end="94" title="plot device" label="plot device"/>
<link wikidata="Q2141130" start="112" end="122" title="Continuity (fiction)" label="continuity"/>
<link wikidata="Q24925" start="396" end="411" title="science fiction" label="science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q581714" start="431" end="446" title="animated series" label="animated series"/>
<link wikidata="Q23739" start="448" end="458" title="soap opera" label="soap opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760610" start="465" end="475" title="comic book" label="comic book"/>
<link wikidata="Q559618" start="557" end="575" title="fictional universe" label="fictional universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5151783" start="772" end="803" title="comic book death" label="the lead character&amp;#x27;s death"/>
<link wikidata="Q951982" start="1046" end="1069" title="suspension of disbelief" label="suspension of disbelief"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321123" start="1350" end="1360" title="plot twist" label="plot twist"/>
<link wikidata="Q847824" start="1582" end="1594" title="Reset (computing)" label="reset button"/>
<link wikidata="Q998854" start="1613" end="1627" title="dream sequence" label="dream sequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1938569" start="1648" end="1658" title="Flashback (psychology)" label="flashbacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q12221140" start="1660" end="1678" title="Parallel universes in fiction" label="parallel universes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6028924" start="1722" end="1731" title="Daydreaming" label="daydreams"/>
<link wikidata="Q182154" start="1733" end="1744" title="time travel" label="time travel"/>
<link wikidata="Q130741" start="1750" end="1763" title="hallucination" label="hallucination"/>
<link wikidata="Q2620972" start="2068" end="2077" title="story arc" label="story arc"/>
<link wikidata="Q4583314" start="2373" end="2377" title="1986 in American television" label="1986"/>
<link wikidata="Q29197" start="2378" end="2393" title="season premiere" label="season premiere"/>
<link wikidata="Q168708" start="2403" end="2409" title="Dallas (1978 TV series)" label="Dallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090662" start="2445" end="2456" title="Bobby Ewing" label="Bobby Ewing"/>
<link wikidata="Q36348" start="2506" end="2511" title="dream" label="dream"/>
<link wikidata="Q470203" start="2581" end="2588" title="Da Boom" label="Da Boom"/>
<link wikidata="Q5930" start="2612" end="2622" title="Family Guy" label="Family Guy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1004" start="2633" end="2639" title="comics" label="comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q79037" start="2645" end="2655" title="Spider-Man" label="Spider-Man"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2672" end="2696" title="Spider-Man: One More Day" label="Spider-Man: One More Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q27810" start="2742" end="2758" title="Mary Jane Watson" label="Mary Jane Watson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3643961" start="2991" end="2998" title="Newhart" label="Newhart"/>
<link wikidata="Q718078" start="3042" end="3053" title="Bob Newhart" label="Bob Newhart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248785" start="3211" end="3231" title="The Bob Newhart Show" label="The Bob Newhart Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q231224" start="3293" end="3310" title="Suzanne Pleshette" label="Suzanne Pleshette"/>
<link wikidata="Q16538" start="4010" end="4020" title="South Park" label="South Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q47386" start="4054" end="4059" title="Kenny McCormick" label="Kenny"/>
<link wikidata="Q886" start="4171" end="4183" title="The Simpsons" label="The Simpsons"/>
<link wikidata="Q43994" start="4305" end="4318" title="Matt Groening" label="Matt Groening"/>
<link wikidata="Q2213906" start="4460" end="4482" title="self-referential humor" label="self-referential humor"/>
<link wikidata="Q935802" start="4541" end="4545" title="CBBC (TV channel)" label="CBBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q16994333" start="4570" end="4577" title="Hounded (TV series)" label="Hounded"/>
<link wikidata="Q53815" start="4728" end="4743" title="Canon (fiction)" label="Canon (fiction)"/>
<link wikidata="Q203698" start="4752" end="4767" title="Deus ex machina" label="Deus ex machina"/>
<link wikidata="Q517361" start="4776" end="4798" title="Retroactive continuity" label="Retroactive continuity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343020" start="4801" end="4817" title="Reboot (fiction)" label="Reboot (fiction)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="313002" wikidata="Q176198" url="?curid=313002" title="The Last Unicorn (film)">
<text>is a 1982 animated fantasy film directed and produced by Arthur Rankin, Jr. and Jules Bass, from a script by Peter S. Beagle adapted from his 1968 novel of the same title. The plot concerns a unicorn who, upon learning that she is the last of her species on Earth, goes on a quest to find out what has happened to others of her kind. It was produced by Rankin/Bass Productions for ITC Entertainment and animated by Japanese studio Topcraft.

Voice performers for the film include Alan Arkin, Jeff Bridges, Mia Farrow, Angela Lansbury, and Christopher Lee. The soundtrack was composed and arranged by Jimmy Webb, and songs were performed by the group America and the London Symphony Orchestra, with additional vocals provided by Lucy Mitchell.

Although critical reviews were generally positive, the film was a commercial failure, grossing $6.5 million in the United States.

==Plot==
A female unicorn learns from two hunters and a butterfly that she is the last of her kind since a malevolent entity called the Red Bull has herded unicorns to the ends of the earth. The Unicorn journeys to find them.

The Unicorn is captured by the witch Mommy Fortuna and displayed in her Midnight Carnival. Most of the attractions are normal animals enhanced by illusions to appear as mythical beasts. Fortuna uses a spell to create another horn on the unicorn&#x27;s head, as the carnival visitors cannot see her real form. Fortuna keeps the immortal harpy Celaeno captive as well, deeming the risk secondary to the deed&#x27;s prestige. The unicorn is befriended by Schmendrick, an incompetent magician in the service of Mommy Fortuna. With the help of Schmendrick, the Unicorn escapes, in the process freeing Celaeno, who kills Fortuna. The Unicorn and Schmendrick gain a second traveling companion with Molly Grue, the careworn lover of Captain Cully (the disappointing reality behind the myth of &quot;Robin Hood&quot;).

When the Unicorn nears the seaside castle of King Haggard, keeper of the Red Bull, she encounters the beast, a monstrous fire elemental. Before she can be captured, Schmendrick uses his unpredictable magic, transforming her into a woman. The Red Bull loses interest in her and departs, but the Unicorn is shocked by the sensation of mortality. Schmendrick promises to return her to normal after the quest is complete.

Schmendrick, Molly Grue, and the now-human Unicorn proceed to the castle. Haggard is at first unwelcoming. Schmendrick introduces the Unicorn as Lady Amalthea, and requests that they become members of Haggard&#x27;s court, only to be told that the only occupants of the castle are Haggard, his adopted son Prince Lír and four ancient men-at-arms. Haggard consents to lodge the trio, replacing his more competent wizard, Mabruk, with Schmendrick, and setting Molly Grue to work in his scullery. Mabruk leaves after recognizing &quot;Amalthea&quot; for what she truly is, jeering that by allowing her into his castle Haggard has invited his doom. Due to her new human emotions, Amalthea begins forgetting her true self and falls in love with Prince Lír, and considers abandoning her quest in favor of mortal love. Haggard confronts Amalthea, hinting at the location of the unicorns, yet from the waning magic in her eyes, has doubts regarding his suspicions that she is more than she seems.

Molly finally learns the location of the Red Bull&#x27;s lair from the castle&#x27;s cat. Molly, Schmendrick, and Amalthea are joined by Lír as they enter the bull&#x27;s den, and are trapped there by Haggard. Schmendrick explains to Lír what they are looking for and reveals Amalthea&#x27;s true identity. Lír declares that he loves her anyway. This makes Amalthea want to abandon the quest and marry Lír, but Lír dissuades her. The Red Bull appears, no longer deceived by Amalthea&#x27;s human form, and chases after her. Schmendrick turns Amalthea back into the Unicorn, but she is unwilling to leave Lír&#x27;s side. The Bull begins driving her toward the ocean just as he had driven the other unicorns. Lír tries defending her, but is killed by the Bull. Enraged, the Unicorn turns on the Bull and forces him into the sea. As the beast is engulfed by the water, the missing hundreds of unicorns emerge from the raging sea, carried on the incoming tides. With their release, Haggard&#x27;s castle collapses into the sea, and Haggard, watching all from the battlements, falls to his death.

On the beach, the Unicorn magically revives Lír before she leaves him. Schmendrick assures Lír he gained much by winning the love of a unicorn, even if he is now alone. The Unicorn later says goodbye to Schmendrick, who laments he wronged her by burdening her with regret and the taint of mortality, which could make her unable to properly rejoin her kind. She disagrees about the importance of his actions, as they had helped restore unicorns to the world and made her experience regret and love. Schmendrick and Molly watch the Unicorn depart for her forest home.

==Voice cast==
* Mia Farrow as the Unicorn/Lady Amalthea, the eponymous &quot;last unicorn&quot; who, in her search for the other unicorns, is transformed into a young woman and learns about regret and love.
* Alan Arkin as Schmendrick, a magician who accompanies the Unicorn on her quest to find others like her. Beagle commented that he was a bit &quot;disappointed&quot; by the way Arkin approached the character because it seemed &quot;too flat&quot;.
* Jeff Bridges as Prince Lír, King Haggard&#x27;s adopted son who falls in love with Lady Amalthea. Although he is later told by Schmendrick that she is a unicorn, his feelings for her remain unchanged, as he says emphatically, &quot;I &quot;love&quot; whom I &quot;love&quot;&quot;.
* Tammy Grimes as Molly Grue, the love of Captain Cully who joins Schmendrick and the Unicorn. While explaining that there was no particular reason that he did not write a detailed background for Molly Grue&#x27;s character, Beagle stated that he has &quot;always been grateful&quot; to Grimes because she &quot;brought such vocal life to the character that she covered things I didn&#x27;t do.&quot;
* Robert Klein as The Butterfly, the creature that gives the Unicorn a hint as to where to find the other unicorns.
* Angela Lansbury as Mommy Fortuna, a witch who uses her illusory magic to run the Midnight Carnival, which showcases mythical creatures that are, in truth, just normal animals. Later, the harpy Celaeno, one of the two &quot;real&quot; mythical creatures, kills her and her henchman, Ruhk.
* Christopher Lee as King Haggard, the ruler of a dreary kingdom, who has never been happy, save for when he looks at unicorns. Beagle described Lee as &quot;the last of the great 20th Century actors, and either the most-literate or second-most literate performer I&#x27;ve ever met.&quot; When Lee came in to work, he brought his own copy of the novel wherein he took note of lines that he believed should not be omitted. Lee, who was fluent in German, also voiced Haggard in the German dub of the film.
* Keenan Wynn as Captain Cully, the leader of a group of bandits. 
** Wynn also voices The Harpy Celaeno, a real harpy that was captured by Mommy Fortuna, freed by the Unicorn, and kills Mommy Fortuna and Ruhk out of vengeance for trapping her. 
* Paul Frees as Mabruk, King Haggard&#x27;s court magician who is replaced by Schmendrick. Frees also voices the Cat that gives hints to finding the Red Bull, and the Tree that falls in love with Schmendrick. Don Messick and Nellie Bellflower have widely been miscredited in the roles for several years (Bellflower&#x27;s character never made it into the final cut of the film). The miscredits were confirmed on a behind the scenes discussion of the film on the blu-ray.
* René Auberjonois as the Skull that guards the clock that serves as an entryway into the Red Bull&#x27;s lair. Beagle praised Auberjonois&#x27; performance, saying &quot;he could have played any role in that movie and I would have been happy ... He&#x27;s that talented.&quot;
* Brother Theodore as Ruhk, a hunchback who works for Mommy Fortuna. He, along with Mommy Fortuna, is killed by the Harpy Celaeno.
* Edward Peck as Jack Jingly, Cully&#x27;s Men
* Kenneth Jennings as Hunter #1, Cully&#x27;s Men
* Jack Lester as Hunter #2, Old Fermer, Cully&#x27;s Men

==Production==
Peter S. Beagle stated that there had been early interest in creating a film based on the book. Those who expressed interest included Lee Mendelson and Bill Melendez of the &quot;Peanuts&quot; television specials, though Beagle had been convinced by one of their partners&#x27; wives that they were &quot;not good enough&quot;, as well as former 20th Century Fox animator Les Goldman. At the time, Beagle believed that &quot;animated was the only way to go&quot; with regard to the film, and had never thought of making it into a live-action film. Arthur Rankin, Jr. and Jules Bass&#x27; New York-based production company, Rankin/Bass Productions, had been the last studio that the film&#x27;s associate producer, Michael Chase Walker, approached, and Beagle was first &quot;horrified&quot; when he was informed that they had made a deal with Walker. Beagle stated that he has since &quot;…come to feel that the film is actually a good deal more than I had originally credited&quot;, and went on to say &quot;There is some lovely design work – the Japanese artists who did the concepts and coloring were very good. And the voice actors do a superb job in bringing my characters to life…&quot;

While Rankin/Bass provided the film&#x27;s dialogue and story based on Beagle&#x27;s work, the animation was done at Topcraft in Tokyo, Japan, headed by former Toei Animation employee Toru Hara, with Masaki Iizuka being in charge of the production. The studio, which previously animated &quot;Frosty&#x27;s Winter Wonderland&quot; (1976), &quot;The Hobbit&quot; (1977), &quot;The Stingiest Man in Town&quot; (1978), &quot;The Return of the King&quot; (1980) and other cel-animated projects from Rankin/Bass, would later be hired by Hayao Miyazaki to work on &quot;Nausicaä of the Valley of the Wind&quot;, and their core members eventually went on to form Studio Ghibli. According to Beagle, the final film ended up being &quot;remarkably close&quot; to his original script, although one scene at the end involving an encounter with a princess was &quot;animated but eventually cut.&quot;

==Soundtrack==
The musical score and the songs were composed and arranged by Jimmy Webb, and performed by the group America and the London Symphony Orchestra, with additional vocals provided by Lucy Mitchell. &quot;The Last Unicorn&quot; soundtrack was recorded at De Lane Lea Studios in Wembley, England in 1982. The album was released in Germany in 1983 by Virgin Records, but has not been released in the United States; it includes the film score&#x27;s symphonic pieces. In his review for AllMusic, James Christopher Monger called it, &quot;an appropriately somber and sentimental blend of fairy tale motifs and dark, Wagnerian cues&quot;.

The theme song is featured on the 1997 compilation album &quot;The Best of America&quot;.

==Release==
U.S. distribution rights were sold to Jensen Farley when Universal Pictures, who were due to release Associated Film Distribution&#x27;s product (including ITC) in the United States, were not keen on the film.

&quot;The Last Unicorn&quot; premiered in 648 theaters in the United States on November 19, 1982, and earned $2,250,000 on its opening weekend. It grossed a total of $6,455,330 in the U.S. and Canada.

==Home media==
The first U.S. DVD, released by Family Home Entertainment on March 16, 2004, was made from poor-quality pan-and-scan masters. The company&#x27;s owner, Lionsgate, later licensed the German video masters and audio mix and came up with a &quot;25th Anniversary Edition&quot; DVD which was released in North America on February 6, 2007. It has audio and visual quality superior to the original U.S. release, and is in 16:9 widescreen format, but has several swear words edited out, and as a result of being taken from PAL masters, plays 4% faster than the original film, resulting in a slightly higher audio pitch than normal. The new DVD edition includes a featurette with an interview with the author, as well as a set-top game, image gallery, and the original theatrical trailer. As of October 2011, over 2,500,000 copies of the DVD have been sold. A Blu-ray edition of the film was released by Lionsgate on February 22, 2011; this release was sourced from a new transfer of the theatrical cut of the film, thus restoring the swearing and correcting the PAL speed-up issue, though the 25th Anniversary Edition was still included as an option on this release.

On June 9, 2015, Shout! Factory released new Blu-ray and DVD versions of &quot;The Last Unicorn&quot; entitled &quot;The Enchanted Edition&quot;. This edition was transferred from a new widescreen 2K digital master, and includes the original uncensored audio as well as a commentary track with Peter S. Beagle, associate producer Michael Chase Walker, tour producer Connor Freff Cochran, and Conlan Press team members; highlights from the Worldwide Screening Tour; a new &quot;True Magic: The Story of the Last Unicorn&quot; featurette; animated storyboards; and the original theatrical trailer.

In the United Kingdom, ITV Studios Global Entertainment hold complete ownership of the film via their acquisition of ITC&#x27;s entire feature film library, not including those released by Embassy Pictures, which are held by StudioCanal. Since 2009, ITV have been responsible for all home media releases of &quot;The Last Unicorn&quot;. The film was available on The Criterion Channel.

==Reception and legacy==
On the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, the film has a 76% rating on Rotten Tomatoes from 29 reviews as of February 2025. The site&#x27;s critical consensus reads: &quot;&quot;The Last Unicorn&quot; lacks the fluid animation to truly sparkle as an animated epic, but offbeat characters and an affecting story make it one of a kind for the true believers.&quot;

In a &quot;New York Times&quot; review, Janet Maslin called &quot;The Last Unicorn&quot; &quot;an unusual children&#x27;s film in many respects, the chief one being that it is unusually good [... and] features a cast that would do any live-action film proud, a visual style noticeably different from that of other children&#x27;s fare, and a story filled with genuine sweetness and mystery.&quot; Regarding the ending she said, &quot;no one of any age will be immune to the sentiment of the film&#x27;s final moments, which really are unexpectedly touching and memorable&quot;.

Todd McCarthy in &quot;Variety&quot; praised the script and voice acting but was unimpressed by the film&#x27;s animation. &quot;However vapid the unicorn may appear to the eye, Mia Farrow&#x27;s voice brings an almost moving plaintive quality to the character. For an actress to register so strongly on voice alone is a rare accomplishment.&quot; The review also praised the vocal talents of Arkin, Lee, and Frees.

Colin Greenland reviewed &quot;The Last Unicorn&quot; for &quot;Imagine&quot; magazine, and stated that &quot;Beagle has kept all the good bits, including the jokes, the smart, wry dialogue, and many bursts of brilliant imagination, here captured in stylish special effects: the attack of the Red Bull, all made of fire; the binding of all the lost unicorns into the foam of the sea.&quot;

Beagle himself called the film &quot;magnificent&quot; in comparison to &quot;J.R.R. Tolkien&#x27;s The Lord of the Rings&quot;, for which he also wrote the screenplay.

The film has since maintained a cult following. In 2003, the Online Film Critics Society ranked the film as the 96th greatest animated film of all time.

==References==
==Bibliography==
* pp. 93–114.

==External links==
* 
* 
* Das letzte Einhorn german movie poster (1983) at &quot;Baumann Graphik&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q11425" start="10" end="18" title="Animation" label="animated"/>
<link wikidata="Q157394" start="19" end="31" title="fantasy film" label="fantasy film"/>
<link wikidata="Q1983712" start="57" end="75" title="Arthur Rankin, Jr." label="Arthur Rankin, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q1442364" start="80" end="90" title="Jules Bass" label="Jules Bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q285007" start="109" end="124" title="Peter S. Beagle" label="Peter S. Beagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q967268" start="153" end="170" title="The Last Unicorn" label="of the same title"/>
<link wikidata="Q7246" start="192" end="199" title="unicorn" label="unicorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2" start="258" end="263" title="Earth" label="Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q724622" start="353" end="376" title="Rankin/Bass Productions" label="Rankin/Bass Productions"/>
<link wikidata="Q3149951" start="381" end="398" title="ITC Entertainment" label="ITC Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q3532077" start="431" end="439" title="Topcraft" label="Topcraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q108283" start="480" end="490" title="Alan Arkin" label="Alan Arkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q174843" start="492" end="504" title="Jeff Bridges" label="Jeff Bridges"/>
<link wikidata="Q202725" start="506" end="516" title="Mia Farrow" label="Mia Farrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q206856" start="518" end="533" title="Angela Lansbury" label="Angela Lansbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q180338" start="539" end="554" title="Christopher Lee" label="Christopher Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7746145" start="560" end="570" title="The Last Unicorn (album)" label="soundtrack"/>
<link wikidata="Q1287983" start="600" end="610" title="Jimmy Webb" label="Jimmy Webb"/>
<link wikidata="Q126852" start="650" end="657" title="America (band)" label="America"/>
<link wikidata="Q155805" start="666" end="691" title="London Symphony Orchestra" label="London Symphony Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q7246" start="893" end="900" title="unicorn" label="unicorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q11946202" start="931" end="940" title="butterfly" label="butterfly"/>
<link wikidata="Q830" start="1015" end="1019" title="Cattle" label="Bull"/>
<link wikidata="Q259745" start="1133" end="1138" title="Witchcraft" label="witch"/>
<link wikidata="Q181360" start="1438" end="1443" title="harpy" label="harpy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1106094" start="1444" end="1451" title="Celaeno" label="Celaeno"/>
<link wikidata="Q148401" start="1582" end="1590" title="Magician (fantasy)" label="magician"/>
<link wikidata="Q122634" start="1893" end="1903" title="Robin Hood" label="Robin Hood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1786347" start="2034" end="2048" title="Elemental" label="fire elemental"/>
<link wikidata="Q2669066" start="2816" end="2824" title="Scullery (room)" label="scullery"/>
<link wikidata="Q4729246" start="4897" end="4903" title="regret" label="regret"/>
<link wikidata="Q316" start="4908" end="4912" title="love" label="love"/>
<link wikidata="Q202725" start="5000" end="5010" title="Mia Farrow" label="Mia Farrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q108283" start="5193" end="5203" title="Alan Arkin" label="Alan Arkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q174843" start="5441" end="5453" title="Jeff Bridges" label="Jeff Bridges"/>
<link wikidata="Q3514842" start="5725" end="5737" title="Tammy Grimes" label="Tammy Grimes"/>
<link wikidata="Q725931" start="6126" end="6138" title="Robert Klein" label="Robert Klein"/>
<link wikidata="Q206856" start="6242" end="6257" title="Angela Lansbury" label="Angela Lansbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q180338" start="6532" end="6547" title="Christopher Lee" label="Christopher Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="6976" end="6982" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q946859" start="7037" end="7048" title="Keenan Wynn" label="Keenan Wynn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1106094" start="7132" end="7139" title="Celaeno" label="Celaeno"/>
<link wikidata="Q181360" start="7148" end="7153" title="harpy" label="harpy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3090544" start="7283" end="7293" title="Paul Frees" label="Paul Frees"/>
<link wikidata="Q645399" start="7490" end="7501" title="Don Messick" label="Don Messick"/>
<link wikidata="Q513399" start="7506" end="7523" title="Nellie Bellflower" label="Nellie Bellflower"/>
<link wikidata="Q348445" start="7754" end="7770" title="René Auberjonois" label="René Auberjonois"/>
<link wikidata="Q990788" start="8032" end="8048" title="Brother Theodore" label="Brother Theodore"/>
<link wikidata="Q3047198" start="8163" end="8174" title="Ed Peck" label="Edward Peck"/>
<link wikidata="Q6387874" start="8210" end="8226" title="Ken Jennings (actor)" label="Kenneth Jennings"/>
<link wikidata="Q6514528" start="8465" end="8478" title="Lee Mendelson" label="Lee Mendelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q862316" start="8483" end="8496" title="Bill Melendez" label="Bill Melendez"/>
<link wikidata="Q85792600" start="8504" end="8543" title="Peanuts animated specials" label="&amp;quot;Peanuts&amp;quot; television specials"/>
<link wikidata="Q434841" start="8677" end="8693" title="20th Century Fox" label="20th Century Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q1983712" start="8879" end="8897" title="Arthur Rankin, Jr." label="Arthur Rankin, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q1442364" start="8902" end="8912" title="Jules Bass" label="Jules Bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q724622" start="8954" end="8977" title="Rankin/Bass Productions" label="Rankin/Bass Productions"/>
<link wikidata="Q3532077" start="9642" end="9650" title="Topcraft" label="Topcraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q730179" start="9685" end="9699" title="Toei Animation" label="Toei Animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5506227" start="9818" end="9849" title="Frosty&amp;#x27;s Winter Wonderland" label="Frosty&amp;#x27;s Winter Wonderland"/>
<link wikidata="Q74229" start="9870" end="9880" title="The Hobbit (1977 film)" label="The Hobbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7766542" start="9901" end="9926" title="The Stingiest Man in Town" label="The Stingiest Man in Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q115285" start="9947" end="9969" title="The Return of the King (1980 film)" label="The Return of the King"/>
<link wikidata="Q55400" start="10057" end="10071" title="Hayao Miyazaki" label="Hayao Miyazaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q8885676" start="10089" end="10123" title="Nausicaä of the Valley of the Wind (film)" label="Nausicaä of the Valley of the Wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q182950" start="10181" end="10194" title="Studio Ghibli" label="Studio Ghibli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1287983" start="10492" end="10502" title="Jimmy Webb" label="Jimmy Webb"/>
<link wikidata="Q126852" start="10531" end="10538" title="America (band)" label="America"/>
<link wikidata="Q155805" start="10547" end="10572" title="London Symphony Orchestra" label="London Symphony Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="10755" end="10762" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q203059" start="10774" end="10788" title="Virgin Records" label="Virgin Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="10823" end="10836" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q492264" start="10854" end="10864" title="film score" label="film score"/>
<link wikidata="Q42998" start="10872" end="10888" title="symphony orchestra" label="symphonic pieces"/>
<link wikidata="Q168383" start="11220" end="11238" title="Universal Pictures" label="Universal Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294" start="11606" end="11609" title="DVD" label="DVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q622550" start="12351" end="12369" title="trailer (film)" label="theatrical trailer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7502767" start="12768" end="12782" title="Shout! Factory" label="Shout! Factory"/>
<link wikidata="Q4633137" start="12948" end="12950" title="2K resolution" label="2K"/>
<link wikidata="Q24963050" start="13117" end="13137" title="Connor Freff Cochran" label="Connor Freff Cochran"/>
<link wikidata="Q5161227" start="13143" end="13155" title="Conlan Press" label="Conlan Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q5975134" start="13371" end="13403" title="ITV Studios Global Distribution" label="ITV Studios Global Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q3149951" start="13465" end="13468" title="ITC Entertainment" label="ITC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5369517" start="13537" end="13553" title="Embassy Pictures" label="Embassy Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q2450848" start="13573" end="13584" title="StudioCanal" label="StudioCanal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204187" start="13711" end="13732" title="The Criterion Collection" label="The Criterion Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3491832" start="13767" end="13784" title="review aggregator" label="review aggregator"/>
<link wikidata="Q105584" start="13793" end="13808" title="Rotten Tomatoes" label="Rotten Tomatoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q105584" start="13839" end="13854" title="Rotten Tomatoes" label="Rotten Tomatoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="14143" end="14157" title="The New York Times" label="New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q509946" start="14172" end="14184" title="Janet Maslin" label="Janet Maslin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2894636" start="14711" end="14724" title="Todd McCarthy" label="Todd McCarthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q471728" start="14734" end="14741" title="Variety (magazine)" label="Variety"/>
<link wikidata="Q742918" start="15128" end="15143" title="Colin Greenland" label="Colin Greenland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6002663" start="15192" end="15199" title="Imagine (game magazine)" label="Imagine"/>
<link wikidata="Q378913" start="15597" end="15640" title="The Lord of the Rings (1978 film)" label="J.R.R. Tolkien&amp;#x27;s The Lord of the Rings"/>
<link wikidata="Q219557" start="15721" end="15735" title="Cult film" label="cult following"/>
<link wikidata="Q2024454" start="15750" end="15777" title="Online Film Critics Society" label="Online Film Critics Society"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="313004" wikidata="Q5632273" url="?curid=313004" title="HMS Egret (L75)">
<text>HMS &quot;Egret&quot; was a sloop of the British Royal Navy, the lead ship of her class. She was built by J. Samuel White at Cowes, Isle of Wight, was launched on 31 May 1938, and entered service on 11 November that year. &quot;Egret&quot; served as a convoy escort with the Western Approaches Command from 1940 until her loss in August 1943: She was on anti-submarine patrol in the Bay of Biscay when she was sunk by a guided missile in combat, the first ship to be lost in this manner.

==Construction==
On 5 March 1937, the British Admiralty ordered two sloops-of-war of a new class, &quot;Egret&quot; and as part of the 1936 construction programme. &quot;Egret&quot; was laid down at J. Samuel White&#x27;s Cowes, Isle of Wight shipyard on 21 September 1937. The ship was launched on 31 May 1938 and completed on 10 November 1938.

==Service history==
At the outbreak of the Second World War &quot;Egret&quot; was at Laurenco Marques in East Africa. She was briefly employed in hunting for raiders in the Indian Ocean before returning to the UK via Suez and Gibraltar.
In 1940 &quot;Egret&quot; was based at Rosyth employed as escort to east coast convoys in the North Sea, and remained at this duty during the Norway campaign. In December transferred to Western Approaches Command, and was based at Londonderry for escort duty for SL/OS convoys to and from Freetown, in West Africa.

In June 1941 &quot;Egret&quot; was in dock for a refit before returning to escort duty

In January 1942, she was escorting SL 97 when it came under attack by German aircraft and a group of U-boats. The convoy was reinforced by the Gibraltar Strike Force, an ASW support group, and &quot;U-93&quot; was destroyed with no loss to the convoy.

In October &quot;Egret&quot; took part in Operation Torch, the Allied landings in French North Africa.

In December she was escorting convoy MKF 4 from Gibraltar when they intercepted the blockade runner &quot;Germania&quot;, which was scuttled by her crew to avoid capture.

In 1943 &quot;Egret&quot; remained on escort duty protecting convoys to and from North Africa; in August 1943, while escorting MKF 20 from Gibraltar, &quot;Egret&quot; and her escort group were detailed to relieve 40 EG which was operating against U-boats traversing the Bay of Biscay.

==Fate==
The British Bay offensive in the summer of 1943 saw aircraft from RAF Coastal Command patrolling the Bay of Biscay and attacking U-boats as they travelled to and from their bases in occupied France. A mistaken decision on the part of U-boat commander, Adm. Karl Dönitz, had led to U-boats resisting air attack by remaining on the surface and fighting back with anti-aircraft weapons, rather than diving to safety underwater, a policy which led to the loss of a number of boats.
An escalation of the campaign had seen German and British long-range fighters, and then RN escort groups joining the fray. In mid-August 1943 40 EG was on station and came under air attack; on 25 August 1943 the Germans had used their Henschel Hs 293 glide bomb for the first time, against the ships of 40 EG in the Bay of Biscay. was slightly damaged by a near miss. was hit and damaged, with one sailor killed, though more serious damage was avoided because the bomb&#x27;s explosive charge did not fully detonate.

On 27 August 1943 the 40th Support Group was relieved by the 1st Support Group, consisting of &quot;Egret&quot; together with the sloop and the frigates , , and . The group was attacked by a squadron of 18 Dornier Do 217 carrying Henschel glide bombs. One of the two covering destroyers, , was heavily damaged and &quot;Egret&quot; was sunk with the loss of 194 of her crew. At the time there were four RAF Y-Service electronics specialists on board, all of whom also died in the attack, thus bringing the total killed to 198. (These four RAF personnel are typically excluded from published casualty figures.) &quot;Egret&quot; had been fitted with electronic surveillance equipment designed to monitor Luftwaffe bomber communications and these Y-Service technicians were aboard to operate this equipment. The other destroyer, , commanded by Roger Hill, was attacked by the Dorniers firing one missile at a time, but survived by being able to out-turn the glide bombs.

&quot;Egret&quot;″s sinking led to the anti-U-boat patrols in the Bay of Biscay being suspended.

HMS &quot;Egret&quot; was the first ship ever to be sunk by a guided missile.

==See also==
* List of ships sunk by missiles

==Notes==
==Citations==

==References==
* Clay Blair (1996). &quot;Hitler’s U-Boat War Vol I &quot;. 
* Clay Blair (1998). &quot;Hitler’s U-Boat War Vol II &quot;. 
*
* Stephen Roskill (1960). &quot;The War at Sea: vol III pt 1&quot;. (ISBN: none)

==External links==
*The sinking of the &quot;Egret&quot;
*An article about the remembrance celebrated in 2012
*HMS &quot;Egret&quot; at epsom and ewell history explorer
*HMS &quot;Egret&quot; at uboat.net</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5632273" start="0" end="15" title="HMS Egret (L75)" label="HMS &amp;quot;Egret"/>
<link wikidata="Q928235" start="28" end="33" title="sloop-of-war" label="sloop"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="49" end="59" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095057" start="65" end="74" title="lead ship" label="lead ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q891662" start="78" end="87" title="Egret-class sloop" label="her class"/>
<link wikidata="Q1676408" start="106" end="121" title="J. Samuel White" label="J. Samuel White"/>
<link wikidata="Q587996" start="125" end="130" title="Cowes" label="Cowes"/>
<link wikidata="Q9679" start="132" end="145" title="Isle of Wight" label="Isle of Wight"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503105" start="275" end="301" title="Western Approaches Command" label="Western Approaches Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q41573" start="383" end="396" title="Bay of Biscay" label="Bay of Biscay"/>
<link wikidata="Q14592615" start="675" end="684" title="Keel laying" label="laid down"/>
<link wikidata="Q1676408" start="688" end="703" title="J. Samuel White" label="J. Samuel White"/>
<link wikidata="Q587996" start="711" end="716" title="Cowes" label="Cowes"/>
<link wikidata="Q596643" start="776" end="784" title="Ceremonial ship launching" label="launched"/>
<link wikidata="Q3780" start="1362" end="1370" title="Freetown" label="Freetown"/>
<link wikidata="Q194132" start="1772" end="1787" title="Operation Torch" label="Operation Torch"/>
<link wikidata="Q954113" start="2368" end="2387" title="RAF Coastal Command" label="RAF Coastal Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q76437" start="2559" end="2570" title="Karl Dönitz" label="Karl Dönitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q586159" start="3015" end="3030" title="Henschel Hs 293" label="Henschel Hs 293"/>
<link wikidata="Q680879" start="3031" end="3041" title="glide bomb" label="glide bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q41573" start="3096" end="3109" title="Bay of Biscay" label="Bay of Biscay"/>
<link wikidata="Q161705" start="3442" end="3449" title="frigate" label="frigate"/>
<link wikidata="Q126966" start="3504" end="3518" title="Dornier Do 217" label="Dornier Do 217"/>
<link wikidata="Q174736" start="3574" end="3583" title="destroyer" label="destroyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3497482" start="3705" end="3714" title="Y service" label="Y-Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q7358754" start="4140" end="4150" title="Roger P. Hill" label="Roger Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q428661" start="4312" end="4318" title="U-boat" label="U-boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q41573" start="4334" end="4347" title="Bay of Biscay" label="Bay of Biscay"/>
<link wikidata="Q974850" start="4428" end="4442" title="guided missile" label="guided missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q103899659" start="4460" end="4490" title="List of ships sunk by missiles" label="List of ships sunk by missiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1099176" start="4534" end="4544" title="Clay Blair" label="Clay Blair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1099176" start="4596" end="4606" title="Clay Blair" label="Clay Blair"/>
<link wikidata="Q3498640" start="4661" end="4676" title="Stephen Roskill" label="Stephen Roskill"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="313006" wikidata="Q13566446" url="?curid=313006" title="Italian ship Roma">
<text>Roma was the name of three ships of the &quot;Regia Marina&quot; (Italian Royal Navy), and may refer to:

* , an armoured steam frigate commissioned in 1865 and scrapped in 1896
* , a predreadnought battleship of the &quot;Regina Elena&quot; class completed in 1908 and stricken in 1926
* , a battleship of the &quot;Vittorio Veneto&quot; class commissioned in 1942 and sunk in 1943</text><links>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="313007" wikidata="Q273108" url="?curid=313007" title="Condottiero">
<text>Condottieri (; : condottiero or condottiere) were Italian military leaders during the Middle Ages and the early modern period. The definition originally applied only to commanders of mercenary companies, in medieval Italian meaning &#x27;contractor&#x27; and being the contract by which the condottieri put themselves in the service of a city or lord. The term, however, came to refer to all the famed Italian military leaders of the Renaissance, Reformation and Counter-Reformation eras. Notable condottieri include Prospero Colonna, Giovanni dalle Bande Nere, Cesare Borgia, the Marquis of Pescara, Andrea Doria, and the Duke of Parma. They served Popes and other European monarchs and states during the Italian Wars and the European wars of religion.

==Time period==
Some authors have described the legendary Alberto da Giussano as the &quot;first condottiero&quot; and Napoleon Bonaparte (in virtue of his Italian origins) as the &quot;last condottiero&quot;. According to this view, the condottieri tradition would span a huge diverse period from the Battle of Legnano in 1176 to the Battle of Waterloo in 1815. Most historians would narrow it down to the years from to , with a particular focus on the rise of the commanders of free companies () and their transformation into captain generals fighting for the major powers during the struggle for political and religious supremacy in Europe.

==Mercenary captains==

===Background===

In the 13th and 14th centuries, the Italian city-states of Venice, Florence, and Genoa were very rich from their trade with the Levant, yet possessed woefully small armies. In the event that foreign powers and envious neighbours attacked, the ruling nobles hired foreign mercenaries to fight for them. The military-service terms and conditions were stipulated in a (contract) between the city-state and the soldiers (officer and enlisted man), thus, the &quot;contracted&quot; leader, the mercenary captain commanding, was titled the &quot;Condottiere&quot;.

From the eleventh to the thirteenth century, European soldiers led by professional officers fought against the Muslims in the Crusades (1095–1291). These crusading officers provided large-scale warfare combat experience in the Holy Land. At the Crusades&#x27; conclusion, the first (bands of roving soldiers; : ) appeared in Italy. Given the profession, some were less mercenaries than bandits and desperate men. These were not Italian, but (mostly) Flemings, from the Duchy of Brabant (hence, ), and from Aragon. The latter were Spanish soldiers who had followed King Peter III of Aragon in the War of the Sicilian Vespers in Italy in October 1282, and, post-war, remained there, seeking military employment. By 1333 other mercenaries had arrived in Italy to fight with John of Bohemia as the (Company of the Dove) in Perugia&#x27;s war against Arezzo. The first well-organised mercenaries in Italy were the Ventura Companies of Duke Werner von Urslingen and Count Konrad von Landau. Werner&#x27;s company differed from other mercenary companies because its code of military justice imposed discipline and an equal division of the contract&#x27;s income. The Ventura Company increased in number until becoming the fearsome &quot;Great Company&quot; of some 3,000 (each comprised a knight and a sergeant).

===Rise===
The first mercenary company with an Italian as its chief was the &quot;Company of St. George&quot; formed in 1339 and led by Lodrisio Visconti. This company was defeated and destroyed by Luchino Visconti of Milan (another condottiero and uncle of Lodrisio) in April 1339. Later, in 1377, a second &quot;Company of St. George&quot; was formed under the leadership of Alberico da Barbiano, also an Italian and the Count of Conio, who later taught military science to condottieri such as Braccio da Montone and Giacomuzzo Attendolo Sforza, who also served in the company.

Once aware of their military power monopoly in Italy, the condottieri bands became notorious for their capriciousness and soon dictated terms to their ostensible employers. In turn, many condottieri, such as Braccio da Montone and Muzio Sforza, became powerful politicians. As most were educated men acquainted with Roman military science manuals (e.g. Vegetius&#x27;s &quot;Epitoma rei militarii&quot;), they began viewing warfare from the perspective of military science, rather than as a matter of valour or physical courage—a great, consequential departure from chivalry, the traditional medieval model of soldiering. Consequently, the condottieri fought by outmanoeuvring the opponent and fighting his ability to wage war, rather than risking uncertain fortune—defeat, capture, death—in battlefield combat.

The earlier, medieval condottieri developed the &quot;art of war&quot; (military strategy and tactics) into military science more than any of their historical military predecessors—fighting indirectly, not directly—thus, only reluctantly endangering themselves and their enlisted men, avoiding battle when possible, also avoiding hard work and winter campaigns, as these all reduced the total number of trained soldiers available, and were detrimental to their political and economic interest. Niccolò Machiavelli even said that condottieri fought each other in grandiose, but often pointless and near-bloodless battles. However, later in the Renaissance the condottieri line of battle still deployed the grand armoured knight and medieval weapons and tactics after most European powers had begun employing professional standing armies of pikemen and musketeers; this helped to contribute to their eventual decline and destruction.

In 1347, Cola di Rienzo (Tribune and effective dictator of the city) had Werner von Urslingen executed in Rome, and Konrad von Landau assumed command of the Great Company. On the conclusion (1360) of the Peace of Bretigny between England and France, Sir John Hawkwood led an army of English mercenaries, called the White Company, into Italy, which took a prominent part in the confused wars of the next thirty years. Towards the end of the century, the Italians began to organize armies of the same description. This ended the reign of the purely mercenary company and began that of the semi-national mercenary army which endured in Europe till replaced by the national standing army system. In 1363, Count von Landau was betrayed by his Hungarian soldiers, and defeated in combat, by the White Company&#x27;s more advanced tactics under commanders Albert Sterz and John Hawkwood. Strategically, the was replaced with the three-soldier, mounted (a , a groom, and a boy); five composed a , five composed a (flag). By that time, the campaigning condottieri companies were as much Italian as foreign: the Astorre I Manfredi&#x27;s (Company of the Star); a new (Company of St. George) under Ambrogio Visconti; Niccolò da Montefeltro&#x27;s (Little Hat Company); and the (Company of the Rose), commanded by Giovanni da Buscareto and Bartolomeo Gonzaga.

From the 15th century hence, most condottieri were landless Italian nobles who had chosen the profession of arms as a livelihood; the most famous of such mercenary captains was the son of Caterina Sforza, Giovanni dalle Bande Nere, from Forlì, known as &quot;The Last Condottiere&quot;; his son was Cosimo I de&#x27; Medici, Grand Duke of Tuscany; besides noblemen, &quot;princes&quot; also fought as condottieri, given the sizable income to their estates, notably Sigismondo Pandolfo Malatesta, Lord of Rimini, and Federico da Montefeltro, Duke of Urbino; despite war-time inflation, soldier&#x27;s pay was high:
* 1,900 monthly florins in 1432: Micheletto Attendolo (Florence)
* 6,600 monthly florins in 1448: William VIII of Montferrat, from Francesco Sforza (Milan); the enlisted soldier&#x27;s pay was 3,300 florins, half that of an officer&#x27;s
* 33,000 yearly scudi for 250 men in 1505: Francesco II Gonzaga (Florence)
* 100,000 yearly scudi for 200 men in 1505: Francesco Maria I della Rovere (Florence)

The condottieri company commanders selected the soldiers to enlist; the was a consolidated contract, and, when the (service period) elapsed, the company entered an (wait) period, wherein the contracting city-state considered its renewal. If the expired definitively, the condottiere could not declare war against the contracting city-state for two years. This military–business custom was respected because professional reputation (business credibility) was everything to the condottieri; a deceived employer was a reputation ruined; likewise, for maritime mercenaries, whose () stipulated naval military-service terms and conditions; sea captains and sailors so-contracted were called . Their principal employers were Genoa and the Papal States, beginning in the fourteenth century, yet Venice considered it humiliating to so employ military sailors, and did not use naval mercenaries, even during the greatest danger in the city&#x27;s history.

In 15th-century Italy, the condottieri were masterful lords of war; during the wars in Lombardy, Machiavelli observed:

In 1487, at Calliano, the Venetians successfully met and acquitted themselves against the German landsknechte and the Swiss infantry, the best soldiers in Europe at the time.

===Decline===
In time, the financial and political interests of the condottieri proved serious drawbacks to decisive, bloody warfare: the mercenary captains often were treacherous, tending to avoid combat, and &quot;resolve&quot; fights with a bribe—either for the opponent or for themselves. Towards the end of the 15th century, when the large cities had gradually swallowed up the small states, and Italy itself was drawn into the general current of European politics, and became the battlefield of powerful armies—French, Spanish and German—the venture captains, who in the end proved quite unequal to the gendarmerie of France and the improved troops of the Italian states, gradually disappeared.

The soldiers of the condottieri were almost entirely heavy armoured cavalry (men-at-arms). Before 1400, they had little or nothing in common with the people among whom they fought, and their disorderly conduct and rapacity seem often to have exceeded that of medieval armies. They were always ready to change sides at the prospect of higher pay—the enemy of today might be the comrade-in-arms of tomorrow. Further, a prisoner was always more valuable than a dead enemy. As a consequence, their battles were often as bloodless as they were theatrical.

The age of firearms and weapons utilizing gunpowder further contributed to the decline of the condottieri. Although the mercenary forces were among the first to adapt to the emerging technologies on the battlefield, ultimately, the advent of firearms-governed warfare rendered their ceremonial fighting style obsolete. When battlefields shifted from chivalric confrontations characterized by ostentatious displays of power to an everyman&#x27;s war, they were ill-prepared to adjust.

==Captain generals==
In 1494, the French king Charles VIII&#x27;s royal army invaded the Italian Peninsula, initiating the Italian Wars. The most renowned condottieri fought for foreign powers: Gian Giacomo Trivulzio abandoned Milan for France, while Andrea Doria was Admiral of the Holy Roman Emperor Charles V. In the end, failure was political, rather than military, stemming from disunity and political indecision, and, by 1550, the military service had disappeared, while the term remained current, denominating the great Italian generals (mainly) fighting for foreign states; men such as Gian Giacomo Medici, Ambrogio Spinola, Alexander Farnese, Marcantonio II Colonna, Raimondo Montecuccoli and Prospero Colonna were prominent into the sixteenth and the seventeenth centuries. The political practice of hiring foreign mercenaries, however, did not end. For example, the Vatican&#x27;s Swiss Guard are the modern remnants of a historically effective mercenary army.

The end of the Thirty Years&#x27; War in 1648 and the birth of Westphalian sovereignty diminished Roman Catholic influence in Europe and led to the consolidation of large states, while Italy was fragmented and divided. The condottieri tradition greatly suffered from the political and strategic decline of Italy and never recovered.

==List==

* Roger de Flor ()
* Malatesta da Verucchio (1212–1312)
* Castruccio Castracani, Lord of Lucca (1281–1328)
* Cangrande della Scala (1291–1329)
* Montréal d&#x27;Albarno ()
* Walter VI of Brienne ()
* Konrad von Landau (died 22 April 1363)
* Albert Sterz (executed 1366)
* John Hawkwood (Giovanni Acuto, )
* Giovanni Ordelaffi from Forlì (1355–1399)
* Astorre I Manfredi (1345–1405)
* Alberico da Barbiano (1344–1409)
* Johann II (Habsburg-Laufenburg) ()
* Facino Cane de Casale ()
* Angelo Broglio da Lavello, also known as &quot;Tartaglia&quot; (1350 or 1370–1421)
* Andrea Fortebracci, better known as Braccio da Montone (1368–1424)
* Muzio Attendolo, also called Sforza (Strong) (1369–1424)
* Francesco Bussone da Carmagnola (1390–1432)
* Giovanni Vitelleschi (died 1440)
* Erasmo da Narni, also known as &quot;Gattamelata&quot; (1370–1443)
* Niccolò Piccinino (1380–1444)
* Micheletto Attendolo (Muzio Attendolo&#x27;s cousin or nephew, – )
* Francesco Sforza (1401–1466)
* Onorata Rodiani (1403–1452)
* Sigismondo Pandolfo Malatesta (1417–1468)
* Bartolomeo Colleoni ()
* Federico III da Montefeltro (1422–1482)
* Francesco Alidosi (1455–1511)
* Vitellozzo Vitelli (1458–1502)
* Oliverotto Euffreducci (1475–1502)
* Niccolò di Pitigliano (died 1510)
* Ettore Fieramosca (1479–1515)
* Cesare Borgia (1475–1507)
* Prospero Colonna (1452–1523)
* Bartolomeo d&#x27;Alviano (1455–1515)
* Mercurio Bua (1478-1542)
* Gian Giacomo Trivulzio ()
* Piero Strozzi (1510–1558)
* Andrea Doria (1466–1560)
* Marquis of Pescara (1489–1525)
*Marquis of Vasto (1502–1546)
* Giovanni dalle Bande Nere (1498–1526)
* Ferrante Gonzaga (1507–1557)
* Alexander Farnese (1545–1592)
* Torquato Conti (1591–1636)
* Ambrogio Spinola (1569–1630)
* Ottavio Piccolomini (1599–1656)
* Raimondo Montecuccoli (1609–1680)

==Principal battles==
* Battle of Montecatini (1315)
* Battle of Parabiago (1339) – Lodrisio Visconti&#x27;s &quot;Company of St. George&quot;, for Verona, against Luchino Visconti and Ettore da Panigo for Milan
* Battle of Cascina (1364)
* War of the Eight Saints (1375–1378)
** Cesena Bloodbath (1377) – Papal and Breton mercenaries under John Hawkwood slaughtered more than 2,000 citizens of Cesena
* Battle of Castagnaro (1387) – Giovanni Ordelaffi for Verona, against John Hawkwood for Padova
* Battle of Casalecchio (1402) – Alberico da Barbiano for Milan against Muzio Attendolo and others for the Bolognese-Florentine League
* Battle of Motta (1412) 
* Battle of Sant&#x27;Egidio (1416) – Braccio da Montone for himself against Carlo I Malatesta for Perugia
* Battle of Maclodio (1427) – Count of Carmagnola for Venice against Carlo I Malatesta for Milan
* Battle of San Romano (1432) – Niccolò da Tolentino for Florence against Francesco Piccinino for Siena
* Battle of Anghiari (1440) – Niccolò Piccinino for Milan against Florence, the Papal States, and Venice under Micheletto Attendolo
* Battle of Bosco Marengo (1447) 
* Battle of Molinella (1467)
* Battle of Crevola (1487) 
* Battle of Fornovo (1495) – The Italian League against Charles VIII of France
* Battle of Agnadello (1509) – Bartolomeo d&#x27;Alviano for Venice against France and the Italian League
* Battle of Pavia (1525) – Fernando d&#x27;Avalos for Emperor Charles V against France
* Battle of Marciano (1554) – Gian Giacomo Medici for Florence and the Holy Roman Empire against Piero Strozzi for Siena and France
* Fall of Antwerp (1585) – Alexander Farnese for Spain, against Dutch Protestants and England
* Siege of Paris – Alexander Farnese for the Catholic League against France, England, and the Huguenots
* Palatinate campaign (1620–1622) – Ambrogio Spinola for Spain and the Holy Roman Empire against the Electorate of Palatinate
* Wars of Castro (1641–1649) – between Pope Urban VIII and his successor Innocent X, and the Parma

==References==
==Sources==
* Machiavelli, Niccolò. &quot;History of Florence&quot;. book I, ch. vii. (on-line text)
* Rendina, Claudio (1992). &quot;I Capitani di ventura&quot;. Newton Compton.
* Ricotti, Ercole (1844–1845). &quot;Storia delle compagnie di ventura in Italia&quot;, 4 vols.
* Lenman, B., Anderson, T., eds. (2000). &quot;Chambers Dictionary of World History&quot;, Edinburgh: Chambers Harrap Publishers Ltd. .
* Димов, Г. Войната в италийските земи през късното Средновековие: кондотиерите – В: сп. Алманах, I, 2015, 30–43.

==External links==
* Adrian Fletcher&#x27;s Paradoxplace Condottieri Statues &amp; Paintings 
* Condottieri di ventura – a complete database about Condottieri operating in Italy between 1300–1550 </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q273108" start="0" end="11" title="Condottiero" label="Condottieri"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="86" end="97" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q5308718" start="106" end="125" title="early modern period" label="early modern period"/>
<link wikidata="Q178197" start="183" end="192" title="mercenary" label="mercenary"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="207" end="223" title="Italian language#History" label="medieval Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="434" end="445" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q12562" start="447" end="458" title="Reformation" label="Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q128168" start="463" end="482" title="Counter-Reformation" label="Counter-Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q721211" start="517" end="533" title="Prospero Colonna" label="Prospero Colonna"/>
<link wikidata="Q80986" start="535" end="560" title="Giovanni dalle Bande Nere" label="Giovanni dalle Bande Nere"/>
<link wikidata="Q187998" start="562" end="575" title="Cesare Borgia" label="Cesare Borgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q699488" start="581" end="599" title="Marquis of Pescara" label="Marquis of Pescara"/>
<link wikidata="Q156521" start="601" end="613" title="Andrea Doria" label="Andrea Doria"/>
<link wikidata="Q312903" start="623" end="636" title="Alexander Farnese, Duke of Parma" label="Duke of Parma"/>
<link wikidata="Q273348" start="706" end="718" title="Italian Wars" label="Italian Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q2490042" start="727" end="752" title="European wars of religion" label="European wars of religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q982635" start="813" end="832" title="Alberto da Giussano" label="Alberto da Giussano"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="874" end="892" title="Napoleon Bonaparte" label="Napoleon Bonaparte"/>
<link wikidata="Q283364" start="1057" end="1074" title="Battle of Legnano" label="Battle of Legnano"/>
<link wikidata="Q48314" start="1090" end="1108" title="Battle of Waterloo" label="Battle of Waterloo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543015" start="1235" end="1249" title="Free Company" label="free companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q133442" start="1486" end="1496" title="city-state" label="city-state"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948" start="1501" end="1507" title="Republic of Venice" label="Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q148540" start="1509" end="1517" title="Republic of Florence" label="Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q174306" start="1523" end="1528" title="republic of Genoa" label="Genoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q81483" start="1570" end="1576" title="Levant" label="Levant"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="2113" end="2120" title="Muslims" label="Muslims"/>
<link wikidata="Q12546" start="2124" end="2136" title="crusades" label="the Crusades"/>
<link wikidata="Q242485" start="2452" end="2460" title="Flemings" label="Flemings"/>
<link wikidata="Q159856" start="2471" end="2487" title="Duchy of Brabant" label="Duchy of Brabant"/>
<link wikidata="Q4040" start="2508" end="2514" title="Aragon" label="Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q312311" start="2571" end="2590" title="Peter III of Aragon" label="Peter III of Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599340" start="2598" end="2625" title="War of the Sicilian Vespers" label="War of the Sicilian Vespers"/>
<link wikidata="Q155167" start="2773" end="2788" title="John of Bohemia" label="John of Bohemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3437" start="2821" end="2828" title="Perugia" label="Perugia"/>
<link wikidata="Q13378" start="2848" end="2854" title="Arezzo" label="Arezzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q403279" start="2932" end="2957" title="Werner von Urslingen" label="Duke Werner von Urslingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q971031" start="2962" end="2985" title="Konrad von Landau" label="Count Konrad von Landau"/>
<link wikidata="Q3114929" start="3232" end="3245" title="The Great Company (German)" label="Great Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q116031" start="3445" end="3462" title="Lodrisio Visconti" label="Lodrisio Visconti"/>
<link wikidata="Q195825" start="3507" end="3523" title="Luchino Visconti (died 1349)" label="Luchino Visconti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379848" start="3686" end="3706" title="Alberico da Barbiano" label="Alberico da Barbiano"/>
<link wikidata="Q192386" start="3765" end="3781" title="military science" label="military science"/>
<link wikidata="Q896536" start="3805" end="3823" title="Braccio da Montone" label="Braccio da Montone"/>
<link wikidata="Q932356" start="3828" end="3855" title="Muzio Sforza" label="Giacomuzzo Attendolo Sforza"/>
<link wikidata="Q4298" start="4243" end="4251" title="Vegetius" label="Vegetius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246541" start="4265" end="4286" title="De re militari" label="Epitoma rei militarii"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056721" start="4456" end="4464" title="chivalry" label="chivalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q219087" start="4775" end="4792" title="military strategy" label="military strategy"/>
<link wikidata="Q207645" start="4797" end="4804" title="Military tactics" label="tactics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399" start="5197" end="5216" title="Niccolò Machiavelli" label="Niccolò Machiavelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q220016" start="5542" end="5549" title="pikemen" label="pikemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q721960" start="5554" end="5563" title="musketeer" label="musketeer"/>
<link wikidata="Q433189" start="5645" end="5659" title="Cola di Rienzo" label="Cola di Rienzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334924" start="5840" end="5857" title="Treaty of Brétigny" label="Peace of Bretigny"/>
<link wikidata="Q323446" start="5890" end="5903" title="John Hawkwood" label="John Hawkwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q288420" start="5951" end="5964" title="White Company" label="White Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q335627" start="6485" end="6497" title="Albert Sterz" label="Albert Sterz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2413843" start="6738" end="6756" title="Astorre I Manfredi" label="Astorre I Manfredi"/>
<link wikidata="Q80992" start="7173" end="7188" title="Caterina Sforza" label="Caterina Sforza"/>
<link wikidata="Q80986" start="7190" end="7215" title="Giovanni dalle Bande Nere" label="Giovanni dalle Bande Nere"/>
<link wikidata="Q13367" start="7222" end="7227" title="Forlì" label="Forlì"/>
<link wikidata="Q48547" start="7284" end="7331" title="Cosimo I de&amp;#x27; Medici, Grand Duke of Tuscany" label="Cosimo I de&amp;#x27; Medici, Grand Duke of Tuscany"/>
<link wikidata="Q506640" start="7450" end="7479" title="Sigismondo Pandolfo Malatesta" label="Sigismondo Pandolfo Malatesta"/>
<link wikidata="Q13369" start="7489" end="7495" title="Rimini" label="Rimini"/>
<link wikidata="Q435501" start="7501" end="7524" title="Federico da Montefeltro" label="Federico da Montefeltro"/>
<link wikidata="Q2759" start="7534" end="7540" title="Urbino" label="Urbino"/>
<link wikidata="Q35865" start="7559" end="7568" title="inflation" label="inflation"/>
<link wikidata="Q650702" start="7615" end="7622" title="Italian coin florin" label="florins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112928" start="7632" end="7652" title="Micheletto Attendolo" label="Micheletto Attendolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125744" start="7697" end="7723" title="William VIII of Montferrat" label="William VIII of Montferrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q310536" start="7730" end="7746" title="Francesco Sforza" label="Francesco Sforza"/>
<link wikidata="Q2117831" start="7854" end="7859" title="scudi" label="scudi"/>
<link wikidata="Q715191" start="7881" end="7901" title="Francesco II Gonzaga" label="Francesco II Gonzaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q555015" start="7957" end="7987" title="Francesco Maria I della Rovere" label="Francesco Maria I della Rovere"/>
<link wikidata="Q1449" start="8719" end="8724" title="Genoa" label="Genoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q170174" start="8733" end="8745" title="Papal States" label="Papal States"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948" start="8788" end="8794" title="Republic of Venice" label="Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q2506432" start="9027" end="9043" title="wars in Lombardy" label="wars in Lombardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3636361" start="9080" end="9088" title="Battle of Calliano (1487)" label="Calliano"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948" start="9094" end="9103" title="Republic of Venice" label="Venetians"/>
<link wikidata="Q156733" start="9165" end="9177" title="landsknechte" label="landsknechte"/>
<link wikidata="Q134452" start="11029" end="11041" title="Charles VIII of France" label="Charles VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q273348" start="11106" end="11118" title="Italian Wars" label="Italian Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q742997" start="11177" end="11199" title="Gian Giacomo Trivulzio" label="Gian Giacomo Trivulzio"/>
<link wikidata="Q156521" start="11234" end="11246" title="Andrea Doria" label="Andrea Doria"/>
<link wikidata="Q181765" start="11266" end="11284" title="Holy Roman Emperor" label="Holy Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q32500" start="11285" end="11294" title="Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Charles V"/>
<link wikidata="Q983302" start="11577" end="11596" title="Gian Giacomo Medici" label="Gian Giacomo Medici"/>
<link wikidata="Q359936" start="11598" end="11614" title="Ambrogio Spinola" label="Ambrogio Spinola"/>
<link wikidata="Q312903" start="11616" end="11633" title="Alexander Farnese, Duke of Parma" label="Alexander Farnese"/>
<link wikidata="Q878288" start="11635" end="11657" title="Marcantonio II Colonna" label="Marcantonio II Colonna"/>
<link wikidata="Q454789" start="11659" end="11680" title="Raimondo Montecuccoli" label="Raimondo Montecuccoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q721211" start="11685" end="11701" title="Prospero Colonna" label="Prospero Colonna"/>
<link wikidata="Q237" start="11860" end="11867" title="Vatican City" label="Vatican"/>
<link wikidata="Q171504" start="11875" end="11886" title="Swiss Guard" label="Swiss Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2487" start="11971" end="11993" title="Thirty Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Thirty Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q442402" start="12019" end="12042" title="Westphalian sovereignty" label="Westphalian sovereignty"/>
<link wikidata="Q436817" start="12302" end="12315" title="Roger de Flor" label="Roger de Flor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1738448" start="12321" end="12343" title="Malatesta da Verucchio" label="Malatesta da Verucchio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049990" start="12358" end="12379" title="Castruccio Castracani" label="Castruccio Castracani"/>
<link wikidata="Q13373" start="12389" end="12394" title="Lucca" label="Lucca"/>
<link wikidata="Q785349" start="12409" end="12430" title="Cangrande della Scala" label="Cangrande della Scala"/>
<link wikidata="Q402249" start="12445" end="12468" title="Fra&amp;#x27; Moriale" label="Montréal d&amp;#x27;Albarno"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335401" start="12474" end="12494" title="Walter VI of Brienne" label="Walter VI of Brienne"/>
<link wikidata="Q971031" start="12500" end="12517" title="Konrad von Landau" label="Konrad von Landau"/>
<link wikidata="Q335627" start="12541" end="12553" title="Albert Sterz" label="Albert Sterz"/>
<link wikidata="Q323446" start="12572" end="12585" title="John Hawkwood" label="John Hawkwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q3107293" start="12607" end="12625" title="Giovanni Ordelaffi" label="Giovanni Ordelaffi"/>
<link wikidata="Q13367" start="12631" end="12636" title="Forlì" label="Forlì"/>
<link wikidata="Q2413843" start="12651" end="12669" title="Astorre I Manfredi" label="Astorre I Manfredi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379848" start="12684" end="12704" title="Alberico da Barbiano" label="Alberico da Barbiano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1694705" start="12719" end="12750" title="Johann II (Habsburg-Laufenburg)" label="Johann II (Habsburg-Laufenburg)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391653" start="12756" end="12777" title="Facino Cane" label="Facino Cane de Casale"/>
<link wikidata="Q3608762" start="12783" end="12808" title="Angelo Tartaglia" label="Angelo Broglio da Lavello"/>
<link wikidata="Q896536" start="12904" end="12922" title="Braccio da Montone" label="Braccio da Montone"/>
<link wikidata="Q932356" start="12937" end="12952" title="Muzio Sforza" label="Muzio Attendolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q130858" start="12966" end="12972" title="Sforza" label="Sforza"/>
<link wikidata="Q1440968" start="12996" end="13027" title="Francesco Bussone da Carmagnola" label="Francesco Bussone da Carmagnola"/>
<link wikidata="Q704503" start="13042" end="13062" title="Giovanni Vitelleschi" label="Giovanni Vitelleschi"/>
<link wikidata="Q733404" start="13077" end="13092" title="Erasmo da Narni" label="Erasmo da Narni"/>
<link wikidata="Q979543" start="13146" end="13163" title="Niccolò Piccinino" label="Niccolò Piccinino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112928" start="13178" end="13198" title="Micheletto Attendolo" label="Micheletto Attendolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q310536" start="13247" end="13263" title="Francesco Sforza" label="Francesco Sforza"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439115" start="13278" end="13293" title="Onorata Rodiani" label="Onorata Rodiani"/>
<link wikidata="Q506640" start="13308" end="13337" title="Sigismondo Pandolfo Malatesta" label="Sigismondo Pandolfo Malatesta"/>
<link wikidata="Q809506" start="13352" end="13371" title="Bartolomeo Colleoni" label="Bartolomeo Colleoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q435501" start="13377" end="13404" title="Federico III da Montefeltro" label="Federico III da Montefeltro"/>
<link wikidata="Q729001" start="13419" end="13436" title="Francesco Alidosi" label="Francesco Alidosi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2714004" start="13451" end="13469" title="Vitellozzo Vitelli" label="Vitellozzo Vitelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641665" start="13484" end="13506" title="Oliverotto Euffreducci" label="Oliverotto Euffreducci"/>
<link wikidata="Q2259375" start="13521" end="13542" title="Niccolò di Pitigliano" label="Niccolò di Pitigliano"/>
<link wikidata="Q328279" start="13557" end="13574" title="Ettore Fieramosca" label="Ettore Fieramosca"/>
<link wikidata="Q187998" start="13589" end="13602" title="Cesare Borgia" label="Cesare Borgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q721211" start="13617" end="13633" title="Prospero Colonna" label="Prospero Colonna"/>
<link wikidata="Q2452129" start="13648" end="13673" title="Bartolomeo d&amp;#x27;Alviano" label="Bartolomeo d&amp;#x27;Alviano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987337" start="13688" end="13700" title="Mercurio Bua" label="Mercurio Bua"/>
<link wikidata="Q742997" start="13715" end="13737" title="Gian Giacomo Trivulzio" label="Gian Giacomo Trivulzio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346257" start="13743" end="13756" title="Piero Strozzi" label="Piero Strozzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q156521" start="13771" end="13783" title="Andrea Doria" label="Andrea Doria"/>
<link wikidata="Q699488" start="13798" end="13816" title="Marquis of Pescara" label="Marquis of Pescara"/>
<link wikidata="Q670504" start="13830" end="13846" title="Alfonso III d&amp;#x27;Avalos" label="Marquis of Vasto"/>
<link wikidata="Q80986" start="13861" end="13886" title="Giovanni dalle Bande Nere" label="Giovanni dalle Bande Nere"/>
<link wikidata="Q693603" start="13901" end="13917" title="Ferrante Gonzaga" label="Ferrante Gonzaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q312903" start="13932" end="13949" title="Alexander Farnese, Duke of Parma" label="Alexander Farnese"/>
<link wikidata="Q329200" start="13964" end="13978" title="Torquato Conti" label="Torquato Conti"/>
<link wikidata="Q359936" start="13993" end="14009" title="Ambrogio Spinola" label="Ambrogio Spinola"/>
<link wikidata="Q697963" start="14024" end="14043" title="Ottavio Piccolomini" label="Ottavio Piccolomini"/>
<link wikidata="Q454789" start="14058" end="14079" title="Raimondo Montecuccoli" label="Raimondo Montecuccoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q946298" start="14117" end="14138" title="Battle of Montecatini" label="Battle of Montecatini"/>
<link wikidata="Q153712" start="14148" end="14167" title="Battle of Parabiago" label="Battle of Parabiago"/>
<link wikidata="Q116031" start="14177" end="14194" title="Lodrisio Visconti" label="Lodrisio Visconti"/>
<link wikidata="Q2028" start="14241" end="14247" title="Verona" label="Verona"/>
<link wikidata="Q195825" start="14257" end="14273" title="Luchino Visconti (died 1349)" label="Luchino Visconti"/>
<link wikidata="Q153529" start="14299" end="14304" title="Duchy of Milan" label="Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2259031" start="14307" end="14324" title="Battle of Cascina" label="Battle of Cascina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2288424" start="14334" end="14357" title="War of the Eight Saints" label="War of the Eight Saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q170174" start="14399" end="14404" title="Papal States" label="Papal"/>
<link wikidata="Q71747" start="14409" end="14415" title="Duchy of Brittany" label="Breton"/>
<link wikidata="Q323446" start="14434" end="14447" title="John Hawkwood" label="John Hawkwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q6662" start="14488" end="14494" title="Cesena" label="Cesena"/>
<link wikidata="Q646532" start="14497" end="14517" title="Battle of Castagnaro" label="Battle of Castagnaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q3107293" start="14527" end="14545" title="Giovanni Ordelaffi" label="Giovanni Ordelaffi"/>
<link wikidata="Q617" start="14584" end="14590" title="Padova" label="Padova"/>
<link wikidata="Q2248041" start="14593" end="14614" title="Battle of Casalecchio" label="Battle of Casalecchio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379848" start="14624" end="14644" title="Alberico da Barbiano" label="Alberico da Barbiano"/>
<link wikidata="Q932356" start="14663" end="14678" title="Muzio Attendolo" label="Muzio Attendolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4871796" start="14728" end="14750" title="Battle of Motta (1412)" label="Battle of Motta (1412)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4872299" start="14754" end="14780" title="Battle of Sant&amp;#x27;Egidio" label="Battle of Sant&amp;#x27;Egidio"/>
<link wikidata="Q896536" start="14790" end="14808" title="Braccio da Montone" label="Braccio da Montone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2552618" start="14829" end="14846" title="Carlo I Malatesta" label="Carlo I Malatesta"/>
<link wikidata="Q3437" start="14851" end="14858" title="Perugia" label="Perugia"/>
<link wikidata="Q671340" start="14861" end="14879" title="Battle of Maclodio" label="Battle of Maclodio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1440968" start="14889" end="14908" title="Francesco Bussone da Carmagnola" label="Count of Carmagnola"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948" start="14913" end="14919" title="Republic of Venice" label="Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q2889924" start="14958" end="14978" title="Battle of San Romano" label="Battle of San Romano"/>
<link wikidata="Q360511" start="14988" end="15008" title="Niccolò da Tolentino" label="Niccolò da Tolentino"/>
<link wikidata="Q148540" start="15013" end="15021" title="Republic of Florence" label="Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q648248" start="15030" end="15049" title="Francesco Piccinino" label="Francesco Piccinino"/>
<link wikidata="Q736727" start="15054" end="15059" title="Republic of Siena" label="Siena"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779008" start="15062" end="15087" title="Battle of Anghiari (1440)" label="Battle of Anghiari (1440)"/>
<link wikidata="Q979543" start="15090" end="15107" title="Niccolò Piccinino" label="Niccolò Piccinino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112928" start="15171" end="15191" title="Micheletto Attendolo" label="Micheletto Attendolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4870529" start="15194" end="15217" title="Battle of Bosco Marengo" label="Battle of Bosco Marengo"/>
<link wikidata="Q532899" start="15228" end="15247" title="Battle of Molinella" label="Battle of Molinella"/>
<link wikidata="Q670094" start="15257" end="15274" title="Battle of Crevola" label="Battle of Crevola"/>
<link wikidata="Q764793" start="15285" end="15302" title="Battle of Fornovo" label="Battle of Fornovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665335" start="15316" end="15330" title="Italian League" label="Italian League"/>
<link wikidata="Q134452" start="15339" end="15361" title="Charles VIII of France" label="Charles VIII of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754732" start="15364" end="15383" title="Battle of Agnadello" label="Battle of Agnadello"/>
<link wikidata="Q2452129" start="15393" end="15418" title="Bartolomeo d&amp;#x27;Alviano" label="Bartolomeo d&amp;#x27;Alviano"/>
<link wikidata="Q70972" start="15438" end="15444" title="Kingdom of France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q63468" start="15470" end="15485" title="Battle of Pavia" label="Battle of Pavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q699488" start="15495" end="15517" title="Fernando d&amp;#x27;Avalos" label="Fernando d&amp;#x27;Avalos"/>
<link wikidata="Q32500" start="15530" end="15539" title="Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Charles V"/>
<link wikidata="Q2628768" start="15557" end="15575" title="Battle of Marciano" label="Battle of Marciano"/>
<link wikidata="Q983302" start="15585" end="15604" title="Gian Giacomo Medici" label="Gian Giacomo Medici"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346257" start="15652" end="15665" title="Piero Strozzi" label="Piero Strozzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q697823" start="15689" end="15704" title="Fall of Antwerp" label="Fall of Antwerp"/>
<link wikidata="Q312903" start="15714" end="15731" title="Alexander Farnese, Duke of Parma" label="Alexander Farnese"/>
<link wikidata="Q600093" start="15736" end="15741" title="Habsburg Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q170072" start="15751" end="15768" title="Dutch Republic" label="Dutch Protestants"/>
<link wikidata="Q179876" start="15773" end="15780" title="Kingdom of England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q3485984" start="15783" end="15797" title="Siege of Paris (1590)" label="Siege of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q101935" start="15875" end="15884" title="Huguenots" label="Huguenots"/>
<link wikidata="Q7126801" start="15887" end="15906" title="Palatinate campaign" label="Palatinate campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q359936" start="15921" end="15937" title="Ambrogio Spinola" label="Ambrogio Spinola"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="15956" end="15973" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q22880" start="15986" end="16010" title="Electorate of Palatinate" label="Electorate of Palatinate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7970865" start="16013" end="16027" title="Wars of Castro" label="Wars of Castro"/>
<link wikidata="Q131579" start="16055" end="16065" title="Pope Urban VIII" label="Urban VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q101266" start="16084" end="16094" title="Pope Innocent X" label="Innocent X"/>
<link wikidata="Q165040" start="16104" end="16109" title="Duchy of Parma and Piacenza" label="Parma"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="313009" wikidata="Q3505252" url="?curid=313009" title="Drug overdose">
<text>A drug overdose (overdose or OD) is the ingestion or application of a drug or other substance in quantities much greater than are recommended. Typically the term is applied for cases when a risk to health is a potential result. An overdose may result in a toxic state or death.

==Classification==
The word &quot;overdose&quot; implies that there is a common safe dosage and usage for the drug; therefore, the term is commonly applied only to drugs, not poisons, even though many poisons as well are harmless at a low enough dosage. Drug overdose is sometimes used as a means to commit suicide, as the result of intentional or unintentional misuse of medication. Intentional misuse leading to overdose can include using prescribed or non-prescribed drugs in excessive quantities in an attempt to produce euphoria.

Usage of illicit drugs, in large quantities, or after a period of drug abstinence can also induce overdose. Cocaine and opioid users who inject intravenously can easily overdose accidentally, as the margin between a pleasurable drug sensation and an overdose is small. Unintentional misuse can include errors in dosage caused by failure to read or understand product labels. Accidental overdoses may also be the result of over-prescription, failure to recognize a drug&#x27;s active ingredient or unwitting ingestion by children. A common unintentional overdose in young children involves multivitamins containing iron.

The term &#x27;overdose&#x27; is often misused as a descriptor for adverse drug reactions or negative drug interactions due to mixing multiple drugs simultaneously.

==Signs and symptoms==
Signs and symptoms of an overdose vary depending on the drug or exposure to toxins. The symptoms can often be divided into differing toxidromes. This can help one determine what class of drug or toxin is causing the difficulties.

Symptoms of opioid overdoses include slow breathing, heart rate and pulse. Opioid overdoses can also cause pinpoint pupils, and blue lips and nails due to low levels of oxygen in the blood. A person experiencing an opioid overdose might also have muscle spasms, seizures and decreased consciousness. A person experiencing an opiate overdose usually will not wake up, even if their name is called or they are shaken vigorously.

==Causes==
The drugs or toxins that are most frequently involved in overdose and death (grouped by ICD-10):

* Acute alcohol intoxication (F10)
** Ethyl alcohol (alcohol)
** Methanol poisoning
** Ethylene glycol poisoning
* Opioid overdose (F11)
* Among sedative-hypnotics (F13)
** Barbiturate overdose (T42.3)
** Benzodiazepine overdose (T42.4)
** Uncategorized sedative-hypnotics (T42.6)
*** Ethchlorvynol (Placidyl)
*** GHB
*** Glutethimide (Doriden)
*** Methaqualone
*** Ketamine (T41.2)
* Among stimulants (F14-F15)
** Cocaine overdose (T40.5)
** Amphetamine overdose (T43.6)
** Methamphetamine overdose (T43.6)
* Among tobacco (F17)
** Nicotine poisoning (T65.2)
* Among poly drug use (F19)
** Drug &quot;cocktails&quot; (speedballs)
* Medications
** Aspirin poisoning (T39.0)
** Paracetamol poisoning (Alone or mixed with oxycodone)
** Paracetamol toxicity (T39.1)
** Tricyclic antidepressant overdose (T43.0)
** Vitamin poisoning
* Pesticide poisoning (T60)
** Organophosphate poisoning
** DDT
* Inhalants
* Lithium toxicity
===Added flavoring===
Masking undesired taste may impair judgement of the potency, which is a factor in overdosing. For example, lean is usually created as a drinkable mixture, the cough syrup is combined with soft drinks, especially fruit-flavored drinks such as Sprite, Mountain Dew or Fanta, and is typically served in a foam cup. A hard candy, usually a Jolly Rancher, may be added to give the mixture a sweeter flavor.

==Diagnosis==
The substance that has been taken may often be determined by asking the person. However, if they will not, or cannot, due to an altered level of consciousness, provide this information, a search of the home or questioning of friends and family may be helpful.

Examination for toxidromes, drug testing, or laboratory test may be helpful. Other laboratory test such as glucose, urea and electrolytes, paracetamol levels and salicylate levels are typically done. Negative drug-drug interactions have sometimes been misdiagnosed as an acute drug overdose, occasionally leading to the assumption of suicide.
==Prevention==
The distribution of naloxone to injection drug users and other opioid drug users decreases the risk of death from overdose. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) estimates that U.S. programs for drug users and their caregivers prescribing take-home doses of naloxone and training on its utilization are estimated to have prevented 10,000 opioid overdose deaths. Healthcare institution-based naloxone prescription programs have also helped reduce rates of opioid overdose in the U.S. state of North Carolina, and have been replicated in the U.S. military. Nevertheless, scale-up of healthcare-based opioid overdose interventions is limited by providers&#x27; insufficient knowledge and negative attitudes towards prescribing take-home naloxone to prevent opioid overdose. Programs training police and fire personnel in opioid overdose response using naloxone have also shown promise in the U.S.

Supervised injection sites (also known as overdose prevention centers) have been used to help prevent drug overdoses by offering opioid reversal medications such as naloxone, medical assistance and treatment options. They also provide clean needles to help prevent the spread of diseases like HIV/AIDS and hepatitis.

==Management==

Stabilization of the person&#x27;s airway, breathing, and circulation (ABCs) is the initial treatment of an overdose. Ventilation is considered when there is a low respiratory rate or when blood gases show the person to be hypoxic. Monitoring of the patient should continue before and throughout the treatment process, with particular attention to temperature, pulse, respiratory rate, blood pressure, urine output, electrocardiography (ECG) and O2 saturation. Poison control centers and medical toxicologists are available in many areas to provide guidance in overdoses both to physicians and to the general public.

===Antidotes===
Specific antidotes are available for certain overdoses. For example, naloxone is the antidote for opiates such as heroin or morphine. Similarly, benzodiazepine overdoses may be effectively reversed with flumazenil. As a nonspecific antidote, activated charcoal is frequently recommended if available within one hour of the ingestion and the ingestion is significant. Gastric lavage, syrup of ipecac, and whole bowel irrigation are rarely used.

==Epidemiology and statistics==

The UN gives a figure of 300,000 deaths per year in the world through drug overdose.

1,015,060 US residents died from drug overdoses from 1968 to 2019. 22 people out of every 100,000 died from drug overdoses in 2019 in the US. From 1999 to Feb 2019 in the United States, more than 770,000 people have died from drug overdoses.

In the US around 107,500 people died in the 12-month period ending August 31, 2022, at a rate of 294 deaths per day. 70,630 people died from drug overdoses in 2019. The U.S. drug overdose death rate has gone from 2.5 per 100,000 people in 1968 to 21.5 per 100,000 in 2019.

The National Center for Health Statistics reports that 19,250 people died of accidental poisoning in the U.S. in the year 2004 (eight deaths per 100,000 population).

In 2008 testimony before a Senate subcommittee, Leonard J. Paulozzi, a medical epidemiologist at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said that in 2005 more than 22,000 American people died due to overdoses, and the number is growing rapidly. Paulozzi also testified that all available evidence suggests unintentional overdose deaths are related to the increasing use of prescription drugs, especially opioid painkillers. However, the vast majority of overdoses are also attributable to alcohol. It is very rare for a victim of an overdose to have consumed just one drug. Most overdoses occur when drugs are ingested in combination with alcohol.

Drug overdose was the leading cause of injury death in 2013. Among people 25 to 64 years old, drug overdose caused more deaths than motor vehicle traffic crashes. There were 43,982 drug overdose deaths in the United States in 2013. Of these, 22,767 (51.8%) were related to prescription drugs.

The 22,767 deaths relating to prescription drug overdose in 2013, 16,235 (71.3%) involved opioid painkillers, and 6,973 (30.6%) involved benzodiazepines. Drug misuse and abuse caused about 2.5 million emergency department (ED) visits in 2011. Of these, more than 1.4 million ED visits were related to prescription drugs. Among those ED visits, 501,207 visits were related to anti-anxiety and insomnia medications, and 420,040 visits were related to opioid analgesics.

New CDC data in 2024 demonstrates U.S. drug overdose deaths have significantly declined, marking the potential for the first year with fewer than 100,000 fatalities since 2020. The CDC data shows a nearly 17% drop in reported overdose deaths during the 12 months ending in June, totaling 93,087. This is a notable decrease from the 111,615 deaths recorded in the same period ending in June 2023. While the opioid crisis continues to take a heavy toll, fentanyl remains a major driver, contributing to the majority of these fatalities.

==See also==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==References==
==Further reading==
*
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3505252" start="2" end="15" title="Drug overdose" label="drug overdose"/>
<link wikidata="Q3505252" start="17" end="25" title="Drug overdose" label="overdose"/>
<link wikidata="Q3505252" start="29" end="31" title="Drug overdose" label="OD"/>
<link wikidata="Q1663054" start="40" end="49" title="ingestion" label="ingestion"/>
<link wikidata="Q8386" start="70" end="74" title="drug" label="drug"/>
<link wikidata="Q274160" start="256" end="267" title="toxicity" label="toxic state"/>
<link wikidata="Q4" start="271" end="276" title="death" label="death"/>
<link wikidata="Q40867" start="454" end="460" title="poison" label="poison"/>
<link wikidata="Q10737" start="586" end="593" title="suicide" label="suicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q12140" start="651" end="661" title="medication" label="medication"/>
<link wikidata="Q203994" start="804" end="812" title="euphoria" label="euphoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q4551312" start="824" end="837" title="illicit drugs" label="illicit drugs"/>
<link wikidata="Q210978" start="886" end="896" title="abstinence" label="abstinence"/>
<link wikidata="Q41576" start="923" end="930" title="Cocaine" label="Cocaine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="952" end="972" title="Injection (medicine)#Intravenous" label="inject intravenously"/>
<link wikidata="Q172395" start="1404" end="1416" title="multivitamin" label="multivitamin"/>
<link wikidata="Q677" start="1429" end="1433" title="iron" label="iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q45959" start="1503" end="1524" title="adverse drug reaction" label="adverse drug reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q718753" start="1538" end="1554" title="drug interaction" label="drug interaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1895998" start="1563" end="1599" title="polypharmacy" label="mixing multiple drugs simultaneously"/>
<link wikidata="Q184651" start="1701" end="1706" title="toxin" label="toxin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2390364" start="1758" end="1767" title="toxidrome" label="toxidrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q427523" start="1868" end="1874" title="opioid" label="opioid"/>
<link wikidata="Q629" start="2025" end="2031" title="oxygen" label="oxygen"/>
<link wikidata="Q17154378" start="2071" end="2086" title="opioid overdose" label="opioid overdose"/>
<link wikidata="Q6279182" start="2118" end="2126" title="seizures" label="seizures"/>
<link wikidata="Q3706669" start="2299" end="2304" title="Psychoactive drug" label="drugs"/>
<link wikidata="Q184651" start="2308" end="2313" title="toxin" label="toxin"/>
<link wikidata="Q45127" start="2383" end="2389" title="ICD-10" label="ICD-10"/>
<link wikidata="Q205972" start="2395" end="2421" title="Acute alcohol intoxication" label="Acute alcohol intoxication"/>
<link wikidata="Q153" start="2431" end="2444" title="Ethanol" label="Ethyl alcohol"/>
<link wikidata="Q47146337" start="2446" end="2453" title="alcohol (drug)" label="alcohol"/>
<link wikidata="Q3631225" start="2458" end="2476" title="Methanol poisoning" label="Methanol poisoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q3153687" start="2480" end="2505" title="Ethylene glycol poisoning" label="Ethylene glycol poisoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q17154378" start="2508" end="2523" title="Opioid overdose" label="Opioid overdose"/>
<link wikidata="Q847705" start="2538" end="2546" title="sedative" label="sedative"/>
<link wikidata="Q62962" start="2547" end="2555" title="hypnotic" label="hypnotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1184752" start="2566" end="2586" title="Barbiturate overdose" label="Barbiturate overdose"/>
<link wikidata="Q4890788" start="2598" end="2621" title="Benzodiazepine overdose" label="Benzodiazepine overdose"/>
<link wikidata="Q3085140" start="2678" end="2691" title="Ethchlorvynol" label="Ethchlorvynol"/>
<link wikidata="Q207920" start="2707" end="2710" title="gamma-Hydroxybutyric acid" label="GHB"/>
<link wikidata="Q414236" start="2715" end="2727" title="Glutethimide" label="Glutethimide"/>
<link wikidata="Q423912" start="2742" end="2754" title="Methaqualone" label="Methaqualone"/>
<link wikidata="Q243547" start="2759" end="2767" title="Ketamine" label="Ketamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q211036" start="2784" end="2793" title="stimulant" label="stimulant"/>
<link wikidata="Q5139133" start="2808" end="2824" title="Cocaine overdose" label="Cocaine overdose"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2836" end="2856" title="Amphetamine#Overdose" label="Amphetamine overdose"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2868" end="2892" title="Methamphetamine#Overdose" label="Methamphetamine overdose"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566" start="2909" end="2916" title="tobacco" label="tobacco"/>
<link wikidata="Q7030575" start="2926" end="2944" title="Nicotine poisoning" label="Nicotine poisoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639827" start="2961" end="2974" title="poly drug use" label="poly drug use"/>
<link wikidata="Q910944" start="3012" end="3022" title="Speedball (drug)" label="speedballs"/>
<link wikidata="Q4808101" start="3041" end="3058" title="Aspirin poisoning" label="Aspirin poisoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q2572879" start="3070" end="3091" title="Paracetamol poisoning" label="Paracetamol poisoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q2572879" start="3127" end="3147" title="Paracetamol toxicity" label="Paracetamol toxicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7841334" start="3159" end="3192" title="Tricyclic antidepressant overdose" label="Tricyclic antidepressant overdose"/>
<link wikidata="Q423927" start="3204" end="3221" title="Vitamin poisoning" label="Vitamin poisoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q839525" start="3224" end="3243" title="Pesticide poisoning" label="Pesticide poisoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q3153685" start="3253" end="3278" title="Organophosphate poisoning" label="Organophosphate poisoning"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3282" end="3285" title="DDT#Effects on human health" label="DDT"/>
<link wikidata="Q900521" start="3288" end="3296" title="Inhalant" label="Inhalant"/>
<link wikidata="Q21002488" start="3300" end="3316" title="Lithium toxicity" label="Lithium toxicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2066956" start="3391" end="3398" title="Potency (pharmacology)" label="potency"/>
<link wikidata="Q899641" start="3446" end="3450" title="Lean (drug)" label="lean"/>
<link wikidata="Q206978" start="3581" end="3587" title="Sprite (drink)" label="Sprite"/>
<link wikidata="Q896" start="3589" end="3601" title="Mountain Dew" label="Mountain Dew"/>
<link wikidata="Q9935" start="3605" end="3610" title="Fanta" label="Fanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q16639345" start="3641" end="3649" title="foam cup" label="foam cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q16980826" start="3675" end="3688" title="Jolly Rancher" label="Jolly Rancher"/>
<link wikidata="Q4736316" start="3884" end="3914" title="altered level of consciousness" label="altered level of consciousness"/>
<link wikidata="Q2390364" start="4033" end="4042" title="toxidrome" label="toxidrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q37525" start="4124" end="4131" title="glucose" label="glucose"/>
<link wikidata="Q48318" start="4133" end="4137" title="urea" label="urea"/>
<link wikidata="Q162908" start="4142" end="4153" title="electrolyte" label="electrolyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q57055" start="4156" end="4167" title="paracetamol" label="paracetamol"/>
<link wikidata="Q193572" start="4179" end="4189" title="salicylate" label="salicylate"/>
<link wikidata="Q10737" start="4351" end="4358" title="suicide" label="suicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q282902" start="4395" end="4403" title="naloxone" label="naloxone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369403" start="4407" end="4427" title="injection drug users" label="injection drug users"/>
<link wikidata="Q427523" start="4438" end="4444" title="opioid" label="opioid"/>
<link wikidata="Q583725" start="4503" end="4545" title="Centers for Disease Control and Prevention" label="Centers for Disease Control and Prevention"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="4868" end="4878" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259963" start="5285" end="5310" title="Supervised injection site" label="Supervised injection site"/>
<link wikidata="Q12199" start="5578" end="5586" title="HIV/AIDS" label="HIV/AIDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q131742" start="5591" end="5600" title="hepatitis" label="hepatitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2668011" start="5690" end="5694" title="ABC (medicine)" label="ABCs"/>
<link wikidata="Q648497" start="5808" end="5819" title="blood gases" label="blood gases"/>
<link wikidata="Q105688" start="5842" end="5849" title="hypoxia (medical)" label="hypoxic"/>
<link wikidata="Q191733" start="5980" end="5985" title="pulse" label="pulse"/>
<link wikidata="Q754250" start="5987" end="6003" title="respiratory rate" label="respiratory rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q82642" start="6005" end="6019" title="blood pressure" label="blood pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q79785" start="6035" end="6054" title="electrocardiography" label="electrocardiography"/>
<link wikidata="Q1450463" start="6080" end="6101" title="Poison control center" label="Poison control center"/>
<link wikidata="Q6806614" start="6107" end="6128" title="Medical toxicology" label="medical toxicologists"/>
<link wikidata="Q194168" start="6262" end="6270" title="antidote" label="antidote"/>
<link wikidata="Q282902" start="6322" end="6330" title="naloxone" label="naloxone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2026938" start="6351" end="6357" title="opiate" label="opiate"/>
<link wikidata="Q60168" start="6367" end="6373" title="heroin" label="heroin"/>
<link wikidata="Q81225" start="6377" end="6385" title="morphine" label="morphine"/>
<link wikidata="Q83871" start="6398" end="6412" title="benzodiazepine" label="benzodiazepine"/>
<link wikidata="Q421920" start="6456" end="6466" title="flumazenil" label="flumazenil"/>
<link wikidata="Q190878" start="6495" end="6513" title="activated charcoal" label="activated charcoal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755116" start="6620" end="6634" title="Gastric lavage" label="Gastric lavage"/>
<link wikidata="Q2755412" start="6636" end="6651" title="syrup of ipecac" label="syrup of ipecac"/>
<link wikidata="Q15474950" start="6657" end="6679" title="whole bowel irrigation" label="whole bowel irrigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3336854" start="7338" end="7375" title="National Center for Health Statistics" label="National Center for Health Statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q583725" start="7602" end="7644" title="Centers for Disease Control and Prevention" label="Centers for Disease Control and Prevention"/>
<link wikidata="Q427523" start="7913" end="7919" title="opioid" label="opioid"/>
<link wikidata="Q47146337" start="7998" end="8005" title="alcohol (drug)" label="alcohol"/>
<link wikidata="Q83871" start="8589" end="8604" title="benzodiazepines" label="benzodiazepines"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="313010" wikidata="Q605042" url="?curid=313010" title="Experiments in the Revival of Organisms">
<text>Experiments in the Revival of Organisms () is a 1940 documentary film directed by that purports to document Soviet research into the resuscitation of clinically dead organisms. The English version of the film begins with British scientist J. B. S. Haldane giving an introduction. 

The operations in the film, as well as the design of the heart-lung machine demonstrated in it, the autojektor, were done by Sergei Brukhonenko, whose work is said to have led to the first operations on heart valves. While the experiments shown are generally considered to have taken place, the legitimacy of the film itself is controversial.

==Synopsis==

The film depicts and discusses a series of medical experiments. The English version of the film begins with British scientist J. B. S. Haldane appearing and discussing how he has personally seen the procedures carried out in the film at an all-Russian physiological congress. The Russian version lacks this explanation. 

The experiments start with a dog&#x27;s heart, attached to a set of tubes to serve as substitutes for the great vessels. Using a system to supply it with blood, the heart beats in the same manner as if it were inside a living organism. The film then shows a lung in a tray, which is operated by bellows that oxygenate the blood being sent to the heart.

Following the lung scene, the audience is then shown the autojektor, a heart-lung machine, composed of a pair of linear diaphragm pumps, venous and arterial, exchanging oxygen with a water reservoir. It is then seen supplying a dog&#x27;s head with oxygenated blood. The head is presented with external stimuli, which it responds to. Finally, a dog is brought to clinical death (depicted primarily through an animated diagram of lung and heart activity) by draining the blood from its body, triggering cardiac arrest.

It is then left for ten minutes and connected to the autojektor, which gradually returns the blood into the animal&#x27;s circulation. After several minutes of restoring blood flow, the heart fibrillates, then resumes its normal rhythm. Respiration resumes shortly thereafter and the machine is disconnected. Over the ensuing ten days, the dog recovers from the procedure and continues living a healthy life. According to the film, several dogs were brought back to life using this method, including one which is the offspring of two parents who were also resuscitated using the machine.

== Background and production ==

In 1925, Sergei Brukhonenko demonstrated the autojektor to the Second Congress of Russian Pathologists in Moscow, where the device kept a dog&#x27;s head alive for an hour and 40 minutes, while it displayed various reflexes. The next year he presented further research to the Second Congress of Soviet Physiologists in Leningrad. 

The film was shot at the Institute of Experimental Physiology and Therapy in Moscow, and was directed by . The operations in the film are credited to Brukhonenko and Boris Levinskovsky. The film was initially produced for Russian audiences using a script written by Brukhonenko. It was one of three Soviet documentary films that Haldane was requested to supply commentary for in July 1942; the originally proposed English title was &quot;Experiments in Bringing the Dead to Life&quot;. It is unclear what happened to the other two films.

==Legacy==
The film was shown in London towards the end of 1942, and then to an audience of a thousand US scientists the next year in New York, at the Congress of American-Soviet Friendship. The audience considered that the film &quot;might move many supposed biological impossibilities into the realm of the possible&quot;. 

George Bernard Shaw wrote of Brukhonenko&#x27;s decapitation experiment: &quot;I am even tempted to have my own head cut off so that I can continue to dictate plays and books without being bothered by illness, without having to dress and undress, without having to eat, without having anything else to do other than to produce masterpieces of dramatic art and literature.&quot; The &quot;Canadian Medical Association Journal&quot;, writing in 1959 in its listing of medical films, described the film as &quot;[w]ell photographed and well arranged&quot; and stated it &quot;[held] interest throughout&quot;, though noted it was &quot;[i]nappropriate for the general public&quot;. Film historian Alisa Nasrtdinova, writing for the Gosfilmofond, praised the film, saying that the &quot;shocking scenes&quot; were shot with care.

The legitimacy of the film is controversial, with some commentators suggesting it is a recreation of the actual experiments, which were more modest. According to some scientists who claimed to have seen the experiments in the film, the severed dog head only survived for a few minutes when attached to the artificial heart, as opposed to the hours claimed in the film. Another source of skepticism are the dogs drained of blood and then brought back to life, as after 10 minutes of death they should have experienced serious brain damage. According to the institute’s records, the dogs only survived for a few days, not several years as the film claimed.

Brukhonenko developed a new version of the heart-lung machine demonstrated in the film, the autojektor, for use on human patients in the same year; it can be seen today on display at the Museum of Cardiovascular Surgery at the Bakulev Scientific Center of Cardiovascular Surgery in Russia. The autojektor was designed and constructed by Brukhonenko, whose work in the film is said to have led to the first operations on heart valves. It is similar to modern extracorporeal membrane oxygenation machines, as well as the systems commonly used for renal dialysis in modern nephrology. Brukhonenko was posthumously awarded the prestigious Lenin Prize.

==In popular culture==
* Polish poet Wisława Szymborska discussed watching the film in her poem &quot;Experiment&quot;.
* Metallica&#x27;s video for their song &quot;All Nightmare Long&quot; is partially based on the film, and shows Soviet scientists reanimating a dead cat.
* According to Neil Cicierega in the audio commentary for the 2016 Lemon Demon album &quot;Spirit Phone&quot;, the first track on the album (&quot;Lifetime Achievement Award&quot;) was originally titled &quot;Experiments in the Revival&quot;, in reference to this film.

==See also==
* Vladimir Demikhov
* &quot;Professor Dowell&#x27;s Head&quot;
* Robert J. White

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q93204" start="53" end="69" title="documentary film" label="documentary film"/>
<link wikidata="Q1989450" start="150" end="165" title="clinically dead" label="clinically dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q156333" start="239" end="255" title="J. B. S. Haldane" label="J. B. S. Haldane"/>
<link wikidata="Q2158319" start="407" end="425" title="Sergei Brukhonenko" label="Sergei Brukhonenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q215620" start="485" end="496" title="heart valve" label="heart valve"/>
<link wikidata="Q156333" start="766" end="782" title="J. B. S. Haldane" label="J. B. S. Haldane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072" start="1002" end="1007" title="heart" label="heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q5600417" start="1068" end="1081" title="great vessels" label="great vessels"/>
<link wikidata="Q552304" start="1387" end="1405" title="heart-lung machine" label="heart-lung machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q649056" start="1436" end="1450" title="diaphragm pump" label="diaphragm pump"/>
<link wikidata="Q1989450" start="1679" end="1693" title="clinical death" label="clinical death"/>
<link wikidata="Q4241510" start="1773" end="1805" title="exsanguination" label="draining the blood from its body"/>
<link wikidata="Q202837" start="1818" end="1832" title="cardiac arrest" label="cardiac arrest"/>
<link wikidata="Q12335414" start="2057" end="2070" title="sinus rhythm" label="normal rhythm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2158319" start="2466" end="2484" title="Sergei Brukhonenko" label="Sergei Brukhonenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q649" start="2563" end="2569" title="Moscow" label="Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q19185" start="3655" end="3674" title="George Bernard Shaw" label="George Bernard Shaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q5030320" start="4043" end="4079" title="Canadian Medical Association Journal" label="Canadian Medical Association Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3111411" start="4384" end="4396" title="Gosfilmofond" label="Gosfilmofond"/>
<link wikidata="Q4314610" start="5365" end="5416" title="Bakulev Scientific Center of Cardiovascular Surgery" label="Bakulev Scientific Center of Cardiovascular Surgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q215620" start="5558" end="5569" title="heart valve" label="heart valve"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385195" start="5596" end="5631" title="extracorporeal membrane oxygenation" label="extracorporeal membrane oxygenation"/>
<link wikidata="Q177635" start="5708" end="5718" title="nephrology" label="nephrology"/>
<link wikidata="Q51067" start="5773" end="5784" title="Lenin Prize" label="Lenin Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q42552" start="5824" end="5842" title="Wisława Szymborska" label="Wisława Szymborska"/>
<link wikidata="Q15920" start="5909" end="5918" title="Metallica" label="Metallica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751907" start="5953" end="5971" title="All Nightmare Long" label="All Nightmare Long"/>
<link wikidata="Q971949" start="6077" end="6091" title="Neil Cicierega" label="Neil Cicierega"/>
<link wikidata="Q19830585" start="6129" end="6140" title="Lemon Demon" label="Lemon Demon"/>
<link wikidata="Q104845048" start="6153" end="6165" title="Spirit Phone" label="Spirit Phone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334851" start="6348" end="6365" title="Vladimir Demikhov" label="Vladimir Demikhov"/>
<link wikidata="Q2499596" start="6374" end="6402" title="Professor Dowell&amp;#x27;s Head" label="Professor Dowell&amp;#x27;s Head"/>
<link wikidata="Q2125056" start="6411" end="6426" title="Robert J. White" label="Robert J. White"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="313012" wikidata="Q251859" url="?curid=313012" title="Manual command to line of sight">
<text>Manual command to line of sight (MCLOS or MACLOS) is a method for guiding guided missiles.

With an MCLOS missile, the operator must track the missile and the target simultaneously and guide the missile to the target. Typically the missile is steered with a joystick, and its path is observed through a periscope-type telescopic sight. The missiles are usually equipped with a magnesium flare in the base that automatically ignites on launch and allows the gunner to visually track the fast-moving missile in a manner similar in concept to tracer ammunition.

MCLOS requires considerable training and practice to master, since even a minor disruption in the gunner&#x27;s concentration would likely cause a miss. These guidance systems have marginal accuracy on tank-sized targets, even with perfect line-of-sight by the gunner, due to erratic flight paths requiring timely manual corrections. As demonstrated by the Israeli Army under fire from Soviet-armed Arab states, responding to the distinctive smoke puff of a missile launch with rapid manoeuvres and immediate counter-fire minimizes their accuracy, as very few anti-tank guided missile (ATGM) gunners maintain their concentration on a fast-moving tank for the entire flight time of the missile while under suppressing fire.

MCLOS guidance today has mostly been replaced by the easier-to-use semi-automatic command to line of sight (SACLOS), which allows the gunner to merely track the target with an optical sight (which guides the missile), rather than being forced to both visually track the target and fly the missile manually. The Vickers Vigilant attempted to solve this by using a &quot;velocity control&quot; method with an on-board gyroscope, rather than simpler &quot;acceleration control&quot;.

==Accuracy==
The accuracy achieved by &quot;MCLOS&quot; missiles is hard to put a firm figure on, since it is highly dependent on the skill of the operator and any distractions the operator has to contend with (such as being fired upon). Actual figures from combat operations suggest that it is much lower than SACLOS guided missiles.
* Six-Day War 1967 – AT-1 Snapper – limited use, only one tank kill is attributed with a hit probability of less than 25%.
* Vietnam War 1972 – fired by American troops, the French SS.11 – about 10% compared with over 50% for the SACLOS BGM-71 TOW.
* Yom Kippur War 1973 – AT-3 Sagger – between 25% at the start in well trained Egyptian hands and 2% at the end in less well trained Syrian hands once the threat was understood by Israeli tank crews.

==MCLOS missiles and guided bombs==
*AGM-12 Bullpup
*Azon
*Fritz X
*Henschel Hs 117, Hs 293
*Ruhrstahl X-4
*Wasserfall
*SS.11
*ENTAC
*Malkara
*Blowpipe missile
*3M6 Shmel
*9M14 Malyutka
*Vickers Vigilant
*Saab Rb 05
*SSM-A-23 Dart
*Swingfire (early models)

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q251859" start="0" end="31" title="Manual command to line of sight" label="Manual command to line of sight"/>
<link wikidata="Q251859" start="33" end="38" title="Manual command to line of sight" label="MCLOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q251859" start="42" end="48" title="Manual command to line of sight" label="MACLOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q974850" start="74" end="88" title="guided missile" label="guided missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q178805" start="258" end="266" title="joystick" label="joystick"/>
<link wikidata="Q660" start="377" end="386" title="magnesium" label="magnesium"/>
<link wikidata="Q628261" start="387" end="392" title="flare" label="flare"/>
<link wikidata="Q518184" start="540" end="557" title="tracer ammunition" label="tracer ammunition"/>
<link wikidata="Q282472" start="1120" end="1144" title="anti-tank guided missile" label="anti-tank guided missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q251892" start="1351" end="1390" title="semi-automatic command to line of sight" label="semi-automatic command to line of sight"/>
<link wikidata="Q4353667" start="1595" end="1611" title="Vickers Vigilant" label="Vickers Vigilant"/>
<link wikidata="Q49077" start="2103" end="2114" title="Six-Day War" label="Six-Day War"/>
<link wikidata="Q605356" start="2122" end="2134" title="AT-1 Snapper" label="AT-1 Snapper"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="2226" end="2237" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q292481" start="2282" end="2287" title="SS.11" label="SS.11"/>
<link wikidata="Q747313" start="2338" end="2348" title="BGM-71 TOW" label="BGM-71 TOW"/>
<link wikidata="Q49100" start="2352" end="2366" title="Yom Kippur War" label="Yom Kippur War"/>
<link wikidata="Q277443" start="2374" end="2385" title="AT-3 Sagger" label="AT-3 Sagger"/>
<link wikidata="Q292420" start="2588" end="2602" title="AGM-12 Bullpup" label="AGM-12 Bullpup"/>
<link wikidata="Q4033121" start="2604" end="2608" title="Azon" label="Azon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425385" start="2610" end="2617" title="Fritz X" label="Fritz X"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545104" start="2619" end="2634" title="Henschel Hs 117" label="Henschel Hs 117"/>
<link wikidata="Q586159" start="2636" end="2642" title="Henschel Hs 293" label="Hs 293"/>
<link wikidata="Q264828" start="2644" end="2657" title="Ruhrstahl X-4" label="Ruhrstahl X-4"/>
<link wikidata="Q620347" start="2659" end="2669" title="Wasserfall" label="Wasserfall"/>
<link wikidata="Q292481" start="2671" end="2676" title="SS.11" label="SS.11"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275380" start="2678" end="2683" title="ENTAC" label="ENTAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479834" start="2685" end="2692" title="Malkara (missile)" label="Malkara"/>
<link wikidata="Q774960" start="2694" end="2710" title="Blowpipe missile" label="Blowpipe missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q605356" start="2712" end="2721" title="3M6 Shmel" label="3M6 Shmel"/>
<link wikidata="Q277443" start="2723" end="2736" title="AT-3 Sagger" label="9M14 Malyutka"/>
<link wikidata="Q4353667" start="2738" end="2754" title="Vickers Vigilant" label="Vickers Vigilant"/>
<link wikidata="Q7299889" start="2761" end="2766" title="Rb 05" label="Rb 05"/>
<link wikidata="Q48844048" start="2768" end="2781" title="SSM-A-23 Dart" label="SSM-A-23 Dart"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630813" start="2783" end="2792" title="Swingfire" label="Swingfire"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="313013" wikidata="Q862257" url="?curid=313013" title="King Philip's War">
<text>King Philip&#x27;s War (sometimes called the First Indian War, Metacom&#x27;s War, Metacomet&#x27;s War, Pometacomet&#x27;s Rebellion, or Metacom&#x27;s Rebellion) was an armed conflict in 1675–1676 between a group of indigenous peoples of the Northeastern Woodlands against the English New England Colonies and their indigenous allies. The war is named for Metacom (alternatively Metacomet), the Pokanoket chief and sachem of the Wampanoag who had adopted the English name Philip because of the friendly relations between his father Massasoit and the Plymouth Colony. The war continued in the most northern reaches of New England until the signing of the Treaty of Casco Bay on April 12, 1678.

Massasoit had maintained a long-standing alliance with the colonists and Metacom (), his younger son, became the tribal chief in 1662 after his father&#x27;s death. Metacom, however, forsook his father&#x27;s alliance between the Wampanoags and the colonists after repeated violations by the latter. The colonists insisted that the 1671 peace agreement should include the surrender of Native guns; then three Wampanoags were hanged in Plymouth Colony in 1675 for the murder of another Wampanoag, which increased tensions. Native raiding parties attacked homesteads and villages throughout Massachusetts, Rhode Island, Connecticut, and Maine over the next six months, and the colonial militia retaliated. The colonies assembled the largest army that New England had yet mustered, consisting of 1,000 militia and 150 Native allies. Governor Josiah Winslow marshaled them to attack the Narragansetts in November 1675. They attacked and burned Native villages throughout Rhode Island territory, culminating with the attack on the Narragansetts&#x27; main fort in the Great Swamp Fight. An estimated 600 Narragansetts were killed, and their coalition was taken over by Narragansett sachem Canonchet. They pushed back the borders of the Massachusetts Bay, Plymouth, and Rhode Island colonies, burning towns as they went, including Providence in March 1676. However, the colonial militia overwhelmed the Native coalition. By the end of the war, the Wampanoags and their Narragansett allies were almost completely destroyed. On August 12, 1676, Metacom fled to Mount Hope where he was killed by the militia.

The war was the greatest calamity in seventeenth-century New England and is considered by many to be the deadliest war in Colonial American history. In the space of little more than a year, 12 of the region&#x27;s towns were destroyed and many more were damaged, the economy of the Plymouth and Rhode Island Colonies was ruined and their population was decimated, losing one-tenth of all men available for military service. More than half of New England&#x27;s towns were involved in the conflict. Hundreds of Wampanoags and their allies were publicly executed or enslaved, and the Wampanoags were left effectively landless.

King Philip&#x27;s War was the Native last-dich effort to make the colonist authority unrecognized. However, it turned out beginning the development of an independent American identity. The New England colonists faced their enemies without support from any European government or military, and this began to give them a group identity separate and distinct from Britain.

==Historical context==

The early Plymouth Colony claimed preemptive rights to the entirety of Wampanoag country through early alliances with some Native leaders, like Squanto (Tisquantam) and Massasoit (Ousamequin). However, English claim to the land relied entirely on misinterpretations of Native leadership, which viewed Ousamequin as the Native &quot;king&quot; of the land, despite the existence of other territorial claims under local leaders like Namumpum (Weetamoo). 

Subsequent colonists founded Salem, Boston, and many small towns around Massachusetts Bay between 1628 and 1640, during a time of increased English immigration. The colonists progressively expanded throughout the territories of the several Algonquian-speaking tribes in the region. Prior to King Philip&#x27;s War, tensions fluctuated between Native tribes and the colonists. The Narragansetts fought alongside the English colonists in the Pequot War and participated in the Mystic massacre but were horrified afterwards. With the defeat of the Pequots, Narragansett leader Miantonomoh gathered groups of Algonquians together in the 1640s in the hope that they could face the colonists together. He was captured by colonists in Connecticut and executed by Mohegan sachem Uncas, shattering the coalition. 

The Rhode Island, Plymouth, Massachusetts Bay, Connecticut, and New Haven colonies each developed separate relations with the Wampanoags, Nipmucs, Narragansetts, Mohegans, Pequots, and other tribes of New England, whose territories historically had differing boundaries. Many of the neighboring tribes had been traditional competitors and enemies. As the colonial population increased, the New Englanders expanded their settlements along the region&#x27;s coastal plain and up the Connecticut River valley. By 1675, they had established a few small towns in the interior between Boston and the Connecticut River settlements.

Meanwhile, with the death of Ousamequin, Native diplomacy with the settlers fell apart, as colonists tried negotiating with Wamsutta in the same role they did with Ousamequin, but slighted female Native rulers (saunkswkas) of the land and erroneously claimed Sakonnet and Pocasset land as freely given. This created further tension between colonists and Natives, as colonial Puritan beliefs did not recognize female leaders as legitimate, despite the great power they held within Native societies. On one such occasion of land dispute, saunkswkas Weetamoo and Awashonks appeared in a colonial court to protest illegitimate deeds signed by Wamsutta that gave colonists lands that were not his to give. This conflict strengthened complaints among natives while simultaneously bolstering Plymouth claims to the land and served as an omen for conflict that was yet to come. 

Eventually, the Wampanoag tribe under Metacomet&#x27;s leadership entered into an agreement with the Plymouth Colony and believed that they could rely on the colony for protection. However, in the decades preceding the war, it became clear to them that the treaty did not mean that the Colonists were not allowed to settle in new territories.

===Failure of diplomacy===
Metacom became sachem of the Pokanoket and Grand Sachem of the Wampanoag Confederacy in 1662 after the death of his older brother Grand Sachem Wamsutta (called &quot;Alexander&quot; by the colonists), who had succeeded their father Massasoit (d. 1661) as chief. Metacom was well known to the colonists before his ascension as paramount chief to the Wampanoags. But, he ultimately distrusted the colonists.

Conflict increased between the Wampanoags and settlers due to the continual intrusion of settlers&#x27; livestock onto Wampanoag farms and food stores, with few colonists taking more than half-hearted steps to prevent this in spite of regular complaints by the Wampanoags. Another grievance held by many Wampanoags was the attempts by colonial missionaries to convert them to Christianity; among those who expressed such grievances was Metacom himself, who declared that he and other Wampanoag leaders possessed a great fear that any of their people &quot;should be called or forced to be Christian Indians&quot;. Metacom began negotiating with the other Algonquian tribes against the Plymouth Colony in the winter of 1674–1675, soon after the death of his father and, within a year, of his brother Wamsutta.

However, conflict abounded, even amidst tribes and families. Two months before the outbreak of the war, Mammanuah, the son of Awashonks, leader of the Sakonnet, had signed a deed granting English colonizers the right to all the land from Pocasset Neck south to the sea, without first seeking his mother&#x27;s approval. 

At the start of the planting season, conflict erupted when new settlers began to plant on lands tenured under the rule of Awashonks. Mammanuah was confronted by his mother and other members of his tribe. He was stripped of his title by his relatives but allowed to leave with his life. Mammanuah sought restitution at Plymouth, where his title was reinstated by colonial authorities who had noticeably ulterior motives for wanting the land deed to remain valid.

Internal conflict between native tribes and their families was motivated by competing concepts of colonial patrilineal rule and the existing matrilineal rule of many native women. As conflict mounted, native tribes turned against other tribes as well as their own people, with families taking sides across different lines.

===Population===
The population of New England colonists totaled about 65,000 people. They lived in 110 towns, of which 64 were in the Massachusetts Bay colony, which then included the southwestern portion of Maine and southern New Hampshire until 1679. The towns had about 16,000 men of military age who were almost all part of the militia, as universal training was prevalent in all colonial New England towns. Many towns had built strong garrison houses for defense, and others had stockades enclosing most of the houses. All of these were strengthened as the war progressed. Some poorly populated towns were abandoned if they did not have enough men to defend them.

Each town had local militias based on all eligible men who had to supply their own arms. Only those who were too old, too young, disabled, or clergy were excused from military service. The militias were usually only minimally trained and initially did relatively poorly against the warring Natives, until more effective training and tactics could be devised. Joint forces of militia volunteers and volunteer indigenous allies were found to be the most effective. The indigenous allies of the colonists numbered about 1,000 from the Mohegans and Praying Indians, with about 200 warriors.

By 1676, the regional indigenous population had decreased to about 10,000 (exact numbers are unavailable) largely because of epidemics. These included about 4,000 Narragansetts of western Rhode Island and eastern Connecticut, 2,400 Nipmucs of central and western Massachusetts, and 2,400 combined in the Massachusett and Pawtucket tribes living around Massachusetts Bay and extending northwest to Maine. The Wampanoags and Pokanokets of Plymouth and eastern Rhode Island are thought to have numbered fewer than 1,000. About one in four were considered to be warriors. By then, the Natives had almost universally adopted steel knives, tomahawks, and flintlock muskets as their weapons. The various tribes had no common government. They had distinct cultures and often warred among themselves, although they all spoke related languages from the Algonquian family.

===The trial===
John Sassamon was a Native convert to Christianity, commonly referred to as a &quot;praying Indian&quot;. He played a key role as a cultural mediator, negotiating with both colonists and Natives while belonging to neither party. He was an early graduate of Harvard College and served as a translator and adviser to Metacomet. He reported to the governor of Plymouth Colony that Metacomet planned to gather allies for Native attacks on widely dispersed colonial settlements.

Metacomet was brought before a public court, where court officials admitted that they had no proof but warned that they would confiscate Wampanoag land and guns if they had any further reports that he was conspiring to start a war. Not long after, Sassamon&#x27;s body was found in the ice-covered Assawompset Pond, and Plymouth Colony officials arrested three Wampanoags on the testimony of a Native witness, including one of Metacomet&#x27;s counselors. The jury, which consisted of twelve colonists and six indigenous elders, convicted the men of Sassamon&#x27;s murder, and they were executed by hanging on June 8, 1675 (O.S.) at Plymouth.

Most importantly, the pond where Sassamon’s body was found in was at the center of a heated land claim, under which Plymouth men were attempting to purchase vast swaths of land at Nemasket. His death became the necessary pretext for Plymouth Colony’s arrest of a counselor tied to suppressing the purchasing of land around Nemasket. Under captivity, the counselor and block to the signing of a land grant for the Plymouth Colony, Tobias, and the other arrested men were forced to sign the rights away of all of their land at Nemasket. With Sassamon dead and the land deed signed, the land surrounding the pond became formally acknowledged as part of the town Middlebury and was open for English settlement. With the execution of the men convicted of Sassamon’s murder, the proverbial first shots of the war were fired.

==Southern theater, 1675==

=== Raid on Swansea ===
A band of Pokanokets attacked several isolated homesteads in the small Plymouth colony settlement of Swansea on June 20, 1675, likely against Phillip&#x27;s approval. They burned several homes. On June 23, a local boy saw a Pokanoket in front of his home and was instructed to fire, killing him. Pokanokets became enraged and on June 24 launched a full-scale attack on Swansea, killing three. On June 27, 1675, a full eclipse of the moon occurred in the New England area, and various tribes in New England thought it a good omen for attacking the colonists. Officials from the Plymouth and Massachusetts Bay colonies responded quickly to the attacks on Swansea; on June 28, they sent a punitive military expedition that destroyed the Wampanoag town at Mount Hope in Bristol, Rhode Island.

The war quickly spread and soon involved the Podunk and Nipmuc tribes. During the summer of 1675, the Natives attacked at Middleborough and Dartmouth, Massachusetts (July 8), Mendon, Massachusetts (July 14), Brookfield, Massachusetts (August 2), and Lancaster, Massachusetts (August 9). In early September, they attacked Deerfield, Hadley, and Northfield, Massachusetts.

=== Siege of Brookfield ===
Wheeler&#x27;s Surprise and the ensuing Siege of Brookfield were fought in August 1675, between Nipmucs under Muttawmp and the colonists of Massachusetts Bay under the command of Thomas Wheeler and Captain Edward Hutchinson. The battle consisted of an initial ambush on August 2, 1675 by the Nipmucs against Wheeler&#x27;s unsuspecting party. Eight men from Wheeler&#x27;s company died during the ambush: Zechariah Phillips of Boston, Timothy Farlow of Billerica, Edward Coleborn of Chelmsford, Samuel Smedly of Concord, Shadrach Hapgood of Sudbury, Sergeant Eyres, Sergeant Prichard, and Corporal Coy of Brookfield. Following the ambush was an attack on Brookfield, Massachusetts, and the consequent besieging of the remains of the colonial force. The Nipmucs harried the settlers for two days, until they were driven off by a newly arrived force of colonial soldiers under the command of Major Simon Willard. The siege took place at Ayers&#x27; Garrison in West Brookfield, but the location of the initial ambush was a subject of extensive controversy among historians in the late nineteenth century.

The New England Confederation consisted of the Massachusetts Bay Colony, Plymouth Colony, New Haven Colony, and Connecticut Colony; they declared war on the Natives on September 9, 1675. The Colony of Rhode Island and Providence Plantations tried to remain neutral, but much of the war was fought on Rhode Island soil; Providence and Warwick suffered extensive damage from the Natives.

The next colonial expedition was to recover crops from abandoned fields along the Connecticut River for the coming winter and included almost 100 farmers and militia, plus teamsters to drive the wagons.

=== Battle of Bloody Brook ===
The Battle of Bloody Brook was fought on September 12, 1675, between militia from the Massachusetts Bay Colony and a band of Natives led by Nipmuc sachem Muttawmp. The Natives ambushed colonists escorting a train of wagons carrying the harvest from Deerfield to Hadley. They killed at least 40 militia men and 17 teamsters out of a company that included 79 militia.

=== Attack on Springfield===
The Natives next attacked Springfield, Massachusetts on October 5, 1675, the Connecticut River&#x27;s largest settlement at the time. They burned to the ground nearly all of Springfield&#x27;s buildings, including the town&#x27;s grist mill. Most of the residents who escaped unharmed took cover at the house of Miles Morgan, a resident who had constructed one of the settlement&#x27;s few fortified blockhouses. An indigenous servant who worked for Morgan managed to escape and alerted the Massachusetts Bay troops under the command of Major Samuel Appleton, who broke through to Springfield and drove off the attackers.

=== Great Swamp Massacre===

The Narragansetts endeavored to remain neutral in the war, driven partly by their relationship with Roger Williams. They were not directly involved in the war, but they had sheltered many of the Wampanoag fighters, women, and children, and there were questions about some of their warriors participating in several Native attacks. In October 1675, Narraganset sachem Canonchet signed a &quot;Treaty of Neutrality&quot; with the Massachusetts Bay Colony, but the colonists&#x27; distrust remained.

On November 2, Plymouth Colony Governor Josiah Winslow led a combined force of Plymouth, Massachusetts, and Connecticut militia against the Narragansett tribe. The colonists distrusted the tribe and their various alliances. As the colonial forces went through Rhode Island, they found and burned several Native towns which had been abandoned by the Narragansetts, who had retreated to a massive fort in a frozen swamp. The cold weather in December froze the swamp so that it was relatively easy to traverse. The colonial force found the Narragansett fort on December 19, 1675 near South Kingstown, Rhode Island. About 1,000 troops attacked, including about 150 Pequot and Mohegan allies. It is believed that the militia killed about 600 Narragansetts. They burned the fort (occupying over of land) and destroyed most of the tribe&#x27;s winter stores.

Most of the Narragansett warriors escaped into the frozen swamp. The colonists lost about 70 men killed and nearly 150 more wounded, including many of their officers. The surviving militia returned to their homes, lacking supplies for an extended campaign. The nearby towns in Rhode Island provided care for the wounded until they could return to their homes.

In the spring of 1676, the Narragansetts counterattacked under Canonchet, assembling an army of 2,000 men. They burned Providence, including Roger William&#x27;s house. The Narragansetts were finally defeated when Canonchet was captured and executed in April 1676; then female sachem Queen Quaiapen and approximately 138 supporters were killed in an ambush.

=== Mohawk intervention ===
In December 1675, Metacomet established a winter camp in Schaghticoke, New York. His reason for moving into New York has been attributed to a desire to enlist Mohawk aid in the conflict. New York was a non-belligerent, but Governor Edmund Andros was nonetheless concerned at the arrival of the Wampanoag sachem. Either with Andros&#x27; sanction, or of their own accord, the Mohawk—traditional rivals of the Algonquian people—launched a surprise assault against a 500-warrior band under Metacomet&#x27;s command the following February. The &quot;coup de main&quot; resulted in the death of between 70 and 460 of the Wampanoags. Metacomet withdrew to New England, pursued by Mohawk forces who attacked Algonquian settlements and ambushed their supply parties.

Over the next several months, fear of Mohawk attack led some Wampanoags to surrender to the colonists, and one historian described the decision of the Mohawks to engage Metacomet&#x27;s forces as &quot;the blow that lost the war for Philip&quot;.

===Native campaign===
Natives attacked and destroyed more settlements throughout the winter of 1675–1676 in their effort to annihilate the colonists. They attacked homes in Andover, Bridgewater, Chelmsford, Groton, Lancaster, Marlborough, Medfield, Medford, Portland, Providence, Rehoboth, Scituate, Seekonk, Simsbury, Sudbury, Suffield, Taunton, Warwick, Weymouth, and Wrentham, including Norfolk and Plainville. 

In the first months of the war, Wampanoags employed the strategy of tactical retreat. As English colonists marched through Native settlements, many Natives sought safety by hiding in the swamps surrounding Nemasket. Led by Weetamoo, mothers and their children were marched silently away from encapments and sought protection in the thickest part of the swamps. In their wake, settled along the outskirts of emptied Native villages, Wampanoag protectors ambushed English troops as they marched through Rhode Island. Utlizing kinship networks, the Wampanoags and their allied tribes spread word of English locations, encampments, and attacks in order to warn other resisting Native Americans. Weetamoo later formed an alliance at Narragansett with the Nipmuc in order to create a larger Native cause.

The account written and published by Mary Rowlandson after the war gives a colonial captive&#x27;s perspective on the conflict. Rowlandson was captured by Nipmucs and led miles through surrounding wilderness, keeping her captured through her lack of knowledge of the land. Rowlandson was &#x27;gifted&#x27; to Weetamoo and her husband Quinnapin following their wedding, as a gift for their role in securing Native alliances and allies in the war. Rowlandson’s captivity narrative and the following explosion of the Puritan captivity narrative genre, is largely where historical information regarding the inner workings of Native society comes from, as primary sources from white colonial entrepreneurs in the New World. In fact, Rowlandson’s captivity narrative is largely the basis of many understanding’s about Weetamoo’s role in the war. 

== Southern theater, 1676 ==

=== Lancaster raid ===

The Lancaster raid in February 1676 was a Native attack on the community of Lancaster, Massachusetts. Philip led a force of 1,500 Wampanoag, Nipmuc, and Narragansett men in a dawn attack on the isolated village, which then included the neighboring communities of Bolton and Clinton. They attacked five fortified houses. They set fire to the house of Rev. Joseph Rowlandson and slaughtered most of its occupants—more than 30 people. Rowlandson&#x27;s wife Mary was taken prisoner, and afterward wrote a best-selling narrative of her experiences. Many of the community&#x27;s other houses were destroyed before the Natives retreated northward.

=== Plymouth Plantation Campaign ===

The spring of 1676 marked the high point for the combined tribes when they attacked Plymouth Plantation on March 12. The town withstood the assault, but the Natives had demonstrated their ability to penetrate deep into colonial territory. They attacked three more settlements; Longmeadow (near Springfield), Marlborough, and Simsbury were attacked two weeks later. They killed Captain Pierce and a company of Massachusetts soldiers between Pawtucket and the Blackstone&#x27;s settlement. They tortured several colonial men to death and buried them at Nine Men&#x27;s Misery in Cumberland as part of their ritual torture of enemies. They also burned the settlement of Providence to the ground on March 29. At the same time, a small band of Natives infiltrated and burned part of Springfield while the militia was away.
The settlements within the Colony of Rhode Island became a literal island colony for a time as the settlements at Providence and Warwick were sacked and burned, and the residents were driven to Newport and Portsmouth on Rhode Island. The Connecticut River towns had thousands of acres of cultivated crop land known as the bread basket of New England, but they had to limit their plantings and work in large armed groups for self-protection. Towns such as Springfield, Hatfield, Hadley, and Northampton, Massachusetts fortified themselves, reinforced their militias, and held their ground, though attacked several times. The small towns of Northfield, Deerfield, and several others were abandoned as the surviving settlers retreated to the larger towns. The towns of the Connecticut colony were largely unharmed in the war, although more than 100 Connecticut militia died in their support of the other colonies.

=== Sudbury Fight ===
The Sudbury Fight took place in Sudbury, Massachusetts on April 21, 1676. The town was surprised by Native raiders at dawn, who besieged a local garrison house and burned several unoccupied homes and farms. Reinforcements that arrived from nearby towns were drawn into ambushes by the Natives; Captain Samuel Wadsworth lost his life and half of a 70-man militia in such an ambush. It was the last major victory by the indigenous coalition of the war.

=== Peskeompscut-Wissantinnewag Massacre ===
On May 19, 1676, Captain William Turner of the Massachusetts Militia and about 150 militia volunteers (mostly minimally trained farmers) attacked a Native fishing camp at Peskeopscut on the Connecticut River now called Turners Falls, Massachusetts. The colonists killed approximately 200 Natives. The warriors were camped upstream at Smeads Island. Turner and nearly 40 of the militia were killed during the return from the falls.

The colonists defeated an attack at Hadley on June 12, 1676 with the help of their Mohegan allies, scattering most of the survivors into New Hampshire and farther north. Later that month, a force of 250 Natives was routed near Marlborough, Massachusetts. Combined forces of colonial volunteers and their indigenous allies continued to attack, kill, capture, or disperse bands of Narragansetts, Nipmucs, and Wampanoags as they tried to plant crops or return to their traditional locations. The colonists granted amnesty to those who surrendered or who were captured and showed that they had not participated in the conflict. Captives who had participated in attacks on the many settlements were hanged, enslaved, or put to indentured servitude, depending upon the colony involved.

=== Second Battle of Nipsachuck ===
The Second Battle of Nipsachuck occurred on July 2, 1676 and included a rare use of a cavalry charge by the English colonists. In the summer of 1676, a band of over 100 Narragansetts led by female sachem Quaiapen returned to northern Rhode Island, apparently seeking to recover cached seed corn for planting. They were attacked by a force of 400, composed of 300 Connecticut colonial militia and about 100 Mohegan and Pequot warriors, and Quaiapen was killed along with the leaders as they sought refuge in Mattekonnit (Mattity) Swamp in North Smithfield, while the remainder of the survivors were sold into slavery.

=== Capture at Mount Hope ===
Metacomet&#x27;s allies began to desert him, and more than 400 had surrendered to the colonists by early July. Metacomet took refuge back at Assawompset Pond, the Wampanoag settlement near which John Sassamon had been found dead before the outset of the war, but the colonists formed raiding parties with indigenous allies, and he retreated southwest towards Rhode Island. Metacomet was killed by one of these teams when Captain Benjamin Church and Captain Josiah Standish of the Plymouth Colony militia tracked him to Mount Hope in Bristol, Rhode Island. He was shot and killed by an Indian named John Alderman on August 12, 1676. Metacomet&#x27;s corpse was beheaded then chopped into pieces. His head was displayed in Plymouth for a generation, which was commonly done in Britain to traitors; Wampanaog memory holds that the skull was later taken by tribal members and secretly buried.

Captain Church and his soldiers captured Pocasset war chief Anawan on August 28, 1676, at Anawan Rock in Rehoboth, Massachusetts. He was an old man at the time, though a chief captain of Metacomet. His capture marked the final event in King Philip&#x27;s War, as he was also beheaded.

== Northern Theater (Maine and Acadia) ==
Before the outbreak of war, English settlers in Maine and New Hampshire lived peaceably with their Wabanaki neighbors. Colonists engaged in fishing, harvesting timber, and trade with the Natives. By 1657, English towns and trading posts stretched along the coast eastward to the Kennebec River. These communities were scattered and lacked fortifications. The defenseless posture of English settlements reflected the amicable relationship between Wabanakis and colonists up to that time.

Upon hearing news of the Wampanoag attack on Swansea, colonists in York marched up the Kennebec River in June 1675 and demanded that Wabanakis turn over their guns and ammunition as a sign of goodwill. The Wabanakis began raiding trading posts and attacking settlers. The Wabanakis decimate the colonial settlements east of the Saco River under the leadership of Androscoggin sagamore Mogg Hegon and Penobscot sagamore Madockawando. The Indians made three major attacks in 1675, 1676, and 1677, most of which led to a massive colonial response. Richard Waldron and Charles Frost led the colonial forces in the northern region. Waldron sent forces that attacked the Mi&#x27;kmaq in Acadia.

Mogg Hegon repeatedly attacked towns such as Black Point (Scarborough), Wells, and Damariscove, building a flotilla out of the approximately 40 sloops and a dozen 30-ton ships previously armed by militia. Maine&#x27;s fishing industry was completely destroyed by the Wabanaki flotilla. Records from Salem record 20 ketches stolen and destroyed in one raid in Maine.

The Wabanakis sued for peace in 1677, and the fighting ended with the Treaty of Casco (1678). The treaty allowed settlers to return to Maine if each English family paid the Wabanakis a peck of corn each year.

By the end of the war, approximately 400 settlers died, Maine&#x27;s fishing economy was devastated, and the Natives maintained power in eastern and northern Maine. There is not an accurate account of the number of Natives who died, but it is thought to be between 100 and 300.

==Dedham as a center of colonial operations==
During the war, men from Dedham went off to fight and several died. They included Robert Hinsdale, his four sons, and Jonathan Plympton who died at the Battle of Bloody Brook. John Plympton was burned at the stake after being marched to Canada with Quentin Stockwell. 

Zachariah Smith was passing through Dedham on April 12, 1671 when he stopped at the home of Caleb Church in the &quot;sawmill settlement&quot; on the banks of the Neponset River. The next morning, a group of praying Indians found him shot dead, and suspicion fell on a group on Nipmucs who were heading south to Providence. This was the &quot;first actual outrage of King Phillip&#x27;s War&quot;. One of the Nipmucs, a son of Matoonas, was found guilty and hanged on Boston Common, and his head was impaled on a pike at the end of the gallows. Dedham then readied its cannon in preparation for an attack that never came.

After the raid on Swansea, the colony ordered the militias of several towns to have 100 soldiers ready to march out on an hour&#x27;s notice. Captain Daniel Henchmen took command of the men and left Boston on June 26, 1675. They arrived in Dedham by nightfall and the troops became worried by an eclipse of the moon, which they took as a bad omen. Some claimed to see Indian bows in the moon. Dedham was largely spared from the fighting and was not attacked, but they did build a fortification and offered tax cuts to men who joined the cavalry.

Plymouth Colony governor Josiah Winslow and Captain Benjamin Church rode from Boston to Dedham to take charge of the 465 soldiers and 275 cavalry assembling there and together departed on December 8, 1675 for the Great Swamp Fight. When the commanders arrived, they also found &quot;a vast assortment of teamsters, volunteers, servants, service personnel, and hangers-on&quot;.

Phillip&#x27;s chief advisor Pumham was captured in Dedham on July 25, 1676. Several Christian Indians had seen his band in the woods, nearly starved to death. Captain Samuel Hunting led 36 men from Dedham and Medfield and joined 90 Indians on a hunt to find them. A total of 15 of the enemy were killed and 35 were captured. Pumham was so wounded that he could barely stand, but he grabbed hold of an English soldier and would have killed him had not one of the settler&#x27;s compatriots come to his rescue.

==Aftermath==

=== Southern New England ===
The war in southern New England largely ended with Metacom&#x27;s death. More than 1,000 colonists and 3,000 Natives had died. More than half of all New England towns were attacked by Native warriors, and many were completely destroyed. Hundreds of Native captives were enslaved. Some women and children were sold as indentured servants or slaves to the households of English settlers, but the majority, including Metacom&#x27;s son and most adult men, were transported to slave markets in Bermuda, Barbados, Jamaica, Spain, Portugal, Madeira, and the Azores. Other survivors joined western and northern tribes and refugee communities as captives or tribal members. Some of the Native refugees returned to southern New England. The Narragansetts, Wampanoags, Podunks, Nipmucks suffered substantial losses, several smaller bands were virtually eliminated as organized bands.

Around a thousand Christian Indians survived the war, and after being released from captivity on Deer Island resettled first Natick and then three other &quot;Praying Towns&quot;. These groups ironically increased their autonomy and provincial laws barred the sale of their lands without permission of the General Court. Natick remained by far the largest, with about thirty families in 1699, compared with five to ten in Chabanakongkomun, Hassanamisco, and Punkapoag. But between 1720 and 1750, Natick rapidly became a white town, as the Indians invited the Anglo minister Oliver Peabody to take the pulpit, and he was followed by a growing tide of Anglo settlers who treated the Indians with contempt and abuse. The result was a native exodus, as their numbers in Natick dropped from 160 in 1754 to only 37 in 1764. But they did not go far: most if not all remained in the area between Worcester and Boston, and for generations remained in close contact with relatives in the region.

The Colony of Rhode Island was devastated by the war, as its principal city Providence was destroyed. Nevertheless, the Rhode Island legislature issued a formal rebuke to Connecticut Governor John Winthrop on October 26, scarcely six months after the burning of the city—although Winthrop had died. The &quot;official letter&quot; places blame squarely on the United Colonies of New England for causing the war by provoking the Narragansetts.

Sir Edmund Andros had been appointed governor of New York in 1674 by the Duke of York, who claimed that his authority extended as far north as Maine&#x27;s northern boundary. He negotiated a treaty with some of the northern Native bands in Maine on April 12, 1678. Metacom&#x27;s Pennacook allies had made a separate peace with the colonists as the result of early battles that are sometimes identified as part of King Philip&#x27;s War. The tribe nevertheless lost members and eventually its identity as the result of the war.

==== Plymouth Colony ====
Plymouth Colony lost close to eight percent of its adult male population and a smaller percentage of women and children to Native attacks and other causes associated with the war. Indigenous losses were much greater, with about 2,000 men killed in the war, more than 3,000 dying of sickness or starvation. Various historians have estimated that several hundred to over one-thousand Native captives were sold into slavery.

But many Natives and their communities survived the war, especially on Cape Cod where the war had few direct effects. After 1695, Plymouth’s incorporation into Massachusetts encouraged expansion and creation of English settlements, putting new pressures on Native resources and driving the consolidation of their villages. Clusters of Indian communities developed: Teticut and Assawompsett, near Pembroke and Middleborough in Plymouth County, around Dartmouth along Buzzard’s Bay in Bristol County, along the upper and middle Cape, with around 500 Indians in four villages in 1693, and at Herring Pond and Mashpee between Plymouth and the lower Cape, with around 500 people in 1698. During the first half of the eighteenth century, nearly all of the remaining Indians on the Cape would move to Mashpee, making it the largest community on the mainland, and the other three clusters would shrink to just a few families.

=== Northern New England ===
Conflict continued for decades in Maine, New Hampshire, and northern Massachusetts. There were six wars over the next 74 years between New France and New England, along with their respective indigenous allies, starting with King William&#x27;s War in 1689. (See French and Indian Wars, Father Rale&#x27;s War, and Father Le Loutre&#x27;s War.) The conflict in northern New England was largely over the border between New England and Acadia, which New France defined as the Kennebec River in southern Maine. Many colonists from northeastern Maine and Massachusetts temporarily relocated to larger towns in Massachusetts and New Hampshire to avoid Wabanaki raids.

==See also==
* American Indian Wars
* Colonial American military history
* Irish Donation of 1676
* Kieft&#x27;s War
* List of Indian massacres
*&quot;Eulogy on King Phillip&quot; by William Apess, 1836

== Explanatory notes ==
== Citations ==
==Works cited==
* 

== General bibliography ==
===Primary sources===
* 
* – John Easton&#x27;s account first published
* 
* 
* 
* 

===Secondary sources===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

== Further reading ==
* 

==External links==

* Martin, Susan S. (ed.). &quot;Edward Randolph on the Causes of the King Philip&#x27;s War (1685)&quot;. New England Indians.
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q862257" start="0" end="22" title="King Philip&amp;#x27;s War" label="King Philip&amp;#x27;s War"/>
<link wikidata="Q862257" start="45" end="61" title="King Philip&amp;#x27;s War" label="First Indian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q862257" start="63" end="81" title="King Philip&amp;#x27;s War" label="Metacom&amp;#x27;s War"/>
<link wikidata="Q862257" start="83" end="103" title="King Philip&amp;#x27;s War" label="Metacomet&amp;#x27;s War"/>
<link wikidata="Q862257" start="105" end="133" title="King Philip&amp;#x27;s War" label="Pometacomet&amp;#x27;s Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q862257" start="138" end="162" title="King Philip&amp;#x27;s War" label="Metacom&amp;#x27;s Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q841334" start="218" end="266" title="indigenous peoples of the Northeastern Woodlands" label="indigenous peoples of the Northeastern Woodlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q7007213" start="287" end="307" title="New England Colonies" label="New England Colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q729648" start="358" end="365" title="Metacomet" label="Metacom"/>
<link wikidata="Q151227" start="397" end="406" title="Pokanoket" label="Pokanoket"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433209" start="417" end="423" title="sachem" label="sachem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047264" start="431" end="440" title="Wampanoag" label="Wampanoag"/>
<link wikidata="Q739194" start="534" end="543" title="Massasoit" label="Massasoit"/>
<link wikidata="Q126195" start="552" end="567" title="Plymouth Colony" label="Plymouth Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q7837007" start="656" end="675" title="Treaty of Casco (1678)" label="Treaty of Casco Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q126195" start="1131" end="1146" title="Plymouth Colony" label="Plymouth Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q16863860" start="1535" end="1549" title="Josiah Winslow" label="Josiah Winslow"/>
<link wikidata="Q5600061" start="1759" end="1776" title="Great Swamp Fight" label="Great Swamp Fight"/>
<link wikidata="Q5033331" start="1880" end="1889" title="Canonchet" label="Canonchet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191350" start="1927" end="1944" title="Massachusetts Bay Colony" label="Massachusetts Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2335224" start="1960" end="1972" title="Colony of Rhode Island and Providence Plantations" label="Rhode Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387" start="2021" end="2031" title="Providence Plantations" label="Providence"/>
<link wikidata="Q6921288" start="2249" end="2259" title="Mount Hope (Rhode Island)" label="Mount Hope"/>
<link wikidata="Q126195" start="3329" end="3344" title="Plymouth Colony" label="Plymouth Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q711498" start="3463" end="3470" title="Squanto" label="Squanto"/>
<link wikidata="Q739194" start="3488" end="3497" title="Massasoit" label="Massasoit"/>
<link wikidata="Q4470200" start="3760" end="3768" title="Weetamoo" label="Weetamoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q54140" start="3802" end="3807" title="Salem, Massachusetts" label="Salem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191350" start="3809" end="3815" title="Massachusetts Bay Colony" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q33392" start="4013" end="4023" title="Algonquian languages" label="Algonquian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207617" start="4213" end="4223" title="Pequot War" label="Pequot War"/>
<link wikidata="Q6948987" start="4248" end="4263" title="Mystic massacre" label="Mystic massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3488169" start="4347" end="4358" title="Miantonomoh" label="Miantonomoh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1388815" start="4544" end="4549" title="Uncas" label="Uncas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2335224" start="4583" end="4595" title="Colony of Rhode Island and Providence Plantations" label="Rhode Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q951500" start="4626" end="4637" title="Connecticut Colony" label="Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q847131" start="4643" end="4652" title="New Haven Colony" label="New Haven"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047264" start="4705" end="4714" title="Wampanoag" label="Wampanoag"/>
<link wikidata="Q541788" start="4717" end="4723" title="Nipmuc" label="Nipmuc"/>
<link wikidata="Q609726" start="4726" end="4739" title="Narragansett people" label="Narragansetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q201024" start="4741" end="4749" title="Mohegan people" label="Mohegans"/>
<link wikidata="Q929025" start="4751" end="4758" title="Pequots" label="Pequots"/>
<link wikidata="Q379648" start="5060" end="5077" title="Connecticut River" label="Connecticut River"/>
<link wikidata="Q739904" start="5329" end="5337" title="Wamsutta" label="Wamsutta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433209" start="5416" end="5426" title="Sachem" label="saunkswkas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4829928" start="5765" end="5774" title="Awashonks" label="Awashonks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047264" start="6093" end="6102" title="Wampanoag" label="Wampanoag"/>
<link wikidata="Q151227" start="6477" end="6486" title="Pokanoket" label="Pokanoket"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047264" start="6511" end="6520" title="Wampanoag" label="Wampanoag"/>
<link wikidata="Q739904" start="6591" end="6599" title="Wamsutta" label="Wamsutta"/>
<link wikidata="Q739194" start="6680" end="6689" title="Massasoit" label="Massasoit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1621197" start="7510" end="7520" title="Algonquian peoples" label="Algonquian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4829928" start="7791" end="7800" title="Awashonks" label="Awashonks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7403051" start="7816" end="7824" title="Sakonnet" label="Sakonnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q759" start="9002" end="9015" title="New Hampshire" label="New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7007213" start="9159" end="9179" title="colonial New England" label="colonial New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q201024" start="9977" end="9984" title="Mohegan" label="Mohegan"/>
<link wikidata="Q212152" start="9990" end="10004" title="Praying Indian" label="Praying Indian"/>
<link wikidata="Q541788" start="10265" end="10271" title="Nipmuc" label="Nipmuc"/>
<link wikidata="Q5403171" start="10682" end="10691" title="flintlock" label="flintlock"/>
<link wikidata="Q33392" start="10876" end="10893" title="Algonquian languages" label="Algonquian family"/>
<link wikidata="Q1701678" start="10912" end="10925" title="John Sassamon" label="John Sassamon"/>
<link wikidata="Q212152" start="10996" end="11010" title="praying Indian" label="praying Indian"/>
<link wikidata="Q49123" start="11169" end="11184" title="Harvard College" label="Harvard College"/>
<link wikidata="Q126195" start="11269" end="11284" title="Plymouth Colony" label="Plymouth Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q4808614" start="11685" end="11701" title="Assawompset Pond" label="Assawompset Pond"/>
<link wikidata="Q11184" start="12011" end="12017" title="Julian calendar" label="(O.S.)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6990979" start="12212" end="12220" title="Nemasket River" label="Nemasket"/>
<link wikidata="Q151227" start="12914" end="12923" title="Pokanoket" label="Pokanoket"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302325" start="13005" end="13012" title="Swansea, Massachusetts" label="Swansea"/>
<link wikidata="Q6921288" start="13656" end="13666" title="Mount Hope (Rhode Island)" label="Mount Hope"/>
<link wikidata="Q917809" start="13670" end="13691" title="Bristol, Rhode Island" label="Bristol, Rhode Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207182" start="13739" end="13745" title="Podunk people" label="Podunk"/>
<link wikidata="Q541788" start="13750" end="13756" title="Nipmuc" label="Nipmuc"/>
<link wikidata="Q2536810" start="13816" end="13829" title="Middleborough, Massachusetts" label="Middleborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811258" start="13834" end="13858" title="Dartmouth, Massachusetts" label="Dartmouth, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2539175" start="13869" end="13890" title="Mendon, Massachusetts" label="Mendon, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2536826" start="13902" end="13927" title="Brookfield, Massachusetts" label="Brookfield, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2427213" start="13944" end="13968" title="Lancaster, Massachusetts" label="Lancaster, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q375905" start="14015" end="14024" title="Deerfield, Massachusetts" label="Deerfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302147" start="14026" end="14032" title="Hadley, Massachusetts" label="Hadley"/>
<link wikidata="Q652287" start="14038" end="14063" title="Northfield, Massachusetts" label="Northfield, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7992172" start="14094" end="14117" title="Wheeler&amp;#x27;s Surprise" label="Wheeler&amp;#x27;s Surprise"/>
<link wikidata="Q541788" start="14190" end="14196" title="Nipmuc" label="Nipmuc"/>
<link wikidata="Q16202152" start="14204" end="14212" title="Muttawmp" label="Muttawmp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191350" start="14234" end="14251" title="Massachusetts Bay Colony" label="Massachusetts Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q7795034" start="14273" end="14287" title="Thomas Wheeler (soldier)" label="Thomas Wheeler"/>
<link wikidata="Q5343569" start="14292" end="14317" title="Edward Hutchinson (captain)" label="Captain Edward Hutchinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2536826" start="14749" end="14774" title="Brookfield, Massachusetts" label="Brookfield, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7520047" start="14990" end="15003" title="Simon Willard (first generation)" label="Simon Willard"/>
<link wikidata="Q962640" start="15053" end="15068" title="West Brookfield, Massachusetts" label="West Brookfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q633593" start="15202" end="15227" title="New England Confederation" label="New England Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191350" start="15245" end="15269" title="Massachusetts Bay Colony" label="Massachusetts Bay Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q126195" start="15271" end="15286" title="Plymouth Colony" label="Plymouth Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q847131" start="15288" end="15304" title="New Haven Colony" label="New Haven Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q951500" start="15310" end="15328" title="Connecticut Colony" label="Connecticut Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q2335224" start="15389" end="15438" title="Colony of Rhode Island and Providence Plantations" label="Colony of Rhode Island and Providence Plantations"/>
<link wikidata="Q379648" start="15667" end="15684" title="Connecticut River" label="Connecticut River"/>
<link wikidata="Q885253" start="15824" end="15846" title="Battle of Bloody Brook" label="Battle of Bloody Brook"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191350" start="15906" end="15930" title="Massachusetts Bay Colony" label="Massachusetts Bay Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q541788" start="15960" end="15966" title="Nipmuc" label="Nipmuc"/>
<link wikidata="Q16202152" start="15974" end="15982" title="Muttawmp" label="Muttawmp"/>
<link wikidata="Q375905" start="16069" end="16078" title="Deerfield, Massachusetts" label="Deerfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302147" start="16082" end="16088" title="Hadley, Massachusetts" label="Hadley"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818005" start="16228" end="16241" title="Attack on Springfield" label="next attacked"/>
<link wikidata="Q49158" start="16242" end="16268" title="Springfield, Massachusetts" label="Springfield, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q6851487" start="16528" end="16540" title="Miles Morgan" label="Miles Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q82101" start="16616" end="16626" title="blockhouse" label="blockhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q16152750" start="16753" end="16774" title="Major Samuel Appleton" label="Major Samuel Appleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5033331" start="17235" end="17244" title="Canonchet" label="Canonchet"/>
<link wikidata="Q16863860" start="17406" end="17420" title="Josiah Winslow" label="Josiah Winslow"/>
<link wikidata="Q190530" start="17789" end="17801" title="Little Ice Age" label="cold weather"/>
<link wikidata="Q163507" start="17947" end="17976" title="South Kingstown, Rhode Island" label="South Kingstown, Rhode Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q929025" start="18027" end="18033" title="Pequot" label="Pequot"/>
<link wikidata="Q201024" start="18038" end="18045" title="Mohegan" label="Mohegan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011399" start="19024" end="19036" title="Schaghticoke (village), New York" label="Schaghticoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q116971" start="19126" end="19132" title="Mohawk people" label="Mohawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q659069" start="19199" end="19212" title="Edmund Andros" label="Edmund Andros"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418066" start="19513" end="19525" title="coup de main" label="coup de main"/>
<link wikidata="Q370619" start="20148" end="20155" title="Andover, Massachusetts" label="Andover"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086280" start="20157" end="20168" title="Bridgewater, Massachusetts" label="Bridgewater"/>
<link wikidata="Q2318398" start="20170" end="20180" title="Chelmsford, Massachusetts" label="Chelmsford"/>
<link wikidata="Q3776991" start="20182" end="20188" title="Groton, Massachusetts" label="Groton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2427213" start="20190" end="20199" title="Lancaster, Massachusetts" label="Lancaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q54189" start="20201" end="20212" title="Marlborough, Massachusetts" label="Marlborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q2415851" start="20214" end="20222" title="Medfield, Massachusetts" label="Medfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q54145" start="20224" end="20231" title="Medford, Massachusetts" label="Medford"/>
<link wikidata="Q49201" start="20233" end="20241" title="Portland, Maine" label="Portland"/>
<link wikidata="Q18383" start="20243" end="20253" title="Providence, Rhode Island" label="Providence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2303125" start="20255" end="20263" title="Rehoboth, Massachusetts" label="Rehoboth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2415936" start="20265" end="20273" title="Scituate, Massachusetts" label="Scituate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2536927" start="20275" end="20282" title="Seekonk, Massachusetts" label="Seekonk"/>
<link wikidata="Q753950" start="20284" end="20292" title="Simsbury, Connecticut" label="Simsbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q591591" start="20294" end="20301" title="Sudbury, Massachusetts" label="Sudbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q753836" start="20303" end="20311" title="Suffield, Connecticut" label="Suffield"/>
<link wikidata="Q127506" start="20313" end="20320" title="Taunton, Massachusetts" label="Taunton"/>
<link wikidata="Q49195" start="20322" end="20329" title="Warwick, Rhode Island" label="Warwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q54195" start="20331" end="20339" title="Weymouth, Massachusetts" label="Weymouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2536885" start="20345" end="20353" title="Wrentham, Massachusetts" label="Wrentham"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302443" start="20365" end="20372" title="Norfolk, Massachusetts" label="Norfolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2536981" start="20377" end="20387" title="Plainville, Massachusetts" label="Plainville"/>
<link wikidata="Q271905" start="21228" end="21243" title="Mary Rowlandson" label="Mary Rowlandson"/>
<link wikidata="Q109902266" start="21526" end="21535" title="Quinnapin" label="Quinnapin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035168" start="21706" end="21733" title="Captivity narrative" label="Puritan captivity narrative"/>
<link wikidata="Q6483293" start="22092" end="22106" title="Lancaster raid" label="Lancaster raid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2427213" start="22164" end="22188" title="Lancaster, Massachusetts" label="Lancaster, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047264" start="22218" end="22227" title="Wampanoag" label="Wampanoag"/>
<link wikidata="Q541788" start="22229" end="22235" title="Nipmuc" label="Nipmuc"/>
<link wikidata="Q609726" start="22241" end="22253" title="Narragansett people" label="Narragansett"/>
<link wikidata="Q2560271" start="22351" end="22357" title="Bolton, Massachusetts" label="Bolton"/>
<link wikidata="Q426209" start="22362" end="22369" title="Clinton, Massachusetts" label="Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q271905" start="22543" end="22547" title="Mary Rowlandson" label="Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302488" start="23046" end="23056" title="Longmeadow, Massachusetts" label="Longmeadow"/>
<link wikidata="Q7038362" start="23320" end="23342" title="Nine Men&amp;#x27;s Misery" label="Nine Men&amp;#x27;s Misery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143667" start="23346" end="23356" title="Cumberland, Rhode Island" label="Cumberland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2335224" start="23614" end="23636" title="Colony of Rhode Island and Providence Plantations" label="Colony of Rhode Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387" start="23701" end="23711" title="Providence Plantations" label="Providence"/>
<link wikidata="Q49195" start="23716" end="23723" title="Warwick, Rhode Island" label="Warwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q54264" start="23781" end="23788" title="Newport, Rhode Island" label="Newport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1787188" start="23793" end="23803" title="Portsmouth, Rhode Island" label="Portsmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780007" start="23807" end="23819" title="Aquidneck Island" label="Rhode Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q49158" start="24042" end="24053" title="Springfield, Massachusetts" label="Springfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q2414217" start="24055" end="24063" title="Hatfield, Massachusetts" label="Hatfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302147" start="24065" end="24071" title="Hadley, Massachusetts" label="Hadley"/>
<link wikidata="Q49186" start="24077" end="24103" title="Northampton, Massachusetts" label="Northampton, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q652287" start="24226" end="24236" title="Northfield, Massachusetts" label="Northfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q375905" start="24238" end="24247" title="Deerfield, Massachusetts" label="Deerfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818009" start="24525" end="24538" title="Sudbury Fight" label="Sudbury Fight"/>
<link wikidata="Q591591" start="24553" end="24575" title="Sudbury, Massachusetts" label="Sudbury, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5524010" start="24666" end="24680" title="garrison house" label="garrison house"/>
<link wikidata="Q379648" start="25208" end="25225" title="Connecticut River" label="Connecticut River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7855984" start="25237" end="25265" title="Turners Falls, Massachusetts" label="Turners Falls, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302147" start="25486" end="25492" title="Hadley, Massachusetts" label="Hadley"/>
<link wikidata="Q201024" start="25533" end="25540" title="Mohegan people" label="Mohegan"/>
<link wikidata="Q759" start="25587" end="25600" title="New Hampshire" label="New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q54189" start="25677" end="25703" title="Marlborough, Massachusetts" label="Marlborough, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q609726" start="25829" end="25842" title="Narragansett people" label="Narragansetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q541788" start="25844" end="25851" title="Nipmucs" label="Nipmucs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047264" start="25857" end="25867" title="Wampanoag people" label="Wampanoags"/>
<link wikidata="Q28153514" start="26271" end="26298" title="Second Battle of Nipsachuck" label="Second Battle of Nipsachuck"/>
<link wikidata="Q19396835" start="26471" end="26479" title="Quaiapen" label="Quaiapen"/>
<link wikidata="Q19396835" start="26706" end="26714" title="Quaiapen" label="Quaiapen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1816636" start="26805" end="26821" title="North Smithfield" label="North Smithfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q4808614" start="27056" end="27072" title="Assawompset Pond" label="Assawompset Pond"/>
<link wikidata="Q1701678" start="27110" end="27123" title="John Sassamon" label="John Sassamon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387" start="27274" end="27286" title="Rhode Island" label="Rhode Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q2896036" start="27344" end="27359" title="Benjamin Church (ranger)" label="Benjamin Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q6290631" start="27372" end="27387" title="Josiah Standish" label="Josiah Standish"/>
<link wikidata="Q917809" start="27448" end="27469" title="Bristol, Rhode Island" label="Bristol, Rhode Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q6218501" start="27513" end="27526" title="John Alderman" label="John Alderman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4752418" start="27895" end="27906" title="Anawan Rock" label="Anawan Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q2303125" start="27910" end="27933" title="Rehoboth, Massachusetts" label="Rehoboth, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q729648" start="27992" end="28001" title="Metacomet" label="Metacomet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322019" start="28232" end="28240" title="Wabanaki Confederacy" label="Wabanaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q465864" start="28984" end="28996" title="Androscoggin people" label="Androscoggin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29006" end="29016" title="Mogg Hegon" label="Mogg Hegon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1883420" start="29040" end="29052" title="Madockawando" label="Madockawando"/>
<link wikidata="Q18385279" start="29094" end="29098" title="Northeast Coast Campaign (1675)" label="1675"/>
<link wikidata="Q18354826" start="29100" end="29104" title="Northwest Coast Campaign (1676)" label="1676"/>
<link wikidata="Q18354831" start="29110" end="29114" title="Northeast Coast Campaign (1677)" label="1677"/>
<link wikidata="Q7329767" start="29166" end="29181" title="Richard Waldron" label="Richard Waldron"/>
<link wikidata="Q17279300" start="29186" end="29199" title="Charles Frost (military officer)" label="Charles Frost"/>
<link wikidata="Q495751" start="29286" end="29298" title="Mi&amp;#x27;kmaq" label="Mi&amp;#x27;kmaq"/>
<link wikidata="Q207353" start="29302" end="29308" title="Acadia" label="Acadia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2076311" start="29369" end="29380" title="Scarborough, Maine" label="Scarborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q5212004" start="29394" end="29405" title="Damariscove Island" label="Damariscove"/>
<link wikidata="Q7837007" start="29748" end="29770" title="Treaty of Casco (1678)" label="Treaty of Casco (1678)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758615" start="30238" end="30244" title="Dedham, Massachusetts" label="Dedham"/>
<link wikidata="Q74967300" start="30295" end="30310" title="Robert Hinsdale" label="Robert Hinsdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q885253" start="30365" end="30387" title="Battle of Bloody Brook" label="Battle of Bloody Brook"/>
<link wikidata="Q106497478" start="30462" end="30479" title="Quentin Stockwell" label="Quentin Stockwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332459" start="30646" end="30660" title="Neponset River" label="Neponset River"/>
<link wikidata="Q212152" start="30691" end="30706" title="praying Indians" label="praying Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q541788" start="30761" end="30768" title="Nipmucs" label="Nipmucs"/>
<link wikidata="Q16859756" start="30910" end="30918" title="Matoonas" label="Matoonas"/>
<link wikidata="Q49132" start="30951" end="30964" title="Boston Common" label="Boston Common"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31116" end="31131" title="King Philip&amp;#x27;s War#Raid on Swansea" label="raid on Swansea"/>
<link wikidata="Q16863860" start="31678" end="31692" title="Josiah Winslow" label="Josiah Winslow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2896036" start="31705" end="31720" title="Benjamin Church (ranger)" label="Benjamin Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q5600061" start="31866" end="31883" title="Great Swamp Fight" label="Great Swamp Fight"/>
<link wikidata="Q106678757" start="32061" end="32067" title="Pumham" label="Pumham"/>
<link wikidata="Q23635" start="33077" end="33084" title="Bermuda" label="Bermuda"/>
<link wikidata="Q244" start="33086" end="33094" title="Barbados" label="Barbados"/>
<link wikidata="Q766" start="33096" end="33103" title="Jamaica" label="Jamaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q26253" start="33122" end="33129" title="Madeira" label="Madeira"/>
<link wikidata="Q25263" start="33139" end="33145" title="Azores" label="Azores"/>
<link wikidata="Q370866" start="34641" end="34654" title="John Winthrop the Younger" label="John Winthrop"/>
<link wikidata="Q633593" start="34809" end="34839" title="United Colonies of New England" label="United Colonies of New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q659069" start="34897" end="34910" title="Edmund Andros" label="Edmund Andros"/>
<link wikidata="Q126188" start="34966" end="34978" title="James II of England" label="Duke of York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761546" start="35173" end="35182" title="Pennacook" label="Pennacook"/>
<link wikidata="Q126195" start="35448" end="35463" title="Plymouth Colony" label="Plymouth Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070342" start="37043" end="37066" title="King William&amp;#x27;s War" label="King William&amp;#x27;s War"/>
<link wikidata="Q681416" start="37081" end="37103" title="French and Indian Wars" label="French and Indian Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265114" start="37105" end="37127" title="Father Rale&amp;#x27;s War" label="Father Rale&amp;#x27;s War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3118940" start="37133" end="37160" title="Father Le Loutre&amp;#x27;s War" label="Father Le Loutre&amp;#x27;s War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431323" start="37292" end="37306" title="Kennebec River" label="Kennebec River"/>
<link wikidata="Q849680" start="37497" end="37517" title="American Indian Wars" label="American Indian Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q5148281" start="37520" end="37554" title="Colonial American military history" label="Colonial American military history"/>
<link wikidata="Q43080604" start="37557" end="37579" title="Irish Donation of 1676" label="Irish Donation of 1676"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377132" start="37582" end="37598" title="Kieft&amp;#x27;s War" label="Kieft&amp;#x27;s War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3296930" start="37601" end="37625" title="List of Indian massacres" label="List of Indian massacres"/>
<link wikidata="Q125559863" start="37633" end="37655" title="Eulogy on King Phillip" label="Eulogy on King Phillip"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="313014" wikidata="Q2140813" url="?curid=313014" title="Rheintochter">
<text>Rheintochter was a German surface-to-air missile developed by Rheinmetall-Borsig during World War II. Its name comes from the mythical &quot;Rheintöchter&quot; (Rhinemaidens) of Richard Wagner&#x27;s opera series &quot;Der Ring des Nibelungen&quot;.

The missile was a multi-stage solid fuelled rocket. It had four small varnished plywood control surfaces, resembling paddles, in the nose, six fins at the after end of the top stage, and four at the end of the main stage. It stood tall, with a diameter of . The sustainer motor, located ahead of the warhead (rather than behind, as is more usual) exhausted through six venturis between the first stage fins.

== History ==
&quot;Rheintochter&quot; was ordered in November 1942 by the German army (&quot;Heer&quot;). Starting in August 1943, 82 test firings were made. An air-launched version was also designed. The operational version was intended to be fired from a ramp or converted gun mount.

The project was cancelled on 6 February 1945.

Examples are on display at the Steven F. Udvar-Hazy Center in Chantilly, Virginia, the &quot;Deutsches Museum&quot; in Munich, Air Defense Learning Annex at Fort Sill, OK and at the RAF Museum Cosford, UK.

== Variants ==
The initial R1 variant was powered by a two-stage solid-fuel rocket.

The proposed R2 did not offer any improvement over the R1, and was dropped in December 1944.

The R3 model was developed, which had a liquid fuel engine with solid-fuel boosters (&quot;strap-ons&quot;). Only six trial missiles were fired.

== Specifications ==
* Power plant: RI variant was 2-stage solid fuel; RIII was liquid fuel with solid-fuel boosters
* Length: 
* Diameter: 
* Wing span: 
* Launch weight: 
* Speed: 1,080 km/h (671 mph)
* Warhead: 
* Altitude: R1 8 km
* Guidance system: Radio Command

== See also ==
* List of World War II guided missiles of Germany
* Enzian

== Notes ==
== Sources ==
* Christopher, John. &quot;The Race for Hitler&#x27;s X-Planes&quot;. The Mill, Gloucestershire: History Press, 2013.
* Ford, Brian J., &quot;Secret Weapons&quot;, Osprey Publishing, 2011, 
== External links ==

* Smithsonian National Air and Space Museum
* Royal Air Force Museum, Cosford (UK)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q466704" start="26" end="48" title="surface-to-air missile" label="surface-to-air missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q161544" start="62" end="80" title="Rheinmetall" label="Rheinmetall-Borsig"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="88" end="100" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639498" start="161" end="173" title="Rhinemaidens" label="Rhinemaidens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511" start="178" end="192" title="Richard Wagner" label="Richard Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q190237" start="219" end="242" title="Der Ring des Nibelungen" label="Der Ring des Nibelungen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408429" start="281" end="291" title="solid fuel" label="solid fuel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="513" end="528" title="sustainer motor" label="sustainer motor"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="620" end="627" title="Venturi effect#Venturi tubes" label="venturi"/>
<link wikidata="Q701923" start="748" end="764" title="German Army (Wehrmacht)" label="&amp;quot;Heer&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055100" start="1026" end="1053" title="Steven F. Udvar-Hazy Center" label="Steven F. Udvar-Hazy Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q328451" start="1057" end="1076" title="Chantilly, Virginia" label="Chantilly, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q131617" start="1088" end="1104" title="Deutsches Museum" label="Deutsches Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726" start="1114" end="1120" title="Munich" label="Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q7373617" start="1177" end="1195" title="RAF Museum Cosford" label="RAF Museum Cosford"/>
<link wikidata="Q280602" start="1267" end="1284" title="solid-fuel rocket" label="solid-fuel rocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q860308" start="1421" end="1439" title="liquid fuel rocket" label="liquid fuel engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6571836" start="1813" end="1860" title="List of World War II guided missiles of Germany" label="List of World War II guided missiles of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346037" start="1863" end="1869" title="Enzian" label="Enzian"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="313015" wikidata="Q46702" url="?curid=313015" title="Kavajë">
<text>Kavajë ( , ) is a city and municipality centrally located in the Western Lowlands region of Albania, in Tirana County. It borders Durrës to the north , Tiranë to the east and Rrogozhinë to the south . To the west lies the Adriatic Sea. According on the 2023 census, the municipality had a population of 30,012, although the Civil Registry inferred the total number of inhabitants to be 79,556. The overall surface area is .

== Etymology ==
The name Kavajë is mentioned in Ottoman archives from the Land Registry of the Sanjak of Albania for the years 1431–1432. In the documents, first published by Turkish researcher Halil İnalcık this locality was part of. On Latin Maps it was mentioned as Cavalli.

== History ==

=== Early development ===

There have been varied opinions on the origin of Kavajë as an inhabited settlement. Until recently, researchers believed the early beginnings of this region as a settlement should be sought somewhere in the middle of the 16th century. However, relying on the findings of geological fragments and inscriptions, it appears that the origin of this settlement can be traced back to the first centuries BCE.

The present day territory of Kavajë has been inhabited since the Late Antiquity. It is believed that the Illyrian tribe of Taulantii built their city Arnisa in the area today known as Zik-Xhafaj.
Ensuing the Roman Conquest of the region, Kavajë would establish itself as a transit route for Via Egnatia – the road was built by the Romans in order to link a chain of their colonies stretching from the Adriatic Sea to the Bosphorus.
The famous Battle of Pharsalus between Julius Caesar and his archrival Pompey took place near Shkëmbi i Kavajës, at the time known as &quot;Petra&quot;. Byzantine historian Anna Komnena in the Alexiad records the name of the area as &quot;Kabalion&quot;.

In the second half of the 13th century and up until the early 15th century, much of central Albania and its surrounding region were ruled by a few powerful feudal families. The two most prominent families that ruled Kavajë at this time were the feudal families of Skuraj and Matrangaj. The Skuraj family, as direct descendants of the dynasty that founded the Principality of Arbanon controlled the eastern part of Kavajë. Their emblem depicted a lion standing up on one foot and reaching up to grab a fleur-de-lis. This symbol would later be used as the official Emblem of the City of Tirana. The Zguraj neighborhood of Kavajë &quot;(Lagja Zguraj)&quot; is named after the Skuraj Dynasty that ruled the region.
The Matrangaj family as the most powerful rulers of the region had established their center in Bashtovë. They controlled most of the Myzeqe plains and the coastal hills of Karpen.

=== Ottoman Period ===

Ottoman writer and traveler Evliya Çelebi describes Kavajë in this 1670 memoir:

Scottish diplomat David Urquhart describes his encounter upon arriving in Kavajë in this 1831 piece:

=== Modern development ===

Dr. Erickson was a missionary to Albania who had offered political advice to the Vatra delegation at the Paris Peace Conference of 1919. The school he founded, aimed to promote the knowledge of modern scientific agriculture and provide a thorough training to young Albanians.

The girls school was inaugurated on September 20 and the boys agriculture school opened on October 10 of that same year. Cost for enrollment was 50 gold franga per month. The students could study continuously for three straight years with an option for two additional years given to those with excellent results. Classes were taught in both Albanian and English language.

Funding for the project was made possible by the Near East Foundation who had commissioned New York based studio &quot;Thompson &amp; Churchill&quot; in charge of the architectural design. Following the Italian fascist occupation of 1939, the school was briefly renamed &quot;Italian Agrarian Institute &quot;Arnaldo Mussolini&quot;&quot; in honor of Benito Mussolini&#x27;s younger brother.
At the start of World War II, approximately 600 Jews lived in the Republic of Albania. About 400 of them were German and Austrian refugees and the rest were from nearby countries like Yugoslavia and Greece. The largest number of these refugees, some 200 in total, were placed at a camp in Kavajë where they would later find shelter amongst the local population.

The citizens of Kavajë gave an invaluable contribution in the housing and sheltering of Jewish refugees during the war. The names of Mihal Lekatari, Besim Kadiu and Shyqyri Myrto are placed on the list of the Righteous among the Nations honored by Yad Vashem.

Known primarily as an agricultural region, in the early decade of the 1960s Kavajë started to emerge as an important industrial center in Albania. Following is a list of the major industrial plants that operated in the city:
* The Nails and Bolts Plant &quot;(Uzina e Gozhdë-Bulonave)&quot; was inaugurated on November 28, 1963. Using Chinese technology, the plant produced nails, bolts and screws. In the later years, with its expansion, the plant started to produce wooden screws, metal wires, metal chains, rail bolts, barbed wires, etc. As of 1990 the plant employed 1,200 workers.
* The Paper Factory &quot;(Fabrika e Letrës)&quot; was inaugurated on November 28, 1966. Using Chinese technology, it initially started to produce stationery paper for notebooks, books and textbooks as well as typographic paper for official documents and newspapers. This plant employed 750 workers at its peak.
* The Glass Factory &quot;(Fabrika e Qelqit)&quot; was inaugurated in the late fall of 1970. Like the others, this factory also used Chinese technology. It produced glass packaging and other glass items for mass consumption. Later on, a ceramic production facility was opened. In 1975, new mirror production lines were set and attempts to produce seasoned glass gave little results. After 1985 the factory started producing items like pearls, stone rings, etc. The Glass factory along with the ceramic facility employed 2,500 workers.
* The Carpet Production Plant &quot;(Ndërmarrja e Prodhimit të Qilimave)&quot; had a separate department for the production of artistic copper. It produced mainly tapestry carpets and artistic copper items for the domestic market. This plant employed 3,000 workers.
* The Food Factory &quot;(Fabrika Ushqimore)&quot; processed fresh fruits, vegetables and bread for the local population. It also produced conserved fruits and vegetables for exports. This factory employed 300 workers.

=== Communism ===

The first anti-communist revolt in Kavajë took place in the Summer of 1988. It was a union strike organized by Nazmi Roli, Fatmir Veliu, Skënder Germani, Viktor Rrapi and others who were protesting against job cuts and poor working conditions on behalf of the pottery workers and those who worked at the textile plant and the glass factory. In the succeeding months, the city&#x27;s youth which at the time was forced by the regime to work in agriculture cooperatives, started distributing anti-communist leaflets at local shops, schools and villages nearby. Enver Hoxha&#x27;s portrait was torn apart at the city&#x27;s main high school and at the SMT (Cars and Tractors Station). The perpetrators were Qazim Kariqi, Josif Budo , Mihal Budo , Rexhep Rrugeja , Shpetim Nova , Alket Alushi, Xhevat Hylviu, Artan Lajthia, Adem Hylviu, Arben Goga, Artan Çelhyka, Tahir Okshtuni, Skënder Llixha etc. These were powerful blows that brought embarrassment to the leadership of the party and the state security apparatus. On March 26, 1990, the first active demonstration in Albania took place in the streets of Kavajë. The event that triggered these demonstrations was the football match between local club Besa and Tirana club Partizani which had long been favored by the regime. Angry fans threw banners on the field detesting the system. After the match, numerous people were arrested by the police. Outraged citizens took on the streets and burned the city&#x27;s police building thus marking the first event of importance against the regime at the time.

== Geography ==

Kavajë is a municipality built on the coastal plains of Albania&#x27;s Western Lowlands region. Located just south of the Bay of Durrës, it is partially engulfed by two small river streams, Leshniqe to the west-northwest and Darçi to the west-southwest. The municipality borders Durrës to the north at latitude 41°15&#x27;N with Përroi i Agait, which flows into the sea, being the dividing border line. The eastern hills near Kryezi border Tirana at longitude 19°38&#x27;E. To the south, Rrogozhinë is bordered at the intersecting point between Luz i Vogël and Luz i Madh at latitude 41°07&#x27;N. The Adriatic Sea faces the western side, with Kepi i Lagjit being its most extreme point at longitude 19°27&#x27;E. Within these boundaries the municipality has an approximate surface area of 198.81 km2.

The highest elevation point is the peak of Bezmajet which reaches a height of . The lowest depression point is found near the shores of Karpen at below sea level.

=== Administrative divisions ===

The municipality of Kavajë consists of the following subdivisions:


Kavajë&#x27;s coastline measures roughly at a length of and is mostly flat with plenty of sandy and gravel beaches. The main beaches are: Golem (Mali i Robit, Qerret), Karpen (Kepi i Bishtit të Barbaut), Carina (Gjiri i Forsilukut), Kepi i Lagjit (Kalaja e Turrës), Plazhi i Gjeneralit, Spille (Guri i Lëmuar), Greth.

=== Climate ===

Kavajë is located in a Mediterranean Climate region where the summers are dry and hot and the winters are wet and mild. Average surface temperatures range annually between .

The following objects/places are declared natural monuments in this region by decree nr.767 dated 20 December 2002: &quot;Salt Springs of Golemas, Sulfurous Springs of Fliballie, Laurel of Turrë Castle, Coastal Cliffs of Bardhor, Carina Beach, Sea Fossils of Thartor, Aligned Rocks in Cikallesh, General&#x27;s Beach, Karstic Caves in Mengaj&quot;

== Demography ==

Population density in urban areas was 285 inhabitants per km2 and in rural areas much less. 57.6% of the people in the district lived in rural areas whereas 42.4% lived in the city. The gender structure of the population is almost equal. Only 48% of the workforce is employed. Since 1990, more than 25% of the total population in the district has migrated elsewhere, mainly to countries like: Italy, Greece, Great Britain, France, Germany, United States and Canada. A smaller percentage has migrated towards neighbouring Durrës and the capital, Tirana.

As of 2023, Kavajë’s population stood at 30,012. The population is distributed as follows:

* 0-14 years: 4,338
* 15-64 years: 18,400
* 65+ years: 7,274

The gender distribution as of 2023 was:

* Males: 14,892 &quot;(2,246 aged 0-14, 8,951 aged 15-64, 3,695 aged 65+)&quot;
* Females: 15,120 &quot;(2,092 aged 0-14, 9,449 aged 15-64, 3,579 aged 65+)&quot;

== Politics &amp; Urban development ==

=== Political Dynamics ===
Kavajë has long been considered a stronghold of the Democratic Party (PD), largely due to its anti-communist stance and active participation in Albania’s post-communist movements. The city is known for its resistance against communist rule and has historically aligned with right-wing parties.

However, this political landscape began to shift in 2013 with the election of Elvis Rroshi, a candidate from the Socialist Party (PS), as mayor. This marked a significant change in the city’s political trajectory, as Kavajë, traditionally dominated by PD, elected a left-wing leader. The city’s political alignment continued to evolve as both parties competed intensely for local governance. Rroshi’s tenure as mayor ended when he resigned following the implementation of Albania’s “decriminalization law,” which aims to remove individuals with criminal records from public office. He acknowledged being convicted in Italy and facing criminal charges in Germany before 2002. A 2015 investigation by BIRN revealed that Rroshi had been convicted in Switzerland for drug-related offenses during the 1990s. Despite facing criminal proceedings, Prime Minister Edi Rama defended Rroshi, attributing his legal troubles to the hardships faced by many Albanians seeking to emigrate in the 1990s. Rroshi was praised for his achievements as mayor, despite the controversies surrounding his past. One of the major works under his tenure was the rehabilitation of the city center and the reconstruction of the municipality building.

In May 2023, Fisnik Qosja, from the Democratic Party (PD), was elected mayor of Kavajë. His victory was seen as a significant political shift, with former Prime Minister Sali Berisha commending the citizens of Kavajë for what he termed the “liberation” of the city, referencing the anti-communist movements of the 1990s. The city has seen political competition between the Socialist and Democratic parties. During the 2023 local elections, the Socialist Party, led by Prime Minister Edi Rama, campaigned heavily in the city. The Socialist leadership highlighted their development projects in Kavajë, including rebuilding efforts after the 2019 earthquake. 

=== City Planning ===
Kavajë&#x27;s General Regulatory Masterplan was drafted in 1994 and approved in that same year by the district council. In the masterplan the city extended over an area of and was spatially divided into several functional zoning schemes. The Functional Zoning Regulation and The Functional Zoning Map of 2007 divided the city into the following: 1) Inhabited Zone, 2) City Center Zone, 3) Economic Zone, 4) Green Zone, 5) Sports Zone, 6) Hospital Zone, 7) Cemetery Zone.

The aforementioned Functional Zoning Regulation and The Functional Zoning Map are prepared over a period of 3–5 years. In addition, partial plans are laid out for each of the zoning areas. Each plan studies the development of the area, where to set up a school, a kindergarten, a park, a recreational area, etc. The new City Center Masterplan devised by Tirana-based architecture studio &quot;Atelier4&quot; was approved in 2007. The plan covered an area of which included the historic city center, the creation of a new administrative center, a cultural center and a commercial center.

Under the governance of the Socialist Party, in 2014, Kavajë became part of the “Rilindja Urbane e Qyteteve” (Urban Renaissance of Cities) initiative, which aimed to rehabilitate urban centers across Albania. While the project modernized Kavajë’s infrastructure with a new municipal building, a 2.5 km reconstructed entrance road, and a 3,200 m² park, it also faced criticism for replacing historic shady trees with palm trees, making the city center less walkable due to the heat. 

The rehabilitation was controversial for demolishing the “Obelisk of Democracy” (Two Fingers monument), which symbolized Albania’s anti-communist struggle in the 1990s. The monument, an emblem of the fight for democracy, was replaced with a red-and-black version that was widely criticized for its aesthetic. A fountain now occupies its original location. The Democratic Party condemned the demolition as an attack on Kavajë’s democratic history, while then-mayor Elvis Rroshi defended it, framing the changes as part of the city’s urban modernization, and even suggested sending the demolished monument to the Democratic Party’s headquarters in Tirana by helicopter.

== Economy ==
=== Agriculture ===

In Kavajë the climate and soil are suitable for the cultivation of fruits and vegetables, among others strawberries and artichokes. 2,451 ha of agriculture land is used for the cultivation of vegetables where the yield was 186.9 quintals/ha.

Fresh vegetables like: tomatoes, peppers, eggplant, cucumber, leek, cabbage, green beans, okra, spinach, carrots, etc. are planted on 1,214 ha of land with a yield of 179.2 quintals/ha. Dried vegetables such as onions, garlic, etc. are planted on 370 ha of land and yield 75.5 quintals/ha.
Watermelons, cantaloupes, etc. are planted on 867 ha of land and provide an output of 245.4 quintals/ha. Potatoes are planted on 450 ha of land and yield 93.7 quintals/ha. Beans are planted on 1,415 ha of land and yield 11.6 quintals/ha.

Fodder is also widely cultivated: hay, clover, corncob, etc. cover 6,924 ha of land and yield an output of 291.3 quintals/ha. The largest production comes from hay.

== Infrastructure ==

=== Education ===
The first Albanian language school opened in Kavajë in the late summer of 1887.
The former District of Kavajë has established a public and a private school system which serves for the upbringing and education of the children and youth. Educational Institutions operating in Kavajë are listed as follows:
* 50 kindergartens throughout the district, 7 within the Municipality of Kavajë and 43 in the surrounding communes; plus 2 private kindergartens. 
* 42 primary public schools (9-year public schools), 6 within the municipality of Kavajë and 36 in the remaining communes;additionally there are 2 private primary schools.
* 7 secondary level high schools throughout the district: 3 within the municipality of Kavajë and 4 in the surrounding communes.
* 2 general level high schools throughout the district. &quot;Aleksandër Moisiu&quot; High School in the municipality of Kavajë and &quot;Haxhi Qehaj&quot; High School in the municipality of Rrogozhinë; and 2 professional level high schools, one is located in the Municipality of Kavajë and the other in the Commune of Golem.

=== Healthcare ===
A whole system of public and non-public (private) health institutions operates in the district to provide services and caring to the health of its citizens. In both municipalities operate 178 doctors (40 of which are family doctors) and 240 nurses and assistants. There are 5 hospitals, 11 health centers and 66 ambulances. In 2008 the central government provided funds to build a new hospital for the city. It was inaugurated 3 years later.

The health services provided by all health institutions include the following: Pathology, Pediatrics, Surgery, Cardiology, Infectious Disease Control, Neurology, Psychiatry, Nephrology, Ophthalmology, Dermatology, Orthopedics, Rheumatology, Hematology, Endocrinology, Emergency Services, Allergology, Physio-Therapy, Pediatrics, Gynocology, Obstretics.. etc.
Dental Services are fully privatized with the exception of 9-year primary schools. A total of 8 private dental clinics operate in the city of Kavajë. Pharmaceutical Services are also fully private. In the whole district there are a total of 12 pharmacies.

== Culture ==

Theater movement in Kavajë has its origins in early 1919. Several teachers and patriots at the time took the initiative to give spark to the emancipation of the city&#x27;s cultural life.

In the early 20th century, most folk songs were performed with a flute or &quot;kavalli&quot; as it was known in this area. Initially made of wood and later of metal, kavalli consisted of two rods, in length with 6 holes attached to each side and with an upper hole which served as some type of a counterbase.
Folk songs were commonly performed by one person. Later performances included more people, mainly in the singing of the chorus. Women always performed together using tambourines.

Folk DancingFolk dancing has been a long-standing tradition in Kavajë. Some of the most popular dances include: &quot;Vallja e Zileve&quot;, &quot;Vallja e Qypave&quot;, &quot;Vallja dyshe e rëndë e Kavajës&quot;, &quot;Vallja e Qilimave&quot;, etc.
Among the most outstanding dancers and choreographers who have remained popular include: Zyhra and Gani Ferra, Remzi Gjeçi, Madrid Maliqati, Ibrahim Roçi, Gëzim Agolli, Arianit Boraku, Leonard Mitrushi, Esdalin Gorani, Myrteza Dimni and others.
Historically the most commonly used men&#x27;s costume was the kilt or the fustanella, which had been in use up until the Proclamation of Independence of 1912. In the later period, looser clothing started to become the trend. Men wore long sleeve shirts accompanied by artistically sewed vests. Trousers were loosely knitted with wool and were black or dark brown. White trousers were used on significant events and holidays. Also included in the costume was a long woolen belt or leather belt, woolen socks and cow leather sandals or moccasins decorated with tufts at the front.

Women&#x27;s costumes included a type of headdress embroidered with gold and filled with small silver coins. These were typically worn by young brides. Women also wore long-sleeved uncollared shirts, accompanied by a small vest embroidered in silk or gold threads. On the bottom, they wore half slips covered by a type of loosely wrapped clothing known as &quot;dimite&quot;, which was usually white.
For walking, they wore white cotton or silk socks accompanied by tailored shoes, sandals or slippers.
When a woman left the house to visit someone, she would wear a long, brightly colored dress made of satin.

Lyrical songs express human feelings and spiritual experiences. They express different moments of a person&#x27;s life, the joy of love, friendship, grief, hatred and other various phenomena of life&#x27;s attitudes. Some of the most authentic lyrical songs from this region include: &quot;Mun aty ke shtatë zymbylat&quot;, &quot;Këndon gjeli pika-pika&quot;, &quot;Kënga e gjemitarit&quot;, all believed to have been composed and sung by popular singers of the time like Pol Kanapari, Hasan Sakati, Zenel Kalushi and Islam Xhatufa.
Other popular singers include Thabit Rexha, Liri Rama, Desire Pezaku, Nysrete Hylviu and undoubtedly the greatest of them all Parashqevi Simaku.

Historical songs are dedicated to historical events and prominent historical figures. They are generally created by people who lived these events or are in some ways attached to them. The oldest historical song that is well-preserved even today is titled &quot;Kënga për mbrojtjen e Ulqinit&quot;. Other historical songs worth mentioning include: &quot;Kënga e Ceno Kavajës&quot;, &quot;Kënga e Sulë Mustafës&quot;, &quot;Bubullin ke Shkambi Kavajës&quot;, etc.

In Albania the phrase &quot;&quot;Llogje Kavaje&quot; or &quot;Lloqe Kavaje&quot;&quot; (&quot;Kavajë Blabber&quot;) is a regional pejorative denoting the word gossip. It suggests a person who gossips or says things which evidently turn out not to be true.

A few old proverbs from Kavajë:
* &#x27;Me fol me ty, si me fol me murin.&quot; (&quot;Talking to you is like talking to the wall.&quot;)
* &quot;U bo veza me mësu pulën.&quot; (&quot;Since when does the egg teach the chicken?&quot;)
* &quot;Rrena osht nona e të këqijave.&quot; (&quot;A lie is the mother of all bad things.&quot;)
* &quot;Breshka po ferrën don.&quot; (&quot;A turtle wants only its bush—things eventually settle in their natural habitat.&quot;)
* &quot;Mjer puna ime, që se boni dora ime.&quot; (&quot;Being critical to something which was done by others but could&#x27;ve been done better by myself had I taken the effort.&quot;)

=== Cultural heritage ===
The Ethnographic Museum of Kavajë, completed in 1971, was built on a restored building with a hajat (gallery), the type of which was widespread throughout the 18th century. Its architectonic origin however dates back to the late antiquity in the typology of a &quot;villa rustica&quot;, commonly present in the region. After the full restoration of the building, the newly formed museum would be given the status of a cultural monument. The managing group which programmed the conceptual orientation and realisation of the museum was made up of the most reputable authorities of the time in the studies of ethnography. The main characteristic of the museum&#x27;s ethnographic fund is defined by the variety of its objects and their diverse origin. Craft works composed in ceramic, copper and textiles from local craftsmen representing the city and the region are present for display. So is a large collection of works from the Northern, North-Eastern and Southern regions of Albania. The elements of the traditional costumes from these regions are distinguished for their level of mastery and finesse, for the richness of the ornaments and symbols merged into geometric, zoomorphic and anthropomorphic forms.

Other Cultural Monuments found in the region of Kavajë: St.Paraskevi&#x27;s Church &quot;(Kisha e Shën Premtes)&quot; built in 1280; Clock Tower &quot;(Sahati)&quot; built in 1817; Bukaq Bridge &quot;(Ura e Bukaqit)&quot; built in the 18th century; Depots of the former Karpen Saltern &quot;(Depot e ish-Kripores së Karpenit)&quot; built in the 17th century; Bashtovë Fortress &quot;(Kalaja e Bashtovës)&quot; built in the 15th century.

=== Media ===
Kavajë has one local television station, TV6 – (former channel &quot;2ATV&quot; is no longer operational) – and one local radio station, Radio Fantazia. The now discontinued &quot;Kavaja Progres&quot; was a weekly publication that began circulation in the late fall of 2007. Printed in a newspaper format, it covered mostly socio-economic issues and other daily aspects of city life. Its editorials were perceived to be overly critical of the then-run democratic administration. The paper&#x27;s publication abruptly ceased in mid-summer of 2009 with the pretext that it lacked funding. This raised speculations that it had been used as a propaganda piece all along by the local socialist party base, in effort to influence the upcoming general elections.

=== Religion ===

The population of Kavajë belongs in part to two religious denominations, Muslim and Orthodox Christian. The Muslim population nominally makes up ¾ of the total population. The remaining ¼ belong to the Orthodox faith. These are estimates which don&#x27;t hold into account atheists and other non-believers. The municipality office maintains no official statistics on religion.

The largest of the four mosques in the city is Kubelie Mosque &quot;(Xhamia Kubelie)&quot;, named after the old mosque built by Kapllan Beu in 1736 and later demolished by the communist regime in 1967. The existing mosque was rebuilt in 1994.

The Piety Mosque &quot;(Xhamia e Devotshmërisë)&quot; was built in the Zguraj neighbourhood in 2001 with funds from a Saudi charity organization. The Dedei Mosque &quot;(Xhamia e Haxhi, Mynyre dhe Dervish Dedeit)&quot; was built in 2005 with funds from the Dedei Family. There is also a small teqe built in recent years within the city limits and another one in the village of Luz i Madh.

Followers of the orthodox faith attend the Shën Kolli Church located near Besa Stadium. The church was rebuilt in 1997, on the same land as the old one with funds from Greece.

St.Paraskevi&#x27;s Church &quot;(Kisha e Shën Premtes)&quot; is located east of Kavajë in the village of Çetë. It was built during the 13th century and today serves as a cultural monument. The frescos inside the church are works of the well-known iconic painter Kostandin Shpataraku.

A smaller church is found in the village of Rreth-Greth, formerly a part of Kryevidh Commune. It&#x27;s attended by the locals of that area.

=== Sports ===
The small town of Kavajë has a storied history associated with the game of football in Albania.
Hometown club Besa, which was founded in 1925, has for decades produced talents for the National Team in all youth and senior levels. In 1973, Besa gained fame for being the first Albanian football club to move into the second round of the UEFA Cup Winner&#x27;s Cup. Two years prior Besa had been a Balkans Cup finalist, where they lost to Greek side Panionios 2–3 on aggregate. In the competition Besa won Group A against FK Crvenka and Veliko Tarnovo.

The club has won two Albanian Cup titles having appeared in the final eight times. They have placed as Superliga runners-up twice and have established third-place a total of eleven times. Some of the most memorable matches are the 9–1 win over Flamurtari in 1937, the 12–0 win over Elbasani in 1945, the 11–0 win over Apolonia in 1965 and the 7–1 win versus Sk Tirana in 1992.

Besa is also a winner of six different cups. In 1946 it won the &quot;Kryesia e Federatës Sportive&quot; Cup, in 1953 and 1957 it won the &quot;Bashkimet Profesionale të Shqipërisë&quot; Cup, in 1961 and 1963 it won the &quot;Gazeta Sporti&quot; Cup, in 1965 it won the &quot;Gazeta Bashkimi&quot; Cup. Youth team Besa U-19 has been crowned Albanian champions twice, in the 1992–1993 and 2008–2009 seasons. The U-17 team was most recently crowned champions in 2018.

Throughout its history Besa has competed in international tournaments and friendlies against such clubs as Sarajevo, Odra Opole, Dynamo Berlin, Progresul, Veliko Tarnovo, Crvenka, Panionios, Fremad Amager, Hibernian, Pas Ioannina, Bezanija, Litex Lovech, Ethnikos Achnas, Grasshopper Zürich, Olympiacos.

The former district region of Kavajë has three other professional football clubs: Egnatia Rrogozhinë, Golemi FC and Luzi United.

== Notable people ==
* Aleksandër Moisiu – 20th century actor of European stage and cinema.
* Spiro Moisiu – Major general of the Albanian National Liberation Army (1943–1944)
* Alfred Moisiu – 5th President of Albania (2002–2007).
* Kristina Koljaka – Albania&#x27;s first female sculptor.
* Mustafa Krantja – Founder of the first symphonic orchestra in Albania.
* Qemal Vogli – Goalkeeper of the Albania national football team (1947–1953)
* Kolë Xhumari – Author of the children&#x27;s book Abetare.
* Ermir Dobjani – Albania&#x27;s first Ombudsman (2000–2010).
* Nexhati Tafa – Screenwriter.
* Parashqevi Simaku – Singer of the 1980s.
* Altin Rraklli – Forward of the Albania national football team (1992–2005)
* Indrit Cara – activist and soldier during the Kosovo War (1998–1999)
* Haxhi Xhaferr Shkodra Religious leader,former first director of the madrasa, outstanding personality honored by the President of the Republic.
* Andi Lila – Defenceman of the Albania national football team 
* Sokol Cikalleshi – Striker of the Albania national football team
* Gazment Bardhi – Minister of Justice in 2017.
* Josif Budo – activist who became the first martyr of the anti-communist uprising in Albania.
* Regi Lushkja (born 1996) – footballer 
* Rrapush Papoj (born 1965) – cyclist and coach

== References ==

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q46702" start="0" end="6" title="Kavajë" label="Kavajë"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988031" start="65" end="81" title="Western Lowlands" label="Western Lowlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q222" start="92" end="99" title="Albania" label="Albania"/>
<link wikidata="Q229892" start="104" end="117" title="Tirana County" label="Tirana County"/>
<link wikidata="Q83285" start="130" end="136" title="Durrës" label="Durrës"/>
<link wikidata="Q19689" start="152" end="158" title="Tirana" label="Tiranë"/>
<link wikidata="Q1007425" start="175" end="185" title="Rrogozhinë" label="Rrogozhinë"/>
<link wikidata="Q13924" start="222" end="234" title="Adriatic Sea" label="Adriatic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q7418360" start="520" end="537" title="Sanjak of Albania" label="Sanjak of Albania"/>
<link wikidata="Q739524" start="619" end="632" title="Halil İnalcık" label="Halil İnalcık"/>
<link wikidata="Q217050" start="1215" end="1229" title="Late Antiquity" label="Late Antiquity"/>
<link wikidata="Q146715" start="1255" end="1263" title="Illyrians" label="Illyrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1271795" start="1273" end="1282" title="Taulantii" label="Taulantii"/>
<link wikidata="Q8071870" start="1334" end="1344" title="Zik-Xhafaj" label="Zik-Xhafaj"/>
<link wikidata="Q154552" start="1358" end="1372" title="Illyrian Wars" label="Roman Conquest"/>
<link wikidata="Q273783" start="1441" end="1452" title="Via Egnatia" label="Via Egnatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="1481" end="1487" title="Ancient Rome" label="Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q13924" start="1551" end="1563" title="Adriatic Sea" label="Adriatic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q35958" start="1571" end="1580" title="Bosphorus" label="Bosphorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q203681" start="1593" end="1612" title="Battle of Pharsalus" label="Battle of Pharsalus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048" start="1621" end="1634" title="Julius Caesar" label="Julius Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q125414" start="1653" end="1659" title="Pompey" label="Pompey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7499541" start="1676" end="1693" title="Shkëmbi i Kavajës" label="Shkëmbi i Kavajës"/>
<link wikidata="Q179284" start="1755" end="1767" title="Anna Komnene" label="Anna Komnena"/>
<link wikidata="Q47494978" start="2128" end="2141" title="Skuraj family" label="Skuraj family"/>
<link wikidata="Q2454379" start="2197" end="2220" title="Principality of Arbanon" label="Principality of Arbanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q211568" start="2339" end="2351" title="fleur-de-lis" label="fleur-de-lis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3303528" start="2401" end="2429" title="Symbols of Tirana" label="Emblem of the City of Tirana"/>
<link wikidata="Q611417" start="2682" end="2688" title="Myzeqe" label="Myzeqe"/>
<link wikidata="Q202308" start="2782" end="2795" title="Evliya Çelebi" label="Evliya Çelebi"/>
<link wikidata="Q334374" start="2853" end="2867" title="David Urquhart" label="David Urquhart"/>
<link wikidata="Q16959986" start="3046" end="3051" title="Vatra, the Pan-Albanian Federation of America" label="Vatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q199820" start="3070" end="3092" title="Paris Peace Conference, 1919" label="Paris Peace Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q4060587" start="3395" end="3401" title="franga" label="franga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973141" start="3664" end="3684" title="Near East Foundation" label="Near East Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q23559" start="3966" end="3982" title="Benito Mussolini" label="Benito Mussolini"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="4023" end="4035" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="4055" end="4059" title="Jews" label="Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q112197" start="4579" end="4606" title="Righteous among the Nations" label="Righteous among the Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q156591" start="4618" end="4628" title="Yad Vashem" label="Yad Vashem"/>
<link wikidata="Q43436" start="5964" end="5969" title="pearl" label="pearl"/>
<link wikidata="Q60695" start="7769" end="7773" title="KS Besa" label="Besa"/>
<link wikidata="Q845772" start="7790" end="7799" title="KF Partizani" label="Partizani"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988031" start="8210" end="8226" title="Western Lowlands" label="Western Lowlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q3303198" start="8261" end="8274" title="Port of Durrës" label="Bay of Durrës"/>
<link wikidata="Q83285" start="8418" end="8424" title="Durrës" label="Durrës"/>
<link wikidata="Q18165746" start="8565" end="8571" title="Kryezi, Kavajë" label="Kryezi"/>
<link wikidata="Q19689" start="8579" end="8585" title="Tirana" label="Tirana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1007425" start="8627" end="8637" title="Rrogozhinë" label="Rrogozhinë"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633832" start="8684" end="8695" title="Luz i Vogël" label="Luz i Vogël"/>
<link wikidata="Q6706548" start="8700" end="8710" title="Luz i Madh" label="Luz i Madh"/>
<link wikidata="Q13924" start="8741" end="8753" title="Adriatic Sea" label="Adriatic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q16359531" start="9078" end="9084" title="Karpen" label="Karpen"/>
<link wikidata="Q747820" start="9347" end="9352" title="Golem, Tirana" label="Golem"/>
<link wikidata="Q16359531" start="9377" end="9383" title="Karpen" label="Karpen"/>
<link wikidata="Q13046303" start="9496" end="9502" title="Spille" label="Spille"/>
<link wikidata="Q13045174" start="9520" end="9525" title="Rreth-Greth" label="Greth"/>
<link wikidata="Q13996" start="9568" end="9589" title="Mediterranean Climate" label="Mediterranean Climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q642882" start="11474" end="11494" title="Socialist Party of Albania" label="Socialist Party (PS)"/>
<link wikidata="Q845743" start="12618" end="12639" title="Democratic Party of Albania" label="Democratic Party (PD)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435606" start="19909" end="19919" title="fustanella" label="fustanella"/>
<link wikidata="Q281097" start="19956" end="19984" title="Albanian Declaration of Independence" label="Proclamation of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q3304274" start="21685" end="21702" title="Parashqevi Simaku" label="Parashqevi Simaku"/>
<link wikidata="Q854648" start="22328" end="22334" title="gossip" label="gossip"/>
<link wikidata="Q7590900" start="24369" end="24395" title="St. Paraskevi&amp;#x27;s Church, Çetë" label="St.Paraskevi&amp;#x27;s Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q657589" start="25965" end="25979" title="Kubelie Mosque" label="Kubelie Mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q467692" start="26455" end="26459" title="Bektashi Order" label="teqe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6706548" start="26539" end="26549" title="Luz i Madh" label="Luz i Madh"/>
<link wikidata="Q4896162" start="26626" end="26638" title="Besa Stadium" label="Besa Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q7590900" start="26729" end="26755" title="St. Paraskevi&amp;#x27;s Church, Çetë" label="St.Paraskevi&amp;#x27;s Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q16972362" start="26835" end="26839" title="Çetë, Kavajë" label="Çetë"/>
<link wikidata="Q6433474" start="26992" end="27012" title="Kostandin Shpataraku" label="Kostandin Shpataraku"/>
<link wikidata="Q13045174" start="27059" end="27070" title="Rreth-Greth" label="Rreth-Greth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2712288" start="27091" end="27107" title="Kryevidh" label="Kryevidh Commune"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="27247" end="27255" title="Soccer" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q222" start="27259" end="27266" title="Albania" label="Albania"/>
<link wikidata="Q60695" start="27282" end="27286" title="Besa Kavajë" label="Besa"/>
<link wikidata="Q186262" start="27356" end="27369" title="Albanian national football team" label="National Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q40241" start="27508" end="27534" title="UEFA Cup Winner&amp;#x27;s Cup" label="UEFA Cup Winner&amp;#x27;s Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q60695" start="27552" end="27556" title="Besa Kavajë" label="Besa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4574440" start="27568" end="27579" title="1971 Balkans Cup" label="Balkans Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q460494" start="27620" end="27629" title="Panionios" label="Panionios"/>
<link wikidata="Q2338230" start="27692" end="27702" title="FK Crvenka" label="FK Crvenka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1388893" start="27707" end="27721" title="FC Etar 1924 Veliko Tarnovo" label="Veliko Tarnovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q116805" start="27745" end="27757" title="Albanian Cup" label="Albanian Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q210183" start="27827" end="27836" title="Albanian Superliga" label="Superliga"/>
<link wikidata="Q60495" start="27968" end="27978" title="Flamurtari Vlorë" label="Flamurtari"/>
<link wikidata="Q846062" start="28006" end="28014" title="KS Elbasani" label="Elbasani"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129650" start="28042" end="28050" title="Apolonia Fier" label="Apolonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q210170" start="28082" end="28091" title="KF Tirana" label="Sk Tirana"/>
<link wikidata="Q239663" start="28676" end="28684" title="FK Sarajevo" label="Sarajevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q958856" start="28686" end="28696" title="Odra Opole" label="Odra Opole"/>
<link wikidata="Q652465" start="28698" end="28711" title="SV Dynamo" label="Dynamo Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195647" start="28713" end="28722" title="AFC Progresul București" label="Progresul"/>
<link wikidata="Q1388893" start="28724" end="28738" title="FC Etar 1924 Veliko Tarnovo" label="Veliko Tarnovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2338230" start="28740" end="28747" title="FK Crvenka" label="Crvenka"/>
<link wikidata="Q460494" start="28749" end="28758" title="Panionios" label="Panionios"/>
<link wikidata="Q549650" start="28760" end="28773" title="Fremad Amager" label="Fremad Amager"/>
<link wikidata="Q192597" start="28775" end="28784" title="Hibernian F.C." label="Hibernian"/>
<link wikidata="Q280679" start="28786" end="28798" title="Pas Ioannina" label="Pas Ioannina"/>
<link wikidata="Q953621" start="28800" end="28808" title="FK Bežanija" label="Bezanija"/>
<link wikidata="Q270420" start="28810" end="28822" title="PFC Litex Lovech" label="Litex Lovech"/>
<link wikidata="Q862791" start="28824" end="28839" title="Ethnikos Achna FC" label="Ethnikos Achnas"/>
<link wikidata="Q201360" start="28841" end="28859" title="Grasshopper Club Zürich" label="Grasshopper Zürich"/>
<link wikidata="Q19628" start="28861" end="28871" title="Olympiacos F.C." label="Olympiacos"/>
<link wikidata="Q194182" start="28885" end="28900" title="Kavajë District" label="district region"/>
<link wikidata="Q1302027" start="28956" end="28974" title="FK Egnatia" label="Egnatia Rrogozhinë"/>
<link wikidata="Q18125853" start="28976" end="28985" title="Golemi FC" label="Golemi FC"/>
<link wikidata="Q3373906" start="28990" end="29001" title="Luzi United" label="Luzi United"/>
<link wikidata="Q112362" start="29027" end="29044" title="Alexander Moissi" label="Aleksandër Moisiu"/>
<link wikidata="Q4501482" start="29098" end="29110" title="Spiro Moisiu" label="Spiro Moisiu"/>
<link wikidata="Q157148" start="29113" end="29126" title="Major general" label="Major general"/>
<link wikidata="Q3299868" start="29134" end="29167" title="National Liberation Movement (Albania)" label="Albanian National Liberation Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q190889" start="29182" end="29195" title="Alfred Moisiu" label="Alfred Moisiu"/>
<link wikidata="Q136664" start="29202" end="29222" title="President of the Republic of Albania" label="President of Albania"/>
<link wikidata="Q4117170" start="29238" end="29254" title="Kristina Koljaka" label="Kristina Koljaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q11016500" start="29297" end="29312" title="Mustafa Krantja" label="Mustafa Krantja"/>
<link wikidata="Q42998" start="29336" end="29355" title="Orchestra" label="symphonic orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q7267384" start="29370" end="29381" title="Qemal Vogli" label="Qemal Vogli"/>
<link wikidata="Q186262" start="29402" end="29432" title="Albania national football team" label="Albania national football team"/>
<link wikidata="Q6427998" start="29447" end="29459" title="Kolë Xhumari" label="Kolë Xhumari"/>
<link wikidata="Q65074602" start="29497" end="29504" title="Abetare" label="Abetare"/>
<link wikidata="Q16728598" start="29508" end="29521" title="Ermir Dobjani" label="Ermir Dobjani"/>
<link wikidata="Q169180" start="29545" end="29554" title="Ombudsman" label="Ombudsman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7020883" start="29570" end="29582" title="Nexhati Tafa" label="Nexhati Tafa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3304274" start="29601" end="29618" title="Parashqevi Simaku" label="Parashqevi Simaku"/>
<link wikidata="Q441400" start="29644" end="29657" title="Altin Rraklli" label="Altin Rraklli"/>
<link wikidata="Q186262" start="29675" end="29705" title="Albania national football team" label="Albania national football team"/>
<link wikidata="Q13040166" start="29720" end="29731" title="Indrit Cara" label="Indrit Cara"/>
<link wikidata="Q190029" start="29766" end="29776" title="Kosovo War" label="Kosovo War"/>
<link wikidata="Q131286265" start="29791" end="29812" title="Haxhi Xhaferr Shkodra" label="Haxhi Xhaferr Shkodra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2725063" start="29936" end="29945" title="Andi Lila" label="Andi Lila"/>
<link wikidata="Q186262" start="29966" end="29996" title="Albania national football team" label="Albania national football team"/>
<link wikidata="Q7555159" start="30000" end="30016" title="Sokol Cikalleshi" label="Sokol Cikalleshi"/>
<link wikidata="Q186262" start="30034" end="30064" title="Albania national football team" label="Albania national football team"/>
<link wikidata="Q47485981" start="30067" end="30081" title="Gazment Bardhi" label="Gazment Bardhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q16828443" start="30115" end="30125" title="Josif Budo" label="Josif Budo"/>
<link wikidata="Q222" start="30199" end="30206" title="Albania" label="Albania"/>
<link wikidata="Q16902195" start="30210" end="30222" title="Regi Lushkja" label="Regi Lushkja"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="30237" end="30247" title="Association football" label="footballer"/>
<link wikidata="Q16902227" start="30251" end="30264" title="Rrapush Papoj" label="Rrapush Papoj"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="313016" wikidata="Q1413972" url="?curid=313016" title="Rheinbote">
<text>Rheinbote (&quot;Rhine Messenger&quot;, or V4) was a German short range ballistic rocket developed by Rheinmetall-Borsig at Berlin-Marienfelde during World War II. It was intended to replace, or at least supplement, large-bore artillery by providing fire support at long ranges in an easily transportable form.

== History ==
One of the problems for the German military, and indeed any mobile military force, is the weight of the artillery and, more importantly, its ammunition supply. Battlefield rockets were intended to circumvent the problems, which led to the development of &quot;Rheinbote&quot;. The &quot;Rheinbote&quot; was the successor of the earlier &quot;Rheintochter&quot; (Rhine Maiden).

Developed in 1943 by the Rheinmetall-Borsig company, &quot;Rheinbote&quot; was a four-stage solid-fuelled rocket, and the only long-range battlefield ballistic missile to enter service in World War II. The first test flights were carried out that year. Several changes were made to the system, but the basic design remained the same. It measured , with fins at the tail and one set of additional fins at each stage. The propellant was a diglycol dinitrate mix, which enabled test models to achieve a speed of , the fastest rocket of the period.

The Rheinbote carried a warhead (just 2.3% of the missile&#x27;s total weight) to a height of , for an effective range of ; it reached over in testing. For shorter ranges, some of the stages could be removed. It was launched from a simple rail on a mobile trailer, based on the one used to transport the V-2. It was aimed simply by pointing the trailer and elevating the launch gantry, a method not guaranteed to be accurate.

Over 220 were constructed, with over 200 being used against the Belgian port of Antwerp between November 1944 and the end of the war. They caused only limited damage in small unpredictable areas of the city.

Some were fired from positions near the town of Nunspeet in the Netherlands.

The concept of long-range artillery rockets on the battlefield would remain undeveloped after the war. Even &quot;Rheinbote&quot; was not used in its intended role, but instead as a smaller version of the V-2 missile in the strategic role, for which its warhead was essentially useless due to its poor accuracy, small size, and its fusing, since it tended to bury itself in the ground before exploding.

After the war, the Soviet Union seized the design.

== Design ==
The &quot;Rheinbote&quot; was a four-stage solid fuel rocket. The slender body measured in at tall and could carry a relatively small payload over a distance of approximately . Each of the four stages fired in succession with the first stage getting the rocket off the ground, the second and third stages lifting it further aloft, and the fourth stage lifting it to its maximum altitude. It was a ballistic missile with relatively low accuracy. Upon detonation the warhead produced no fragment damage and produced a crater no larger than across. The accuracy of the &quot;Rheinbote&quot; was found impossible to calculate after tests, because the craters proved too small to find.

== Characteristics ==
* Primary function: artillery support
* Contractor: Rheinmetall-Borsig
* Fuel source: diglycol-dinitrate solid propellant rocket
* Length: 
* Diameter:
* Wingspan:
* Launch weight: 
* Speed: 
* Warhead: 
* Range: (effective); (maximum)
* Fuzes:
* Unit cost:
* Date deployed: November 1944
* Users: Germany

== See also ==
* List of World War II guided missiles of Germany

== Notes ==
== Sources ==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1413972" start="43" end="45" title="Rheinbote" label="V4"/>
<link wikidata="Q161544" start="102" end="113" title="Rheinmetall" label="Rheinmetall"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="124" end="130" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q695777" start="131" end="142" title="Marienfelde" label="Marienfelde"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="150" end="162" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q64418" start="430" end="439" title="artillery" label="artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140813" start="668" end="680" title="Rheintochter" label="Rheintochter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5275149" start="1141" end="1159" title="Diethylene glycol dinitrate" label="diglycol dinitrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q174640" start="1554" end="1557" title="V-2 rocket" label="V-2"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1757" end="1764" title="Antwerp#20th century" label="Antwerp"/>
<link wikidata="Q4403814" start="1934" end="1942" title="Round House (Nunspeet, Netherlands)" label="Nunspeet"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="2387" end="2399" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q6571836" start="3461" end="3508" title="List of World War II guided missiles of Germany" label="List of World War II guided missiles of Germany"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="313019" wikidata="Q620347" url="?curid=313019" title="Wasserfall">
<text>The  (&quot;Waterfall remote-controlled anti-aircraft rocket&quot;) was a German guided supersonic surface-to-air missile project of World War II. Development was not completed before the end of the war and it was not used operationally.

The system was based on many of the technologies developed for the V-2 rocket program, including the rocket itself, which was essentially a much scaled-down version of the V-2 airframe. The rocket motor used new fuels as it was expected to be stored in ready-to-fire form for months, and the guidance system used external fins for control instead of relying entirely on the steerable rocket motor exhaust.

Among the many development problems, control of the high-speed rocket was a significant concern, leading to the development of a radio control system where the operator sat in a reclining chair so he could see the target as it passed overhead. Another significant problem was the lack of a suitable proximity fuse, which was required as there was no way for the operator to visually determine when the rocket was close to a target that was directly above it. A radar-aided system was still under development and not ready for operational use.

== Technical characteristics ==
 was essentially an anti-aircraft development of the V-2 rocket, sharing the same general layout and shaping. Since the missile had to fly only to the altitudes of the attacking bombers, and needed a far smaller warhead to destroy these, it could be much smaller than the V-2, about the size. The design also included an additional set of fins located at the middle of the fuselage to provide extra maneuvering capability. Steering during the launch phase was accomplished by four graphite rudders placed in the exhaust stream of the combustion chamber, as in the V-2, but once high airspeeds had been attained this was accomplished by four air rudders mounted on the rocket tail.

Unlike the V-2, was designed to stand ready for periods of up to a month and fire on command, therefore the volatile liquid oxygen used in the V-2 was inappropriate. A new engine design, developed by Dr. Walter Thiel, was based on &quot;Visol&quot; (vinyl isobutyl ether) and &quot;SV-Stoff&quot; or red fuming nitric acid (RFNA), (94% nitric acid, 6% dinitrogen tetroxide). This hypergolic mixture was forced into the combustion chamber by pressurising the fuel tanks with nitrogen gas released from another tank. was to be launched from rocket bases (code-named &quot;Vesuvius&quot;) that could tolerate leaked hypergolic fuels in the event of a launch problem.

Guidance was to be a simple radio control manual command to line of sight (MCLOS) system for use against daytime targets. Commands were sent to the missile using a modified version of the FuG 203/FuG 230 &quot;Kehl-Straßburg&quot; (code name &quot;Burgund&quot;) radio-guidance system that used a joystick.
Originally developed for anti-ship missiles dropped by bombers, it was used to direct both the unpowered Fritz X and rocket-boosted Henschel Hs 293. For the anti-aircraft role, the controller was mounted beside a chair on a framework that allowed the operator to tilt back to easily look at targets above him, rotating as needed to keep the target in sight.

Night-time use was considerably more complex because neither the target nor the missile would be easily visible. For this role a new system known as &quot;Rheinland&quot; was under development. Rheinland used a radar unit for tracking the target and a transponder in the missile for locating it in flight. A simple analog computer guided the missile into the tracking radar beam as soon as possible after launch, using a radio direction finder and the transponder to locate it. Once it entered the radar beam the transponder responded to the radar signals and created a strong &quot;blip&quot; on the display. The operator then used the joystick to guide the missile so that the blips overlapped.

The original design had called for a warhead, but because of accuracy concerns it was replaced with a much larger one of , based on a liquid explosive. The idea was to create a large blast area effect amidst the enemy bomber stream, which would conceivably bring down several airplanes for each missile deployed. For daytime use the operator would detonate the warhead by remote control.

== Development ==
Conceptual work began in 1941, and final specifications were defined on 2 November 1942. The first models were being tested in March 1943, but a major setback occurred in August 1943 when Dr. Walter Thiel was killed during the Operation Hydra bombings, the start of the Allied campaign against German V-weapons including V-2 production. After the first successful firing (the third prototype) on 8 March 1944, three trial launches were completed by the end of June 1944. A launch on 8 January 1945 was a failure, with the engine &quot;fizzling&quot; and launching the missile to only 7 km of altitude at subsonic speeds. The following February saw a successful launch which reached a supersonic speed of 770 m/s (2,800 km/h) in vertical flight. Thirty-five trial firings had been completed by the time Peenemünde was evacuated on 17 February 1945.

The Bäckebo rocket, a V-2 rocket using radio guidance, crashed in Sweden on 13 June 1944.

== Assessment ==
According to Albert Speer and Carl Krauch it could have devastated the Allied bomber fleets. Speer, Germany&#x27;s Reich Minister of Armaments and War Production, later claimed:
== See also ==
* Enzian
* Henschel Hs 117 (&quot;Butterfly&quot;)
* List of missiles
* List of German guided weapons of World War II
* List of surface-to-air missiles

== References ==
== External links ==

* EMW Wasserfall Luft &#x27;46 entry
* Wasserfall German Surface to Air Missile
* W-10 Drawing </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q620347" start="4" end="4" title="Wasserfall" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q221337" start="88" end="98" title="supersonic" label="supersonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q466704" start="99" end="121" title="surface-to-air missile" label="surface-to-air missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="133" end="145" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q174640" start="306" end="316" title="V-2 rocket" label="V-2 rocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q335225" start="429" end="441" title="rocket motor" label="rocket motor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436167" start="775" end="788" title="radio control" label="radio control"/>
<link wikidata="Q333133" start="945" end="959" title="proximity fuse" label="proximity fuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q47528" start="1107" end="1112" title="radar" label="radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q86739852" start="1242" end="1255" title="anti-aircraft" label="anti-aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q618153" start="2021" end="2034" title="liquid oxygen" label="liquid oxygen"/>
<link wikidata="Q77440" start="2108" end="2120" title="Walter Thiel" label="Walter Thiel"/>
<link wikidata="Q901644" start="2204" end="2226" title="red fuming nitric acid" label="red fuming nitric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q83320" start="2240" end="2251" title="nitric acid" label="nitric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q382984" start="2256" end="2276" title="dinitrogen tetroxide" label="dinitrogen tetroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q81614" start="2284" end="2294" title="hypergolic" label="hypergolic"/>
<link wikidata="Q627" start="2378" end="2386" title="nitrogen" label="nitrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q251859" start="2611" end="2642" title="manual command to line of sight" label="manual command to line of sight"/>
<link wikidata="Q22115601" start="2757" end="2799" title="Kehl-Strasbourg radio control link" label="FuG 203/FuG 230 &amp;quot;Kehl-Straßburg&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q643532" start="2901" end="2918" title="anti-ship missile" label="anti-ship missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425385" start="2981" end="2988" title="Fritz X" label="Fritz X"/>
<link wikidata="Q586159" start="3008" end="3023" title="Henschel Hs 293" label="Henschel Hs 293"/>
<link wikidata="Q849640" start="3487" end="3498" title="transponder" label="transponder"/>
<link wikidata="Q63759" start="3550" end="3565" title="analog computer" label="analog computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367488" start="3656" end="3678" title="radio direction finder" label="radio direction finder"/>
<link wikidata="Q827512" start="3970" end="3977" title="warhead" label="warhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q77440" start="4532" end="4544" title="Walter Thiel" label="Walter Thiel"/>
<link wikidata="Q15264163" start="4567" end="4582" title="Operation Hydra (1943)" label="Operation Hydra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1766984" start="4610" end="4650" title="Operation Crossbow" label="Allied campaign against German V-weapons"/>
<link wikidata="Q8424" start="4944" end="4952" title="Subsonic flight" label="subsonic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5193" end="5207" title="Sweden during World War II#The Bäckebo rocket" label="Bäckebo rocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q60045" start="5310" end="5322" title="Albert Speer" label="Albert Speer"/>
<link wikidata="Q91024" start="5327" end="5338" title="Carl Krauch" label="Carl Krauch"/>
<link wikidata="Q834877" start="5412" end="5458" title="Reich Minister of Armaments and War Production" label="Reich Minister of Armaments and War Production"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346037" start="5492" end="5498" title="Enzian" label="Enzian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545104" start="5501" end="5516" title="Henschel Hs 117" label="Henschel Hs 117"/>
<link wikidata="Q3244242" start="5543" end="5559" title="List of missiles" label="List of missiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q6571836" start="5562" end="5607" title="List of German guided weapons of World War II" label="List of German guided weapons of World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q500960" start="5610" end="5641" title="List of surface-to-air missiles" label="List of surface-to-air missiles"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="313025" wikidata="Q11325111" url="?curid=313025" title="Needlegun">
<text>A needlegun, also known as a needler, flechette gun or fletcher, is a firearm that fires small, sometimes fin-stabilized, metal darts or flechettes. Theoretically, the advantages of a needlegun over conventional projectile firearms are in its compact size, high rate of fire, and extreme muzzle velocity. The needle presents less frontal area than a bullet, producing less drag and thus more effective range (especially in water) than a wider projectile of the same mass and velocity. There have been experiments to make guided flechettes that can home in on targets.

== Pre-industrial ==
The first projectiles in early gun systems dating from the 14th century were typically hand wrought iron flechettes wrapped in a leather sabot. However, due to the expense and trouble of making these darts in a pre-industrial society, they were soon replaced with the less accurate stone cannonball.

==World War I==

Flechettes again came into mass use in the years before World War I. Starting as early as 1910, the French began experimenting with air-dropped flechettes; flechettes dropped from planes were used extensively during the war.

==Vietnam War==
A June 1978 issue of &quot;Gallery Magazine&quot; quotes L. Fletcher Prouty observing a test of flechette weapons in 1960 and the testimony of William E. Colby in the Church Committee on September 16 to 18, 1975 describing flechette weapons. Charles A. Senseney testified that he was a project engineer of the M-1 dart launcher that was described as resembling a M1911 pistol with a sight mount at the top.

Senseney claimed the M-1 was designed for the US Army Special Forces to be used in the Vietnam War but never got there due to not being able to get into the US Army&#x27;s logistics system in time. Flechette ammunition encased in a sabot was available for the M-16, shotguns, and other weapons for use in Vietnam.

==Underwater==
A June 1965 &quot;Esquire&quot; magazine story on the making of the then-upcoming James Bond film &quot;Thunderball&quot; featured drawings of dart firing pistols that were not used in the completed film.

At the same time several makes of underwater firearms fired a steel bolt just over 4 inches long (but without fins).

==Special Purpose Individual Weapon==

The Special Purpose Individual Weapon was a long-running United States Army program to develop, in part, a workable XM-216 flechette-based &quot;rifle&quot;, though other concepts were also involved. The concepts continued to be tested under the Future Rifle Program and again in the 1980s and 1990s under the Advanced Combat Rifle program, but neither program resulted in a system useful enough to warrant replacing the current M16.

== In fiction ==

In Marko Kloos&#x27;s &quot;Frontlines&quot; series of novels, the military commonly use M66 flechette rifles and pistols putting out rounds of thousands a minute.

In William Gibson&#x27;s novel &quot;Neuromancer&quot;, the character Molly Millions uses a flechette pistol.

In Neal Stephenson&#x27;s novel &quot;Snow Crash&quot;, characters use a modified version of a needle/railgun called Reason.

In Michael Moorcock&#x27;s Jerry Cornelius stories, the title character uses a transistorized needlegun.

In Terry Brooks&#x27;s &quot;Genesis of Shannara&quot; stories, multiple characters use flechette guns.

In TSR&#x27;s 1982 science fiction role-playing game Star Frontiers, a &quot;needler&quot; was a common weapon with multiple variations existing in the game. 

In Bungie&#x27;s 1996 video game sequel, &quot;Marathon Infinity&quot;, the KKV-7 10mm SMG Flechette makes its debut and introduces the player to an extreme rate of fire.

In the &quot;Halo&quot; video games, originally developed by Bungie, the Needler is an alien weapon that fires homing crystalline needles that explode after a delay. In 2010, the Needle Rifle was introduced to the series with the release of &quot;&quot;. 

In &quot;Call of Duty: Black Ops 4&quot;, a flechette rifle called the S6 Stingray can be unlocked. It is a two-round burst tactical rifle firing high damage serrated projectiles. Impact blasting projectiles can be equipped for maximum damage.

In &quot;Fallout 2&quot; there is a pistol variant of flechette firing weapons known as the &quot;Needler Pistol&quot;.

In the videogame F.E.A.R., there are several 10mm flechette nailguns.

In the fictional universe of &quot;Warhammer 40,000&quot;, Needleguns are occasionally mentioned as being used by non-military combatants, such as inquisitors and assassins.

In Frank Herbert&#x27;s &quot;Dune&quot; novel, many organizations and houses wielded flechette projectile weapons, and a needlegun is featured in the 1984 film adaptation as a pistol wielded by Gurney Halleck.

In Robert A Heinlein&#x27;s novel &quot;The Number of the Beast&quot;, the character Deety (Deja Thoris Burroughs-Carter) owns an illegal flechette pistol for self-defence.

In David Weber&#x27;s Honorverse, several factions use flechette guns.

In K. A. Applegate&#x27;s Animorphs, the alien race of Howlers use flechette guns.

In Dan Simmons&#x27; Hyperion Cantos, flechette guns are used by many military and police forces.

==See also==
* Nail gun
* SCMITR
* Steyr ACR
* 6.5×25mm CBJ

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q11325111" start="2" end="11" title="Needlegun" label="needlegun"/>
<link wikidata="Q11325111" start="29" end="36" title="Needlegun" label="needler"/>
<link wikidata="Q11325111" start="38" end="51" title="Needlegun" label="flechette gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q11325111" start="55" end="63" title="Needlegun" label="fletcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q12796" start="70" end="77" title="firearm" label="firearm"/>
<link wikidata="Q20726474" start="137" end="146" title="flechette" label="flechette"/>
<link wikidata="Q174583" start="199" end="222" title="bullet" label="conventional projectile"/>
<link wikidata="Q753454" start="262" end="274" title="rate of fire" label="rate of fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q920165" start="288" end="303" title="muzzle velocity" label="muzzle velocity"/>
<link wikidata="Q286" start="719" end="726" title="leather" label="leather"/>
<link wikidata="Q1580802" start="727" end="732" title="Sabot (firearms)" label="sabot"/>
<link wikidata="Q3772521" start="801" end="823" title="pre-industrial society" label="pre-industrial society"/>
<link wikidata="Q20726474" start="908" end="917" title="Flechette" label="Flechette"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="964" end="975" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q5518979" start="1177" end="1193" title="Gallery (magazine)" label="Gallery Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918736" start="1207" end="1225" title="L. Fletcher Prouty" label="L. Fletcher Prouty"/>
<link wikidata="Q482827" start="1293" end="1309" title="William E. Colby" label="William E. Colby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089721" start="1317" end="1333" title="Church Committee" label="Church Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q201419" start="1513" end="1525" title="M1911 pistol" label="M1911 pistol"/>
<link wikidata="Q482421" start="1604" end="1626" title="US Army Special Forces" label="US Army Special Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="1645" end="1656" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q170318" start="1818" end="1822" title="M16 rifle" label="M-16"/>
<link wikidata="Q107724" start="1992" end="2003" title="Thunderball (film)" label="Thunderball"/>
<link wikidata="Q3622819" start="2128" end="2146" title="underwater firearm" label="underwater firearm"/>
<link wikidata="Q7574693" start="2255" end="2288" title="Special Purpose Individual Weapon" label="Special Purpose Individual Weapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="2308" end="2326" title="United States Army" label="United States Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q20726474" start="2374" end="2383" title="flechette" label="flechette"/>
<link wikidata="Q4686153" start="2561" end="2582" title="Advanced Combat Rifle" label="Advanced Combat Rifle"/>
<link wikidata="Q170318" start="2680" end="2683" title="M16 rifle" label="M16"/>
<link wikidata="Q19885245" start="2707" end="2718" title="Marko Kloos" label="Marko Kloos"/>
<link wikidata="Q188987" start="2872" end="2886" title="William Gibson" label="William Gibson"/>
<link wikidata="Q662029" start="2906" end="2917" title="Neuromancer" label="Neuromancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6896639" start="2939" end="2953" title="Molly Millions" label="Molly Millions"/>
<link wikidata="Q312853" start="2983" end="2998" title="Neal Stephenson" label="Neal Stephenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q768389" start="3018" end="3028" title="Snow Crash" label="Snow Crash"/>
<link wikidata="Q316138" start="3109" end="3125" title="Michael Moorcock" label="Michael Moorcock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503293" start="3133" end="3148" title="Jerry Cornelius" label="Jerry Cornelius"/>
<link wikidata="Q318845" start="3215" end="3227" title="Terry Brooks" label="Terry Brooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q3822522" start="3241" end="3260" title="The Genesis of Shannara" label="Genesis of Shannara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543201" start="3320" end="3323" title="TSR, Inc." label="TSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q7600723" start="3370" end="3384" title="Star Frontiers" label="Star Frontiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q735267" start="3480" end="3486" title="Bungie" label="Bungie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2756410" start="3524" end="3541" title="Marathon Infinity" label="Marathon Infinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747150" start="3662" end="3666" title="Halo (franchise)" label="Halo"/>
<link wikidata="Q735267" start="3710" end="3716" title="Bungie" label="Bungie"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3915" end="3940" title="Call of Duty: Black Ops 4" label="Call of Duty: Black Ops 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q910938" start="4160" end="4169" title="Fallout 2" label="Fallout 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q2620856" start="4289" end="4297" title="F.E.A.R." label="F.E.A.R."/>
<link wikidata="Q209026" start="4378" end="4394" title="Warhammer 40,000" label="Warhammer 40,000"/>
<link wikidata="Q7934" start="4521" end="4534" title="Frank Herbert" label="Frank Herbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q190192" start="4548" end="4552" title="Dune (novel)" label="Dune"/>
<link wikidata="Q114819" start="4669" end="4689" title="Dune (1984 film)" label="1984 film adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q384546" start="4713" end="4727" title="Gurney Halleck" label="Gurney Halleck"/>
<link wikidata="Q123078" start="4733" end="4750" title="Robert A Heinlein" label="Robert A Heinlein"/>
<link wikidata="Q2703133" start="4770" end="4793" title="The Number of the Beast (novel)" label="The Number of the Beast"/>
<link wikidata="Q588653" start="4907" end="4918" title="David Weber" label="David Weber"/>
<link wikidata="Q3052521" start="4926" end="4936" title="Honorverse" label="Honorverse"/>
<link wikidata="Q260730" start="4979" end="4994" title="K. A. Applegate" label="K. A. Applegate"/>
<link wikidata="Q548365" start="5002" end="5011" title="Animorphs" label="Animorphs"/>
<link wikidata="Q297538" start="5063" end="5074" title="Dan Simmons" label="Dan Simmons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1213577" start="5081" end="5096" title="Hyperion Cantos" label="Hyperion Cantos"/>
<link wikidata="Q77257" start="5174" end="5182" title="Nail gun" label="Nail gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q17142227" start="5185" end="5191" title="SCMITR" label="SCMITR"/>
<link wikidata="Q693825" start="5194" end="5203" title="Steyr ACR" label="Steyr ACR"/>
<link wikidata="Q4641590" start="5206" end="5218" title="6.5×25mm CBJ" label="6.5×25mm CBJ"/>
</links>
</doc>
