<doc id="311735" wikidata="Q1987713" url="?curid=311735" title="Operation Blue Star">
<text>Operation Blue Star was a military operation by the Indian Armed Forces conducted between 1 and 10 June 1984 to remove Jarnail Singh Bhindranwale and other Sikh militants from the Golden Temple (Harmandir Sahib), a holy site of Sikhism, and its adjacent buildings.

A long-standing movement advocating for greater political rights for the Sikh community had previously existed in the Indian state of Punjab, and in 1973, Sikh activists presented the Indian government with the Anandpur Sahib Resolution, a list of demands for greater autonomy for Punjab. The resolution was rejected by the Indian government. In July 1982, Harchand Singh Longowal, the president of the Sikh political party Shiromani Akali Dal, invited Bhindranwale, who was wanted by authorities, to take up residence in the Golden Temple to evade arrest. Bhindranwale had organized killer squads to eliminate supposed enemies of Sikhism. From the Harmandir Sahib complex, Bhindranwale orchestrated militants to kill hundreds of Hindus, and used terrorism to evoke fear among Hindus, hoping to incite their mass flight from Punjab. On 1 June 1984, after negotiations with the militants failed, Indian prime minister Indira Gandhi ordered the army to launch Operation Blue Star in haste, attacking the Golden Temple and scores of other Sikh temples and sites across Punjab which included killing civilians and devotees too.

The military underestimated the firepower possessed by the Sikh militants, whose armaments included Chinese-made rocket-propelled grenade launchers and ammunition with armour-piercing capabilities. Hoping to avoid damage to the holy site, Indian forces unsuccessfully assaulted the temple using light weaponry and quickly resorted to using heavy weapons, including tanks, helicopters and artillery to dislodge the well-fortified Sikh militants. Combat devolved into protracted urban warfare, with the Indian forces committing significant forces to slowly gain ground. Eventually, the Sikh militants ran out of most of their ammunition on 6 June, and by 10 June fighting had largely ceased, with the Indian forces in control of the complex. The Indian government attributed high civilian casualties to Sikh militants using pilgrims trapped inside the temple as human shields. However, Indian forces were aware that civilians were present inside, and the operation began on a Sikh religious day, the martyrdom day of Guru Arjan Dev, when many worshippers would be present. Many civilians were subject to extrajudicial killings by the military during the operation.

The military action in the temple complex was criticized by Sikhs worldwide, who interpreted it as an assault on the Sikh religion and the entire Sikh community. Five months after the operation, on 31 October 1984, Indira Gandhi was assassinated in retaliation by two Sikhs, Satwant Singh and Beant Singh. Her party, the Indian National Congress, utilized public outcry over her death, leading to the 1984 anti-Sikh riots led by Congress workers and angered mobs, which resulted in the deaths of thousands of Sikh civilians. Despite accomplishing its stated objectives, the operation has been described as &quot;disastrous&quot; for the Indian military and state. It greatly exacerbated tensions between the Indian government and the Sikh community, many of whom had been demanding a separate state. Meanwhile, the anti-Sikh riots of 1984 turned a series of police operations into widespread sectarian violence. The brutality of the operation and high civilian casualties spawned an insurgency in Punjab, which would be waged by Sikh militants for over a decade. The operation has been used as a case study highlighting the importance of respecting religious and cultural sensitivity prior to launching military operations. The complex would later be raided twice more as part of Operation Black Thunder I and II, with both operations having little to no civilian casualties or damage to the Temple despite larger amounts of militants than Operation Blue Star.

==Background==
In the years leading up to the operation, there was a significant build-up in agitation for greater autonomy for the Sikh community. Economic and social pressures driven by the Green Revolution led many young Sikh men to support varying degrees of self-determination for Sikhs and Punjab, with many even advocating independence from India.

The introduction of mechanised agricultural techniques led to uneven distribution of wealth in Punjab. Industrial development did not occur at the same pace of agricultural development in Punjab, as the Indian government was reluctant to set up heavy industries in Punjab due to its status as a high-risk border state with Pakistan. Meanwhile, a rapid increase in higher education opportunities without adequate rise in jobs resulted in an increase in unemployment among educated youth. The resulting unemployed young Sikhs were drawn to militant groups, which formed the backbone of increasing militancy.

In the 1950s, the Akali Dal party launched the Punjabi Suba movement, demanding a new state within India with a majority of Punjabi speaking people, out of undivided East Punjab under the leadership of Sant Fateh Singh. This movement resulted in fraught relations with the union government, and the Golden Temple, the holiest site in Sikhism, was raided in 1955, and many of the movement&#x27;s leaders were arrested. In 1966, after negotiations, the present Punjab state with a Sikh majority was formed. The Akali Dal came to power in the new Punjab state in March 1967, but early governments didn&#x27;t last long due to internal conflicts and power struggles within the party. Later, the party strengthened and party governments completed their full term and eventually came to play a major role in the developments to come.

After being routed in the 1972 Punjab election, the Akali Dal put forward the Anandpur Sahib Resolution in 1973 to demand more autonomy to Punjab. The resolution was rejected by the Indian government. Activist Jarnail Singh Bhindranwale then joined the Akali Dal, and launched the Dharam Yudh Morcha movement in 1982, in a bid to urge the Indian government to implement the Anandpur Sahib Resolution.

==Prelude==
Following the events of the 1978 Sikh-Nirankari clashes and the Dharam Yudh Morcha, Bhindranwale had risen to prominence in Sikh political circles with his policy of getting the Anandpur Resolution passed, failing which he wanted to declare a separate country of Khalistan as a homeland for Sikhs. The resolution declared its goals within the context of remaining within the federal union of India, and leaving the powers of foreign relations, defence, currency, and general communications subject to the jurisdiction of the Indian central government. Harchand Singh Longwal, the leader of the Akali Dal, stated, &quot;[let] us make it clear once and for all that the Sikhs have no designs to get away from India in any manner. What they simply want is that they should be allowed to live within India as Sikhs, free from all direct and indirect interference and tampering with their religious way of life. Undoubtedly, the Sikhs have the same nationality as other Indians.&quot; Nonetheless, Prime Minister Indira Gandhi, viewed the Anandpur Sahib Resolution as a secessionist document.

===Initial Indian intelligence situation===
The reluctance of the central government to deescalate the situation or offer major concessions has often been attributed to foreign influence. In the early 1980s, one of the main aims of Soviet KGB active measures with regards to India was to manufacture evidence that the CIA and Pakistani intelligence were behind the growth of Sikh separatism in Punjab. In 1981, the Soviets launched Operation Kontakt, which was centered around a forged document purporting to contain details of the weapons and money provided by the Pakistani Inter-Services Intelligence (ISI) to Sikh militants who wanted to create an independent country. According to agent reports, the level of anxiety in the Indian embassy in Islamabad regarding Pakistani support for Sikh separatists indicated that Operation Kontakt was successfully achieving its goals of creating an alarmist effect.

The Soviets used a new recruit in the New Delhi residency named &quot;Agent S&quot; who was close to Indira Gandhi as a major channel for providing her misleading information. Agent S provided Indira Gandhi with false documents purporting to show Pakistani involvement in the Khalistan conspiracy. In November 1982, Yuri Andropov, the leader of the Soviet Union, approved a proposal to fabricate Pakistani intelligence documents detailing ISI plans to foment religious disturbances in Punjab and promote the creation of Khalistan as an independent Sikh state. The KGB became confident that it could continue to deceive Indira Gandhi indefinitely with fabricated reports of CIA and Pakistani conspiracies against her. The Soviets persuaded Rajiv Gandhi during a visit to Moscow in 1983 that the CIA was engaged in subversion in the Punjab. When Rajiv Gandhi returned to India, he declared this to be true. Indira Gandhi&#x27;s decision to move troops into the Punjab was based on her taking seriously the disinformation provided by the Soviets regarding secret CIA support for the Sikhs.

In 2005, Christopher Andrew concluded that the KGB was ultimately responsible for Indira Gandhi and others in the central government exaggerating the threats posed by the Sikh militants, Pakistan, and the CIA. The KGB role in facilitating Operation Blue Star was acknowledged by Subramanian Swamy in 1992, who stated, 
[the] 1984 Operation Bluestar became necessary because of the vast disinformation against Sant Bhindranwale by the KGB, and repeated inside Parliament by the Congress Party of India.

In addition to Soviet influence, India was also aware of actual Pakistani influence and armament operations among the Sikh militants. According to anthropologist Cynthia Keppley Mahmood, Kashmiri fighters were present in the Golden Temple complex in 1984; both the Punjab and Kashmir insurgencies shared links with the Pakistan secret service whose aegis provided arms and training.

===Militant fortifications and initial violence===
Following the 1978 clashes, Bhindranwale&#x27;s followers had begun keeping firearms and fortified the gurdwara that served as the headquarters of the Damdami Taksal religious center.

In July 1982, Harchand Singh Longowal invited Bhindranwale to take up residence in the Golden Temple complex. He called Bhindranwale &quot;our stave to beat the government&quot;. On 19 July 1982, Bhindranwale and approximately 200 armed militants occupied the Guru Nanak Niwas, a guest house for pilgrims, within the precincts of the Golden Temple complex. Bhindranwale had effectively made the complex his headquarters. From there he met and was interviewed by international television crews.

On 23 April 1983, Punjab Police Deputy Inspector General A. S. Atwal was shot dead by a gunman in the complex as he left the complex. The following day, Longowal accused Bhindranwale of involvement in the murder. The Punjab Assembly noted that the murder in the temple premises confirmed the charges that the extremists were being sheltered and given active support in religious buildings around the Golden Temple complex, especially the Guru Nanak Niwas. After the murder of six Hindu bus passengers in the 1983 Dhilwan Bus Massacre, President&#x27;s rule was imposed in Punjab state. This led to increasing communal tension between Sikhs and Hindus as Hindu mobs in Karnal, Haryana murdered 8 Sikhs and set fire to a gurdwara on 19 February 1984.

===Continued occupation of the Golden Temple complex by Sikh militants===

During debate in the Parliament of India members of both houses demanded the arrest of Bhindranwale. Sensing a prospect of his arrest from the hostel premises, he convinced SGPC president Tohra to set up his headquarter in Akal Takht (a shrine representing the temporal power of God) in the Golden Temple. The temple high priest protested this move as a sacrilege since no Guru or leader ever resided in the Akal Takht on the floor above Granth Sahib, but Tohra agreed to Bhindranwale&#x27;s demand to prevent his arrest. On 15 December 1983, Bhindranwale was asked to move out of Guru Nanak Niwas house by members of the Babbar Khalsa, who opposed Bhindranwale, who acted with Longowal&#x27;s support. Longowal by now feared for his own safety. Tohra convinced the high priest to allow Bhindranwale to reside on the first floor of Akal Takht, as he had nowhere to go to avoid arrest. He said that he had to move to Akal Takht as Morcha director Longowal was negotiating with the government for his arrest. The government said Bhindranwale and his followers had made the Golden Temple complex an armoury and headquarters, though amassing arms and usage as a base for waging war was part of the tradition of most historical gurdwaras, which display weapons caches used by the Gurus, depicting the centrality of Sikh sites to their struggles.

A few leaders raised their voice against Bhindranwale in the Akal Takht complex and other gurdwaras across the state. Among the prominent ones was Giani Partap Singh, a spiritual leader and former Jathedar of the Akal Takht, who criticized Bhindranwale for keeping guns in the Akal Takht. Partap was later killed along with other dissenters including Harbans Singh Manchanda, the Delhi Sikh Gurudwara Management Committee president, Niranjan Singh, the Granthi of Gurudwara Toot Sahib, Granthi Jarnail Singh of Valtoha and Granthi Surat Singh of Majauli.

The militants were able to claim safe haven in the Golden Temple due to the whole or partial support received by them from key Sikh religious leaders and institutions such as the SGPC, AISSF and Jathedar (head) of the Akal Takht. The support was either voluntary or forced by using violence or threat of violence.

==Negotiations==
In January 1984, India&#x27;s secret service Research &amp; Analysis Wing (RAW) prepared a covert plan codenamed Operation Sundown involving special forces to abduct Bhindranwale from the Golden Temple complex. A RAW unit was formed to rehearse Operation Sundown in the Sarsawa Air Force Base in Uttar Pradesh, but the operation never materialized due to Indira Gandhi&#x27;s rejection.

The government sent a team led by Narasimha Rao to try to convince Bhindranwale to back out, but he was adamant. The negotiations failed and the law and order situation in Punjab continued to deteriorate. Indira Gandhi tried to persuade the Akalis to support her in the arrest of Bhindranwale peacefully. These talks ended up being futile. In the days before the assault, government representatives met with Bhindranwale in a last ditch effort to negotiate a truce. The Sikhs would withdraw, believing they had seen a commando unit move into the city. Bhindranwale warned of a backlash by the Sikh community in the event of an armed assault on the Golden Temple. On 26 May, Tohra informed the government that he had failed to get Bhindranwale to agree to a peaceful resolution of the crisis, and that Bhindranwale was no longer under anyone&#x27;s control. Faced with imminent army action and with Harchand Singh Longowal abandoning him, Bhindranwale declared, &quot;This bird is alone. There are many hunters after it.&quot; In his final interview to Subhash Kirpekar, Bhindranwale stated that &quot;Sikhs can neither live in India nor with India.&quot;

Indira Gandhi then gave her permission to initiate Operation Blue Star on the recommendation of Army Chief Arun Shridhar Vaidya. She was apparently led to believe and had assumed that the operation would not involve any civilian casualties. The assumption was that, when confronted, Bhindranwale would surrender to the army.

==Preparations==
===Fortification of Golden Temple===
An arsenal had been created within the Akal Takht over a period of several months. It was reported that trucks engaged for kar seva (religious service) and bringing in supplies for the daily langar were smuggling in guns and ammunition. The police never attempted to check these vehicles entering the Golden Temple, on instructions from superiors. During a random check one such truck was stopped and many Sten guns and ammunition were found. The Indian government White Paper alleged that after Operation Blue Star it was found that the militants had set up a grenade manufacturing facility, and a workshop for the fabrication of Sten guns inside the Temple Complex. However, the allegations of the militants being in possession of weapon workshops was never made prior to Operation Blue Star, and only after, with only the Army making these statements. The statements of multiple civilian eyewitnesses instead were consistent that the militants were a small number of men and had limited arms that were used sparingly.

The Harmandir Sahib compound and some of the surrounding houses were fortified under the guidance of Major General Shabeg Singh, who had joined Bhindranwale&#x27;s group after dismissal from the army. During their occupation of Akal Takht, Bhindranwale&#x27;s group had begun fortifying the building. &quot;The Statesman&quot; reported that light machine guns and semi-automatic rifles were known to have been brought into the compound, and strategically placed to defend against an armed assault on the complex. The modern weapons later found inside the temple complex indicated that foreign elements were involved. The heavier weapons were found to have Pakistani or Chinese markings on them. According to Lt. General J.S. Arora only 60 self-loading riles were foreign made. The rest were Indian. He also said that there were no medium machine guns and only two RPGs. Arora says that the arsenal was not truly sophisticated. A Lt. Colonel part of the Operation later revealed that militants only had 4 light machine gun magazines. According to him a single light machine gun carries 12 magazines. He revealed that the main gun that was kept and used by militants was AK-47s.

Holes were smashed through the marble walls of Akal takht to create gun positions. Walls were broken to allow entry points to the tiled courtyards. Secure machine gun nests were created. All of these positions were protected by sandbags and newly made brick walls. The windows and arches of Akal Takht were blocked with bricks and sandbags. Sandbags were placed on the turrets. Every strategically significant building of the temple complex, apart from the Harmandir Sahib in the center, had been fortified in a similar manner and allegedly defaced. The fortifications also included seventeen private houses in the residential area near the Temple. All the high rise buildings and towers near the temple complex were occupied. The militants manning these vantage points were in wireless contact with Shabeg Singh in Akal Takht. Under the military leadership of Major General Singh, ex-army veterans and deserters had trained Bhindranwale&#x27;s men.

The militants in the complex were anticipating an attack by government troops. The defences in the complex were created with the purpose of stalling an assault, giving time to provoke Sikhs in the villages and encourage them to march en masse towards the Golden Temple in support of the militants. Sufficient food to last a month was stocked in the complex.

During this period police and security forces stationed around the temple complex were allowed only within 200 yards. This was to avoid the &#x27;desecration&#x27; of the temple by their presence. The security forces were prevented by the politicians from taking action in enforcing the law. Even self-defence from the militants was made difficult. On 14 February 1984, a police post near the entrance of the Temple was attacked by a group of militants. Six fully armed policemen were captured and taken inside. After twenty four hours the police responded and sent in a senior police officer for negotiation. He asked Bhindranwale to release his men, along with their weapons. Bhindranwale agreed and delivered the dead body of one of the hostages who had been killed. Later the remaining five policemen were released alive, but their weapons were kept.

The fortifications of the temple denied the army the possibility of commando operations. The buildings were close together and had labyrinthine passages all under the control of the militants. Militants in the temple premises had access to langars, food supplies, and water from the Sarovar (temple pond). Militants were well stocked with weapons and ammunition. Any siege under these circumstances would have been long and difficult. The option of laying down a long siege was ruled out by the army due to the risk of emotionally aroused villagers marching to the temple and clashing with the army. The negotiated settlement had already been rejected by Bhindranwale and the government decided to raid the temple.

===Rise in militant incidents===
Police methods normally used on common criminals were used on protesters during the Dharam Yudh Morcha, creating state repression affecting a very large segment of Punjab&#x27;s population. Retaliatory violence came from a section of the Sikh population, widening the scope of the conflict and creating fresh motives for Sikh youth to turn to insurgency. The concept of Khalistan was still vague even while the complex was fortified under the influence of former Sikh army officials alienated by government actions who now advised Bhindranwale, Major General Shabeg Singh and retired Major General and Brigadier Mohinder Singh, and at that point the concept was still not directly connected with the movement he headed. In other parts of Punjab, a &quot;state of chaos and repressive police methods&quot; combined to create &quot;a mood of overwhelming anger and resentment in the Sikh masses against the authorities&quot;, making Bhindranwale even more popular, and demands of independence gain currency, even amongst moderates and Sikh intellectuals.

On 12 May 1984, Ramesh Chander, son of Lala Jagat Narain and editor of media house Hind Samachar group, was murdered by pro-Bhindranwale militants. In addition, seven editors and seven news hawkers and newsagents were killed in a planned attack on the freedom of media house, to cripple it financially. Punjab Police had to provide protection for the entire distribution staff.

Violent incidents including arson, bombings, and shootings increased over the following months. The total number of deaths was 410 in violent incidents and riots, and 1,180 people were injured.

The government never provided evidence of the supposedly planned massacre of Hindus that triggered Operation Blue Star, although the pace of attacks was increasing. Congress member of parliament Amarjit Kaur, who referred to the Akali Dal as &quot;the enemy within&quot; and who had opposed the creation of the Punjabi Suba, alleged that Bhindranwale wanted to start a civil war between Hindus and Sikhs. Meanwhile, the number of killings had been rising all over the state, with sometimes more than a dozen a day. On 2 June in the last 24 hours before the announcement of the operation 23 people were killed.

In June 1984, the army was called out to help the civil administration in Punjab in response to a request from the Punjab Governor, B. D. Pande, &quot;in view of the escalating violence by terrorists in Punjab.&quot; On 2 June Operation Blue Star was initiated to flush out the militants from the Golden Temple.

The Khalistanis had started the movement to drive Hindus out of certain areas to make way for Sikhs coming in from other states. Due to the increased incidents of religious violence, an exchange of population had already started in Punjab. New Khalistani currency was being printed and distributed. By May 1984, the establishment of an independent Khalistan seemed imminent, as the Indian government had &quot;received intelligence&quot; that Pakistan had been supporting the militants with arms and money, and if Khalistan declared its independence there was the risk of Pakistan recognizing the new country and sending the Pakistani Army into Indian Punjab to protect it. However, the Indian government had been the target of disinformation by the Russian KGB intelligence agency, which had sought to implicate Pakistans&#x27; Inter-Services Intelligence (ISI) in the Khalistan movement by spreading forged documents and reports to the Indian government.

===Army preparations===
According to the then-Vice Chief of the Army Staff, Srinivas Kumar Sinha the army had begun preparations for an attack on the Golden Temple 18 months prior. Two months prior to the Operation the Air Force had helicopters flying above the temple taking photographs. The Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) had surrounded the temple two months prior to the Operation.

== Operation ==

Operation Blue Star was launched to remove Jarnail Singh Bhindranwale and his followers who had sought cover in the Amritsar Harmandir Sahib Complex.

On 3 June, a 36-hour curfew was imposed on the state of Punjab with all methods of communication and public travel suspended. The electricity supply was also interrupted, creating a total blackout and cutting off the state from the rest of the world. Complete media censorship was enforced.

The army stormed Harmandir Sahib on the night of 5 June under the command of Major-General Kuldip Singh Brar. The forces had full control of Harmandir Sahib by the morning of 7 June. There were casualties among the army, civilians, and militants. Sikh leaders Bhindranwale and Shabeg Singh were killed in the operation.

===Generals===
The armed Sikhs within the Harmandir Sahib were led by Bhindranwale, former Maj. Gen. Shabeg Singh, and Amrik Singh, the President of the All India Sikh Students Federation from Damdami Taksal.

General Arun Shridhar Vaidya was the Chief of the Indian Army. Lt. Gen. Krishaswamy Sundarji, GOC Western Command, planned and coordinated Operation Blue Star. From the Indian Army Maj. Gen. Kuldip Singh Brar had command of the operation. On 31 May he had been summoned from Meerut and asked to lead the operation to remove the militants from the temple. Brar was a Jat Sikh, the same caste as Bhindranwale, and was also acquainted with Shabeg Singh, having been his student at the Indian Military Academy at Dehradun. Among the six generals leading the operation, four were Sikhs.

The army operation was further subdivided along two subcategories:

# Operation Metal: to take out the militants including Bhindranwale from the Golden Temple complex. Brar&#x27;s 9 Infantry Division was deputed for this.
# Operation Shop: to attack extremist areas throughout the Punjab state and deal with remaining militants in the countryside.

In addition, the army carried out Operation Woodrose, in which units were deployed to the border areas, replacing the pickets routinely held by the paramilitary Border Security Force (BSF). The border pickets were held in at least company strength.

=== 1 June ===
On 1 June 1984 the Indian security forces fired into various buildings with the goal of assessing the training of the militants. Eyewitness testimony of pilgrims inside the temple complex state that the Harmandir Sahib was fired on initially by security forces on 1 June and not 5 June as reported by the army. The firing began at about 12:40 pm and went until about 8:40 pm It was by the CRPF and they used medium machine guns, light machine guns and rifles. It resulted in the main shrine of the Golden Temple sustaining 34 bullet holes. The action claimed the lives of eight pilgrims, including a woman and a child, inside the temple complex and injured 25 others. Devinder Singh Duggal, who was in-charge of the Sikh Reference Library located inside of the Temple complex and an eye-witness to Operation Blue Star, stated that the militants were given instructions to not fire until the army or security forces entered the temple. Duggal stated, &quot;...when I heard in the news bulletin that there was unprovoked firing from inside the Temple, but that the security forces showed extreme restrain and did not fire a single shot, I was surprised at this naked lie.&quot; The deaths of at least three of the pilgrims was confirmed by the eyewitness testimony of a female Sikh student who had dressed their wounds and who later witnessed their deaths in Guru Nanak Nivas. According to Kirpal Singh eleven were killed in the shooting. Furthermore, Duggal stated that on 2 June 1984 a BBC team, including journalist Mark Tully, were taken around the Temple and shown 34 holes, some of them as big as three inches in diameter, caused by the bullets on all sides of the temple. Tully noted, &quot;The CRPF firing took place four days before the army actually entered the Temple.&quot;

=== 2 June ===
The army had already sealed the international border from Kashmir to Ganga Nagar, Rajasthan. At least seven divisions of troops were deployed in villages of Punjab. The soldiers began taking control of the city of Amritsar from the paramilitary. A young Sikh officer posing as a pilgrim was sent in to reconnoitre the temple. He spent an hour in the complex noting defensive preparations. Plans were made to clear vantage points occupied by militants outside the complex before the main assault. Patrols were also sent to study these locations.

As the Indian army was sealing off exits out of Amritsar, it continued to allow pilgrims to enter the temple complex. All outgoing trains from Amritsar had left by noon and other trains were cancelled. The CRPF outside the temple had been replaced by the army who were taking into custody any visitors leaving the temple. A pilgrim who survived the assault stated that he did not leave the temple because of the detention of visitors by the army.

By nightfall media and the press were gagged and rail, road and air services in Punjab were suspended. Foreigners and non-resident Indians were denied entry. General Gauri Shankar was appointed as security advisor to the Governor of Punjab. The water and electricity supply was cut off.

=== 3 June ===
According to an All Sikhs Student Federation member, 10,000 people had come from outside including many women and 4,000 of them were young people. The Shiromani Gurdwara Prabhandak Committee estimates that approximately 10,000 to 15,000 pilgrims had come from Punjab&#x27;s cities and villages to attend the Gurparab. Along with the pilgrims were 1,300 Akali workers led by Jathedar Nachattar Singh who had come to participate in the Dharam Yudh Morcha and to court arrest. The Akali jathas who were also present consisted of about 200 women, 18 children and about 1,100 men and were also forced to stay inside the temple complex. Those who were inside were not allowed to go out after 10:00 pm on 3 June because of the curfew placed by the military.

In addition, as of 3 June the pilgrims who had entered the temple in the days prior were unaware that Punjab had been placed under curfew. Thousands of pilgrims and hundreds of Akali workers had been allowed to collect inside the Temple complex without any warning either of the sudden curfew or imminent Army attack.

In the night the curfew was re-imposed with the army and para-military patrolling all of Punjab. The army sealed off all routes of ingress and exit around the temple complex.

Army units led by Indian Army Lt. Gen Kuldip Singh Brar surrounded the temple complex on 3 June 1984. Just before the commencement of the operation, Lt. Gen Brar addressed the soldiers:

However, no one opted out and that included many &quot;Sikh officers, junior commissioned officers and other ranks&quot;.

=== 4 June ===

On 4 and 5 June, messages asking pilgrims to leave the temple were played over loudspeakers. However, in 2017 the Amritsar District and Sessions Judge Gurbir Singh gave a ruling in which he stated: &quot;There is no evidence that army made any announcements asking ordinary civilians to leave Golden Temple complex before launching the operation in 1984...There is no written record of any public announcement by the civil authorities requesting the people to come out of the complex. No log of vehicle used for making such announcements is there...The event underlines the human rights violations by troops during the operation.&quot; The lack of evidence of any warning to vacate the temple complex was the basis of a compensatory award given to Sikhs who had been illegally detained by the Indian military. The army began bombarding the historic Ramgarhia Bunga, the water tank, and other fortified positions with Ordnance QF 25-pounder artillery. After destroying the outer defences laid by Shabeg Singh, the army moved tanks and armoured personnel carrier (APCs) onto the road separating the Guru Nanak Niwas building.

The army helicopters spotted the massive movements, and General Krishnaswamy Sundarji sent tanks and APCs to meet them.

The accounts of survivors inside of the temple complex were consistent with the military commencing its assault in the early morning of June 4. Duggal states that the army attack started at 4:00 am with a 25-pounder that fell in the ramparts of the Deori to the left of the Akal Takht Sahib. Duggal further states that during the assault he saw a number of dead bodies of children and women in the Parikrama. The army&#x27;s assault had prevented Duggal from leaving the room in which he had taken shelter as he believed it would have resulted in his death. Another eyewitness, Bhan Singh the Secretary of the SGPC, states that the army provided no warning of the start of the attack which prevented pilgrims and those who came as a part of the Dharam Yudh Morcha from exiting. A female survivor recalled that it was not until the army began using explosives on the temple that they were aware that it had commenced its assault. She further stated that within the Harmandir Sahib, there were some granthis (priests), ragis (singers), sevadars (service volunteers) and yatris (pilgrims) but no armed militants. Prithpal Singh, the sevadar on duty at the Akal rest house which housed pilgrims, stated that it was shelled by the military. As of May 1985 during the recording of Prithpal&#x27;s account, the Akal Rest house still bore the bullet marks caused by the Indian Army.

=== 5 June ===

On 5 June the blind head Ragi of the Harmandir Sahib Amrik Singh and Ragi Avtar Singh, were struck by bullets inside of the Harmandir Sahib by the Indian army. The army&#x27;s targeting of the Harmandir Sahib with bullets was in contrast to the alleged restraint stated in the army issued White Paper on 10 July 1984. As of 5 June pilgrims who had reached the temple on 3 June were still present hiding in rooms. In one room 40–50 persons were huddled together, including a six-month-old child, during the army&#x27;s assault. A female survivor of the assault stated that the army asked people to leave their hiding spots and guaranteed safe passage and water; she recalled seeing the dead bodies of pilgrims who answered the announcements lying in the Parikrama the next morning.

In the morning, shelling started on the building inside the Harmandir Sahib complex. The 9th division launched a frontal attack on the Akal Takht, although it was unable to secure the building. The Golden Temple complex had honeycombed tunnel structures.

7:00 pm

The BSF and CRPF attacked Hotel Temple View and Brahm Boota Akhara, respectively, on the southwest fringes of the complex. By 10:00 pm both the structures were under their control. The army simultaneously attacked various other gurdwaras. Sources mention either 42 or 74 locations.

10:00 pm – 7:30 am

Late in the evening, the generals decided to launch a simultaneous attack from three sides. Ten Guards, 1 Para Commandos and Special Frontier Force (SFF) would attack from the main entrance of the complex, and 26 Madras and 9 Kumaon battalions from the hostel complex side entrance from the south. The objective of the 10 Guards was to secure the northern wing of the Temple complex and draw attention away from the SFF who were to secure the western wing of the complex and 1 Para Commandos who were to gain a foothold in Akal Takht and in Harmandir Sahab, with the help of divers. 26 Madras was tasked with securing the southern and the eastern complexes, and the 9 Kumaon regiment with SGPC building and Guru Ramdas Serai. Twelve Bihar was charged with providing a cordon and fire support to the other regiments by neutralising enemy positions under their observance.

An initial attempt by the commandos to gain a foothold at Darshani Deori failed as they came under devastating fire, after which several further attempts were made with varying degrees of success. Eventually, other teams managed to reach Darshani Deori, a building north of the Nishan Sahib, and started to fire at the Akal Takth and a red building towards its left, so that the SFF troops could get closer to the Darshani Deori and fire gas canisters at Akal Takth. The canisters bounced off the building and affected the troops instead.

Meanwhile, 26 Madras and 9 Garhwal Rifles (reserve troops) had come under heavy fire from the Langar rooftop, Guru Ramdas Serai and the buildings in the vicinity. Moreover, they took a lot of time in forcing open the heavy Southern Gate, which had to be shot open with tank fire. This delay caused a lot of casualties among the Indian troops fighting inside the complex. Three tanks and an APC had entered the complex.

Crawling was impossible as Shabeg Singh had placed light machine guns nine or ten inches above the ground. The attempt caused many casualties among the Indian troops. A third attempt to gain the Pool was made by a squad of 200 commandos. On the southern side, the Madras and Garhwal battalions were not able to make it to the pavement around the pool because they were engaged by positions on the southern side.

Despite the mounting casualties, General Sunderji ordered a fourth assault by the commandos. This time, the Madras battalion was reinforced with two more companies of the 7th Garhwal Rifles under the command of General Kuldip Singh Brar. However, the Madras and Garhwal troops under Brigadier A. K. Dewan once again failed to move towards the parikarma (the pavement around the pool).

Brigadier Dewan reported heavy casualties and requested more reinforcements. General Brar sent two companies of 15 Kumaon Regiment. This resulted in yet more heavy casualties, forcing Brigadier Dewan to request tank support. As one APC inched closer to the Akal Takth it was hit with an anti-tank RPG, which immediately immobilized it. Brar also requested tank support. The tanks received the clearance to fire their main guns (105 mm high-explosive squash head shells) only at around 7:30 am.
According to Giani Puran Singh, a priest in Harimander Sahib, at 10:00 pm tanks began entering the temple complex. At the same time armored carriers began entering to.

=== 6 June ===
At 10:00 am the &quot;vigerous&quot; battle ended. In the battle about 40–50 Sikh fought the army continuously until they died or ran out of ammunition. Once this battle ended the army gained control of Darshani Deori, Clock Tower, and Atta Mandi.

Vijayanta tanks shelled the Akal Takht. It suffered some damage, but the structure was still standing. The Special Group, a confidential special forces unit of the R&amp;AW, began its planned raid on this day.

=== 7–10 June ===
The army entered the Akal Takht. Dead bodies of Bhindranwale, Shabeg Singh and Amrik Singh were discovered in the building. Few surviving snipers who had managed to hold off the army for 3 days were killed. At noon the army burned down the Sikh Reference Library. The library contained numerous artefacts and contained letters signed by the Sikh gurus.

According to Giani Puran Singh, a Granthi of the Golden Temple, on June 7 at Ramgharia Bunga 4 Sikh held out at a trench they had dug. Giani Puran Singh was told by soldier to negotiate with them, but they pledged to die there. They killed multiple soldiers. The army failed to fight the Sikh so they attempted bombing them, but the Sikh still held out. They were eventually drawn out with chemical gas and were killed on June 10.

President Zail Singh visited the temple premises after the operation, while making the round, he was shot at by a sniper from one of the buildings that the army had not yet cleared. The bullet hit the arm of an army colonel who led a Commando battalion. He was accompanying the president. On June 8, he was shot by the Sikh held out in Ramgharia Bunga.

The Sikh held out were Major Singh Nagoke, Dalbir Singh, Swaran Singh Rode, Ram Singh Sultanpuri, and Nand Singh Patti.

==Casualties==
The Indian army initially placed total casualties at 554 Sikh militants and civilians dead, and 83 killed (4 officers, 79 soldiers) and 236 wounded among government forces. Kuldip Nayar cites Rajiv Gandhi as allegedly admitting that nearly 700 soldiers were killed. This number was allegedly disclosed by Gandhi in September 1984 as he was addressing the National Student Union of India session in Nagpur. Per Ved Marwah the army suffered 35% casualties.

According to a close associate of Bhindranwale only 35 militants were killed with the rest leaving in the early days of the Operation. They left because of a plan devised in which they would launch a revolution against the state to form Khalistan so the movement may live on. The belief of the militants was that it is better for some to live to fight another day. According to the associate all who left would die in the Punjab Insurgency.

Independent casualty figures were much higher. Bhindranwale and large number of his militants were killed. There were high civilian casualties as well, which the Indian government argued were due to Sikhs in the Golden Temple using pilgrims trapped inside the temple as human shields, though the operation was conducted at a time when the Golden Temple was packed to capacity with pilgrims who were there to celebrate the annual martyrdom anniversary of Guru Arjan Dev, the fifth Guru of the Sikhs. The pilgrims were not allowed by the militants to escape from the temple premises in spite of relaxation in the curfew hours by the security forces. According to Indian army generals, &quot;it is possible&quot; that militants were &quot;depending upon the Sikh masses to form a human shield to prevent action by the army&quot;, as well as the presence of a &quot;whole lot of moderate Akali leadership&quot;.

Delivering the findings of a review in 2014, U.K. Foreign Secretary William Hague attributed high civilian casualties to the Indian Government&#x27;s attempt at a full frontal assault on the militants, diverging from the recommendations provided by the U.K. Military. The Indian military had created a situation where civilians were allowed to collect inside of the temple complex. On 3 June the Indian military allowed pilgrims to enter the temple complex. The Indian military also allowed thousands of protestors whom were a part of the Dharam Yudh Morcha to enter the temple complex. These protestors included women and children. There was no warning provided to the pilgrims who entered on 3 June that a curfew was put in place by the military. These pilgrims were prevented from leaving after the curfew had been placed by the army at approximately 10:00 pm.

On 4 June no warning was provided to the pilgrims to evacuate and the pilgrims were deterred of leaving as the Indian army would arrest anyone who left the temple complex. Although officially the army stated that it made announcements, the eyewitness testimony of pilgrims who were arrested after the assault was used as the basis of a decision in the Amritsar district court in April 2017, which held that the army made no such announcements. The eyewitness testimony of survivors of the army&#x27;s assault on the temple complex were consistent with stating that they were unaware of the start of the attack by the army until it took place without notice on the morning of 4 June.

On 6 June the Indian military detained surviving pilgrims on the grounds that they were affiliated with the militants and subjected them to interrogations, beatings and executions.

==Aftermath==
The operation also led to the assassination of Prime Minister Indira Gandhi on 31 October 1984 by two of her Sikh bodyguards as an act of vengeance, triggering the 1984 Sikh massacre. The widespread killing of Sikhs, principally in the national capital Delhi but also in other major cities in North India, led to major divisions between the Sikh community and the Indian Government. The army withdrew from Harmandir Sahib later in 1984 under pressure from Sikh demands. The 1985 bombing of Air India Flight 182 is thought to have been a revenge action.

General Arun Shridhar Vaidya, the Chief of Army Staff at the time of Operation Blue Star, was assassinated in 1986 in Pune by two Sikhs, Harjinder Singh Jinda and Sukhdev Singh Sukha. Both were sentenced to death, and hanged on 7 October 1992.

In March 1986, Sikh militants again occupied and continued to use the temple compound which necessitated another police action known as Operation Black Thunder on 1 May 1986, Indian paramilitary police entered the temple and arrested 200 militants that had occupied Harmandir Sahib for more than three months. On 2 May 1986 the paramilitary police undertook a 12-hour operation to take control of Harmandir Sahib at Amritsar from several hundred militants, but almost all the major radical leaders managed to escape. In June 1990, the Indian government ordered the area surrounding the temple to be vacated by local residents in order to prevent militants activity around the temple.

=== Mutinies by Sikh soldiers ===
In the aftermath of Operation Blue Star, mutinies by Sikh soldiers, mostly raw recruits, were reported from different places. On 7 June, six hundred soldiers of the 9th Battalion of the Sikh Regiment, almost the entire other ranks&#x27; strength, mutinied in Sri Ganganagar. While some managed to escape to Pakistan, most were rounded up by men of the Rajputana Rifles. The largest mutiny took place in the Sikh Regimental Centre at Ramgarh, in Bihar, where recruits for the Sikh Regiment are trained. There, 1,461 soldiers—1,050 of them raw recruits, stormed the armoury, killing one officer and injuring two before they set out for Amritsar. The leaders of the mutiny divided the troops into two groups just outside of Banaras to avoid a rumoured roadblock. One half was engaged by army artillery at Shakteshgarh railway station; those who managed to escape were rounded up by the 21st Mechanised Infantry Regiment. The other half engaged with the artillery and troops of the 20th Infantry Brigade, during which 35 soldiers, of both sides, were killed. There were five smaller mutinies in different parts of India. In total 55 mutineers were killed and 2,606 were captured alive.

The captured mutineers were court-martialed, despite efforts by various groups including retired Sikh officers to get them reinstated. In August 1985, 900 of the 2,606 mutineers were rehabilitated by the Central government as part of the Rajiv–Longowal Accord.

===Long term effects===

The long-term results of the operation included:
# Intended to end the insurgency, the operation, had the opposite effect, with attacks escalating. There was more violence in Punjab after Operation Blue Star than prior. Official estimates of civilians, police, and terrorists killed increased with 27 in 1981, 22 in 1982, and 99 in 1983 to more than one thousand per year from 1987 to 1992.
# Outraging Sikhs all over India, with most finding it unacceptable that the armed forces had desecrated the Golden Temple, thousands of young men can join the Khalistan movement, with &quot;organized insurgency not taking root in Punjab until after the operation&quot;. Sikhs became outraged with the military action in the bastion of Sikhi that provoked a wave of deep anguish and long-term resentment.
# The operation inflamed tensions in Punjab, though independence would only be declared by a Sarbat Khalsa in 1986, as 500,000 deployed Indian troops operated violently in Punjab, causing thousands of Sikh deaths between 1984 and 1992.

Following the operation the central government demolished hundreds of houses and created a corridor around the compound called &quot;Galliara&quot; (also spelled Galiara or Galyara) for security reasons. This was made into a public park and opened in June 1988.

==Criticisms==
The operation has been criticized on several grounds including: the government&#x27;s choice of timing for the attack, the heavy casualties, the loss of property, and human rights violations.

===Timing===
Operation Blue Star was planned on a Sikh religious day—the martyrdom day of Guru Arjan Dev, the founder of the Harmandir Sahib. Sikhs from all over the world visit the temple on this day. Many Sikhs view the timing and attack by the army as an attempt to inflict maximum casualties on Sikhs and demoralize them, and the government is in turn blamed for the inflated number of civilian casualties by choosing to attack on that day. Additionally, Longowal had announced a statewide civil disobedience movement that would launch on 3 June 1984. Participants planned to block the flow of grain out of Punjab and refuse to pay land revenue, water and electricity bills.

When asked about why the army entered the temple premises just after Guru Arjan Dev&#x27;s martyrdom day (when the number of devotees is much higher), General Brar said that it was just a coincidence and that while he could not &quot;comment on the inside of politics&quot;, he &quot;assume[d] that after taking everything into consideration, the Prime Minister and the government decided this was the only course of action left&quot;, with &quot;perhaps&quot; the army having only had three to four days to complete the operation. Based on &quot;some sort of information&quot;, Bhindranwale was planning to declare Khalistan an independent country any moment with &quot;a strong possibility&quot; of support from Pakistan, and &quot;Khalistani currency had already been distributed&quot;. This declaration &quot;might&quot; have increased chances of &quot;large sections&quot; of Punjab Police and security personnel siding with Bhindranwale; as &quot;if there could be desertions in the army, then the police, who were in Punjab, who were privy to Bhindranwale&#x27;s speeches, might have [also deserted]&quot;, as &quot;they were also emotionally charged by what was happening&quot;. The army waited for the surrender of militants on the night of 5 June, but the surrender did not happen. The operation had to be completed before dawn. Otherwise, exaggerated messages of army besieging the temple would have attracted mobs from nearby villages to the temple premises. The army could not have fired upon these civilians. More importantly, Pakistan would have come in the picture, declaring its support for Khalistan. He described the operation as traumatic and painful, but necessary.

===Media censorship===
Before the attack by the army, a media blackout was imposed in Punjab. &quot;The Times&quot; reporter Michael Hamlyn reported that journalists were picked up from their hotels at 5 am in a military bus, taken to the adjoining border of the state of Haryana and &quot;were abandoned there&quot;. The main towns in Punjab were put under curfew, transportation was banned, a news blackout was imposed, and Punjab was &quot;cut off from the outside world&quot;. A group of journalists who later tried to drive into Punjab were stopped at the road block at Punjab border and were threatened with being shot if they proceeded. Indian nationals who worked with the foreign media also were banned from the area. The press criticized these actions by government as an &quot;obvious attempt to attack the temple without the eyes of the foreign press on them&quot;. The media blackout throughout Punjab resulted in spread of rumours. The only available source of information during the period was All India Radio and the Doordarshan channel.

===Human rights===
==== Sikh militants ====
The government issued White Paper alleged that on June 6, a group of some 350 people, including Longowal and Tohra surrendered to the army near the Guru Nanak Niwas. The White Paper further alleged that to prevent the surrender, the militants opened fire and threw grenades at the group resulting in the deaths of 70 people, including 30 women and 5 children. However, neither Bhan Singh nor Longowal during their recounting of the events that took place on June 6 made any reference to either surrendering to the military or an attack on civilians by the militants.

The government issued White Paper alleged that on 8 June 1984, an unarmed army doctor was abducted by the militants and was hacked to death. However, Giani Puran Singh who was called by the military to act as a mediator to facilitate the surrender of four militants in the basement of the Bunga Jassa Singh Ramgharia, stated that the &quot;so called doctor&quot; had been killed along with two other army personnel when they ventured close to the militant&#x27;s hiding place.

==== Indian Army ====
Former Indian Service Officer Ramesh Inder Singh, the then Deputy Commissioner (DC) of Amritsar in one of his interview with BBC said that even the Governor of (Indian) Punjab did not know that there would be military action and he indicated that the Operation was badly carried out and panic among foot soldiers was so evident that they were formalizing their plans on the bonnets of their vehicles.

Brahma Chellaney, the Associated Press&#x27;s South Asia correspondent, was the only foreign reporter who managed to stay on in Amritsar despite the media blackout. His dispatches, filed by telex, provided the first non-governmental news reports on the bloody operation in Amritsar. His first dispatch, front-paged by &quot;The New York Times&quot;, &quot;The Times of London&quot; and &quot;The Guardian&quot;, reported a death toll about twice of what authorities had admitted. According to the dispatch, about 780 militants and civilians and 400 troops had perished in fierce gun-battles. Chellaney reported that about &quot;eight to ten&quot; men suspected Sikh militants had been shot with their hands tied. In that dispatch, Mr. Chellaney interviewed a doctor who said he had been picked up by the army and forced to conduct postmortems despite the fact he had never done any postmortem examination before. In reaction to the dispatch, the Indian government charged Chellaney with violating Punjab press censorship, two counts of fanning sectarian hatred and trouble, and later with sedition, calling his report baseless and disputing his casualty figures. The Supreme Court of India ordered Chellaney to cooperate with Amritsar police, who interrogated him concerning his report and sources. Chellaney declined to reveal his source, citing journalistic ethics and the constitutional guarantee of freedom of the press. In September 1985 charges against Chellaney were dropped. The Associated Press stood by the accuracy of the reports and figures, which were &quot;supported by Indian and other press accounts&quot;.

Similar accusations of highhandedness by the army and allegations of human rights violations by security forces in Operation Blue Star and subsequent military operations in Punjab have been leveled by Justice V. M. Tarkunde, Mary Anne Weaver, human rights lawyer Ram Narayan Kumar, and anthropologists Cynthia Mahmood and Joyce Pettigrew.

Some of the human rights abuses alleged to have been committed by the Indian army were:
* In April 2017 Justice Gurbir Singh stated that the army&#x27;s failure to provide any announcement to pilgrims before commencing Operation Blue Star was a human rights violation.
* The Indian army mistreated pilgrims who were detained immediately after the fighting stopped on June 6 by failing to provide them any water. Some pilgrims were reduced to collecting drinking water from the canals that contained dead bodies and were filled with blood.
* Ragi Harcharan Singh stated that on June 6 the Indian army gave its first announcement for evacuation since the commencement of Operation Blue Star. Singh states that he witnessed hundreds of pilgrims, including women, being shot at by the army as they emerged from hiding.
* A female survivor witnessed Indian soldiers line up Sikh men in a queue, tie their arms behind their backs with their turbans, beat them with rifle butts until they bled and then executed by being shot.
* Giana Puran Singh stated he along with 3–4 others were used as human shields for the protection of an officer who wanted to inspect the inside of the Darbar Sahib for anyone using a machine gun.
* A member of the AISSF stated that on June 6 those who surrendered before the army were made to lie down on the hot road, interrogated, made to move on their knees, bit with rifle butts and kicked with boots on private parts and their heads. The detainees were made to have their arms tied behind their backs with their own turbans and denied water. At about 7:00 pm the detainees were made to sit on the Parikrama near the army tanks. Many were injured as there was still firing from the side of the Akal Takht.
* Post-mortem reports showed that most of the dead bodies had their hands tied behind their backs, implying they had died after the army assault and not during. These bodies were in a putrid state at the time of post-mortem as they had been exposed in the open for 72 hours before being brought in.
* The Red Cross was stopped from aiding the wounded civilians by the army.
* Punjab officials who visited after the Operation complained to the army of 6 cases of rape during the Operation by soldiers that they had heard of.

The Indian Army responded to this criticism by stating that they &quot;answered the call of duty as disciplined, loyal and dedicated members of the Armed Forces of India. ... our loyalties are to the nation, the armed forces to which we belong, the uniforms we wear and to the troops we command.&quot;

===Strategy===
Blue Star encompassed 41 other gurdwaras all over Punjab, in which more than 3 army divisions were deployed. As later events conclusively proved, the operations was not only flawed in its very concept, but marred by poor planning and execution. According to Khushwant Singh,

As reported by Indian Army Major General Afsir Karim, among the main factors of planning and conduct which aggravated the impact of this operation, the foremost decision was to launch the assault on the day of the martyrdom day of Guru Arjan, the builder of the temple, described as &quot;sheer perversity&quot;, as a large number of pilgrims were bound to be injured and killed. The date being chosen for its surprise factor, or the presence of pilgrims potentially preventing the militants from responding, showed &quot;cynical disregard&quot; for innocent lives, with &quot;neither good soldiering nor honourable combat&quot; on the part of the senior generals in charge of planning the operation. They would later &quot;make various statements, invent excuses, and shade the truth to hide inconvenient facts&quot;. The incompetence resulting in the burning of the Sikh Reference Library was taken as &quot;vengeful vandalism&quot; by the Sikh masses. The additional Army action of Operation Woodrose, where 37 other gurdwaras were subjected to a combing operation, also put the Sikhs on notice and created an atmosphere of terror, widening the scope of the conflict.

There was &quot;little doubt&quot;, according to Karim, that it was the operation, because of its lasting adverse effects on the Sikh masses, which put a majority of unemployed Sikh youth, disadvantaged by the economic results of the Green Revolution that the Dharam Yudh Morcha had been launched to ameliorate through the implementation of the Anandpur Sahib Resolution, on the road to insurgency. After the operation a large number crossed the border for training and weaponry, as an operation where &quot;thousands of Sikh youth were humiliated, harassed, and physically hurt was bound to intensify the conflict&quot;. Previously the conflict had been limited to a few radical groups and scattered, small-scale incidents; after, it affected all of Punjab, with &quot;organized insurgency not taking root in Punjab until after the operation&quot;.

The military operation was a disastrous political decision and severely bungled; Lt. Gen. S. K. Sinha would later characterize the operation as both a political and military blunder, and would cite Sundarji as flouting standard operating procedure laid out by Sinha, seeking army promotion, and impressing Indira Gandhi, who wanted to appear politically strong to her electorate after frustrations in Kashmir. He would also ascribe his dismissal by Gandhi to his attempts to put up his views of the Akali problem, and his long personal friendships with Akalis, which he believed irritated Gandhi.

According to retired Lt. Gen. Shankar Prasad, &quot;It was because of the disasters called Vaidya [who superseded Sinha] and Sundarji—who did not have the brains to pick on the plans left behind by Lt Gen S.K. Sinha—that we had both a political folly compounded by a military botch-up.&quot; He would blame Sundarji more for the operation than Vaidya, who he says &quot;was taken in by Sundarji&#x27;s swagger&quot;, and that both &quot;were being politically subservient to the Prime Minister... maybe they wanted governorships or ambassadorships after serving their time&quot;. Prasad also believed that the military high command should have refused to implement the order, and craft a more suitable operation in its place, instead of being pressured by deadlines from the political leadership.

In the UK cabinet secretary&#x27;s report, contrary to the advice of a British military advisor in February 1984 of surgical strike involving a helicopter-borne commando operation had advised in February 1984, the Indian Army went into the temple &quot;sledgehammer-style&quot;, with massive casualties of civilians. The assault on the Golden Temple would be later recognized as a major blunder on the part of the central government even by Congress leaders.

Five years later, the army&#x27;s strategy was criticised by comparing it with the blockade approach taken by KPS Gill in Operation Black Thunder, when Sikh militants had again taken over the temple complex. It was said that Operation Blue Star could have been averted by using similar blockade tactics. The army responded by stating that &quot;no comparison is possible between the two situations&quot;, as &quot;there was no cult figure like Bhindranwale to idolise, and no professional military general like Shahbeg Singh to provide military leadership&quot; and &quot;the confidence of militants having been shattered by Operation Blue Star&quot;. Furthermore, it was pointed out that the separatists in the temple were armed with machine guns, anti-tank missiles and Chinese-made armour-piercing rocket launchers, and that they strongly resisted the army&#x27;s attempts to dislodge them from the shrine, appearing to have planned for a long standoff, having arranged for water to be supplied from wells within the temple compound and had stocked food provisions that could have lasted months.

===Honours to the soldiers===
The soldiers and generals involved in the Operation were presented with gallantry awards, honours, decoration strips and promotions by the Indian president Zail Singh, a Sikh, in a ceremony conducted on 10 July 1985. The act was criticized by authors and activists such as Harjinder Singh Dilgeer, who accused the troops of human rights violations during the operation.

===British involvement===
The accidental release of secret documents in the United Kingdom in 2014 revealed that the Thatcher government was aware of the Indian government&#x27;s intention to storm the temple and that a Special Air Service officer was tasked to advise the Indian authorities on removing the armed Sikh militants from the Golden Temple. According to a report by the Sikh Federation of UK, India was one of the biggest purchasers of military equipment for UK between 1981 and 1990. Most of the Foreign Office&#x27;s documents on India from 1984 are classified in whole or in part.

==See also==
* Kharku
* Khalistan movement
* Golden Temple

==References==
==Further reading==
* : presents comprehensive details of the invasion of Indian Army (causes and events). Vols 7 to 10 also give precious information.
* : presents the version of Giani Kirpal Singh, the Jathedar of the Akal Takht.
* 
* 

==External links==
* Operation Blue Star Gallery (Archive)
* Operation Blue Star Photos</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1987713" start="0" end="19" title="Operation Blue Star" label="Operation Blue Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q320919" start="52" end="71" title="Indian Armed Forces" label="Indian Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q358874" start="119" end="145" title="Jarnail Singh Bhindranwale" label="Jarnail Singh Bhindranwale"/>
<link wikidata="Q180422" start="180" end="193" title="Golden Temple" label="Golden Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q9316" start="228" end="235" title="Sikhism" label="Sikhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004192" start="339" end="353" title="Khalsa" label="Sikh community"/>
<link wikidata="Q22424" start="400" end="406" title="Punjab, India" label="Punjab"/>
<link wikidata="Q4751372" start="477" end="502" title="Anandpur Sahib Resolution" label="Anandpur Sahib Resolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q5654966" start="623" end="646" title="Harchand Singh Longowal" label="Harchand Singh Longowal"/>
<link wikidata="Q148034" start="690" end="709" title="Shiromani Akali Dal" label="Shiromani Akali Dal"/>
<link wikidata="Q192711" start="1161" end="1182" title="Prime Minister of India" label="Indian prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149" start="1183" end="1196" title="Indira Gandhi" label="Indira Gandhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q327394" start="1504" end="1528" title="rocket-propelled grenade" label="rocket-propelled grenade"/>
<link wikidata="Q868534" start="1559" end="1574" title="armour-piercing" label="armour-piercing"/>
<link wikidata="Q12876" start="1756" end="1760" title="tank" label="tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q34486" start="1763" end="1773" title="helicopter" label="helicopter"/>
<link wikidata="Q64418" start="1779" end="1788" title="artillery" label="artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1644573" start="2213" end="2220" title="pilgrim" label="pilgrim"/>
<link wikidata="Q121397" start="2251" end="2263" title="human shield" label="human shield"/>
<link wikidata="Q369920" start="2406" end="2420" title="Guru Arjan Dev" label="Guru Arjan Dev"/>
<link wikidata="Q2717573" start="2493" end="2514" title="extrajudicial killing" label="extrajudicial killing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3347903" start="2770" end="2800" title="Assassination of Indira Gandhi" label="Indira Gandhi was assassinated"/>
<link wikidata="Q2546004" start="2830" end="2843" title="Satwant Singh" label="Satwant Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q4876319" start="2848" end="2859" title="Beant Singh (assassin)" label="Beant Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q10225" start="2876" end="2900" title="Indian National Congress" label="Indian National Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q3504310" start="2956" end="2976" title="1984 anti-Sikh riots" label="1984 anti-Sikh riots"/>
<link wikidata="Q3511031" start="3339" end="3353" title="Khalistan movement" label="separate state"/>
<link wikidata="Q692346" start="3835" end="3867" title="Operation Black Thunder" label="Operation Black Thunder I and II"/>
<link wikidata="Q186050" start="4209" end="4225" title="Green Revolution" label="Green Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q148034" start="4998" end="5007" title="Shiromani Akali Dal" label="Akali Dal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7260340" start="5027" end="5048" title="Punjabi Suba movement" label="Punjabi Suba movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2354639" start="5146" end="5157" title="East Punjab" label="East Punjab"/>
<link wikidata="Q5437403" start="5182" end="5198" title="Sant Fateh Singh" label="Sant Fateh Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q180422" start="5279" end="5292" title="Golden Temple" label="Golden Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q31786554" start="5835" end="5855" title="1972 Punjab Legislative Assembly election" label="1972 Punjab election"/>
<link wikidata="Q4751372" start="5887" end="5912" title="Anandpur Sahib Resolution" label="Anandpur Sahib Resolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q358874" start="6019" end="6045" title="Jarnail Singh Bhindranwale" label="Jarnail Singh Bhindranwale"/>
<link wikidata="Q104841707" start="6090" end="6108" title="Dharam Yudh Morcha" label="Dharam Yudh Morcha"/>
<link wikidata="Q18109192" start="6251" end="6278" title="1978 Sikh-Nirankari clashes" label="1978 Sikh-Nirankari clashes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4751372" start="6401" end="6420" title="Anandpur Resolution" label="Anandpur Resolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q3511031" start="6486" end="6495" title="Khalistan" label="Khalistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16513600" start="6501" end="6509" title="homeland" label="homeland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440567" start="6598" end="6611" title="Federalism in India" label="federal union"/>
<link wikidata="Q5654966" start="6775" end="6797" title="Harchand Singh Longwal" label="Harchand Singh Longwal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149" start="7231" end="7244" title="Indira Gandhi" label="Indira Gandhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="7544" end="7550" title="Soviet" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q80919" start="7551" end="7554" title="KGB" label="KGB"/>
<link wikidata="Q422886" start="7555" end="7570" title="active measures" label="active measures"/>
<link wikidata="Q274564" start="7888" end="7915" title="Inter-Services Intelligence" label="Inter-Services Intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q24896068" start="8041" end="8068" title="List of High Commissioners of India to Pakistan" label="Indian embassy in Islamabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q44071" start="8537" end="8550" title="Yuri Andropov" label="Yuri Andropov"/>
<link wikidata="Q4593" start="8960" end="8972" title="Rajiv Gandhi" label="Rajiv Gandhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086484" start="9318" end="9336" title="Christopher Andrew (historian)" label="Christopher Andrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q3530322" start="9588" end="9605" title="Subramanian Swamy" label="Subramanian Swamy"/>
<link wikidata="Q18109192" start="10257" end="10273" title="1978 Sikh–Nirankari clash" label="the 1978 clashes"/>
<link wikidata="Q337986" start="10350" end="10358" title="gurdwara" label="gurdwara"/>
<link wikidata="Q5212110" start="10398" end="10412" title="Damdami Taksal" label="Damdami Taksal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5654966" start="10446" end="10469" title="Harchand Singh Longowal" label="Harchand Singh Longowal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5261097" start="10959" end="10983" title="Deputy Inspector General" label="Deputy Inspector General"/>
<link wikidata="Q4648359" start="10984" end="10995" title="A. S. Atwal" label="A. S. Atwal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7260271" start="11144" end="11159" title="Punjab Legislative Assembly" label="Punjab Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q60775688" start="11435" end="11460" title="1983 Dhilwan bus massacre" label="1983 Dhilwan Bus Massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1486618" start="11462" end="11483" title="President&amp;#x27;s rule" label="President&amp;#x27;s rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q256194" start="11595" end="11601" title="Karnal" label="Karnal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1174" start="11603" end="11610" title="Haryana" label="Haryana"/>
<link wikidata="Q695252" start="11773" end="11792" title="Parliament of India" label="Parliament of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q203249" start="12190" end="12202" title="Granth Sahib" label="Granth Sahib"/>
<link wikidata="Q797601" start="12374" end="12387" title="Babbar Khalsa" label="Babbar Khalsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q81669" start="12848" end="12855" title="arsenal" label="armoury"/>
<link wikidata="Q5253818" start="13474" end="13515" title="Delhi Sikh Gurudwara Management Committee" label="Delhi Sikh Gurudwara Management Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7498941" start="13829" end="13833" title="SGPC" label="SGPC"/>
<link wikidata="Q4728983" start="13835" end="13840" title="AISSF" label="AISSF"/>
<link wikidata="Q28135423" start="13845" end="13853" title="Jathedar of Akal Takht" label="Jathedar"/>
<link wikidata="Q118893" start="13868" end="13878" title="Akal Takht" label="Akal Takht"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092054" start="14027" end="14055" title="Research &amp;amp; Analysis Wing" label="Research &amp;amp; Analysis Wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q17061954" start="14095" end="14112" title="Operation Sundown" label="Operation Sundown"/>
<link wikidata="Q7424592" start="14252" end="14274" title="Sarsawa Air Force Base" label="Sarsawa Air Force Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q1498" start="14278" end="14291" title="Uttar Pradesh" label="Uttar Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q275146" start="14404" end="14417" title="P. V. Narasimha Rao" label="Narasimha Rao"/>
<link wikidata="Q4616814" start="15622" end="15632" title="Chief of the Army Staff (India)" label="Army Chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q4802144" start="15633" end="15653" title="Arun Shridhar Vaidya" label="Arun Shridhar Vaidya"/>
<link wikidata="Q7448336" start="16029" end="16037" title="kar seva" label="kar seva"/>
<link wikidata="Q211782" start="16312" end="16320" title="Sten gun" label="Sten gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q7460091" start="17043" end="17055" title="Shabeg Singh" label="Shabeg Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q372096" start="17235" end="17248" title="The Statesman (India)" label="The Statesman"/>
<link wikidata="Q720711" start="17269" end="17286" title="light machine gun" label="light machine gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q2291248" start="17292" end="17312" title="semi-automatic rifle" label="semi-automatic rifle"/>
<link wikidata="Q81641" start="18174" end="18187" title="Embrasure" label="gun positions"/>
<link wikidata="Q91764" start="18261" end="18277" title="machine gun nest" label="machine gun nest"/>
<link wikidata="Q91398" start="18437" end="18444" title="sandbag" label="sandbag"/>
<link wikidata="Q104841707" start="21105" end="21123" title="Dharam Yudh Morcha" label="Dharam Yudh Morcha"/>
<link wikidata="Q7460091" start="21580" end="21592" title="Shabeg Singh" label="Shabeg Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q6122215" start="22114" end="22131" title="Lala Jagat Narain" label="Lala Jagat Narain"/>
<link wikidata="Q5765865" start="22158" end="22171" title="Hind Samachar" label="Hind Samachar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7260340" start="22960" end="22972" title="Punjabi Suba" label="Punjabi Suba"/>
<link wikidata="Q4900784" start="23392" end="23403" title="B. D. Pande" label="B. D. Pande"/>
<link wikidata="Q3511031" start="23921" end="23930" title="Khalistan" label="Khalistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2078095" start="24198" end="24212" title="Pakistani Army" label="Pakistani Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q80919" start="24331" end="24334" title="KGB" label="KGB"/>
<link wikidata="Q274564" start="24402" end="24429" title="Inter-Services Intelligence" label="Inter-Services Intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q25205985" start="24577" end="24605" title="Vice Chief of the Army Staff (India)" label="Vice Chief of the Army Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q7586449" start="24607" end="24627" title="Srinivas Kumar Sinha" label="Srinivas Kumar Sinha"/>
<link wikidata="Q330658" start="24750" end="24759" title="Indian Air Force" label="Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q3348002" start="24824" end="24852" title="Central Reserve Police Force" label="Central Reserve Police Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q223625" start="25111" end="25117" title="curfew" label="curfew"/>
<link wikidata="Q6442890" start="25473" end="25490" title="Kuldip Singh Brar" label="Kuldip Singh Brar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7460091" start="25804" end="25816" title="Shabeg Singh" label="Shabeg Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q4748639" start="25822" end="25833" title="Amrik Singh" label="Amrik Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q4728983" start="25856" end="25890" title="All India Sikh Students Federation" label="All India Sikh Students Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4802144" start="25921" end="25941" title="Arun Shridhar Vaidya" label="Arun Shridhar Vaidya"/>
<link wikidata="Q355771" start="25963" end="25974" title="Indian Army" label="Indian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q6437621" start="25985" end="26005" title="Krishnaswamy Sundarji" label="Krishaswamy Sundarji"/>
<link wikidata="Q7987738" start="26011" end="26026" title="Western Command (India)" label="Western Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q6442890" start="26104" end="26121" title="Kuldip Singh Brar" label="Kuldip Singh Brar"/>
<link wikidata="Q200237" start="26188" end="26194" title="Meerut" label="Meerut"/>
<link wikidata="Q6164703" start="26279" end="26287" title="Jat Sikh" label="Jat Sikh"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595639" start="26395" end="26418" title="Indian Military Academy" label="Indian Military Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q199528" start="26422" end="26430" title="Dehradun" label="Dehradun"/>
<link wikidata="Q2723836" start="27006" end="27027" title="Border Security Force" label="Border Security Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192819" start="27518" end="27537" title="medium machine guns" label="medium machine guns"/>
<link wikidata="Q720711" start="27539" end="27557" title="light machine guns" label="light machine guns"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009220" start="28627" end="28637" title="Mark Tully" label="Mark Tully"/>
<link wikidata="Q43100" start="28968" end="28975" title="Kashmir" label="Kashmir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437" start="28992" end="29001" title="Rajasthan" label="Rajasthan"/>
<link wikidata="Q22424" start="31367" end="31373" title="Punjab, India" label="Punjab"/>
<link wikidata="Q6442890" start="31492" end="31509" title="Kuldip Singh Brar" label="Kuldip Singh Brar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7289508" start="32629" end="32644" title="Ramgarhia Bunga" label="Ramgarhia Bunga"/>
<link wikidata="Q2479591" start="32697" end="32719" title="Ordnance QF 25-pounder" label="Ordnance QF 25-pounder"/>
<link wikidata="Q4407246" start="32814" end="32840" title="armoured personnel carrier" label="armoured personnel carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q6437621" start="32969" end="32990" title="Krishnaswamy Sundarji" label="Krishnaswamy Sundarji"/>
<link wikidata="Q5596649" start="34023" end="34030" title="granthi" label="granthi"/>
<link wikidata="Q15621011" start="34043" end="34047" title="Ragi (Sikhism)" label="ragi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7448336" start="34060" end="34067" title="sevadar" label="sevadar"/>
<link wikidata="Q118893" start="35335" end="35345" title="Akal Takht" label="Akal Takht"/>
<link wikidata="Q3058398" start="35893" end="35915" title="Special Frontier Force" label="Special Frontier Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q327394" start="38696" end="38699" title="Rocket-propelled grenade" label="RPG"/>
<link wikidata="Q1034063" start="38834" end="38860" title="high-explosive squash head" label="high-explosive squash head"/>
<link wikidata="Q47074363" start="39433" end="39446" title="Special Group (India)" label="Special Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092054" start="39490" end="39498" title="R&amp;amp;AW" label="R&amp;amp;AW"/>
<link wikidata="Q7513652" start="39795" end="39817" title="Sikh Reference Library" label="Sikh Reference Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q7513652" start="39907" end="39907" title="Sikh Reference Library" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q5596649" start="39943" end="39950" title="Granthi" label="Granthi"/>
<link wikidata="Q334851" start="40351" end="40361" title="Zail Singh" label="Zail Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q6978752" start="41186" end="41217" title="National Student Union of India" label="National Student Union of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1513" start="41229" end="41235" title="Nagpur" label="Nagpur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1644573" start="41961" end="41968" title="pilgrim" label="pilgrim"/>
<link wikidata="Q121397" start="41999" end="42011" title="human shield" label="human shield"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371091" start="42683" end="42705" title="Foreign Secretary (United Kingdom)" label="U.K. Foreign Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q58282" start="42706" end="42719" title="William Hague" label="William Hague"/>
<link wikidata="Q222595" start="42891" end="42904" title="British Army" label="U.K. Military"/>
<link wikidata="Q3347903" start="44413" end="44426" title="Assassination of Indira Gandhi" label="assassination"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149" start="44445" end="44458" title="Indira Gandhi" label="Indira Gandhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3504310" start="44547" end="44565" title="1984 Sikh massacre" label="1984 Sikh massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353" start="44636" end="44641" title="Delhi" label="Delhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2767140" start="44747" end="44764" title="Indian Government" label="Indian Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q406588" start="44873" end="44893" title="Air India Flight 182" label="Air India Flight 182"/>
<link wikidata="Q4802144" start="44945" end="44965" title="Arun Shridhar Vaidya" label="Arun Shridhar Vaidya"/>
<link wikidata="Q4616814" start="44971" end="44990" title="Chief of the Army Staff (India)" label="Chief of Army Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538" start="45055" end="45059" title="Pune" label="Pune"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585398" start="45074" end="45095" title="Harjinder Singh Jinda" label="Harjinder Singh Jinda"/>
<link wikidata="Q948634" start="45100" end="45119" title="Sukhdev Singh Sukha" label="Sukhdev Singh Sukha"/>
<link wikidata="Q175111" start="45155" end="45161" title="Hanging" label="hanged"/>
<link wikidata="Q692346" start="45318" end="45341" title="Operation Black Thunder" label="Operation Black Thunder"/>
<link wikidata="Q692346" start="45542" end="45559" title="Operation Black Thunder" label="12-hour operation"/>
<link wikidata="Q180422" start="45579" end="45594" title="Golden Temple" label="Harmandir Sahib"/>
<link wikidata="Q3630099" start="46087" end="46100" title="Sikh Regiment" label="Sikh Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="46120" end="46137" title="Army ranks and insignia of India#Other ranks" label="other ranks&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q490883" start="46160" end="46174" title="Sri Ganganagar" label="Sri Ganganagar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3633830" start="46253" end="46269" title="Rajputana Rifles" label="Rajputana Rifles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026876" start="46334" end="46341" title="Ramgarh Cantonment" label="Ramgarh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165" start="46346" end="46351" title="Bihar" label="Bihar"/>
<link wikidata="Q79980" start="46622" end="46629" title="Banaras" label="Banaras"/>
<link wikidata="Q6804642" start="46784" end="46817" title="Mechanised Infantry Regiment" label="21st Mechanised Infantry Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q4630759" start="46879" end="46900" title="20th Indian Infantry Brigade" label="20th Infantry Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q85795744" start="47322" end="47343" title="Rajiv–Longowal Accord" label="Rajiv–Longowal Accord"/>
<link wikidata="Q3511031" start="47922" end="47940" title="Khalistan movement" label="Khalistan movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q7423509" start="48260" end="48273" title="Sarbat Khalsa" label="Sarbat Khalsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q8458" start="48849" end="48872" title="human rights violations" label="human rights violations"/>
<link wikidata="Q369920" start="48965" end="48979" title="Guru Arjan Dev" label="Guru Arjan Dev"/>
<link wikidata="Q180422" start="49000" end="49015" title="Harmandir Sahib" label="Harmandir Sahib"/>
<link wikidata="Q47217" start="49369" end="49387" title="civil disobedience" label="civil disobedience"/>
<link wikidata="Q7260281" start="50436" end="50449" title="Punjab Police (India)" label="Punjab Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770770" start="51299" end="51313" title="media blackout" label="media blackout"/>
<link wikidata="Q50008" start="51343" end="51352" title="The Times" label="The Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q1174" start="51515" end="51522" title="Haryana" label="Haryana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770770" start="52125" end="52139" title="media blackout" label="media blackout"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321122" start="52252" end="52267" title="All India Radio" label="All India Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1763315" start="52276" end="52287" title="Doordarshan" label="Doordarshan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2401481" start="53812" end="53828" title="Brahma Chellaney" label="Brahma Chellaney"/>
<link wikidata="Q40469" start="53834" end="53850" title="Associated Press" label="Associated Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q48403" start="53940" end="53948" title="Amritsar" label="Amritsar"/>
<link wikidata="Q66175" start="54002" end="54007" title="telex" label="telex"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="54136" end="54154" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q50008" start="54168" end="54177" title="The Times" label="The Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="54204" end="54216" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q213380" start="54979" end="55001" title="Supreme Court of India" label="Supreme Court of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595331" start="55645" end="55659" title="V. M. Tarkunde" label="V. M. Tarkunde"/>
<link wikidata="Q355771" start="58036" end="58047" title="Indian Army" label="Indian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1740716" start="58608" end="58623" title="Khushwant Singh" label="Khushwant Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q4690391" start="58667" end="58678" title="Afsir Karim" label="Afsir Karim"/>
<link wikidata="Q369920" start="58857" end="58867" title="Guru Arjan" label="Guru Arjan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7513652" start="59494" end="59516" title="Sikh Reference Library" label="Sikh Reference Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q7097720" start="59611" end="59629" title="Operation Woodrose" label="Operation Woodrose"/>
<link wikidata="Q4751372" start="60143" end="60168" title="Anandpur Sahib Resolution" label="Anandpur Sahib Resolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7586449" start="60739" end="60750" title="Srinivas Kumar Sinha" label="S. K. Sinha"/>
<link wikidata="Q4802144" start="61338" end="61344" title="Arun Shridhar Vaidya" label="Vaidya"/>
<link wikidata="Q273976" start="62588" end="62596" title="blockade" label="blockade"/>
<link wikidata="Q6365745" start="62615" end="62623" title="KPS Gill" label="KPS Gill"/>
<link wikidata="Q692346" start="62627" end="62650" title="Operation Black Thunder" label="Operation Black Thunder"/>
<link wikidata="Q7460091" start="63016" end="63029" title="Shahbeg Singh" label="Shahbeg Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q12800" start="63240" end="63251" title="machine gun" label="machine gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q282472" start="63254" end="63271" title="anti-tank missile" label="anti-tank missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q868534" start="63290" end="63305" title="armour-piercing" label="armour-piercing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3216918" start="63306" end="63322" title="rocket launchers" label="rocket launchers"/>
<link wikidata="Q334851" start="63791" end="63801" title="Zail Singh" label="Zail Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5658074" start="63908" end="63931" title="Harjinder Singh Dilgeer" label="Harjinder Singh Dilgeer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416" start="64123" end="64131" title="Margaret Thatcher" label="Thatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q222883" start="64226" end="64245" title="Special Air Service" label="Special Air Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q117254289" start="64618" end="64624" title="Kharku" label="Kharku"/>
<link wikidata="Q3511031" start="64627" end="64645" title="Khalistan movement" label="Khalistan movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q180422" start="64648" end="64661" title="Golden Temple" label="Golden Temple"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="311737" wikidata="Q209096" url="?curid=311737" title="Burnley">
<text>Burnley () is a town and the administrative centre of the wider Borough of Burnley in Lancashire, England, with a 2021 population of 78,266. It is north of Manchester and east of Preston, at the confluence of the River Calder and River Brun.

The town is located near the countryside to the south and east, with the towns of Padiham and Brierfield to the west and north respectively. It has a reputation as a regional centre of excellence for the manufacturing and aerospace industries.

The town began to develop in the early medieval period as a number of farming hamlets surrounded by manor houses and royal forests, and has held a market for more than 700 years. During the Industrial Revolution it became one of Lancashire&#x27;s most prominent mill towns; at its peak, it was one of the world&#x27;s largest producers of cotton cloth and a major centre of engineering.

Burnley has retained a strong manufacturing sector, and has strong economic links with the cities of Manchester and Leeds, as well as neighbouring towns along the M65 corridor. In 2013, in recognition of its success, it received an Enterprising Britain award from the UK Government as the Most Enterprising Area in the UK. For the first time in more than 50 years, a direct train service now operates between the town&#x27;s Manchester Road railway station and Manchester&#x27;s Victoria station and onward to Wigan Wallgate via the restored Todmorden Curve, which opened in May 2015.

==History==
===Toponymy===
The name Burnley is believed to have been derived from Brun Lea, meaning &quot;meadow by the River Brun&quot;. Various other spellings have been used: Bronley (1241), Brunley (1251) and commonly Brumleye (1294)

===Origins===
Stone Age flint tools and weapons have been found on the moors around the town, as have numerous tumuli, stone circles, and some hill forts (see: Castercliff, which dates from around 600 BC). Modern-day Back Lane, Stump Hall Lane and Noggarth Road broadly follow the route of a classic ridgeway running east–west to the north of the town, suggesting that the area was populated during pre-history and probably controlled by the Brigantes.

Limited coin finds indicate a Roman presence, but no evidence of a settlement has been found in the town. Gorple Road (running east from Worsthorne) appears to follow the route of a Roman road that may have crossed the present-day centre of town, on the way to the fort at Ribchester. It has been claimed that the nearby earthworks of Ring Stones Camp (), Twist Castle () and Beadle Hill () are of Roman origin, but little supporting archaeological information has been published.

Following the Roman period, the area became part of the kingdom of Rheged, and then the kingdom of Northumbria. Local place-names Padiham and Habergham show the influence of the Angles, suggesting that some had settled in the area by the early 7th century; sometime later the land became part of the hundred of Blackburnshire.

There is no definitive record of a settlement until after the Norman conquest of England. In 1122, a charter granted the church of Burnley to the monks of Pontefract Abbey. In its early days, Burnley was a small farming community, gaining a corn mill in 1290, a market in 1294, and a fulling mill in 1296. At this point, it was within the manor of Ightenhill, one of five that made up the Honor of Clitheroe, then a far more significant settlement, and consisted of no more than 50 families. Little survives of early Burnley apart from the Market Cross, erected in 1295, which now stands in the grounds of the old grammar school.

Over the next three centuries, Burnley grew in size to about 1,200 inhabitants by 1550, still centred around the church, St Peter&#x27;s, in what is now known as &quot;Top o&#x27; th&#x27; Town&quot;. Prosperous residents built larger houses, including Gawthorpe Hall in Padiham and Towneley Hall. 

In 1532, St Peter&#x27;s Church was largely rebuilt. Burnley&#x27;s grammar school was founded in 1559, and moved into its own schoolhouse next to the church in 1602. Burnley began to develop in this period into a small market town, with a population of not more than 2,000 by 1790. It is known that weaving was established in the town by the middle of the 18th century, and in 1817 a new Market House was built. The town continued to be centred on St Peter&#x27;s Church, until the market was moved to the bottom of what is today Manchester Road, at the end of the 19th century.

===Industrial Revolution===

In the second half of the 18th century, the manufacture of cotton began to replace wool. Burnley&#x27;s earliest known factories – dating from the mid-century – stood on the banks of the River Calder, close to where it is joined by the River Brun, and relied on water power to drive the spinning machines. The first turnpike road through the area now known as Burnley was begun in 1754, linking the town to Blackburn and Colne eventually leading to the area of Brun Lea developing into a town, and by the mid 19th century, there were daily stagecoach journeys to Blackburn, Skipton and Manchester, the latter taking just over two hours.

The 18th century also saw the rapid development of coal mining on the Burnley Coalfield: the drift mines and shallow bell-pits of earlier centuries were replaced by deeper shafts, meeting industrial as well as domestic demand in Nelson, Colne and Padiham, and by 1800 there were over a dozen pits in the modern-day centre of the town alone.

The arrival of the Leeds and Liverpool Canal in 1796 made possible transportation of goods in bulk, bringing a huge boost to the area&#x27;s economy and the town of Burnley was born. Dozens of new mills were constructed, along with many foundries and ironworks that supplied the cotton mills and coal mines with machinery and cast and wrought iron for construction. The town became renowned for its mill-engines, and the Burnley Loom was recognised as one of the best in the world.

A permanent military presence was established in the town with the completion of Burnley Barracks in 1820.

Disaster struck Burnley in 1824, when its only local bank, Holgate&#x27;s Bank, collapsed, forcing the closure of some of the largest mills. This was followed by a summer drought, which caused serious problems for many of the other mills, leading to high levels of unemployment and possibly contributing to the national Panic of 1825.

By 1830, there were 32 steam engines in cotton mills throughout the rapidly expanding town, an example of which, originally installed at Harle Syke Mill, is on display in the Science Museum in London.

Around 1840, a traveller described the town as ugly, stating that: &quot;parts of it were so situated that good architectural effects might have been obtained had the disposition and the resources co-existed&quot;.

The Great Famine of Ireland led to an influx of Irish families during the 1840s, who formed a community in one of the poorest districts. At one time, the Park District (modern-day town centre, around Parker St.) was known as Irish Park.

In 1848, the East Lancashire Railway Company&#x27;s extension from Accrington linked the town to the nation&#x27;s nascent railway network for the first time. This was another significant boost to the local economy and, by 1851, the town&#x27;s population had reached almost 21,000.

The Burnley Building Society, incorporated in Burnley in 1850, was, by 1911, not only &#x27;by far the largest in the County of Lancashire... but the sixth in magnitude in the kingdom&#x27;.

The Cotton Famine of 1861–1865, caused by the American Civil War, was again disastrous for the town. However, the resumption of trade led to a quick recovery and, by 1866, the town was the largest producer of cotton cloth in the world. By the 1880s, the town was manufacturing more looms than anywhere in the country.

In 1871, the population was 44,320, and had grown to 87,016 by 1891. Burnley Town Hall, designed by Holton and Fox of Dewsbury, was built between 1885 and 1888.

The Burnley Electric Lighting Order was granted in 1890, giving Burnley Corporation (which already controlled the supply of water and the making and sale of gas) a monopoly in the generation and sale of electricity in the town. The building of the coal-powered Electricity Works, in Grimshaw Street, began in 1891, close to the canal (the site of the modern-day Tesco supermarket) and the first supply was achieved on 22 August 1893, initially generating electricity for street lighting.

The start of the 20th century saw Burnley&#x27;s textile industry at the height of its prosperity. By 1901 there were 700,000 spindles and 62,000 looms at work in the textile industry. Other industries at that time included: brass and iron foundries, rope works, calico printing works, tanneries, paper mills, collieries and corn mills and granaries. By 1910, there were approximately 99,000 power looms in the town, and it reached its peak population of over 100,000 in 1911. By 1920, the Burnley and District Weavers&#x27;, Winders&#x27; and Beamers&#x27; Association had more than 20,000 members. However, the First World War heralded the beginning of the collapse of the English textiles industry and the start of a steady decline in the town&#x27;s population. The Bank Parade drill hall was completed in the early 20th century.

There is a total of 191 listed buildings in Burnley – one Grade I (Towneley Hall), two Grade II* (St Peter&#x27;s Church and Burnley Mechanics) and 188 Grade II.

===World Wars===
Over 4000 men from Burnley were killed in the First World War, about 15 per cent of the male working-age population.

250 volunteers, known as the Burnley Pals, made up Z Company of 11th Battalion, the East Lancashire Regiment, a battalion that as a whole became known by the far more famous name of the Accrington Pals. Victoria Crosses were awarded to two soldiers from the town, Hugh Colvin and Thomas Whitham, along with a third to resident (and only son of the chief constable) Alfred Victor Smith. In 1926 a memorial to the fallen was erected in Towneley Park, funded by Caleb Thornber, former mayor and alderman of the borough to ensure the sacrifice of the men lost was commemorated. The local school of art created pages of vellum with the names of the fallen inscribed. These were framed in a rotating carousel in Towneley Hall for visitors to see. There were 2000 names inscribed – less than half the number of actual casualties.

The Burnley Justices had delegated their authority to determine which pictures could be shown in local cinemas to a panel of three justices. In a judicial review in 1916 this was found to be an unlawful delegation of their authority.

During the Second World War, Burnley largely escaped the Blitz, with the only Luftwaffe bomb to known to have fallen within the town landing near the conservatory at Thompson Park on 27 October 1940. In early 1941 a network of five Starfish site bombing decoys were established in the rural areas near Burnley, designed to protect Accrington. A site was located near Crown Point in Habergham Eaves with two on Hameldon Hill, and others in Worsthorne-with-Hurstwood and near Haslingden.

On 6 May 1941, a stick of eight bombs straddled houses around Rossendale Avenue on the southern edge of town, causing only minor damage. On the night of 12 October the control shelter at the Starfish site near Crown Point suffered a direct hit, killing Aircraftman L R Harwood, and severely injuring four other men.

Although the blackout was enforced, most of the aircraft in the sky above the town would have been friendly and on training missions, or returning to the factories for maintenance. Aircraft crashes did occur, however: In September 1942 a P-38 Lightning from the 14th Fighter Group USAAF crashed near Cliviger, and Black Hameldon Hill claimed a Halifax from No. 51 Squadron RAF in January 1943, and also a B-24 Liberator from the 491st Bombardment Group USAAF in February 1945. Lucas Industries set up shadow factories, producing a wide range of electrical parts for the war effort. Notably they were involved with the Rover Company&#x27;s failed attempts (and Rolls-Royce&#x27;s later successful ones) to produce Frank Whittle&#x27;s pioneering jet engine design, the W.2 (Rolls-Royce Welland) in Barnoldswick. Magnesium Elektron&#x27;s factory in Lowerhouse became the largest magnesium production facility in Britain. An unexpected benefit of the conflict for the residents of Burnley occurred in 1940. The Old Vic Theatre Company and the Sadler&#x27;s Wells Opera and Ballet Companies moved from London to the town&#x27;s Victoria Theatre.

For their actions during the war, two Distinguished Service Orders and eight Distinguished Conduct Medals, along with a large number of lesser awards, were awarded to servicemen from the town. Burnley&#x27;s main war memorial stands in Place de Vitry sur Seine next to the central library.

===Post-Second World War===
The Queen, together with Prince Philip, first visited the town as well as Nelson and the Mullard valve factory at Simonstone near Padiham in 1955.

There were widespread celebrations in the town in the summer of 1960, when Burnley FC won the old first division to become Football League champions.

The Queen paid a second official visit to the town in summer 1961, marking the 100th anniversary of Burnley&#x27;s borough status. The rest of the decade saw large-scale redevelopment in the town. Many buildings were demolished including the market hall, the cattle market, the Odeon cinema and thousands of mainly terraced houses. New construction projects included the Charter Walk shopping centre, Centenary Way and its flyover, the Keirby Hotel, a new central bus station, a large scale housing development known as Trafalgar Gardens, and a number of office blocks. The town&#x27;s largest coal mine, Bank Hall Colliery, closed in April 1971 resulting in the loss of 571 jobs. The area of the mine has been restored as a park.

In 1980 Burnley was connected to the motorway network, through the construction of the first and second sections of the M65. Although the route, next to the railway and over the former Clifton colliery site, was chosen to minimise the clearance of occupied land, Yatefield, Olive Mount and Whittlefield Mills, Burnley Barracks, and several hundred more terrace houses had to be demolished. Unusually this route passed close to the town centre and had a partitioning effect on the districts of Gannow, Ightenhill, Whittlefield, Rose Grove and Lowerhouse to the north. The 1980s and 1990s saw massive expansion of Ightenhill and Whittlefield. Developers such as Bovis, Barratt and Wainhomes built large housing estates, predominantly on greenfield land.

In summer 1992, the town came to national attention following rioting on the Stoops and Hargher Clough council estates in the south west of the town.

The millennium brought some improvement projects, notably the &quot;Forest of Burnley&quot; scheme, which planted approximately a million trees throughout the town and its outskirts, and the creation of the Lowerhouse Lodges local nature reserve.

In June 2001, during the 2001 England riots, the town again received national attention following a series of violent disturbances arising from racial tensions between some of its White and Asian residents.

==Governance==
Burnley was incorporated as a municipal borough in 1861, a Parliamentary Borough returning one member in 1867 and became, under the Local Government Act 1888, a county borough outside the administrative county of Lancashire. Under the Local Government Act 1972 Burnley&#x27;s county borough status was abolished, and it was incorporated with neighbouring areas into the non-metropolitan district of Burnley.

Burnley has three tiers of government: Local government responsibilities are shared by Burnley Borough Council and Lancashire County Council; at a national level the town gives its name to a seat in the United Kingdom parliament. While the town itself is unparished, the rest of the borough has one further, bottom tier of government, the parish or town council.

===Borough Council===

Burnley Borough Council is currently governed by a multi-party coalition. The role of mayor is a ceremonial post which rotates annually and for 2020-21 is Wajid Khan (Labour Party).

The borough comprises 15 wards, 12 of which – Bank Hall, Briercliffe, Brunshaw, Coal Clough with Deerplay, Daneshouse with Stoneyholme, Gannow, Lanehead, Queensgate, Rosegrove with Lowerhouse, Rosehill with Burnley Wood, Trinity, and Whittlefield with Ightenhill – fall within the town itself. The remaining three – Cliviger with Worsthorne, Gawthorpe, and Hapton with Park, cover the neighbouring town of Padiham and a number of villages.

===County Council===
Lancashire County Council is currently controlled by the Conservative Party and has been since 2017. They have had only one other term in power between 2009 – 2013, the rest of the time from 1981, the council has been under Labour control. The borough is represented on the council in six divisions: Burnley Central East, Burnley Central West, Burnley North East, Burnley Rural, Burnley South West, and Padiham &amp; Burnley West.

===National===
The constituency of Burnley elects a single member of Parliament (MP). In the 2024 election Burnley elected Labour MP Oliver Ryan. Previously, in the general election in 2019, the town elected Antony Higginbotham, its first Conservative Party MP in over 100 years. The constituency had been represented by MPs of the Labour Party since 1935, apart from 2010 – 2015, when it was represented by Gordon Birtwistle, a Liberal Democrat. Richard Shaw was the town&#x27;s first MP in 1868. Arguably its most notable MP was former leader of the Labour Party and Nobel Peace Prize laureate Arthur Henderson.

==Geography==

The town lies in a natural three-forked valley at the confluence of the River Brun and the River Calder, surrounded by open fields, with wild moorland at higher altitudes. To the west of Burnley lie the towns of Padiham, Accrington and Blackburn, with Nelson and Colne to the north. The centre of the town stands at approximately above sea level and east of the Irish Sea coast.

Areas in the town include: Burnley Wood, Rose Hill, Healey Wood, Harle Syke, Haggate, Daneshouse, Stoneyholme, Burnley Lane, Heasandford, Brunshaw, Pike Hill, Gannow, Ightenhill, Whittlefield, Rose Grove, Habergham, and Lowerhouse. Although Reedley is considered to be a suburb of the town, it is actually part of the neighbouring borough of Pendle.

To the north west of the town, and home of the Pendle Witches, is the imposing Pendle Hill, which rises to , beyond which lie Clitheroe and the Ribble Valley. To the south west, Hameldon Hill rises to , on top of which are the Met Office north west England weather radar, a BBC radio transmitter, and a number of microwave communication towers. This site was the first place in the UK chosen for an unmanned weather radar, beginning operation in 1979; it is one of 18 that cover the British Isles. Also since 2007 the three turbines of the Hameldon Hill wind farm have stood on its northern flank. To the east of the town lie the Boulsworth Hill and the moors of the South Pennines, and to the south, the Forest of Rossendale. On the hills above the Cliviger area to the south east of the town stands Coal Clough wind farm, whose white turbines are visible from most of the town. Built in 1992 amidst local controversy, it was one of the first wind farm projects in the UK. Nearby, the landmark RIBA Award-winning Panopticon &quot;Singing Ringing Tree&quot;, overlooking the town from the hills at Crown Point, was installed in 2006.

Due to its hilly terrain and mining history, rural areas of modern Burnley encroach on the urban ones to within a mile of the town centre on the south, north west and north east.

The Pennine Way passes six miles (10 km) east of Burnley; the Mary Towneley Loop, part of the Pennine Bridleway, the Brontë Way and the Burnley Way offer riders and walkers clearly signed routes through the countryside immediately surrounding the town.

Burnley has a temperate maritime climate, with relatively cool summers and mild winters. There is regular but generally light precipitation throughout the year, contributing to a relatively high humidity level. While snowfall occasionally occurs during the winter months, the temperature is rarely low enough for it to build up on the ground in any quantity. The town is believed to be the first place in the UK where regular rainfall measurements were taken (by Richard Towneley, beginning in 1677).


==Demography==

The 2001 United Kingdom census showed a total resident population for the Burnley subdivision of the Burnley Built-up area of 73,021. The entire built-up area, which includes Nelson, Colne and Brierfield had a population of 149,796; for comparison purposes, this was about the same size as Oxford or Swindon in South England. At that time the racial composition of the wider local government district (the Borough of Burnley) was 91.77% white and 7.16% South Asian or South Asian/British, predominantly from Bangladesh. The largest religious groups were Christian (74.46%) and Muslim (6.58%). 59.02% of adults between the ages of 16 and 74 were classed as economically active and in work. In the 2011 United Kingdom census, these figures had changed to 87.4% white and 10.7% South Asian or South Asian/British, with 63.6% identifying as Christian and 9.9% Muslim. The Burnley Built-up area, had a population of 149,422 according to the 2011 census. The ONS annual population survey for the year Apr 2013–Mar 2014 showed that 63.1% of adults between the ages of 16 and 64 were classed as economically active.

The majority of its Asian residents live in the neighbouring Daneshouse and Stoneyholme districts. In total, the size of its Asian community is much smaller than that in nearby towns such as Blackburn and Oldham.

In February 2010, the &quot;Lancashire Telegraph&quot; reported that Burnley topped Home Office figures for the highest number of burglaries per head in England and Wales between April 2008 – April 2009. This claim (minus the dates) was repeated during one of the questions in the first of the televised 2010 general election debates. However, in May 2010, the NPIA Local Crime Mapping System (believed to be the source of the data in the report) listed a 49.5% drop in this rate on the previous year.

Burnley has some of the lowest property prices in the country, with numerous streets appearing in the annual mouseprice.com most affordable streets in England and Wales report. These streets are concentrated in areas of terrace housing in poorer neighbourhoods adjacent to the town centre. Between 2005 and 2010, approximately £65m of government funds was invested into these areas through the Elevate East Lancashire housing market renewal company (replaced by Regenerate Pennine Lancashire in 2010).


==Economy==

In 2013, Burnley was awarded an Enterprising Britain award from the UK Government for being the &#x27;Most Enterprising Area in the UK&#x27;. This accolade subsequently received praise from the British Prime Minister, David Cameron, and His Royal Highness, the Prince of Wales.

A series of high-profile regeneration schemes, including: a direct rail link to Manchester, an aerospace supply village and multimillion-pound investment in the former Victorian industrial heartland through a project called &#x27;On The Banks&#x27; are radically transforming the economy of the Lancashire town. Although traditional manufacturing has been in decline in the town for several decades, high end advanced manufacturing remains very strong in the town. The Secretary of State for Business, Innovation and Skills, Vince Cable, said in 2013: &quot;Burnley in the north of Lancashire is currently now booming economically on the back of manufacturing and proximity to the aerospace industry.&quot; Cable praised the town again in 2014 saying: &quot;If every other part of Britain was like Burnley we wouldn&#x27;t be talking about a recession&quot;.

The last deep coal mine, Hapton Valley Colliery, closed in February 1981 and the last steam-powered mill, Queen Street Mill, in 1982. Over the next two decades, Burnley&#x27;s three largest manufacturers closed their factories: BEP in 1992, Prestige in July 1997 and Michelin in 2002. The town has struggled to recover: its employment growth between 1995 and 2004 placed it 55th of England&#x27;s 56 largest towns and cities, and as of 2007 it was the 21st most deprived local authority (out of 354) in the United Kingdom. In 2016, a study by the Joseph Rowntree Foundation put Rochdale, Burnley and Bolton at top of a list of the 74 largest UK cities and towns faring worst compared with UK trends. 10.1% of its working age population currently claims incapacity benefit and ESA (national average 6.2%). The largest employment sector in the town is now Health (21%), followed by Manufacturing (16%).

Home shopping firm Shop Direct announced in January 2010 that it was to close its Burnley call centre with the loss of 450 jobs. The company, which owns Littlewoods, Additions Direct, Very, Empire Stores and Marshall Ward, had been in the town for over 30 years, originally as Great Universal Stores but now known as GUS plc.

Modern economic developments have been industrial estates and business parks with the following currently in Burnley: Heasandford, Rossendale Road, and Healeywood Industrial Estates; Network 65, Shuttleworth Mead, Smallshaw &amp; Chestnut, Elm Street, and Gannow Business Parks; and Burnham Gate Trading Estate. A further large business park called Burnley Bridge, on a site near Hapton formerly belonging to Hepworth Plastics has recently opened.

Key manufacturing employers today are in highly specialised fields: Safran Aircelle (aerospace), GE subsidiary Unison Engine Components (aerospace), AMS Neve (professional audio), and TRW Automotive and Futaba-Tenneco UK (automotive components). In 2011 Gardner Aerospace, which made parts for the Eurofighter Typhoon, closed its site, with the loss of 120 jobs. The town has also had a long association with Endsleigh Insurance Services, providing its main training facility and an important call centre. Endsleigh acquired a number of the former Burnley Building Society&#x27;s properties in the town centre following its merger with the Provincial Building Society and subsequent merger with the Abbey National. It also hosts the head office of The Original Factory Shop chain. In 2004, the Lancashire Digital Technology Centre was opened by Sir Digby Jones on land formerly occupied by the Michelin factory, to provide support and incubation space for start-up technology companies. The rest of the Michelin site has recently been opened as Innovation Drive, a new business park aimed at businesses in the Aerospace and Advanced Manufacturing supply chain.

Continuing the town&#x27;s historic association with fabric weaving is Ian Mankin Ltd, a company which manufactures high quality, natural woven fabrics and furnishings using only natural, recycled or certified organic fibres, at Ashfield Mill, Active Way, Burnley BB11 1BS, on the northern edge of the Weavers&#x27; Triangle. The company also supplies fabrics to the Landmark Trust for use in their restoration of historic buildings across the UK.

Burnley&#x27;s main shopping area is St James Street, along with the nearby Charter Walk Shopping Centre. The YMCA claimed to have opened the largest charity shop in the UK in 2009, when they temporarily took over the former Woolworths store in the centre. The shopping centre was sold in 2001 by Great Portland Estates to Sapphire Retail Fund, which was 50% owned by the Reuben Brothers. The centre was bought in March 2011 by Addington Capital following the 2010 collapse of Sapphire Retail Fund. The centre incorporates the council-run market which is open four days a week.

The town centre is home to a large number of high street multiples, along with other shops, including specialist food shops, independent record shops and an independent bookshop. On the edge of the town centre, there are four retail parks; there are also a number of mill shops. Plans have been in place since 2004 to construct a second town centre shopping centre, originally called &#x27;The Oval&#x27;. By the time a sufficient number of tenants had signed up to begin construction, the effects of the Great Recession cast doubts over the viability of the project. In early 2011, fresh plans were released for a considerably smaller scheme involving a cluster of retail units. The site is now earmarked for a cinema and restaurants and is due to open in 2016 As well as Woolworths, the Great Recession led to the closure of T J Hughes, Miss Selfridge, and HMV but the project gained new high street names in large retail units including Next and River Island. The Market Square is currently under redevelopment with a number of retailers already moved in and more said to be &#x27;signed up&#x27; to move in once the development is complete.

The local brewery, Moorhouse&#x27;s, which was founded in 1865, produces a range of award-winning beers and currently operates six pubs in the area. The Worsthorne Brewing Company produces a number of cask ales. The Moonstone Brewery is operated within the &quot;Ministry of Ale&quot;, Burnley&#x27;s first Brewpub. Reedley Hallows Brewery was launched in 2012 by the former Head Brewer at Moorhouses.

== Religion ==
St Peter&#x27;s Church, around which the town developed, dates from the 15th century, and is designated a Grade II* listed building by English Heritage. St Andrew&#x27;s Church on Colne Road was built in 1866–67, to a design by J. Medland Taylor, and was restored in 1898 by the Lancaster architects Austin and Paley. It is designated a Grade II listed building. There are many other places of worship including those for Roman Catholics, Baptists, United Reformed Church, Methodists, Jehovah&#x27;s Witnesses, Latter-Day Saints and Spiritualists.

The chapel at Towneley Hall was the centre for Roman Catholic worship in Burnley until modern times. Well before the Industrial Revolution, the town saw the emergence of many non-conformist churches and chapels. In 1891 the town was the location of the meeting which saw the creation of the Baptist Union of Great Britain and Ireland.

Burnley has ten mosques, with the first purpose-built premises opening in 2009. A total of 17 religious buildings or structures are designated as listed buildings – all Grade II by English Heritage.

==Landmarks==
===Leeds and Liverpool Canal===
Along the Burnley section of the canal are a number of notable features. The long and up to high almost perfectly level embankment, known as the Straight Mile, was built between 1796 and 1801 (before the invention of the steam shovel), to avoid the need for locks. It is regarded as one of the original seven wonders of the British waterways. The much more modern (1980) Whittlefield motorway aqueduct is believed to be the first time a canal aqueduct was constructed over a motorway in the UK.

===Weavers&#x27; Triangle===
The Weavers&#x27; Triangle is an area west of Burnley town centre, consisting mostly of 19th-century industrial buildings, clustered around the Leeds and Liverpool Canal. The area has been identified as being of significant historical interest as the cotton mills and associated buildings encapsulate the social and economic development of the town and its weaving industry. From the 1980s, the area has been the focus of major redevelopment efforts.

===Singing Ringing Tree===

The Singing Ringing Tree is a wind powered sound sculpture resembling a tree, set in the landscape of the Pennines, south of Burnley town centre.

Completed in 2006, it is part of the series of four sculptures within the Panopticons arts and regeneration project created by the East Lancashire Environmental Arts Network (ELEAN). The project was set up to erect a series of 21st-century landmarks, or Panopticons (structures providing a comprehensive view), across East Lancashire as symbols of the renaissance of the area.

Designed by architects Mike Tonkin and Anna Liu of Tonkin Liu, the &quot;Singing Ringing Tree&quot; is a tall construction comprising pipes of galvanised steel, which harness the energy of the wind to produce a slightly discordant and penetrating choral sound covering a range of several octaves. Some of the pipes are primarily structural and aesthetic elements, while others have been cut across their width enabling the sound. The harmonic and singing qualities of the tree were produced by tuning the pipes according to their length by adding holes to the underside of each.

In 2007 the sculpture was one of 14 winners of the National Award of the Royal Institute of British Architects (RIBA) for architectural excellence.

===Towneley Hall===

Towneley Hall was the home of the Towneley family for more than 500 years. Various family members were influential in the scientific, technological and religious developments which took place in the 17th and 18th centuries. The male line of the family died out in 1878 and in 1901 one of the daughters, Lady O&#x27;Hagan, sold the house together with of land to Burnley Corporation.
The hall contains the 15th-century Whalley Abbey vestments and has its own chapel, which contains a finely carved altarpiece made in Antwerp in about 1525.
==Transport==
Burnley is served by Junctions 9, 10 and 11 of the M65 motorway, which runs west to Accrington, Blackburn and Preston (where it connects to the M6), and northeast to Nelson and Colne. From the town centre, the A646 runs to Todmorden, the A679 to Accrington, the A671 to Clitheroe, and the A682 (a nearby rural section of which has been classified as Britain&#x27;s most dangerous road) south to Rawtenstall and north east to Nelson and the Yorkshire Dales. The A56 dual carriageway skirts the western edge of the town, linking to the M66 motorway heading towards Manchester and the M62.

Rail services to and from Burnley are provided by Northern. The town has four railway stations: Burnley Manchester Road, Burnley Central, Burnley Barracks and Rose Grove. A fifth station, Hapton, serves Padiham and Hapton to the west of the town, but inside the borough. Manchester Road station has an hourly semi-fast service west to Preston (the nearest station on the West Coast Main Line) and Blackpool North, and east to Leeds and York, whilst the Central and Barracks stations provide an hourly stopping service west to Blackpool South and Preston, and east to Nelson and Colne.

In May 2015, a direct train service to Manchester and onwards to Wigan Wallgate was reinstated. This provides a direct route to Manchester Victoria for the first time in over fifty years with the construction of a short section of track at the Hall Royd Junction of the Caldervale Line (known as the Todmorden curve). This has reduced the journey time between Burnley and central Manchester from around 1 hour and 25 minutes via Blackburn and Bolton and 1 hour and 4 minutes via Hebden Bridge to approximately 45 minutes via Todmorden and Rochdale where Metrolink tram connections via Oldham are possible. In preparation for this new direct service a new Manchester Road station building including a ticket office and waiting rooms has recently been completed, which has made Manchester Road the new principal station for the town 

Burnley bus station, designed by Manchester-based SBS Architects, won the UK Bus Award for Infrastructure in 2003. The main bus operator is Burnley Bus Company, with Tyrer Bus operating some tendered town services. Other services are provided by First West Yorkshire (591/592 to Halifax), Blackburn Bus Company (152 to Preston) and Rosso (483 to Bury). National Express operates three coach services to London each day, and one to Birmingham. The X43 Witch Way service (operated by Burnley Bus Company) runs from Burnley to Manchester via Rawtenstall and Prestwich using a fleet of specially branded double-decker buses. The fastest journey takes about an hour.

Burnley does not have an airport, but there are four international airports within an hour&#x27;s travel of the town: Manchester Airport at , Liverpool John Lennon Airport at , Leeds Bradford Airport at , and Blackpool Airport at .

Since 2009, the Reedley Marina has provided a 100-berth facility, on the Leeds and Liverpool Canal on the northern edge of town.

==Sport==

The town&#x27;s sporting scene is dominated by Burnley Football Club, nicknamed &quot;The Clarets&quot; and founded in 1882. They were one of the first to become professional (in 1883), and subsequently put pressure on the Football Association to permit payments to players. In 1888, Burnley were one of the 12 founder members of the Football League. From the 1950s until the 1970s, under chairman Bob Lord, the club became renowned for its youth policy and scouting system, and was one of the first to set up a purpose-built training ground (Gawthorpe). The team currently compete in the English Football League Championship, the second tier of English football.

The club has played its home matches at Turf Moor since 1883, with average attendances of 20,000 in the Premier League. The club is well supported in the town, and is one of the best supported sides in English football per capita. Burnley have been champions of England twice, in 1920–21 and 1959–60, have won the FA Cup once, in 1913–14, and have won the FA Charity Shield twice, in 1960 and 1973. When the team won the 1959–60 Football League, the town of Burnley became one of the smallest to have an English first tier champion. It is one of only five English league clubs to have been champions of all four professional league divisions (along with Wolverhampton Wanderers, Preston North End, Sheffield United and Portsmouth).

There are two members of the Lancashire Cricket League in the town. Burnley Cricket Club play their home matches at Turf Moor, their ground being adjacent to the football ground, while Lowerhouse Cricket Club play at Liverpool Road. England Cricketer James Anderson started his career at Burnley Cricket Club and TV weatherman John Kettley used to play for them.

Burnley is also home to Burnley Rugby Club (formerly Calder Vale Rugby Club 1926–2001). They field three senior sides, with teams at most junior age groups, and play at Holden Road, the site of Belvedere and Calder Vale Sports Club.

Rugby League is represented in the town by Burnley and Pendle Lions RLFC. They train and play their home games at Prairie Sports Village. They are in the North West Men&#x27;s Merit League.

Burnley Tornados is the American Football club in the town.

Burnley held greyhound racing and speedway at Towneley Stadium, that existed from 1927 until 1935.

Burnley has good public sporting facilities for a town of its size. The £29m St Peter&#x27;s Centre (opened in 2006) offers swimming, squash courts and a fitness suite, while the nearby Spirit of Sport complex includes a large sports hall, and several indoor courts and outdoor synthetic pitches. There is an outdoor athletics track at Barden Lane, where the Burnley Athletic Club meets. For golfers, there are both 9-hole and 18-hole municipal golf courses at Towneley Park, along with an 18-hole pitch and putt course. Burnley Golf Club have a private course, established in 1905 above the town in Habergham Eaves. There are tennis courts at Towneley Park, and at the Burnley Lawn Tennis Club, as well as eleven bowling greens around the town, and a £235,000 skate park at Queens Park, which opened in 2003. There are also basketball, caving and judo clubs in the town. In 2001, the private Crow Wood Leisure Centre was established in countryside on the edge of the town, offering a combination of fitness facilities, racquet and equestrian sports. In 2013 Crow Wood opened its own day Spa, the Woodland Spa, which was named Day Spa of the Year at the Professional Beauty Awards 2014, just one year after opening.

==Culture and entertainment==
===Museums and galleries===
On the outskirts of the town there are galleries in two stately homes, the Burnley council-owned Towneley Hall and Gawthorpe Hall in Padiham, which is owned by Lancashire County Council and managed by the National Trust. There are also two local museums: the Weavers&#x27; Triangle Trust operates the Visitor Centre and Museum of Local History in the historic surroundings of the Weavers&#x27; Triangle, while the Queen Street Mill Textile Museum is unique as the world&#x27;s only surviving steam driven cotton weaving shed.

Mid Pennine Arts were instrumental in the Panopticons project and run exhibitions and creative learning projects across the town and wider area.

===Parks===
There are several large parks in the town, including Towneley Park, once the deer park for the 15th century Towneley Hall, and three winners of the Green Flag Award, Queens Park which hosts a summer season of brass band concerts each year, and Thompson Park which has a boating lake and miniature railway. The other parks include Scott Park, Ightenhill Park and Thursby Gardens. A greenway route linking Burnley Central Station along a former mineral line and incorporating the former Bank Hall colliery and reclaimed landfill site at Heasandford extends out of the town towards Worsthorne at Rowley Lake. The lake was constructed in the 1980s as a means to divert the river Brun away from former mine workings that were causing significant pollution of the river.

===Activities===

There is a modern 24-lane ten pin bowling centre on Finsley Gate, operated by 1st Bowl. A 9-screen multiplex cinema opened in 1995 (with 3 3D screens as of 2010), operated by Reel Cinemas. The town&#x27;s theatre, named after its former use as a Mechanics Institute, hosts touring comedians and musical acts and amateur dramatics. In 2005, Burnley Youth Theatre moved into a second, purpose-built £1.5 million performance space next to Queen&#x27;s Park, one of only two purpose-built youth theatres in the UK.

===Festivals===
Each year Burnley hosts the two-day Burnley International Rock and Blues Festival, which started as the Burnley National Blues Festival in 1988. The renamed festival moved from Easter to the early May Bank Holiday. The festival introduced a new logo, website and branding in a bid to attract new and younger audiences, and to encourage cross-town participation with a &#x27;Little America&#x27; theme. It is one of the largest blues festivals in the country, drawing fans from all over Britain and beyond to venues spread across the town. In the 1970s, the town was also an important venue for Northern soul and several local pubs still hold regular Northern soul nights. In recent years the town has also hosted the annual Burnley Balloon Festival in Towneley Park and a science festival at UCLan&#x27;s local university campus. A funfair is usually held around the second weekend in July at Fulledge Recreation Ground, which is also the venue for the town&#x27;s main Guy Fawkes Night celebration.

In July 2023, the town celebrated its first ever Pride parade. Local charities, organisations, youth groups and trade unions were in attendance at the parade which was led by RuPaul’s Drag Race UK contestant, Elektra Fence.

===Nightlife===

Major bars and nightclubs in Burnley included Lava &amp; Ignite, which was a leading nightclub, which closed in 2014. Curzon Street in Burnley was also the site of the legendary Angels nightclub.

Burnley has a small gay scene, centred on the Guys as Dolls showbar in St James Street. In 1971 the granting of a licence to the town&#x27;s first gay club, The Esquire, caused considerable controversy, with Tory deputy council leader, Alderman Frank Bailey, suggesting that the building be bought by the corporation to stop the plan. A rainbow plaque was unveiled at Burnley Library on 30 July 2021 marking the 50th anniversary of a meeting organised by the Campaign for Homosexual Equality regarding the gay club.

Bénédictine and hot water, known locally as &quot;Bene &#x27;n&#x27; Hot&quot; is a popular drink in east Lancashire, after soldiers stationed in Normandy during the First World War brought back a taste for it. The Burnley Miners&#x27; Club is the world&#x27;s largest consumer of the French liqueur, and has its own Bénédictine Lounge.

===Media===
Local radio for Burnley and its surrounding area is currently provided by Capital Manchester and Lancashire (formerly 2BR), Central Radio North West and BBC Radio Lancashire.

Local television news programmes are BBC North West Tonight and ITV Granada Reports.

There are two local newspapers: the &quot;Burnley Express&quot;, published on Tuesdays and Fridays, and the daily &quot;Lancashire Telegraph&quot;, which publishes a local edition for Burnley and Pendle. Two free advertisement-supported newspapers, &quot;The Citizen&quot; and &quot;The Reporter&quot;, are posted to homes throughout the town.

Burnley was one of seven sites chosen to be part of Channel 4&#x27;s The Big Art project in which a group of 15 young people from all over the town commissioned artist Greyworld to create a piece of public art. The artwork, named &quot;Invisible&quot;, is a series of UV paintings placed all around the town centre displaying public heroes.

===Appearance in television and cinema===
Parts of the 1961 British film &quot;Whistle Down the Wind&quot;, and the two BBC television series &quot;All Quiet on the Preston Front&quot; and &quot;Juliet Bravo&quot;, were filmed in the town. Burnley Fire Station was the location of Social Services in the first series of &quot;Juliet Bravo&quot;, and Burnley Library was used for exterior shots of the magistrates&#x27; court in the series. Numerous locations in the town were used in the 1996–1998 BBC comedy drama &quot;Hetty Wainthropp Investigates&quot;. Ashfield Road, which runs between the Burnley College and DIY superstore, was used as a film location in the 1951 film &quot;The Man in the White Suit&quot;.

Queen Street Mill textile museum was used for a scene in the 2010 Oscar-winning film The King&#x27;s Speech, and for scenes in the 2004 BBC dramatisation of Elizabeth Gaskell&#x27;s &quot;North and South&quot;, as well as &quot;Life on Mars&quot; (S1 E3; 2006). It has also featured in the following BBC documentaries: Fred Dibnah&#x27;s &quot;Industrial Age&quot; (E2; 1999), Adam Hart-Davies&#x27; &quot;What the Victorians Did for Us&quot; (E1; 2001), and Jeremy Paxman&#x27;s &quot;The Victorians&quot; (2009), as well as &quot;Who Do You Think You Are?&quot; (Bill Oddie episode), &quot;Flog It&quot; and UKTV History&#x27;s &quot;The Re-Inventors&quot; (2006).

Towneley Hall featured in the BBC comedy drama &quot;Casanova&quot; (2005) and the BBC antiques quiz &quot;Antiques Master&quot; is currently filmed there.

The canal embankment featured in the 2007 ITV documentary &quot;Locks and Quays&quot; (S2 E9) and two families in Burnley have been featured in the ITV series &quot;60 Minute Makeover&quot; (S6 E28 and S7 E70).

In 2023, Netflix released the comedy film &quot;Bank of Dave&quot;, billed as a true-ish story of Burnley businessman David Fishwick, who in 2011 opened Burnley Savings &amp; Loans, trading under the slogan &#x27;Bank of Dave&#x27;.

==Education==
Burnley Grammar School was first established in St Peter&#x27;s Church in 1559, with its first headmaster a former chantry priest, Gilbert Fairbank. In 1602, one of the governors, John Towneley, paid for a new schoolhouse to be built in the churchyard; the school moved again in 1876 to a new building on Bank Parade, which can still be seen today. The first technical school, in Elizabeth Street, was erected in 1892. The equivalent school for girls, Burnley Girls&#x27; High School, was established in 1909 on a site in Ormerod Road (along with the Technical School and Art School) later moving to Kiddrow Lane in the 1960s. The tripartite system of Education established by the Education Act 1944 affected Burnley in the following ways: Heasandford Technical High School for Girls and Towneley Technical High School for Boys were established (Burnley Technical High School was formed in 1956 by the merger of the two), as were Barden, Burnley Wood, Rosegrove &amp; St. Mary&#x27;s (Roman Catholic) Secondary Modern Schools.

The borough completed the move to comprehensive education in 1981.

Secondary Schools: Habergham (mixed), Ivy Bank (mixed), Gawthorpe (mixed), Towneley (mixed), Barden (boys), Walshaw (girls), St Theodores RC (boys), St Hilda&#x27;s RC (Girls).

Further education: Habergham and St Theodores Sixth Forms and Burnley College (all mixed).

In 2003 a plan was devised to replace all the secondary schools in the town as part of the first wave of a nationwide programme funded by the Department for Education and Skills called Building Schools for the Future. Funding was secured in 2004 and in 2006 the new schools opened (in the buildings of their predecessors).

Today there are still five 11–16 secondary schools:

Shuttleworth College moved into new buildings in 2008, Sir John Thursby in 2009, and Blessed Trinity, Hameldon and Unity in 2010.

Thomas Whitham Sixth Form, which forms a sixth element of the BSF programme, offers sixth form provision at its Burnley campus (opened 2008) on Barden Lane.

University Technical College Lancashire is a university technical college for 14- to 19-year-olds that opened in Burnley in September 2013. Burnley High School is a free school for 11- to 19-year-olds that opened in Burnley in September 2014.

Burnley College has its heritage in the mid 19th century and is the borough&#x27;s main tertiary education (post 16) provider, offering a comprehensive range of 40 A Levels, a range of advanced vocational courses and professional training. Apprenticeship courses provided over 1000 local apprenticeship places in 2013, within businesses across Pennine Lancashire. Burnley College in partnership with the University of Central Lancashire (UCLan Burnley) also provides adult education and 70 degree courses.

Burnley College moved to a new £80 million campus, (in partnership with the University of Central Lancashire), off Princess Way in 2009. It achieved &#x27;outstanding&#x27; status in that year&#x27;s OFSTED inspection. The inspection awarded the College 54 out of 54 areas grade one status.

The Mohiuddin Trust charity subsequently purchased the former College site for £2m, and opened the Mohiuddin International Girls&#x27; College in October 2010.

===Attainment===
The town&#x27;s educational attainment has continued to improve over the last few years. In 2012, 82% of children at the end of Key Stage 2 achieved Level 4 or above in English and 81% in Mathematics.

In 2012 59% of students at the end of Key Stage 4 achieved A*-C grades or above at GCSE and in 2012 Burnley College reported a 99.8% A Level pass rate and a record number of A and A* grades.

==People==
===Art===
Keith Coventry, the winner of the 2010 John Moores Painting Prize, was born and educated in the town. The watercolourist Noel Leaver studied and also taught at the former Burnley School of Art, later attended by Greta Tomlinson.

===Entertainment===
Possibly the best-known Burnley figure in the field of entertainment is actor Ian McKellen, who was born in the town in 1939. There is a blue plaque on the house where he lived, but where he says he was not born. Other actors born in the town include J. Pat O&#x27;Malley, Mary Mackenzie, Irene Sutcliffe, Julia Haworth, Richard Moore, Jody Latham, Kathy Jamieson, Hannah Hobley, Natalie Gumede and Lee Ingleby. &quot;Coronation Street&quot; regular Malcolm Hebden grew up in the town. Screenwriter Paul Abbott, creator of &quot;Shameless&quot;, and television producer and executive Peter Salmon were also born here.
Musicians born in the town include Danbert Nobacon, Alice Nutter, Lou Watts and Boff Whalley (all of Chumbawamba), Eric Haydock (bassist in The Hollies), classical composer John Pickard, the DJ Anne Savage, Record Producer Ady Hall of Sugar House, young soprano Hollie Steel. and singer Cody Frost.

The 19th-century author and clergyman Silas K. Hocking wrote his most famous work, &quot;Her Benny&quot; (1879), while living in Burnley. Crime writer Stephen Booth is another native of the town, as are journalist and broadcaster Tony Livesey and author and documentary maker Stewart Binns.

===Politics and the church===
David Waddington, Lord Waddington of Read (former Conservative Home Secretary and former Lord Privy Seal and Leader of the House of Lords), Phil Willis, Liberal Democrat MP for Harrogate &amp; Knaresborough, and the diplomat Sir Vincent Fean were born in Burnley, as was the 16th-century Catholic martyr Robert Nutter, and the 17th-century Catholic martyr Thomas Whittaker. Suffragettes Margaret Aldersley was born in Burnley in 1852 while Ada Nield Chew died in the town in 1945.

Sir John Stuttard, Lord Mayor of London from 2006 to 2007, was born in Burnley in 1945.

===Military===
James Yorke Scarlett, commander of the Heavy Brigade at the Battle of Balaclava, was married to a Hargreaves coal heiress and lived at Bank Hall. Victoria Cross winners 2nd Lieutenant Hugh Colvin and Private Thomas Whitham both served during World War I.

===Science and industry===
Engineer Sir Willis Jackson was born and educated in the town. James Drake, a pioneer of British motorways, was also born here. 17th-century mathematician Sir Jonas Moore was from Higham but is believed to have been educated at the Grammar School. Moore&#x27;s contemporary, Richard Towneley, pioneered many scientific and technological developments at Towneley Hall. Scottish cardiology pioneer Sir James Mackenzie lived and practised medicine in the town for more than a quarter of a century. The Lasker Award-winning molecular biologist Edwin Southern, inventor of the Southern blot, was born and raised in Burnley.

===Sport===
Burnley&#x27;s sporting figures include England and Lancashire cricketer James Anderson, former England international footballers Jimmy Crabtree, Billy Bannister, and Jay Rodriguez, Northern Ireland international Oliver Norwood, Pakistan international Adnan Ahmed, former England Women&#x27;s goalkeeper Rachel Brown, ex-Manchester United player Chris Casper, Commonwealth Games Gold Medal-winning gymnast Craig Heap. Supercars Championship driver Fabian Coulthard, second cousin of Formula One driver David Coulthard, was born in Burnley along with Neil Hodgson, 2003 World Superbike champion. Also long-time Burnley F.C. chairman Bob Lord, football pioneer Jimmy Hogan (who grew up in the town), football manager Harry Bradshaw, handball player Holly Lam-Moores, middleweight boxer Jock McAvoy, World Rally Championship navigator Daniel Barritt, and hammer thrower Sophie Hitchon.

==See also==
* Pendelfin, a Burnley-based stoneware company named after Pendle Hill
* Collieries in the Burnley area of Lancashire
* List of mining disasters in Lancashire

==References==
Citations
Bibliography
* Brian Hall &amp; Ken Spencer, &quot;Burnley: A Pictorial History&quot;, Phillimore, 1993, 
* Guy Rickards, &quot;Icarus Soaring: The Music of John Pickard&quot; in &quot;Tempo&quot;, n.s., 201 (July 1997), pp. 2–5
* Kev Roberts, &quot;Northern Soul Top 500&quot;, Goldmine Publications, 2000, 

==Further reading==
* Walter Bennett, &quot;The History of Burnley&quot;, 4 vols., Burnley Corporation, 1946–1951
* Ken Bolton &amp; Roger Frost, &quot;Burnley&quot;, Francis Frith, 2006 
* Mike Townend, &quot;Burnley&quot;, Tempus Publishing, 2004 
* Mike Townend, &quot;Burnley Revisited&quot;, Tempus Publishing, 2006 

==External links==


===General information===
* Burnley Borough Council Official council site
* Visit Burnley Official tourism site

===Maps and photographs===
* Ordnance Survey Map of Eastern Burnley in 1890
* Ordnance Survey Map of Western Burnley in 1890
* Ordnance Survey Map of Burnley in 1910
* Ordnance Survey Map of Burnley in 1953–55
* Photographs of Burnley at Geograph (UK)
* Burnley in 2007 | Photographs of the Leeds and Liverpool Canal in Burnley
* Image Burnley</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q209096" start="0" end="7" title="Burnley" label="Burnley"/>
<link wikidata="Q894079" start="64" end="82" title="Borough of Burnley" label="Borough of Burnley"/>
<link wikidata="Q23077" start="86" end="96" title="Lancashire" label="Lancashire"/>
<link wikidata="Q16970190" start="114" end="129" title="2021 United Kingdom census" label="2021 population"/>
<link wikidata="Q18125" start="156" end="166" title="Manchester" label="Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q184090" start="179" end="186" title="Preston, Lancashire" label="Preston"/>
<link wikidata="Q3225350" start="213" end="225" title="River Calder, Lancashire" label="River Calder"/>
<link wikidata="Q7337190" start="230" end="240" title="River Brun" label="River Brun"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035820" start="325" end="332" title="Padiham" label="Padiham"/>
<link wikidata="Q523025" start="337" end="347" title="Brierfield, Lancashire" label="Brierfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="527" end="535" title="medieval" label="medieval"/>
<link wikidata="Q5084" start="566" end="573" title="Hamlet (place)" label="hamlets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550557" start="588" end="593" title="Manorialism" label="manor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1975546" start="605" end="617" title="royal forest" label="royal forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269" start="678" end="699" title="Industrial Revolution" label="Industrial Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q4012861" start="750" end="759" title="mill town" label="mill town"/>
<link wikidata="Q39121" start="992" end="997" title="Leeds" label="Leeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q2796161" start="1039" end="1042" title="M65 motorway" label="M65"/>
<link wikidata="Q4539321" start="1301" end="1316" title="Burnley Manchester Road railway station" label="Manchester Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q1859573" start="1355" end="1363" title="Manchester Victoria station" label="Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1418" end="1433" title="Calder Valley line#Todmorden curve" label="Todmorden Curve"/>
<link wikidata="Q11759" start="1715" end="1724" title="Stone Age" label="Stone Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q479257" start="1725" end="1736" title="flint tools" label="flint tools"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092661" start="1772" end="1777" title="Moorland" label="moors"/>
<link wikidata="Q34023" start="1812" end="1818" title="tumuli" label="tumuli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935728" start="1820" end="1833" title="stone circles" label="stone circles"/>
<link wikidata="Q744099" start="1844" end="1854" title="hill forts" label="hill forts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5049859" start="1861" end="1872" title="Castercliff" label="Castercliff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1643682" start="2001" end="2009" title="Ridgeway (road)" label="ridgeway"/>
<link wikidata="Q11756" start="2100" end="2111" title="pre-history" label="pre-history"/>
<link wikidata="Q500393" start="2143" end="2152" title="Brigantes" label="Brigantes"/>
<link wikidata="Q185103" start="2185" end="2190" title="Roman Britain" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q8037143" start="2292" end="2302" title="Worsthorne" label="Worsthorne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2179671" start="2337" end="2342" title="Roman roads in Britain" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083066" start="2428" end="2438" title="Ribchester" label="Ribchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349587" start="2476" end="2486" title="Earthworks (archaeology)" label="earthworks"/>
<link wikidata="Q23498" start="2589" end="2603" title="archaeological" label="archaeological"/>
<link wikidata="Q633573" start="2704" end="2710" title="Rheged" label="Rheged"/>
<link wikidata="Q107299" start="2736" end="2747" title="Northumbria" label="Northumbria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035820" start="2767" end="2774" title="Padiham" label="Padiham"/>
<link wikidata="Q104238" start="2815" end="2821" title="Angles (tribe)" label="Angles"/>
<link wikidata="Q313354" start="2937" end="2944" title="Hundred (county subdivision)" label="hundred"/>
<link wikidata="Q4922750" start="2948" end="2962" title="Blackburnshire" label="Blackburnshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q200485" start="3027" end="3053" title="Norman conquest of England" label="Norman conquest of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q727002" start="3066" end="3073" title="charter" label="charter"/>
<link wikidata="Q733786" start="3111" end="3115" title="monk" label="monk"/>
<link wikidata="Q7228175" start="3120" end="3136" title="Pontefract Abbey" label="Pontefract Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q623605" start="3206" end="3215" title="gristmill" label="corn mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585730" start="3249" end="3261" title="Fulling" label="fulling mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550557" start="3304" end="3309" title="manorialism" label="manor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5991724" start="3313" end="3323" title="Ightenhill" label="Ightenhill"/>
<link wikidata="Q5897177" start="3354" end="3372" title="Honor of Clitheroe" label="Honor of Clitheroe"/>
<link wikidata="Q427926" start="3505" end="3517" title="Market Cross" label="Market Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q7595224" start="3717" end="3732" title="St Peter&amp;#x27;s Church, Burnley" label="St Peter&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q5528499" start="3849" end="3863" title="Gawthorpe Hall" label="Gawthorpe Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7830101" start="3879" end="3892" title="Towneley Park" label="Towneley Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q967098" start="3964" end="3978" title="grammar school" label="grammar school"/>
<link wikidata="Q18511725" start="4116" end="4127" title="market town" label="market town"/>
<link wikidata="Q192296" start="4196" end="4203" title="weaving" label="weaving"/>
<link wikidata="Q18125" start="4427" end="4437" title="Manchester" label="Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q946725" start="4565" end="4571" title="Cotton mill" label="cotton"/>
<link wikidata="Q42329" start="4589" end="4593" title="wool" label="wool"/>
<link wikidata="Q3225350" start="4693" end="4705" title="River Calder, Lancashire" label="River Calder"/>
<link wikidata="Q7337190" start="4742" end="4752" title="River Brun" label="River Brun"/>
<link wikidata="Q170196" start="4768" end="4779" title="water power" label="water power"/>
<link wikidata="Q49015" start="4793" end="4810" title="Spinning jenny" label="spinning machines"/>
<link wikidata="Q7814335" start="4822" end="4830" title="Toll roads in Great Britain" label="turnpike"/>
<link wikidata="Q188313" start="4913" end="4922" title="Blackburn" label="Blackburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2374484" start="4927" end="4932" title="Colne" label="Colne"/>
<link wikidata="Q188313" start="5069" end="5078" title="Blackburn" label="Blackburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q516131" start="5080" end="5087" title="Skipton" label="Skipton"/>
<link wikidata="Q18125" start="5092" end="5102" title="Manchester" label="Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q12880211" start="5195" end="5206" title="coal mining" label="coal mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q52063213" start="5214" end="5231" title="Burnley Coalfield" label="Burnley Coalfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q5307459" start="5237" end="5248" title="Drift mining" label="drift mines"/>
<link wikidata="Q4883320" start="5261" end="5270" title="Bell pit" label="bell-pits"/>
<link wikidata="Q2424148" start="5505" end="5530" title="Leeds and Liverpool Canal" label="Leeds and Liverpool Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q13883136" start="5723" end="5732" title="foundries" label="foundries"/>
<link wikidata="Q10832530" start="5737" end="5746" title="ironworks" label="ironworks"/>
<link wikidata="Q946725" start="5765" end="5777" title="cotton mills" label="cotton mills"/>
<link wikidata="Q483269" start="5812" end="5816" title="cast iron" label="cast"/>
<link wikidata="Q860451" start="5821" end="5833" title="wrought iron" label="wrought iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q6483025" start="5907" end="5919" title="Lancashire Loom" label="Burnley Loom"/>
<link wikidata="Q22000516" start="6050" end="6066" title="Burnley Barracks" label="Burnley Barracks"/>
<link wikidata="Q3893296" start="6397" end="6410" title="Panic of 1825" label="Panic of 1825"/>
<link wikidata="Q7604348" start="6436" end="6449" title="Stationary steam engine" label="steam engines"/>
<link wikidata="Q674773" start="6588" end="6602" title="Science Museum (London)" label="Science Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q188371" start="6835" end="6858" title="Great Famine (Ireland)" label="Great Famine of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5328785" start="7082" end="7113" title="East Lancashire Railway 1844-1859" label="East Lancashire Railway Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1622949" start="7136" end="7146" title="Accrington" label="Accrington"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7357" end="7381" title="Burnley Building Society#cite note-nat-arch-1" label="Burnley Building Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q811645" start="7549" end="7562" title="Lancashire Cotton Famine" label="Cotton Famine"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="7591" end="7609" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q26537489" start="7933" end="7950" title="Burnley Town Hall" label="Burnley Town Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q525508" start="7982" end="7990" title="Dewsbury" label="Dewsbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q104867483" start="8287" end="8304" title="Burnley power station" label="Electricity Works"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353185" start="8907" end="8917" title="power loom" label="power loom"/>
<link wikidata="Q54818094" start="9005" end="9084" title="Burnley and District Weavers&amp;#x27;, Winders&amp;#x27; and Beamers&amp;#x27; Association" label="Burnley and District Weavers&amp;#x27;, Winders&amp;#x27; and Beamers&amp;#x27; Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q38251894" start="9285" end="9307" title="Bank Parade drill hall" label="Bank Parade drill hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q19871722" start="9374" end="9401" title="listed buildings in Burnley" label="listed buildings in Burnley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5328786" start="9732" end="9756" title="East Lancashire Regiment" label="East Lancashire Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q20036665" start="9834" end="9849" title="Accrington Pals" label="Accrington Pals"/>
<link wikidata="Q219578" start="9851" end="9865" title="Victoria Cross" label="Victoria Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q5930392" start="9912" end="9923" title="Hugh Colvin" label="Hugh Colvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7795073" start="9928" end="9942" title="Thomas Whitham" label="Thomas Whitham"/>
<link wikidata="Q4723557" start="10013" end="10032" title="Alfred Victor Smith" label="Alfred Victor Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q7830101" start="10082" end="10095" title="Towneley Park" label="Towneley Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q6731168" start="10484" end="10492" title="Magistrate (England and Wales)" label="Justices"/>
<link wikidata="Q1184065" start="10497" end="10506" title="delegation" label="delegated"/>
<link wikidata="Q898871" start="10618" end="10633" title="judicial review" label="judicial review"/>
<link wikidata="Q6900329" start="10760" end="10769" title="the Blitz" label="the Blitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564009" start="10785" end="10794" title="Luftwaffe" label="Luftwaffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q84634321" start="10873" end="10886" title="Thompson Park (Burnley)" label="Thompson Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q3485384" start="10939" end="10952" title="Starfish site" label="Starfish site"/>
<link wikidata="Q1622949" start="11038" end="11048" title="Accrington" label="Accrington"/>
<link wikidata="Q2121541" start="11089" end="11104" title="Habergham Eaves" label="Habergham Eaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q24662482" start="11117" end="11130" title="Hameldon Hill" label="Hameldon Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q20876896" start="11146" end="11171" title="Worsthorne-with-Hurstwood" label="Worsthorne-with-Hurstwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q2361633" start="11181" end="11191" title="Haslingden" label="Haslingden"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698576" start="11447" end="11458" title="Aircraftman" label="Aircraftman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770547" start="11524" end="11532" title="Blackout (wartime)" label="blackout"/>
<link wikidata="Q172913" start="11749" end="11763" title="Lockheed P-38 Lightning" label="P-38 Lightning"/>
<link wikidata="Q4550069" start="11773" end="11791" title="14th Fighter Group" label="14th Fighter Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q741723" start="11792" end="11797" title="United States Army Air Forces" label="USAAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q921279" start="11811" end="11819" title="Cliviger" label="Cliviger"/>
<link wikidata="Q502034" start="11855" end="11862" title="Handley Page Halifax" label="Halifax"/>
<link wikidata="Q12064279" start="11868" end="11887" title="No. 51 Squadron RAF" label="No. 51 Squadron RAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q220759" start="11916" end="11930" title="Consolidated B-24 Liberator" label="B-24 Liberator"/>
<link wikidata="Q4638730" start="11940" end="11963" title="491st Bombardment Group" label="491st Bombardment Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q741723" start="11964" end="11969" title="United States Army Air Forces" label="USAAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q574425" start="11988" end="12004" title="Lucas Industries" label="Lucas Industries"/>
<link wikidata="Q4971450" start="12012" end="12028" title="shadow factory" label="shadow factories"/>
<link wikidata="Q848620" start="12129" end="12142" title="Rover Company" label="Rover Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q679888" start="12171" end="12182" title="Rolls-Royce Limited" label="Rolls-Royce"/>
<link wikidata="Q312547" start="12224" end="12237" title="Frank Whittle" label="Frank Whittle"/>
<link wikidata="Q178777" start="12256" end="12266" title="jet engine" label="jet engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7236340" start="12279" end="12282" title="Power Jets W.2" label="W.2"/>
<link wikidata="Q914043" start="12284" end="12303" title="Rolls-Royce Welland" label="Rolls-Royce Welland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2049578" start="12308" end="12320" title="Barnoldswick" label="Barnoldswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q6731372" start="12322" end="12340" title="Magnesium Elektron" label="Magnesium Elektron"/>
<link wikidata="Q660" start="12389" end="12398" title="magnesium" label="magnesium"/>
<link wikidata="Q868806" start="12520" end="12543" title="Old Vic Theatre Company" label="Old Vic Theatre Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342882" start="12552" end="12577" title="Sadler&amp;#x27;s Wells Opera" label="Sadler&amp;#x27;s Wells Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q323283" start="12582" end="12588" title="Sadler&amp;#x27;s Wells Ballet" label="Ballet"/>
<link wikidata="Q615838" start="12693" end="12720" title="Distinguished Service Order" label="Distinguished Service Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q339016" start="12732" end="12759" title="Distinguished Conduct Medal" label="Distinguished Conduct Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="12978" end="12983" title="Queen Elizabeth II" label="Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q80976" start="12999" end="13012" title="Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh" label="Prince Philip"/>
<link wikidata="Q1857774" start="13048" end="13054" title="Nelson, Lancashire" label="Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952198" start="13063" end="13070" title="Mullard" label="Mullard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2053864" start="13088" end="13098" title="Simonstone, Lancashire" label="Simonstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035820" start="13104" end="13111" title="Padiham" label="Padiham"/>
<link wikidata="Q19458" start="13197" end="13207" title="Burnley FC" label="Burnley FC"/>
<link wikidata="Q754839" start="13220" end="13234" title="Football League First Division" label="first division"/>
<link wikidata="Q331483" start="13490" end="13500" title="demolished" label="demolished"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425560" start="13696" end="13703" title="overpass" label="flyover"/>
<link wikidata="Q54817783" start="13878" end="13896" title="Bank Hall Colliery" label="Bank Hall Colliery"/>
<link wikidata="Q2796161" start="14125" end="14128" title="M65 motorway" label="M65"/>
<link wikidata="Q875016" start="14358" end="14372" title="terrace houses" label="terrace houses"/>
<link wikidata="Q5991724" start="14506" end="14516" title="Ightenhill" label="Ightenhill"/>
<link wikidata="Q5991724" start="14617" end="14627" title="Ightenhill" label="Ightenhill"/>
<link wikidata="Q4950583" start="14665" end="14670" title="Bovis Homes Group" label="Bovis"/>
<link wikidata="Q591090" start="14672" end="14679" title="Barratt Developments" label="Barratt"/>
<link wikidata="Q12104567" start="14706" end="14720" title="housing estate" label="housing estate"/>
<link wikidata="Q12018455" start="14740" end="14755" title="greenfield land" label="greenfield land"/>
<link wikidata="Q21585398" start="14861" end="14875" title="council estate" label="council estate"/>
<link wikidata="Q36507" start="14913" end="14923" title="millennium" label="millennium"/>
<link wikidata="Q179049" start="15140" end="15154" title="nature reserve" label="nature reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q4598991" start="15182" end="15200" title="2001 Oldham riots" label="2001 England riots"/>
<link wikidata="Q3254959" start="15301" end="15307" title="Race (classification of human beings)" label="racial"/>
<link wikidata="Q518343" start="15410" end="15427" title="municipal borough" label="municipal borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q6664051" start="15512" end="15537" title="Local Government Act 1888" label="Local Government Act 1888"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137272" start="15541" end="15555" title="county borough" label="county borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q1510461" start="15615" end="15640" title="Local Government Act 1972" label="Local Government Act 1972"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137272" start="15656" end="15670" title="county borough" label="county borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187580" start="15750" end="15775" title="non-metropolitan district" label="non-metropolitan district"/>
<link wikidata="Q894079" start="15779" end="15786" title="Borough of Burnley" label="Burnley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112653" start="15828" end="15844" title="Local government in England" label="Local government"/>
<link wikidata="Q894079" start="15876" end="15899" title="Burnley (borough)" label="Burnley Borough Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q6386149" start="15904" end="15929" title="Lancashire County Council" label="Lancashire County Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q11010" start="15992" end="16017" title="Parliament of the United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q7137435" start="16128" end="16150" title="Parish councils in England" label="parish or town council"/>
<link wikidata="Q31210746" start="16331" end="16341" title="Wajid Khan (British politician)" label="Wajid Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="16343" end="16355" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q589282" start="16384" end="16389" title="Wards of the United Kingdom" label="wards"/>
<link wikidata="Q576852" start="16416" end="16427" title="Briercliffe" label="Briercliffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035820" start="16765" end="16772" title="Padiham" label="Padiham"/>
<link wikidata="Q6386149" start="16821" end="16846" title="Lancashire County Council" label="Lancashire County Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="16878" end="16896" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="17045" end="17051" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064521" start="17110" end="17119" title="County constituency" label="divisions"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235145" start="17272" end="17295" title="Burnley (UK Parliament constituency)" label="constituency of Burnley"/>
<link wikidata="Q78851988" start="17346" end="17359" title="2024 United Kingdom general election" label="2024 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="17376" end="17382" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q96483398" start="17386" end="17397" title="Oliver Ryan (politician)" label="Oliver Ryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q30173038" start="17418" end="17442" title="2019 United Kingdom general election" label="general election in 2019"/>
<link wikidata="Q76363542" start="17461" end="17480" title="Antony Higginbotham" label="Antony Higginbotham"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="17492" end="17510" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="17585" end="17597" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q918378" start="17604" end="17608" title="1935 United Kingdom general election" label="1935"/>
<link wikidata="Q263822" start="17661" end="17678" title="Gordon Birtwistle" label="Gordon Birtwistle"/>
<link wikidata="Q9624" start="17682" end="17698" title="Liberal Democrats (UK)" label="Liberal Democrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7328991" start="17700" end="17712" title="Richard Shaw (Liberal politician)" label="Richard Shaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q2074525" start="17745" end="17749" title="1868 United Kingdom general election" label="1868"/>
<link wikidata="Q3615378" start="17791" end="17817" title="Leader of the Labour Party (UK)" label="leader of the Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q35637" start="17822" end="17839" title="Nobel Peace Prize" label="Nobel Peace Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q208665" start="17849" end="17865" title="Arthur Henderson" label="Arthur Henderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q39816" start="17923" end="17929" title="valley" label="valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q723748" start="17937" end="17947" title="confluence" label="confluence"/>
<link wikidata="Q7337190" start="17955" end="17965" title="River Brun" label="River Brun"/>
<link wikidata="Q3225350" start="17974" end="17986" title="River Calder, Lancashire" label="River Calder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092661" start="18025" end="18033" title="moorland" label="moorland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035820" start="18095" end="18102" title="Padiham" label="Padiham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1622949" start="18104" end="18114" title="Accrington" label="Accrington"/>
<link wikidata="Q188313" start="18119" end="18128" title="Blackburn" label="Blackburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1857774" start="18135" end="18141" title="Nelson, Lancashire" label="Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2374484" start="18146" end="18151" title="Colne" label="Colne"/>
<link wikidata="Q41735" start="18245" end="18254" title="Irish Sea" label="Irish Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q5000023" start="18290" end="18302" title="Burnley Wood" label="Burnley Wood"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18304" end="18313" title="Rose Hill, Lancashire" label="Rose Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q5658458" start="18328" end="18338" title="Harle Syke" label="Harle Syke"/>
<link wikidata="Q5638682" start="18340" end="18347" title="Haggate" label="Haggate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7619441" start="18361" end="18372" title="Stoneyholme" label="Stoneyholme"/>
<link wikidata="Q5991724" start="18430" end="18440" title="Ightenhill" label="Ightenhill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2525678" start="18504" end="18511" title="Reedley Hallows" label="Reedley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1693090" start="18605" end="18611" title="Borough of Pendle" label="Pendle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044650" start="18661" end="18675" title="Pendle Witches" label="Pendle Witches"/>
<link wikidata="Q3374661" start="18693" end="18704" title="Pendle Hill" label="Pendle Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1008765" start="18740" end="18749" title="Clitheroe" label="Clitheroe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2116317" start="18758" end="18771" title="Ribble Valley" label="Ribble Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q24662482" start="18792" end="18805" title="Hameldon Hill" label="Hameldon Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1851405" start="18841" end="18851" title="Met Office" label="Met Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q863343" start="18871" end="18884" title="weather radar" label="weather radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="18888" end="18891" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q127995" start="18927" end="18936" title="microwave" label="microwave"/>
<link wikidata="Q4949732" start="19244" end="19259" title="Boulsworth Hill" label="Boulsworth Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q7568202" start="19281" end="19295" title="South Pennines" label="South Pennines"/>
<link wikidata="Q7369790" start="19319" end="19339" title="Forest of Rossendale" label="Forest of Rossendale"/>
<link wikidata="Q921279" start="19364" end="19372" title="Cliviger" label="Cliviger"/>
<link wikidata="Q5137710" start="19415" end="19426" title="Coal Clough Wind Farm" label="Coal Clough"/>
<link wikidata="Q194356" start="19427" end="19436" title="wind farm" label="wind farm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067943" start="19609" end="19613" title="RIBA" label="RIBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7131478" start="19628" end="19638" title="Panopticons" label="Panopticon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2289192" start="19645" end="19665" title="Singing Ringing Tree (Panopticons)" label="Singing Ringing Tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478622" start="19933" end="19944" title="Pennine Way" label="Pennine Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q6780842" start="19991" end="20009" title="Mary Towneley Loop" label="Mary Towneley Loop"/>
<link wikidata="Q2069097" start="20023" end="20040" title="Pennine Bridleway" label="Pennine Bridleway"/>
<link wikidata="Q4974111" start="20046" end="20056" title="Brontë Way" label="Brontë Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q5000024" start="20065" end="20076" title="Burnley Way" label="Burnley Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q167466" start="20197" end="20206" title="temperate" label="temperate"/>
<link wikidata="Q182090" start="20207" end="20215" title="Oceanic climate" label="maritime"/>
<link wikidata="Q25257" start="20309" end="20322" title="Precipitation (meteorology)" label="precipitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q180600" start="20378" end="20386" title="humidity" label="humidity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7561" start="20400" end="20408" title="snowfall" label="snowfall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7329522" start="20646" end="20662" title="Richard Towneley" label="Richard Towneley"/>
<link wikidata="Q609443" start="20706" end="20732" title="2001 United Kingdom census" label="2001 United Kingdom census"/>
<link wikidata="Q105972206" start="20803" end="20824" title="Burnley Built-up area" label="Burnley Built-up area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1857774" start="20877" end="20883" title="Nelson, Lancashire" label="Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2374484" start="20885" end="20890" title="Colne" label="Colne"/>
<link wikidata="Q523025" start="20895" end="20905" title="Brierfield, Lancashire" label="Brierfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q34217" start="20992" end="20998" title="Oxford" label="Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q200942" start="21002" end="21009" title="Swindon" label="Swindon"/>
<link wikidata="Q349084" start="21077" end="21102" title="Local authority district" label="local government district"/>
<link wikidata="Q894079" start="21108" end="21126" title="Borough of Burnley" label="Borough of Burnley"/>
<link wikidata="Q902" start="21210" end="21220" title="Bangladesh" label="Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="21279" end="21285" title="Muslim" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q855531" start="21398" end="21424" title="2011 United Kingdom census" label="2011 United Kingdom census"/>
<link wikidata="Q7619441" start="21887" end="21898" title="Stoneyholme" label="Stoneyholme"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22002" end="22011" title="Blackburn#Demography" label="Blackburn"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22016" end="22022" title="Oldham#Demography" label="Oldham"/>
<link wikidata="Q6483046" start="22053" end="22073" title="Lancashire Telegraph" label="Lancashire Telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q763388" start="22109" end="22120" title="Home Office" label="Home Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888038" start="22329" end="22358" title="United Kingdom general election debates, 2010" label="2010 general election debates"/>
<link wikidata="Q3873182" start="22386" end="22390" title="NPIA" label="NPIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="22691" end="22696" title="Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q875016" start="22748" end="22763" title="terrace housing" label="terrace housing"/>
<link wikidata="Q123705" start="22774" end="22788" title="neighbourhoods" label="neighbourhoods"/>
<link wikidata="Q7830048" start="22805" end="22816" title="town centre" label="town centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q6063" start="22863" end="22873" title="UK government" label="government"/>
<link wikidata="Q244312" start="23849" end="23860" title="Vince Cable" label="Vince Cable"/>
<link wikidata="Q54817796" start="24209" end="24231" title="Hapton Valley Colliery" label="Hapton Valley Colliery"/>
<link wikidata="Q12066704" start="24290" end="24307" title="Queen Street Mill" label="Queen Street Mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q151107" start="24451" end="24459" title="Michelin" label="Michelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q16850876" start="24731" end="24757" title="Joseph Rowntree Foundation" label="Joseph Rowntree Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6014124" start="24937" end="24955" title="incapacity benefit" label="incapacity benefit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7501116" start="25105" end="25116" title="Shop Direct" label="Shop Direct"/>
<link wikidata="Q6653170" start="25239" end="25250" title="Littlewoods" label="Littlewoods"/>
<link wikidata="Q1487502" start="25363" end="25385" title="Great Universal Stores" label="Great Universal Stores"/>
<link wikidata="Q1487502" start="25403" end="25410" title="GUS plc" label="GUS plc"/>
<link wikidata="Q1662100" start="25452" end="25470" title="industrial estates" label="industrial estates"/>
<link wikidata="Q338313" start="25475" end="25488" title="business park" label="business park"/>
<link wikidata="Q2805266" start="25793" end="25799" title="Hapton, Lancashire" label="Hapton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1886126" start="25930" end="25945" title="SAFRAN" label="Safran Aircelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q54173" start="25959" end="25961" title="GE" label="GE"/>
<link wikidata="Q4032966" start="26011" end="26019" title="AMS Neve" label="AMS Neve"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117943" start="26046" end="26060" title="TRW Automotive" label="TRW Automotive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509038" start="26072" end="26079" title="Tenneco" label="Tenneco"/>
<link wikidata="Q151384" start="26160" end="26179" title="Eurofighter Typhoon" label="Eurofighter Typhoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5376637" start="26271" end="26290" title="Endsleigh Insurance" label="Endsleigh Insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7755366" start="26610" end="26635" title="The Original Factory Shop" label="The Original Factory Shop"/>
<link wikidata="Q24039" start="26711" end="26722" title="Digby Jones" label="Digby Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q7978380" start="27326" end="27348" title="Weavers&amp;#x27; Triangle" label="Weavers&amp;#x27; Triangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2689124" start="27391" end="27405" title="Landmark Trust" label="Landmark Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q157169" start="27583" end="27587" title="YMCA" label="YMCA"/>
<link wikidata="Q153551" start="27623" end="27635" title="charity shop" label="charity shop"/>
<link wikidata="Q958479" start="27698" end="27708" title="Woolworths Group (United Kingdom)" label="Woolworths"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599804" start="27770" end="27792" title="Great Portland Estates" label="Great Portland Estates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273254" start="27841" end="27860" title="David and Simon Reuben" label="the Reuben Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1308100" start="28097" end="28108" title="high street" label="high street"/>
<link wikidata="Q472577" start="28278" end="28289" title="retail park" label="retail park"/>
<link wikidata="Q76470" start="28319" end="28329" title="Outlet store" label="mill shops"/>
<link wikidata="Q154510" start="28557" end="28572" title="Great Recession" label="Great Recession"/>
<link wikidata="Q154510" start="28841" end="28856" title="Great Recession" label="Great Recession"/>
<link wikidata="Q7672651" start="28879" end="28889" title="T J Hughes" label="T J Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6877374" start="28891" end="28905" title="Miss Selfridge" label="Miss Selfridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q10854572" start="28911" end="28914" title="HMV" label="HMV"/>
<link wikidata="Q15255982" start="29217" end="29233" title="Moorhouse&amp;#x27;s Brewery" label="Moorhouse&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q7595224" start="29616" end="29638" title="St Peter&amp;#x27;s Church, Burnley" label="St Peter&amp;#x27;s Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q570600" start="29732" end="29747" title="listed building" label="listed building"/>
<link wikidata="Q7592332" start="29769" end="29792" title="St Andrew&amp;#x27;s Church, Burnley" label="St Andrew&amp;#x27;s Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q205905" start="29895" end="29904" title="Lancaster, Lancashire" label="Lancaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q7490384" start="29916" end="29932" title="Austin and Paley" label="Austin and Paley"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="30038" end="30052" title="Roman Catholic" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q93191" start="30055" end="30062" title="Baptist" label="Baptist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458238" start="30065" end="30087" title="United Reformed Church" label="United Reformed Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q33203" start="30089" end="30098" title="Methodist" label="Methodist"/>
<link wikidata="Q35269" start="30101" end="30123" title="Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witness" label="Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witness"/>
<link wikidata="Q42504" start="30127" end="30144" title="The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints" label="Latter-Day Saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586144" start="30149" end="30161" title="Spiritualist church" label="Spiritualist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7830101" start="30179" end="30192" title="Towneley Hall" label="Towneley Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269" start="30282" end="30303" title="Industrial Revolution" label="Industrial Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144064" start="30340" end="30354" title="Nonconformist (Protestantism)" label="non-conformist"/>
<link wikidata="Q30188468" start="30456" end="30498" title="Baptist Union of Great Britain" label="Baptist Union of Great Britain and Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q32815" start="30517" end="30523" title="mosque" label="mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q570600" start="30647" end="30662" title="listed building" label="listed building"/>
<link wikidata="Q936287" start="30682" end="30698" title="English Heritage" label="English Heritage"/>
<link wikidata="Q77874279" start="30888" end="30905" title="Burnley Embankment" label="the Straight Mile"/>
<link wikidata="Q7605386" start="30968" end="30980" title="steam shovel" label="steam shovel"/>
<link wikidata="Q105731" start="31005" end="31010" title="Locks (water transport)" label="locks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1267889" start="31079" end="31087" title="waterway" label="waterway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7978380" start="31276" end="31298" title="Weavers&amp;#x27; Triangle" label="Weavers&amp;#x27; Triangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2424148" start="31416" end="31441" title="Leeds and Liverpool Canal" label="Leeds and Liverpool Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2289192" start="31756" end="31776" title="Singing Ringing Tree (sculpture)" label="Singing Ringing Tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q43302" start="31782" end="31792" title="wind power" label="wind power"/>
<link wikidata="Q1744327" start="31795" end="31810" title="sound sculpture" label="sound sculpture"/>
<link wikidata="Q35647" start="31858" end="31866" title="Pennines" label="Pennines"/>
<link wikidata="Q7131478" start="31973" end="31984" title="Panopticons" label="Panopticons"/>
<link wikidata="Q23077" start="32222" end="32232" title="Lancashire" label="Lancashire"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="32251" end="32262" title="renaissance" label="renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094821" start="32420" end="32436" title="galvanised steel" label="galvanised steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3029382" start="32497" end="32507" title="Consonance and dissonance" label="discordant"/>
<link wikidata="Q131186" start="32524" end="32530" title="choral" label="choral"/>
<link wikidata="Q386025" start="32565" end="32571" title="octave" label="octave"/>
<link wikidata="Q184421" start="32711" end="32719" title="Harmony" label="harmonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067943" start="32930" end="32967" title="Royal Institute of British Architects" label="Royal Institute of British Architects"/>
<link wikidata="Q7830101" start="33027" end="33040" title="Towneley Hall" label="Towneley Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631088" start="33445" end="33458" title="Whalley Abbey" label="Whalley Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2796161" start="33631" end="33643" title="M65 motorway" label="M65 motorway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1622949" start="33664" end="33674" title="Accrington" label="Accrington"/>
<link wikidata="Q188313" start="33676" end="33685" title="Blackburn" label="Blackburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q184090" start="33690" end="33697" title="Preston, Lancashire" label="Preston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1881041" start="33724" end="33726" title="M6 motorway" label="M6"/>
<link wikidata="Q1857774" start="33746" end="33752" title="Nelson, Lancashire" label="Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2374484" start="33757" end="33762" title="Colne" label="Colne"/>
<link wikidata="Q4660973" start="33790" end="33794" title="A646 road" label="A646"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327770" start="33803" end="33812" title="Todmorden" label="Todmorden"/>
<link wikidata="Q4660973" start="33818" end="33822" title="A679 road" label="A679"/>
<link wikidata="Q1622949" start="33826" end="33836" title="Accrington" label="Accrington"/>
<link wikidata="Q4649571" start="33842" end="33846" title="A671 road" label="A671"/>
<link wikidata="Q1008765" start="33850" end="33859" title="Clitheroe" label="Clitheroe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4660973" start="33869" end="33873" title="A682 road" label="A682"/>
<link wikidata="Q2201943" start="33975" end="33986" title="Rawtenstall" label="Rawtenstall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1857774" start="34005" end="34011" title="Nelson, Lancashire" label="Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q977613" start="34020" end="34035" title="Yorkshire Dales" label="Yorkshire Dales"/>
<link wikidata="Q4649482" start="34041" end="34044" title="A56 road" label="A56"/>
<link wikidata="Q1302778" start="34045" end="34061" title="dual carriageway" label="dual carriageway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1945546" start="34114" end="34126" title="M66 motorway" label="M66 motorway"/>
<link wikidata="Q18125" start="34143" end="34153" title="Manchester" label="Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q1881035" start="34162" end="34165" title="M62 Motorway" label="M62"/>
<link wikidata="Q85789775" start="34218" end="34226" title="Northern (train operating company)" label="Northern"/>
<link wikidata="Q4539321" start="34264" end="34287" title="Burnley Manchester Road railway station" label="Burnley Manchester Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q2664533" start="34289" end="34304" title="Burnley Central railway station" label="Burnley Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q2180048" start="34306" end="34322" title="Burnley Barracks railway station" label="Burnley Barracks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2696848" start="34327" end="34337" title="Rose Grove railway station" label="Rose Grove"/>
<link wikidata="Q2211158" start="34356" end="34362" title="Hapton railway station" label="Hapton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035820" start="34371" end="34378" title="Padiham" label="Padiham"/>
<link wikidata="Q2805266" start="34383" end="34389" title="Hapton, Lancashire" label="Hapton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2441793" start="34503" end="34510" title="Preston railway station" label="Preston"/>
<link wikidata="Q19889" start="34539" end="34559" title="West Coast Main Line" label="West Coast Main Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q2351722" start="34565" end="34580" title="Blackpool North railway station" label="Blackpool North"/>
<link wikidata="Q1466941" start="34594" end="34599" title="Leeds railway station" label="Leeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269429" start="34604" end="34608" title="York railway station" label="York"/>
<link wikidata="Q4923280" start="34694" end="34709" title="Blackpool South railway station" label="Blackpool South"/>
<link wikidata="Q1943735" start="34735" end="34741" title="Nelson (Lancashire) railway station" label="Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2800574" start="34746" end="34751" title="Colne railway station" label="Colne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1859573" start="34882" end="34901" title="Manchester Victoria station" label="Manchester Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q5019066" start="35024" end="35039" title="Caldervale Line" label="Caldervale Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327770" start="35054" end="35063" title="Todmorden" label="Todmorden"/>
<link wikidata="Q18548" start="35308" end="35322" title="Manchester Metrolink" label="Metrolink tram"/>
<link wikidata="Q5000027" start="35587" end="35606" title="Burnley bus station" label="Burnley bus station"/>
<link wikidata="Q4999954" start="35727" end="35746" title="Burnley Bus Company" label="Burnley Bus Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q5454074" start="35833" end="35853" title="First West Yorkshire" label="First West Yorkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q826561" start="35866" end="35873" title="Halifax, West Yorkshire" label="Halifax"/>
<link wikidata="Q6483048" start="35876" end="35897" title="Blackburn Bus Company" label="Blackburn Bus Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q184090" start="35906" end="35913" title="Preston, Lancashire" label="Preston"/>
<link wikidata="Q7369789" start="35919" end="35924" title="Rosso (bus company)" label="Rosso"/>
<link wikidata="Q47822" start="35933" end="35937" title="Bury, Greater Manchester" label="Bury"/>
<link wikidata="Q13479582" start="35940" end="35956" title="National Express Coaches" label="National Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q2256" start="36018" end="36028" title="Birmingham" label="Birmingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q7775283" start="36038" end="36055" title="The Witch Way" label="Witch Way service"/>
<link wikidata="Q18125" start="36111" end="36121" title="Manchester" label="Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q2201943" start="36126" end="36137" title="Rawtenstall" label="Rawtenstall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003559" start="36142" end="36151" title="Prestwich" label="Prestwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q854585" start="36187" end="36204" title="double-decker bus" label="double-decker bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q8694" start="36368" end="36386" title="Manchester Airport" label="Manchester Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q8727" start="36392" end="36421" title="Liverpool John Lennon Airport" label="Liverpool John Lennon Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q8699" start="36427" end="36449" title="Leeds Bradford Airport" label="Leeds Bradford Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q598831" start="36459" end="36476" title="Blackpool Airport" label="Blackpool Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q2424148" start="36556" end="36581" title="Leeds and Liverpool Canal" label="Leeds and Liverpool Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q19458" start="36671" end="36692" title="Burnley F.C." label="Burnley Football Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q2111991" start="36786" end="36798" title="Professionalism in association football" label="professional"/>
<link wikidata="Q9500" start="36843" end="36867" title="the Football Association" label="the Football Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q213347" start="36954" end="36973" title="English Football League" label="the Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q4933198" start="37022" end="37030" title="Bob Lord (football chairman)" label="Bob Lord"/>
<link wikidata="Q7438308" start="37082" end="37097" title="Scout (association football)" label="scouting system"/>
<link wikidata="Q2945309" start="37150" end="37165" title="Training ground (association football)" label="training ground"/>
<link wikidata="Q5528499" start="37167" end="37176" title="Gawthorpe Hall" label="Gawthorpe"/>
<link wikidata="Q19510" start="37213" end="37249" title="English Football League Championship" label="English Football League Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478144" start="37270" end="37286" title="Football in England" label="English football"/>
<link wikidata="Q683112" start="37329" end="37338" title="Turf Moor" label="Turf Moor"/>
<link wikidata="Q558635" start="37508" end="37518" title="per capita" label="per capita"/>
<link wikidata="Q532723" start="37538" end="37558" title="List of English football champions" label="champions of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q4560940" start="37569" end="37576" title="1920–21 Burnley F.C. season" label="1920–21"/>
<link wikidata="Q56057015" start="37581" end="37588" title="1959–60 Burnley F.C. season" label="1959–60"/>
<link wikidata="Q11151" start="37603" end="37609" title="FA Cup" label="FA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773526" start="37619" end="37626" title="1913–14 FA Cup" label="1913–14"/>
<link wikidata="Q189188" start="37645" end="37662" title="FA Community Shield" label="FA Charity Shield"/>
<link wikidata="Q3736639" start="37673" end="37677" title="1960 FA Charity Shield" label="1960"/>
<link wikidata="Q3736653" start="37682" end="37686" title="1973 FA Charity Shield" label="1973"/>
<link wikidata="Q18559" start="37892" end="37930" title="English football league system" label="all four professional league divisions"/>
<link wikidata="Q19500" start="37943" end="37966" title="Wolverhampton Wanderers F.C." label="Wolverhampton Wanderers"/>
<link wikidata="Q19612" start="37968" end="37985" title="Preston North End F.C." label="Preston North End"/>
<link wikidata="Q19607" start="37987" end="38003" title="Sheffield United F.C." label="Sheffield United"/>
<link wikidata="Q19604" start="38008" end="38018" title="Portsmouth F.C." label="Portsmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3216910" start="38051" end="38076" title="Lancashire League (cricket)" label="Lancashire Cricket League"/>
<link wikidata="Q5000015" start="38090" end="38110" title="Burnley Cricket Club" label="Burnley Cricket Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q6693967" start="38207" end="38230" title="Lowerhouse Cricket Club" label="Lowerhouse Cricket Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q654375" start="38273" end="38287" title="James Anderson (cricketer)" label="James Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q182868" start="38338" end="38348" title="Weather forecasting" label="weatherman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6243021" start="38349" end="38361" title="John Kettley" label="John Kettley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5000020" start="38410" end="38428" title="Burnley Rugby Club" label="Burnley Rugby Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q750080" start="38906" end="38914" title="motorcycle speedway" label="speedway"/>
<link wikidata="Q28404334" start="38918" end="38934" title="Burnley Greyhound Stadium" label="Towneley Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501" start="39096" end="39104" title="Swimming pool" label="swimming"/>
<link wikidata="Q133201" start="39106" end="39119" title="Squash (sport)" label="squash courts"/>
<link wikidata="Q14092" start="39126" end="39139" title="Gym" label="fitness suite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048525" start="39417" end="39429" title="golf courses" label="golf courses"/>
<link wikidata="Q7830101" start="39433" end="39446" title="Towneley Park" label="Towneley Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898422" start="39470" end="39484" title="pitch and putt" label="pitch and putt"/>
<link wikidata="Q895471" start="39686" end="39700" title="Bowls" label="bowling greens"/>
<link wikidata="Q909906" start="39733" end="39743" title="skate park" label="skate park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343246" start="40303" end="40315" title="stately home" label="stately home"/>
<link wikidata="Q7830101" start="40344" end="40357" title="Towneley Park" label="Towneley Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q5528499" start="40362" end="40376" title="Gawthorpe Hall" label="Gawthorpe Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035820" start="40380" end="40387" title="Padiham" label="Padiham"/>
<link wikidata="Q333515" start="40452" end="40466" title="National Trust for Places of Historic Interest or Natural Beauty" label="National Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q7978380" start="40627" end="40649" title="Weavers&amp;#x27; Triangle" label="Weavers&amp;#x27; Triangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q12066704" start="40661" end="40693" title="Queen Street Mill" label="Queen Street Mill Textile Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7131478" start="40816" end="40827" title="Panopticons" label="Panopticons"/>
<link wikidata="Q7830101" start="40985" end="40998" title="Towneley Park" label="Towneley Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q2662247" start="41009" end="41018" title="Medieval deer park" label="deer park"/>
<link wikidata="Q7830101" start="41040" end="41053" title="Towneley Hall" label="Towneley Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q5602556" start="41080" end="41096" title="Green Flag Award" label="Green Flag Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q85795305" start="41098" end="41109" title="Queens Park, Burnley" label="Queens Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q3244156" start="41141" end="41151" title="brass band" label="brass band"/>
<link wikidata="Q84634321" start="41176" end="41189" title="Thompson Park (Burnley)" label="Thompson Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q20820102" start="41219" end="41236" title="Ridable miniature railway" label="miniature railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q88204836" start="41262" end="41272" title="Scott Park" label="Scott Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153108" start="41815" end="41831" title="Multiplex (movie theater)" label="multiplex cinema"/>
<link wikidata="Q229390" start="41855" end="41857" title="3-D film" label="3D"/>
<link wikidata="Q5052147" start="41891" end="41903" title="Reel Cinemas" label="Reel Cinemas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5000025" start="42056" end="42077" title="Burnley Youth Theatre" label="Burnley Youth Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q277436" start="42441" end="42457" title="Bank Holiday" label="May Bank Holiday"/>
<link wikidata="Q9759" start="42671" end="42676" title="blues" label="blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q1928583" start="42838" end="42851" title="Northern soul" label="Northern soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q4999955" start="42968" end="42992" title="Burnley Balloon Festival" label="Burnley Balloon Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q7830101" start="42996" end="43009" title="Towneley Park" label="Towneley Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q259037" start="43076" end="43083" title="travelling funfair" label="funfair"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="43137" end="43163" title="Fulledge Recreation Ground" label="Fulledge Recreation Ground"/>
<link wikidata="Q844844" start="43214" end="43230" title="Guy Fawkes Night" label="Guy Fawkes Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q51404" start="43294" end="43306" title="Pride parade" label="Pride parade"/>
<link wikidata="Q114608460" start="43454" end="43467" title="Elektra Fence" label="Elektra Fence"/>
<link wikidata="Q622425" start="43502" end="43511" title="nightclub" label="nightclub"/>
<link wikidata="Q4763037" start="43665" end="43671" title="Angels (nightclub)" label="Angels"/>
<link wikidata="Q51393" start="43704" end="43713" title="gay scene" label="gay scene"/>
<link wikidata="Q120800775" start="44021" end="44035" title="rainbow plaque" label="rainbow plaque"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189608" start="44143" end="44175" title="Campaign for Homosexual Equality" label="Campaign for Homosexual Equality"/>
<link wikidata="Q498750" start="44201" end="44212" title="Bénédictine" label="Bénédictine"/>
<link wikidata="Q15878" start="44347" end="44355" title="Normandy" label="Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="44367" end="44382" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q65064096" start="44625" end="44658" title="Capital Manchester and Lancashire" label="Capital Manchester and Lancashire"/>
<link wikidata="Q16823827" start="44669" end="44672" title="2BR" label="2BR"/>
<link wikidata="Q4546626" start="44675" end="44699" title="106.5 Central Radio" label="Central Radio North West"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834919" start="44704" end="44724" title="BBC Radio Lancashire" label="BBC Radio Lancashire"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834876" start="44764" end="44786" title="BBC North West Tonight" label="BBC North West Tonight"/>
<link wikidata="Q5594101" start="44791" end="44810" title="ITV Granada Reports" label="ITV Granada Reports"/>
<link wikidata="Q5000016" start="44855" end="44870" title="Burnley Express" label="Burnley Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q6483046" start="44933" end="44953" title="Lancashire Telegraph" label="Lancashire Telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q1693090" start="45009" end="45015" title="Borough of Pendle" label="Pendle"/>
<link wikidata="Q501070" start="45210" end="45219" title="Channel 4" label="Channel 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q7717484" start="45227" end="45246" title="The Big Art project" label="The Big Art project"/>
<link wikidata="Q5608522" start="45326" end="45335" title="Greyworld" label="Greyworld"/>
<link wikidata="Q557141" start="45357" end="45367" title="public art" label="public art"/>
<link wikidata="Q955018" start="45579" end="45600" title="Whistle Down the Wind (film)" label="Whistle Down the Wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="45620" end="45623" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q4729274" start="45648" end="45678" title="All Quiet on the Preston Front" label="All Quiet on the Preston Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q3374435" start="45695" end="45707" title="Juliet Bravo" label="Juliet Bravo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195942" start="45748" end="45760" title="Fire Station" label="Fire Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q986172" start="45901" end="45924" title="magistrates&amp;#x27; court (England and Wales)" label="magistrates&amp;#x27; court"/>
<link wikidata="Q859369" start="46002" end="46014" title="comedy drama" label="comedy drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q3232435" start="46021" end="46050" title="Hetty Wainthropp Investigates" label="Hetty Wainthropp Investigates"/>
<link wikidata="Q2162060" start="46183" end="46208" title="The Man in the White Suit" label="The Man in the White Suit"/>
<link wikidata="Q12066704" start="46217" end="46234" title="Queen Street Mill" label="Queen Street Mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q183355" start="46278" end="46296" title="83rd Academy Awards" label="2010 Oscar-winning"/>
<link wikidata="Q160060" start="46302" end="46324" title="The King&amp;#x27;s Speech" label="The King&amp;#x27;s Speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q1213562" start="46357" end="46370" title="Adaptation (arts)" label="dramatisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q229226" start="46374" end="46391" title="Elizabeth Gaskell" label="Elizabeth Gaskell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1853142" start="46405" end="46420" title="North and South (1855 novel)" label="North and South"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071501" start="46445" end="46457" title="Life on Mars (UK TV series)" label="Life on Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q5494999" start="46536" end="46547" title="Fred Dibnah" label="Fred Dibnah"/>
<link wikidata="Q4117137" start="46594" end="46610" title="Adam Hart-Davies" label="Adam Hart-Davies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7991640" start="46623" end="46653" title="What the Victorians Did for Us" label="What the Victorians Did for Us"/>
<link wikidata="Q1942003" start="46676" end="46689" title="Jeremy Paxman" label="Jeremy Paxman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7772552" start="46703" end="46717" title="The Victorians" label="The Victorians"/>
<link wikidata="Q2985293" start="46749" end="46774" title="Who Do You Think You Are? (British TV series)" label="Who Do You Think You Are?"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407976" start="46782" end="46792" title="Bill Oddie" label="Bill Oddie"/>
<link wikidata="Q5459980" start="46809" end="46816" title="Flog It" label="Flog It"/>
<link wikidata="Q8052976" start="46827" end="46839" title="UKTV History" label="UKTV History"/>
<link wikidata="Q7830101" start="46885" end="46898" title="Towneley Hall" label="Towneley Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q859369" start="46919" end="46931" title="comedy drama" label="comedy drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q2016740" start="46938" end="46946" title="Casanova (2005 TV serial)" label="Casanova"/>
<link wikidata="Q220072" start="47084" end="47087" title="ITV (TV network)" label="ITV"/>
<link wikidata="Q4641670" start="47207" end="47225" title="60 Minute Makeover" label="60 Minute Makeover"/>
<link wikidata="Q116158634" start="47302" end="47314" title="Bank of Dave (film)" label="Bank of Dave"/>
<link wikidata="Q5000018" start="47502" end="47524" title="Burnley Grammar School" label="Burnley Grammar School"/>
<link wikidata="Q575842" start="47617" end="47624" title="chantry" label="chantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7843247" start="48133" end="48150" title="Tripartite system of education in England, Wales and Northern Ireland" label="tripartite system"/>
<link wikidata="Q5340874" start="48183" end="48201" title="Education Act 1944" label="Education Act 1944"/>
<link wikidata="Q7443856" start="48503" end="48519" title="Secondary Modern" label="Secondary Modern"/>
<link wikidata="Q682697" start="48564" end="48587" title="Comprehensive school" label="comprehensive education"/>
<link wikidata="Q765192" start="48776" end="48793" title="Further education" label="Further education"/>
<link wikidata="Q895809" start="48822" end="48832" title="Sixth Form" label="Sixth Form"/>
<link wikidata="Q5260118" start="49010" end="49045" title="Department for Education and Skills (United Kingdom)" label="Department for Education and Skills"/>
<link wikidata="Q4986499" start="49053" end="49084" title="Building Schools for the Future" label="Building Schools for the Future"/>
<link wikidata="Q7795075" start="49376" end="49401" title="Thomas Whitham Sixth Form" label="Thomas Whitham Sixth Form"/>
<link wikidata="Q17031623" start="49534" end="49573" title="University Technical College Lancashire" label="University Technical College Lancashire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7894959" start="49579" end="49607" title="university technical college" label="university technical college"/>
<link wikidata="Q22906980" start="49674" end="49693" title="Burnley High School" label="Burnley High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5500295" start="49699" end="49710" title="Free school (England)" label="free school"/>
<link wikidata="Q4999956" start="49778" end="49793" title="Burnley College" label="Burnley College"/>
<link wikidata="Q829183" start="49972" end="49982" title="vocational" label="vocational"/>
<link wikidata="Q1857773" start="50182" end="50214" title="University of Central Lancashire" label="University of Central Lancashire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319035" start="50245" end="50260" title="adult education" label="adult education"/>
<link wikidata="Q189533" start="50268" end="50282" title="degree courses" label="degree courses"/>
<link wikidata="Q1857773" start="50361" end="50393" title="University of Central Lancashire" label="University of Central Lancashire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6398095" start="50883" end="50894" title="Key Stage 2" label="Key Stage 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q16988966" start="50995" end="51006" title="Key Stage 4" label="Key Stage 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q6384228" start="51170" end="51184" title="Keith Coventry" label="Keith Coventry"/>
<link wikidata="Q6249314" start="51209" end="51235" title="John Moores Painting Prize" label="John Moores Painting Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q50030" start="51276" end="51290" title="watercolourist" label="watercolourist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7047066" start="51291" end="51302" title="Noel Leaver" label="Noel Leaver"/>
<link wikidata="Q21465579" start="51382" end="51397" title="Greta Tomlinson" label="Greta Tomlinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q170510" start="51498" end="51510" title="Ian McKellen" label="Ian McKellen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1983282" start="51671" end="51691" title="J. Pat O&amp;#x27;Malley" label="J. Pat O&amp;#x27;Malley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6780219" start="51693" end="51707" title="Mary Mackenzie" label="Mary Mackenzie"/>
<link wikidata="Q6069265" start="51709" end="51724" title="Irene Sutcliffe" label="Irene Sutcliffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4280047" start="51726" end="51739" title="Julia Haworth" label="Julia Haworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7327875" start="51741" end="51754" title="Richard Moore (actor)" label="Richard Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q15504789" start="51756" end="51767" title="Jody Latham" label="Jody Latham"/>
<link wikidata="Q6377243" start="51769" end="51783" title="Kathy Jamieson" label="Kathy Jamieson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5648849" start="51785" end="51798" title="Hannah Hobley" label="Hannah Hobley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6968171" start="51800" end="51814" title="Natalie Gumede" label="Natalie Gumede"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811844" start="51819" end="51830" title="Lee Ingleby" label="Lee Ingleby"/>
<link wikidata="Q945030" start="51838" end="51855" title="Coronation Street" label="Coronation Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q6742374" start="51870" end="51884" title="Malcolm Hebden" label="Malcolm Hebden"/>
<link wikidata="Q602828" start="51919" end="51930" title="Paul Abbott" label="Paul Abbott"/>
<link wikidata="Q23605" start="51949" end="51958" title="Shameless (UK TV series)" label="Shameless"/>
<link wikidata="Q7176759" start="52004" end="52016" title="Peter Salmon (producer)" label="Peter Salmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089523" start="52073" end="52088" title="Danbert Nobacon" label="Danbert Nobacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4726039" start="52090" end="52102" title="Alice Nutter (writer)" label="Alice Nutter"/>
<link wikidata="Q12495325" start="52104" end="52113" title="Lou Watts" label="Lou Watts"/>
<link wikidata="Q4937279" start="52118" end="52130" title="Boff Whalley" label="Boff Whalley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089523" start="52139" end="52150" title="Chumbawamba" label="Chumbawamba"/>
<link wikidata="Q943891" start="52153" end="52165" title="Eric Haydock" label="Eric Haydock"/>
<link wikidata="Q282925" start="52178" end="52189" title="The Hollies" label="The Hollies"/>
<link wikidata="Q4780102" start="52211" end="52223" title="John Pickard (composer)" label="John Pickard"/>
<link wikidata="Q4768779" start="52232" end="52243" title="Anne Savage (DJ)" label="Anne Savage"/>
<link wikidata="Q3656378" start="52300" end="52312" title="Hollie Steel" label="Hollie Steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q117830777" start="52325" end="52335" title="Cody Frost" label="Cody Frost"/>
<link wikidata="Q7514165" start="52376" end="52392" title="Silas K. Hocking" label="Silas K. Hocking"/>
<link wikidata="Q48379" start="52489" end="52502" title="Stephen Booth (writer)" label="Stephen Booth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7822797" start="52568" end="52580" title="Tony Livesey" label="Tony Livesey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7615729" start="52614" end="52627" title="Stewart Binns" label="Stewart Binns"/>
<link wikidata="Q334565" start="52660" end="52693" title="David Waddington, Baron Waddington" label="David Waddington, Lord Waddington"/>
<link wikidata="Q2230619" start="52697" end="52701" title="Read, Lancashire" label="Read"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484309" start="52723" end="52737" title="Home Secretary" label="Home Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q910308" start="52749" end="52764" title="Lord Privy Seal" label="Lord Privy Seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2012061" start="52769" end="52797" title="Leader of the House of Lords" label="Leader of the House of Lords"/>
<link wikidata="Q333020" start="52800" end="52811" title="Phil Willis" label="Phil Willis"/>
<link wikidata="Q9624" start="52813" end="52829" title="Liberal Democrats (UK)" label="Liberal Democrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q3337289" start="52837" end="52866" title="Harrogate &amp;amp; Knaresborough" label="Harrogate &amp;amp; Knaresborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q7931786" start="52889" end="52901" title="Vincent Fean" label="Vincent Fean"/>
<link wikidata="Q6498826" start="52957" end="52963" title="martyr" label="martyr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1634188" start="52964" end="52977" title="Robert Nutter" label="Robert Nutter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7795082" start="53016" end="53032" title="Thomas Whittaker (martyr)" label="Thomas Whittaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q322170" start="53034" end="53045" title="Suffragette" label="Suffragette"/>
<link wikidata="Q56598692" start="53047" end="53065" title="Margaret Aldersley" label="Margaret Aldersley"/>
<link wikidata="Q4678284" start="53100" end="53114" title="Ada Nield Chew" label="Ada Nield Chew"/>
<link wikidata="Q15070073" start="53146" end="53159" title="John Stuttard" label="John Stuttard"/>
<link wikidata="Q333223" start="53246" end="53266" title="James Yorke Scarlett" label="James Yorke Scarlett"/>
<link wikidata="Q5695026" start="53285" end="53298" title="Heavy Brigade" label="Heavy Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q464512" start="53306" end="53325" title="Battle of Balaclava" label="Battle of Balaclava"/>
<link wikidata="Q219578" start="53392" end="53406" title="Victoria Cross" label="Victoria Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q5930392" start="53430" end="53441" title="Hugh Colvin" label="Hugh Colvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7795073" start="53454" end="53468" title="Thomas Whitham" label="Thomas Whitham"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="53488" end="53499" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q8022078" start="53542" end="53556" title="Willis Jackson, Baron Jackson of Burnley" label="Willis Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q15451997" start="53592" end="53603" title="James Drake (engineer)" label="James Drake"/>
<link wikidata="Q6272193" start="53684" end="53699" title="Sir Jonas Moore" label="Sir Jonas Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q5757791" start="53709" end="53715" title="Higham, Lancashire" label="Higham"/>
<link wikidata="Q7329522" start="53804" end="53820" title="Richard Towneley" label="Richard Towneley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7830101" start="53882" end="53895" title="Towneley Hall" label="Towneley Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q10379" start="53906" end="53916" title="cardiology" label="cardiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q920583" start="53925" end="53944" title="Sir James Mackenzie" label="Sir James Mackenzie"/>
<link wikidata="Q921415" start="54028" end="54040" title="Lasker Award" label="Lasker Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q7202" start="54049" end="54068" title="Molecular biology" label="molecular biologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q903388" start="54069" end="54083" title="Edwin Southern" label="Edwin Southern"/>
<link wikidata="Q48749" start="54101" end="54114" title="Southern blot" label="Southern blot"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375" start="54224" end="54233" title="cricketer" label="cricketer"/>
<link wikidata="Q654375" start="54234" end="54248" title="James Anderson (cricketer)" label="James Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1689342" start="54291" end="54305" title="Jimmy Crabtree" label="Jimmy Crabtree"/>
<link wikidata="Q4912149" start="54307" end="54322" title="Billy Bannister" label="Billy Bannister"/>
<link wikidata="Q581973" start="54328" end="54341" title="Jay Rodriguez" label="Jay Rodriguez"/>
<link wikidata="Q190978" start="54343" end="54359" title="Northern Ireland national football team" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q920425" start="54374" end="54388" title="Oliver Norwood" label="Oliver Norwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="54390" end="54398" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q339956" start="54413" end="54424" title="Adnan Ahmed" label="Adnan Ahmed"/>
<link wikidata="Q10857" start="54465" end="54477" title="Rachel Brown" label="Rachel Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q18656" start="54482" end="54499" title="Manchester United F.C." label="Manchester United"/>
<link wikidata="Q5106114" start="54507" end="54519" title="Chris Casper" label="Chris Casper"/>
<link wikidata="Q178340" start="54521" end="54539" title="Commonwealth Games" label="Commonwealth Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q5181021" start="54567" end="54577" title="Craig Heap" label="Craig Heap"/>
<link wikidata="Q647527" start="54579" end="54601" title="Supercars Championship" label="Supercars Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q5427637" start="54609" end="54625" title="Fabian Coulthard" label="Fabian Coulthard"/>
<link wikidata="Q172832" start="54663" end="54678" title="David Coulthard" label="David Coulthard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1383829" start="54711" end="54723" title="Neil Hodgson" label="Neil Hodgson"/>
<link wikidata="Q206756" start="54725" end="54754" title="2003 Superbike World Championship" label="2003 World Superbike champion"/>
<link wikidata="Q4933198" start="54793" end="54801" title="Bob Lord (football chairman)" label="Bob Lord"/>
<link wikidata="Q1388881" start="54820" end="54831" title="Jimmy Hogan" label="Jimmy Hogan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386573" start="54876" end="54890" title="Harry Bradshaw (football manager)" label="Harry Bradshaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q8418" start="54892" end="54900" title="handball" label="handball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343568" start="54908" end="54924" title="Holly Lam-Moores" label="Holly Lam-Moores"/>
<link wikidata="Q6207387" start="54945" end="54956" title="Jock McAvoy" label="Jock McAvoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7852" start="54958" end="54982" title="World Rally Championship" label="World Rally Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q18977746" start="54993" end="55007" title="Daniel Barritt" label="Daniel Barritt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3125075" start="55028" end="55042" title="Sophie Hitchon" label="Sophie Hitchon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7162381" start="55060" end="55069" title="Pendelfin" label="Pendelfin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="55131" end="55175" title="List of collieries in Lancashire since 1854#Burnley area" label="Collieries in the Burnley area of Lancashire"/>
<link wikidata="Q41555601" start="55178" end="55216" title="List of mining disasters in Lancashire" label="List of mining disasters in Lancashire"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="311738" wikidata="Q6390632" url="?curid=311738" title="Dick Norris">
<text>Kenneth Richard Norris (28 March 1914 – 14 July 2003) was an Australian entomologist.

==Early life and education==
He was born in Geraldton, Western Australia. The family moved to Fremantle in 1922, which was to provide the opportunity for Dick and his younger brother Donald to pursue studies in agricultural science at the University of Western Australia (UWA). Don graduated in 1938, completed his MSc in 1944 and a doctorate in 1948. His thesis for the doctorate was entitled &#x27;History, Bionomics, and Control of Pests of the Australian Pastoral Industry&#x27;.

==Career==
He became a world authority on plant viruses, and chief research scientist with the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation&#x27;s (CSIRO) Division of Tropical Agronomy in Queensland.

He joined the CSIR - later to become the CSIRO - in 1937 as a temporary research officer for Western Australia. Ultimately he moved to Canberra and progressed to become assistant chief of the Division of Entomology in 1965. In recognition of his unique contributions he was honoured with the title of Associate Chief in 1977.
During his long career he undertook pioneering research on serious pests such as the red-legged earth mite, buffalo fly, lucerne fly, cattle tick, clothes moth and the New Guinea screw-worm fly. However, he was perhaps best known as a leading authority on Australian blowflies. He was often consulted by Australian police and health authorities over forensic matters, and appeared in an Australian Broadcasting Commission (ABC) documentary on the subject a few years ago.

==Retirement==
After retirement in 1979 he continued as an honorary research fellow with the CSIRO well into his eighties. His last scientific publication was in 1999 at the age of 85. It exceeded 100 pages of original research and taxonomic drawings.

==Death==
He died in Canberra, having outlived five siblings from the family of Leonard and Constance Norris (née Wright). His mother, who died in 1955, is still well known in Geraldton for her posthumously-published historical reminiscences of the town.

Norris is survived by his wife of 69 years, and two sons, both scientists.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6390632" start="0" end="22" title="Dick Norris" label="Kenneth Richard Norris"/>
<link wikidata="Q39286" start="72" end="84" title="entomology" label="entomologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q605267" start="131" end="140" title="Geraldton, Western Australia" label="Geraldton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3206" start="142" end="159" title="Western Australia" label="Western Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3606845" start="298" end="318" title="agricultural science" label="agricultural science"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517021" start="326" end="357" title="University of Western Australia" label="University of Western Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q849697" start="420" end="429" title="doctorate" label="doctorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q808" start="620" end="625" title="virus" label="virus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117048" start="667" end="727" title="Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation" label="Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q36074" start="776" end="786" title="Queensland" label="Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3114" start="924" end="932" title="Canberra" label="Canberra"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1200" end="1221" title="red-legged earth mite" label="red-legged earth mite"/>
<link wikidata="Q15631410" start="1223" end="1234" title="buffalo fly" label="buffalo fly"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1236" end="1247" title="lucerne fly" label="lucerne fly"/>
<link wikidata="Q4808965" start="1249" end="1260" title="Rhipicephalus microplus" label="cattle tick"/>
<link wikidata="Q25036256" start="1262" end="1274" title="clothes moth" label="clothes moth"/>
<link wikidata="Q4121076" start="1294" end="1308" title="screw-worm fly" label="screw-worm fly"/>
<link wikidata="Q495304" start="1465" end="1473" title="forensic" label="forensic"/>
<link wikidata="Q781365" start="1502" end="1536" title="Australian Broadcasting Corporation" label="Australian Broadcasting Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q8269924" start="1820" end="1829" title="Taxonomy (biology)" label="taxonomic"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="311746" wikidata="Q2749746" url="?curid=311746" title="Love's Labour's Won">
<text>Love&#x27;s Labour&#x27;s Won is a lost play attributed by contemporaries to William Shakespeare, written before 1598 and published by 1603, though no copies are known to have survived. Scholars dispute whether it is a true lost work, possibly a sequel to &quot;Love&#x27;s Labour&#x27;s Lost&quot;, or an alternative title to a known Shakespeare play.

==Evidence==
The first mention of the play occurs in Francis Meres&#x27; &quot;Palladis Tamia, Wits Treasury&quot; (1598) in which he lists a dozen Shakespeare plays. His list of Shakespearean comedies reads:

for Comedy, witnes his &quot;Gẽtlemẽ of Verona&quot;, his &quot;Errors&quot;, his &quot;Loue labors lost&quot;, his &quot;Loue labours wonne&quot;, his &quot;Midsummers night dreame&quot;, &amp; his &quot;Merchant of Venice&quot;

The August 1603 book list of the stationer Christopher Hunt lists the play as printed in quarto among other works by Shakespeare:

marchant of vennis, taming of a shrew, ...loves labor lost, loves labor won.

==Theories==
Shakespeare scholars have several theories about the play.

===Sequel to &quot;Love&#x27;s Labour&#x27;s Lost&quot;===
One theory is that &quot;Love&#x27;s Labour&#x27;s Won&quot; may be a lost sequel to &quot;Love&#x27;s Labour&#x27;s Lost&quot;, depicting the further adventures of the King of Navarre, Berowne, Longaville, and Dumain, whose marriages were delayed at the end of &quot;Love&#x27;s Labour&#x27;s Lost&quot;. In the final moments of &quot;Love&#x27;s Labour&#x27;s Lost&quot; the weddings that customarily close Shakespeare&#x27;s comedies are unexpectedly deferred for a year without any obvious plot purpose, which would allow for a sequel. Critic Cedric Watts imagined what a sequel might look like:

Against this it must be observed that Elizabethan playwrights almost never wrote sequels to comedies. Sequels were written for historical plays or, less commonly, for tragedies.

===Alternative name for existing play===
Another theory is that &quot;Love&#x27;s Labour&#x27;s Won&quot; was an alternative name for a known play. This would explain why it was not printed under that name in the First Folio of Shakespeare&#x27;s complete dramatic works in 1623, for which the sequel theory has no obvious explanation.

A longtime theory held that &quot;Love&#x27;s Labour&#x27;s Won&quot; was an alternative name for &quot;The Taming of the Shrew&quot;, which had been written several years earlier and is noticeably missing from Meres&#x27; list. But in 1953, Solomon Pottesman, a London-based antiquarian book dealer and collector, discovered the August 1603 book list of the stationer Christopher Hunt, which lists as printed in quarto:

marchant of vennis, taming of a shrew, knak to know a knave [unknown author], knak to know an honest man [unknown author], loves labor lost, loves labor won.

The find provided evidence that the play might be a distinct work that had been published but lost and not an early title of &quot;The Taming of the Shrew&quot;. However, this evidence is not decisive. Another playwright had written a play called &quot;The Taming of a Shrew&quot; which was published in quarto in 1594, whereas Shakespeare&#x27;s &quot;Shrew&quot; play was not published until the 1623 Folio. Therefore, it is possible that Shakespeare originally titled his Shrew play &quot;Love&#x27;s Labour&#x27;s Won&quot; in order to distinguish it from the rival play.

Yet another possibility is that the name is an alternative title for another Shakespearean comedy not listed by Meres or Hunt. &quot;Much Ado About Nothing&quot;, commonly believed to be written around 1598, is often suggested. For example, Henry Woudhuysen&#x27;s Arden edition (third series) of &quot;Love&#x27;s Labour&#x27;s Lost&quot; lists a number of striking similarities between the two plays. &quot;Much Ado about Nothing&quot; is also listed under another alternative title – &quot;Benedick and Beatrice –&quot; in several book sellers&#x27; catalogues.

Leslie Hotson speculated that &quot;Love&#x27;s Labour&#x27;s Won&quot; was the former title of &quot;Troilus and Cressida&quot;, which did not appear in &quot;Palladis Tamia&quot;. This view has been criticised by Kenneth Palmer for requiring a &quot;forced interpretation of the play&quot;. In addition, &quot;Troilus and Cressida&quot; is generally considered to have been written around 1602.

David Grote argues that it was another name for &quot;As You Like It&quot;. He suggests that titles for comedies were often generic – several plays could be called &quot;As You Like It&quot; or &quot;All&#x27;s Well that Ends Well&quot;, for example, and that names were not fixed until repeated publication. He suggests that &quot;As You Like It&quot; began as a sequel to &quot;Love&#x27;s Labour&#x27;s Lost&quot;, but was later revised when Robert Armin replaced William Kempe as the principal comic actor in Shakespeare&#x27;s theatre company, the Lord Chamberlain&#x27;s Men.

==Use of the title==
In their 2014 season commemorating the centenary of the commencement of World War I hostilities, the Royal Shakespeare Company co-opted the title in performing &quot;Much Ado about Nothing&quot; under the name &quot;Love&#x27;s Labour&#x27;s Won (also known as Much Ado about Nothing)&quot;. It was staged as a companion piece to &quot;Love&#x27;s Labour&#x27;s Lost&quot;. The pair of plays bookended the period of the war. &quot;Love&#x27;s Labour&#x27;s Lost&quot; was set at the beginning of the war in 1914, with &quot;Love Labour&#x27;s Won&quot; set at its end in 1918, with the male characters returning home after the final victory.

==In other popular culture==
The play was featured as a plot device in the 1948 novel &quot;Love Lies Bleeding&quot; (1948) by Edmund Crispin, in which the discovery of a copy of the play triggers a series of murders.

The writing of the play is a major plot point in the 2007 &quot;Doctor Who&quot; episode &quot;The Shakespeare Code&quot; where The Tenth Doctor witnesses the writing of the play firsthand.

It was also used in the book series &quot;The 39 Clues&quot; as a minor plot device in the final book of the first series.

In Harry Turtledove&#x27;s alternate history novel &quot;Ruled Britannia&quot;, depicting a Spanish-ruled England in which Shakespeare is involved in the clandestine resistance, depicts him writing a play called &quot;Love&#x27;s Labour&#x27;s Won&quot;. However, this play seems to be simply &quot;our&quot; &quot;Love&#x27;s Labour&#x27;s Lost&quot;, as Shakespeare is shown making a last-minute change of Don Armado&#x27;s nationality from Spanish to Italian, to avoid insulting the overlords.

==References==
==Bibliography==
* Baldwin, T.W. &quot;Shakespeare&#x27;s Love&#x27;s Labour&#x27;s Won: New Evidence from the Account Books of an Elizabethan Bookseller&quot;. Carbondale: Southern Illinois University Press, 1957.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1585442" start="35" end="44" title="Lost literary work" label="lost play"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="77" end="96" title="William Shakespeare" label="William Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q261636" start="246" end="252" title="sequel" label="sequel"/>
<link wikidata="Q128610" start="262" end="292" title="Love&amp;#x27;s Labour&amp;#x27;s Lost" label="Love&amp;#x27;s Labour&amp;#x27;s Lost"/>
<link wikidata="Q509706" start="407" end="420" title="Francis Meres" label="Francis Meres"/>
<link wikidata="Q7127707" start="433" end="462" title="Palladis Tamia" label="Palladis Tamia, Wits Treasury"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152184" start="533" end="555" title="Shakespearean comedies" label="Shakespearean comedies"/>
<link wikidata="Q232042" start="593" end="610" title="The Two Gentlemen of Verona" label="Gẽtlemẽ of Verona"/>
<link wikidata="Q506505" start="628" end="634" title="Comedy of Errors" label="Errors"/>
<link wikidata="Q128610" start="652" end="668" title="Love&amp;#x27;s Labour&amp;#x27;s Lost" label="Loue labors lost"/>
<link wikidata="Q104871" start="722" end="745" title="Midsummer night dream" label="Midsummers night dreame"/>
<link wikidata="Q206400" start="769" end="787" title="The Merchant of Venice" label="Merchant of Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q5112588" start="838" end="854" title="Christopher Hunt" label="Christopher Hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2122442" start="884" end="890" title="quarto" label="quarto"/>
<link wikidata="Q332387" start="946" end="963" title="The Taming of the Shrew" label="taming of a shrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q128610" start="1227" end="1257" title="Love&amp;#x27;s Labour&amp;#x27;s Lost" label="Love&amp;#x27;s Labour&amp;#x27;s Lost"/>
<link wikidata="Q833645" start="2129" end="2140" title="First Folio" label="First Folio"/>
<link wikidata="Q332387" start="2357" end="2380" title="The Taming of the Shrew" label="The Taming of the Shrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q5112588" start="2622" end="2638" title="Christopher Hunt" label="Christopher Hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2122442" start="2666" end="2672" title="quarto" label="quarto"/>
<link wikidata="Q49000520" start="2714" end="2734" title="A Knack to Know a Knave" label="knak to know a knave"/>
<link wikidata="Q130851" start="3544" end="3566" title="Much Ado About Nothing" label="Much Ado About Nothing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4787941" start="3676" end="3689" title="Arden Shakespeare" label="Arden edition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1820796" start="3977" end="3990" title="Leslie Hotson" label="Leslie Hotson"/>
<link wikidata="Q183304" start="4079" end="4099" title="Troilus and Cressida" label="Troilus and Cressida"/>
<link wikidata="Q237572" start="4429" end="4443" title="As You Like It" label="As You Like It"/>
<link wikidata="Q2326905" start="4820" end="4832" title="Robert Armin" label="Robert Armin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2028014" start="4842" end="4855" title="William Kempe" label="William Kempe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146254" start="5080" end="5105" title="Royal Shakespeare Company" label="Royal Shakespeare Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q6690955" start="5708" end="5745" title="Love Lies Bleeding (novel)" label="&amp;quot;Love Lies Bleeding&amp;quot; (1948)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351641" start="5749" end="5763" title="Edmund Crispin" label="Edmund Crispin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424152" start="5899" end="5921" title="Doctor Who (series 3)" label="&amp;quot;Doctor Who&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089582" start="5936" end="5956" title="The Shakespeare Code" label="The Shakespeare Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q2656347" start="5969" end="5985" title="The Tenth Doctor" label="The Tenth Doctor"/>
<link wikidata="Q130438" start="6074" end="6086" title="The 39 Clues" label="The 39 Clues"/>
<link wikidata="Q455780" start="6159" end="6175" title="Harry Turtledove" label="Harry Turtledove"/>
<link wikidata="Q224989" start="6183" end="6200" title="Alternate history (fiction)" label="alternate history"/>
<link wikidata="Q4048595" start="6213" end="6228" title="Ruled Britannia" label="Ruled Britannia"/>
<link wikidata="Q17062065" start="6842" end="6876" title="Southern Illinois University Press" label="Southern Illinois University Press"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="311747" wikidata="Q520050" url="?curid=311747" title="Adam Beck">
<text>Sir Adam Beck (June 20, 1857 – August 15, 1925) was a Canadian politician and hydroelectricity advocate who founded the Hydro-Electric Power Commission of Ontario. 

==Biography==

Beck was born in Baden, Canada West to German immigrants, Jacob Beck and Charlotte Hespeler (sister of William and Jacob Hespeler). He was the great-great-grandson of Count Károly Andrássy de Csíkszentkirály et Krasznahorka (1723–1795). He attended school at the Rockwood Academy in Rockwood, Ontario. As a teenager he worked in his father&#x27;s foundry, and later established a cigar-box manufacturing company in Galt (now Cambridge, Ontario) with his brother William. In 1885, he moved the company to London, Ontario, where it quickly flourished and established Beck as a wealthy and influential civic leader.

He was also involved in horse breeding and racing, and at a horse show in 1897 he met Lilian Ottaway of Hamilton daughter of Cuthbert Ottaway and Marion Stinson. Lilian&#x27;s mother, by then Marion Crerar, objected to their 21-year age difference – she was 19 and he 40 – as well as Beck&#x27;s love of horse racing, which they felt would keep him away from home. Nevertheless, they were married on September 7, 1898. Beck named their London mansion Headley, after Lilian&#x27;s parents&#x27; home in Surrey, England. In addition to horse breeding, for which he won numerous prizes, Beck was also associated with tennis and lawn bowling.

Also in 1898, Beck ran for provincial legislature for the first time, but lost. In 1900, Beck founded the London Health Association, which would later develop into the University and Victoria Hospitals. In 1902, he was elected mayor of London and a few months later was elected to the Ontario legislature as the Conservative member from the London riding. He was re-elected mayor in 1903 and 1904 while simultaneously serving as a member of the provincial legislature (which is no longer permitted). Already a wealthy man, he donated his salary to charity while serving as mayor. In 1905, he was appointed minister without portfolio in the government of premier Sir James P. Whitney.

Beck was an early and prominent advocate of publicly owned electricity grids, opposing the privately owned companies who he felt did not adequately serve the needs of the public. With the slogan &quot;Power at Cost&quot; and in Latin, &quot;dona naturae pro populo sunt&quot; (&quot;the gifts of nature are for the public&quot;), he convinced Premier Whitney to create a board of enquiry on the matter, with him as chairman. The enquiry suggested creating a municipally owned hydroelectric system, funded by the provincial government, and using water from Niagara Falls and other Ontario lakes and rivers. In 1906 Whitney appointed Beck the first chairman of the Hydro-Electric Power Commission. He was knighted by King George V in 1914 for his promotion of electricity and development of transmission lines.

In 1915, he tried to introduce a network of interurban railways, known provincially as radials (long-distance trolleys) in Ontario under public ownership, but this plan had to be put on hold during World War I. In the 1919 post-war election, Beck lost his seat to Hugh Stevenson as the United Farmers of Ontario swept the Conservatives out of power.

Beck continued to push his radial railways proposal after World War I, which pitted him against Premier Ernest Drury, with whom he had an antagonistic relationship. In 1920, Drury created a Royal Commission, chaired by Robert Franklin Sutherland, which concluded that the popularity of automobiles had rendered Beck&#x27;s proposal obsolete.

During his time in the provincial legislature Beck remained active in London. His daughter Marion, born in 1904, suffered from tuberculosis, but with Beck&#x27;s wealth and influence she had access to the best doctors and medicine. Realizing that not everyone could afford such care, in 1910 Beck founded a sanitorium, which was very advanced for its time. The Queen Alexandra Sanitorium, named after Alexandra of Denmark, wife of King Edward VII, was officially opened on April 5 of that year by Governor General Earl Grey. It was later renamed the Beck Memorial Sanitorium. Later still it was renamed the Children&#x27;s Psychiatric Research Institute (CPRI). Today the building houses the London Child and Parent Resource Institute. In 1918 Beck also paid fellow Londoner Guy Lombardo to play at Marion&#x27;s débutante party.

Lilian Beck died of cancer on October 17, 1921. In 1923 Beck was re-elected to the Ontario legislature, until his own death from anemia in 1925. Former Prime Minister of Canada Arthur Meighen, Ontario premier George Howard Ferguson, and London mayor George Wenige attended his funeral.

The Queenston Chippawa power station (now Sir Adam Beck Hydroelectric Power Stations), which he helped to create, was renamed after him in 1950. Also named for him were Sir Adam Beck Collegiate Institute, a public secondary school in London which is now home to the Thames Valley District School Board headquarters, an elementary school in Upper Beaches, Toronto, Ontario, and a bilingual elementary school in Etobicoke. Sir Adam Beck Public School was built in his hometown of Baden. In 1990, Headley, the Becks&#x27; mansion at Richmond and Sydenham streets, was demolished by Sifton Properties Ltd. and replaced with a condominium replica dubbed the Sir Adam Beck Manor. In Toronto, there is a statue of Beck (Adam Beck Memorial), sculpted by Emanuel Hahn, on University Avenue at Queen Street West. It was jointly erected by City of Toronto and the Toronto Hydro-Electric Commission in 1934.

==References==
==Sources==
* Ontario Liberals blacking out Adam Beck&#x27;s energy legacy, by Christina Blizzard, May 16, 2015
* Sir Adam Beck at The Canadian Encyclopedia, accessed September 1, 2019

== External links ==
* 
* Biocards: Sir Adam Beck at www.londonhistory.org
* Hydro One : About Hydro One : History : Sir Adam Beck at www.hydroone.com</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q520050" start="0" end="13" title="Adam Beck" label="Sir Adam Beck"/>
<link wikidata="Q80638" start="78" end="94" title="hydroelectricity" label="hydroelectricity"/>
<link wikidata="Q910426" start="120" end="162" title="Ontario Hydro" label="Hydro-Electric Power Commission of Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q798907" start="198" end="203" title="Baden, Ontario" label="Baden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121436" start="205" end="216" title="Canada West" label="Canada West"/>
<link wikidata="Q42884" start="220" end="226" title="Germans" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q8012280" start="284" end="291" title="William Hespeler" label="William"/>
<link wikidata="Q6118741" start="296" end="310" title="Jacob Hespeler" label="Jacob Hespeler"/>
<link wikidata="Q4492408" start="354" end="404" title="Andrássy" label="Károly Andrássy de Csíkszentkirály et Krasznahorka"/>
<link wikidata="Q7355698" start="444" end="460" title="Rockwood Academy (Ontario)" label="Rockwood Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q695157" start="464" end="481" title="Rockwood, Ontario" label="Rockwood, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q13883136" start="528" end="535" title="foundry" label="foundry"/>
<link wikidata="Q199379" start="561" end="570" title="cigar-box" label="cigar-box"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028279" start="606" end="624" title="Cambridge, Ontario" label="Cambridge, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q92561" start="685" end="700" title="London, Ontario" label="London, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q726" start="819" end="824" title="horse" label="horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q133116" start="899" end="907" title="Hamilton, Ontario" label="Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q593843" start="920" end="936" title="Cuthbert Ottaway" label="Cuthbert Ottaway"/>
<link wikidata="Q36918937" start="941" end="955" title="Marion Stinson Crerar" label="Marion Stinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q187916" start="1099" end="1111" title="horse racing" label="horse racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q23276" start="1297" end="1312" title="Surrey, England" label="Surrey, England"/>
<link wikidata="Q847" start="1409" end="1415" title="tennis" label="tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q895471" start="1420" end="1432" title="lawn bowling" label="lawn bowling"/>
<link wikidata="Q6627580" start="1662" end="1677" title="List of mayors of London, Ontario" label="mayor of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q826977" start="1747" end="1759" title="Ontario Progressive Conservative Party" label="Conservative"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1783" end="1789" title="Riding (division)#Canada" label="riding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937160" start="2041" end="2067" title="minister without portfolio" label="minister without portfolio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1850322" start="2089" end="2096" title="List of Ontario premiers" label="premier"/>
<link wikidata="Q3161488" start="2101" end="2117" title="James P. Whitney" label="James P. Whitney"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="2348" end="2353" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q34221" start="2676" end="2689" title="Niagara Falls" label="Niagara Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q269412" start="2835" end="2848" title="George V of the United Kingdom" label="King George V"/>
<link wikidata="Q1664428" start="2974" end="2984" title="interurban" label="interurban"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="3128" end="3139" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q3550699" start="3216" end="3241" title="United Farmers of Ontario" label="United Farmers of Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q3056893" start="3385" end="3397" title="Ernest Charles Drury" label="Ernest Drury"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986735" start="3471" end="3487" title="Royal Commission" label="Royal Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q275708" start="3500" end="3526" title="Robert Franklin Sutherland" label="Robert Franklin Sutherland"/>
<link wikidata="Q12204" start="3751" end="3763" title="tuberculosis" label="tuberculosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q46124" start="3931" end="3941" title="sanitorium" label="sanitorium"/>
<link wikidata="Q152260" start="4025" end="4045" title="Alexandra of Denmark" label="Alexandra of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q20875" start="4060" end="4070" title="Edward VII of the United Kingdom" label="Edward VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q390776" start="4121" end="4137" title="Governor General of Canada" label="Governor General"/>
<link wikidata="Q333336" start="4138" end="4147" title="Albert Grey, 4th Earl Grey" label="Earl Grey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5097821" start="4323" end="4358" title="Child and Parent Resource Institute" label="Child and Parent Resource Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q467087" start="4399" end="4411" title="Guy Lombardo" label="Guy Lombardo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780030" start="4437" end="4446" title="débutante" label="débutante"/>
<link wikidata="Q12078" start="4475" end="4481" title="cancer" label="cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5445" start="4584" end="4590" title="anemia" label="anemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q839078" start="4607" end="4631" title="Prime Minister of Canada" label="Prime Minister of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q128645" start="4632" end="4646" title="Arthur Meighen" label="Arthur Meighen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141552" start="4664" end="4686" title="George Howard Ferguson" label="George Howard Ferguson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5546156" start="4705" end="4718" title="George Wenige" label="George Wenige"/>
<link wikidata="Q7525907" start="4784" end="4826" title="Sir Adam Beck Hydroelectric Power Stations" label="Sir Adam Beck Hydroelectric Power Stations"/>
<link wikidata="Q159334" start="4956" end="4972" title="secondary school" label="secondary school"/>
<link wikidata="Q7709930" start="5008" end="5043" title="Thames Valley District School Board" label="Thames Valley District School Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q9842" start="5061" end="5078" title="elementary school" label="elementary school"/>
<link wikidata="Q7898480" start="5082" end="5113" title="Upper Beaches" label="Upper Beaches, Toronto, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q9842" start="5131" end="5148" title="elementary school" label="elementary school"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020159" start="5152" end="5161" title="Etobicoke" label="Etobicoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q4678688" start="5455" end="5473" title="Adam Beck Memorial" label="Adam Beck Memorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551335" start="5505" end="5522" title="University Avenue (Toronto)" label="University Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q130334" start="5785" end="5810" title="The Canadian Encyclopedia" label="The Canadian Encyclopedia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="311748" wikidata="Q379497" url="?curid=311748" title="Smokejumper">
<text>A smokejumper is a specially-trained wildland firefighter who provides an initial attack response on remote wildfires. They are inserted at the site of the fire by parachute. This allows firefighters to access remote fires in their early stages without needing to hike long distances carrying equipment and supplies. Traditional terrestrial crews can use only what they can carry and often require hours and days to reach fire on foot. The benefits of smokejumping include the speed at which firefighters can reach a burn site, the broad range of fires a single crew can reach by aircraft, and the larger equipment payloads that can be delivered to a fire compared to pedestrian crews.

Once arrived on site, smokejumpers utilize similar strategies to hotshot crews and terrestrial crews to extinguish fires. Primarily, firefighters use axes to dig trenches around the fire&#x27;s perimeter to isolate the flames from further fuel sources - nearby trees and shrubs. By tilling the newly exposed soil, the firefighters limit available material for the fire and it slowly burns itself out. If necessary, crews will supervise the fire overnight, and churn the ash in the morning to effectively put out any remaining embers. Once the fires are deemed thoroughly extinguished, smokejumpers retrieve the equipment and hike to the nearest clearing to be collected by helicopter.

Only four countries currently house smokejumpers: Russia, Canada, United States and Malaysia. These countries often coordinate exchange programs in which smokejumpers travel to aid in intense wildfire seasons.

In addition to performing the initial attack on wildfires, they may also provide leadership for extended attacks on wildland fires. Shortly after smokejumpers touch ground, they are supplied by parachute with food, water, and firefighting tools, making them self-sufficient for 48 hours. Smokejumpers are usually on duty from early spring through late fall.

==History==

Prior to the full establishment of smokejumping, experiments with parachute insertion of firefighters were conducted in 1934 in Utah and in the Soviet Union. Earlier, aerial firefighting experiments had been conducted with air delivery of equipment and water bombs. Although this first experiment was not pursued, another began in 1939 in the Methow Valley, Washington, where professional parachutists jumped into a variety of timbered and mountainous terrains, proving the feasibility of the idea. 

Smokejumping was first proposed in 1934 in the Intermountain Region (Region 4), by Regional Forester T.V. Pearson. By 1939, the program began as an experiment in the Pacific Northwest Region (Region 6). The first official non-fire jump was made in the Nez Perce National Forest in the Northern Region (Region 1) in 1940 by John Furgurson and Lester Gohler. The McCall smokejumper program was established in 1943; their base is on the Idaho shores of Payette Lake. The base is near six national forests: Nez Perce / Clearwater, Sawtooth, the Boise, Payette, Salmon–Challis, and Wallowa-Whitman.

In 1942, permanent jump operations were established at Winthrop, Washington, and Ninemile Camp, an abandoned Civilian Conservation Corps camp (Camp Menard) a mile north of the Forest Service&#x27;s Ninemile Remount Depot (pack mule) at Huson, Montana, about northwest of Missoula. The first fire jumps were made by Rufus Robinson and Earl Cooley at Rock Pillar near Marten Creek in the Nez Perce National Forest on July 12, 1940, out of Ninemile, followed shortly by a two-man fire jump out of Winthrop. In subsequent years, the Ninemile Camp operation moved to Missoula, where it became the Missoula Smokejumper Base. The Winthrop operation remained at its original location, as North Cascades Smokejumper Base. The &quot;birthplace&quot; of smokejumping continues to be debated between these two bases, the argument having persisted for about 70 years.

The first smokejumper training camp was at the Seeley Lake Ranger Station, over northeast of Missoula. The camp relocated to Camp Menard in July 1943. Here, when not fighting fires, the men spent much time putting up hay to feed the hundreds of pack mules that carried supplies and equipment to guard stations and fire locations. To work fires, the men, organized into squads of eight to fifteen, were stationed at six strategic points, also known as &quot;spike camps&quot;: Seeley Lake, Big Prairie, and Ninemile in Montana; Moose Creek and McCall in Idaho; and Redwood Ranger Station in southwestern Oregon at the edge of Cave Junction. The men worked from other spike camps as well, including some in Washington.

===Relations with the military===
After observing smokejumper training methods at Seeley Lake in June 1940, then-Major William C. Lee of the United States Army went on to become a major general and establish the 101st Airborne Division.

In 1940, Army Dr. (Captain) Leo P. Martin was trained by the U.S. Forest Service Smokejumper Parachute Training Center in Seeley Lake, Montana as the first &#x27;para-doctor&#x27; (predecessor to USAF Pararescue ).

In May 1978, members of the Army National Guard&#x27;s 19th Special Forces Group (Airborne) and other western military units briefly began airborne training at the Missoula Smokejumper School. Although in years past, the army had conducted basic airborne training at various locations, it has since been consolidated at Fort Benning, (now called Fort Moore) Georgia.

===WWII-era===
The 555th Parachute Infantry Battalion gained fame as the only entirely black airborne unit in United States Army history. The 555th was allegedly not sent to combat because of segregation in the military during World War II. In May 1945, the unit was sent to the West Coast of the United States to combat forest fires ignited by incendiary balloons sent by the Japanese Empire, an operation named &quot;Operation Firefly&quot;. Although this threat did not fully materialize, the 555th fought numerous other forest fires while there. Stationed at Pendleton Field, Oregon, with a detachment in Chico, California, 300 unit members participated in firefighting missions throughout the Pacific Northwest during the summer and fall of 1945, earning the nickname &quot;Smoke Jumpers&quot;. The 555th made a total of 1,200 jumps to 36 fires, 19 from Pendleton and 17 from Chico. Only one member, PFC Malvin L. Brown, was killed on August 6, 1945, after falling during a let-down from a tree in the Umpqua National Forest near Roseburg, Oregon. His death is the first recorded smokejumper fatality during a fire jump. 

Around 240 workers from Civilian Public Service (CPS) camps worked as smokejumpers during World War II. An initial group of 15 men began training in parachute rigging in May 1943 at Seeley Lake, and a total of 33 completed jump training in the middle of June, followed by two weeks of training in fire ground control and first aid. About 500 training jumps were made by the first 70 CPS smokejumpers in 1943, who went on to fight 31 fires that first season. Their number increased to 110 in 1944, and to 220 in 1945, as more equipment became available from the War Department. Twenty-nine jumpers battled the remote Bell Lake fire in September 1944, among 70 fires suppressed that year, and 179 were fought in the Missoula Region alone by September 1945, with other jumpers assigned to McCall and Cave Junction. The last CPS smokejumper left the service in January 1946.

The Smokejumper Project had become a permanent establishment of the USFS in 1944. In 1946, the Missoula Region had 164 smokejumpers, many of them recent military veterans, college students, or recent college graduates. New bases were opened in Grangeville, Idaho, and West Yellowstone, Montana.

Most smokejumpers of the era were not career professionals, but seasonal employees lured by the prospect of earning as much as $1,000 over a summer. They tended to be well-behaved, self-motivated, and responsible. Squad-sized and larger crews were supervised by foremen who were career wildland firefighters and experts in all types of wildfires.

===Mann Gulch fire===
The fire with the greatest toll of smokejumper deaths was the Mann Gulch fire in 1949, which occurred north of Helena, Montana, at the Gates of the Mountains area along the Missouri River. Thirteen firefighters died during the blowup, twelve of them smokejumpers. This disaster directly led to the establishment of modern safety standards used by all wildland firefighters. Author Norman Maclean described the incident in his book &quot;Young Men and Fire&quot; (1992).

==Smokejumper crews worldwide==
Smokejumpers are employed by the Russian Federation, United States (namely the United States Forest Service and Bureau of Land Management), Canada (in British Columbia). and Malaysia.

===Russia===
In Russia, smokejumpers are firefighters who parachute or rappel, or both, into fires. They work for the Aerial Forest Protection Service, or &quot;Avialesookhrana&quot;. This agency represents the largest cohort of smokejumpers worldwide, employing up to 4,000 individuals who protect of land across 11 different time zones. This makes the &quot;Avialsookhrana&quot; the primary defences for half of Russia&#x27;s wildland. Smokejumpers are located at 340 Avialsookhrana bases and dispatched in groups of differing sizes according to the situation at hand. Rappelling crews consist of a maximum of 20 firefighters, while parachuting teams are usually made up of five or six.

===Canada===
In Canada, smokejumpers are employed by the BC Wildfire Service. Here, there are three classes of initial response firefighters; initial attack crews, rapattack crews (refers to firefighters who rappel from aircraft into wildfires), and parattack crews (smokejumpers). The BC Wildfire Service houses roughly 60 smokejumpers yearly and operates the only smokejumper crews in Canada. There are two crews located in the northeast of the province.

* North Peace Smokejumpers in Fort St. John, British Columbia
* Omenica Smokejumpers in Mackenzie, British Columbia

===United States===
The U.S. Forest Service (USFS) and Bureau of Land Management (BLM) house 320 smokejumpers yearly, across nine bases in the western third of the country, in Idaho (3), Montana (2), California, Oregon, Washington, and Alaska. In 2020, across all the bases, 1,130 jumps were executed, with a total of 5211 days spent on initial attack. As of August 2021, nine smokejumper crews operate in the United States; seven by the USFS and two by the BLM.

Operated by the U.S. Forest Service:
*NorthwestRedmond Smokejumpers in Redmond, Oregon; North Cascades Smokejumpers in Winthrop, Washington
*Northern CaliforniaRegion 5 Smokejumpers in Redding, California
*Northern RockiesMissoula Smokejumpers in Missoula, Montana; Grangeville Smokejumpers in Grangeville, Idaho; West Yellowstone Smokejumpers in West Yellowstone, Montana
*Great BasinMcCall Smokejumpers in McCall, Idaho

Operated by the Bureau of Land Management:
*Great BasinBoise Smokejumpers in Boise, Idaho
*AlaskaAlaska Smokejumpers in Fort Wainwright, Alaska

===Malaysia===
Pasukan Khas Udara Bomba (PASKUB) () is a command for elite Smokejumper with support of helicopters from JBPM Air Wing.

Smoke Jumpers Unit () is an elite unit of JBPM and trained in parachute insertion (static line and freefall), helicopter-borne operation and jungle survival. The formation of elite Smoke Jumper began in 2000 after JBPM sent five firefighters to enter the Basic Static Line Parachuting Course held at Royal Malaysian Air Force (RMAF) Sempang Air Force Base, Sungai Besi as the pioneer team Smoke Jumpers. The course was conducted by RMAF Special Operations Force, PASKAU until 2007 when JBPM established their own Static Ramp Air Course. Among the task of Smoke Jumper is:
* Combat Air Rescue Medic 
* Medical Evacuation (Medevac)
* Deep jungle/Isolated Area Firefighting Operations

Smoke Jumper enjoys good relations with Malaysian Armed Force Special Operations Forces as they always train with RMAF PASKAU, Malaysian Army Grup Gerak Khas from PULPAK and Royal Malaysian Police VAT 69 Commando. PASKUB members are selected from various units including STORM, MUST and EMRS.

== Equipment and gear ==

=== Aircraft ===
Smokejumping crews prefer the use of fixed wing aircraft rather than helicopters as they typically carry more passengers and larger payloads. At the Fort St. John base in British Columbia, Canada, modified DC-3 planes are used to carry thirteen jumpers and two spotters. 

CASA C-212 Aviocar airplanes are common for American crews as they possess rear ramps that are retractable as stated in a news article from 2023. However, in 2020 the main aircraft used by the USFS smokejumpers were SD3-60, B model, Sherpas. These represented seven of the nine agency owned aircraft that season.

Recently the United States have made advancements in paracargo technology that allows for supplies to be dropped with a high level of accuracy through low visibility settings such as night time and heavy smoke. This global positioning system (GPS) technology is called Joint Precision Air Drop System (JPADS).

=== Firefighting gear ===
A single crew of five to six smokejumpers in Canada will carry of hose, four heavy water pumps, four chainsaws, hand tools (Pulaski axes) and enough water for all crew members for 48 hours. These are all dropped with bound in a separate parachute drop. Additionally, tree climbing gear must be included in equipment drops as is possible for jumpers to become tangled in trees upon descent.

=== Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) ===

The main body of a Canadian smokejumpers PPE is a Kevlar suit to protect against the intense heat of fires, as well as sharp objects that may pierce the skin. Helmets are adorned with mesh face shields to maintain visibility while protecting the smokejumpers from branches and embers. Gear is designed to allow jumpers to free themselves if they become tangled in trees, and is designed to help firefighters to float should they land in a body of water. These standard design features for Canadian parattack crews run a cost of roughly $12,000 per crew member. However, there is the opportunity for jumpers to edit, alter, and ultimately add to their collection of gear. Many Canadian jumpers are known to use motocross gear or hockey pads in order to help soften the blows associated with landing a parachute in deeply forested territory.

American jumpsuits are fashioned using a blend of Kevlar and Nomex and serve similar functions to the aforementioned Canadian suits. These suits are crafted by the smokejumpers themselves using sewing supplies housed at each base. With only 400 suits needed yearly, it is not feasible to have them manufactured offshore or en masse. Just as with Canadian jumpers, Americans use hockey gear, motocross pads, and ski helmets to round out their kit. Each jumper dons roughly of gear for a single jump.

=== Survival gear ===
A significant portion of initial attack jumps take multiple days to control. On account of this, the payload deposited by aircraft include survival gear such as dried fruit, canned soup and beef jerky. Crews are equipped with shelters for sleep and sleeping bags.

==Safety record==

Despite the seemingly dangerous nature of the job, fatalities from jumping are infrequent, the best-known fatalities in the United States being those that occurred at the Mann Gulch fire in 1949 and the South Canyon Fire in 1994.

The Smokejumper Parachute Landing Injury Database and eSafety are the two databases used to record and collect data regarding smokejumper injuries in the United States. Serious and minor injuries are logged in this database depending on the many factors. Serious injuries are categorized as:

* Requiring hospitalization for greater than 48 hours,
* Bone fractures (excluding finger and toes),
* Severe hemorrhaging,
* Severe nerve, muscle or tendon damage,
* Burns covering more than 5% of the body
* Second and third degree burns

According to the 2020 National Smokejumper Program End of Year Summary published by the USFS, an American smokejumper in 2020 had a 99.75% chance of landing free of injury. This is attributed to the rigorous registry of injuries in the past 28 years, when these databases were created. By documenting the rate, severity, and cause of each incident, the USFS has been able to eliminate hazards and create better training.

Jump injuries are infrequent. The National Interagency Fire Center (NIFC) states injuries occur once for every 909 jumps - a rate of 0.11%. Smokejumper personnel take deliberate precautions before deciding whether to jump a particular fire. Multiple factors are analyzed, and then a decision is made as to whether jumping the fire is safe. Bases tend to look for highly motivated individuals who are in superior shape and have the ability to think independently and react to changing environments rapidly. Many smokejumpers have previous experience as hotshots, who provide a strong foundation of wildland firefighting experience and physical conditioning.

==Recruitment==
Prior to employment at a smokejumper in the United states, applicants are required to have one year of wildland firefighting experience as a minimum. It is said that competitive applicants range closer to three years of experience. Canadian recruitment errs towards a minimum of two years of prior wildland firefighting experience, with a preferred six to seven years.

=== Team members ===
In order to execute a single jump, the number of smokejumpers involved may vary from fire to fire and from country to country. However, in each case teams require multiple jumpers, two spotters, jumpers-in-command, and two pilots&#x27;. Spotters are specialized smokejumpers who make decisions prior to the jump. They assess fires from the air, determine the approximate landing site, and use paper streamers - dropped from the plane hatch - to measure wind speed. Jumpers-in-command are the initial jumpers. In a pair, they reach land first and report via radio the conditions of the landing site and authorize the secondary jump for remaining smokejumpers.

=== Physical fitness ===
The minimum required physical fitness standards for smokejumpers set by the National Wildfire Coordinating Group are: packout for within 90 minutes; run in 11 or fewer minutes; 25 push-ups in 60 seconds; 45 sit-ups in 60 seconds; and seven pull-ups.

==In popular culture (chronological)==
*The 1952 film &quot;Red Skies of Montana&quot; is loosley based on the Mann Gulch fire
*Smokejumpers are featured in the 1985 novel &quot;Wildfire&quot; by Richard Martin Stern
*The 1996 film &quot;Smoke Jumpers&quot; is loosely based on Don Mackey&#x27;s life. Mackey was a smokejumper and one of the 14 fatalities of the 1994 South Canyon fire. In the movie, he pursues job-related accolades while his marriage disintegrates.
*In the 2002 made-for-television movie &quot;SuperFire&quot;, a disgraced pilot joins a group of smokejumpers as they attempt to save a town from a raging wildfire. This film is recognised for its inaccurate description of smokejumper practices.
*In the television show &quot;Entourage&quot;, Vincent Chase lands a lead role in an action film called &quot;Smokejumpers&quot; in an episode airing in 2008.
*Smokejumpers are described in Philip Connor&#x27;s 2011 book &quot;Fire Season&quot;. 
*Author Nora Roberts&#x27;s 2011 novel &quot;Chasing Fire&quot; details the lives and loves of a group of smokejumpers at Missoula Smokejumper Base.
*Author M. L. Buchman&#x27;s &quot;Firehawks Smokejumpers Trilogy,&quot; published in 2014 and 2015&quot;,&quot; follows a team of fictitious Oregon-based smokejumpers.
*The 2019 American family comedy film &quot;Playing with Fire&quot; follows a group of smokejumpers who must watch over three children who have been separated from their parents following an accident. The film stars John Cena, Keegan-Michael Key, John Leguizamo, Brianna Hildebrand, Dennis Haysbert, and Judy Greer.

==See also==
*Wildland fire module
*Helitack
*National Smokejumper Association

==References==
==External links==

* California Smokejumpers Official Site.
* National Smokejumper Association (USA), including history
* US Forest Service - National Interagency Smokejumper Training Guide, including history (in PDF format)
* CPS Unit Number 103-01, World War II Smokejumpers
* Smokejumpers and Smokejumping: Information and Photos
* Spotfire Images: Quality Smokejumper and Fire Photos.
* Earl Cooley - Daily Telegraph obituary
* US Forest Service list of smokejumper bases
* Nick Sundt Smokejumpers Oral History Project (University of Montana Archives)
* Civilian Public Service Smokejumpers Oral History Project (University of Montana Archives)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q379497" start="2" end="13" title="Smokejumper" label="smokejumper"/>
<link wikidata="Q5659355" start="37" end="57" title="Wildfire suppression" label="wildland firefighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q169950" start="108" end="116" title="wildfire" label="wildfire"/>
<link wikidata="Q482816" start="164" end="173" title="parachute" label="parachute"/>
<link wikidata="Q17092522" start="752" end="764" title="hotshot crew" label="hotshot crew"/>
<link wikidata="Q829" start="2084" end="2088" title="Utah" label="Utah"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="2100" end="2112" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q15624835" start="2123" end="2142" title="aerial firefighting" label="aerial firefighting"/>
<link wikidata="Q3307375" start="2299" end="2312" title="Methow River" label="Methow Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1223" start="2314" end="2324" title="Washington (state)" label="Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q6047590" start="2504" end="2524" title="Intermountain West" label="Intermountain Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q7021532" start="2709" end="2734" title="Nez Perce National Forest" label="Nez Perce National Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q60739870" start="2907" end="2919" title="Payette Lake" label="Payette Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q612741" start="2942" end="2958" title="National forest (United States)" label="national forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q5130951" start="2972" end="2982" title="Clearwater National Forest" label="Clearwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q3609437" start="2984" end="2992" title="Sawtooth National Forest" label="Sawtooth"/>
<link wikidata="Q891075" start="2998" end="3003" title="Boise National Forest" label="Boise"/>
<link wikidata="Q14687276" start="3005" end="3012" title="Payette National Forest" label="Payette"/>
<link wikidata="Q7405481" start="3014" end="3028" title="Salmon–Challis National Forest" label="Salmon–Challis"/>
<link wikidata="Q525077" start="3034" end="3049" title="Wallowa-Whitman National Forest" label="Wallowa-Whitman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1505403" start="3107" end="3127" title="Winthrop, Washington" label="Winthrop, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094508" start="3161" end="3188" title="Civilian Conservation Corps" label="Civilian Conservation Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q622377" start="3274" end="3283" title="Pack animal" label="pack mule"/>
<link wikidata="Q4414546" start="3288" end="3302" title="Huson, Montana" label="Huson, Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q189602" start="3323" end="3331" title="Missoula, Montana" label="Missoula"/>
<link wikidata="Q5325802" start="3386" end="3397" title="Earl Cooley (smokejumper)" label="Earl Cooley"/>
<link wikidata="Q955887" start="3955" end="3981" title="Seeley Lake, Montana" label="Seeley Lake Ranger Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q2227595" start="4153" end="4163" title="Packhorse" label="pack mules"/>
<link wikidata="Q1928791" start="4533" end="4546" title="Cave Junction, Oregon" label="Cave Junction"/>
<link wikidata="Q955887" start="4708" end="4719" title="Seeley Lake, Montana" label="Seeley Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q711767" start="4745" end="4759" title="William C. Lee" label="William C. Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q165256" start="4838" end="4861" title="101st Airborne Division" label="101st Airborne Division"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4910" end="4917" title="United_States_Air_Force_Pararescue#Pre-World_War_II" label="trained"/>
<link wikidata="Q442272" start="5065" end="5075" title="United_States_Air_Force_Pararescue" label="Pararescue"/>
<link wikidata="Q4595819" start="5135" end="5160" title="19th Special Forces Group" label="19th Special Forces Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438462" start="5426" end="5436" title="Fort Moore" label="Fort Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q4640578" start="5467" end="5501" title="555th Parachute Infantry Battalion (United States)" label="555th Parachute Infantry Battalion"/>
<link wikidata="Q12606" start="5727" end="5758" title="West Coast of the United States" label="West Coast of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q55554851" start="5793" end="5811" title="incendiary balloon" label="incendiary balloon"/>
<link wikidata="Q188712" start="5825" end="5840" title="Empire of Japan" label="Japanese Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5330354" start="6011" end="6026" title="Eastern Oregon Regional Airport" label="Pendleton Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q432152" start="6057" end="6074" title="Chico, California" label="Chico, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q12603" start="6146" end="6163" title="Pacific Northwest" label="Pacific Northwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q3079111" start="6455" end="6477" title="Umpqua National Forest" label="Umpqua National Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q846170" start="6483" end="6499" title="Roseburg, Oregon" label="Roseburg, Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5124726" start="6600" end="6623" title="Civilian Public Service" label="Civilian Public Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516646" start="7692" end="7710" title="Grangeville, Idaho" label="Grangeville, Idaho"/>
<link wikidata="Q956110" start="7716" end="7741" title="West Yellowstone, Montana" label="West Yellowstone, Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1890554" start="8176" end="8191" title="Mann Gulch fire" label="Mann Gulch fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q38733" start="8225" end="8240" title="Helena, Montana" label="Helena, Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q5527136" start="8249" end="8271" title="Gates of the Mountains Wilderness" label="Gates of the Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419" start="8287" end="8301" title="Missouri River" label="Missouri River"/>
<link wikidata="Q736123" start="8495" end="8509" title="Norman Maclean" label="Norman Maclean"/>
<link wikidata="Q16983846" start="8551" end="8569" title="Young Men and Fire" label="Young Men and Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891156" start="8696" end="8724" title="United States Forest Service" label="United States Forest Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010556" start="8729" end="8754" title="Bureau of Land Management" label="Bureau of Land Management"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973" start="8768" end="8784" title="British Columbia" label="British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q121136" start="8920" end="8952" title="Aerial Forest Protection Service (Russia)" label="Aerial Forest Protection Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q43082492" start="9549" end="9568" title="BC Wildfire Service" label="BC Wildfire Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q332231" start="9700" end="9706" title="Abseiling" label="rappel"/>
<link wikidata="Q23021" start="9980" end="10011" title="Fort St. John, British Columbia" label="Fort St. John, British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6724341" start="10038" end="10065" title="Mackenzie, British Columbia" label="Mackenzie, British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1221" start="10243" end="10248" title="Idaho" label="Idaho"/>
<link wikidata="Q1212" start="10254" end="10261" title="Montana" label="Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="10267" end="10277" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q824" start="10279" end="10285" title="Oregon" label="Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1223" start="10287" end="10297" title="Washington (state)" label="Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="10303" end="10309" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650600" start="10602" end="10617" title="Redmond, Oregon" label="Redmond, Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1505403" start="10650" end="10670" title="Winthrop, Washington" label="Winthrop, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q495361" start="10716" end="10735" title="Redding, California" label="Redding, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q189602" start="10778" end="10795" title="Missoula, Montana" label="Missoula, Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516646" start="10825" end="10843" title="Grangeville, Idaho" label="Grangeville, Idaho"/>
<link wikidata="Q956110" start="10878" end="10903" title="West Yellowstone, Montana" label="West Yellowstone, Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q377741" start="10939" end="10952" title="McCall, Idaho" label="McCall, Idaho"/>
<link wikidata="Q35775" start="11031" end="11043" title="Boise, Idaho" label="Boise, Idaho"/>
<link wikidata="Q3748479" start="11074" end="11097" title="Fort Wainwright" label="Fort Wainwright, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q379497" start="11174" end="11185" title="Smokejumper" label="Smokejumper"/>
<link wikidata="Q13646141" start="11277" end="11281" title="Fire and Rescue Department of Malaysia" label="JBPM"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142298" start="11490" end="11519" title="Static line" label="Basic Static Line Parachuting"/>
<link wikidata="Q224577" start="11535" end="11567" title="Royal Malaysian Air Force" label="Royal Malaysian Air Force (RMAF)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1082819" start="11568" end="11590" title="Simpang Airport" label="Sempang Air Force Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q7640126" start="11592" end="11603" title="Sungai Besi" label="Sungai Besi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7118249" start="11698" end="11704" title="PASKAU" label="PASKAU"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783447" start="11748" end="11763" title="Ram Air Progression System" label="Static Ramp Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q655177" start="11836" end="11864" title="Medical evacuation" label="Medical Evacuation (Medevac)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073939" start="11958" end="11979" title="Malaysian Armed Forces" label="Malaysian Armed Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1533593" start="12045" end="12059" title="Malaysian Army" label="Malaysian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q109536094" start="12060" end="12075" title="Grup Gerak Khas" label="Grup Gerak Khas"/>
<link wikidata="Q30602836" start="12081" end="12087" title="Special Warfare Training Centre (Malaysia)" label="PULPAK"/>
<link wikidata="Q1664804" start="12092" end="12114" title="Royal Malaysia Police" label="Royal Malaysian Police"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12115" end="12130" title="Pasukan Gerakan Khas#VAT 69" label="VAT 69 Commando"/>
<link wikidata="Q23021" start="12404" end="12417" title="Fort St. John, British Columbia" label="Fort St. John"/>
<link wikidata="Q190211" start="12461" end="12465" title="Douglas DC-3" label="DC-3"/>
<link wikidata="Q6497" start="12528" end="12546" title="CASA C-212 Aviocar" label="CASA C-212 Aviocar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2032926" start="12761" end="12768" title="Short C-23 Sherpa" label="Sherpas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6269327" start="13111" end="13142" title="Joint Precision Airdrop System" label="Joint Precision Air Drop System"/>
<link wikidata="Q7259192" start="13303" end="13315" title="Pulaski (tool)" label="Pulaski axes"/>
<link wikidata="Q207344" start="13665" end="13671" title="Kevlar" label="Kevlar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2319815" start="14517" end="14522" title="Nomex" label="Nomex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072897" start="15173" end="15178" title="jerky" label="jerky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1890554" start="15433" end="15448" title="Mann Gulch fire" label="Mann Gulch fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7566504" start="15465" end="15482" title="South Canyon Fire" label="South Canyon Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891156" start="16114" end="16118" title="United States Forest Service" label="USFS"/>
<link wikidata="Q3336900" start="16482" end="16514" title="National Interagency Fire Center" label="National Interagency Fire Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q17092522" start="17000" end="17008" title="Hotshot crew" label="hotshots"/>
<link wikidata="Q6979416" start="18274" end="18310" title="National Wildfire Coordinating Group" label="National Wildfire Coordinating Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q694512" start="18509" end="18529" title="Red Skies of Montana" label="Red Skies of Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416142" start="18645" end="18665" title="Richard Martin Stern" label="Richard Martin Stern"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18962" end="18971" title="SuperFire (film)" label="SuperFire"/>
<link wikidata="Q253205" start="19193" end="19202" title="Entourage (American TV series)" label="Entourage"/>
<link wikidata="Q3559533" start="19210" end="19223" title="Vincent Chase" label="Vincent Chase"/>
<link wikidata="Q16745391" start="19567" end="19587" title="M. L. Buchman" label="M. L. Buchman&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q61774239" start="19772" end="19789" title="Playing with Fire (2019 film)" label="Playing with Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451673" start="20059" end="20079" title="Wildland fire module" label="Wildland fire module"/>
<link wikidata="Q113500765" start="20081" end="20089" title="Helitack" label="Helitack"/>
<link wikidata="Q6978470" start="20091" end="20123" title="National Smokejumper Association" label="National Smokejumper Association"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="311749" wikidata="Q2049847" url="?curid=311749" title="Wong">
<text>Wong or Mr Wong may refer to:
==Name==
* Wong (surname), a Chinese surname, listing people and fictional characters with the surname
* Wong (Marvel Comics), manservant/mentor to Doctor Strange Sr./Jr. in Marvel Comics
** Wong (Marvel Cinematic Universe), the portrayal of the character in the Marvel Cinematic Universe
* Mr. Wong (fictional detective), in short stories created by Hugh Wiley
* Mr. Wong, a &quot;Coronation Street&quot; character
* Won-G (born 1978), Haitian rapper

==Arts and entertainment==
* &quot;Mr. Wong&quot; (web series), an internet television series
* &quot;Mr. Wong, Detective&quot;, a 1938 American crime film 
* &quot;Mr. Wong&quot;, a 1963 Filipino film starring Chiquito

==Businesses and organisations==
* WONG, a radio station (1150 AM) in Canton, Mississippi, USA
* Wong (supermarket), a supermarket chain in Peru
* Mister Wong, a social bookmarking website

==See also==

* Huang (disambiguation)
* Wang (disambiguation)
* Ng (name)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2049847" start="0" end="4" title="Wong" label="Wong"/>
<link wikidata="Q2049847" start="8" end="15" title="Wong" label="Mr Wong"/>
<link wikidata="Q16242398" start="41" end="55" title="Wong (surname)" label="Wong (surname)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4357278" start="135" end="155" title="Wong (Marvel Comics)" label="Wong (Marvel Comics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q24045752" start="221" end="253" title="Wong (Marvel Cinematic Universe)" label="Wong (Marvel Cinematic Universe)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16924420" start="321" end="351" title="Mr. Wong (fictional detective)" label="Mr. Wong (fictional detective)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="406" end="445" title="List of Coronation Street characters (2005)#Mr. Wong" label="&amp;quot;Coronation Street&amp;quot; character"/>
<link wikidata="Q8031670" start="448" end="453" title="Won-G" label="Won-G"/>
<link wikidata="Q6929307" start="512" end="545" title="Mr. Wong (web series)" label="&amp;quot;Mr. Wong&amp;quot; (web series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q12126324" start="585" end="604" title="Mr. Wong, Detective" label="Mr. Wong, Detective"/>
<link wikidata="Q3549261" start="694" end="702" title="Chiquito (actor)" label="Chiquito"/>
<link wikidata="Q7953918" start="739" end="743" title="WONG" label="WONG"/>
<link wikidata="Q28604866" start="801" end="819" title="Wong (supermarket)" label="Wong (supermarket)"/>
<link wikidata="Q571490" start="851" end="862" title="Mister Wong" label="Mister Wong"/>
<link wikidata="Q421252" start="910" end="932" title="Huang (disambiguation)" label="Huang (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q296599" start="935" end="956" title="Wang (disambiguation)" label="Wang (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q37188616" start="959" end="968" title="Ng (name)" label="Ng (name)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="311752" wikidata="Q380238" url="?curid=311752" title="Shin Bet">
<text>The Israel Security Agency (ISA; (GSS); ), better known by the acronyms Shabak (; ; ) or Shin Bet (from the abbreviation of , &quot;Security Service&quot;), is Israel&#x27;s internal security service. Its motto is &quot;Magen v&#x27;lo Yera&#x27;eh&quot; (). The Shin Bet&#x27;s headquarters are located in northwest Tel Aviv, north of Yarkon Park.

It is one of three principal organizations of the Israeli Intelligence Community, alongside Aman (military intelligence) and Mossad (foreign intelligence service).

==Organization==
Shabak is believed to have three operational wings:
;The Arab Department: responsible primarily for Arab-related counterterrorism activities in Israel, the West Bank, and the Gaza Strip.
;The Israel and Foreigners Department: formerly named the Non-Arab Affairs Department. It includes the Department for Counter-intelligence and Prevention of Subversion in the Jewish Sector, also known as the &quot;Jewish Department&quot;. It is responsible for preventing espionage, and for dealing with extremists who carry out actions (such as terrorism) against the state and the democratic regime. As its original concerns mostly related to the Communist Bloc, it shrank after the fall of the Soviet Union, but rose again in importance in response to Jewish terrorist activity that began in the early 1980s.
;The Protective Security Department: responsible for protecting high-value individuals and locations in the country such as government officials, embassies, airports, and research facilities.

Although a security agency, it is not a part of the Israeli Ministry of Defense, and its chief answers directly to the Prime Minister of Israel.

==Duties and roles==
Shabak&#x27;s duties are safeguarding state security, exposing terrorist rings, interrogating terror suspects, providing intelligence for counter-terrorism operations in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip, counter-espionage, personal protection of senior public officials, securing important infrastructure and government buildings, and safeguarding Israeli airlines and overseas embassies.

==History==
With the Israeli declaration of independence in 1948, the Shabak was founded as a branch of the Israel Defense Forces and was initially headed by Isser Harel (the father of Israeli Intelligence, who later headed the Mossad). Responsibility for Shabak activity was later moved from the IDF to the office of the prime minister. During the 1948 Arab–Israeli war, Shabak&#x27;s responsibilities included only internal security affairs. In February 1949 (a short while before the end of the war), its responsibilities were extended to counter-espionage.

One of the Shabak&#x27;s leading successes was obtaining a copy of the secret speech made by Nikita Khrushchev in 1956, in which he denounced Stalin. A Polish edition of the speech was provided to the Israeli embassy in Warsaw by the boyfriend of the secretary of a Polish communist official. The Shabak&#x27;s Polish liaison officer conveyed the copy to Israel. The Israeli government then decided to share the information with the United States, which published it with Israeli approval. On the other hand, a study published in 2013 by Matitiahu Mayzel casts doubt on the story, arguing that the speech was not secret and that it was conveyed to the West by multiple sources, including Soviet political and intelligence agencies.

A notable achievement in counter-espionage was the 1961 capture of Israel Beer, who was revealed to be a Soviet spy. Beer was a lieutenant colonel in the reserves, a senior security commentator and close friend of Ben-Gurion and reached high Israeli circles. Beer was tried and sentenced to ten years in prison (later extended by the Supreme Court to fifteen years, following his appeal), where he died. A year before, Kurt Sitte, a Christian German from the Sudetenland and a professor in the Technion, was revealed as a Czechoslovakian spy.

In 1967, an Egyptian-Israeli double agent, Refaat Al-Gammal, gave Egypt false information about Israel&#x27;s battle plans, claiming it would begin with ground operations. The Egyptians thus left their aircraft on open runways, which enabled the Israel Air Force to knock out Egypt&#x27;s air force within three hours of the outbreak of the Six-Day War. Operation Yated, as it was later known, is considered one of the most successful deceptions in Israeli intelligence history, on a par with Britain&#x27;s Operation Mincemeat during World War II.

After the war, monitoring terrorist activity in the West Bank and Gaza Strip became a major part of Shabak&#x27;s mission. During 1984–1986, Shabak experienced a major crisis following the Kav 300 affair in which four Palestinian militants hijacked a bus. Two of the hijackers were killed in the ensuing standoff and the other two were killed shortly after being taken into custody by Shabak officers, who later covered up the event and conspired to frame a senior IDF officer. Following the affair, Shabak head Avraham Shalom was forced to resign.

The 1987 Landau Commission, set up to investigate Shabak interrogation methods, criticized the organization and established guidelines to regulate what forms of physical pressure could be used on prisoners. Among the practices authorised were &quot;keeping prisoners in excruciatingly uncomfortable postures, covering their heads with filthy and malodorous sacks and depriving them of sleep.&quot; Human rights groups in Israel maintained that this amounts to torture. A 1995 official report by Miriam Ben-Porat, made public in 2000, showed that Shin Bet &quot;routinely&quot; went beyond the &quot;moderate physical pressure&quot; authorised by the Landau Commission. In the report, Israel admitted for the first time that Palestinian detainees were tortured during the First Intifada, between 1988 and 1992.

In 1995, the Shin Bet failed to protect the Israeli prime minister, Yitzhak Rabin, who was assassinated by right-wing Israeli radical Yigal Amir. Shin Bet had discovered Amir&#x27;s plans, and a Shin Bet agent was sent to monitor Amir, and reported that Amir was not a threat. Following the assassination, the Shabak director, Carmi Gillon, resigned preemptively. Later, the Shamgar Commission pointed to serious flaws in the personal security unit. Another source of embarrassment and criticism was the violent, provocative and inciting behavior of Avishai Raviv, an informer of the Shabak&#x27;s Jewish Unit during the time leading up to the assassination. Later, Raviv was acquitted of the charges that he encouraged Yigal Amir to kill Yitzhak Rabin.

A few months after the Rabin assassination, Hamas chief bombmaker Yahya Ayyash was assassinated in a targeted killing in which an explosive device was planted in his cellular phone.

Gillon was replaced by Israeli Navy admiral Ami Ayalon, who helped to restore the organizational morale, after the debacle of the Rabin assassination, and to rehabilitate its public image.

In 2000, Ayalon was replaced by Avi Dichter, an ex-Sayeret Matkal commando and experienced Shabak agent, who tightened the working relationship with the Israel Defense Forces and Israeli police. Dichter was in charge when the al-Aqsa Intifada erupted. He turned Shabak into a prominent player in the war on terrorism after the collapse of the 2000 Camp David Summit.

In November 2003, four former heads of Shabak (Avraham Shalom, Yaakov Peri, Carmi Gillon and Ami Ayalon) called upon the Government of Israel to reach a peace agreement with the Palestinians.

In May 2005, Dichter was replaced by Yuval Diskin, who served until 2011.

In 2007, the service launched its first-ever public recruitment drive, unveiling a &quot;slick Website&quot; and buying on-line ads in Israel and abroad in a campaign aimed at &quot;attract[ing] top-tier computer programmers&quot; to its &quot;cutting-edge&quot; IT division. On March 18, 2008, it was announced that Shabak&#x27;s official website would also offer a blog, where four of its agents would discuss anonymously how they were recruited, and what sort of work they perform; they would also answer questions sent in by members of the public. The decision to launch the blog was made by the Shin Bet&#x27;s top brass, including head Yuval Diskin, and is part of an attempt to attract high-tech workers to the agency&#x27;s growing IT department. According to Shabak officers, the Web site and blog are aimed also at promoting a more accessible and positive public image for the secret service, long associated with &quot;dark, undercover and even violent activity&quot;.

In 2011, Yoram Cohen was chosen as the new head of Shabak, and served until 2016.

In 2016, Nadav Argaman was chosen as the new head of Shabak, and assumed office on 8 May 2016.

On 11 October 2021, Ronen Bar was announced as the next head of the ISA, and took office on 13 October.

On 16 October 2023, following the successful surprise attacks by Hamas against Israel and the subsequent outbreak of the 2023 Israel–Hamas war, ISA director Ronen Bar took responsibility for his role in the failure of Israeli intelligence to predict the oncoming war from Gaza.

In August 2024, ISA director, Ronen Bar wrote to Israeli Prime Minister, Benjamin Netanyahu warning that Israel&#x27;s existence is threatened by Jewish terrorism, following Jewish settler riots and attacks on Palestinian villages on the West Bank.

===Accountability===
Former Shin Bet director special assistant Barak Ben-Zur said that since 1948 (or more particularly 1957) the group has been brought under the control of the Knesset in order to monitor its budget. In May 2002, Shin Bet was brought under the purview of the Knesset Foreign and Security Committee, which could investigate whether it is working within legal boundaries which, in turn, involves the Constitution, Law and Justice Committee. The government legal adviser approves Shin Bet activities while the Political-Security Cabinet receives reports directly from the Shin Bet director and ensures that every detainee has the right to submit a complaint.

==Information gathering, interrogation methods and torture==
Shabak also extracts information by interrogating suspects, and there is a history of concern over its methods. In 1987, after complaints about excessive use of violence, the Landau Commission drew up guidelines condoning &quot;moderate physical pressure&quot; when necessary, but in 1994, State Comptroller Miriam Ben-Porat found that these regulations were violated and senior GSS commanders did not prevent it.

Later, in 1999, the Israeli Supreme Court heard several petitions against Shabak methods, including (1) &quot;forceful and repeated shaking of the suspect&#x27;s upper torso, in a manner which causes the neck and head to swing rapidly,&quot; (2) manacling of the suspect in a painful &quot;Shabach position&quot; for a long period of time, (3) the &quot;frog crouch&quot; consisting of &quot;consecutive, periodical crouches on the tips of one&#x27;s toes,&quot; and other methods. The Court ruled that Shabak did not have the authority, even under the defense of &quot;necessity,&quot; to employ such methods. This ruling was hailed as landmark against using torture on Palestinian prisoners.

Shabak claims it now uses only psychological means, although B&#x27;Tselem and Amnesty International continue to accuse Shabak of employing physical methods that amount to torture under international conventions. In 2015, Physicians for Human Rights–Israel noted that petitions against Shin Bet had quadrupled since 2012, and claimed that over the past several years of 850 complaints against Shin Bet for torture none had yet been investigated. It further claimed that no system of legal redress against security organizations is in place.

Shabak has also worked closely with the Israeli Air Force in &quot;targeted killings&quot; of field commanders and senior leaders of Palestinian militant factions of Hamas, the Islamic Jihad, the Al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigades, and Fatah. These killings are usually done by helicopter gunships. Both the IAF commanders and Shabak agents sit together in the command center to monitor the operations. Shabak&#x27;s task is to give intelligence about when and where the target will be available for a strike and then react to IAF drone feedback to ensure the men at the location are indeed the correct targets.

===Detentions===
Salah Haj Yihyeh, a Palestinian who runs mobile clinics for Physicians for Human Rights, was detained for questioning by the Shin Bet. In the questioning, Yihyeh answered questions about the activities of the organization, its budget, the identity of its donors, and details about others employed by PHR. The board of Physicians for Human Rights, in a letter to Shin Bet chief Yuval Diskin, rejected the &quot;crossing of a red line in a democracy.&quot; The letter argued that since the only cause for calling an employee of the group was to scare him, the tactics were unacceptable and illegal.

Palestinian journalist Mohammed Omer was detained in July 2008 by Shin Bet. Having arrived on a flight from London, Omer says that he was taken aside by a Shin Bet official. According to &quot;Democracy Now!&quot;, Omer was later questioned, strip-searched, and then beaten by eight armed Shin Bet officers. Injuries from the ordeal allegedly left Mohammed Omer in the hospital for a week. The Israeli government rejected Omer&#x27;s claims outright, citing inconsistencies in his allegations and noting that such investigations are strictly regulated.

== Shin Bet in popular culture ==

In 2012, six former heads of the Shabak (Shalom, Peri, Gillon, Ayalon, Dichter, and Diskin) featured in a documentary film, &quot;The Gatekeepers&quot;, and discussed the main events of their tenures.

An undercover Shin Bet agent appears in &quot;Tom Clancy&#x27;s Splinter Cell: Pandora Tomorrow&quot; as a supporting character. 

In &quot;Messiah&quot;, Tomer Sisley plays Aviram Dahan, a Shin Bet operative who is fighting terrorism to protect his country.

In &quot;Munich&quot;, Mathieu Kassovitz plays Robert, a Belgian toy-maker and explosives expert, who worked for Shin Bet as a bomb dismantler.

The film &quot;The Engineer&quot; follows the Shin Bet operation to assassinate Hamas bombmaker Yahya Ayyash.

==Shabak directors==
* Isser Harel (1948–1952)
* Izi Dorot (1952–1953)
* Amos Manor (1953–1963)
* Yossef Harmelin (1964–1974)
* Avraham Ahituv (1974–1981)
* Avraham Shalom (1981–1986)
* Yossef Harmelin (1986–1988)
* Yaakov Peri (1988–1994)
* Carmi Gillon (1995–1996)
* Ami Ayalon (1996–2000)
* Avi Dichter (2000–2005)
* Yuval Diskin (2005–2011)
* Yoram Cohen (2011–2016)
* Nadav Argaman (2016–2021)
* Ronen Bar (2021–present)

==See also==
* Administration of Border Crossings, Population and Immigration
* Aliyah Bet
* Israel Border Police
* Israel Security Forces
* Yamam

==References==
==External links==
* Profile: Israel&#x27;s Shin Bet agency, BBC News
* Text of the 1999 High Court of Justice ruling (PDF)
* B&#x27;tselem report on Shabak&#x27;s use of torture
* &quot;Inside Shin Bet&quot; video documentary by Al Jazeera
* Knesset said &quot;No&quot; to Shabak
* Photos</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q380238" start="4" end="26" title="Shin Bet" label="Israel Security Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q380238" start="28" end="31" title="Shin Bet" label="ISA"/>
<link wikidata="Q16148801" start="63" end="71" title="Hebrew acronyms" label="acronyms"/>
<link wikidata="Q380238" start="72" end="78" title="Shin Bet" label="Shabak"/>
<link wikidata="Q380238" start="89" end="97" title="Shin Bet" label="Shin Bet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3238445" start="183" end="199" title="Security agency" label="security service"/>
<link wikidata="Q33935" start="317" end="325" title="Tel Aviv" label="Tel Aviv"/>
<link wikidata="Q1683522" start="336" end="347" title="Yarkon Park" label="Yarkon Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q2656328" start="400" end="430" title="Israeli Intelligence Community" label="Israeli Intelligence Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q453558" start="442" end="446" title="Military Intelligence Directorate (Israel)" label="Aman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4168000" start="448" end="469" title="military intelligence" label="military intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q34216" start="475" end="481" title="Mossad" label="Mossad"/>
<link wikidata="Q909459" start="645" end="661" title="counterterrorism" label="counterterrorism"/>
<link wikidata="Q36678" start="688" end="697" title="West Bank" label="West Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q39760" start="707" end="717" title="Gaza Strip" label="Gaza Strip"/>
<link wikidata="Q2614401" start="1102" end="1119" title="Jewish and democratic state" label="democratic regime"/>
<link wikidata="Q170541" start="1168" end="1182" title="Communist Bloc" label="Communist Bloc"/>
<link wikidata="Q5167679" start="1204" end="1228" title="Dissolution of the Soviet Union" label="fall of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1862884" start="1576" end="1603" title="Israeli Ministry of Defense" label="Israeli Ministry of Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q208487" start="1643" end="1667" title="Prime Minister of Israel" label="Prime Minister of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7283" start="1754" end="1763" title="terrorism" label="terrorist"/>
<link wikidata="Q4168000" start="1812" end="1824" title="military intelligence" label="intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q909459" start="1829" end="1846" title="counter-terrorism" label="counter-terrorism"/>
<link wikidata="Q36678" start="1865" end="1874" title="West Bank" label="West Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q39760" start="1883" end="1893" title="Gaza Strip" label="Gaza Strip"/>
<link wikidata="Q501700" start="1895" end="1912" title="counter-espionage" label="counter-espionage"/>
<link wikidata="Q213283" start="2069" end="2078" title="embassy" label="embassies"/>
<link wikidata="Q223732" start="2102" end="2137" title="Israeli Declaration of Independence" label="Israeli declaration of independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q350744" start="2239" end="2250" title="Isser Harel" label="Isser Harel"/>
<link wikidata="Q34216" start="2309" end="2315" title="Mossad" label="Mossad"/>
<link wikidata="Q49092" start="2430" end="2451" title="1948 Arab–Israeli war" label="1948 Arab–Israeli war"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165372" start="2714" end="2727" title="On the Personality Cult and its Consequences" label="secret speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q35314" start="2736" end="2753" title="Nikita Khrushchev" label="Nikita Khrushchev"/>
<link wikidata="Q270" start="2863" end="2869" title="Warsaw" label="Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q382322" start="3443" end="3454" title="Israel Beer" label="Israel Beer"/>
<link wikidata="Q165950" start="3488" end="3491" title="Espionage" label="spy"/>
<link wikidata="Q493898" start="3504" end="3522" title="lieutenant colonel" label="lieutenant colonel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7057796" start="3795" end="3805" title="Kurt Sitte" label="Kurt Sitte"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="3809" end="3818" title="Christianity" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q194242" start="3835" end="3846" title="Sudetenland" label="Sudetenland"/>
<link wikidata="Q121594" start="3853" end="3862" title="professor" label="professor"/>
<link wikidata="Q333705" start="3870" end="3878" title="Technion – Israel Institute of Technology" label="Technion"/>
<link wikidata="Q33946" start="3898" end="3912" title="Czechoslovakia" label="Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920700" start="3963" end="3979" title="Refaat Al-Gammal" label="Refaat Al-Gammal"/>
<link wikidata="Q462211" start="4166" end="4182" title="Israel Air Force" label="Israel Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q63863" start="4186" end="4195" title="Operation Focus" label="knock out"/>
<link wikidata="Q49077" start="4261" end="4272" title="Six-Day War" label="Six-Day War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130522" start="4428" end="4447" title="Operation Mincemeat" label="Operation Mincemeat"/>
<link wikidata="Q36678" start="4522" end="4531" title="West Bank" label="West Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q39760" start="4536" end="4546" title="Gaza Strip" label="Gaza Strip"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031150" start="4659" end="4673" title="Kav 300 affair" label="Kav 300 affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q58967" start="4935" end="4938" title="Israel Defense Forces" label="IDF"/>
<link wikidata="Q3828691" start="4982" end="4996" title="Avraham Shalom" label="Avraham Shalom"/>
<link wikidata="Q6484319" start="5029" end="5046" title="Landau Commission" label="Landau Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q132781" start="5480" end="5487" title="torture" label="torture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2907460" start="5515" end="5531" title="Miriam Ben-Porat" label="Miriam Ben-Porat"/>
<link wikidata="Q49105" start="5791" end="5805" title="First Intifada" label="First Intifada"/>
<link wikidata="Q34060" start="5899" end="5912" title="Yitzhak Rabin" label="Yitzhak Rabin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2608162" start="5922" end="5934" title="assassination of Yitzhak Rabin" label="assassinated"/>
<link wikidata="Q319029" start="5965" end="5975" title="Yigal Amir" label="Yigal Amir"/>
<link wikidata="Q2911848" start="6158" end="6170" title="Carmi Gillon" label="Carmi Gillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7487534" start="6206" end="6224" title="Shamgar Commission" label="Shamgar Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q4828979" start="6381" end="6394" title="Avishai Raviv" label="Avishai Raviv"/>
<link wikidata="Q165950" start="6399" end="6407" title="espionage" label="informer"/>
<link wikidata="Q319029" start="6551" end="6561" title="Yigal Amir" label="Yigal Amir"/>
<link wikidata="Q2019221" start="6652" end="6664" title="Yahya Ayyash" label="Yahya Ayyash"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642263" start="6687" end="6703" title="targeted killing" label="targeted killing"/>
<link wikidata="Q17517" start="6752" end="6766" title="cellular phone" label="cellular phone"/>
<link wikidata="Q510534" start="6792" end="6804" title="Israeli Navy" label="Israeli Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q132851" start="6805" end="6812" title="admiral" label="admiral"/>
<link wikidata="Q470654" start="6813" end="6823" title="Ami Ayalon" label="Ami Ayalon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1465318" start="6866" end="6872" title="morale" label="morale"/>
<link wikidata="Q790699" start="6991" end="7002" title="Avi Dichter" label="Avi Dichter"/>
<link wikidata="Q927370" start="7010" end="7024" title="Sayeret Matkal" label="Sayeret Matkal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780133" start="7025" end="7033" title="commando" label="commando"/>
<link wikidata="Q594444" start="7138" end="7152" title="Israeli police" label="Israeli police"/>
<link wikidata="Q49106" start="7185" end="7201" title="al-Aqsa Intifada" label="al-Aqsa Intifada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029825" start="7302" end="7324" title="2000 Camp David Summit" label="2000 Camp David Summit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3828691" start="7374" end="7388" title="Avraham Shalom" label="Avraham Shalom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2909958" start="7390" end="7401" title="Yaakov Peri" label="Yaakov Peri"/>
<link wikidata="Q2585691" start="7557" end="7569" title="Yuval Diskin" label="Yuval Diskin"/>
<link wikidata="Q30849" start="7962" end="7966" title="blog" label="blog"/>
<link wikidata="Q2585691" start="8237" end="8249" title="Yuval Diskin" label="Yuval Diskin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2585671" start="8585" end="8596" title="Yoram Cohen" label="Yoram Cohen"/>
<link wikidata="Q22764255" start="8668" end="8681" title="Nadav Argaman" label="Nadav Argaman"/>
<link wikidata="Q108367051" start="8775" end="8784" title="Ronen Bar" label="Ronen Bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q122976243" start="8894" end="8945" title="2023 Hamas attack on Israel" label="successful surprise attacks by Hamas against Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q122962941" start="8981" end="9002" title="2023 Israel–Hamas war" label="2023 Israel–Hamas war"/>
<link wikidata="Q108367051" start="9017" end="9026" title="Ronen Bar" label="Ronen Bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q108367051" start="9169" end="9178" title="Ronen Bar" label="Ronen Bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q43723" start="9212" end="9230" title="Benjamin Netanyahu" label="Benjamin Netanyahu"/>
<link wikidata="Q36678" start="9377" end="9386" title="West Bank" label="West Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q4184899" start="9806" end="9845" title="Constitution, Law and Justice Committee" label="Constitution, Law and Justice Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q327018" start="10162" end="10175" title="interrogation" label="interrogating"/>
<link wikidata="Q6484319" start="10301" end="10318" title="Landau Commission" label="Landau Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q2907460" start="10434" end="10450" title="Miriam Ben-Porat" label="Miriam Ben-Porat"/>
<link wikidata="Q399798" start="10561" end="10582" title="Supreme Court of Israel" label="Israeli Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334053" start="11297" end="11310" title="B&amp;#x27;Tselem" label="B&amp;#x27;Tselem"/>
<link wikidata="Q42970" start="11315" end="11336" title="Amnesty International" label="Amnesty International"/>
<link wikidata="Q7189677" start="11458" end="11492" title="Physicians for Human Rights–Israel" label="Physicians for Human Rights–Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q462211" start="11818" end="11835" title="Israeli Air Force" label="Israeli Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642263" start="11845" end="11862" title="targeted killings" label="targeted killings"/>
<link wikidata="Q38799" start="11944" end="11949" title="Hamas" label="Hamas"/>
<link wikidata="Q117907" start="11955" end="11968" title="Palestinian Islamic Jihad" label="Islamic Jihad"/>
<link wikidata="Q309474" start="11974" end="11998" title="Al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigades" label="Al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigades"/>
<link wikidata="Q178888" start="12004" end="12009" title="Fatah" label="Fatah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316223" start="12046" end="12064" title="helicopter gunship" label="helicopter gunship"/>
<link wikidata="Q484000" start="12299" end="12304" title="Unmanned aerial vehicle" label="drone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7189673" start="12458" end="12485" title="Physicians for Human Rights" label="Physicians for Human Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q3073490" start="13019" end="13032" title="Mohammed Omer (journalist)" label="Mohammed Omer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185824" start="13189" end="13203" title="Democracy Now!" label="Democracy Now!"/>
<link wikidata="Q2891056" start="13715" end="13730" title="The Gatekeepers (documentary film)" label="The Gatekeepers"/>
<link wikidata="" start="13833" end="13882" title="Tom Clancy&amp;#x27;s Splinter Cell: Pandora Tomorrow" label="Tom Clancy&amp;#x27;s Splinter Cell: Pandora Tomorrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q48816399" start="13921" end="13940" title="Messiah (American TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Messiah&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108449" start="13942" end="13954" title="Tomer Sisley" label="Tomer Sisley"/>
<link wikidata="Q152456" start="14050" end="14068" title="Munich (2005 film)" label="&amp;quot;Munich&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q491766" start="14070" end="14087" title="Mathieu Kassovitz" label="Mathieu Kassovitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q123085101" start="14201" end="14225" title="The Engineer (film)" label="&amp;quot;The Engineer&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q38799" start="14272" end="14277" title="Hamas" label="Hamas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2019221" start="14288" end="14300" title="Yahya Ayyash" label="Yahya Ayyash"/>
<link wikidata="Q350744" start="14326" end="14337" title="Isser Harel" label="Isser Harel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2910416" start="14352" end="14361" title="Izi Dorot" label="Izi Dorot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658582" start="14376" end="14386" title="Amos Manor" label="Amos Manor"/>
<link wikidata="Q554617" start="14401" end="14416" title="Yossef Harmelin" label="Yossef Harmelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2907844" start="14431" end="14445" title="Avraham Ahituv" label="Avraham Ahituv"/>
<link wikidata="Q3828691" start="14460" end="14474" title="Avraham Shalom" label="Avraham Shalom"/>
<link wikidata="Q554617" start="14489" end="14504" title="Yossef Harmelin" label="Yossef Harmelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2909958" start="14519" end="14530" title="Yaakov Peri" label="Yaakov Peri"/>
<link wikidata="Q2911848" start="14545" end="14557" title="Carmi Gillon" label="Carmi Gillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q470654" start="14572" end="14582" title="Ami Ayalon" label="Ami Ayalon"/>
<link wikidata="Q790699" start="14597" end="14608" title="Avi Dichter" label="Avi Dichter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2585691" start="14623" end="14635" title="Yuval Diskin" label="Yuval Diskin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2585671" start="14650" end="14661" title="Yoram Cohen" label="Yoram Cohen"/>
<link wikidata="Q22764255" start="14676" end="14689" title="Nadav Argaman" label="Nadav Argaman"/>
<link wikidata="Q108367051" start="14704" end="14713" title="Ronen Bar" label="Ronen Bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4589155" start="14745" end="14807" title="Administration of Border Crossings, Population and Immigration" label="Administration of Border Crossings, Population and Immigration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1305697" start="14810" end="14820" title="Aliyah Bet" label="Aliyah Bet"/>
<link wikidata="Q74484" start="14823" end="14843" title="Israel Border Police" label="Israel Border Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q2447722" start="14846" end="14868" title="Israel Security Forces" label="Israel Security Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q63847" start="14871" end="14876" title="Yamam" label="Yamam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160945" start="14954" end="14962" title="BBC News" label="BBC News"/>
<link wikidata="Q13477" start="15123" end="15133" title="Al Jazeera Arabic" label="Al Jazeera"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="311753" wikidata="Q845104" url="?curid=311753" title="Huang (surname)">
<text>Huang (; ) is a Chinese surname. While &quot;Huáng&quot; is the pinyin romanization of the word, it may also be romanized as Hwang, Wong, Waan, Wan, Waon, Hwong, Vong, Hung, Hong, Bong, Eng, Ng, Uy, Wee, Oi, Oei, Oey, Ooi, Ong, or Ung due to pronunciations of the word in different dialects and languages. It is the 96th name on the &quot;Hundred Family Surnames&quot; poem.

This surname is known as [[Hwang (Korean name)|Hwang]] in Korean. In Vietnamese, the name is known as Hoàng or Huỳnh.

Huang is the 7th most common surname in China. Hoang/Huynh is the 5th most common surname in Vietnam. The population of Huangs in China and Taiwan was estimated at more than 35 million in 2020; it was also the surname of more than 2 million overseas Chinese, 5.7 million Vietnamese (6%), and an estimated 1 million Koreans (The 2015 census of South Korea revealed it was the surname for 697,171 South Koreans, ranked 16th).

Huang is also the pinyin romanization of the very rare surname .

==Pronunciations/transliterations==
* Huang () used in Mandarin
*Hwang () used in Korean
* Huỳnh or Hoàng used in Vietnamese
** Huỳnh is the cognate adopted in Southern and most parts of Central Vietnam because of a naming taboo decree banning the surname Hoàng, due to similarity between the surname and the name of Lord Nguyễn Hoàng.
* Vong used in Hakka, Vietnamese, and Taishanese
* Ng, Ung, Ong, Wee, Oi, Ooi or Uy, used in Southern Min, specifically the Hokkien- and Teochew-speaking Chinese diaspora in Southeast Asia
** Ooi, Oei, Oey, Uy in Zhangzhou dialect and Xiamen dialect
** Ng, Eng used in Quanzhou dialect, Xiamen dialect, and Teochew
** Oey or Oei used in Indonesia
** Ng, Uy, Wee is used in the Philippines
** Ng, Ooi, Wee used in Singapore and Malaysia
*** Ooi used in Penang and nearby Malaysian states
* Wong, Vong or Hwong used in Cantonese, Wu and Fuzhou dialect
* Oeng, Eung, Ueng, Ung, or Ing (Khmer: ) used in Cambodia
* Eung or Ueng () used in Thailand (often paired with the prefix &#x27;Sae&#x27; (แซ่) to indicate surname.

==Origins==
Huang is an ancient surname. According to tradition, there are several different origins of the surname, for example as descendants of Bo Yi, Lu Zhong (陸終) or Tai Tai (臺駘). There were also at least three Huang Kingdoms during the Xia, Shang and Zhou dynasties. Most of the people with the surname Huang could track back their ancestors to one of the Huang Kingdoms.

=== Dong Yi Tribe 東夷 ===
The Dong Yi or Eastern Barbarians were ancient people who lived in eastern China during the prehistoric period. They were one of the Four Barbarians in Chinese culture, along with the Northern Di 北狄, the Southern Man 南蠻, and the Western Rong 西戎. The Dong Yi tribe was the tribal alliance group that consisted of nine tribes in the Huai River Basin 淮水流域: Quan Yi 畎夷, Yu Yi 於夷, Fang Yi 方夷, Huang Yi 黃夷, Bai Yi 白夷, Chi Yi 赤夷, Xuan Yi 玄夷, Feng Yi 風夷 and Yang Yi 陽夷. The Dong Yi tribe people used different birds as their totems and for Huang Yi 黃夷 tribe, Yellow Oriole 黃鶯 was the totem. Later when the people from Huang Yi 黃夷 tribe moved and settled in different parts of China, they adopted Huang 黃 as their surname.

===Ying Clan 嬴姓===
Shaohao 少皋 had a son, Gao Yao and Gao Yao had a son, Bo Yi. Bo Yi helped Emperor Shun and Yu the Great control the Great Flood and got surname Ying (嬴) at early Xia dynasty period. Bo Yi married Emperor Shun&#x27;s youngest daughter and had three sons (some accounts mentioned only two sons – Da Lian and Ruo Mu):
* Eldest Son Da Lian 大廉 – Founder of Huang Kingdom 黃國 (Qin Kingdom Founder Fei Zi 非子 and Zhao Kingdom Founder Shu Dai 叔帶 were descendants of Da Lian)
* Second Son Ruo Mu 若木 – Founder of Xu Kingdom 徐國 (his great-great-grandson Fei Chang 費昌 founded Fei Kingdom 費國)
* Third Son En Cheng 恩成 – Founder of Jiang Kingdom 江國

Xia Yu awarded the Huang kingdom to Da Lian, and his descendants are known as the Huangs.
There are total of 14 clans derived from Bo Yi Ying Clan: Lian (廉), Xu (徐), Jiang (江), Qin (秦), Zhao (趙), Huang (黃), Liang (梁), Ma (馬), Ge (葛), Gu (谷), Miao (繆), Zhong (鍾), Fei (費), and Qu (瞿). Rulers of Qin Kingdom, Zhao Kingdom, Qin dynasty and Song dynasty could trace back their ancestor to Bo Yi. Hata Clan (秦氏) of Japan, and Aisin Gioro Clan, Irgen Gioro Clan and Gioro Clan of Manchuria (one of several different opinions) were also derived from Bo Yi Ying Clan.

===Ji Clan 姬姓===
The lineage of Huang Clan from the Yellow Emperor is as follows:
1) Yellow Emperor 黃帝 -&gt; 2) Chang Yi 昌意 -&gt; 3) Zhuanxu Emperor 顓頊帝 -&gt; 4) Da Ye 大業 (aka Ye the Great) -&gt; 5) Shao Dian 少典 -&gt; 6) Nu Shen 女莘 -&gt; 7) Da Fei 大費 (aka Fei the Great) -&gt; 8) Juan Zhang 卷章 -&gt; 9) Wu Hui 吳回 (also known as Zhurong) -&gt; 10) Lu Zhong 陸終 -&gt; 11) Hui Lian 惠連 (Some accounts state that Hui Lian is son of Fan Ren, son of Lu Zhong). Lu Zhong had six sons: 
* Eldest Son Fan 樊 (also known as Fan Ren 樊人 or Kun Wu 昆吾) – Legendary Pottery Inventor and Founder of Kunwu Kingdom 昆吾國, 
* Second Son Ding 定 (also known as Hui Lian 惠连 or Can Hu 參胡) – Founder of Huang Kingdom 黃國, 
* Third Son Qian (also known as Qian Keng 钱铿) – Legendary God of Longevity and Founder of Da Peng Kingdom 大彭國, 
* Fourth Son Qiu 求 (also known as Qiu Yan 求言 or Kuai Ren 鄶人)- Founder of Kuai Kingdom 鄶國, 
* Fifth Son Yan An 晏安 (also known as Cao An 曹安 or Zao An 遭安) – Founder of Zhu Kingdom 邾國, and 
* Sixth Son Ji 季 (also known as Ji Lian 季连) – Founder of Chu Kingdom 楚國.

In 2220 BC during the reign of Emperor Yao 帝堯, Hui Lian 惠連 scored merits in harnessing river floods. Emperor Yao conferred on Hui Lian the title of Viscount 子 (but the nobility system of ancient China is still not clear) and the state of Can&#x27;hu 參胡 (in present-day region of Fenyang, Shanxi province). Emperor Yao renamed Can&#x27;hu as State of Huang, and bestowed on Hui Lian the surname Huang 黃 and the name &quot;Yun&quot; 雲. Hence, Hui Lian was also known as Huang Yun 黃雲 or Nan Lu 南陆. Hui Lian became the Progenitor of the Huang surname clan. During Western Zhou dynasty, the rulers of the Huang State was given the title of Duke 公. The descendants of Huang Yun (Hui Lian) ruled the Huang State of Shanxi until the early Spring and Autumn period (722 BC-481 BC) when it was conquered by the State of Jin.

Another lineage of Huang Clan from the Yellow Emperor is as follows:
1) Yellow Emperor 黃帝 -&gt; 2) Shao Hao 少昊 -&gt; 3) Jiao Ji 嬌極 -&gt; 4) Hui Gong 揮公 -&gt; 5) Mei 昧 -&gt; 6) Tai Tai 臺駘. Tai Tai helped Zhuan Xu Emperor 顓頊, and he and his descendants (Jin Tian Clan 金天氏) were enfeoffed with Fen Zhou 汾州 at Fen River 汾河 which was further divided into four kingdoms – Huang Kingdom 黃國, Shen Kingdom 沈國, Ru Kingdom 蓐國 and Si Kingdom 姒國.

===Development and emigration===
In 891 BC King Xiao of Zhou conferred on the 53rd generation descendant of Hui Lian, Huang Xi 黃熙 (aka Huang Shi 黃石) the nobility of &#x27;Hou&#x27; 侯 (marquis) and a fiefdom in the region east of the Han river 漢水 (in present-day region of Yicheng, Hubei province) called &#x27;Huang&#x27; 黃 (Not to be confused with the Huang State of Fenyang, Shanxi) with the four states Jiang 江, Huang 黃 (founded by 伯益 Bo Yi&#x27;s descendants), Dao 道, and Bo 柏 in the Huang river 潢水 valley as vassals. The Huang State of Yicheng, Hubei was known as the Western Huang (Xi Huang 西黃) in history.

During the Jin dynasty (266–420), when northern China was invaded by the barbarian tribes, many northerners (especially the aristocratic clans) moved to south China with the Jin court. It was during this period that the Huang clansmen migrated to Fujian.

According to Min Shu 閩書 (Book of Min) (Quoted from Chung Yoon-Ngan):
&quot;During the second year (of the reign) of Yongjia (308AD) the Central Plain was in chaos and the eight clans:- Lin 林, Huang 黃, Chen 陳, Zheng 鄭, Zhan 詹, Qiu 邱, He 何, and Hu 胡, entered Min 閩 (present day Fujian province, China).&quot;

From the Tang dynasty (618–907) onwards, many Han Chinese migrated from Fujian to Guangdong and the other southern provinces. Huang grew into a big clan in south China and it is the 3rd biggest surname in Southern China today. The Cantonese Baiyue adopted Huang surname as well.

Huang migration overseas began as early as the 14th century during the Ming dynasty to destinations in Southeast Asia. Migration to Americas began only in the mid-19th century following the forced opening of China&#x27;s doors to the West. Huang is one of the largest Chinese surname clans in Americas today. The population of overseas Huang Clansmen was estimated at 2 million in 2000.

The surname 皇 has several origins:

# The descendants of the Three Emperors of ancient China.
# The descendants of Duke Dai of Song&#x27;s prince named Huangfu Chongshi 皇父充石.
# An ancient book Xing Kao 姓考 says Zheng Kingdom has a royal clan named Huang clan 皇氏.

Across Guangdong, three million people surnamed Huang claim descent from the same paternal ancestor, Huang Qiaoshan who lived in the Tang dynasty and migrated to Fujian at the end of the dynasty, via three of his sons (out of 21) who founded different branches, found among the Hakka, Chaoshan and Cantonese. Among them are the Longgang, Kengxi village Hakka Huang, the Cantonese &quot;guangfu&quot; Huang native to Shenzhen in the villages of Shangsha &amp; Xiasha &amp; the Chaoshan Huang. Huang Qiaoshan lived from 872 to 953 and claimed he was the Yellow Emperor&#x27;s 128th generation descendant. Huang Moutang who was born in 1183 and was Huang Qiaoshan&#x27;s 15th generation descendant is the ancestor of the Cantonese guangfu Huang clans. One of his descendants was Huang Siming from whom the Xiasha Huang descent. Huang Qiaoshan&#x27;s 9th generation descendant Huang Liao was a Song official and his descendant Huang Chaoxuan during the Ming-Qing transition was the ancestor of the Longgang, Kengzi village Hakka Huang. The Huang descendants who migrated and established linages in the Song were Cantonese speakers while the Huang descendants who migrated to the coast in the Ming-Qing transition spoke Hakka.

==Huang==
Huang is the 7th most common surname in China, and the 3rd most common surname in Taiwan. It is also one of the common surnames among Zhuang People, the largest ethnic minority in China, and is also the most common surname in the Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region. 19% of people from China with Surname Huang live in Guangdong Province. The population of people named Huang in China was approximately 29 million and in Taiwan about 1.4 million.
In 2019 Huang was again the seventh most common surname in mainland China.

A 2013 study found that it was the seventh-most common surname, shared by 32,600,000 people or 2.450% of the population, with the province having the most people being Guangdong.

===Historical figures with Huang 黃 surname===


*Huang Chao 黃巢 (820–884), leader of the Huang Chao rebellion against the Tang dynasty
*Huang Cheng Yan 黃承彥, Eastern Han dynasty scholar
*Huang Dao Po 黃道婆 (1245–1330), Yuan dynasty Weaver and innovator
*Huang Dao Zhou 黃道週 (1585–1646), Ming dynasty calligrapher and politician named as one of the Four Lords of the Yellow Gate (黃門四君子)
*Huang Ding 黃鼎 (1650–1730), Qing dynasty landscape painter and poet
*Wong Fei Hung 黃飛鴻 (1847–1924), Martial artist, physician, acupuncturist, revolutionary, and folk hero during late Qing dynasty
*Wong Kim Ark 黃金德 ( – after 1931), Chinese American who was the subject of a landmark US Supreme Court citizenship case
*Huang Gai 黃蓋, Eastern Wu general and one of the &quot;Twelve Tiger Generals of Jiangdong&quot; (江東十二虎臣) during the Three Kingdoms period
*Huang Gong Wang 黃公望 (1269–1345), painter and one of the &quot;Four Masters of the Yuan dynasty&quot;
*Huang Ji 黃濟, Ming dynasty imperial painter
*Huang Quan 黃權 (?–240), general of Shu Han and later of Cao Wei during the Three Kingdoms period
*Huang Ru Heng 黃汝亨 (1558–1626), calligrapher during late Ming dynasty
*Huang Shen 黃慎 (1687–1772), Qing dynasty painter and artistic innovator who was one of the &quot;Eight Eccentrics of Yangzhou&quot;
*Ong Sum Ping 黃森屏 Huang Senping, Noble of Brunei. Street Name in Brunei Capital of Bandar Seri Begawan Jalan Ong Sum Ping (only street in Brunei with Chinese name) was named after him
*Huang Ting Jian 黃庭堅 (1045–1105), Song dynasty noted filial son, poet, scholar, magistrate, and calligrapher. One of the &quot;Song Four&quot; (宋四家) and one of the &quot;Four Scholar of Su&#x27;men&quot; (蘇門四學士)
*Huang Xie 黃歇 (314 BC–238 BC), Lord Chunshen, Prime Minister of the state of Chu during the Warring States period and one of the famous &quot;Four Lords of the Warring States&quot; 
*Huang Zhong 黃忠 (?–220), Shu Han Kingdom General during the Three Kingdoms period and one of the &quot;Five Tiger Generals&quot; under Liu Bei
*Huang Zong Xi 黃宗羲 (1610–1695), Ming-Qing dynasties naturalist, political theorist, philosopher, historian and educator, one of the famous &quot;Eastern Zhe&#x27;jiang Three Huangs&quot; (浙東三黃), one of the &quot;Four Worthies of Yu&#x27;yao&quot; (餘姚四賢) and one of the &quot;Early Qing Five Grandmasters&quot; (清初五大師)
*Huang Zun Xian 黃遵憲 (1848–1905), Late Qing dynasty scholar, poet, educator, diplomat and statesman

===Modern figures===

*Huang Bai Tao 黃百韬 (1900–1948), Chinese Nationalist General active in the Second Sino-Japanese War and Chinese Civil War, for which he was twice awarded the Order of Blue Sky and White Sun, the highest honor a Chinese commander can achieve
*Huang Bamei 黃八妹 (1906–1982), Chinese pirate and naval commander
*Huang Bin Hong 黃宾虹 (1865–1955), Chinese art historian and Literati painter
*Wong Che Yin 黃志贤 (born 1959), businessman and philanthropist from Hong Kong, China, and founder and Chairman of Kong Fung International Group
*Huang Chieh 黃杰 (1902–1995), Kuomintang General and Minister of Defense of the Republic of China
*Huang Chih Hsien 黃智賢 (born in 1964), Taiwanese TV commentator, author and host on CTV and CTITV between 2014 and 2019
*Huang Chun Ming 黃春明 (born 1935), Taiwanese literary figure and teacher
*Huang Da Ren 黃达人 (born 1945), Chinese mathematician
*Huang Dao 黃道 (1900–1939), Chinese Workers&#x27; and Peasants&#x27; Red Army and the New Fourth Army General and Martyr active during the Anti-Japanese War
*Huang En Ru 黄恩茹 (born 1997), Chinese singer, actress, and member of the idol group BEJ48
*Huang Fu 黃郛 (1883–1936), Former Premier and Acting President of Republic of China
*Huang Guang Yu 黃光裕 (born 1969), Chinese billionaire
*Huang Guo Xian 黃国显 (born 1962), Lieutenant General of the People&#x27;s Liberation Army Air Force (PLAAF) of China and Commander of the Nanjing Military Region Air Force
*Huang Heng Mei 黃恒美 (born 1940), Lieutenant General of the People&#x27;s Liberation Army Air Force (PLAAF) of China and Commander of the Chengdu Military Region Air Force and the Lanzhou Military Region Air Force
*Huang Hong Jia 黃宏嘉 (1924–2021), Chinese Academician of Science in Microwave Theory and Optical Fibre
*Huang Hua Hua 黃华华 (born 1946), Former Governor of Guangdong Province, China
*Huang Jian Xiang 黃健翔 (born 1968), renowned sports commentator in China
*Huang Jian Xin 黃建新 (born 1954), Chinese film director and film producer
*Huang Ji Guang 黃继光 (1931–1952), highly decorated Chinese soldier during the Korean War
*Huang Ju 黃菊 (1938–2007), Former Vice Premier of China
*Wong Jumsum 黃沾, also known as James Wong Jim (1940–2004), Renowned Lyricist, Writer and one of the &quot;Four Talent of Hong Kong&quot; 香港四大才子
*Huang Kaiming 黄凯明 and Huang Yiming 黄一鸣 (born 1997), also known as Cary and Michael Huang (or Huang twins), YouTubers, voice actors and animators who created &quot;The Scale of the Universe&quot;
*Huang Kan 黃侃 (1886–1935), Early Republic of China period Chinese philologist, revolutionary and one of the Sinology experts known as &quot;Seven Accomplished of Jiang&#x27;nan&quot; 江南七彥. Together with famous Literary Figure Li Lianggong 李亮工, he is also known as &quot;Southern Huang and Northern Li&quot; 南黃北李.
*Huang Ke Cheng 黃克诚 (1902–1986), Chinese military strategist, senior General, founding General of the People&#x27;s Liberation Army and former head of People&#x27;s Liberation Army General Staff Department
*Huang Kun 黃昆 (1919–2005), physicist in solid-state physics. The Born–Huang approximation is partially named after him
*Huang Kun Ming 黃坤明 (born 1956), Head of the Propaganda Department of the Chinese Communist Party and a member of the Politburo of the Chinese Communist Party
*Huang Mao Zong 黃茂榮 (1944–2025), Taiwanese judge, justice of the Judicial Yuan
*Huang Meng Fu 黃孟复 (born 1944), Vice Chairman of the China People&#x27;s Political Consultative Conference and Chairman of the All-China Federation of Industry and Commerce
*Huang Min Hui 黃敏惠 (born 1959), former Acting Chairperson and current vice-chairperson of Kuomintang Party, and Mayor of Chiayi City of the Republic of China
*Huang Min Lon 黃鸣龙 (1898–1979), Chinese organic chemist and pharmaceutical scientist; Pioneer and founder of modern pharmaceutical industries in China. The &quot;Huang Modification&quot; or &quot;Huang-Minlon Modification&quot; is named after Huang Minglon. It was the first time that a Chinese name appeared in an organic chemical reaction
*Huang Ming 黃鸣 (born 1958), Chinese solar energy researcher and entrepreneur
*Huang Ming Hao 黃明昊, also known as Justin (born 2002), rapper and dancer of the C-pop group NEXT and Nine Percent
*Huang Na 黄娜 (1996–2004), Chinese student studying in Singapore and murder victim
*Wong Ngok Tai 黃岳泰, also known as Arthur Wong (born 1956), Nine time Hong Kong Film Awards-winning Cinematographer, Actor, Screenwriter, Film producer and film director
*Huang Nu Bo 黃怒波 (born 1956), Chinese real estate developer, entrepreneur, poet and billionaire
*Wong Pik Wan 黃碧雲 or Helena Wong (born 1959), Hong Kong legislative council member
*Huang Ren Jun 黄仁俊 (born 2000), Singer and dancer based in South Korea and member of K-pop boy group NCT Dream
*Huang Ru Lun 黃如论, Chinese real estate developer, philanthropist and billionaire
*Huang Shao Qiang 黃少強 (1901–1942), painter
*Huang Sheng Shyan 黃性贤 (1910–1992), kung fu and tai chi practitioner
*Huang Sheng Yi 黃圣依 (born 1983), Chinese actress
*Huang Shu Kuang 黃曙光 (born 1957), Republic of China Navy Admiral, Commander of Navy and Chief of the General Staff
*Wong Shun Leung 黃淳梁 (1935–1997), Chinese martial artist in Wing Chun Kung Fu
*Huang Shu Xian 黃树贤 (born 1954), Minister of Civil Affairs, Former Minister of Supervision and Deputy Secretary of the Central Commission for Discipline Inspection of the People&#x27;s Republic of China
*Huang Ting Ting 黄婷婷 (born 1992), Chinese singer and member of the idol group SNH48
*Wong Tze Wah 黃子華 or Dayo Wong (born 1960), Hong Kong stand-up comedian, actor, presenter, screenwriter, and singer-songwriter who is the pioneer of stand-up comedy in Hong Kong
*Huang Tzu 黃自 (1904–1938), Chinese musician of the early 20th century
*Wong Wang Fat 黃宏发 or Andrew Wong (born 1943), Last President of the Legislative Council of Hong Kong during British rule and the only person of Chinese ethnicity to have served in the position during British rule
*Huang Wei 黄伟 (born 1959), Chinese real estate developer and billionaire
*Huang Wei Lu 黃緯祿 (1916–2011), One of China&#x27;s pioneer missile scientists, one of the &quot;Four Elders of China&#x27;s Aerospace&quot; and Winner of &quot;Two Bombs, One Satellite&quot; Award
*Huang Xian Zhong 黃獻中 (born 1947), General in the People&#x27;s Liberation Army (PLA) of the People&#x27;s Republic of China, and Current Political Commissar of the PLA Shenyang Military Region
*Huang Xiao Jing 黃小晶 (born 1946), Former Governor of Fujian Province, China
*Huang Xiao Ming 黄晓明 (born 1977), Chinese actor
*Huang Xing 黃興 (1874–1916), Chinese revolutionary leader, militarist, and statesman, and the First Army Commander-in-chief of the Republic of China
*Huang Xing Guo 黃興國 (born 1954), Mayor of Tianjin, China
*Huang Xin Rui 黃新瑞, better known as John &quot;Buffalo&quot; Huang (1914–1941), ace fighter pilot; original contingent of American volunteer combat aviators joining the Chinese Air Force during the War of Resistance/WWII 
*Huang Xu Hua 黃旭華, One of the chief designers for China&#x27;s first generation of nuclear submarines
*Huang Yan Pei 黃炎培 (1878–1965), Chinese educator, industrialist, politician, founding pioneer of the China Democratic League, former Minister of Education of the Early Republic of China and Deputy Prime Minister of early People&#x27;s Republic of China
*Huang Yong Sheng 黃永勝 (1910–1983), Founding General of the People&#x27;s Liberation Army, Former Commander of the Guangzhou Military Region and former head of People&#x27;s Liberation Army General Staff Department
*Huang Yuan yong 黃遠庸 (1885–1915), Renowned Chinese Author and Journalist during the late Qing dynasty and early Republic of China
*Wong Yuk Hei 黃仁俊, also known as Lucas (born 1999), Chinese rapper based in South Korea and former member of K-pop boy group NCT
*Huang Zhang 黃章, also known as Jack Wong (born 1976), Chinese entrepreneur, founder and former CEO of Meizu
*Huang Zhen 黄镇 (1909–1989), Former Minister of Culture and former Vice Minister of Foreign Affairs of People&#x27;s Republic of China
*Huang Zhen Dong 黄镇东 (born 1941), Former Minister of Transport and Communist Party Secretary of Chongqing of the People&#x27;s Republic of China
*Huang Zhi Qian 黃志千 (1914–1965), Chinese aircraft designer
*Huang Zhun (composer) 黃準 (1926–2024), Chinese composer
*Huang Zhun (footballer) 黄准 (born 1989), Chinese footballer
*Huang Zi Tao 黄子韬, also known as Tao (born 1993), Chinese singer and former member of the Chinese-South Korean boy band Exo
*Wong Ka Kui 黄家驹, also known as Koma Wong (1962-1993), Hongkongese singer and former lead singer of the rock band Beyond.

===Modern figures (Overseas Chinese)===




*Wong Ah Fook 黄亚福 (1837–1918), Malaysian Chinese entrepreneur, and philanthropist who left an indelible imprint on the state of Johor in present-day Malaysia
*Huang Bi Ren 黄碧仁 (born 1969), Singaporean actress
*Huang Bing Yao 黄炳耀, also known as Benjamin Wong Tape (1875–1967), Chinese New Zealand merchant
*Ng Chee Khern 黄志勤 (born 1965), Singaporean Major General, Former Chief of the Republic of Singapore Air Force and Permanent Secretary (Defence Development) in Singapore&#x27;s Ministry of Defence
*Ng Chee Meng 黄志明 (born 1968), Minister for Education (Schools), Senior Minister of State (Ministry of Transport), Second Minister for Transport and Former Chief of Defence Force of Singapore
*Ng Chee Peng 黄志平 (born 1970), Singaporean Naval Admiral and Former Chief of the Republic of Singapore Navy
*Ng Chee Siong 黄志祥 or Robert Ng (born 1952), Chairman of Hong Kong property development conglomerate Sino Group and Singaporean Real Estate Billionaire
*Ng Chee Yang 黄智阳 (born 1989), Singaporean singer
*Huang Cheng Hui 黄呈辉, also known as John K.C. Ng (1939–2013), Filipino Chinese businessman, philanthropist, former Presidential Advisor and Special Envoy for China Affairs
*Huang Ching He 黄瀞亿 (born 1978), British Chinese food writer and chef
*Wee Chong Jin 黄宗仁 (1917–2005), Judge and the First Chief Justice of Singapore
*Ng Choon Siong 黄俊雄 or Elvin Ng (born 1980), Singaporean actor and model
*Wee Cho Yaw 黄祖耀 (1929–2024), Singaporean businessman, and the current Chairman of the United Overseas Bank (UOB) and United Industrial Corporation (UIC) in Singapore
*Huang Chuang Shan 黄创山, also known as Keeree Kanjanapas (born 1950), Thailand-based entrepreneur with extensive business interests in mass transit and real estate in the Kingdom of Thailand
*Wong Doc Fai 黄德輝 (born 1948), internationally recognized master of Choy Li Fut kung fu and tai chi
*Oei Ektjong 黄亦聪 or Eka Tjipta Widjaja (born 1923), Indonesian billionaire
*Ng Eng Hen 黄永宏 (born 1958), Minister of Defence of Singapore
*Ng Eng Teng 黄荣庭 (1934–2001), Singaporean sculptor
*Freddie Wong 黄谷子 (born 1985), American internet celebrity and filmmaker
*Huang Gantapawei 黄甘塔帕薇 or Ing Kuntha Phavi អឹង កន្ថាផាវី (born 1960), Current Minister of Women&#x27;s Affairs of Cambodia
*Wong Gen Yeo 黄齐耀 or Tyrus Wong (born 1910), Chinese American painter, muralist, ceramicist, lithographer, and designer
*Hao Huang, American mathematician
*Wong Hok Sing 黄鹤声 (1915–1993), Chinese American actor and director
*Hosea Wong 黄振宇 (born 2003), Bruneian wushu athlete
*Oey Hui Siang 黄惠祥 or Michael Bambang Hartono (born 1941), Indonesian tobacco billionaire
*Oey Hui Tiong 黄惠忠 or Robert Budi Hartono (born 1940), Indonesian tobacco billionaire
*Ung Huot 黄发 (born 1945), Former Prime Minister of Cambodia
*Wong Jeh Shyan 黄哲贤 (born 1964), Former CEO of CommerceNet Singapore, and co-founder and CEO of Ecommerce Gateway Pte. Ltd.
*Huang Jen Hsun 黃仁勳 or Jensen Huang (born 1963), co-founder, President and CEO of Nvidia Corporation
*Huang Jia Lue 黄嘉略 or Arcadio Huang (1679–1716), French Chinese Pioneer who compiled first Chinese-French Lexicon and first Chinese Grammar in French
*Huang Jin Shao 黄锦绍 or Delbert Earl Wong (1920–2006), First Chinese American judge in the continental United States
*Ng Jui Ping 黄维彬 (1948–2020), Singaporean Lieutenant General and former Chief of Defence Force (CDF) of the Singapore Armed Forces (SAF)
*Huang Jun Rong 黄俊融 or Jarrell Huang (born 2000), Singaporean singer and actor
*Ong Ka Chuan 黄家泉 (born 1954), Secretary-General of the Malaysian Chinese Association (MCA), Former Minister of Housing and Local Government and Current Second Minister for International Trade and Industry of Malaysia
*Wong Kan Seng 黄根成 (born 1946), former deputy prime minister of Singapore
*Ong Ka Ting 黄家定 (born 1956), President of Malaysian Chinese Association (MCA), Minister of Housing and Local Government and Acting Minister of Health of Malaysia
*Wee Kheng Chiang 黄庆昌 (1890–1978), Malaysian Chinese businessman and founder of United Overseas Bank (UOB) in Singapore
*Oey Kian Kok 黄建国 or Christianto Wibisono (1945–2021), prominent Chinese Indonesian business analyst in Indonesia
*Wong Kim Min 黄金明 or James Wong (1922–2011), Malaysian Chinese Leader of the Opposition in Malaysia and Deputy Chief Minister of Sarawak
*Wee Kim Wee 黄金辉 (1915–2005), former president of the Republic of Singapore
*Ng Kok Kwang 黄国光 or Louis Ng (born 1978), Singaporean politician and founder of Animal Concerns Research and Education Society (ACRES)
*Huang Lan Hsuan 黃籃萱, Taiwanese-American mathematician
*Wong Liu Tsong 黄柳霜 or Anna May Wong (1905–1961), First Chinese American movie star and first Asian-American actress to gain international recognition
*Melki Sedek Huang (born 2000), Indonesian activist and sex offender who formerly served as Chairman of the Student Executive Board at University of Indonesia
*Wong Mun Charn 黄门赞 (1918–2002), Chinese American businessman and first Chinese-American fighter pilot
*Huang Pei Qian 黄培谦 or Puey Ungpakorn ป๋วย อึ๊งภากรณ์ (1916–1999), Thai bureaucrat who played a central role in the shaping of Thailand&#x27;s economic development and in the strengthening of its system of higher education
*Wong Peng Soon 黄秉璇 (1918–1996), Chinese Malaysian badminton player who reigned as a top player in Malaya from the 1930s to the 1950s
*Huang Ren Yu 黄仁宇 or Ray Huang (1918–2000), Chinese historian and philosopher, best known in his later years for the idea of macro history
*Huang Ru You 黄如佑 Loke Yew (1845–1917), businessman and philanthropist in British Malaya. He was regarded as the richest man in British Malaya during his time.
*Huang Ruo 黄若 (born 1976), Chinese American Composer, pianist and vocalist
*Huang Shao Fan 黄少凡 or Hasan Karman (born 1962), Former Mayor of Singkawang, West Kalimantan and First Chinese Mayor of Indonesia
*Huang Shiaan Bin 黄士豪, Member of Parliament of South Africa, Member of the African National Congress (ANC), Former Deputy Mayor of Newcastle in KwaZulu-Natal and Former Executive Councillor of Newcastle
*Huang Shi Hou 黄诗厚 or Alice S. Huang (born 1939), Chinese American biologist specialized Microbiology and Virology
*Huang Shi Tao 黄煦涛 or Thomas Huang (born 1936), Chinese Academician of Science in computer vision, pattern recognition and human-computer interaction
*Wong Shyun Tsai 黄循财 or Lawrence Wong (born 1972), Prime Minister and Minister for Finance of Singapore
*Wong Si Tian 黄思恬 or Carrie Wong (born 1994), Singaporean actress
*Huang Su Shu 黄授书 (1915–1977), Chinese American astrophysicist and asteroid 3014 Huangsushu was named after him
*Ng Teng Fong 黄廷芳 (1928–2010), Singaporean real estate tycoon
*Huang Tian Xi 黄天喜 or Thian Hee (1848–1925), Prominent military doctor, influential merchant and founder of the illustrious Sarasin Family in the Kingdom of Thailand
*Oei Tiong Ham 黄仲涵 (1866–1924), Indonesian businessman
*Oei Tjoe Tat 黄自达 (1922–1996), First Chinese Indonesian Minister of State of Indonesia
*Huang Tseng Hao 黄俊豪 or Hao Huang (born 1957), Chinese American concert pianist and music professor
*Wong Tung Jim 黄宗沾 or James Wong Howe (1899–1976), Chinese American cinematographer
*Oei Wie Gwan 黄维源 (?–1963), Indonesian businessman and entrepreneur
*Huang Wen Bo 黄闻波 or Boonchu Rojanastien (1921–2007), Former Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Finance of Thailand
*Huang Wen Shiung 黄文雄 or Peter Huang (born 1937), Japanese Chinese writer and activist active in Taiwan for democratization and human rights
*Huang Wen Yong 黄文永 (1952–2013), Singaporean actor
*Huang Xi 黄西 or Joe Wong (born 1970), Chinese American stand-up comedian and chemical engineer
*Huang Xin Xiang 黄馨祥 or Patrick Soon-Shiong (born 1952), South African-born American surgeon, medical researcher, businessman, philanthropist, and professor at University of California, Los Angeles
*Huang Xue Dong 黄学东 (born 1962), Microsoft&#x27;s Chief speech scientist. He was named one of the &quot;25 Geniuses of Next List 2016&quot; in &quot;Wire&quot; magazine.
*Huang Yan Hui 黄彦辉 Arthur C. Yap (born 1965), Former Filipino Chinese Secretary of Agriculture and Member of the House of Representatives of the Philippines
*Wong Yee Ching 黄以静 or Flossie Wong-Staal (1947–2020), Chinese American virologist and molecular biologist. She was the first scientist to clone HIV and determine the function of its genes, a major step in proving that HIV is the cause of AIDS.
*Ng Yen Yen 黄燕燕 (born 1946), Malaysian Chinese politician, former Minister of Tourism in the Malaysian Cabinet and Current Vice-president of Malaysian Chinese Association (MCA)
*Huang Yi Liang 黄奕良 (born 1961), Singaporean actor
*Huang Yi Ming 黄颐铭 or Eddie Huang (born 1981), Chinese American restaurateur, chef, food personality, writer, and Attorney
*Wong Ying Yen 黄英贤 or Penny Wong (born 1968), Senator and Minister for Foreign Affairs, Former Minister for Finance and Deregulation, and Minister for Climate Change, Energy Efficiency and Water of Australia
*Wong Yi Shan 黄易山, CEO of Reddit, co-founder at Mountain View coworking space Sunfire Offices, and Advisor at Quora, an online knowledge market
*Huang Yi Yu 黄毅瑜 or James Wong (born 1959), Chinese American Television Producer, Writer and Film Director
*Huang Yuan Ling 黄苑玲 or Ruthlane Uy Asmundson (born 1945), Former Mayor of the City of Davis, California and First Female Filipino Migrant to be elected into the position of mayor in an American city
*Huang Yu De Hu 黄欲德虎 or Cham Prasidh ចម ប្រសិទ្ធ (born 1951), Current Minister of Industry and Handicrafts and Former Minister of Commerce of Cambodia
*Huang Yu Tang 黄玉堂 or Nelson Wang (born 1950), Indian Chinese restaurateur
*Huang Zhe Lun 黄哲伦 or David Henry Hwang (born 1957), Chinese American playwright, librettist, screenwriter, and theater professor
*Huang Zhen Tan 黄祯谭 or Alfonso A. Uy, Filipino Chinese businessman, and former and first President of the Federation of Filipino Chinese Chambers of Commerce &amp; Industry
*Nigel Ng 黄瑾瑜 (born 1991), Malaysian Chinese standup comedian and internet personality of Hokkien descent, known for potraying the character Uncle Roger.
*Christiandy Sanjaya 黃漢山 (born 1964), Senator in Regional Representative Council and Vice Governor of West Kalimantan

== Hwang ==
==Hoàng/Huỳnh==
The Vietnamese versions of this surname are Hoàng and Huỳnh. According to Lê Trung Hoa, a Vietnamese scholar, approximately 5.1 percent of Vietnamese people have this surname. The original form of this surname was Hoàng. But in southern Vietnam, Hoàng was ordered to be changed (excluding the Hoàng Trọng family) to Huỳnh due to a naming taboo with the name of Lord Nguyễn Hoàng.

===Notable people with Hoàng surname===

*Hoàng Anh Tuấn (born 1985), Vietnamese weightlifter
*Hoàng Cầm (poet) (1922–2010), Vietnamese poet, playwright, and novelist
*Hoàng Cầm (general) (1920–2013), Major General of People&#x27;s Army of Vietnam 
*Hoàng Cầm (1916–1996), Inventor of the Việt Minh Hoàng Cầm stove
*Hoàng Cao Khải 黃高啟 (1850–1933), Viceroy of Tonkin (locally known as Bắc Kỳ), the northernmost of the three parts of Vietnam under French colonial rule, Minister of War 兵部尚書, Duke of Duyên Mậu Quận (Duyên Mậu Quận Công 延茂郡公) and Prince&#x27;s Tutor 太子太傅 of Nguyễn dynasty
*Hoàng Châu Ký (1921–2008), Vietnamese professor of literature and playwright
*Hoàng Cơ Minh (1935–1987), First Chairman of the Việt Tân (Vietnam Reform Party) and Democracy Activist
*Hoàng Đăng Huệ (1932–2015), Major General of Ministry of Defence and Political Commissar of the High Command of Tank and Armour of Vietnam
*Hoàng Diệu 黃耀 (1828–1882), Nguyễn dynasty Governor of Hanoi on behalf of Emperor Tự Đức resident in Huế
*Hoàng Hiệp (1931–2013), Vietnamese songwriter and recipient of the Hồ Chí Minh Prize in 2000
*Hoàng Hồng Cẩm (1959–2011), Vietnamese painter
*Hoàng Kế Viêm 黃繼炎 (1820–1909), Nguyễn dynasty General, Dong&#x27;ge Grand Secretariat 東閣大學士, Viscount of Địch Trung (Địch Trung Tử 迪忠子) and Count of Địch Trung (Địch Trung Bá 迪忠伯)
*Hoang Kieu, Vietnamese-American billionaire
*Hoàng Lập Ngôn (1910–2006), Vietnamese painter
*Hoàng Minh Chính (1922–2008), Vietnamese politician, dissident, and one of the best-known figures and ideologists of the Vietnamese Communist Party during the 1960s
*Hoàng Sĩ Trinh (poet) (1920–2011), known professionally as Hà Thượng Nhân
*Hoàng Thị Loan (1868–1901), Mother of Hồ Chí Minh
*Hoàng Thi Thơ (1929–2001), Vietnamese Songwriter
*Hoàng Tích Chu (1897–1933), Vietnamese journalist
*Hoàng Tích Chù (1912–2003), Vietnamese painter
*Hoàng Trọng (1922–1998), Vietnamese songwriter
*Hoàng Trung Hải (born 1959), Deputy Prime Minister of Vietnam
*Hoàng Tụy (1927–2019), Prominent Vietnamese applied mathematician
*Hoàng Văn Chí (1913–1988), One of the first Vietnamese political writers, and prominent intellectual who was an opponent of colonialism and later of communism in Vietnam
*Hoàng Văn Hoan (1905–1991), Founding Member of the Indochinese Communist Party, and a Politburo Member of the Lao Dong Party (Vietnam Workers&#x27; Party-VWP) from 1960 to 1976
*Hoàng Văn Thái (1915–1986), Vietnamese General and Chief of General Staff of Vietnam People&#x27;s Army
*Hoàng Xuân Hãn 黃春罕 (1908–1996), Vietnamese Professor of mathematics, linguist, historian and educationalist
*Hoàng Xuân Sính, Vietnamese Mathematician, Founder of Thăng Long University and Recipient of the Ordre des Palmes Académiques
*Hoàng Xuân Vinh (born 1974), Vietnamese Shooter and First Ever Olympic Gold Medallist of Vietnam
*Hoàng Thị Thùy (born 1992), Vietnamese model and beauty queen who was appointed as Miss Universe Vietnam 2019

===Notable people with Huỳnh surname===

*Alex Huynh, Vietnamese-American martial artist and stuntman
*Carol Huynh (born 1980), Vietnamese-Canadian freestyle wrestler
*Huỳnh Công Út (born 1951), Photographer for the Associated Press (AP) who works out of Los Angeles. He won the 1973 Pulitzer Prize for Spot News Photography for &quot;The Terror of War&quot;, depicting children in flight from a napalm bombing.
*Huỳnh Phú Sổ (1920–1947), Founder of the Hòa Hảo religious tradition
*Huỳnh Sanh Thông (1926–2008), Vietnamese-American scholar and translator
*Huỳnh Tấn Phát (1913–1989), Former Vice President and Prime Minister of Vietnam
*Huỳnh Thúc Kháng 黃叔抗 (1876–1947), Vietnamese anti-colonialist
*Huỳnh Tường Đức 黃奉德 Nguyễn Huỳnh Đức 阮黃德 (1748–1819), Nguyễn dynasty Founding Grand General (輔國上將軍, 上柱國), Grand Tutor 太傅, Duke of Kiến Xương (Kiến Xương Quận Công 建昌郡公) and one of the &quot;Five Tiger-Generals of Gia Định&quot; (Gia Định ngũ hổ tướng 嘉定五虎將)
*Huỳnh Văn Cao (1927–2013), Major General in the Army of the Republic of Vietnam
*Huỳnh Văn Gấm (1922–1987), Vietnamese painter

==Fictional characters with surname Huang==


*Huang Bu-Ling 黄 歩鈴, member of the Mew Mew team in the 2002 Japanese manga series &quot;Tokyo Mew Mew&quot;
*Huang Feihu 黃飛虎, General of Shang dynasty and later of Zhou dynasty, Prince of Wu&#x27;cheng 國武成王 and Great Emperor of the Mount Tai &quot;Dongyue Taishan Tianqi Rensheng Dadi&quot; 東嶽泰山天齊仁聖大帝 who oversees the fortunes and fates of mortals and the Eighteen Levels of Hell in Chinese classic novel &quot;Fengshen Yanyi&quot; (&quot;The Investiture of the Gods&quot;)
*Huang Gun 黃滾, General of Shang dynasty and later of Zhou dynasty in Chinese classic novel &quot;Fengshen Yanyi&quot; (&quot;The Investiture of the Gods&quot;)
*Huang Rong 黃蓉, Daughter of Huang Yaoshi and Beggars&#x27; Gang&#x27;s chief in Jin Yong&#x27;s wuxia novel &quot;The Legend of the Condor Heroes&quot; and its sequel &quot;The Return of the Condor Heroes&quot;
*Huang Xin 黃信, Nickname: &quot;Guardian of the Three Mountains&quot;, Scouting general of the Liangshan cavalry, 38th of the 108 Liangshan heroes and Deity of Di&#x27;sha Star 地煞星 in Water Margin, one of the Four Great Classical Novels of Chinese literature
*Huang Yaoshi 黃藥師, Nickname: &quot;Eastern Heretic&quot; (東邪), Master of Peach Blossom Island and one of the Five Greats of the wulin (martial artists&#x27; community) during the Song dynasty in Jin Yong&#x27;s wuxia novel &quot;The Legend of the Condor Heroes&quot; and its sequel &quot;The Return of the Condor Heroes&quot;
*Huang Yuanji 黃元濟, General of Shang dynasty and Deity of Can&#x27;chu Star 蠶畜星 in Chinese classic novel &quot;Fengshen Yanyi&quot; (&quot;The Investiture of the Gods&quot;)

== See also ==
* Hwang (Korean name)
* Ng (surname)
* Wong (surname)
* Wang (surname)

==Notes==
== External links ==
* 
*Huang Worldwide Organization Network Group 世界黄联邦
*华夏黄氏网
*黄氏宗亲网
*Huang Shi Zong Hui (Singapore)
*Huang Association of Malaysia
*Wong Kong Har Tong of Hawaii
*天下黄姓出江夏
*黄姓家谱
*黄姓简史(A Brief History of the Family Name Huang)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q845104" start="0" end="5" title="Huang (surname)" label="Huang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093580" start="16" end="31" title="Chinese surname" label="Chinese surname"/>
<link wikidata="Q42222" start="64" end="70" title="pinyin" label="pinyin"/>
<link wikidata="Q13099639" start="125" end="130" title="Hwang (Korean surname)" label="Hwang"/>
<link wikidata="Q16242398" start="132" end="136" title="Wong (surname)" label="Wong"/>
<link wikidata="Q37188616" start="191" end="193" title="Ng (name)" label="Ng"/>
<link wikidata="Q25114858" start="195" end="197" title="Uy (surname)" label="Uy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7078721" start="213" end="216" title="Oey" label="Oey"/>
<link wikidata="Q55274" start="339" end="362" title="Hundred Family Surnames" label="Hundred Family Surnames"/>
<link wikidata="Q845104" start="401" end="430" title="Huang (surname)" label="[[Hwang (Korean name)|Hwang]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q9176" start="434" end="440" title="Korean language" label="Korean"/>
<link wikidata="Q9199" start="445" end="455" title="Vietnamese language" label="Vietnamese"/>
<link wikidata="Q845104" start="478" end="483" title="Huang (surname)" label="Hoàng"/>
<link wikidata="Q845104" start="487" end="492" title="Huang (surname)" label="Huỳnh"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="535" end="540" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q881" start="588" end="595" title="Vietnam" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="635" end="641" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q884" start="838" end="849" title="South Korea" label="South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q845104" start="920" end="925" title="Huang (surname)" label="Huang"/>
<link wikidata="Q9192" start="1041" end="1049" title="Mandarin Chinese" label="Mandarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q13099639" start="1051" end="1056" title="Hwang (Korean name)" label="Hwang"/>
<link wikidata="Q9176" start="1068" end="1074" title="Korean language" label="Korean"/>
<link wikidata="Q9199" start="1100" end="1110" title="Vietnamese language" label="Vietnamese"/>
<link wikidata="Q871246" start="1202" end="1214" title="naming taboo" label="naming taboo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2301908" start="1303" end="1307" title="Nguyễn Lords" label="Lord"/>
<link wikidata="Q3087774" start="1308" end="1320" title="Nguyễn Hoàng" label="Nguyễn Hoàng"/>
<link wikidata="Q660947" start="1337" end="1342" title="Hakka people" label="Hakka"/>
<link wikidata="Q9199" start="1344" end="1354" title="Vietnamese language" label="Vietnamese"/>
<link wikidata="Q2208940" start="1360" end="1370" title="Taishanese" label="Taishanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q36495" start="1415" end="1427" title="Southern Min" label="Southern Min"/>
<link wikidata="Q1624231" start="1446" end="1453" title="Hokkien" label="Hokkien"/>
<link wikidata="Q36759" start="1459" end="1466" title="Teochew dialect" label="Teochew"/>
<link wikidata="Q8070492" start="1535" end="1552" title="Zhangzhou dialect" label="Zhangzhou dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q2705752" start="1557" end="1571" title="Amoy dialect" label="Xiamen dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q2251677" start="1591" end="1607" title="Quanzhou dialect" label="Quanzhou dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q2705752" start="1609" end="1623" title="Amoy dialect" label="Xiamen dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q36759" start="1629" end="1636" title="Chaozhou dialect" label="Teochew"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="1659" end="1668" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="1699" end="1710" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="1735" end="1744" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="1749" end="1757" title="Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q188096" start="1774" end="1780" title="Penang" label="Penang"/>
<link wikidata="Q16242398" start="1811" end="1815" title="Wong (surname)" label="Wong"/>
<link wikidata="Q9186" start="1839" end="1848" title="Cantonese" label="Cantonese"/>
<link wikidata="Q34290" start="1850" end="1852" title="Wu Chinese" label="Wu"/>
<link wikidata="Q35571" start="1857" end="1871" title="Fuzhou dialect" label="Fuzhou dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q9205" start="1905" end="1910" title="Khmer language" label="Khmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q424" start="1922" end="1930" title="Cambodia" label="Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="1957" end="1965" title="Thailand" label="Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q4243879" start="2187" end="2192" title="Yi (husbandman)" label="Bo Yi"/>
<link wikidata="Q169705" start="2282" end="2285" title="Xia dynasty" label="Xia"/>
<link wikidata="Q128938" start="2287" end="2292" title="Shang dynasty" label="Shang"/>
<link wikidata="Q35216" start="2297" end="2301" title="Zhou dynasty" label="Zhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q333910" start="2423" end="2439" title="Dongyi" label="Dong Yi Tribe 東夷"/>
<link wikidata="Q333910" start="2448" end="2455" title="Dongyi" label="Dong Yi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5366110" start="2577" end="2592" title="Four Barbarians" label="Four Barbarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207124" start="2628" end="2639" title="Beidi" label="Northern Di"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352250" start="2648" end="2660" title="Nanman" label="Southern Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252551" start="2673" end="2685" title="Xirong" label="Western Rong"/>
<link wikidata="Q8062583" start="3162" end="3174" title="Yíng" label="Ying Clan 嬴姓"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147250" start="3178" end="3185" title="Shaohao" label="Shaohao"/>
<link wikidata="Q3659487" start="3200" end="3207" title="Gao Yao (minister)" label="Gao Yao"/>
<link wikidata="Q3659487" start="3212" end="3219" title="Gao Yao (minister)" label="Gao Yao"/>
<link wikidata="Q4243879" start="3231" end="3236" title="Yi (husbandman)" label="Bo Yi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4243879" start="3238" end="3243" title="Yi (husbandman)" label="Bo Yi"/>
<link wikidata="Q313342" start="3251" end="3263" title="Emperor Shun" label="Emperor Shun"/>
<link wikidata="Q627784" start="3268" end="3280" title="Yu the Great" label="Yu the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q134052" start="3293" end="3304" title="Great Flood" label="Great Flood"/>
<link wikidata="Q8062583" start="3321" end="3325" title="Yíng" label="Ying"/>
<link wikidata="Q169705" start="3339" end="3350" title="Xia dynasty" label="Xia dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q4243879" start="3359" end="3364" title="Yi (husbandman)" label="Bo Yi"/>
<link wikidata="Q313342" start="3373" end="3385" title="Emperor Shun" label="Emperor Shun"/>
<link wikidata="Q10935404" start="3471" end="3478" title="Lian the Great" label="Da Lian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5154182" start="3483" end="3489" title="Ruomu" label="Ruo Mu"/>
<link wikidata="Q10935404" start="3505" end="3512" title="Lian the Great" label="Da Lian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2650142" start="3529" end="3542" title="Huang (state)" label="Huang Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q34756" start="3547" end="3558" title="Qin (state)" label="Qin Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q556234" start="3567" end="3573" title="Feizi" label="Fei Zi"/>
<link wikidata="Q197430" start="3581" end="3593" title="Zhao (state)" label="Zhao Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q10935404" start="3633" end="3640" title="Lian the Great" label="Da Lian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5154182" start="3655" end="3661" title="Ruomu" label="Ruo Mu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2650109" start="3678" end="3688" title="Xu (state)" label="Xu Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q15299166" start="3718" end="3727" title="Feichang" label="Fei Chang"/>
<link wikidata="Q627784" start="3810" end="3816" title="Yu the Great" label="Xia Yu"/>
<link wikidata="Q10935404" start="3846" end="3853" title="Lian the Great" label="Da Lian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4243879" start="3941" end="3946" title="Yi (husbandman)" label="Bo Yi"/>
<link wikidata="Q16872109" start="3958" end="3962" title="Lian (surname)" label="Lian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9757446" start="3968" end="3970" title="Xu (surname 徐)" label="Xu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3808259" start="3976" end="3981" title="Jiang (surname)" label="Jiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q13391671" start="3987" end="3990" title="Qin (surname)" label="Qin"/>
<link wikidata="Q804886" start="3996" end="4000" title="Zhao (surname)" label="Zhao"/>
<link wikidata="Q13391233" start="4017" end="4022" title="Liang (surname)" label="Liang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931708" start="4028" end="4030" title="Ma (surname)" label="Ma"/>
<link wikidata="Q4153205" start="4036" end="4038" title="Ge (surname)" label="Ge"/>
<link wikidata="Q4151201" start="4044" end="4046" title="Gu (surname)" label="Gu"/>
<link wikidata="Q16260510" start="4052" end="4056" title="Miào (surname)" label="Miao"/>
<link wikidata="Q16865583" start="4062" end="4067" title="Zhong (surname)" label="Zhong"/>
<link wikidata="Q4493814" start="4073" end="4076" title="Fei (surname)" label="Fei"/>
<link wikidata="Q6745196" start="4086" end="4088" title="Qu (surname 瞿)" label="Qu"/>
<link wikidata="Q34756" start="4104" end="4115" title="Qin (state)" label="Qin Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q197430" start="4117" end="4129" title="Zhao (state)" label="Zhao Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7183" start="4131" end="4142" title="Qin dynasty" label="Qin dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7462" start="4147" end="4159" title="Song dynasty" label="Song dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q4243879" start="4195" end="4200" title="Yi (husbandman)" label="Bo Yi"/>
<link wikidata="Q987290" start="4202" end="4211" title="Hata Clan" label="Hata Clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q934262" start="4231" end="4247" title="Aisin Gioro" label="Aisin Gioro Clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q54593665" start="4249" end="4265" title="Irgen Gioro" label="Irgen Gioro Clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q81126" start="4284" end="4293" title="Manchuria" label="Manchuria"/>
<link wikidata="Q4243879" start="4353" end="4358" title="Yi (husbandman)" label="Bo Yi"/>
<link wikidata="Q55267" start="4374" end="4384" title="Jī" label="Ji Clan 姬姓"/>
<link wikidata="Q29201" start="4456" end="4470" title="Yellow Emperor" label="Yellow Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q198180" start="4504" end="4519" title="Zhuanxu" label="Zhuanxu Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q10933357" start="4547" end="4559" title="Ye the Great" label="Ye the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q4243879" start="4627" end="4640" title="Yi (husbandman)" label="Fei the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q198249" start="4699" end="4706" title="Zhurong" label="Zhurong"/>
<link wikidata="Q2650142" start="5045" end="5058" title="Huang (state)" label="Huang Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2194386" start="5096" end="5105" title="Peng Zu" label="Qian Keng"/>
<link wikidata="Q9904423" start="5154" end="5169" title="Dapeng (state)" label="Da Peng Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q227007" start="5341" end="5352" title="Zou (state)" label="Zhu Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q10122188" start="5394" end="5401" title="Ji Lian" label="Ji Lian"/>
<link wikidata="Q504759" start="5419" end="5430" title="Chu (state)" label="Chu Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q819556" start="5467" end="5478" title="Emperor Yao" label="Emperor Yao"/>
<link wikidata="Q819556" start="5537" end="5548" title="Emperor Yao" label="Emperor Yao"/>
<link wikidata="Q929190" start="5715" end="5722" title="Fenyang" label="Fenyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q46913" start="5724" end="5730" title="Shanxi" label="Shanxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q819556" start="5742" end="5753" title="Emperor Yao" label="Emperor Yao"/>
<link wikidata="Q2650142" start="5777" end="5791" title="State of Huang" label="State of Huang"/>
<link wikidata="Q185047" start="6167" end="6191" title="Spring and Autumn period" label="Spring and Autumn period"/>
<link wikidata="Q912043" start="6246" end="6249" title="Jin (Chinese state)" label="Jin"/>
<link wikidata="Q29201" start="6324" end="6338" title="Yellow Emperor" label="Yellow Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147250" start="6351" end="6359" title="Shaohao" label="Shao Hao"/>
<link wikidata="Q198180" start="6455" end="6471" title="Zhuanxu" label="Zhuan Xu Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2650142" start="6618" end="6631" title="Huang (state)" label="Huang Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1449069" start="6636" end="6648" title="Shěn (state)" label="Shen Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209245" start="6730" end="6747" title="King Xiao of Zhou" label="King Xiao of Zhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199240" start="6959" end="6966" title="Yicheng, Hubei" label="Yicheng"/>
<link wikidata="Q46862" start="6968" end="6973" title="Hubei" label="Hubei"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292383" start="7152" end="7155" title="Dao (state)" label="Dao"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199240" start="7228" end="7235" title="Yicheng, Hubei" label="Yicheng"/>
<link wikidata="Q46862" start="7237" end="7242" title="Hubei" label="Hubei"/>
<link wikidata="Q2650142" start="7268" end="7273" title="Huang (state)" label="Huang"/>
<link wikidata="Q7352" start="7312" end="7333" title="Jin dynasty (266–420)" label="Jin dynasty (266–420)"/>
<link wikidata="Q41705" start="7548" end="7554" title="Fujian" label="Fujian"/>
<link wikidata="Q15242576" start="7742" end="7745" title="Lin (surname)" label="Lin"/>
<link wikidata="Q804988" start="7758" end="7762" title="Chen (surname)" label="Chen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6583590" start="7766" end="7771" title="Zheng (surname)" label="Zheng"/>
<link wikidata="Q19611083" start="7775" end="7779" title="Zhan (surname)" label="Zhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q81906336" start="7783" end="7786" title="Qiū (surname)" label="Qiu"/>
<link wikidata="Q16633972" start="7790" end="7792" title="He (surname)" label="He"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132594" start="7800" end="7802" title="Hu (surname)" label="Hu"/>
<link wikidata="Q9683" start="7874" end="7886" title="Tang dynasty" label="Tang dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q41705" start="7937" end="7943" title="Fujian" label="Fujian"/>
<link wikidata="Q15175" start="7947" end="7956" title="Guangdong" label="Guangdong"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="8248" end="8262" title="Southeast Asia" label="Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="10111" end="10117" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q36692" start="10163" end="10176" title="Zhuang People" label="Zhuang People"/>
<link wikidata="Q15176" start="10259" end="10266" title="Guangxi" label="Guangxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q15175" start="10345" end="10363" title="Guangdong" label="Guangdong Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="10447" end="10453" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q15175" start="10717" end="10726" title="Guangdong" label="Guangdong"/>
<link wikidata="Q714113" start="10778" end="10788" title="Huang Chao" label="Huang Chao"/>
<link wikidata="Q9683" start="10850" end="10862" title="Tang dynasty" label="Tang dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q844264" start="10864" end="10879" title="Huang Chengyan" label="Huang Cheng Yan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209" start="10885" end="10904" title="Eastern Han dynasty" label="Eastern Han dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q842488" start="10914" end="10926" title="Huang Daopo" label="Huang Dao Po"/>
<link wikidata="Q7313" start="10944" end="10956" title="Yuan dynasty" label="Yuan dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q3369486" start="10979" end="10993" title="Huang Daozhou" label="Huang Dao Zhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q9903" start="11011" end="11023" title="Ming dynasty" label="Ming dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q5925500" start="11111" end="11121" title="Huang Ding" label="Huang Ding"/>
<link wikidata="Q8733" start="11138" end="11150" title="Qing dynasty" label="Qing dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q317869" start="11179" end="11192" title="Huang Feihong" label="Wong Fei Hung"/>
<link wikidata="Q8733" start="11293" end="11305" title="Qing dynasty" label="Qing dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7893530" start="11307" end="11319" title="Wong Kim Ark" label="Wong Kim Ark"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="11392" end="11408" title="US Supreme Court" label="US Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q559727" start="11427" end="11436" title="Huang Gai" label="Huang Gai"/>
<link wikidata="Q274488" start="11441" end="11451" title="Eastern Wu" label="Eastern Wu"/>
<link wikidata="Q185043" start="11542" end="11563" title="Three Kingdoms period" label="Three Kingdoms period"/>
<link wikidata="Q702525" start="11565" end="11580" title="Huang Gongwang" label="Huang Gong Wang"/>
<link wikidata="Q5475328" start="11627" end="11659" title="Four Masters of the Yuan dynasty" label="Four Masters of the Yuan dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q3430445" start="11667" end="11675" title="Huang Ji" label="Huang Ji"/>
<link wikidata="Q9903" start="11680" end="11692" title="Ming dynasty" label="Ming dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q706004" start="11711" end="11721" title="Huang Quan (general)" label="Huang Quan"/>
<link wikidata="Q320925" start="11745" end="11752" title="Shu Han" label="Shu Han"/>
<link wikidata="Q320930" start="11766" end="11773" title="Cao Wei" label="Cao Wei"/>
<link wikidata="Q11176529" start="11808" end="11821" title="Huang Ruheng" label="Huang Ru Heng"/>
<link wikidata="Q9903" start="11864" end="11876" title="Ming dynasty" label="Ming dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q701076" start="11878" end="11888" title="Huang Shen" label="Huang Shen"/>
<link wikidata="Q8733" start="11905" end="11917" title="Qing dynasty" label="Qing dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q340808" start="11974" end="12002" title="Eight Eccentrics of Yangzhou" label="Eight Eccentrics of Yangzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q5925687" start="12010" end="12022" title="Ong Sum Ping" label="Ong Sum Ping"/>
<link wikidata="Q5925687" start="12027" end="12040" title="Huang Senping" label="Huang Senping"/>
<link wikidata="Q921" start="12051" end="12057" title="Brunei" label="Brunei"/>
<link wikidata="Q709460" start="12194" end="12209" title="Huang Tingjian" label="Huang Ting Jian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7462" start="12227" end="12239" title="Song dynasty" label="Song dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q10835094" start="12406" end="12415" title="Huang Xie" label="Huang Xie"/>
<link wikidata="Q504759" start="12482" end="12485" title="Chu (state)" label="Chu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3180388" start="12547" end="12579" title="Four Lords of the Warring States" label="Four Lords of the Warring States"/>
<link wikidata="Q378547" start="12588" end="12599" title="Huang Zhong" label="Huang Zhong"/>
<link wikidata="Q320925" start="12612" end="12619" title="Shu Han" label="Shu Han"/>
<link wikidata="Q185043" start="12647" end="12668" title="Three Kingdoms period" label="Three Kingdoms period"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198134" start="12690" end="12709" title="Five Tiger Generals" label="Five Tiger Generals"/>
<link wikidata="Q245315" start="12722" end="12729" title="Liu Bei" label="Liu Bei"/>
<link wikidata="Q31754" start="12731" end="12744" title="Huang Zongxi" label="Huang Zong Xi"/>
<link wikidata="Q709087" start="13049" end="13063" title="Huang Zunxian" label="Huang Zun Xian"/>
<link wikidata="Q8733" start="13086" end="13098" title="Qing dynasty" label="Qing dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q5925455" start="13171" end="13184" title="Huang Baitao" label="Huang Bai Tao"/>
<link wikidata="Q952003" start="13327" end="13358" title="Order of Blue Sky and White Sun" label="Order of Blue Sky and White Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q113621751" start="13411" end="13422" title="Huang Bamei" label="Huang Bamei"/>
<link wikidata="Q715837" start="13476" end="13490" title="Huang Binhong" label="Huang Bin Hong"/>
<link wikidata="Q50637" start="13516" end="13529" title="art historian" label="art historian"/>
<link wikidata="Q756712" start="13534" end="13542" title="literati painting" label="Literati"/>
<link wikidata="Q5088776" start="13552" end="13564" title="Che Yin Wong" label="Wong Che Yin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5925475" start="13695" end="13706" title="Huang Chieh" label="Huang Chieh"/>
<link wikidata="Q31113" start="13723" end="13733" title="Kuomintang" label="Kuomintang"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="13773" end="13790" title="Republic of China" label="Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q11176444" start="13792" end="13808" title="Huang Chih-hsien" label="Huang Chih Hsien"/>
<link wikidata="Q2037965" start="13911" end="13926" title="Huang Chunming" label="Huang Chun Ming"/>
<link wikidata="Q5925505" start="13983" end="13995" title="Huang Daren" label="Huang Da Ren"/>
<link wikidata="Q21040504" start="14036" end="14045" title="Huang Dao" label="Huang Dao"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036830" start="14062" end="14111" title="Chinese Workers&amp;#x27; and Peasants&amp;#x27; Red Army" label="Chinese Workers&amp;#x27; and Peasants&amp;#x27; Red Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q709541" start="14120" end="14135" title="New Fourth Army" label="New Fourth Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q56411620" start="14192" end="14203" title="Huang Enru" label="Huang En Ru"/>
<link wikidata="Q23901195" start="14275" end="14280" title="BEJ48" label="BEJ48"/>
<link wikidata="Q712780" start="14282" end="14290" title="Huang Fu" label="Huang Fu"/>
<link wikidata="Q5925535" start="14365" end="14379" title="Huang Guangyu" label="Huang Guang Yu"/>
<link wikidata="Q24835296" start="14418" end="14432" title="Huang Guoxian" label="Huang Guo Xian"/>
<link wikidata="Q607832" start="14476" end="14515" title="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army Air Force" label="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077971" start="14554" end="14577" title="Nanjing Military Region" label="Nanjing Military Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q8320741" start="14589" end="14603" title="Huang Hengmei" label="Huang Heng Mei"/>
<link wikidata="Q607832" start="14647" end="14686" title="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army Air Force" label="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077923" start="14725" end="14748" title="Chengdu Military Region" label="Chengdu Military Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197005" start="14767" end="14790" title="Lanzhou Military Region" label="Lanzhou Military Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q5895835" start="14802" end="14816" title="Hongjia Huang" label="Huang Hong Jia"/>
<link wikidata="Q707493" start="14904" end="14917" title="Huang Huahua" label="Huang Hua Hua"/>
<link wikidata="Q128018225" start="14942" end="14950" title="Governor of Guangdong" label="Governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q15175" start="14954" end="14972" title="Guangdong Province" label="Guangdong Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q684802" start="14981" end="14997" title="Huang Jianxiang" label="Huang Jian Xiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q704612" start="15053" end="15067" title="Huang Jianxin" label="Huang Jian Xin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6650690" start="15126" end="15140" title="Huang Jiguang" label="Huang Ji Guang"/>
<link wikidata="Q8663" start="15202" end="15212" title="Korean War" label="Korean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q505710" start="15214" end="15222" title="Huang Ju" label="Huang Ju"/>
<link wikidata="Q709317" start="15299" end="15313" title="James Wong Jim" label="James Wong Jim"/>
<link wikidata="Q124326113" start="15576" end="15601" title="The Scale of the Universe" label="The Scale of the Universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5925589" start="15609" end="15618" title="Huang Kan" label="Huang Kan"/>
<link wikidata="Q13426199" start="15641" end="15658" title="Republic of China (1912–1949)" label="Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q717035" start="15922" end="15936" title="Huang Kecheng" label="Huang Ke Cheng"/>
<link wikidata="Q200106" start="16023" end="16052" title="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army" label="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q22075564" start="16072" end="16126" title="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army General Staff Department" label="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army General Staff Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q713524" start="16128" end="16137" title="Huang Kun" label="Huang Kun"/>
<link wikidata="Q715396" start="16167" end="16186" title="solid-state physics" label="solid-state physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q4946169" start="16192" end="16216" title="Born–Huang approximation" label="Born–Huang approximation"/>
<link wikidata="Q8292452" start="16247" end="16261" title="Huang Kunming" label="Huang Kun Ming"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153569" start="16291" end="16343" title="Publicity Department of the Chinese Communist Party" label="Propaganda Department of the Chinese Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076970" start="16364" end="16404" title="Politburo of the Chinese Communist Party" label="Politburo of the Chinese Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q11176815" start="16406" end="16420" title="Huang Mao-zong" label="Huang Mao Zong"/>
<link wikidata="Q8967986" start="16485" end="16498" title="Huang Mengfu" label="Huang Meng Fu"/>
<link wikidata="Q4727815" start="16611" end="16656" title="All-China Federation of Industry and Commerce" label="All-China Federation of Industry and Commerce"/>
<link wikidata="Q5925638" start="16658" end="16671" title="Huang Min-hui" label="Huang Min Hui"/>
<link wikidata="Q31113" start="16747" end="16757" title="Kuomintang" label="Kuomintang"/>
<link wikidata="Q6627476" start="16769" end="16774" title="List of mayors of Chiayi" label="Mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q249995" start="16778" end="16789" title="Chiayi City" label="Chiayi City"/>
<link wikidata="Q5925645" start="16816" end="16829" title="Huang Minlon" label="Huang Min Lon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5925648" start="17157" end="17167" title="Huang Ming (entrepreneur)" label="Huang Ming"/>
<link wikidata="Q40015" start="17192" end="17204" title="solar energy" label="solar energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q63683362" start="17234" end="17248" title="Huang Minghao" label="Huang Ming Hao"/>
<link wikidata="Q55641185" start="17325" end="17329" title="NEX7" label="NEXT"/>
<link wikidata="Q51625866" start="17334" end="17346" title="Nine Percent" label="Nine Percent"/>
<link wikidata="Q6937882" start="17348" end="17356" title="Huang Na" label="Huang Na"/>
<link wikidata="Q2865389" start="17463" end="17474" title="Arthur Wong" label="Arthur Wong"/>
<link wikidata="Q19409" start="17498" end="17518" title="Hong Kong Film Award" label="Hong Kong Film Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q222344" start="17528" end="17543" title="Cinematographer" label="Cinematographer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3480998" start="17599" end="17610" title="Huang Nubo" label="Huang Nu Bo"/>
<link wikidata="Q8425912" start="17715" end="17726" title="Helena Wong (politician)" label="Helena Wong"/>
<link wikidata="Q47002841" start="17778" end="17791" title="NCT Dream" label="Huang Ren Jun"/>
<link wikidata="Q8968616" start="17889" end="17901" title="Huang Rulun" label="Huang Ru Lun"/>
<link wikidata="Q11176245" start="17970" end="17986" title="Huang Shaoqiang" label="Huang Shao Qiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1632798" start="18013" end="18030" title="Huang Sheng-shyan" label="Huang Sheng Shyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3705105" start="18048" end="18055" title="kung fu" label="kung fu"/>
<link wikidata="Q167987" start="18060" end="18067" title="tai chi" label="tai chi"/>
<link wikidata="Q708485" start="18082" end="18096" title="Huang Shengyi" label="Huang Sheng Yi"/>
<link wikidata="Q27063160" start="18131" end="18146" title="Huang Shu-kuang" label="Huang Shu Kuang"/>
<link wikidata="Q702116" start="18164" end="18186" title="Republic of China Navy" label="Republic of China Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q112762025" start="18218" end="18244" title="Chief of the General Staff (Republic of China)" label="Chief of the General Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639844" start="18246" end="18261" title="Wong Shun Leung" label="Wong Shun Leung"/>
<link wikidata="Q217127" start="18305" end="18314" title="Wing Chun" label="Wing Chun"/>
<link wikidata="Q8293836" start="18324" end="18338" title="Huang Shuxian" label="Huang Shu Xian"/>
<link wikidata="Q907098" start="18356" end="18381" title="Ministry of Civil Affairs" label="Minister of Civil Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046737" start="18390" end="18413" title="Ministry of Supervision" label="Minister of Supervision"/>
<link wikidata="Q19840047" start="18418" end="18486" title="Deputy Secretary of the Central Commission for Discipline Inspection" label="Deputy Secretary of the Central Commission for Discipline Inspection"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="18490" end="18525" title="China" label="the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q23670982" start="18527" end="18542" title="Huang Tingting" label="Huang Ting Ting"/>
<link wikidata="Q181457" start="18604" end="18609" title="SNH48" label="SNH48"/>
<link wikidata="Q698851" start="18631" end="18640" title="Dayo Wong" label="Dayo Wong"/>
<link wikidata="Q708898" start="18789" end="18798" title="Huang Tzu" label="Huang Tzu"/>
<link wikidata="Q4758975" start="18880" end="18891" title="Andrew Wong (politician)" label="Andrew Wong"/>
<link wikidata="Q2994119" start="18927" end="18946" title="Legislative Council" label="Legislative Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q18921926" start="19073" end="19082" title="Huang Wei (businessman)" label="Huang Wei"/>
<link wikidata="Q11178154" start="19146" end="19158" title="Huang Weilu" label="Huang Wei Lu"/>
<link wikidata="Q10891829" start="19305" end="19329" title="Two Bombs, One Satellite" label="Two Bombs, One Satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q5925739" start="19343" end="19359" title="Huang Xianzhong" label="Huang Xian Zhong"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="19435" end="19466" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197000" start="19511" end="19535" title="Shenyang Military Region" label="Shenyang Military Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q376456" start="19537" end="19552" title="Huang Xiaojing" label="Huang Xiao Jing"/>
<link wikidata="Q41705" start="19589" end="19604" title="Fujian Province" label="Fujian Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q701194" start="19613" end="19628" title="Huang Xiaoming" label="Huang Xiao Ming"/>
<link wikidata="Q706842" start="19661" end="19671" title="Huang Xing" label="Huang Xing"/>
<link wikidata="Q13426199" start="19790" end="19807" title="Republic of China (1912–1949)" label="Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q5925757" start="19809" end="19823" title="Huang Xingguo" label="Huang Xing Guo"/>
<link wikidata="Q11736" start="19850" end="19857" title="Tianjin" label="Tianjin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3245352" start="19866" end="19879" title="John Huang Xinrui" label="Huang Xin Rui"/>
<link wikidata="Q702659" start="20034" end="20051" title="Republic of China Air Force" label="Chinese Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q170314" start="20063" end="20085" title="Second Sino-Japanese War" label="War of Resistance/WWII"/>
<link wikidata="Q8972150" start="20088" end="20100" title="Huang Xuhua" label="Huang Xu Hua"/>
<link wikidata="Q5925773" start="20190" end="20203" title="Huang Yanpei" label="Huang Yan Pei"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348513" start="20290" end="20313" title="China Democratic League" label="China Democratic League"/>
<link wikidata="Q13426199" start="20357" end="20374" title="Republic of China (1912–1949)" label="Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="20410" end="20441" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q710154" start="20443" end="20459" title="Huang Yongsheng" label="Huang Yong Sheng"/>
<link wikidata="Q200106" start="20501" end="20530" title="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army" label="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077991" start="20556" end="20581" title="Guangzhou Military Region" label="Guangzhou Military Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q22075564" start="20601" end="20655" title="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army General Staff Department" label="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army General Staff Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q11178497" start="20657" end="20672" title="Huang Yuanyong" label="Huang Yuan yong"/>
<link wikidata="Q8733" start="20745" end="20757" title="Qing dynasty" label="Qing dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q13426199" start="20768" end="20785" title="Republic of China (1912–1949)" label="Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q52219380" start="20787" end="20799" title="Lucas (rapper)" label="Wong Yuk Hei"/>
<link wikidata="Q23725822" start="20911" end="20914" title="NCT (group)" label="NCT"/>
<link wikidata="Q23416847" start="20916" end="20927" title="Jack Wong" label="Huang Zhang"/>
<link wikidata="Q23416847" start="20946" end="20955" title="Jack Wong" label="Jack Wong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143917" start="21017" end="21022" title="Meizu" label="Meizu"/>
<link wikidata="Q8288361" start="21024" end="21034" title="Huang Zhen" label="Huang Zhen"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="21125" end="21156" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q8969372" start="21158" end="21173" title="Huang Zhendong" label="Huang Zhen Dong"/>
<link wikidata="Q832416" start="21198" end="21219" title="Ministry of Transport of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="Minister of Transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="21270" end="21301" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q61719496" start="21303" end="21317" title="Huang Zhiqian" label="Huang Zhi Qian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5925824" start="21362" end="21383" title="Huang Zhun (composer)" label="Huang Zhun (composer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q8968483" start="21418" end="21441" title="Huang Zhun (footballer)" label="Huang Zhun (footballer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q10769072" start="21478" end="21490" title="Huang Zitao" label="Huang Zi Tao"/>
<link wikidata="Q494717" start="21597" end="21600" title="Exo (group)" label="Exo"/>
<link wikidata="Q711965" start="21602" end="21613" title="Wong Ka Kui" label="Wong Ka Kui"/>
<link wikidata="Q853266" start="21715" end="21721" title="Beyond (band)" label="Beyond"/>
<link wikidata="Q8031963" start="21769" end="21781" title="Wong Ah Fook" label="Wong Ah Fook"/>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="21917" end="21925" title="Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5925452" start="21927" end="21939" title="Huang Biren" label="Huang Bi Ren"/>
<link wikidata="Q4889412" start="22012" end="22030" title="Wong Tape" label="Benjamin Wong Tape"/>
<link wikidata="Q7021727" start="22074" end="22087" title="Ng Chee Khern" label="Ng Chee Khern"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002451" start="22152" end="22183" title="Republic of Singapore Air Force" label="Republic of Singapore Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q4294509" start="22250" end="22269" title="Ministry of Defence (Singapore)" label="Ministry of Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q15410291" start="22271" end="22283" title="Ng Chee Meng" label="Ng Chee Meng"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="22452" end="22461" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q15410371" start="22463" end="22475" title="Ng Chee Peng" label="Ng Chee Peng"/>
<link wikidata="Q2531890" start="22543" end="22569" title="Republic of Singapore Navy" label="Republic of Singapore Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q126488" start="22592" end="22601" title="Robert Ng" label="Robert Ng"/>
<link wikidata="Q4776877" start="22671" end="22681" title="Sino Group" label="Sino Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q7021731" start="22723" end="22735" title="Ng Chee Yang" label="Ng Chee Yang"/>
<link wikidata="Q15637816" start="22808" end="22820" title="John K.C. Ng" label="John K.C. Ng"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074342" start="22945" end="22959" title="Ching He Huang" label="Huang Ching He"/>
<link wikidata="Q7979278" start="23015" end="23028" title="Wee Chong Jin" label="Wee Chong Jin"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="23083" end="23092" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q5368081" start="23116" end="23124" title="Elvin Ng" label="Elvin Ng"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484368" start="23167" end="23178" title="Wee Cho Yaw" label="Wee Cho Yaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="23323" end="23332" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q6383299" start="23371" end="23388" title="Keeree Kanjanapas" label="Keeree Kanjanapas"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="23503" end="23522" title="Thailand" label="Kingdom of Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q16123118" start="23524" end="23536" title="Wong Doc-Fai" label="Wong Doc Fai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770826" start="23591" end="23602" title="Choy Li Fut" label="Choy Li Fut"/>
<link wikidata="Q167987" start="23615" end="23622" title="tai chi" label="tai chi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322162" start="23643" end="23661" title="Eka Tjipta Widjaja" label="Eka Tjipta Widjaja"/>
<link wikidata="Q1984113" start="23699" end="23709" title="Ng Eng Hen" label="Ng Eng Hen"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="23750" end="23759" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q7021744" start="23761" end="23772" title="Ng Eng Teng" label="Ng Eng Teng"/>
<link wikidata="Q971622" start="23812" end="23824" title="Freddie Wong" label="Freddie Wong"/>
<link wikidata="Q28412157" start="23885" end="23901" title="Ing Kuntha Phavi" label="Huang Gantapawei"/>
<link wikidata="Q28412157" start="23911" end="23927" title="Ing Kuntha Phavi" label="Ing Kuntha Phavi"/>
<link wikidata="Q424" start="23999" end="24007" title="Cambodia" label="Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3546382" start="24029" end="24039" title="Tyrus Wong" label="Tyrus Wong"/>
<link wikidata="Q67864437" start="24129" end="24138" title="Hao Huang (mathematician)" label="Hao Huang"/>
<link wikidata="Q11176994" start="24164" end="24177" title="Wong Hok-Sing" label="Wong Hok Sing"/>
<link wikidata="Q124077452" start="24232" end="24242" title="Hosea Wong" label="Hosea Wong"/>
<link wikidata="Q6828395" start="24305" end="24328" title="Michael Bambang Hartono" label="Michael Bambang Hartono"/>
<link wikidata="Q2156645" start="24395" end="24414" title="Robert Budi Hartono" label="Robert Budi Hartono"/>
<link wikidata="Q7884430" start="24460" end="24468" title="Ung Huot" label="Ung Huot"/>
<link wikidata="Q424" start="24510" end="24518" title="Cambodia" label="Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8031987" start="24520" end="24534" title="Wong Jeh Shyan" label="Wong Jeh Shyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q305177" start="24666" end="24678" title="Jen-Hsun Huang" label="Jensen Huang"/>
<link wikidata="Q182477" start="24725" end="24743" title="Nvidia Corporation" label="Nvidia Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2859909" start="24766" end="24779" title="Arcadio Huang" label="Arcadio Huang"/>
<link wikidata="Q5253529" start="24917" end="24934" title="Delbert E. Wong" label="Delbert Earl Wong"/>
<link wikidata="Q7021755" start="25011" end="25022" title="Ng Jui Ping" label="Ng Jui Ping"/>
<link wikidata="Q5097020" start="25082" end="25110" title="Chief of Defence Force (Singapore)" label="Chief of Defence Force (CDF)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074568" start="25118" end="25140" title="Singapore Armed Forces" label="Singapore Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q86418695" start="25170" end="25183" title="Jarrell Huang" label="Jarrell Huang"/>
<link wikidata="Q7093808" start="25227" end="25239" title="Ong Ka Chuan" label="Ong Ka Chuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="25435" end="25443" title="Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q461128" start="25445" end="25458" title="Wong Kan Seng" label="Wong Kan Seng"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="25508" end="25517" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q716871" start="25519" end="25530" title="Ong Ka Ting" label="Ong Ka Ting"/>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="25672" end="25680" title="Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16008474" start="25682" end="25698" title="Wee Kheng Chiang" label="Wee Kheng Chiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064074" start="25761" end="25781" title="United Overseas Bank" label="United Overseas Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="25791" end="25800" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q5110647" start="25822" end="25842" title="Christianto Wibisono" label="Christianto Wibisono"/>
<link wikidata="Q1945786" start="25866" end="25884" title="Chinese Indonesian" label="Chinese Indonesian"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="25905" end="25914" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16019264" start="25936" end="25946" title="James Wong (politician)" label="James Wong"/>
<link wikidata="Q7098625" start="25978" end="26014" title="Leader of the Opposition (Malaysia)" label="Leader of the Opposition in Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q170462" start="26044" end="26051" title="Sarawak" label="Sarawak"/>
<link wikidata="Q399998" start="26053" end="26064" title="Wee Kim Wee" label="Wee Kim Wee"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="26106" end="26127" title="Republic of Singapore" label="Republic of Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q22007161" start="26149" end="26157" title="Louis Ng" label="Louis Ng"/>
<link wikidata="Q28608448" start="26209" end="26255" title="Animal Concerns Research and Education Society" label="Animal Concerns Research and Education Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q102360621" start="26265" end="26280" title="Lan-Hsuan Huang" label="Huang Lan Hsuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q232376" start="26342" end="26355" title="Anna May Wong" label="Anna May Wong"/>
<link wikidata="Q122127995" start="26471" end="26488" title="Melki Sedek Huang" label="Melki Sedek Huang"/>
<link wikidata="Q5659979" start="26526" end="26538" title="sex offender" label="sex offender"/>
<link wikidata="Q534515" start="26605" end="26628" title="University of Indonesia" label="University of Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6935544" start="26630" end="26644" title="Mun Charn Wong" label="Wong Mun Charn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2117500" start="26755" end="26769" title="Puey Ungpakorn" label="Puey Ungpakorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q459147" start="26956" end="26970" title="Wong Peng Soon" label="Wong Peng Soon"/>
<link wikidata="Q707088" start="27110" end="27119" title="Ray Huang" label="Ray Huang"/>
<link wikidata="Q6668636" start="27246" end="27254" title="Loke Yew" label="Loke Yew"/>
<link wikidata="Q871091" start="27302" end="27316" title="British Malaya" label="British Malaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q4406577" start="27389" end="27398" title="Huang Ruo" label="Huang Ruo"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="27583" end="27592" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7495978" start="27594" end="27610" title="Shiaan-Bin Huang" label="Huang Shiaan Bin"/>
<link wikidata="Q83162" start="27668" end="27693" title="African National Congress" label="African National Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027294" start="27724" end="27733" title="Newcastle, KwaZulu-Natal" label="Newcastle"/>
<link wikidata="Q81725" start="27737" end="27750" title="KwaZulu-Natal" label="KwaZulu-Natal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027294" start="27786" end="27795" title="Newcastle, KwaZulu-Natal" label="Newcastle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4726076" start="27818" end="27832" title="Alice S. Huang" label="Alice S. Huang"/>
<link wikidata="Q7790863" start="27933" end="27945" title="Thomas Huang" label="Thomas Huang"/>
<link wikidata="Q6504758" start="28085" end="28098" title="Lawrence Wong" label="Lawrence Wong"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="28155" end="28164" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q18637232" start="28186" end="28197" title="Carrie Wong" label="Carrie Wong"/>
<link wikidata="Q11176369" start="28232" end="28244" title="Su-Shu Huang" label="Huang Su Shu"/>
<link wikidata="Q685045" start="28307" end="28322" title="3014 Huangsushu" label="3014 Huangsushu"/>
<link wikidata="Q718141" start="28344" end="28356" title="Ng Teng Fong" label="Ng Teng Fong"/>
<link wikidata="Q7783879" start="28427" end="28436" title="Thian Hee" label="Thian Hee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7423209" start="28529" end="28543" title="Sarasin Family" label="Sarasin Family"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="28551" end="28570" title="Thailand" label="Kingdom of Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1272459" start="28572" end="28585" title="Oei Tiong Ham" label="Oei Tiong Ham"/>
<link wikidata="Q12501160" start="28627" end="28639" title="Oei Tjoe Tat" label="Oei Tjoe Tat"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="28703" end="28712" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5651483" start="28737" end="28746" title="Hao Huang (pianist)" label="Hao Huang"/>
<link wikidata="Q266521" start="28835" end="28850" title="James Wong Howe" label="James Wong Howe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7078539" start="28898" end="28910" title="Oei Wie Gwan" label="Oei Wie Gwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4943581" start="28986" end="29005" title="Boonchu Rojanastien" label="Boonchu Rojanastien"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="29075" end="29083" title="Thailand" label="Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q697905" start="29109" end="29120" title="Peter Huang" label="Peter Huang"/>
<link wikidata="Q5925720" start="29226" end="29240" title="Huang Wenyong" label="Huang Wen Yong"/>
<link wikidata="Q6213057" start="29292" end="29300" title="Joe Wong (comedian)" label="Joe Wong"/>
<link wikidata="Q7147677" start="29395" end="29414" title="Patrick Soon-Shiong" label="Patrick Soon-Shiong"/>
<link wikidata="Q174710" start="29531" end="29568" title="University of California, Los Angeles" label="University of California, Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q8045224" start="29570" end="29584" title="Xuedong Huang" label="Huang Xue Dong"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283" start="29602" end="29611" title="Microsoft" label="Microsoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q712100" start="29758" end="29771" title="Arthur C. Yap" label="Arthur C. Yap"/>
<link wikidata="Q7444283" start="29809" end="29833" title="Secretary of Agriculture (Philippines)" label="Secretary of Agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q678545" start="29852" end="29895" title="House of Representatives of the Philippines" label="House of Representatives of the Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q3074353" start="29919" end="29937" title="Flossie Wong-Staal" label="Flossie Wong-Staal"/>
<link wikidata="Q11176608" start="30142" end="30152" title="Ng Yen Yen" label="Ng Yen Yen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1886920" start="30282" end="30311" title="Malaysian Chinese Association" label="Malaysian Chinese Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q5925783" start="30319" end="30333" title="Huang Yiliang" label="Huang Yi Liang"/>
<link wikidata="Q5336136" start="30391" end="30402" title="Eddie Huang" label="Eddie Huang"/>
<link wikidata="Q456759" start="30514" end="30524" title="Penny Wong" label="Penny Wong"/>
<link wikidata="Q8053839" start="30701" end="30713" title="Yishan Wong" label="Wong Yi Shan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136" start="30726" end="30732" title="Reddit" label="Reddit"/>
<link wikidata="Q486860" start="30748" end="30761" title="Mountain View, California" label="Mountain View"/>
<link wikidata="Q51711" start="30810" end="30815" title="Quora" label="Quora"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076547" start="30827" end="30843" title="knowledge market" label="knowledge market"/>
<link wikidata="Q698951" start="30864" end="30874" title="James Wong (filmmaker)" label="James Wong"/>
<link wikidata="Q7383395" start="30975" end="30996" title="Ruthlane Uy Asmundson" label="Ruthlane Uy Asmundson"/>
<link wikidata="Q668546" start="31038" end="31055" title="Davis, California" label="Davis, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q5069253" start="31175" end="31187" title="Cham Prasidh" label="Cham Prasidh"/>
<link wikidata="Q424" start="31293" end="31301" title="Cambodia" label="Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6990778" start="31324" end="31335" title="Nelson Wang" label="Nelson Wang"/>
<link wikidata="Q329897" start="31399" end="31416" title="David Henry Hwang" label="David Henry Hwang"/>
<link wikidata="Q23761221" start="31530" end="31543" title="Alfonso A. Uy" label="Alfonso A. Uy"/>
<link wikidata="Q73623742" start="31681" end="31689" title="Nigel Ng" label="Nigel Ng"/>
<link wikidata="Q703914" start="31770" end="31777" title="Hokkien people" label="Hokkien"/>
<link wikidata="Q12478651" start="31835" end="31854" title="Christiandy Sanjaya" label="Christiandy Sanjaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q2118693" start="31883" end="31914" title="Regional Representative Council" label="Regional Representative Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q3916" start="31936" end="31951" title="West Kalimantan" label="West Kalimantan"/>
<link wikidata="Q871246" start="32312" end="32324" title="naming taboo" label="naming taboo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3087774" start="32347" end="32359" title="Nguyễn Hoàng" label="Nguyễn Hoàng"/>
<link wikidata="Q531749" start="32404" end="32418" title="Hoàng Anh Tuấn" label="Hoàng Anh Tuấn"/>
<link wikidata="Q967516" start="32457" end="32473" title="Hoàng Cầm (poet)" label="Hoàng Cầm (poet)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5923051" start="32530" end="32549" title="Hoàng Cầm (general)" label="Hoàng Cầm (general)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3936506" start="32580" end="32609" title="People&amp;#x27;s Army of Vietnam" label="People&amp;#x27;s Army of Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q5923054" start="32661" end="32676" title="Hoàng Cầm stove" label="Hoàng Cầm stove"/>
<link wikidata="Q5874375" start="32678" end="32692" title="Hoàng Cao Khải" label="Hoàng Cao Khải"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500483" start="32934" end="32948" title="Nguyễn dynasty" label="Nguyễn dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155647" start="32950" end="32963" title="Hoàng Châu Ký" label="Hoàng Châu Ký"/>
<link wikidata="Q5874387" start="33028" end="33041" title="Hoàng Cơ Minh" label="Hoàng Cơ Minh"/>
<link wikidata="Q19369152" start="33133" end="33147" title="Hoàng Đăng Huệ" label="Hoàng Đăng Huệ"/>
<link wikidata="Q157148" start="33161" end="33174" title="Major General" label="Major General"/>
<link wikidata="Q168559" start="33202" end="33221" title="Political Commissar" label="Political Commissar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2368890" start="33273" end="33283" title="Hoàng Diệu" label="Hoàng Diệu"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500483" start="33300" end="33314" title="Nguyễn dynasty" label="Nguyễn dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1858" start="33327" end="33332" title="Hanoi" label="Hanoi"/>
<link wikidata="Q36399" start="33373" end="33376" title="Huế" label="Huế"/>
<link wikidata="Q5923060" start="33378" end="33388" title="Hoàng Hiệp" label="Hoàng Hiệp"/>
<link wikidata="Q5874021" start="33445" end="33462" title="Hồ Chí Minh Prize" label="Hồ Chí Minh Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q5874392" start="33472" end="33486" title="Hoàng Hồng Cẩm" label="Hoàng Hồng Cẩm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156062" start="33520" end="33533" title="Hoàng Kế Viêm" label="Hoàng Kế Viêm"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500483" start="33551" end="33565" title="Nguyễn dynasty" label="Nguyễn dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q18098272" start="33701" end="33711" title="Hoang Kieu" label="Hoang Kieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q5923076" start="33746" end="33760" title="Hoàng Lập Ngôn" label="Hoàng Lập Ngôn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1306742" start="33794" end="33810" title="Hoàng Minh Chính" label="Hoàng Minh Chính"/>
<link wikidata="Q427325" start="33915" end="33941" title="Vietnamese Communist Party" label="Vietnamese Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="" start="34019" end="34033" title=":vi:Hà Thượng Nhân" label="Hà Thượng Nhân"/>
<link wikidata="Q16030483" start="34035" end="34049" title="Hoàng Thị Loan" label="Hoàng Thị Loan"/>
<link wikidata="Q36014" start="34073" end="34084" title="Hồ Chí Minh" label="Hồ Chí Minh"/>
<link wikidata="Q3739509" start="34086" end="34099" title="Hoàng Thị Thơ" label="Hoàng Thi Thơ"/>
<link wikidata="Q5923096" start="34136" end="34150" title="Hoàng Tích Chu" label="Hoàng Tích Chu"/>
<link wikidata="Q5923100" start="34187" end="34201" title="Hoàng Tích Chù" label="Hoàng Tích Chù"/>
<link wikidata="Q10769054" start="34235" end="34246" title="Hoàng Trọng" label="Hoàng Trọng"/>
<link wikidata="Q10769050" start="34283" end="34298" title="Hoàng Trung Hải" label="Hoàng Trung Hải"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141673" start="34346" end="34355" title="Hoàng Tụy" label="Hoàng Tụy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5874451" start="34413" end="34426" title="Hoàng Văn Chí" label="Hoàng Văn Chí"/>
<link wikidata="Q705682" start="34584" end="34598" title="Hoàng Văn Hoan" label="Hoàng Văn Hoan"/>
<link wikidata="Q14658619" start="34635" end="34662" title="Indochinese Communist Party" label="Indochinese Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q309118" start="34670" end="34679" title="Politburo" label="Politburo"/>
<link wikidata="Q427325" start="34694" end="34708" title="Lao Dong Party" label="Lao Dong Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q700897" start="34762" end="34776" title="Hoàng Văn Thái" label="Hoàng Văn Thái"/>
<link wikidata="Q4722490" start="34867" end="34881" title="Hoàng Xuân Hãn" label="Hoàng Xuân Hãn"/>
<link wikidata="Q10769120" start="34976" end="34991" title="Hoàng Xuân Sính" label="Hoàng Xuân Sính"/>
<link wikidata="Q760940" start="35073" end="35101" title="Ordre des Palmes Académiques" label="Ordre des Palmes Académiques"/>
<link wikidata="Q2019283" start="35103" end="35118" title="Hoàng Xuân Vinh" label="Hoàng Xuân Vinh"/>
<link wikidata="Q881" start="35192" end="35199" title="Vietnam" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q10769024" start="35201" end="35215" title="Hoàng Thùy" label="Hoàng Thị Thùy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2832965" start="35354" end="35364" title="Alex Huynh" label="Alex Huynh"/>
<link wikidata="Q256421" start="35415" end="35426" title="Carol Huynh" label="Carol Huynh"/>
<link wikidata="Q362337" start="35480" end="35493" title="Huỳnh Công Út" label="Huỳnh Công Út"/>
<link wikidata="Q643752" start="35596" end="35636" title="Pulitzer Prize for Spot News Photography" label="Pulitzer Prize for Spot News Photography"/>
<link wikidata="Q5951484" start="35725" end="35737" title="Huỳnh Phú Sổ" label="Huỳnh Phú Sổ"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369404" start="35766" end="35773" title="Hòa Hảo" label="Hòa Hảo"/>
<link wikidata="Q10769919" start="35795" end="35811" title="Huỳnh Sanh Thông" label="Huỳnh Sanh Thông"/>
<link wikidata="Q337811" start="35869" end="35883" title="Huỳnh Tấn Phát" label="Huỳnh Tấn Phát"/>
<link wikidata="Q5951487" start="35950" end="35966" title="Huỳnh Thúc Kháng" label="Huỳnh Thúc Kháng"/>
<link wikidata="Q81093" start="36013" end="36028" title="Nguyễn Huỳnh Đức" label="Huỳnh Tường Đức"/>
<link wikidata="Q81093" start="36033" end="36049" title="Nguyễn Huỳnh Đức" label="Nguyễn Huỳnh Đức"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500483" start="36067" end="36081" title="Nguyễn dynasty" label="Nguyễn dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q5951476" start="36272" end="36285" title="Huỳnh Văn Cao" label="Huỳnh Văn Cao"/>
<link wikidata="Q18917" start="36320" end="36351" title="Army of the Republic of Vietnam" label="Army of the Republic of Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q5951618" start="36353" end="36366" title="Huỳnh Văn Gấm" label="Huỳnh Văn Gấm"/>
<link wikidata="Q392125" start="36534" end="36547" title="Tokyo Mew Mew" label="Tokyo Mew Mew"/>
<link wikidata="Q5925538" start="36555" end="36566" title="Huang Feihu" label="Huang Feihu"/>
<link wikidata="Q128938" start="36583" end="36596" title="Shang dynasty" label="Shang dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q35216" start="36610" end="36622" title="Zhou dynasty" label="Zhou dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336310" start="36858" end="36872" title="Fengshen Yanyi" label="Fengshen Yanyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5925531" start="36922" end="36931" title="Huang Gun" label="Huang Gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q128938" start="36947" end="36960" title="Shang dynasty" label="Shang dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q35216" start="36974" end="36986" title="Zhou dynasty" label="Zhou dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336310" start="37018" end="37032" title="Fengshen Yanyi" label="Fengshen Yanyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1797731" start="37082" end="37092" title="Huang Rong" label="Huang Rong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1797832" start="37109" end="37121" title="Huang Yaoshi" label="Huang Yaoshi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929092" start="37126" end="37144" title="Beggars&amp;#x27; Gang" label="Beggars&amp;#x27; Gang"/>
<link wikidata="Q180626" start="37161" end="37169" title="Jin Yong" label="Jin Yong"/>
<link wikidata="Q754803" start="37177" end="37182" title="wuxia" label="wuxia"/>
<link wikidata="Q855062" start="37293" end="37302" title="Huang Xin" label="Huang Xin"/>
<link wikidata="Q70827" start="37475" end="37487" title="Water Margin" label="Water Margin"/>
<link wikidata="Q753883" start="37500" end="37527" title="Four Great Classical Novels" label="Four Great Classical Novels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1797832" start="37551" end="37563" title="Huang Yaoshi" label="Huang Yaoshi"/>
<link wikidata="Q716299" start="37623" end="37643" title="Peach Blossom Island" label="Peach Blossom Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1688869" start="37678" end="37683" title="Jianghu" label="wulin"/>
<link wikidata="Q180626" start="37745" end="37753" title="Jin Yong" label="Jin Yong"/>
<link wikidata="Q754803" start="37761" end="37766" title="wuxia" label="wuxia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5925793" start="37877" end="37889" title="Huang Yuanji" label="Huang Yuanji"/>
<link wikidata="Q128938" start="37906" end="37919" title="Shang dynasty" label="Shang dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336310" start="37986" end="38000" title="Fengshen Yanyi" label="Fengshen Yanyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q13099639" start="38067" end="38086" title="Hwang (Korean name)" label="Hwang (Korean name)"/>
<link wikidata="Q37188616" start="38089" end="38101" title="Ng (surname)" label="Ng (surname)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16242398" start="38104" end="38118" title="Wong (surname)" label="Wong (surname)"/>
<link wikidata="Q804943" start="38121" end="38135" title="Wang (surname)" label="Wang (surname)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="311756" wikidata="Q1047144" url="?curid=311756" title="Echizen Province">
<text>was a province of Japan in the area that is today the northern portion of Fukui Prefecture in the Hokuriku region of Japan. Echizen bordered on Kaga, Wakasa, Hida, and Ōmi Provinces. It was part of Hokurikudō Circuit. Its abbreviated form name was .

==History==
===Ancient and classical Echizen===
 was an ancient province of Japan and is listed as one of the original provinces in the &quot;Nihon Shoki&quot;. The region as a whole was sometimes referred to as . In 507, during a succession crisis, the king of Koshi was chosen to become the 26th emperor of Japan, Emperor Keitai.

In 701 AD, per the reforms of the Taihō Code, Koshi was divided into three separate provinces: Echizen, Etchū, and Echigo. The original Echizen included all of what is now Ishikawa Prefecture. In 718 A.D., four districts of northern Echizen (Hakui District, Noto District (also called Kashima District), Fugeshi District and Suzu District), were separated to form Noto Province. During the Nara period, the poet Nakatomi no Yakamori was exiled to Echizen, where he wrote some of his 40 poems collected in the &quot;Man&#x27;yōshū&quot;, including his love letters to Sanuno Otogami no Otome. Another famous &quot;Man&#x27;yōshū&quot; poet, Ōtomo no Yakamochi, wrote many pieces about Echizen. .

In 823 AD, the two eastern districts of Echizen (Kaga and Enuma) were separated to form Kaga Province. Kaga was thus the last province to be created under the &quot;ritsuryō&quot; system, and Echizen received its current borders at that time. During the Heian period, the provincial governor of Echizen, Fujiwara no Tametoki, was the father of the celebrated author Murasaki Shikibu. Lady Murasaki left her hometown of Heian-kyō only once in her life, to go to Echizen with her father. She stayed for just over one year, and then returned home to marry Fujiwara no Nobutaka. Her experiences in Echizen are said to have had a major influence on her greatest work, &quot;The Tale of Genji&quot;, and many place names from Echizen appear in her stories and poems.

Echizen was a strategically important province due to its proximity to Kyoto and Nara and due to its location on the Sea of Japan with contacts to the Asian continent. The province was traditionally famous for its production of &quot;washi&quot; paper. A text dated AD 774 mentions the &quot;washi&quot; made in this area. Echizen is also well known for its ceramics. It is one of the so-called six old kiln sites of Japan (the others being Shigaraki, Bizen, Seto, Tanba, and Tokoname).

The exact location of the provincial capital and Provincial temple of Echizen are unknown, but are believed to have been in what is now the city of Echizen.

===Medieval and pre-modern Echizen===
For most of the war between the Northern and Southern Courts, Echizen was under the control of the Ashikaga shogunate and Northern Courts. The province was often used as a launching point for the shogunate&#x27;s attack against the capital, and Echizen became the stage for a number of decisive battles of the war.

During most of the Muromachi period, the Shiba clan ruled as &quot;shugo&quot; of Echizen. The Shiba were displaced by the Asakura clan towards the start of the Sengoku period, who made Ichijōdani their headquarters. Under Asakura Yoshikage, Echizen enjoyed a peace and stability far greater than the rest of Japan during this chaotic period, partly due to his negotiations with the &quot;Ikkō-ikki&quot;. As a result, Echizen became a refuge for people fleeing the violence to the south.

When Oda Nobunaga invaded Echizen, he defeated the Asakura clan, burned Ichijōdani Castle to the ground and re-established the provincial capital at Echizen-Fūchu, divided among his generals Fuwa Mitsuharu, Sassa Narimasa, and Maeda Toshiie. The province remained in their hands only for a short time, after which the three were granted larger fiefs of their own elsewhere. After the death of Nobunaga, control of Echizen passed on to Shibata Katsuie, who built his castle at Kitanosho Castle in what is now the city of Fukui. Shibata himself only held Echizen Province for a few years, after which he was defeated by Toyotomi Hideyoshi.

After the Battle of Sekigahara and the establishment of the Tokugawa shogunate, the entire province was awarded by the first shogun Tokugawa Ieyasu to his second son, Yūki Hideyasu, who became the &quot;daimyō&quot; of Echizen Domain, from his base at Fukui Castle. During the early years of the Tokugawa shogunate, many nobles and aristocrats moved to Fukui city in hopes to win the favor of Hideyasu, who was widely expected to become the new shōgun. There was great disappointment and resentment when the shogunate passed on to Ieyasu&#x27;s third son, Tokugawa Hidetada. However, Echizen remained a strategically important military and political base; the Tokugawa shōguns needed loyal &quot;daimyō&quot; in the provinces surrounding the imperial capital, and Echizen served as a powerful buffer between Kyōto and the Maeda clan of Kaga, who were not among the &quot;fudai&quot; (hereditary Tokugawa allies).

Much of the province remained in the control of the Matsudaira clan until the Meiji Restoration; however, due to internal conflicts, the &quot;kokudaka&quot; of Fukui Domain was much reduced from its initial size, and several new domains were created. A large portion of the area of the province also became &quot;tenryo&quot; territory (shogunal demenses) administered directly by the shogunate.

===Meiji period and beyond===
During the Bakumatsu period, Matsudaira Shungaku, the 17th &quot;daimyō&quot; of Fukui Domain plays a major role in national politics, and acted as an intermediary to negotiate the surrender of pro-Tokugawa forces to the Meiji government at the end of the Boshin War. However, with the Meiji Restoration, the centre of political power shifted completely from Kyoto to Tokyo, and Echizen increasingly became a backwater. On August 29, 1871, Fukui Prefecture and Tsuruga Prefecture were established. However, on August 21, 1875 Fukui Prefecture was abolished, becoming part of Ishikawa Prefecture, whereas Tsuruga Prefecture became part of Shiga Prefecture. Fukui Prefecture was re-established on February 7, 1881.

Although Echizen no longer existed after 1871 and maps of Japan were reformed after that date At the same time, Echizen continued to exist legally for certain purposes. For example, Echizen is explicitly recognized in treaties in 1894 (a) between Japan and the United States and (b) between Japan and the United Kingdom.

In a border adjustment between Fukui prefecture and Gifu Prefecture on October 15, 1958, the village of Itoshiro in Ōno District was transferred to Gifu.

==Historical districts==
Echizen Province consisted of four districts:

* Fukui Prefecture
** Asuwa District (足羽郡) - dissolved
** Imadate District (今立郡)
** Nanjō District (南条郡)
** Nyū District (丹生郡)
** Ōno District (大野郡) - dissolved
** Sakai District (坂井郡) - dissolved
** Tsuruga District (敦賀郡) - dissolved
** Yoshida District (吉田郡)

==Bakumatsu period domains==
==Notes==
==References==
* Nussbaum, Louis-Frédéric and Käthe Roth. (2005). &quot;Japan encyclopedia.&quot; Cambridge: Harvard University Press. ; OCLC 58053128
* Papinot, Edmond. (1910). &quot;Historical and Geographic Dictionary of Japan.&quot; Tokyo: Librarie Sansaisha. OCLC 77691250

== External links ==

* Murdoch&#x27;s map of provinces, 1903</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q860290" start="6" end="23" title="Provinces of Japan" label="province of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q133879" start="74" end="90" title="Fukui Prefecture" label="Fukui Prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q381025" start="98" end="113" title="Hokuriku region" label="Hokuriku region"/>
<link wikidata="Q907469" start="144" end="148" title="Kaga Province" label="Kaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053713" start="150" end="156" title="Wakasa Province" label="Wakasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056535" start="158" end="162" title="Hida Province" label="Hida"/>
<link wikidata="Q843882" start="168" end="171" title="Ōmi Province" label="Ōmi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3139239" start="198" end="208" title="Hokurikudō" label="Hokurikudō"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196984" start="209" end="216" title="Gokishichidō" label="Circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q860290" start="307" end="323" title="Old provinces of Japan" label="ancient province"/>
<link wikidata="Q813935" start="393" end="404" title="Nihon Shoki" label="Nihon Shoki"/>
<link wikidata="Q208233" start="549" end="565" title="emperor of Japan" label="emperor of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q349277" start="567" end="581" title="Emperor Keitai" label="Emperor Keitai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059892" start="618" end="628" title="Taihō Code" label="Taihō Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q906899" start="688" end="693" title="Etchū Province" label="Etchū"/>
<link wikidata="Q666514" start="699" end="705" title="Echigo Province" label="Echigo"/>
<link wikidata="Q131281" start="756" end="775" title="Ishikawa Prefecture" label="Ishikawa Prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122846" start="795" end="804" title="districts of Japan" label="districts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130953" start="826" end="840" title="Hakui District, Ishikawa" label="Hakui District"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130967" start="842" end="886" title="Kashima District, Ishikawa" label="Noto District (also called Kashima District)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5507254" start="888" end="904" title="Fugeshi District, Ishikawa" label="Fugeshi District"/>
<link wikidata="Q7651143" start="909" end="922" title="Suzu District, Ishikawa" label="Suzu District"/>
<link wikidata="Q189178" start="974" end="985" title="Nara period" label="Nara period"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="996" end="1016" title="Nakatomi no Yakamori" label="Nakatomi no Yakamori"/>
<link wikidata="Q834321" start="1099" end="1113" title="Man&amp;#x27;yōshū" label="Man&amp;#x27;yōshū"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1151" end="1174" title="Sanuno Otogami no Otome" label="Sanuno Otogami no Otome"/>
<link wikidata="Q386308" start="1224" end="1242" title="Ōtomo no Yakamochi" label="Ōtomo no Yakamochi"/>
<link wikidata="Q742460" start="1445" end="1453" title="ritsuryō" label="ritsuryō"/>
<link wikidata="Q193292" start="1534" end="1546" title="Heian period" label="Heian period"/>
<link wikidata="Q759338" start="1584" end="1604" title="Fujiwara no Tametoki" label="Fujiwara no Tametoki"/>
<link wikidata="Q81731" start="1646" end="1662" title="Murasaki Shikibu" label="Murasaki Shikibu"/>
<link wikidata="Q34600" start="1699" end="1708" title="Kyoto" label="Heian-kyō"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1833" end="1853" title="Fujiwara no Nobutaka" label="Fujiwara no Nobutaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q8269" start="1949" end="1966" title="The Tale of Genji" label="The Tale of Genji"/>
<link wikidata="Q34600" start="2113" end="2118" title="Kyoto" label="Kyoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q169134" start="2123" end="2127" title="Nara, Nara" label="Nara"/>
<link wikidata="Q27092" start="2159" end="2171" title="Sea of Japan" label="Sea of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q846299" start="2276" end="2281" title="washi" label="washi"/>
<link wikidata="Q13464614" start="2400" end="2408" title="ceramics (art)" label="ceramics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1724341" start="2445" end="2449" title="kiln" label="kiln"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="2459" end="2464" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3482045" start="2483" end="2492" title="Shigaraki" label="Shigaraki"/>
<link wikidata="Q863741" start="2494" end="2499" title="Bizen, Okayama" label="Bizen"/>
<link wikidata="Q499493" start="2501" end="2505" title="Seto, Aichi" label="Seto"/>
<link wikidata="Q877196" start="2507" end="2512" title="Tanba, Hyōgo" label="Tanba"/>
<link wikidata="Q209683" start="2518" end="2526" title="Tokoname" label="Tokoname"/>
<link wikidata="Q1629088" start="2556" end="2574" title="Kokufu" label="provincial capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207757" start="2579" end="2596" title="Provincial temple" label="Provincial temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q877941" start="2678" end="2685" title="Echizen, Fukui" label="Echizen"/>
<link wikidata="Q264012" start="2758" end="2786" title="Nanboku-chō period" label="Northern and Southern Courts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154406" start="2825" end="2843" title="Ashikaga shogunate" label="Ashikaga shogunate"/>
<link wikidata="Q334845" start="3061" end="3077" title="Muromachi period" label="Muromachi period"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057742" start="3083" end="3093" title="Shiba clan" label="Shiba clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141023" start="3109" end="3114" title="shugo" label="shugo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772267" start="3165" end="3177" title="Asakura clan" label="Asakura clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q204023" start="3203" end="3217" title="Sengoku period" label="Sengoku period"/>
<link wikidata="Q2968274" start="3228" end="3238" title="Ichijōdani Asakura Family Historic Ruins" label="Ichijōdani"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322768" start="3265" end="3282" title="Asakura Yoshikage" label="Asakura Yoshikage"/>
<link wikidata="Q947533" start="3431" end="3440" title="Ikkō-ikki" label="Ikkō-ikki"/>
<link wikidata="Q171411" start="3537" end="3549" title="Oda Nobunaga" label="Oda Nobunaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073936" start="3597" end="3621" title="Siege of Ichijōdani Castle" label="burned Ichijōdani Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5510942" start="3723" end="3737" title="Fuwa Mitsuharu" label="Fuwa Mitsuharu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186700" start="3739" end="3753" title="Sassa Narimasa" label="Sassa Narimasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196817" start="3759" end="3772" title="Maeda Toshiie" label="Maeda Toshiie"/>
<link wikidata="Q707587" start="3967" end="3982" title="Shibata Katsuie" label="Shibata Katsuie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2969491" start="4008" end="4024" title="Kitanosho Castle" label="Kitanosho Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q201618" start="4052" end="4057" title="Fukui, Fukui" label="Fukui"/>
<link wikidata="Q187550" start="4150" end="4168" title="Toyotomi Hideyoshi" label="Toyotomi Hideyoshi"/>
<link wikidata="Q234188" start="4181" end="4201" title="Battle of Sekigahara" label="Battle of Sekigahara"/>
<link wikidata="Q205662" start="4231" end="4249" title="Tokugawa shogunate" label="Tokugawa shogunate"/>
<link wikidata="Q171977" start="4303" end="4318" title="Tokugawa Ieyasu" label="Tokugawa Ieyasu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130929" start="4338" end="4351" title="Yūki Hideyasu" label="Yūki Hideyasu"/>
<link wikidata="Q903537" start="4390" end="4404" title="Echizen Domain" label="Echizen Domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073692" start="4423" end="4435" title="Fukui Castle" label="Fukui Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q205662" start="4467" end="4485" title="Tokugawa shogunate" label="Tokugawa shogunate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196276" start="4492" end="4514" title="Kuge" label="nobles and aristocrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q314464" start="4727" end="4744" title="Tokugawa Hidetada" label="Tokugawa Hidetada"/>
<link wikidata="Q578033" start="4993" end="5003" title="Maeda clan" label="Maeda clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q907469" start="5007" end="5011" title="Kaga Province" label="Kaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q643640" start="5042" end="5047" title="fudai" label="fudai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141077" start="5137" end="5152" title="Matsudaira clan" label="Matsudaira clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q8707" start="5163" end="5180" title="Meiji Restoration" label="Meiji Restoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q909302" start="5228" end="5236" title="kokudaka" label="kokudaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q841985" start="5315" end="5322" title="Han system" label="domains"/>
<link wikidata="Q205662" start="5399" end="5405" title="tenryo" label="tenryo"/>
<link wikidata="Q804558" start="5524" end="5540" title="Bakumatsu period" label="Bakumatsu period"/>
<link wikidata="Q910802" start="5542" end="5561" title="Matsudaira Yoshinaga" label="Matsudaira Shungaku"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322181" start="5734" end="5750" title="Meiji government" label="Meiji government"/>
<link wikidata="Q309184" start="5769" end="5779" title="Boshin War" label="Boshin War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1490" start="5881" end="5886" title="Tokyo" label="Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q133879" start="5953" end="5969" title="Fukui Prefecture" label="Fukui Prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q11499560" start="5974" end="5992" title="Tsuruga District, Fukui" label="Tsuruga Prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q131281" start="6088" end="6107" title="Ishikawa Prefecture" label="Ishikawa Prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q131358" start="6151" end="6167" title="Shiga Prefecture" label="Shiga Prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="6488" end="6501" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="6532" end="6546" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q131277" start="6601" end="6616" title="Gifu Prefecture" label="Gifu Prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q133879" start="6778" end="6794" title="Fukui Prefecture" label="Fukui Prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q4811958" start="6798" end="6812" title="Asuwa District, Fukui" label="Asuwa District"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204530" start="6834" end="6850" title="Imadate District, Fukui" label="Imadate District"/>
<link wikidata="Q776029" start="6860" end="6874" title="Nanjō District, Fukui" label="Nanjō District"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204551" start="6884" end="6896" title="Nyū District, Fukui" label="Nyū District"/>
<link wikidata="Q8081656" start="6906" end="6918" title="Ōno District, Fukui" label="Ōno District"/>
<link wikidata="Q7402764" start="6940" end="6954" title="Sakai District, Fukui" label="Sakai District"/>
<link wikidata="Q11499560" start="6976" end="6992" title="Tsuruga District, Fukui" label="Tsuruga District"/>
<link wikidata="Q737826" start="7014" end="7030" title="Yoshida District, Fukui" label="Yoshida District"/>
<link wikidata="Q726040" start="7094" end="7118" title="Louis-Frédéric" label="Nussbaum, Louis-Frédéric"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587900" start="7186" end="7210" title="Harvard University Press" label="Harvard University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q4141631" start="7230" end="7245" title="Edmond Papinot" label="Papinot, Edmond"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="311764" wikidata="Q1809286" url="?curid=311764" title="Lawrence University">
<text>Lawrence University is a private liberal arts college and conservatory of music in Appleton, Wisconsin, United States. Founded in 1847, its first classes were held on November 12, 1849. Lawrence was the second college in the U.S. to be founded as a coeducational institution.

==History==
Lawrence&#x27;s first president, William Harkness Sampson, founded the school with Henry R. Colman, using $10,000 provided by philanthropist Amos Adams Lawrence, and matched by the Methodist church. Both founders were ordained Methodist ministers, but Lawrence was Episcopalian. The school was originally named Lawrence Institute of Wisconsin in its 1847 charter from the Wisconsin Territorial Legislature, but the name was changed to Lawrence University before classes began in November 1849. Its oldest extant building, Main Hall, was built in 1853. Lawrence University was the second coeducational institution in the country.

Lawrence&#x27;s first period of major growth came during the thirty-year tenure (1894―1924) of alumnus Samuel G. Plantz as president, when the student body quadrupled, from 200 to 800.

From 1913 until 1964, it was named Lawrence College, to emphasize its small size and liberal arts education focus. The name returned to Lawrence University when it merged with Milwaukee-Downer College. The state of Wisconsin then purchased the Milwaukee-Downer property and buildings to expand the campus of the University of Wisconsin–Milwaukee. Initially, the university designated two entities: Lawrence College for Men and Downer College for Women. This separation has not lasted in any material form, though degrees are still conferred &quot;on the recommendation of the Faculty of Lawrence and Downer Colleges&quot; and the university by-laws still make the distinction. The traditions and heritage of Milwaukee-Downer are woven into the Appleton campus, from the grove of hawthorn trees (called Hawthornden) between Brokaw and Colman halls, to the sundial on the back of Main Hall, to the bestowing upon each class a class color and banner.

The Lawrence Conservatory of Music, usually referred to as &quot;the Con&quot;, was founded in 1874. Lawrence offers three degrees: a Bachelor of Arts, a Bachelor of Music and a Bachelor of Musical Arts. It also offers a five-year dual degree program, where students can receive both B.A. and B.Mus. degrees.

First-year Studies (formerly named Freshman Studies) at Lawrence is a mandatory two-term class, in which all students study the same selected 11 classic works of literature, art, and music, the list varying from year to year. President Nathan M. Pusey is credited with initiating the program in 1945, although Professor Waples chaired the Freshman Studies Committee and was responsible for implementing the program. The program continues to this day, despite being temporarily suspended in 1975.

===Presidents===
* 1849–1853 William Harkness Sampson, principal
* 1853–1859 Edward Cooke, president
* 1859–1865 Russell Zelotes Mason, president
* 1865–1879 George McKendree Steele, president
* 1879–1889 Elias DeWitt Huntley, president
* 1883–1889 Bradford Paul Raymond, president
* 1889–1893 Charles Wesley Gallagher, president
* 1893–1894 L. Wesley Underwood, acting president
* 1894–1924 Samuel G. Plantz, president
* 1925–1937 Henry Merritt Wriston, president
* 1937–1943 Thomas Nichols Barrows, president
* 1944–1953 Nathan Marsh Pusey, president
* 1954–1963 Douglas Maitland Knight, president
* 1963–1969 Curtis William Tarr, president
* 1969–1979 Thomas S. Smith, president
* 1979–2004 Richard Warch, president
* 2004–2013 Jill Beck, president
* 2013–2021 Mark Burstein, president
* 2021–present () Laurie Carter, president

==Campus==

The campus is located in downtown Appleton, divided into two parts by the Fox River. The academic campus is on the north shore of the river, and the major athletic facilities (including the 5,000-seat Banta Bowl) are on the southeast shore. Lawrence also has a northern estate called Björklunden (full name: Björklunden vid sjön), which serves as a site for retreats, seminars, concerts, and theatrical performances. It contains a chapel for weddings. Donald and Winifred Boynton of Highland Park, Illinois, donated the property in Door County, Wisconsin to Lawrence in 1963.

In the mid-1980s, the Physics Department built a $330,000 small laser laboratory which includes 800 5 mW small lasers and more than 500 mirrors.

In 2009, Lawrence opened the Richard and Margot Warch Campus Center, a gathering place for students, faculty, staff, alumni, and guests from the Fox Cities community. The building is situated on the Fox River on the site of the former Hulburt House. The Warch Campus Center includes a cinema, campus dining services, campus mailboxes, and various meeting and event spaces. The building has earned a LEED certification.

==Academics==
The student/faculty ratio at Lawrence is 9:1. 

The college offers majors in most of the liberal arts. The school also offers the option of interdisciplinary areas of study and allows students to design their own majors. Lawrence grants Bachelor of Arts and Bachelor of Music degrees, with a double degree possible. Lawrence offers a number of cooperative degree programs in areas such as engineering, health sciences and environmental studies. 

All students are required to take First-Year Studies during their first trimester, which introduces students to broad areas of study and provides a common academic experience for the college. Known as Freshman Studies until 2021, the program was established in 1945, and aside from a brief interruption in the mid-1970s it has remained a consistent fixture of the school&#x27;s liberal arts curriculum. Lawrence&#x27;s First-Year Studies program focuses on a mixture of Great Books and more contemporary, influential works, which include non-fiction books, fiction books, and various other types of works, such as paintings, photographs, musical recordings, and the periodic table of the elements. Readings are replaced every few years, with the exception of Plato&#x27;s &quot;Republic&quot;, which was included in the list from 1945 until the program was revised in 2024.

The Lawrence University Conservatory of Music was founded in 1874 and has been a part of Lawrence University ever since. The Conservatory offers Bachelor of Music degrees in Performance, Theory/Composition, Music Education, and a five-year double degree option that grants both a BM degree from the Conservatory and a BA degree from the College. Approximately 25% of the Lawrence student body, or 350 students, is in the Conservatory. The Conservatory has three choirs, two bands, two jazz ensembles, a symphony orchestra, an improvisation collective, five world music ensembles, and numerous chamber music groups. The Conservatory offers also a Bachelor of Musical Arts, primarily—but not exclusively—for students whose interest is in other than Western Classical Music. Students complete coursework in both the College and the Conservatory, and choose a &quot;cognate&quot;--a secondary field of study in the college to accompany their music studies.

Lawrence is a member of the Associated Colleges of the Midwest, an academic consortium of 14 liberal arts colleges in the Midwest and Colorado that coordinates several off-campus study programs in a large number of countries as its primary activity. Lawrence University is also part of the Oberlin Group, a consortium of liberal arts college libraries.

===Rankings and reputation===
In the 2025 &quot;U.S. News &amp; World Report&quot; college rankings, Lawrence University was ranked 69th (tied) of 211 liberal arts colleges nationwide. Lawrence was ranked 85th in the national liberal arts colleges and 12th in Pell Grant performance in &quot;Washington Monthly&quot;&#x27;s rankings in 2024. 

==Student life==
Lawrence enrolls about 1,500 students. The total enrollment in academic year 2010–11 was 1,566 students, the largest student body in Lawrence University&#x27;s history. Over 75% of the students identify as white, about 12% are international students, and about 25% of students study in the conservatory of music. In the fall of 2014, a quarter of the incoming class were domestic students of color.

Lawrence students have been named Rhodes Scholars seven times. Since 1976, 57 students and nine faculty have received Fulbright Scholarships. Since 1969, 73 students have been named Watson Fellows.

===Traditions===
At the beginning of every academic year in September, incoming freshmen arrive a week before returning students to partake in Welcome Week. During Welcome Week, various activities are planned in order to help the incoming class get to know one another and to help them acclimate to college life. During the first night of Welcome Week, students and their parents attend the President&#x27;s Welcome, which concludes with the traditional matriculation handshake, where every member of the incoming class shakes hands and exchanges words with the university&#x27;s president.

During the fall term, the on-campus fraternity Beta Theta Pi hosts the annual Beach Bash. For this event, the brothers of ΒθΠ shovel approximately 14 tons of sand into the fraternity house basement, and install a boardwalk and a lifeguard station that doubles as a DJ booth.This tradition was skipped in 2020, due to the COVID-19 pandemic.

The Great Midwest Trivia Contest, claimed to be the longest-running college bowl trivia competition, is hosted by a group of Trivia Masters composed of current Lawrence students every January. Alumni and independent teams from around the world are also able to compete, with the contest broadcast previously over radio and currently on Twitch.

During spring term, Lawrence hosts a music festival, LU-aroo (a play on words on the popular music festival Bonnaroo). Held on the quad, the festival features many talented student bands, both from the college and the conservatory. In 2016, the musician The Tallest Man on Earth played at the festival.

An on-campus bar, the Viking Room (VR), serves as a beloved campus lounge within the basement of the Memorial Hall classroom building. Professors and other senior university personnel frequently serve as guest bartenders, and &quot;VR tokens&quot; are commonly distributed during campus events or when bartering to exchange for drinks at the bar. Students of drinking age customize a numbered tankard that is stored in the VR and is reused by the individual each time they order a drink. Upon graduation, students take their mug with them as a reminder of the many great times spent in the VR.

===Media===
The student newspaper, &quot;The Lawrentian&quot;, has been published for over a century. Lawrence had a radio station, WLFM, from 1955 (broadcasting beginning in 1956) through 2005.

==Athletics==

Lawrence University&#x27;s intercollegiate athletic teams, known as the Vikings since 1926, compete in the Midwest Conference in National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA) Division III. Men&#x27;s sports include baseball, basketball, cross country, fencing, football, golf, ice hockey, soccer, swimming &amp; diving, tennis, and track &amp; field; women&#x27;s sports include basketball, cross country, fencing, golf, soccer, softball, swimming &amp; diving, tennis, track &amp; field, and volleyball. 

In 2005–06, the men&#x27;s basketball team was ranked first in Division III for much of the season, after starting the season unranked. The Vikings were the only undefeated team in all divisions of college basketball for the last six weeks of the season, ending with a record of 25–1. Star forward Chris Braier won the Josten&#x27;s Award as the top player in the country for both playing ability and community service. Coach John Tharp was named Division III Midwest Coach of the Year. Beginning in 2004, Lawrence qualified for the Division III national tournament in five of the next six years (2004, 2005, 2006, 2008, 2009). Their best result was in 2004, advancing to the quarterfinals (Elite 8), but fell to eventual national champion Wisconsin–Stevens Point by a point in overtime at Tacoma, Washington.

In 2011, Lawrence&#x27;s men&#x27;s cross country team won the Midwest Conference championships for the first time since 1985, beating Grinnell College and ending its 14-year winning streak.

In 2021, Lawrence unveiled a new athletics logo, featuring a Viking ship incorporating the antelope from the crest on the Lawrence coat of arms. This replaced the longstanding previous Viking logo with variations utilized by many other organizations, notably including the Minnesota Vikings. In 2022, the Vikings debuted a new mascot, an antelope named Blu.

==Notable faculty==
* William Chaney, historian
* Richard N. Current, historian
* Emanuel Gerechter, rabbi
* Estelí Gomez, soprano
* William H. Riker, political scientist
* Charles B. Schudson, judge
* Fred Sturm, jazz composer and musician
* Arthur Thrall, artist
* Harry Dexter White, economist, first U.S. Director of IMF (1946–47), and Soviet informant
* John Holiday, opera singer, music professor, and finalist on season 19 of The Voice.
* Peter N. Peregrine, renowned anthropologist and archaeologist
==Notable alumni==
 
* James Sibree Anderson, Wisconsin State Representative
* Martha Bablitch, judge of the Wisconsin Court of Appeals
* John Miller Baer, 1909, Congressman from North Dakota
* William Baer, Assistant Attorney General for the Antitrust Division
* Melvin Baldwin, Congressman from Minnesota
* Charles A. Barnard, Wisconsin State Representative
* Sam Barry, college basketball and baseball coach (attended)
* Myrt Basing, NFL player
* Jennifer Baumgardner, 1992, feminist writer and activist
* Lisle Blackbourn, 1925, NFL head coach
* Champ Boettcher, NFL player
* Thomas Boyd, Wisconsin State Representative
* Alexander Brazeau, Wisconsin State Representative
* Webster E. Brown, Congressman from Wisconsin (attended)
* Bonnie Bryant, 1968, author of children&#x27;s books
* Louis B. Butler Jr., 1973, associate justice of the Wisconsin Supreme Court
* Thomas Callaway, Actor and Interior Designer
* Robert A. Collins, Wisconsin State Representative
* Julia Colman (1828–1909), American temperance educator, activist, editor, writer
* Charles Rankin Deniston, Wisconsin State Representative
* James Dinsdale, Wisconsin State Representative
* William Diver, 1942, linguist and founder of the Columbia School of Linguistics
* Pawo Choyning Dorji, 2006, filmmaker and photographer
* William Draheim, Wisconsin State Senator
* Paul Driessen, 1970, author and lobbyist
* Dale Duesing, 1967, operatic baritone
* Siri Engberg, curator, Walker Art Center
* Cynthia Estlund, 1978, law professor and author
* Edna Ferber, author and playwright (attended)
* James A. Frear, Congressman from Wisconsin (attended)
* Earle W. Fricker, Wisconsin State Representative
* William Fuller, 1975, poet and senior vice president and chief fiduciary officer of Northern Trust Corporation
* Dominic Fumusa, 1991, actor
* John Rankin Gamble, 1872, Congressman from South Dakota
* Robert J. Gamble, 1874, Congressman from South Dakota

* Ed Glick, NFL player (attended)
* Walter Samuel Goodland, governor of Wisconsin (attended)
* Suzanne Graff, actress

* Michael P. Hammond, 1954, chairman of the National Endowment for the Arts
* Lorena Hickok, confidante of Eleanor Roosevelt (attended)
* Earnest Hooton, 1903, physical anthropologist
* John D. Huber, Columbia University political scientist
* Thomas R. Hudd, Congressman from Wisconsin (attended)
* Frank W. Humphrey, 1881, Wisconsin State Representative
* Bruce Iglauer, founder of Alligator Records
* Lester Johnson, Congressman from Wisconsin
* Zachary Scot Johnson, 2001, singer-songwriter and creator of Thesongadayproject
* Jeffrey Jones, 1968, actor, sex offender
* Scott Klug, 1975 former congressman from Wisconsin
* Peter Kolkay, bassoonist
* Eddie Kotal, National Football League player
* Takakazu Kuriyama, Japanese ambassador to the United States (attended)
* Barbara Lawton, 1987, Lieutenant Governor of Wisconsin (2001–2011)
* Fred Lerdahl, 1965, composer and music theorist
* John A. Luke Jr., 1971, CEO of MeadWestvaco
* Harry N. MacLean, 1964, true crime author
* Momodu Maligie, 2004, Minister of Water Resources for Sierra Leone 
* William H. Markham, Wisconsin State Senator

* James H. McGillan, mayor of Green Bay, Wisconsin
* James Merrell, 1975, professor of history at Vassar College
* John S. Mills, U.S. Air Force major general
* Terry Moran, 1982, chief White House correspondent for ABC News
* David Mulford, 1969, United States Ambassador to India (2004–2009)
* William F. Nash, Wisconsin State Senator
* George Allen Neeves, Wisconsin State Representative
* Tom Neff, 1975, CEO and founder of The Documentary Channel
* Justus Henry Nelson, missionary in the Amazon (attended)
* Garth Neustadter, 2011 Emmy winner, Outstanding Music Composition for a Series
* Angelia Thurston Newman, poet, author, lecturer
* Roger Nicoll, 1963, neuroscientist at UCSF
* Jessica Nelson North, 1917, author
* Arnold C. Otto, Wisconsin State Representative
* Rip Owens, NFL player (attended)
* Alice Peacock, 1992 singer-songwriter
* Charles Pettibone, Wisconsin State Senator
* Cindy Regal, 2001, experimental physicist
* Scott Reppert, 1983, player for Lawrence&#x27;s football team
* Eben Eugene Rexford, author of works on gardening (attended)
* Carl W. Riddick, member of the U.S. House of Representatives from the Second District of Montana
* Josh Sawyer, video game designer at Obsidian Entertainment
* Melvin H. Schlytter, Wisconsin State Representative
* Campbell Scott, 1983, actor
* Michael Shurtleff, 1942, casting director, author
* Eric Simonson, 1982, Oscar-winning writer–director
* Red Smith, 1926, MLB player, NFL player and assistant coach, head coach of the Georgetown Hoyas football team and Wisconsin Badgers football team
* Anil Singh (judge), 1980, associate justice New York Supreme Court, Appellate Division
* Janet Steiger, 1961, chairman of the Federal Trade Commission
* Thomas A. Steitz, 1962, Sterling Professor of Molecular Biophysics and Biochemistry at Yale University, 2009 Nobel Prize in Chemistry laureate
* Heidi Stober, 2000, operatic soprano
* Fred Sturm, 1973, jazz composer and arranger
* William T. Sullivan, Wisconsin State Representative
* Gladys Taber (1899–1980), author
* Anton R. Valukas, 1965, U.S. attorney, author of the Valukas Report
* Madhuri Vijay, 2009, novelist, author of &quot;The Far Field&quot;
* James Franklin Ware, 1871, legislator
* William Warner, U.S. Senator from Missouri (attended)
* Iva Bigelow Weaver, soprano and music educator based in Milwaukee
* Alexander B. Whitman, Wisconsin State Senator
* George W. Wolff, Wisconsin State Representative and Senator
* Tom Zoellner, 1991, author, journalist
* Al Zupek, 1944, NFL player
==See also==
* List of NCAA fencing schools

==References==
== External links ==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1809286" start="0" end="19" title="Lawrence University" label="Lawrence University"/>
<link wikidata="Q902104" start="25" end="32" title="Private college" label="private"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377182" start="33" end="53" title="liberal arts college" label="liberal arts college"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021290" start="58" end="79" title="Music school" label="conservatory of music"/>
<link wikidata="Q94928" start="83" end="102" title="Appleton, Wisconsin" label="Appleton, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q541394" start="249" end="262" title="coeducational" label="coeducational"/>
<link wikidata="Q5727296" start="372" end="387" title="Henry R. Colman" label="Henry R. Colman"/>
<link wikidata="Q185733" start="415" end="429" title="philanthropist" label="philanthropist"/>
<link wikidata="Q474219" start="430" end="449" title="Amos Adams Lawrence" label="Amos Adams Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q33203" start="470" end="479" title="Methodist" label="Methodist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423891" start="526" end="535" title="minister of religion" label="ministers"/>
<link wikidata="Q682443" start="554" end="566" title="Episcopal Church in the United States of America" label="Episcopalian"/>
<link wikidata="Q14714524" start="811" end="820" title="Main Hall (Lawrence University)" label="Main Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q508719" start="1014" end="1021" title="alumnus" label="alumnus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411447" start="1022" end="1038" title="Samuel G. Plantz" label="Samuel G. Plantz"/>
<link wikidata="Q189329" start="1190" end="1202" title="liberal arts" label="liberal arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q6861650" start="1281" end="1305" title="Milwaukee-Downer College" label="Milwaukee-Downer College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755318" start="1417" end="1450" title="University of Wisconsin–Milwaukee" label="University of Wisconsin–Milwaukee"/>
<link wikidata="Q132557" start="1884" end="1892" title="Crataegus" label="hawthorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q80793" start="1960" end="1967" title="sundial" label="sundial"/>
<link wikidata="Q14714524" start="1983" end="1992" title="Main Hall (Lawrence University)" label="Main Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765120" start="2188" end="2204" title="Bachelor of Arts" label="Bachelor of Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q4838815" start="2208" end="2225" title="Bachelor of Music" label="Bachelor of Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q4838815" start="2232" end="2256" title="Bachelor of Musical Arts" label="Bachelor of Musical Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772795" start="2600" end="2615" title="Nathan M. Pusey" label="Nathan M. Pusey"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2890" end="2914" title="William Harkness Sampson" label="William Harkness Sampson"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2974" end="2995" title="Russell Zelotes Mason" label="Russell Zelotes Mason"/>
<link wikidata="Q16030509" start="3019" end="3042" title="George McKendree Steele" label="George McKendree Steele"/>
<link wikidata="Q5360477" start="3066" end="3086" title="Elias DeWitt Huntley" label="Elias DeWitt Huntley"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3110" end="3131" title="Bradford Paul Raymond" label="Bradford Paul Raymond"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3155" end="3179" title="Charles Wesley Gallagher" label="Charles Wesley Gallagher"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411447" start="3253" end="3269" title="Samuel G. Plantz" label="Samuel G. Plantz"/>
<link wikidata="Q15438539" start="3293" end="3314" title="Henry Merritt Wriston" label="Henry Merritt Wriston"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3338" end="3360" title="Thomas Nichols Barrows" label="Thomas Nichols Barrows"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772795" start="3384" end="3402" title="Nathan Marsh Pusey" label="Nathan Marsh Pusey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5301698" start="3426" end="3449" title="Douglas Maitland Knight" label="Douglas Maitland Knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q5195911" start="3473" end="3492" title="Curtis William Tarr" label="Curtis William Tarr"/>
<link wikidata="Q7793740" start="3516" end="3531" title="Thomas S. Smith (educator)" label="Thomas S. Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q7329804" start="3555" end="3568" title="Richard Warch" label="Richard Warch"/>
<link wikidata="Q14949415" start="3592" end="3601" title="Jill Beck" label="Jill Beck"/>
<link wikidata="Q6766941" start="3625" end="3638" title="Mark Burstein (academic administrator)" label="Mark Burstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q110109268" start="3668" end="3681" title="Laurie Carter" label="Laurie Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147392" start="3780" end="3789" title="Fox River (Green Bay tributary)" label="Fox River"/>
<link wikidata="Q4919684" start="3990" end="4001" title="Björklunden" label="Björklunden"/>
<link wikidata="Q576671" start="4189" end="4212" title="Highland Park, Illinois" label="Highland Park, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q490550" start="4238" end="4260" title="Door County, Wisconsin" label="Door County, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1521623" start="4828" end="4832" title="LEED" label="LEED"/>
<link wikidata="Q189329" start="4952" end="4964" title="liberal arts" label="liberal arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q849359" start="5003" end="5020" title="interdisciplinary" label="interdisciplinary"/>
<link wikidata="Q716855" start="5155" end="5168" title="double degree" label="double degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q11023" start="5252" end="5263" title="engineering" label="engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q843601" start="5265" end="5280" title="health sciences" label="health sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q5381367" start="5285" end="5306" title="environmental studies" label="environmental studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q4223073" start="5780" end="5791" title="Great Books" label="Great Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q10693" start="5976" end="6006" title="periodic table of the elements" label="periodic table of the elements"/>
<link wikidata="Q859" start="6069" end="6074" title="Plato" label="Plato"/>
<link wikidata="Q123397" start="6088" end="6096" title="Republic (Plato)" label="Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6504688" start="6189" end="6230" title="Lawrence University Conservatory of Music" label="Lawrence University Conservatory of Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q4809171" start="7167" end="7201" title="Associated Colleges of the Midwest" label="Associated Colleges of the Midwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q194166" start="7215" end="7225" title="consortium" label="consortium"/>
<link wikidata="Q7074765" start="7429" end="7442" title="Oberlin Group" label="Oberlin Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q848629" start="7541" end="7569" title="U.S. News &amp;amp; World Report" label="U.S. News &amp;amp; World Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q7972062" start="7785" end="7803" title="Washington Monthly" label="Washington Monthly"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500387" start="8081" end="8102" title="international student" label="international student"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204346" start="8288" end="8303" title="Rhodes Scholars" label="Rhodes Scholars"/>
<link wikidata="Q253936" start="8372" end="8394" title="Fulbright Program" label="Fulbright Scholarships"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8436" end="8450" title="Watson Foundation#Thomas J. Watson Fellowship" label="Watson Fellows"/>
<link wikidata="Q3721" start="9081" end="9091" title="Fraternities and sororities" label="fraternity"/>
<link wikidata="Q4897282" start="9092" end="9105" title="Beta Theta Pi" label="Beta Theta Pi"/>
<link wikidata="Q93338609" start="9258" end="9267" title="boardwalk (entertainment district)" label="boardwalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q259327" start="9274" end="9283" title="lifeguard" label="lifeguard"/>
<link wikidata="Q130857" start="9310" end="9312" title="Disc jockey" label="DJ"/>
<link wikidata="Q83873577" start="9366" end="9383" title="COVID-19 pandemic in the United States" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599568" start="9390" end="9418" title="Great Midwest Trivia Contest" label="Great Midwest Trivia Contest"/>
<link wikidata="Q872" start="9699" end="9704" title="radio" label="radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q4555537" start="9722" end="9728" title="Twitch (service)" label="Twitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984221" start="9839" end="9847" title="Bonnaroo" label="Bonnaroo"/>
<link wikidata="Q554657" start="9985" end="10009" title="The Tallest Man on Earth" label="The Tallest Man on Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q187456" start="10048" end="10051" title="Bar (establishment)" label="bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q808266" start="10245" end="10254" title="bartender" label="bartender"/>
<link wikidata="Q484830" start="10337" end="10343" title="barter" label="barter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915195" start="10394" end="10406" title="legal drinking age" label="drinking age"/>
<link wikidata="Q3446398" start="10428" end="10435" title="tankard" label="tankard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7746447" start="10671" end="10685" title="The Lawrentian" label="The Lawrentian"/>
<link wikidata="Q17051160" start="10868" end="10892" title="College athletics in the United States" label="intercollegiate athletic"/>
<link wikidata="Q12567" start="10913" end="10920" title="Vikings" label="Vikings"/>
<link wikidata="Q6843362" start="10948" end="10966" title="Midwest Conference" label="Midwest Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q271805" start="10970" end="11010" title="National Collegiate Athletic Association" label="National Collegiate Athletic Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q5284440" start="11018" end="11030" title="Division III (NCAA)" label="Division III"/>
<link wikidata="Q65059458" start="11850" end="11854" title="2004 NCAA Division III men&amp;#x27;s basketball tournament" label="2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q3653937" start="11883" end="11915" title="NCAA Division III men&amp;#x27;s basketball tournament" label="Division III national tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q65059549" start="11953" end="11957" title="2005 NCAA Division III men&amp;#x27;s basketball tournament" label="2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q65059551" start="11959" end="11963" title="2006 NCAA Division III men&amp;#x27;s basketball tournament" label="2006"/>
<link wikidata="Q65059563" start="11965" end="11969" title="2008 NCAA Division III men&amp;#x27;s basketball tournament" label="2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q55263865" start="11971" end="11975" title="2009 NCAA Division III men&amp;#x27;s basketball tournament" label="2009"/>
<link wikidata="Q2687782" start="12090" end="12113" title="University of Wisconsin–Stevens Point" label="Wisconsin–Stevens Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q199797" start="12140" end="12158" title="Tacoma, Washington" label="Tacoma, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q2982991" start="12296" end="12312" title="Grinnell College" label="Grinnell College"/>
<link wikidata="Q25894" start="12444" end="12452" title="antelope" label="antelope"/>
<link wikidata="Q14659" start="12484" end="12496" title="coat of arms" label="coat of arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q221150" start="12626" end="12643" title="Minnesota Vikings" label="Minnesota Vikings"/>
<link wikidata="Q30058184" start="12734" end="12748" title="William Chaney" label="William Chaney"/>
<link wikidata="Q7327986" start="12762" end="12780" title="Richard N. Current" label="Richard N. Current"/>
<link wikidata="Q127179601" start="12794" end="12811" title="Emanuel Gerechter" label="Emanuel Gerechter"/>
<link wikidata="Q50137345" start="12821" end="12833" title="Estelí Gomez" label="Estelí Gomez"/>
<link wikidata="Q326238" start="12845" end="12861" title="William H. Riker" label="William H. Riker"/>
<link wikidata="Q5075328" start="12885" end="12904" title="Charles B. Schudson" label="Charles B. Schudson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5496358" start="12914" end="12924" title="Fred Sturm" label="Fred Sturm"/>
<link wikidata="Q4800465" start="12955" end="12968" title="Arthur Thrall" label="Arthur Thrall"/>
<link wikidata="Q918520" start="12979" end="12997" title="Harry Dexter White" label="Harry Dexter White"/>
<link wikidata="Q18978153" start="13071" end="13083" title="John Holiday" label="John Holiday"/>
<link wikidata="Q7176033" start="13158" end="13176" title="Peter N. Peregrine" label="Peter N. Peregrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q24284695" start="13243" end="13264" title="James Sibree Anderson" label="James Sibree Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6774330" start="13299" end="13314" title="Martha Bablitch" label="Martha Bablitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1701102" start="13358" end="13374" title="John Miller Baer" label="John Miller Baer"/>
<link wikidata="Q8004915" start="13414" end="13426" title="William Baer (antitrust lawyer)" label="William Baer"/>
<link wikidata="Q591513" start="13484" end="13498" title="Melvin Baldwin" label="Melvin Baldwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5074794" start="13529" end="13547" title="Charles A. Barnard (Wisconsin politician)" label="Charles A. Barnard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3946322" start="13582" end="13591" title="Sam Barry" label="Sam Barry"/>
<link wikidata="Q6948551" start="13644" end="13655" title="Myrt Basing" label="Myrt Basing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2133896" start="13670" end="13690" title="Jennifer Baumgardner" label="Jennifer Baumgardner"/>
<link wikidata="Q16010294" start="13729" end="13745" title="Lisle Blackbourn" label="Lisle Blackbourn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5069852" start="13770" end="13785" title="Champ Boettcher" label="Champ Boettcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q22017324" start="13800" end="13811" title="Thomas Boyd (Wisconsin politician)" label="Thomas Boyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q23715031" start="13846" end="13863" title="Alexander Brazeau" label="Alexander Brazeau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384392" start="13898" end="13914" title="Webster E. Brown" label="Webster E. Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1801864" start="13956" end="13969" title="Bonnie Bryant" label="Bonnie Bryant"/>
<link wikidata="Q6686696" start="14011" end="14030" title="Louis B. Butler" label="Louis B. Butler Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q18638528" start="14089" end="14104" title="Thomas Callaway (actor and interior designer)" label="Thomas Callaway"/>
<link wikidata="Q16015775" start="14136" end="14153" title="Robert A. Collins" label="Robert A. Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q56451986" start="14188" end="14200" title="Julia Colman" label="Julia Colman"/>
<link wikidata="Q20707717" start="14271" end="14294" title="Charles Rankin Deniston" label="Charles Rankin Deniston"/>
<link wikidata="Q6132643" start="14329" end="14343" title="James Dinsdale" label="James Dinsdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007854" start="14378" end="14391" title="William Diver" label="William Diver"/>
<link wikidata="Q104439581" start="14460" end="14479" title="Pawo Choyning Dorji" label="Pawo Choyning Dorji"/>
<link wikidata="Q16073017" start="14516" end="14531" title="William Draheim" label="William Draheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q610533" start="14559" end="14572" title="Paul Driessen (lobbyist)" label="Paul Driessen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1157839" start="14602" end="14614" title="Dale Duesing" label="Dale Duesing"/>
<link wikidata="Q13403349" start="14642" end="14654" title="Siri Engberg" label="Siri Engberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5200057" start="14685" end="14700" title="Cynthia Estlund" label="Cynthia Estlund"/>
<link wikidata="Q283496" start="14735" end="14746" title="Edna Ferber" label="Edna Ferber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1679891" start="14783" end="14797" title="James A. Frear" label="James A. Frear"/>
<link wikidata="Q16014060" start="14839" end="14855" title="Earle W. Fricker" label="Earle W. Fricker"/>
<link wikidata="Q8009471" start="14890" end="14904" title="William Fuller (poet)" label="William Fuller"/>
<link wikidata="Q80925" start="15003" end="15017" title="Dominic Fumusa" label="Dominic Fumusa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1701528" start="15033" end="15051" title="John Rankin Gamble" label="John Rankin Gamble"/>
<link wikidata="Q446101" start="15091" end="15107" title="Robert J. Gamble" label="Robert J. Gamble"/>
<link wikidata="Q5334864" start="15148" end="15156" title="Ed Glick" label="Ed Glick"/>
<link wikidata="Q885495" start="15182" end="15204" title="Walter Samuel Goodland" label="Walter Samuel Goodland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7650865" start="15241" end="15254" title="Suzanne Graff" label="Suzanne Graff"/>
<link wikidata="Q6833298" start="15267" end="15285" title="Michael P. Hammond" label="Michael P. Hammond"/>
<link wikidata="Q3259432" start="15343" end="15356" title="Lorena Hickok" label="Lorena Hickok"/>
<link wikidata="Q517619" start="15403" end="15417" title="Earnest Hooton" label="Earnest Hooton"/>
<link wikidata="Q103019779" start="15451" end="15464" title="John D. Huber" label="John D. Huber"/>
<link wikidata="Q49088" start="15466" end="15485" title="Columbia University" label="Columbia University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2426640" start="15508" end="15522" title="Thomas R. Hudd" label="Thomas R. Hudd"/>
<link wikidata="Q51612363" start="15564" end="15581" title="Frank W. Humphrey" label="Frank W. Humphrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q991662" start="15622" end="15635" title="Bruce Iglauer" label="Bruce Iglauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1656018" start="15668" end="15682" title="Lester Johnson (politician)" label="Lester Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q20684261" start="15713" end="15733" title="Zachary Scot Johnson" label="Zachary Scot Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q377662" start="15795" end="15808" title="Jeffrey Jones" label="Jeffrey Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q2260923" start="15838" end="15848" title="Scott Klug" label="Scott Klug"/>
<link wikidata="Q24572700" start="15891" end="15903" title="Peter Kolkay" label="Peter Kolkay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282869" start="15918" end="15929" title="Eddie Kotal" label="Eddie Kotal"/>
<link wikidata="Q807530" start="16038" end="16052" title="Barbara Lawton" label="Barbara Lawton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5495769" start="16107" end="16119" title="Fred Lerdahl" label="Fred Lerdahl"/>
<link wikidata="Q6217790" start="16157" end="16173" title="John A. Luke Jr." label="John A. Luke Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q5671233" start="16203" end="16219" title="Harry N. MacLean" label="Harry N. MacLean"/>
<link wikidata="Q6897401" start="16247" end="16261" title="Momodu Maligie" label="Momodu Maligie"/>
<link wikidata="Q19974881" start="16317" end="16335" title="William H. Markham" label="William H. Markham"/>
<link wikidata="Q14592193" start="16364" end="16381" title="James H. McGillan" label="James H. McGillan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6139656" start="16415" end="16428" title="James Merrell" label="James Merrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6256345" start="16477" end="16490" title="John S. Mills" label="John S. Mills"/>
<link wikidata="Q7704818" start="16523" end="16534" title="Terry Moran" label="Terry Moran"/>
<link wikidata="Q3017617" start="16589" end="16602" title="David Mulford" label="David Mulford"/>
<link wikidata="Q16059205" start="16658" end="16673" title="William F. Nash" label="William F. Nash"/>
<link wikidata="Q22019106" start="16701" end="16720" title="George Allen Neeves" label="George Allen Neeves"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817010" start="16755" end="16763" title="Tom Neff" label="Tom Neff"/>
<link wikidata="Q6318561" start="16816" end="16835" title="Justus Henry Nelson" label="Justus Henry Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5524370" start="16875" end="16891" title="Garth Neustadter" label="Garth Neustadter"/>
<link wikidata="Q42860365" start="16956" end="16979" title="Angelia Thurston Newman" label="Angelia Thurston Newman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318548" start="17006" end="17018" title="Roger Nicoll" label="Roger Nicoll"/>
<link wikidata="Q6187383" start="17051" end="17071" title="Jessica Nelson North" label="Jessica Nelson North"/>
<link wikidata="Q21664812" start="17088" end="17102" title="Arnold C. Otto" label="Arnold C. Otto"/>
<link wikidata="Q7335521" start="17137" end="17146" title="Rip Owens" label="Rip Owens"/>
<link wikidata="Q303244" start="17172" end="17185" title="Alice Peacock" label="Alice Peacock"/>
<link wikidata="Q16031106" start="17212" end="17229" title="Charles Pettibone" label="Charles Pettibone"/>
<link wikidata="Q61970592" start="17257" end="17268" title="Cindy Regal" label="Cindy Regal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7437125" start="17301" end="17314" title="Scott Reppert" label="Scott Reppert"/>
<link wikidata="Q4352329" start="17365" end="17384" title="Eben Eugene Rexford" label="Eben Eugene Rexford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040939" start="17428" end="17443" title="Carl W. Riddick" label="Carl W. Riddick"/>
<link wikidata="Q846794" start="17527" end="17538" title="Josh Sawyer" label="Josh Sawyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q15999373" start="17588" end="17607" title="Melvin H. Schlytter" label="Melvin H. Schlytter"/>
<link wikidata="Q528527" start="17642" end="17656" title="Campbell Scott" label="Campbell Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q1467753" start="17672" end="17689" title="Michael Shurtleff" label="Michael Shurtleff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351634" start="17724" end="17737" title="Eric Simonson" label="Eric Simonson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7305061" start="17777" end="17786" title="Red Smith (American football/baseball)" label="Red Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q130158497" start="17925" end="17943" title="Anil Singh (judge)" label="Anil Singh (judge)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7014754" start="17969" end="18011" title="New York Supreme Court, Appellate Division" label="New York Supreme Court, Appellate Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q16016283" start="18014" end="18027" title="Janet Steiger" label="Janet Steiger"/>
<link wikidata="Q109559" start="18078" end="18094" title="Thomas A. Steitz" label="Thomas A. Steitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q19285081" start="18223" end="18235" title="Heidi Stober" label="Heidi Stober"/>
<link wikidata="Q5496358" start="18262" end="18272" title="Fred Sturm" label="Fred Sturm"/>
<link wikidata="Q16071696" start="18309" end="18328" title="William T. Sullivan" label="William T. Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5566467" start="18363" end="18375" title="Gladys Taber" label="Gladys Taber"/>
<link wikidata="Q16982774" start="18398" end="18414" title="Anton R. Valukas" label="Anton R. Valukas"/>
<link wikidata="Q98140058" start="18468" end="18481" title="Madhuri Vijay" label="Madhuri Vijay"/>
<link wikidata="Q20709923" start="18537" end="18556" title="James Franklin Ware" label="James Franklin Ware"/>
<link wikidata="Q1628712" start="18577" end="18591" title="William Warner (Missouri)" label="William Warner"/>
<link wikidata="Q62024957" start="18633" end="18651" title="Iva Bigelow Weaver" label="Iva Bigelow Weaver"/>
<link wikidata="Q51877678" start="18701" end="18721" title="Alexander B. Whitman" label="Alexander B. Whitman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5545779" start="18749" end="18764" title="George W. Wolff" label="George W. Wolff"/>
<link wikidata="Q7818143" start="18811" end="18823" title="Tom Zoellner" label="Tom Zoellner"/>
<link wikidata="Q4705019" start="18852" end="18860" title="Al Zupek" label="Al Zupek"/>
<link wikidata="Q6591098" start="18894" end="18922" title="List of NCAA fencing schools" label="List of NCAA fencing schools"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="311767" wikidata="Q3889334" url="?curid=311767" title="Saint Neot (monk)">
<text>Neot (died 31 July 877) was an English monk. Born in the first half of the ninth century, he lived as a monk at Glastonbury Abbey. He preferred to perform his religious devotions privately, and he later went to live an isolated life in Cornwall, near the village now called St Neot. His wisdom and religious dedication earned him admiration from the monks. He visited the Pope in Rome, who instructed him to found a monastery in Cornwall.

He did so, and because of his devotional qualities, he became famous, and attracted large numbers of pilgrims, and with them money. A number of miracles are said to have taken place involving him. Neot died on 31 July 877. His remains were kept at the monastery he had founded, and they attracted considerable numbers of pilgrims.

About 975 AD a monastery was founded at Eynesbury (in what is now the town of Saint Neots), and in order to increase the lucrative visits of pilgrims, Neot&#x27;s remains were abstracted from Cornwall without permission, and lodged at Eynesbury. The anticipated public attention followed, and the district around the priory and monastery became known as St Neots: that is the name of the chief town there now. Controversy arose later as to whether Neot&#x27;s remains were truly at the Priory, but this was confirmed by Anselm, the Prior of the French Abbey of our Lady of Bec, in Normandy, which was the superior institution to Eynesbury and St Neots after the Norman Conquest. Anselm took Neot&#x27;s jawbone back to Bec.

During the reign of King Henry VIII, the Dissolution of the Monasteries took place and the priory and monastery at St Neots were probably destroyed. No further report is made of the location of Neot&#x27;s remains to this day. He is remembered by the names of the town of St Neots and the Cornish village of St Neot; the parish church of Poundstock in Cornwall was also dedicated to him until 1970. The parish church in St Neot has a medieval stained glass window depicting the miracles. His feast day is 31 July.

==Early life==

Neot was born into a minor branch of the West Saxon royal house, in the first half of the ninth century, somewhere in Wessex. Neot&#x27;s father was named Ethelwulph. In early life he was under pressure to become a soldier, but when he was old enough, he devoted himself instead to a religious life. As a young man therefore, he became a novice monk, living in Glastonbury Abbey, about the middle of the ninth century. He was extremely studious.

He is likely to have been given an Anglo-Saxon name by his parents, but this is not recorded. The word neophyte was commonly used at the time for individuals who had newly undertaken religious vows, and Gorham speculates that he might have been called &quot;Neophytus&quot;, the Latin form of neophyte, at the monastery by monks who noticed his application to religiosity. In time, this might have been abbreviated to &quot;Neotus&quot;, the Latin form of the name by which we know him now.

He was admired for his literary attainments by the other monks; and he was known for his humility and religious devotion. In addition to the religious observances prescribed by the monastery, he often awoke in the middle of the night and went to the chapel secretly to pray, in the disguise of a penitent, returning at dawn to continue the ordinary monastic routine. In due course he was admitted to Holy orders, and later he was made Sacristan of the Abbey. The fame of his scholarship and devotion attracted many pilgrims from all parts of the country, who went to Glastonbury to receive the benefit of his wisdom.

It was while he was at Glastonbury that the miracle of the door lock, described below, took place.

==Becoming a hermit==
Neot&#x27;s wish to do his additional devotional prayer privately shows that he wanted to avoid deriving pleasure from the approval of others. As Gorham puts it, &quot;Under a strong feeling of the danger of popular applause, he determined to retire from this public station, and to lead the life of an anchoret in some less frequented spot&quot;. An anchoret (or anchorite) is someone who retires from ordinary life, and lives in seclusion for religious reasons.

Neot travelled from Glastonbury to live near a remote village in Cornwall; at the time the village was known as Hamstoke. The location Neot chose was surrounded by dense woodland in hilly terrain. Neot took with him one man, named Barius, as a servant. He spent seven years at this place; despite his wish to avoid public attention, the tiny community of Hamstoke became known as Neotstoke or Neot-stow during this time. He lived as if he was a novice in religion; he macerated his body by fastings, by watchings, by prayers, because he had not lived hitherto in any hermitical strictness.

When seven years had passed, Neot visited the Pope in Rome, to seek instructions about his future. He evidently intended to withdraw further from the world, but the Pope dissuaded him from that course, and told him to return to Cornwall and to &quot;scatter the word of God among the people&quot;. Neot returned to where he had been living and founded a monastery there, and gathered together some religious men, over whom he was made Abbot.

==King Alfred&#x27;s visits==
King Alfred is said to have been a frequent visitor to Hamstoke (or Neotstoke) where Neot had withdrawn from his celebrity status at Glastonbury. In the year 867, Alfred was on a hunting expedition in the area; he turned aside to the Church at Ham-Stoke, where St Guerir was in residence. Alfred remained there for some time prostrate in prayer, imploring freedom from some severe disease with which he was afflicted. When he left, it was not long before the King was free of the illness. This was believed to be as a result of the holiness of the place in which his prayers had been offered. Neot seems not to have been in residence at the time of this visit by Alfred, and Whitaker says that the cure of Alfred&#x27;s illness prompted Neot&#x27;s adoption of the place as his residence.

Later, when Neot was installed as Abbot, Alfred made several visits. Neot is said to have repeatedly rebuked the King for his unbridled ambition. He warned that Alfred might expect greater misfortunes from the Danish (Viking) invasions. Alfred had failed, Neot said, to attend to his people&#x27;s complaints and petitions.

==Neot&#x27;s death==
After his journey to Rome and his return to Neotstoke, Neot now remained there for the rest of his life. In the year 877 he became ill with a progressive illness described as &quot;langour&quot; and sensing the approach of death, he took the holy communion.

Having refreshed his spirit by a participation of the emblems of his Saviour&#x27;s death, like a faithful shepherd he addressed his own little flock. He exhorted them to live in peace, and spoke much of the means by which the salvation of the soul might be promoted. He then committed his soul to the mercy of the Almighty, and (stretching forth his hands towards heaven) breathed out his spirit in the midst of psalmody [the singing of psalms] and prayers.

He died on 31 July 877.

31 July is widely quoted as his Saint&#x27;s Day. 

However Skeat gives his day as October 28. and Saunders explains: 

That was the date of his death and his &quot;principal festival&quot;; &quot;Afterwards his festival was observed on October 28th, the day of the translation of his relics from Cornwall into Huntingdonshire, and he is still venerated on that day in the calendar of the Universal Church.

He was buried in the Church which he himself had built, upon the site of the more ancient Chapel dedicated to St Guerir. Seven years later, a larger and more appropriate building had been made by the monks of Neotstoke, and Neot&#x27;s body was reinterred at the north side of the altar. 

Whitaker had written that &quot;When Neot died he was buried at the monastery. About sixty years after his death, about the year 936, his remains were taken inside, at first to a side-chapel, and then to the nave, while much of the monastery and the accompanying church were demolished and rebuilt.&quot; but Gorham, writing later, decidedly contradicts that.

The monastery that Neot had founded declined in importance after his death, and in fact the lands were later seized by the Earl of Morton. It is likely that in the reign of William the Conqueror the building was demolished entirely. No trace of it remains, nor is the location known.

==Eynesbury Priory founded and Neot&#x27;s remains transferred there==
About the year 975 a priory was founded in Eynesbury, close to the River Great Ouse in what is now Huntingdonshire. A nobleman and landowner named Leofric (alternatively Earl Alric) and his wife Leofleda (alternatively Countess Ethelfleda) were the creators of the priory on their land. It was essential to add prestige and status to their new priory; the objective was to attract pilgrims, and their money. This meant selecting a notable holy person as their patron, and Neot was their choice. The commercial possibilities would be even greater if some physical relics could be acquired, and legend has it that Leofric and Leofleda decided to acquire those of Neot. Legend continues that Neot&#x27;s bones were stolen from Cornwall, and brought to Eynesbury where they were placed in a shrine at the priory.

The priory structure was wooden, located in what is now St Neots, but at that time was considered to be part of Eynesbury. The locality already had a small population.

The official Warden of Neot&#x27;s shrine secretly decamped from Cornwall with the treasure with which he had been entrusted. He left Neot-Stoke on St Andrew&#x27;s day, 30 November, he reached Eynesbury on 7 December. Neot&#x27;s remains were kept in the residence of Earl Alric at Eynesbury for a short time, as the Priory had not yet been constructed. The year of this event seems not to have been recorded, but must have been several years after Neot&#x27;s death in 877 AD and well before the presumed destruction of the Eynesbury priory by the Danes in 1010 AD.

Stevenson in reviewing the work of other historians states in passing, &quot;The date of the transference [of the relics] was, however, not 974, [as had been suggested] but about 1000.&quot; 

Returning to events at the time:

In the meantime, the inhabitants of Neot-Stoke, having understood that the Warden was missing, and having suspected the fraud, flocked to the Shrine of their Saint to inspect the sacred Chest. On finding that their invaluable treasure was gone, they were filled with self-reproach at their own carelessness, and with indignation at the infidelity of their servant. Having armed themselves with such weapons as they could procure, they sought the fugitive among the neighbouring woods, hills and valleys. After much waste of time and fruitless labor, having obtained information respecting the road by which he had fled, a party of the principal inhabitants traced him to Eynesbury.

Restoration of the stolen property having been in vain demanded, their rage became excessive. From bribes and threats, they were about to proceed to violence; and blood would have been shed, had not the royal authority interposed to quell this disturbance.

King Edgar sided with Leofric and Leofleda, and actually sent soldiers to ensure that the Cornishmen went home, empty-handed.

==Eynesbury Priory==
Gorham says

No sooner were the remains of Neot safely deposited at Eynesbury, than Earl Alric raised over them a Chapel, and converted the palace of Earl Elfrid into a Monastery which was dedicated to the Saint... In honor of the Saint the name of the place was changed to Neots-bury.

The chapel and monastery were located on the east bank of the River Great Ouse, on the north side of the present-day town of St Neots. The priory was located in the space between the present-day Priory Lane and Tan Yard, on the bank of the River Great Ouse.

The chapel at the Priory was soon consecrated in the presence of Ethelwolde, Bishop of Winchester, Æscwin, Bishop of Lincoln, Brithnod, Abbot of Ely, Earl Ægelwin, Ædric Pope, Ædelm Polga and many others. Earl Alric and Lady Ethelfleda entreated Abbot Brithnod and Bishop Æscwin that the foundation would have their protection, and that they would furnish it with monks. This was agreed to, and a Benedictine foundation was created, monks being sent from Ely and Thorney. Some land was given to the foundation, most of which was at Waresley and Gamlingay.

==Removal of the relics==
It appeared that the future of the Priory at St Neots, and the remains lodged there, were secure. However after a few years a Danish attack on the area was anticipated, and for safety the relics, that is the remains of Neot, were transferred for safety to a place thought to be less susceptible to Danish attack. Lewina, a lady of Eynesbury and the sister of Osketul, the Abbot of Croyland (now Crowland), arranged for the relics to be taken to her property at Whittlesea. She sent a message to Osketul asking him to come with a force of monks to take the relics to Croyland Abbey. They did so, although at that time the marshy district was almost impenetrable. This event probably took place in 1003. The priory of Neotsbury, that is St Neots, was destroyed by the Danes in 1010. They were pagans and had no scruples about destroying religious relics. It is not known whether the Danes attempted the destruction of the first priory, but Young says that if they did so, the buildings were either repaired or rebuilt, since it is recorded that the bones of St Neot had been restored to the priory by 1020.

When peace was restored and Danish incursions were no longer expected, Neot&#x27;s remains were transferred back to St Neots, where some rebuilding had taken place. The fame and attraction provided by possession of the remains of a saint were so powerful that the monks of Croyland falsely insisted in later years that Neot&#x27;s remains were still at Croyland. The issue became so contentious that in 1078 or 1079 Bishop Anselm (soon afterwards Archbishop of Canterbury) visited the priory at St Neots and inspected the remains, and announced that they were indeed present there. Nevertheless the Abbot of Croyland continued to claim that his Abbey held them.

A century later, the subsequent Abbot of Croyland continued to claim that the remains were with him there, but widespread doubts were expressed and the chest which was claimed to contain Neot&#x27;s remains was opened. It was found to contain a skull, the collar bones, the shoulder blades, some bones of the thorax, and the leg bones. 

&quot;In 1215 these pretended relics of Neot were removed by the Abbot Henry Longchamp, and were placed by an altar erected to his honor... As a proof of the futility of these claims, in 1295 Oliver Bp. of Lincoln issued a second Attestation, reciting the Testimonial of Abp. Anselm.&quot; The bones were not those of Neot, he affirmed, and Neot&#x27;s remains were at St Neots.

==Adoption of the Priory by a French Abbey==
The Norman Conquest took place in 1066, and England became subject to the rule of William the Conqueror. This huge change of governance was accompanied by changes in religious authority, and the Priory of St Neots was seized by Gilbert Earl of Owe. The local monks were ejected and French monks installed. The son of Gilbert, Richard fitz Gilbert and his wife Rohaïs were in local control, and sent word to the Abbey of Bec, in Normandy, for monks to be sent; St Neots Priory became subject to the French Abbey. This took place about 1080 and was a most important step, for Bec was one of the leading intellectual and cultural centres of northern Europe.

Once again doubts surfaced about whether Neot&#x27;s bones were indeed at St Neots Priory, and in 1078 or 1079 the Abbot of Bec came to St Neots to verify the matter. This was in fact Anselm, who had been appointed to the post of Abbot in 1078. Anselm examined the shrine, which was a portable container called a feretory. Anselm found all of Neot&#x27;s bones inside, with the exception of one arm, which may have been pilfered by the Monks of Croyland. The bones were once again enclosed in the feretory, with the exception of one minor part, probably Neot&#x27;s jawbone, which Anselm took with him on his return to Bec. The feretory was locked, and Anselm took the key with him as well.

In 1113 Rohaïs, now a widow, gave all her farmlands (&quot;her entire manor&quot;) to the priory and its monks. In 1409 the Priory was removed from the control of the French Abbey in a process called denization. An Englishman, Edward Salisbury was appointed Prior, and only English monks were to be admitted.

==Dissolution of the monasteries==

King Henry VIII brought about a rupture between the church in England and the Roman Catholic religion, resulting in the first Act of Supremacy of 1534, making Henry supreme authority over the Church of England and rejecting the authority of the Pope. From 1536 Henry instituted a series of processes called the Dissolution of the Monasteries (or Suppression of the Monasteries), in which the lands and property of monasteries were appropriated to the state. There were about 900 religious houses in England at the time.

St Neots Priory was surrendered to the King on 21 December 1539. There were a prior and seven monks in residence. The Priory had no further religious activity.

==Relics of St Neot==
With the monasteries being dissolved, and the Roman Catholic observances now being disparaged, the remains of Neot seem to have lost their significance. The Priory of St Neots was already in a poor physical condition, and when its associated lands were given by Henry VIII to Sir Richard Williams of Hinchinbrook. In 1589 the stones in the ruins of the Priory were used for construction of the new bridge over the nearby River Great Ouse. No trace of the existence of the buildings remained.

There is no record of the fate of the shrine (feretory) of St Neot. The jawbone of Neot, taken by Anselm to Bec, was last recorded there in 1680, and it too has been lost.

The writer Leland saw two non-bodily relics at St Neots in 1538: Neot&#x27;s &quot;interior vest&quot; made of hair-cloth, &quot;in the Irish manner&quot;, and a comb used by Neot, &quot;made of a little bone of two fingers&#x27; breadth, into which were inserted small fishes&#x27; teeth, the whole having the appearance of a pike&#x27;s jaw.&quot;

Young remarks that no-one knows what happened to the bones of St Neot after the Dissolution. They may have been seized and destroyed by King Henry&#x27;s commissioners, who were ordered to remove all relics and other &quot;superstitious&quot; items from religious houses.

==The Alfred Jewel==
The Alfred Jewel was found in 1693 near Athelney in Somerset, close to the area where King Alfred had hidden to escape Viking soldiers in AD 878. The jewel is made of gold with an enamel image under a rock crystal; it is thought to be the end of a pointer used to follow religious text when reading. The Old English inscription reads &quot;Alfred ordered me to be made&quot;.

The figure depicted on the jewel was believed to be Saint Neot, and for that reason was adopted as the emblem for the Cambridgeshire town of St Neots. Neot is thought to have carried a palm before King Alfred&#x27;s soldiers as they went into battle, and the figure seems to be holding a palm. Later studies suggested that it depicts Christ, or alternatively the abstract idea of insight, inspired by the reading of religious works. The jewel is now part of the collection in the Ashmolean Museum, Oxford.

A mosaic based on the design of the jewel is inset into the pavement of the Market Square in the town of St Neots.

==Miracles==
Neot is said to have been involved in several miraculous events, although these are not universally supported as accurate.

===The high door lock===
Neot was small of stature: four feet tall. An important visitor arrived at Glastonbury church, of which Neot was sacrist, responsible for the general management of the building. The visitor knocked loudly, but he had arrived at a time when the occupants, including Neot, were taking a midday nap. Neot was eventually woken by the visitor&#x27;s knocking, and went to open the door to him. It was approached from within by a step upwards, so that the lock was very high from the place where Neot could stand, and he could not reach it.

He is thus distressed exceedingly, when at last, wonderful to be seen! the lock descends from its height to the level of his monastic sash... the lock remained thus low during a long time afterwards, for a witness to the mighty &quot;miracle&quot;, being lowered assuredly in consequence of St. Neot&#x27;s distress, continuing lowered long after St. Neot was gone... 

Whitaker asserts that in reality, Neot fetched an iron stool, enabling him to reach the lock, and left it there for later use. This is how the lock &quot;lowered&quot; for Neot to reach.

Gorham thinks that, afterwards, the door lock was permanently lowered by the more worldly agency of a carpenter:

&quot;The lock was lowered in consequence of St. Neot&#x27;s distress... Thus, what was left, as the consequence of a little alteration made, and a memorial of a little event in the life of the Saint, was shaped by the plastic imagination of devotees into the memorial of a miracle that had never been wrought.&quot;

A derivative of this fable developed later: there is supposed to be a stone opposite the south porch; Neot stood on it and threw the key towards the door; the key found its way into the keyhole and opened the door for him.

===The perpetual fishpond===
The next reported miracle took place at the place in Cornwall where Neot lived as a hermit, with Barius as his servant. God had placed three small fish in a pond nearby. Neot was a vegetarian, but he was told by an angel that he might take one fish daily to eat, but only one. He did so every day, and in the following mornings Neot found that there were still three fish: the fish that had been taken was restored.

Later Neot fell very ill, and in despair his servant Barius decided to take two fishes out of the pond, and prepared them for Neot to eat. He boiled one and broiled (grilled) the other. When he took the cooked fish to Neot, he was alarmed, and told Barius to return them to the water instantly. He did so, and as soon as the fish reached the water they revived and began to swim about.

The language of Gorham, translating an ancient manuscript, is more poetic; when Barius brought him the two fish:

Neot was alarmed, and anxiously inquired whence the two fishes came. Barius told his simple tale. &quot;What hast thou done?&quot; said the Hermit: &quot;Lo! the favor of God deserts us; go instantly and restore these fishes to their element.&quot; While Barius was absent at the pool, Neot prostrated himself in earnest prayer, till his servant returned with the intelligence that the fishes were disporting in the water as usual. He again went to the well (continues this fabulous narrative), and took only one fish; which the Hermit had no sooner tasted, than he was restored to perfect health!

===A fox stole Neot&#x27;s shoe===
There is a natural spring a short distance to the west of the church in the Cornish village of St Neot. It is likely that this was the spring habitually used by Neot himself. It formed a small pond at the time, and Neot seems to have bathed in the pond. At the time it was a secluded spot, and Neot liked to pray there, unobserved by others. He may have spoken his prayers while standing in the pond and washing himself. One day he was doing so, when he heard the approach of some horsemen; to avoid making contact with them, he hastened away to the dwelling where he lived, to complete his prayers. In his hurry to avoid the horsemen, he shed a sandal, and now he sent Barius to find it.

While Neot was absent from the spring, a fox was passing and discovered the lost shoe, and picked it up and ran off with it. &quot;In order that the Saint might not
be scandalized by so mean a thing, the fox was miraculously cast into a deep sleep, and died, having the thongs of the shoe in his vile mouth.&quot; Barius found the shoe and took it to Neot, who made him promise never to tell the story during Neot&#x27;s lifetime.

A writer in the Catholic Layman tells us that an angel was involved: when the fox saw the shoe and decided to take it away:

An angel, who loved to hover in hallowed places, and to breathe an atmosphere which was sanctified by the devotions of God&#x27;s Saints, was present there invisibly and saw this thing, and he would not that such an one as St Neot should be molested even in so small a matter, so that he had sent the sleep of death upon the fox, and Barius when he came there found him dead —- arrested at the instant of his theft —- yet holding the thongs of the shoe in his mouth.

===The deer pulled the plough===
Although he had been a hermit, Neot farmed land at the monastery, and he used oxen to pull the plough. One night some thieves came and stole the oxen. There was a great herd of stags near the place and Neot ordered them to be yoked to the plough like oxen, to pull the plough. At the Saint&#x27;s command, the stags all left their pasture and came to bow their necks under the yoke. They were yoked to the plough and pulled it every day. They returned to their usual pastures in the evening, but came back every morning for another day of ploughing.

The thieves heard of this miracle and went to Neot and asked for forgiveness, which he promptly granted to them. Realising that their life of crime was wicked, they asked to be admitted as monks, and they spent the rest of their lives in prayer. As the oxen had been returned to Neot by the thieves, he commanded the stags to return to their natural life, but their progeny bore a mark recording the event, &quot;a ring of white like a yoke about their necks, and on that part of the neck which used to bear the yoke.&quot;

===Hunting dogs were repelled===
One day Neot was singing the psalms at the spring, when a doe was being chased by a huntsman&#x27;s dogs. She came in terror to Neot and lay down at his feet, and by her anxious paintings implored his aid. The pursuing dogs wished to tear her into pieces, and approaching, they showed the signs of their fury in the loudness of their barking. However, when they saw the doe at the feet of St Neot, they ran away, as if they had been struck with a stick or a spear, and Neot commanded the doe to depart in safety.

The huntsman was a noble gentleman; he went to Neot in submission and asked his advice on how he should conduct his life; and on Neot&#x27;s instruction he too became a monk and joined the monastery.

===The powerful wind===
Neot had a wealthy neighbour, and one day his agricultural workers were bringing in the harvest on wagons. A strong wind developed, and it was so powerful that it drove the wagons and the oxen and men back to the field from which the corn had been taken. The harvest was unloaded for safety. As soon as the rich man heard of the event, he considered it as a warning, sent for his sin. He hastened to the saint and begged pardon, and made a perpetual donation of money to the tenants of the saint, apparently liberating them from further obligation to work for him.

===The crows respect the Sabbath services===
Once a great multitude of crows began to eat the crops and everything they could from the fields, damaging them greatly. People watched over their fields from Monday to Saturday and scared the crows away. However on Sunday the people went to church and the crows took advantage of their absence and feasted on the crops. The people ceased to go to church on Sundays, preferring to guard their crops. Neot saw this and he built a large compound of earth and granite and ordered the crows to gather in it every Sunday at the time of Liturgy: because people should hear the Word of God and because it was bad to harm the fields. The birds obeyed immediately and as long as the saint was alive they flew to the compound every Sunday and remained there till the end of the Holy Service. (There is a Roman or early British earthwork in Eynesbury connected with this miracle.)

==Stained-glass window depicting the miracles==
The Church of St Neot stands in the village of St Neot, Cornwall. The church was built between 1425 and 1530, on a site where there had previously been an earlier church. It has a series of magnificent stained-glass windows depicting religious themes. One of them shows representations of the miracles connected with Neot.

Grylls describes them in detail; writing in 1844 he says that &quot;they have all been restored as they originally stood&quot;:

1. Neot resigning his crown to his younger brother, who is kneeling to receive it; whilst two attendants stand behind. In the background of this and all the other compartments, is seen his monastery...

2. Neot kneeling, taking the vows as monk. The abbot, with the crosier in his hand, reading the vows to him, whilst a monk is covering his head with a cowl. Another monk, in a white dress, bears the holy oil...

3. Neot, reading his psalter, as was his daily wont, with his feet immersed in his favourite well, rescues a doe from her hunter, who, struck with awe at the miracle which has preserved her from his dogs, is delivering up his horn to the saint, and afterwards turns monk himself...

4. Neot receiving instructions from an angel, respecting three fishes which he shows him in his well. These instructions were, that so long as he took one, and only one, of the fishes for his daily food, the supply should never be diminished...
5. The saint, sick in his bed, ordering his servant Barius to bring him one of the fish for his dinner, as usual...

6. Barius, anxious to suit his sick master’s taste, has here taken two fishes from the well, (which is seen behind with the third fish in it) and is boiling one in a vessel, and broiling the other on a gridiron...

7. Barius bringing the two fishes on a dish to his master in bed...

8. Barius, sent back by the saint, in alarm at his having transgressed the angel&#x27;s instructions, throwing the two fish again into the well, where they are immediately restored to life...
9. A thief driving away the saint&#x27;s oxen from before the monastery...

10. A man and boy ploughing the ground with four stags, which, at the saint’s prayers, came and offered themselves tamely to the yoke, in lieu of the stolen oxen...

11. One of the robbers (who were terrified by the report of the foregoing miracle) bringing back the oxen to Neot, in consequence of whose instructions out of the book he is reading to him, the thief and his companions become monks, and enter the convent...

12. Neot kneeling to receive Pope Martin&#x27;s blessings who wears the papal crown and robes, and holds the aspergillum, or holy-water sprinkle, in his right hand, and his staff, surmounted by the triple cross, in the left...
Along the bottom of the window runs the following inscription (in Latin): At the cost of the young men of this parish of St. Neot, who erected this window, A.D. 1528.

==Eastern Orthodox Church==
Neot is venerated in the Orthodox church. His saint&#x27;s day in that church is 31 July in the Julian calendar, which is 13 August according to the Gregorian calendar.

==Relics==
There are no physical remains known of St Neot. He is remembered by the name of the large town of St Neots in Cambridgeshire and the village of St Neot in Cornwall. St Winwaloe&#x27;s Church, Poundstock, Cornwall, was dedicated to him from medieval times until 1970, when it reverted to its original dedication to Saint Winwaloe.

St Neot&#x27;s well is located a short distance to the west of the church at St Neot, Cornwall. Hope, writing in 1893, said that &quot;It was arched over by General Carlyon, having fallen in many years ago.&quot;

There is a holy well dedicated to Neot about half a mile north of Poundstock church. A well house was constructed there in 1914.

Both wells may be seen by a simple search on Youtube.

==The Annals of St Neots==
Contemporary records of Neot&#x27;s life are scarce, and in many cases vague and self-contradictory. There are four surviving manuscripts which purport to describe his life, and writers in the last few centuries have arrived at different conclusions from them. The writer Asser was contemporaneous with Neot but his work on Alfred the Great and available in translation throws only limited light on Neot. A so-called &quot;interpolation&quot; is associated with Asser&#x27;s work; this was written by a different, anonymous writer, and this too is of limited value. The work entitled &quot;Annals of St Neots&quot; is so-called only because the writer Leland met with a copy of the work at the priory of St Neots, and hence bestowed upon it the title &quot;Chronicon Fani Sancti Neoti&quot;.

==Notes==
In this Wikipedia article, archaic spellings have been retained in quoted passages. 

==References==
==Further reading==
&quot;The Annals of St Neots with Vita Primi Sancti Neoti&quot;, in &quot;The Anglo-Saxon Chronicle: A Collaborative Edition&quot;, vol. 17, edited by David Dumville and Michael Lapidge, D S Brewer, Cambridge, 1985.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3889334" start="0" end="4" title="Saint Neot (monk)" label="Neot"/>
<link wikidata="Q733786" start="39" end="43" title="monk" label="monk"/>
<link wikidata="Q733786" start="104" end="108" title="monk" label="monk"/>
<link wikidata="Q544113" start="112" end="129" title="Glastonbury Abbey" label="Glastonbury Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q23148" start="236" end="244" title="Cornwall" label="Cornwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2722353" start="274" end="281" title="St Neot, Cornwall" label="St Neot"/>
<link wikidata="Q19546" start="372" end="376" title="Pope" label="Pope"/>
<link wikidata="Q44613" start="416" end="425" title="monastery" label="monastery"/>
<link wikidata="Q170774" start="584" end="592" title="miracle" label="miracles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1644573" start="761" end="768" title="pilgrim" label="pilgrim"/>
<link wikidata="Q4930029" start="812" end="821" title="Eynesbury, Cambridgeshire" label="Eynesbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018225" start="850" end="861" title="Saint Neots" label="Saint Neots"/>
<link wikidata="Q2750108" start="1089" end="1095" title="priory" label="priory"/>
<link wikidata="Q43939" start="1292" end="1298" title="Anselm of Canterbury" label="Anselm"/>
<link wikidata="Q32989" start="1324" end="1348" title="Bec Abbey" label="Abbey of our Lady of Bec"/>
<link wikidata="Q15878" start="1353" end="1361" title="Normandy" label="Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q200485" start="1434" end="1449" title="Norman Conquest" label="Norman Conquest"/>
<link wikidata="Q38370" start="1522" end="1532" title="Henry VIII" label="Henry VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q759837" start="1538" end="1568" title="Dissolution of the Monasteries" label="Dissolution of the Monasteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q673454" start="1835" end="1845" title="Poundstock" label="Poundstock"/>
<link wikidata="Q6806857" start="1931" end="1953" title="medieval stained glass" label="medieval stained glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q688564" start="1989" end="1998" title="feast day" label="feast day"/>
<link wikidata="Q105313" start="2069" end="2079" title="Wessex" label="West Saxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q105313" start="2146" end="2152" title="Wessex" label="Wessex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183487" start="2366" end="2372" title="novice" label="novice"/>
<link wikidata="Q733786" start="2373" end="2377" title="monk" label="monk"/>
<link wikidata="Q210891" start="2389" end="2400" title="Glastonbury" label="Glastonbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q662862" start="3367" end="3378" title="Holy orders" label="Holy orders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365552" start="3402" end="3411" title="Sacristan" label="Sacristan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1644573" start="3482" end="3490" title="pilgrim" label="pilgrims"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146843" start="4010" end="4018" title="anchorite" label="anchoret"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="4817" end="4821" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q83476" start="5236" end="5247" title="Alfred the Great" label="King Alfred"/>
<link wikidata="Q12567" start="6244" end="6250" title="Vikings" label="Viking"/>
<link wikidata="Q66086" start="6615" end="6629" title="Eucharist" label="holy communion"/>
<link wikidata="Q37594" start="8349" end="8370" title="William the Conqueror" label="William the Conqueror"/>
<link wikidata="Q192925" start="11248" end="11258" title="Edgar the Peaceful" label="King Edgar"/>
<link wikidata="Q19716" start="11745" end="11761" title="River Great Ouse" label="River Great Ouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018225" start="12570" end="12578" title="St Neots" label="St Neots"/>
<link wikidata="Q581158" start="12920" end="12928" title="Crowland" label="Crowland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2335054" start="12986" end="12996" title="Whittlesey" label="Whittlesea"/>
<link wikidata="Q549614" start="13091" end="13105" title="Croyland Abbey" label="Croyland Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q200485" start="15061" end="15076" title="Norman Conquest" label="Norman Conquest"/>
<link wikidata="Q37594" start="15139" end="15160" title="William the Conqueror" label="William the Conqueror"/>
<link wikidata="Q1382281" start="15383" end="15403" title="Richard fitz Gilbert" label="Richard fitz Gilbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q24969941" start="15417" end="15423" title="Rohese Giffard" label="Rohaïs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5257869" start="16605" end="16615" title="denization" label="denization"/>
<link wikidata="Q38370" start="16756" end="16766" title="Henry VIII" label="Henry VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q392226" start="16877" end="16901" title="Acts of Supremacy" label="Act of Supremacy of 1534"/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="16943" end="16960" title="Church of England" label="Church of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q759837" start="17062" end="17092" title="Dissolution of the Monasteries" label="Dissolution of the Monasteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q11801889" start="17731" end="17751" title="Richard Williams (alias Cromwell)" label="Sir Richard Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q5765720" start="17755" end="17767" title="Hinchingbrooke House" label="Hinchinbrook"/>
<link wikidata="Q3496233" start="18806" end="18814" title="Athelney" label="Athelney"/>
<link wikidata="Q23157" start="18818" end="18826" title="Somerset" label="Somerset"/>
<link wikidata="Q636400" start="19623" end="19639" title="Ashmolean Museum" label="Ashmolean Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365552" start="20041" end="20048" title="sacristan" label="sacrist"/>
<link wikidata="Q956165" start="29274" end="29281" title="psalter" label="psalter"/>
<link wikidata="Q103423" start="30904" end="30922" title="Pope Marinus II" label="Pope Martin&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q543177" start="30984" end="30995" title="aspergillum" label="aspergillum"/>
<link wikidata="Q11184" start="31394" end="31409" title="Julian calendar" label="Julian calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q12138" start="31447" end="31465" title="Gregorian calendar" label="Gregorian calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q17529439" start="31644" end="31681" title="St Winwaloe&amp;#x27;s Church, Poundstock" label="St Winwaloe&amp;#x27;s Church, Poundstock"/>
<link wikidata="Q2361972" start="31799" end="31807" title="Winwaloe" label="Winwaloe"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="311771" wikidata="Q4766391" url="?curid=311771" title="Ann Fagan Ginger">
<text>Ann Fagan Ginger (born July 11, 1925) is an American lawyer, teacher, writer, and political activist. She is the founder and Executive Director Emerita of the Meiklejohn Civil Liberties Institute in Berkeley, California.

==Personal and Professional Career==
Ginger is an expert in human rights and peace law under the statutes and treaties of the United States and the United Nations. The author of 22 books and many articles, Ginger has lectured widely. She has been a visiting professor of law at Hastings University, the University of Santa Clara, and San Francisco State.

Ginger was born in 1925 in East Lansing, Michigan, to radical parents. Her father was from a rural family of English Quaker descent; her mother was urban and of Lithuanian Jewish heritage. Ginger graduated from the University of Michigan Law School in 1947, one of only eight women in her class. She met her husband, historian Ray Ginger, at Michigan. Ginger practiced labor law in Ohio for a few years, and then moved with her husband to Boston in 1951 when he was hired by the Harvard Business School. Forced to leave Harvard for their refusal to sign non-Communist oaths, the couple moved to New York City. Ann Ginger began working half-time as an administrator for the National Lawyers Guild while raising two children; between 1954 and 1959 she rose to the position of editor of the NLG&#x27;s professional journal, &quot;The Guild Practitioner&quot;.

In 1955, Ginger began compiling and publishing the &quot;Civil Liberties Docket,&quot; a summary and archive of contemporary civil rights and civil liberties litigation materials and decisions, much of which was &quot;not otherwise available.&quot; In 1962, she was the only woman lawyer to attend the first joint meeting of black and white attorneys in the South, co-sponsored in Atlanta by the Guild and the Southern Christian Leadership Conference. There she spoke in favor of the Civil Rights Movement also supporting women&#x27;s rights. In 1963, having divorced and moved to Berkeley, California, Ginger hired Boalt Hall law students Michael Tigar and Dennis Roberts to help the &quot;Docket&quot; keep up with the explosion in school desegregation and other civil rights litigation. Tigar would later describe Ginger as &quot;a superb editor and writer.&quot; In 1965, she founded the independent nonprofit Meiklejohn Civil Liberties Institute in Berkeley, named for scholar Alexander Meiklejohn.

Ginger argued and won a case before the U.S. Supreme Court in 1959, upholding the due process rights of a target of Ohio&#x27;s state-level Un-American Activities Committee. She chaired the City of Berkeley Commission on Peace and Justice from 1986-1989 and was Vice-Chair from 1989–1999. Ginger&#x27;s biography of the pioneering left-wing immigration lawyer, Carol Weiss King, was published in 1993.

==Marriage and Harvard Controversy==
From the late 1940s until the mid-1950s, Ann Fagan Ginger was married to historian and author Ray Ginger (1924 – 1975). In September 2000, she wrote to the Harvard Board of Overseers demanding an apology for Harvard&#x27;s 1954 action in forcing her then-husband to resign his position at the Business School for refusing to swear he was not a Communist. Harvard had demanded the same of Ann Ginger, although she was not a university employee. Harvard further demanded that the couple leave Massachusetts as a condition of receiving Ray Ginger&#x27;s final two weeks&#x27; pay. Ann Ginger was then pregnant with their second son. At the time of her 2000 letter, she also made public FBI files that confirmed the Gingers&#x27; account of being required to sign a non-Communist oath. This was the first documented proof of Harvard having made such a demand, which Harvard had previously publicly denied. 

Harvard replied a few months later, admitting that Ray Ginger had been forced out of the faculty but not apologizing. Board of Overseers President Sharon Gagnon wrote: &quot;I would not presume to ... second-guess the motives or judgments of individuals in that difficult time. It seems clear, however, that Harvard took an action in the case of Mr. Ginger that many thoughtful people today, looking back, would not find appropriate.&quot; Ann Ginger found the response insufficient and said Harvard needed a truth and reconciliation commission to make it face what it had done.

Francis Boyle, law professor at the University of Illinois, and a 1976 graduate of Harvard Law School, initiated a national campaign to lobby Harvard to conduct a public inquiry, issue a meaningful apology, and endow a chair in the Gingers&#x27; name for the study of peace, justice, and human rights.

==Selected works==
* &quot;Bill of Rights Citator 1955-1966&quot; [1967]
* &quot;Holdings of Meiklejohn Civil Liberties Institute and ACLU 1920-1966&quot; [1967]
* &quot;California Criminal Law Practice&quot; [vol. I, 1969]
* &quot;The Relevant Lawyers;: Conversations out of court on their clients, their practice, their politics, their life style&quot; [1972]
* &quot;Human Rights Case Finder, 1953—1969&quot;
* &quot;The Law, the Supreme Court, and the People&#x27;s Rights&quot; [1977]
* &quot;Jury Selection in Civil and Criminal Trials&quot; [1984]
* &quot;The Cold War Against Labor&quot; [1987]
* &quot;The National Lawyers Guild: From Roosevelt through Reagan&quot; (ed.) [Temple Univ. Press 1988]
* &quot;Carol Weiss King: Human Rights Lawyer (1895-52)&quot; [1993] (about mentor Carol Weiss King)
* &quot;Nuclear Weapons Are Illegal: The Historic Opinion of the World Court and How It Will Be Enforced&quot; [1998] (Summary)
* &quot;Human Rights and Peace Law in the U.S.&quot; [2003]
* &quot;Challenging U.S. Human Rights Violations since 9/11&quot; [2005] (Table of Contents)
* &quot;Landmark Cases Left Out Of Your Textbooks&quot; (ed.) [2006] (introduction and table of contents)
* &quot;The Living Constitution&quot; (ed.) [2007]
* &quot;Undoing The Bush-Cheney Legacy: A Tool Kit for Congress and Activists&quot; (ed.) [2008]
* &quot;The U.N. Declaration of Human Rights Is the Law: A Guide to U.D.H.R. Articles in Treaties Ratified by the U.S.&quot; (ed.) [2009]

==References==
==External links==
* 2005 radio interview with Ann Fagan Ginger</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4766391" start="0" end="16" title="Ann Fagan Ginger" label="Ann Fagan Ginger"/>
<link wikidata="Q6810063" start="159" end="195" title="Meiklejohn Civil Liberties Institute" label="Meiklejohn Civil Liberties Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q484678" start="199" end="219" title="Berkeley, California" label="Berkeley, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="370" end="384" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q5680304" start="500" end="519" title="Hastings University" label="Hastings University"/>
<link wikidata="Q992830" start="525" end="550" title="University of Santa Clara" label="University of Santa Clara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256981" start="556" end="575" title="San Francisco State" label="San Francisco State"/>
<link wikidata="Q871265" start="605" end="627" title="East Lansing, Michigan" label="East Lansing, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q911830" start="793" end="826" title="University of Michigan Law School" label="University of Michigan Law School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7297528" start="905" end="915" title="Ray Ginger" label="Ray Ginger"/>
<link wikidata="Q49126" start="1057" end="1080" title="Harvard Business School" label="Harvard Business School"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1132" end="1151" title="Loyalty oath#1930s to 1950s" label="non-Communist oaths"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="1173" end="1186" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q6974039" start="1251" end="1273" title="National Lawyers Guild" label="National Lawyers Guild"/>
<link wikidata="Q23556" start="1817" end="1824" title="Atlanta" label="Atlanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q605130" start="1846" end="1886" title="Southern Christian Leadership Conference" label="Southern Christian Leadership Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q48537" start="1920" end="1941" title="Civil Rights Movement" label="Civil Rights Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q223569" start="1958" end="1977" title="women&amp;#x27;s rights" label="women&amp;#x27;s rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q484678" start="2017" end="2037" title="Berkeley, California" label="Berkeley, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q846183" start="2052" end="2062" title="Boalt Hall" label="Boalt Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308559" start="2076" end="2089" title="Michael Tigar" label="Michael Tigar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6810063" start="2350" end="2386" title="Meiklejohn Civil Liberties Institute" label="Meiklejohn Civil Liberties Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q15527262" start="2418" end="2438" title="Alexander Meiklejohn" label="Alexander Meiklejohn"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="2481" end="2499" title="U.S. Supreme Court" label="U.S. Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397" start="2557" end="2561" title="Ohio" label="Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q945795" start="2581" end="2613" title="Un-American Activities Committee" label="Un-American Activities Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q5044600" start="2802" end="2818" title="Carol Weiss King" label="Carol Weiss King"/>
<link wikidata="Q7297528" start="2975" end="2985" title="Ray Ginger" label="Ray Ginger"/>
<link wikidata="Q737056" start="4365" end="4378" title="Francis Boyle" label="Francis Boyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q457281" start="4401" end="4423" title="University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign" label="University of Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q49122" start="4448" end="4466" title="Harvard Law School" label="Harvard Law School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5044600" start="5458" end="5474" title="Carol Weiss King" label="Carol Weiss King"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="311774" wikidata="Q661315" url="?curid=311774" title="Coyoacán">
<text>Coyoacán ( ; , Otomi: ) is a borough (&quot;demarcación territorial&quot;) in Mexico City. The former village is now the borough&#x27;s &quot;historic center&quot;. The name comes from Nahuatl and most likely means &quot;place of coyotes&quot;, when the Aztecs named a pre-Hispanic village on the southern shore of Lake Texcoco dominated by the Tepanec people. Against Aztec domination, these people allied with the Spanish, who used the area as a headquarters during the Spanish conquest of the Aztec Empire and made it the first capital of New Spain between 1521 and 1523.

The village and later municipality of Coyoacán remained independent of Mexico City through the colonial period into the 19th century. In 1857, the area was incorporated into the then Federal District when this district was expanded. In 1928, the borough was created when the Federal District was divided into sixteen boroughs. The urban expansion of Mexico City reached the borough in the mid-20th century, turning farms, former lakes, and forests into developed areas, but many of the former villages have kept their original layouts, plazas, and narrow streets and have conserved structures built from the 16th to the early 20th centuries. This has made the borough of Coyoacán, especially its historic center, a popular place to visit on weekends.

==Villa Coyoacán or historic center==
To distinguish it from the rest of Coyoacán borough, the former independent community is referred to as Villa Coyoacán or the historic center of the borough. Consisting now of 29 blocks, it is one of the oldest neighborhoods in Mexico City, located 10 km south of the Zocalo (main square) of Mexico City. This area is filled with narrow cobblestone streets and small plazas, which were laid out during the colonial period, and today give the area a distinct and bohemian identity. The area is filled with mostly single family homes, which were former mansions and country homes built between the colonial period to the mid 20th century. The Project for Public Spaces ranked the neighborhood as one of the best urban spaces to live in North America in 2005 and is the only Mexican neighborhood on the list. This area was designated as a &quot;Barrio Mágico&quot; by the city in 2011.

The center of Coyoacán is relatively peaceful during the week, but it becomes crowded and festive on weekends and holidays. After the Zocalo, the most-visited place in Mexico City is this historic center, especially the twin plazas in its center. According to the borough, the area receives about 70,000 people each weekend. The area is a stop for both the Turibus and Tranvia Turistico tour bus routes, on their routes through San Ángel, and other locations in the south of Mexico City. People come to enjoy the still somewhat rural atmosphere of the area as well as the large number of restaurants, cafes, cantinas, museums, bookstores and other cultural attractions. Some of these businesses have been around for almost a century. In the two main plazas and even in smaller ones such as the one in the neighboring Santa Catarina neighborhood. Mimes, clowns, musicians, folk and indigenous dancers, storytellers and other street performers can be found entertaining crowds. Vendors sell street food such as ice cream, homemade fruit drinks, esquites (flavored corn kernels) and corn-on-the-cob served with mayonnaise, lime, chili pepper and grated cheese, amaranth bars, and various candies. In the evening, food vendors tend to sell more hot items such as quesadillas, sopes, tortas, tostadas, pozoles and more. One known food vendor, located in the Mercado de Comida Coyoacán, goes by the name of Rogelio. He is known for making pancakes (called hotcakes) in the shape of animals and humans. These are usually eaten as a snack with jam, cream and other toppings.

The tourism has been a mixed blessing for the historic center as commercial establishments open, helping the economy, but also push residents out. In the historic center, there are over 860 retail businesses, mostly restaurants, about 200 of which were established in the last five years. Residents attribute the growth to Mexico City&#x27;s promotion of the area tourism in general as well as the opening of commercial centers in the borough. While the growing business helps the economy, resident groups fear that the area will lose its current character, as many businesses are opening in formerly residential buildings, with questionable legal basis. Currently, most of the borough, especially in historic center, is residential with older adults. Property prices are high, leading to sales not to new families but rather to larger commercial interests, squeezing out smaller businesses along with residents. Neighborhood groups have formed to confront the changes and preserve the historic value of the area. Another serious problem for the area is the traffic jams and serious lack of parking in the historic center. The quantity of cars and the lack of traffic patrols have meant the proliferation of “franeleros” or people who illegally take possession of public areas such as streets to charge for parking.
The historic area is centered on two large plazas filled with Indian laurel trees called the Jardin del Centenario and the Jardín Hidalgo. These plazas cover an area of 24,000 m2, which were renovated, along with the areas around them in 2008. The green areas were rehabilitated, and areas were paved with red and black volcanic stone. Renovation of the two plazas and the streets around them cost 88.3 million pesos. For over twenty five years, these plazas, especially Plaza Hidalgo, and the streets around them were filled with vendors (wandering and with stalls). When renovation efforts began, 150 vendors were removed from the plazas proper with about 500 total including the surrounding streets. While the practice was illegal, it had been tolerated by authorities, even though it caused damage to the plazas and caused traffic problems. One of the main goals of the renovation work in 2008 was to remove these vendors and move them to a new crafts bazaar built nearby. Initially, opposition to the removal of the vendors came not only from the vendors themselves, but also from some neighborhood groups and local businesses who feared their removal would hurt tourism. When renovation work finished in 2009, police were assigned to the plazas to keep vendors from returning, leading to confrontations, both physically in the plazas and legally in the courts. The borough began to issue some permits for vendors, but there was opposition. Eventually, a group representing the vendors obtained a court order to allow forty vendors to return to the plazas, citing the history of tolerating such activity in the past. This order is still opposed by some neighborhood groups, but as of 2010, there are still a limited number of these vendors selling in the plazas.

Plaza Hidalgo, also called Jardín (garden) Hidalgo is the main plaza or square of the borough. It is bordered by Calle Carillo Puerto on the east, Calle Caballocalco on the west, Calle B. Dominguez and the Casa Municipal on the north and the Plaza del Centenario and the Parish is San Juan Bautista on the south. In the center of the plaza, there is an early 20th-century kiosk with a stained glass cupola topped by a bronze eagle. This kiosk was donated to the then village by Porfirio Díaz for the then-upcoming Centennial of Mexico&#x27;s Independence in 1910. The eagle design is one adopted by Mexico after the French Intervention. As the plaza is named after Miguel Hidalgo y Costilla, a statue of the priest, created by Luis Arias can also be found on the plaza. Behind it is a sculpture carved from a tree trunk called “La Familia de Antonio Alvarez Portual y Josué.

The Plaza del Centenario (also called the &quot;Jardín del Centenario&quot;) is slightly smaller and located just west of the Plaza Hidalgo, separated by Calle Carrillo Puerto. This plaza originally was part of the very large atrium that belonged to Parish of San Juan Bautista during the colonial period. The main entrance to this atrium still exist on the west side of this plaza and are called the Arcadas Atrial or the Arcos del Jardín del Centenario. This entrance was built in the 16th century of stone with decorative motifs that show both European and indigenous influence. The current name for this area comes from the Centennial of Mexico&#x27;s Independence. In the center of the plaza, there is a fountain which contains a bronze sculpture of two coyotes, which refer to the borough&#x27;s name. The south side of the plaza is lined with cafes and restaurants, including the well-known Café El Parnaso, and the north side features a very large crafts market.

The Casa Municipal, also referred to &quot;La Casa de Cortés&quot;, is a building located on the north side of the Plaza Hidalgo. It has served as an administrative/governmental building since it was constructed in the 18th century. The erroneous name of Casa de Cortés (House of Cortés, referring to Hernán Cortés), comes from Coyoacán&#x27;s association with the conquistador. Cortés did live in Coyoacán in 1521 and 1522, while the destroyed Aztec city of Tenochtitlan was being rebuilt into Mexico City, and the area was the capital of the colony of New Spain. However, Cortés never lived at the site, despite a plaque on building that says that he did. Cortés residence in Coyoacán was on lands that belonged to the then leader of the indigenous of this area, Juan de Guzmán Iztolinque, in the area where the La Conchita Church and plaza are found now. What Cortés eventually built here where administrative buildings for the offices used to manage the vast lands he was granted as the Marquis del Valle de Oaxaca, which included the Coyoacán area. Local legend states that this was the location were Cuauhtémoc was tortured as the Spanish tried to learn of the whereabouts of more treasure.

The current structure was built in the mid 18th century, by Cortés’ descendants, who still carried the title of the Marquis of the Valle de Oaxaca to replace the old structure, which had deteriorated. In the 1850s, the building began to be used as the seat of the government of the municipality of Coyoacán, which then belonged to the State of Mexico, very separate from Mexico City. When the borough of Coyoacán was created in 1928, as part of the Federal District, the building remained the government seat but of the modern “delegación.” The structure was declared a Colonial Monument by INAH in 1932.

The structure is much the same as it was when it was constructed in the 18th century. The facade is simple and is fronted by a series of columns in sandstone and wood over which is a roof. The door and window jambs are typical of civil constructions of the 18th century with wrought iron work. The facade is topped by a wide cornice and inverted arches. At the very front is a sculpture of two coyotes in volcanic stone, the current logo of the borough. Above the entrance is the coat of arms granted to Coyoacán by Charles IV of Spain. On one side of the building is the Sala de Cabildos, or City Council Hall. It was painted by Aurora Reyes Flores with a mural depicting pre-Hispanic Coyoacán and includes depictions of the landscape of the area including the Xitle volcano, the Tepaneca god Xocotlhuetzin as well as the Mesoamerican deity Quetzalcoatl. Next to this hall is an attached chapel. The mural in the chapel was done by Diego Rosales in 1961, depicting the early history of Mexico with personages such as Cuauhtémoc, Cortés, La Malinche and Pedro de Alvarado. Scenes of the work cover the walls and the ceiling.
One of the most important historic buildings in the borough is the Parish of San Juan Bautista. Built between 1520 and 1552, it is one of three oldest parish churches in Mexico City, along with the ones in Tlalpan and the small community of Amaqueman. Originally, this church and the cloister next to it were constructed as a monastery by the Dominicans, but the complex was transferred to the Franciscans. Over time, as the complex deteriorated and was reconstructed and restored various time, most was replaced so that now the only original parts from the 16th century are the choir area, the Rosario Chapel and the main altar. However, much of the same layout remains. The parish church has a large open chapel, but only a portion of the atrium it had in the 16th century. During much of the colonial period, the atrium functioned as a cemetery. Today, much of this atrium is now the Plaza del Centenario. The interior of the church has seven chapels, with the Rosario Chapel containing an ornate Baroque altarpiece from the end of the 17th century. The monastery portion is two floors surrounding a large inner courtyard. It conserves a large part of the original wood beams and decorative work in wood which was done by indigenous hands. The feast day for San Juan Bautista is 24 June. In the church a special altar is installed and mass is said all day. The most important mass occurs at midday with mariachi music, with a meal offered in the adjoining monastery building. The event is organized by 24 civil associations and the chaplains of the parish.

In 2005, the San Juan Bautista church underwent renovations to its tower, atrium, facade, portal for pilgrims, the north and south sides and the cupola and more under the supervision of INAH and academics from UNAM. Prior to this, there had been no restoration work to the building for about a century. The cupola was particularly damaged, with trees and other plants growing out of it. Much of the work was to make straight many of the walls and floors, which had cracked and warped. Studies were done on the building to determine what materials in what colors were used in order to use the same. It was declared a National Monument in 1934. The work was sponsored by government and private funds.

Other landmarks off the plazas include the Museo Nacional de Culturas Populares, and the Acuavida Coyoacán. The museum is located just off the Plaza del Centenario, and features mostly temporary exhibits related to popular or mass culture such as one related to lucha libre wrestling. The museum was created in 1982, to show the values and ways of live of the various modern cultural groups in Mexico. It has various halls, an auditorium and two courtyards in which are exhibitions, auditions, concerts, plays, recitals and craft workshops for children. The Acuavida Coyacán Aquarium is on the north side of the Plaza del Centenario. It offers exhibits of fishes, reptiles, live coral, aquatic plants and more, including the only freshwater manta ray in captivity in the Americas.

The rest of the historic center and nearby neighborhoods are filled with homes built from the colonia era to the middle of the 20th century, many of which have been catalogued for their historic value. Many of these homes can be found one two of the historic center&#x27;s oldest streets, the Calle de Higuera, which leads southeast away from the Parish of San Juan Miguel and to the La Concepción neighborhood and Calle Francisco Sosa, which leads away from the same area towards San Angel. Calle Francisco Sosa alone has 65 structures catalogued by INAH for their historic value. One of the most important of these structures is the Casa de Ordaz, located on Calle Francisco Sosa on the corner with the Plaza de Centenario.) It was long thought to have belonged to conquistador Diego de Ordaz, who died in 1532, but research has shown that it was built sometime in the 18th century. Remodeling work was authorized on the Casa de Ordaz in 2004 by the INAH, but complaint stated that the owner, Banamex, gutted the interior and exceeded the limits set for the work by INAH. However, the chronicler of the borough, Luis Everaert, stated that the only original part of the building was the facade, which was not changed. The house underwent modification in the 1930s. In the 1920s, it was a school for girls, the first in Coyoacán, In the 1930s, it was the Instituto Centroamericano, a middle school for boys. The Instituto Italiano de Cultura (Italian Cultural Institute) on Francisco Sosa Street is house in a structure built between the 17th and 18th centuries and remodeled in the 20th. This structure is an adobe and stone mansion with a flat red façade with Moorish style decorative features. It has an inner courtyard with a tile decorated fountain and a private altar. It houses the cultural offices of the Italian Embassy. The main house of the San Pedro Martír Hacienda is located off of Belisario Dominguez Street. The house is now divided into three independent parts, but they retain their original facades. In 1932, this house was where the Escuela de Pintura al Aire Libre (Open Air Painting School) was established, which was an important artistic movement.

==The borough==
The borough of Coyoacán was created in 1928, when the Federal District of Mexico City was divided into 16 administrative parts. The borough is named after the old village of Coyoacán, where the borough government is seated. This borough is much larger than the village, extending for 54.4km2 in the geographic center of the Federal District. Accounting for 3.6% of the Federal District, it is the tenth largest borough. The borough is bordered to the north by the boroughs of Benito Juárez, Iztapalapa, Xochimilco, Tlalpan and Álvaro Obregón. Border roads include Avenida Río Churubusco, Calzada Ermita Iztapalapa, Calzada de la Viga, Canal Nacional, Calzada del Hueso, Avenida del Bordo, Calzado Acoxpa, Calzada de Tlalpan, Avenida de Pedregal, Anillo Periférico, Boulevard de las Cataratas, Circuito Universitario, Avenida Ciudad Universitaria, San Jerónimo, Río Magdalena and Avenida Universidad.

Sixty-nine percent of the land is residential, 60% is open or green space and the rest is mixed use or commercial. The borough contains 167,157 housing units with between two and four occupant, which is 7.5% of the total of the District. It contains 7.2% of the total population of the Federal District. This population has fallen slightly from 640,423 to 628,063 (2000 to 2005) as the overall population of Mexico City has risen.

However, quality of life in this borough his ranked among the top in the nation and has been ranked internationally. Coyoacán was ranked third best place to live in the country in 2004 by the United Nations Development Programme, behind Benito Juarez and San Pedro Garza García in Nuevo León. The ranking is based on income levels, health and education. Coyoacán was ranked sixth in education, fourth in income and fifth in health. In quality of life, which takes into account factors such as crime statistics, Coyoacán ranked second behind Benito Juarez in Mexico City. This ranks the quality of life as equivalent to that in developed countries. In 2004, Coyoacán was ranked the fifth most livable neighborhood in North America, ahead of Rittenhouse, Philadelphia and behind Camden, Maine. The borough contains 228 preschools, 227 primary schools, 103 middle schools, and 66 technical, preparatory and other high schools serving about 155,000 students. Illiteracy is lower here than in the rest of the Federal District at 1.9% for residents over the age of 15. About 55% of the population is of working age with less than 2% unemployed. 77.8% are employed in commerce and services, with 7% in industry; 44.8% of industrial jobs is related to pharmaceuticals with food processing accounting for 18.7%. However, industry accounts for 47.3% of the borough GDP, followed by services at 32.6% and commerce at 16.7%. As of 2004, the borough accounted for 4.1% of Mexico City&#x27;s total GDP, but its industry accounts for 21% of industrial GDP. Tourism is an important part of the borough commerce and services sector. However, there are only nine hotels rated with three stars or above.
Most of the borough located at 2240 meters above sea level with little variation. Minor elevations are located in Ciudad Universitaria, San Francisco Culuacán and Santa Úrusula Coapa. The most important elevation is in the far south called the Cerro Zacatépetl which rises to 2420masl. Parks and other green spaces cover 4,318,783.56m2 and can be found in most of the communities of the borough. Soil composition is of two types, of volcanic origin and the former lakebed of Lake Texcoco. Volcanic land is subdivided by volcanic rock which is decomposing and that which has not. The best known of the areas with still-hard lava rock is called the Pedregal, which covers the communities of the Ciudad Universitaria, the Pedregal de Carrasco, Santa Úrsula Coapa, Copilco el Alto, Viveros de Coyocan and the Villa de Coyoacán or historic center. The southeast of the borough is dominated by volcanic rock from an eruption of a now dormant volcano called Xitle. This lava bed covers the current communities of Colonia Santo Domingo, Colonia Ajusco and Pueblo de Santa Úrsula. Decomposing volcanic rock is mostly found by the former lake. The borough is part of the Pánuco River Basin, in the subregion of the Lake Texcoco Zumpango. The lake no longer exists except for a canal called the Canal Nacional which is on the east border. Two rivers pass through the territory called the Río Magdalena and Río Mixcoac. Both of these are almost fully encased in cement tubes as they pass through. These two rivers join to form the Río Churubusco on the border with Benito Juárez.

The borough is divided into 140 communities, classified as colonias, pueblos, unidades habitacionales and barrios. The oldest of these divisions are former villages which are distinguished by their colonial era churches and who still celebrate their feast of their patron saint much as they did when they were independent, with fireworks, masses, processions, folk and indigenous dance and more. A number of these villages also have certain unique traditions associated with these celebrations. These barrios and pueblos can still be somewhat distinguished by their narrow, winding roads and alleyways. Culturally, they are still distinguished by having their own histories and legends. Many of the old villages are linked by the old Calle Real, which was renamed Santa Catarina, then Benito Juarez and now Francisco Sosa. Today, this road extends from Plaza or Jardín Hidalgo to the Panzacola Bridge. This street used to have a trolley car that linked the historic center of Coyoacán with San Ángel and Churubusco. At first this trolley was pulled by mules, but later it was electrified. Sometime after that, it was replaced by modern busses. Another main road in the borough is La Higuera, which links Plaza Hidalgo which the La Conchita Plaza.

In additions to structures from the colonial era, Coyoacán has important structure from the 19th century, replicas of colonial and 19th century buildings constructed in the 20th century and modern buildings. In total, the borough contains 349 registered buildings of cultural or historic importance, with 157 of these in the historic center. Coyoacán was declared a “Zona Típica y Pintoresca del Distrito Federal” (Typical and Picturesque Zone of the Federal District) by INAH in 1934 due to is historical, cultural and artistic value. This declaration recognizes 278 buildings within the borough. This historic center has the most with fifty buildings on 86 blocks over 1.64km2.

Despite its rural past with villages and farmlands, today the borough is urban, with all of its territory paved and developed with the exception of parks and other reserved green spaces as it is completely integrated with the urban sprawl of Mexico City. This has brought a number of problems to the area. Traffic in Coyoacán is some of the worst in the city. While there are 70.7 km of primary roads through the borough, with 8,200,947m2 of pavement, many sections have maintained the narrow winding streets and plazas from its colonial past. These sections bring in a large number of visitors, especially on weekends and holidays, with these roads unable to cope with the volume of traffic and need for parking. Other issues are graffiti and vandalism, and other crimes, the most serious of which is theft/robbery, followed by assault. However, Coyoacán generates only 7.2% of all crime reports in Mexico City.

==Other neighborhoods of the borough==

For long before it became a borough, the area was home to a number of small community and villages. Vestiges of a number of these communities can still be distinguished by street layouts and by customs and traditions which have survived. Many of the old villages, now called colonias, pueblos and barrios (roughly “neighborhood”) are linked by the old Calle Real, which was renamed Santa Catarina, then Benito Juarez and now Francisco Sosa. Today, this road extends from Plaza Hidalgo to the Panzacola Bridge in Santa Catarina. This street used to have a trolley car that linked the historic center of Coyoacán with San Ángel and Churubusco. At first this trolley was pulled by mules, but later it was electrified. Sometime after that, it was replaced by modern busses. Another main road in the borough is La Higuera, which links Plaza Hidalgo which the La Conchita Plaza in the La Concepción neighborhood. These two roads, along with other colonial-era roads still have structures which are centuries old. Another street with a number of country mansions and homes is Calle de Fernandez Leal, mostly built at the beginning of the 20th century. A film called “The Matador, with Pierce Brosnan and Greg Kinnear was filmed partly on the Plaza Santa Catarina.

===La Concepción===

One neighborhood which is as old as the historic center is the &quot;La Concepción&quot; or &quot;La Conchita&quot; neighborhood (Barrio de la Concepción), an area where the Spanish conquistadors settled in the 1520s. The neighborhood centers on a small plaza with a church just southeast of Villa Coyoacán or the historic center. This main chapel and plaza are called the Purísima Concepción Chapel and the Plaza de la Conchita. This plaza is surrounded by very small streams still fed by a spring called &quot;Los Camilos&quot;. It is thought that &quot;Los Camilos&quot; once provided potable water to Tenochitlan. According to INAH, the plaza was a pre-Hispanic ceremonial center, upon which Cortés had this chapel built. The first Catholic mass in Mexico City was celebrated here and according to tradition, Hernán Cortés’ lover and translator, La Malinche, prayed here. The official name of the building is the Purísima Concepción Chapel, but its more common name is &quot;La Conchita&quot;, (literally, “the little shell”).

The feast day for this neighborhood is 8 December. The façade of the La Conchita Church is decorated with a large flower portal, usually donated by a sister community of Coyoacán such as Los Reyes or La Candelaria. The festival begins with chamber music and then the patron image of the Virgin Mary is “awakened” with the song Las Mañanitas as she is surrounded by numerous floral arrangements for mass. On the plaza in front of the church, wind bands play while participants share tamales and atole. Later in the night, student musical groups perform &quot;callejoneadas&quot; where they roam the streets playing music as a traveling party.

Most of the area&#x27;s oldest buildings are located on this plaza, Calle Fernando Sosa, which leads to Villa Coyoacán and Calle Fernandez Leal. The Casa Colorada or Casa de la Malinche is located on a corner of the Plaza La Conchita, but it is not open to the public. It is said that Cortés built it for La Malinche, and historians believe Cortés had his Spanish wife, Catalina Juárez de Marcaida, murdered there. In spite of the house&#x27;s historic and aesthetic value, it receives little attention. The reason for this is that La Malinche is often blamed for the downfall of the Aztec Empire, acting as a traitor to her own people.

La Casa de los Padres Camilos (The House of the Camillo Priests) is on Calle Fernandez Leal in the Barrio de la Concepción. This structure was part of a farm and hospice which was owned by a Camillian religious order. The brothers cultivated a number of crops including fruit trees and flowers. Today the main house is used for commercial purposes but the building retains many of its original architectural details. It is a small stone-block building with a door made of black stone. A hall was added in the early 1900s. Opposite the Casa de los Camilos is the Jardín Frida Kahlo which has a statue of the painter and a fountain.

On Calle Fernández Leal you can also find the Elena Garro Cultural Center. Since its inauguration, on October 5, 2012, this space was conceived as a project of community life around books and a permanent offer of cultural activities that make available to visitors various expressions of the culture of Mexico and the world. The mansion of the early twentieth century, illuminated by its glass windows, calls readers to walk among its high shelves of two floors and to know its wide range of titles.

===Santa Catarina===

The Santa Catarina neighborhood is home to a large number of Coyoacán&#x27;s landmarks. It is located just west of the Plaza del Centenario along Calle Francisco Sosa. It is a small square with a bright yellow chapel named the Capilla de Santa Catarina. This chapel was built for use by the indigenous population in the very early colonial period. The building today conserves some of the original built in the 1520s when it was originally built as an open chapel, and ornamental work done in the mid 17th century, when the nave with cannon vault was added. Later a tower and a linterna were added, but these fell in the 1985 earthquake. Inside there are 400-year-old murals. It was declared a National Monument in 1932. There are also several restored colonial era houses around it. On one side, there is Casa de Cultura de Coyacán which hold art and cultural events. Once part of a hacienda, behind the building there are large gardens filled with vegetation.

The Dolores del Río House is located on Salvador Novo Street in Barrio de Santa Catarina. It is also known as “La Escondida” (The Hidden One), where Mexican actress Dolores del Río lived. It is neo-Colonial in design when it was built for her, but it has since been remodeled and has a more modern appearance. It still functions as a private residence.

The Miguel Angel de Quevedo House is on Francisco Sosa Street in Barrio de Santa Catarina. It is a very large structure for the area, filled with trees and plants both inside and out. Originally, these gardens were watered with river flow from the Río Magdalena, but this river is no longer accessible because it is encased. It is still used as a residence.

The Casa del Indio Fernández House is located on Dulce Oliva Street in Barrio de Santa Catarina. The house was constructed over twenty years by architect Manuel Parra for Mexican filmmaker Emilio “Indio” Fernández, who died in the house in 1986. The house is colonial in style with a facade constructed from volcanic rock. Today it belongs to Fernandez&#x27;s daughter, Adela.

The Casa de Cultura Jesús Reyes Heroles is located on Francisco Sosa, named after a historian and political scientist from Veracruz. The house is on a property, which was called Izotitlán, meaning “izotes” a type of wild palm to make hats. In the colonial period, the house belonged to Juan de Luis Celis who had a small paper factory. It changed hands several times by the 20th century, but all this time, the structure kept its original appearance including very old atrium cross in the first courtyard. In the 1940s, it was enlarged, but its colonial style was respected. The building gained its current function in 1985, when President Miguel de la Madrid donated the house and lands to create a cultural center. Today, the center has three art galleries, named after Alfredo Ramos Martinez, Guillermo Kahlo and Miguel Alvarez Acosta to house temporary exhibits, an area to teach the culinary arts and two multiuse rooms. At the beginning of the 20th century, the Casa de Cultura Jesús Reyes Heroles was inhabited by María Concepción Armida, who is being considered for beatification by the Catholic Church. It is said that she performed a number of miracles in this house. Behind this house is the Callejón del Aguacate, which is said to be haunted by the ghost associated with the woman, and local school children are known to go looking for the ghost.

The San José del Altillo Church is located on the corner of Avenida Universidad and Miguel Angel de Quevedo. This area was once the El Altillo Hacienda. This hacienda was donated by its last owner, Aguayo Piña to the Misioneros del Espíritu Santo religious order in the very early 19th century. Here they founded the Centro de Espiritualidad San José del Altillo spiritual center. Today, the church site has a modern structure on it, built by architect Enrique de la Mora.

According to legend, the San Antonio Panzacola Chapel was built by the mother of a group of smugglers to fulfill a promise or to offer gratitude. It is also said that it was the transfer point and a customs checkpoint for goods heading from Coyoacán and San Angel to Mexico City.

The Casa Alvarado is now the home of the Fonoteca National or National Sound Library. Octavio Paz died here in 1998.

The &quot;Alfredo Guati Rojo&quot; National Watercolor Museum is dedicated to watercolor paintings. It was founded by Cuernavaca-born watercolor artist Alfredo Guati in 1967. Originally located in Colonia Roma, it was moved to its current location near Santa Catarina after the 1985 earthquake.

===Colonia del Carmen===

Colonia del Carmen was not a village in the past. It was built in 1890 and named in honour of Carmen Romero, the wife of then president Porfirio Díaz, and it is best known for having several of the borough&#x27;s museums and other landmarks. The Del Carmen colonia has had an intellectual and vanguard reputation since the 1920s, when it was the home of Salvador Novo, Octavio Paz, Mario Moreno and Dolores del Río. The Frida Kahlo Museum, popularly called “La Casa Azul” (The Blue House) is one of the most popular sites in Coyoacán. It is a deep blue house on Londres Street, built in the early 20th century in which Frida Kahlo was born in 1907 and in which she spent the last thirteen years of her life. The house contains a selection of Kahlo&#x27;s personal art collection and a large collection of pre-Hispanic artifacts, Mexican folk art (mostly indigenous inspired jewelry and clothes which she wore) and works by José María Velasco, Paul Klee and Diego Rivera. The museum also contains a café and a small gift shop. The Kahlo pieces are some of her minor works and include &quot;El Marxismo Dará la Salud&quot;, which shows her casting away her crutches. There is an unfinished portrait of Joseph Stalin, who became a hero to Kahlo after Rivera had a falling out with Russian Communism theorist Leon Trotsky. In this portrait, Stalin stands before a wheelchair. The folk art collection contains Rivera&#x27;s collection of retablos.

The Leon Trotsky Museum is located near the Frida Kahlo Museum. Trotsky was forced into exile in 1929 by Josef Stalin and in 1937, due to efforts by Diego Rivera and Frida Kahlo, he was granted asylum in Mexico. At first, Trotsky and his wife lived in the La Casa Azul with Frida, but after a falling out with Diego Rivera, the couple moved to this house on Viena Street in 1938. The house looks like a fortress, and it was fortified to protect Trotsky from assassins. It has high outer walls and watchtowers once occupied by armed guards. Inside, there is a small house and garden. The house and garden were original with the defenses added later after an attack led by David Alfaro Siqueiros, who shot up the house. Trotsky and his wife survived by hiding under furniture. The bullet holes from this attack remain on the outer walls of the house.

However, in 1940, a Spanish Stalin supporter by the name of Ramón Mercader managed to gain entry to the house and to kill Trotsky with a mountaineer&#x27;s ice axe. The room in which Trotsky was killed remains exactly as it was at that moment, including the papers and the books in their exact positions. As a museum, some other buildings were added along the walls which contain photos from Trotsky&#x27;s lifetime, biographical notes in Spanish and memorabilia such as Trotsky trademark small round glasses. In the garden, there is a tomb which contains Trotsky&#x27;s and his wife&#x27;s ashes. The complex also houses the Instituto del Derecho de Asilo y las Libertades Públicas (Institute for the Right of Asylum and Public Liberties) which was founded in 1990 and the Rafael Galván Library, which contains a collection of books with social themes. These organizations occasionally sponsor events such as expositions and conferences.

The Escuela Superior de Música (Higher School of Music) on Fernández Leal Street in Colonia Del Carmen is an imitation of the house occupied by Shakespeare&#x27;s Othello. It stands out due to its many stained glass windows with Arab phrases inscribed against a stucco facade. This school used to be a pulqueria called La Rosita, which was frequented by intellectuals in the area. When this bar was demolished, it took with it a mural done by Diego Rivera.

The La Capilla Theater is on Madrid Street in Colonia Del Carmen. This building was part of the ruins on a portion of an old hacienda purchased by Salvador Novo around 1950. In the ruins of this structure he visualized a theater and hired Alejandro Prieto to make the adaptation. This theater was opened to the public in 1953 along with a restaurant called El Reflectorio alongside. Later a bar called El Habito, today called El Vicio was added. The theater remains as one of the more important cultural venues in the borough.

The Juárez Institute is located on the corner of Cuauhtemoc and Abasolo Streets. It was built in the 19th century. Originally, this was part of a Presbyterian church complex, but this church has since moved to another location on Cuauhtemoc street. Today, it houses an educational institution. The building is two floors, with a sober facade made of stone and brick. The sides are framed by sandstone, with the main entrance on Cuauhtemoc. The interior has a large courtyard which contains gardens.

The Coyoacán Market was built in 1956 by Pedro Ramírez Vázquez in a Functionalist style on a site that originally housed stables and horse corrals.

===Churubusco===

The Churubusco neighborhood has the historic Dieguinos monastery located near the ancient road to Iztapalapa. In the pre-Hispanic period, this area was a small island, which was called Teopanzolco, at the juncture of Lake Texcoco and Lake Xochimilco. In the 17th century, the Spanish built the monastery of Churubusco over a ceremonial site dedicated to the god Huitzilopochtli. This monastery complex is best known for its role during the Mexican–American War. The Mexicans, aided by the &quot;Saint Patrick&#x27;s Battalion&quot;, a military unit composed of catholic immigrants (mainly Irish), had fortified the monastery and fought until they ran out of ammunition and then beaten only after hand-to-hand combat. When U.S. General David Twiggs asked Mexican General Pedro María de Anaya to surrender his ammunition, the reply is said to have been &quot;If there were any, you would not be here.&quot; There is a memorial to this event outside the main entrance and a plaque commemorating the &quot;Irish martyrs&quot;. The monastery&#x27;s church still retains its original function, but most of the rest of the complex is now the Museo Nacional de las Intervenciones; Parque Xicoténcatl is across the street. The collection includes an American map of the facility from 1847, artifacts from the French Intervention in Mexico and a plot by Henry Lane Wilson to bring down the government of Francisco I. Madero in 1913.

The Casa de Cristo (House of Christ) is located on Heroes Street in Churubusco. It was constructed in 1906 as a residence for Bertha Vizcayno de Vergara who remained there until 1967. Today, it is still private property but is used as a restaurant. It has three floors and twelve rooms, with walls of brick and limestone and wood roof decorated with tiles. The front has sandstone Ionic columns. The name comes from the inscription of &quot;Casa de Cristo&quot; over the main entrance.

===Pueblo de los Reyes, La Candelaria and other traditional &quot;barrios&quot;===


While lacking in landmarks, La Candelaria and Los Reyes are considered to be the two most traditional communities in the borough, with mostly religious traditions that extend back into the colonial period. Much of Los Reyes’ traditions revolve around a crucifix imaged called the Señor de las Misericordias. According to legend, sometime in the 18th century, residents of Santiago Zapotitlan, today in Tlahuac borough, were carrying the image to Mexico City for restoration. Upon encountering a business producing pulque, they decided to go inside after leaving the image in a supposedly secure place. When they were done drinking, they could not find the image where they left it or anywhere nearby. A few days later a &quot;tlachiquero&quot; (one who takes nectar out of maguey plants) heard a child&#x27;s cry in the area and found the image. Word went out to try to find which church the image belonged to. Representatives of various communities come to claim it, but none could lift the image. When it was the turn of the Pueblo de los Reyes, they prayed that the image would be light as a feather for them and the easily lifted it. They returned home joyous to have been chosen by the image. Later, representatives of Santiago Zapotitlan came to reclaim the image, but again it became too heavy to lift and it has remained in the church ever since. The festival called the Recibimiento del Señor de las Misericordia occurs in September in both Los Reyes and La Candelaria. It celebrates the arrival of the image according to the legend. From June until September, the image is sent out to visit various communities in the borough. During the ceremony to return the image to its home church, the people of La Candelaria bring the image and the people of Los Reyes receive it with much fanfare.

On 6 January in the Pueblo de los Reyes, the main square of the community is decorated with flower portals and &quot;carpets&quot; made by carefully arranging colored sawdust on the ground. There are also processions and a ceremony called the &quot;vítor&quot; used to announce coming of the festival. Reeds are cut and decorated with multicolored crepe paper and half inflated balloons and then are given to children as they pass by on the streets. There is also a parade that features &quot;mojigangas&quot; which are large structures made of cardboard and paper in the shape of human figures. These are hollow and placed on the shoulders of parade participants. An image of the Nativity and the Three Wise Men is carried through the town on a truck from which bags of candies are tossed to children.

The image for the La Candelaria neighborhood is an image of the Virgin Mary called the &quot;Virgen de la Candelaria&quot;. The feast day for this image occurs on 2 February in the Pueblo de la Candelaria. This event is organized by a &quot;mayordomo&quot; who is chosen each year and last for ten days. It includes religious activities such as a novena and a special Mass. It also includes cultural, sporting and recreational activities, which also gives the event the alternative name of &quot;La Semana Cultural de La Candelaria&quot; (Culture Week of La Candelaria). During Holy Week, La Candelaria holds a passion play which runs about 4 km from the main plaza to the Huayamilpas Ecological and Recreational Park.

The feast day of Francis of Asisi, patron of the Barrio Cuadrante de San Francisco is announced by a band playing wind instruments playing through the streets. In addition to more common elements, the celebration also includes the lighting of the candle of three large wooden crosses, performed by groups performing indigenous dances such as Concheros. The crosses are eventually surrounded by a multitude of candles in the night as people pray. The origin of this tradition is unknown.

The feast day of Saint Ursula, patroness of Santa Ursula Coapa last for about a week. The first three days are dedicated to 40 hours of prayer. Other religious events include processions on Calzada de Tlalpan and the blessing of taxi drivers. Cultural and recreational activities include a marathon, fireworks, including those on large frames called &quot;toritos&quot; (little bulls) and &quot;castillos&quot; (castles), indigenous and folk dancing including Concheros, Santiagueros and Chinelos, and music played by wind bands especially from neighboring Tepepan and San Lucas Xochimanca.

Other traditional neighborhoods include San Lucas, San Mateo, El Niño Jesús, San Francisco and San Antonio. The San Lucas and San Mateo barrios are sliced through by small arroyos and used to be surrounded by cornfields and pastures for cattle. The El Niño Jesús and San Francisco barrios are filled with very winding alleyways over black volcanic rock, called pedregal, from an ancient eruption of Xitle. These two are separated from the historic center by Avenida Miguel A de Quevedo. The San Antonio barrio is very small with an equally small chapel by the name of San Antonio Panzacola. This chapel belonged to the Carmelites and is located alongside an old stone bridge over the Río Magdalena.

==History==
The name comes from the Nahuatl original &quot;Coyohuacán&quot;. It is most often translated as &quot;place of coyotes&quot; but other possible translations such as &quot;skinny coyote&quot; and &quot;place of wells&quot; and &quot;land of the water of the jackal or coyote&quot; have also been proposed. The area&#x27;s Nahuatl glyph prominently depicts the figure of a coyote in profile, with its tongue hanging out and down halfway across the body where it curls. This tongue position often indicates hunger or thirst, but can also indicate tiredness. This glyph was likely devised when the pre-Hispanic settlement was founded around the 10th to 12th centuries.

In the pre-Hispanic period, Coyoacán was originally an independent dominion or altepetl. It was a major center of trade on the southern shore of Lake Texcoco. Its people were Tecpanecas, who were farmers and stoneworkers specializing in the volcanic stone from the old lava flow of Xitle. It had been a Tepaneca dominion for 300 years until the Aztecs took over in the 15th century. Famous rulers were Maxtla and his son Tecollotzin.

The Aztecs gave the area its current name; however their rule was hated by the native Tepanecas, who welcomed Hernán Cortés and the Spanish, allowing them to use this southern port on Lake Texcoco as a headquarters during the conquest of Tenochtitlan.

After the Aztec capital was destroyed, Cortés remained in Coyoacán and made it the first capital of New Spain from 1521 to 1523. During the colonial period, the village remained independent of Mexico City, separated by farmland and lakes, filled with haciendas and monasteries. This allowed the area to maintain many of its plazas and narrow cobblestone streets to this day. During the sixteenth century and into the seventeenth, there was an active Spanish land market in Coyoacán, with many bills of sale in Nahuatl found in the archives. Rebecca Horn found over 100 such bills of sale naming Nahua men and women selling to Spaniards. Natives also dictated last wills and testaments in Nahuatl the colonial era, which further contribute to our understanding of continuities and changes in Nahuas&#x27; situation in the colonial era. The altepetl (town) of Coyoacán continued to assess tribute on the basis of the size of a person&#x27;s land holdings long after Spaniards had switched to a head tax. The earliest extant native pictorial of Coyoacán, the so-called Códice de Coyoacán, dating from a 1553 &quot;visita&quot; (inspection) gives a baseline for tribute and labor.

One important monastery was the Churubusco monastery, at which the Battle of Churubusco took place on August 20, 1847, during the Mexican–American War. Ten years later, the area became part of the Federal District of Mexico City when it was expanded by the 1857 Constitution.

From the rest of the 19th century to the middle of the 20th, Coyoacán remained separate from Mexico City proper, keeping its rural reputation and gaining one for cantinas and pulque bars. During the Mexican Revolution, Victoriano Huerta was sometimes found in cantinas here, proclaiming that the &quot;only foreigners welcome [in Mexico] were Martell and Hennessy.&quot;

The historic center and other villages were linked to each other and Mexico City proper by rail lines and trolleys. The rail line linked Mexico City and the historic center from the 1860s to the early 1900s. Many of the old villages were linked by a trolley on Santa Catarina Road, now Francisco Sosa. This trolley was initially pulled by mules but later it became electrified. In the 1920s, areas of the borough became a magnet for artists and intellectuals after being promoted by Francisco Sosa Escalante. Over time, it attracted names such as Salvador Novo, Octavio Paz, Mario Moreno (aka Cantínflas), and Dolores del Río, exiles such as Leon Trotsky and Romania&#x27;s King Carl, as well as its two most famous residents, Diego Rivera and Frida Kahlo. Trotsky lived close by Rivera and Kahlo and was murdered by one of Stalin&#x27;s agents. Rivera and Kahlo&#x27;s presence gave the area a bohemian reputation. In 1923, the Escuela de Pintura al Aire Libre (Open Air School of Painting) was established at the former San Pedro Martír Hacienda, establishing the area as an artists’ enclave. From the 1920s to the 1940s, the area was a mix of rural farms and upper-class families who were building mansions and country homes. In the 1930s, Attending mass on Sundays was a must although attendance was segregated by social class and age. It was commons for the youth to go to the Cine Centenario movie theatre (now a Sanborns) after Mass. Some youths, called &quot;Vanguardias&quot; preferred to meet on Thursdays and Sundays in private home to watch alternative films such as documentaries and animated features. Other forms of entertainment included picking fruit from trees or horse racing on Xicotencatl Street. The main street market, or &quot;tianguis&quot;, for the area was called Luis Mondragón, which set up each Friday where the Coyoacán gymnasium is now, selling foodstuff, domestic animals, and other necessities. There were also about 25 pulque bars or pulquerías.

===Absorption into the Distrito Federal and twentieth- and twenty-first century developments===

The area was officially designated the Mexico City borough of Coyoacán in 1928. By the mid 20th century, the urban sprawl of Mexico City began to envelop the borough, much as it was doing to other former villages and municipalities in the Federal District such as Tacuba, Tacubaya, Mixcoac and others. The rural economy gave way as fields and orchards were built over, as well as the remaining lake and conifer forests. This has deforested the area and depleted the soil leaving very little wildlife. There have been efforts to cultivate human-planted forests, mostly of eucalyptus and other trees in areas such as Zacatépetl, which had been completely deforested.

This integration into the city proper has brought with it big city problems. The first is that redevelopment will take over areas which still maintain some of their rural or village feel, which has happened in other formerly independent communities. In 2008, neighborhood groups worked against the construction of new apartment complexes in the borough in order to halt further urbanization. The area&#x27;s popularity, both as a place to live and as a place to visit on weekends, along with its narrow winding streets has caused it to have some of the worst traffic problems in the city, with traffic jams and parking problems. In spite of the fact that there are six parking garages in the historic center, drivers in the area still jockey for spaces on the street. The six public garages are always full. This makes for big business for establishments which offer valet parking and for franeleros. Franeleros are people who illegally take over public street parking and charge for it. The &quot;franeleros&quot; charge to &quot;take care of vehicle&quot; but also threaten to damage those who refuse to pay. There are an estimated 250 franeleros working the borough, and in 2010, the city government proposed regulating them instead of eliminating them, which the residents of Coyoacán and neighboring San Angel have strongly rejected. One last issue is the proliferation of unauthorized street vendors and tianguis markets.

During the 2000s, the city and borough have done major rehabilitation and reconstruction work in the borough, especially in the historic center, renovating plazas, colonial buildings and streets. This work moved to areas in and around the Plaza Hidalgo and Plaza del Centenario in 2008, with the main goals being the redesign of the plazas, the renovation of the Parish of San Juan Bautista and the removal of street stalls in and around the plazas. Opposition to the removal of the vendors came not only from the vendors themselves, but also from some neighborhood groups and local businesses who feared their removal would hurt tourism. In March 2008, the two plazas were closed off by authorities for renovation work, forcing the removal of more than 500 street stalls for renovation of the two plazas and the streets around them costing 88.3 million pesos. When the plazas reopened in 2009, there were confrontations between the vendors and authorities, both on the plazas with police and in the courts, despite the fact that the borough built a nearby bazaar on Felipe Carrillo Puerto. Vendor&#x27;s groups eventually obtained a court order to allow for about forty vendors in the plazas, citing the 25 years or so when about 150 vendors were tolerated on the premises, even though this order is opposed by residents&#x27; groups. As of 2010, most vendors remain off the two plazas proper.

In 2010, the borough hosted an event in the Jardín Hidalgo where the Guinness record for largest mug of hot chocolate in the world was broken.

==Education==
===Elementary schools===
* Reino de Jordania
* Tecayehuatzin]
* Professor Jesús Silva Herzog
* República de Checoslovaquia
* Activa Paidos
* República de Guatemala
* República de Finlandia
* Professor Fernando Brom Rojas
* Centenario de Juárez
* República de Suazilandia
* Professor Samuel Delgado I. Moya 
* Professor Francisco Javier Lilly Huerta
* Professor Anton Semionovich Makarenko

===Middle schools===
* Diurna Número 35 General Vicente Guerrero
* Diurna Número 130 Guadalupe Ceniceros de Zavaleta
* Diurna Número 139 José Enrique Rodó
* Diurna Número 127 Ramón López Velarde
* Diurna Número 145 José Guadalupe Nájera Jiménez
* Diurna Número 149 David Alfaro Siqueiros
* Diurna Número 178 Madame Curie
* Diurna Número 208 Salvador Díaz Mirón
* Diurna Número 280 Max Shein
* Diurna Número 101 Ludwig van Beethoven
* Técnica Número 1043 Luis Enrique Erro
* Técnica Número 1084 Belisario Domínguez Palencia
* Centro de Educación Artística (CEDART) Diego Rivera
* Técnica Número 67 Fco. Diaz de Leon
* Técnica Número 49 José Vasconcelos

===Senior high schools===
* Centro de Estudios Tecnológicos Industrial y de Servicios 2
* Colegio de Bachilleres 4
* Colegio de Bachilleres 17
* Centro de Estudios Científicos y Tecnológicos 13 (IPN)
* Colegio de Ciencias y Humanidades Plantel Sur
* Centro de Estudios Superiores Navales
* Centro de Educación Artística (CEDART) Diego Rivera
* National public high schools of the National Autonomous University of Mexico (UNAM) &quot;Escuela Nacional Preparatoria&quot; include: Escuela Nacional Preparatoria 6 &quot;Antonio Caso&quot;
* Public high schools of the &quot;Instituto de Educación Media Superior del Distrito Federal&quot; (IEMS) include: Escuela Preparatoria Coyoacán &quot;Ricardo Flores Magón&quot; (Viejo Ejido de Santa Úrsula)

===International schools===
* Lycée Franco-Mexicain (Liceo Franco Mexicano) - Coyoacán Campus

===Other private schools===
* Colegio Olinca Periférico Campus
* Escuela Mier y Pesado
*Colegio Anglo Mexicano de Coyoacán in Colonia San Francisco Culhuacán
*Colegio Anglo Americano de Coyoacán in Fraccionamiento Paseos de Taxqueña
*Modern American School in Romero de Terreros (ES)

==Ciudad Universitaria==

The Ciudad Universitaria (University City) is UNAM&#x27;s main campus. Designed by architects Mario Pani and Enrique del Moral, it was built in the 1950s to move the university from the scattered colonial buildings in the historic center of Mexico City.
It was declared a World Heritage Site by UNESCO in 2007. 
The Biblioteca Central (Central Library) is a large rectangular prism in the center of the campus. It was built by Gustavo Saavedra, Juan Martínez and Juan O&#x27;Gorman. O’Gorman was in charge of decorating the four sides with multicolored mosaics of stone pieces brought from all parts of Mexico. The murals relate to the history of Mexico. The north side reflects the pre-Hispanic period; the south reflects the colonial period and the east is from the modern period. The west side is meant to represent Mexico today with the coat of arms of the university in the center with José Vasconcelos’ motto of “Por mi raza hablará mi espíritu” (For my race, speaks my spirit.). These mosaics are the largest of their type in the world.

The Torre de Rectoría (Dean&#x27;s Tower) is the main administration building for UNAM. It was designed by Mario Pani, Enrique del Moral and Salvador Ortega as a tower of glass and marble, decorated with three-dimensional murals by David Alfaro Siqueiros, mixing painting and sculpting. The north side has a piece entitled “El Pueblo a la Universidad y la Universidad al pueblo” (People to the university and University to the People). The work on the south side is called “Estudiantes que extiende sus brazos a la cultura” (Students who extend their arms to culture). On the east side is an unfinished work related to the culture of Mexico.

The Centro Cultural Universitario was built between 1976 and 1980 by engineers and architects of the school headed by Arcadio Artis Espiritu and Orso Nuñez Ruiz Velasco. It was created to house facilities related to various art forms and by artists from all over the world as well as Mexico. It is built over volcanic rock, oriented north–south and is surrounded by desert vegetation. The main entrance on Avenida Insurgentes contains a mural by Carlos Mérida. The complex contains the National Library and National Periodical Collection, the Instituto de Estudio Bibliográficos, the Coordinacion de Diffusion Cultural and the Julio Torre Bookstore/Café.

The Estadio Olímpico México 68 is the main sports facility built for the Olympic Games of 1968 held in Mexico City. It was constructed to simulate a volcanic cone with a wide crater. The high relief decoration in the front was designed by Diego Rivera and created as a mosaic using naturally colored stones. Today, the stadium is the home of the Pumas professional soccer team.

The Sala Nezahualcóyotl is a concert hall and the main site for the UNAM philharmonic orchestra. The building was inaugurated in 1976. It was designed acoustically to allow the orchestra to be in the center of the hall and seats 2311 people around a 240m2 stage.

The Sala Migual Covarrubias y Carlos Chávez is used primarily for dance recitals but has also hosted operatic events, musical theater, and stage plays.

The Juan Ruiz de Alarcón Theater and Sor Juana Inés de la Cruz Forum were both inaugurated in 1979 as space for cultural events under the same roof. They have a capacity of 430 and 120 spectators respectively. The Forum does not define stage and audience space so that the facility can be adapted to a number of different arrangements. The stage of the Theatre, with its 12-meter walls, can be disassembled partially or fully.

The Espacio Escultórico or Sculpture Space is a monumental sculpture made of 64 stone triangular blocks arranged in a circle such that from above, it looks like a crown. Inside this space is exposed naturally occurring volcanic stone. The outside of the sculpture retains its natural vegetation. The idea is to combine nature and art and represents the cosmology of pre-Hispanic Mexico.

The Universum Museo de Ciencias is an interactive museum with 315 exhibits related to the natural and physical sciences. Halls are named for mathematics, chemistry, energy, biological diversity, agriculture and food, ecology, human biology and health, Science in the big city, animal behavior and society and more.

Running across the borough from the east end and ending in the west near the university campus is Avenida Miguel Angel de Quevedo. This street is lined with bookstores, such as Nalanda, El Sotano de Coyoacán, “Octavio Paz” and two branches of the Gandhi chain. The first was one of the Gandhi stores, placed in 1973 at the site of a former supermarket. The bookstores are here because the area is close to the Ciudad Universitaria and the student population that lives in the area. The bookstores have attracted other cultural businesses such as theaters cafes and restaurants. The second Gandhi store, called Gandhi 2000, was built to be a cultural center as well as a bookstore with literature related events, children&#x27;s activities, concerts and more. It also has a series of nude sculpture by Gabriel Ponzanelli.

Ciudad Universitaria is very large, so you might need a Ciudad Universitaria&#x27;s map.

==Other landmarks in the borough==

The Viveros de Coyoacán is located on the west side of the borough just north of the Ciudad Universitaria. This land once belonged to Miguel Angel de Quevedo, but they were nationalized under President Venustiano Carranza and today it serves as a park and a plant nursery for trees used in reforestation projects. It is the first plant nursery of its kind in Mexico. Today, it not only germinates and grows trees for reforestation projects, it is considered to be one of Mexico City&#x27;s “lungs.” This and other areas serve to recharge aquifers and add oxygen to the air. In the past, this park was also home to the first Escuela Nacional de Tauromaquia (National School of Bullfighting).

Centro Nacional de las Artes (National Arts Center) is located on Avenida Rio Churubusco just east of Calazada de Tlalpan. It contains the Blas Galindo Auditorium, the Teatro de las Artes, two other theaters, the national music conservatory as well as schools of theater, dance, cinema, painting, sculpture and engraving. The building is modern. It has a bookstore and art materials shop open to the public. 

Anahuacalli is a museum designed by Diego Rivera to house his personal collection of pre-Hispanic art. It also contains some of his own work as well. The building is towering and fortress-like made of volcanic stone, incorporating stylistic features from several pre-Hispanic cultures. The name means “house of Anáhuac” Anáhuac was the Nahuatl name for the Valley of Mexico. The exhibits are mostly pottery and stone figures and other pieces chosen for their artistic value. Rivera&#x27;s works on display are murals on the walls and ceilings, studies of major murals done in other locations such as El Hombre en el Cruce de los Caminos, which reflects the original El Hombre, Controlador del Universo, which is in the Palacio de Bellas Artes.

The Casa del Sol (House of the Sun) was constructed by the Aguilar and Quevedo families. In this house, Venustiano Carranza composed the Constitution of 1917. Legend says it was originally a country home for Miguel Angel de Quevedo. Today it is a privately owned building with a restaurant and catering business.

The Casa de Cultura Raúl Anguiano is located in the Pedregal area on a property with a 2 hectare lake. It is named after a Mexican artist whose work reflected the country&#x27;s political and artistic history. The Casa de Cultura Ricardo Flores Magón was opened in 1986 with the name of Casa del Pueblo. Its currently named after a journalist and ideologue from the Mexican Revolution. This building is one of the few built specifically to be a cultural center to serve the eastern side of the borough, which is densely populated due to apartment complexes such as the CTM Infonavit Culhuacan and the Alianza Popular Revolucionaria. The building contains a stage theater, a multipurpose room, an open-air theater and a library. Other museums in the borough include the Museo de Arte Escultórico Geles Cabrera on Xicotencatl Street in Colonia del Carmen, the Museo del Automóvil on Avenida Division del Norte in Pueblo de San Pablo Tepetlapa, the Museo del Retrato Hablado on Avenida Universidad in Colonia del Carmen, Museo Cultural de las Artes Graficas on Calzada de Tlapan in Barrio de San Diego Churubusco and the Museo Alejandro Galindo on Avenida Santa Úrsula in Colonia Santa Úrsula. Other theaters includeTeatro Rafael Solana on Miguel Angel de Quevedo in Barrio del Cuadrante de San Francisco, Foro de la Conchita Forum on Vallara in the center, the Teatro Santa Catarina in Barrio Santa Catarina, the Teatro Coyoacán /Foro Rodolfo Usigli on Heroes Street in Barrio de San Mateo Churubusco, Teatro La Capilla on Madrid in Colonia del Carmen, Centro Nacional de las Artes in Calzada de Tlalpan in Colonia Country Club.

Estadio Azteca, located in the Santa Ursula area, is the home of the Club América and Mexican national soccer teams. It is also used for other events, including concerts, and hosted two FIFA World Cups. The rivalry is known as the Clasico Capitalino is centered around the Coyoacán borough, as the home stadiums for both America and the Pumas are within a few miles of each other.

==Twinning==
Coyoacán is a Sister City of Arlington County, Virginia, United States; it has also been a sister city of Clifden, County Galway, Ireland since 2012.

==Notable residents==
*Adolfo Aguilar Zínser
*David Alfaro Siqueiros
*Diana Bracho
*Luis Buñuel
*Wojciech Cejrowski
*Hernán Cortés
*Pedro de Alvarado
*Dolores del Río
*Marcela Del Río Reyes
*Miguel de la Madrid Hurtado
*Miguel Ángel de Quevedo
*Lila Downs
*Laura Esquivel
*Emilio (El Indio) Fernández
*Adolfo Gilly
*Jorge Ibargüengoitia
*Frida Kahlo
*Diego Luna
*Marina (La Malinche)
*Miguel Moreno Arreola
*Salvador Novo
*Zelia Nuttall
*Sergio Pitol
*Diego Rivera
*Carlos Salinas de Gortari
*Benjamin Travers
*Leon Trotsky
*Soberano Jr.

==In popular culture==
*The band Calexico named an instrumental track on their 2015 album &quot;Edge of the Sun&quot; &quot;Coyoacán.&quot;

==References==
==Bibliography==

==External links==

* Alcaldía de Coyoacán website 
* Official page of the Italian Institute of Culture, located in Coyoacán 
* Mexicocity.com.mx: Coyoacán 
* Ciudad Universitaria map</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q661315" start="0" end="8" title="Coyoacán" label="Coyoacán"/>
<link wikidata="Q36355" start="15" end="20" title="Otomi language" label="Otomi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2734310" start="29" end="36" title="Boroughs of Mexico City" label="borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q1489" start="78" end="89" title="Mexico City" label="Mexico City"/>
<link wikidata="Q5195043" start="121" end="128" title="borough" label="borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q13300" start="185" end="192" title="Nahuatl" label="Nahuatl"/>
<link wikidata="Q44299" start="230" end="237" title="coyotes" label="coyotes"/>
<link wikidata="Q12542" start="254" end="259" title="Aztec" label="Aztec"/>
<link wikidata="Q13700" start="315" end="327" title="Lake Texcoco" label="Lake Texcoco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537180" start="345" end="352" title="Tepanec" label="Tepanec"/>
<link wikidata="Q2608489" start="369" end="385" title="Aztec Empire" label="Aztec domination"/>
<link wikidata="Q828435" start="472" end="508" title="Spanish conquest of the Aztec Empire" label="Spanish conquest of the Aztec Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q170603" start="542" end="551" title="New Spain" label="New Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952852" start="598" end="610" title="municipalities of Mexico" label="municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1489" start="759" end="775" title="Federal District (Mexico)" label="Federal District"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348507" start="1634" end="1640" title="Zocalo" label="Zocalo"/>
<link wikidata="Q207175" start="1828" end="1836" title="Bohemianism" label="bohemian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918249" start="2007" end="2032" title="Project for Public Spaces" label="Project for Public Spaces"/>
<link wikidata="Q4863756" start="2202" end="2227" title="Barrios Mágicos of Mexico City" label="&amp;quot;Barrio Mágico&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2067789" start="2678" end="2687" title="San Ángel" label="San Ángel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5243850" start="3293" end="3301" title="esquites" label="esquites"/>
<link wikidata="Q156344" start="3408" end="3416" title="amaranth" label="amaranth"/>
<link wikidata="Q865325" start="3509" end="3519" title="quesadilla" label="quesadilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q10751991" start="3522" end="3526" title="Sope (food)" label="sope"/>
<link wikidata="Q3573026" start="3529" end="3534" title="torta" label="torta"/>
<link wikidata="Q3280441" start="3537" end="3545" title="Tostada (tortilla)" label="tostadas"/>
<link wikidata="Q515692" start="3547" end="3553" title="pozole" label="pozole"/>
<link wikidata="Q693369" start="7275" end="7280" title="kiosk" label="kiosk"/>
<link wikidata="Q11346334" start="7302" end="7308" title="cupola" label="cupola"/>
<link wikidata="Q34095" start="7321" end="7327" title="bronze" label="bronze"/>
<link wikidata="Q150688" start="7381" end="7394" title="Porfirio Díaz" label="Porfirio Díaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q68750" start="7431" end="7457" title="Mexican War of Independence" label="Mexico&amp;#x27;s Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q952881" start="7519" end="7538" title="Second French intervention in Mexico" label="French Intervention"/>
<link wikidata="Q55636" start="7568" end="7593" title="Miguel Hidalgo y Costilla" label="Miguel Hidalgo y Costilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q189265" start="8005" end="8011" title="Atrium (architecture)" label="atrium"/>
<link wikidata="Q3810938" start="9516" end="9530" title="Juan de Guzmán" label="Juan de Guzmán"/>
<link wikidata="Q297050" start="9857" end="9867" title="Cuauhtémoc" label="Cuauhtémoc"/>
<link wikidata="Q82112" start="10284" end="10299" title="State of Mexico" label="State of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q901361" start="10540" end="10544" title="INAH" label="INAH"/>
<link wikidata="Q328092" start="10880" end="10887" title="cornice" label="cornice"/>
<link wikidata="Q183226" start="11071" end="11090" title="Charles IV of Spain" label="Charles IV of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q777294" start="11185" end="11204" title="Aurora Reyes Flores" label="Aurora Reyes Flores"/>
<link wikidata="Q521559" start="11317" end="11322" title="Xitle" label="Xitle"/>
<link wikidata="Q179818" start="11397" end="11409" title="Quetzalcoatl" label="Quetzalcoatl"/>
<link wikidata="Q230314" start="11593" end="11604" title="La Malinche" label="La Malinche"/>
<link wikidata="Q210900" start="11609" end="11626" title="Pedro de Alvarado" label="Pedro de Alvarado"/>
<link wikidata="Q408187" start="11886" end="11893" title="Tlalpan" label="Tlalpan"/>
<link wikidata="Q131479" start="12023" end="12033" title="Dominican Order" label="Dominicans"/>
<link wikidata="Q165005" start="12074" end="12085" title="Franciscans" label="Franciscans"/>
<link wikidata="Q37853" start="12680" end="12687" title="Baroque" label="Baroque"/>
<link wikidata="Q222738" start="13451" end="13455" title="UNAM" label="UNAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q9046890" start="13984" end="14020" title="Museo Nacional de Culturas Populares" label="Museo Nacional de Culturas Populares"/>
<link wikidata="Q927431" start="14203" end="14214" title="lucha libre" label="lucha libre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536199" start="14682" end="14691" title="manta ray" label="manta ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q911242" start="15503" end="15517" title="Diego de Ordaz" label="Diego de Ordaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q749474" start="15718" end="15725" title="Banamex" label="Banamex"/>
<link wikidata="Q2356998" start="17388" end="17401" title="Benito Juárez, D.F." label="Benito Juárez"/>
<link wikidata="Q741771" start="17403" end="17413" title="Iztapalapa" label="Iztapalapa"/>
<link wikidata="Q643026" start="17415" end="17425" title="Xochimilco" label="Xochimilco"/>
<link wikidata="Q408187" start="17427" end="17434" title="Tlalpan" label="Tlalpan"/>
<link wikidata="Q14906254" start="17439" end="17453" title="Álvaro Obregón, D.F." label="Álvaro Obregón"/>
<link wikidata="Q11680443" start="17617" end="17635" title="Calzada de Tlalpan" label="Calzada de Tlalpan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3366724" start="17658" end="17675" title="Anillo Periférico" label="Anillo Periférico"/>
<link wikidata="Q161718" start="18437" end="18473" title="United Nations Development Programme" label="United Nations Development Programme"/>
<link wikidata="Q1944489" start="18500" end="18522" title="San Pedro Garza García" label="San Pedro Garza García"/>
<link wikidata="Q15282" start="18526" end="18536" title="Nuevo León" label="Nuevo León"/>
<link wikidata="Q521559" start="20881" end="20886" title="Xitle" label="Xitle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1893265" start="21091" end="21103" title="Pánuco River" label="Pánuco River"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21325" end="21336" title="Río Mixcoac" label="Río Mixcoac"/>
<link wikidata="Q6630336" start="21499" end="21542" title="List of colonias in Coyoacán" label="The borough is divided into 140 communities"/>
<link wikidata="Q81520" start="25560" end="25574" title="Pierce Brosnan" label="Pierce Brosnan"/>
<link wikidata="Q269869" start="25579" end="25591" title="Greg Kinnear" label="Greg Kinnear"/>
<link wikidata="Q13695" start="26266" end="26277" title="Tenochitlan" label="Tenochitlan"/>
<link wikidata="Q901361" start="26292" end="26296" title="Instituto Nacional de Antropología e Historia" label="INAH"/>
<link wikidata="Q230314" start="26511" end="26522" title="La Malinche" label="La Malinche"/>
<link wikidata="Q940218" start="27020" end="27033" title="Las Mañanitas" label="Las Mañanitas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147853" start="27175" end="27181" title="tamale" label="tamale"/>
<link wikidata="Q2312651" start="27187" end="27192" title="atole" label="atole"/>
<link wikidata="Q915029" start="28165" end="28174" title="Camillians" label="Camillian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1034612" start="29581" end="29592" title="open chapel" label="open chapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1798567" start="29750" end="29765" title="1985 Mexico City earthquake" label="1985 earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q124057" start="30257" end="30272" title="Dolores del Río" label="Dolores del Río"/>
<link wikidata="Q2173389" start="30450" end="30473" title="Miguel Angel de Quevedo" label="Miguel Angel de Quevedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q458612" start="30994" end="31018" title="Emilio Fernández" label="Emilio “Indio” Fernández"/>
<link wikidata="Q51620" start="32257" end="32270" title="beatification" label="beatification"/>
<link wikidata="Q46739" start="33384" end="33395" title="Octavio Paz" label="Octavio Paz"/>
<link wikidata="Q204245" start="33534" end="33544" title="Cuernavaca" label="Cuernavaca"/>
<link wikidata="Q584381" start="33613" end="33625" title="Colonia Roma" label="Colonia Roma"/>
<link wikidata="Q63667" start="34092" end="34105" title="Salvador Novo" label="Salvador Novo"/>
<link wikidata="Q46739" start="34107" end="34118" title="Octavio Paz" label="Octavio Paz"/>
<link wikidata="Q195371" start="34120" end="34132" title="Mario Moreno" label="Mario Moreno"/>
<link wikidata="Q124057" start="34137" end="34152" title="Dolores del Río" label="Dolores del Río"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663377" start="34158" end="34176" title="Frida Kahlo Museum (La Casa Azul)" label="Frida Kahlo Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5588" start="34357" end="34368" title="Frida Kahlo" label="Frida Kahlo"/>
<link wikidata="Q610971" start="34661" end="34679" title="José María Velasco Gómez" label="José María Velasco"/>
<link wikidata="Q44007" start="34681" end="34690" title="Paul Klee" label="Paul Klee"/>
<link wikidata="Q171128" start="34695" end="34707" title="Diego Rivera" label="Diego Rivera"/>
<link wikidata="Q855" start="34938" end="34951" title="Joseph Stalin" label="Joseph Stalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q33391" start="35043" end="35055" title="Leon Trotsky" label="Leon Trotsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q7942197" start="35171" end="35179" title="votive paintings of Mexico" label="retablos"/>
<link wikidata="Q4165221" start="35186" end="35205" title="Leon Trotsky Museum, Mexico City" label="Leon Trotsky Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q33391" start="35246" end="35253" title="Leon Trotsky" label="Trotsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q855" start="35287" end="35299" title="Josef Stalin" label="Josef Stalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q315647" start="35853" end="35875" title="David Alfaro Siqueiros" label="David Alfaro Siqueiros"/>
<link wikidata="Q298380" start="36092" end="36106" title="Ramón Mercader" label="Ramón Mercader"/>
<link wikidata="Q26833" start="37135" end="37142" title="Othello" label="Othello"/>
<link wikidata="Q511700" start="37274" end="37280" title="pulque" label="pulque"/>
<link wikidata="Q63667" start="37577" end="37590" title="Salvador Novo" label="Salvador Novo"/>
<link wikidata="Q178169" start="38104" end="38116" title="Presbyterian" label="Presbyterian"/>
<link wikidata="Q350915" start="38499" end="38520" title="Pedro Ramírez Vázquez" label="Pedro Ramírez Vázquez"/>
<link wikidata="Q376095" start="38859" end="38874" title="Lake Xochimilco" label="Lake Xochimilco"/>
<link wikidata="Q219412" start="38987" end="39002" title="Huitzilopochtli" label="Huitzilopochtli"/>
<link wikidata="Q6683" start="39065" end="39085" title="Mexican–American War" label="Mexican–American War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546864" start="39120" end="39150" title="Saint Patrick&amp;#x27;s Battalion" label="Saint Patrick&amp;#x27;s Battalion"/>
<link wikidata="Q448348" start="39360" end="39372" title="David Twiggs" label="David Twiggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2208980" start="39395" end="39415" title="Pedro María de Anaya" label="Pedro María de Anaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q6940505" start="39760" end="39796" title="Museo Nacional de las Intervenciones" label="Museo Nacional de las Intervenciones"/>
<link wikidata="Q124619174" start="39798" end="39816" title="Parque Xicoténcatl" label="Parque Xicoténcatl"/>
<link wikidata="Q2126571" start="39969" end="39986" title="Henry Lane Wilson" label="Henry Lane Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q216766" start="40019" end="40038" title="Francisco I. Madero" label="Francisco I. Madero"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="40993" end="41012" title="Santiago Zapotitlan" label="Santiago Zapotitlan"/>
<link wikidata="Q511700" start="41135" end="41141" title="pulque" label="pulque"/>
<link wikidata="Q7428618" start="42532" end="42609" title="sawdust carpet" label="&amp;quot;carpets&amp;quot; made by carefully arranging colored sawdust on the ground"/>
<link wikidata="Q131080" start="43803" end="43812" title="Holy Week" label="Holy Week"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349065" start="43836" end="43848" title="passion play" label="passion play"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="43962" end="43978" title="Francis of Asisi" label="Francis of Asisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5158628" start="44287" end="44296" title="Concheros" label="Concheros"/>
<link wikidata="Q186277" start="45644" end="45654" title="Carmelites" label="Carmelites"/>
<link wikidata="Q13300" start="45761" end="45768" title="Nahuatl" label="Nahuatl"/>
<link wikidata="Q36975" start="46066" end="46071" title="glyph" label="glyph"/>
<link wikidata="Q202390" start="46410" end="46429" title="pre-Hispanic period" label="pre-Hispanic period"/>
<link wikidata="Q2479824" start="46482" end="46490" title="altepetl" label="altepetl"/>
<link wikidata="Q13700" start="46548" end="46560" title="Lake Texcoco" label="Lake Texcoco"/>
<link wikidata="Q982515" start="46805" end="46811" title="Maxtla" label="Maxtla"/>
<link wikidata="Q16243110" start="46824" end="46835" title="Tecollotzin" label="Tecollotzin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7326" start="46948" end="46961" title="Hernán Cortés" label="Hernán Cortés"/>
<link wikidata="Q170603" start="47191" end="47200" title="New Spain" label="New Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2479824" start="47930" end="47938" title="altepetl" label="altepetl"/>
<link wikidata="Q6940505" start="48301" end="48321" title="Museo Nacional de las Intervenciones" label="Churubusco monastery"/>
<link wikidata="Q2333407" start="48336" end="48356" title="Battle of Churubusco" label="Battle of Churubusco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009194" start="48526" end="48543" title="1857 Constitution" label="1857 Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206714" start="48708" end="48715" title="cantina" label="cantina"/>
<link wikidata="Q214426" start="48745" end="48763" title="Mexican Revolution" label="Mexican Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q299168" start="48765" end="48782" title="Victoriano Huerta" label="Victoriano Huerta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1902998" start="48889" end="48896" title="Martell (cognac)" label="Martell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229287" start="48901" end="48909" title="Hennessy" label="Hennessy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="49401" end="49425" title="Francisco Sosa Escalante" label="Francisco Sosa Escalante"/>
<link wikidata="Q46739" start="49480" end="49491" title="Octavio Paz" label="Octavio Paz"/>
<link wikidata="Q195371" start="49493" end="49505" title="Mario Moreno" label="Mario Moreno"/>
<link wikidata="Q124057" start="49528" end="49543" title="Dolores del Río" label="Dolores del Río"/>
<link wikidata="Q33391" start="49560" end="49572" title="Leon Trotsky" label="Leon Trotsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q57146" start="49577" end="49601" title="Carol I of Romania" label="Romania&amp;#x27;s King Carl"/>
<link wikidata="Q171128" start="49645" end="49657" title="Diego Rivera" label="Diego Rivera"/>
<link wikidata="Q5588" start="49662" end="49673" title="Frida Kahlo" label="Frida Kahlo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="49742" end="49762" title="Stalin&amp;#x27;s agents" label="Stalin&amp;#x27;s agents"/>
<link wikidata="Q1943868" start="50669" end="50677" title="tianguis" label="tianguis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="50709" end="50723" title="Luis Mondragón" label="Luis Mondragón"/>
<link wikidata="Q7674191" start="51261" end="51267" title="Tacuba (Mexico City)" label="Tacuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026427" start="51269" end="51277" title="Tacubaya" label="Tacubaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q5845392" start="51279" end="51286" title="Mixcoac" label="Mixcoac"/>
<link wikidata="Q169940" start="51426" end="51436" title="deforestation" label="deforested"/>
<link wikidata="Q41675" start="54557" end="54572" title="Guinness World Records" label="Guinness record"/>
<link wikidata="Q315618" start="55084" end="55100" title="Vicente Guerrero" label="Vicente Guerrero"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="55121" end="55152" title="Guadalupe Ceniceros de Zavaleta" label="Guadalupe Ceniceros de Zavaleta"/>
<link wikidata="Q734054" start="55173" end="55190" title="José Enrique Rodó" label="José Enrique Rodó"/>
<link wikidata="Q2620876" start="55211" end="55230" title="Ramón López Velarde" label="Ramón López Velarde"/>
<link wikidata="Q315647" start="55301" end="55323" title="David Alfaro Siqueiros" label="David Alfaro Siqueiros"/>
<link wikidata="Q7186" start="55344" end="55356" title="Madame Curie" label="Madame Curie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3775886" start="55377" end="55396" title="Salvador Díaz Mirón" label="Salvador Díaz Mirón"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="55417" end="55426" title="Max Shein" label="Max Shein"/>
<link wikidata="Q255" start="55447" end="55467" title="Ludwig van Beethoven" label="Ludwig van Beethoven"/>
<link wikidata="Q2087554" start="55490" end="55507" title="Luis Enrique Erro" label="Luis Enrique Erro"/>
<link wikidata="Q171128" start="55600" end="55612" title="Diego Rivera" label="Diego Rivera"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="55633" end="55650" title="Fco. Diaz de Leon" label="Fco. Diaz de Leon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091141" start="55671" end="55687" title="José Vasconcelos" label="José Vasconcelos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1539696" start="55884" end="55887" title="Instituto Politécnico Nacional" label="IPN"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="55891" end="55924" title="Colegio de Ciencias y Humanidades" label="Colegio de Ciencias y Humanidades"/>
<link wikidata="Q171128" start="56018" end="56030" title="Diego Rivera" label="Diego Rivera"/>
<link wikidata="Q222738" start="56069" end="56109" title="National Autonomous University of Mexico" label="National Autonomous University of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367381" start="56123" end="56152" title="Escuela Nacional Preparatoria (Mexico)" label="Escuela Nacional Preparatoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q7240622" start="56168" end="56224" title="Escuela Nacional Preparatoria 6 &amp;quot;Antonio Caso&amp;quot;" label="Escuela Nacional Preparatoria 6 &amp;quot;Antonio Caso&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5918116" start="56260" end="56318" title="Instituto de Educación Media Superior del Distrito Federal" label="Instituto de Educación Media Superior del Distrito Federal"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="56341" end="56403" title="Escuela Preparatoria Coyoacán &amp;quot;Ricardo Flores Magón&amp;quot;" label="Escuela Preparatoria Coyoacán &amp;quot;Ricardo Flores Magón&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7419967" start="56420" end="56432" title="Santa Úrsula, Mexico City" label="Santa Úrsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q3268669" start="56465" end="56486" title="Lycée Franco-Mexicain" label="Lycée Franco-Mexicain"/>
<link wikidata="Q17065790" start="56560" end="56574" title="Colegio Olinca" label="Colegio Olinca"/>
<link wikidata="Q17069149" start="56595" end="56616" title="Escuela Mier y Pesado" label="Escuela Mier y Pesado"/>
<link wikidata="Q25022249" start="56618" end="56652" title="Colegio Anglo Mexicano de Coyoacán" label="Colegio Anglo Mexicano de Coyoacán"/>
<link wikidata="Q25022249" start="56689" end="56724" title="Colegio Anglo Americano de Coyoacán" label="Colegio Anglo Americano de Coyoacán"/>
<link wikidata="Q25206361" start="56764" end="56786" title="Modern American School (Mexico)" label="Modern American School"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="56790" end="56808" title="Romero de Terreros (colonia)" label="Romero de Terreros"/>
<link wikidata="" start="56810" end="56812" title=":es:Romero de Terreros (colonia)" label="ES"/>
<link wikidata="Q222738" start="56887" end="56891" title="UNAM" label="UNAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q671960" start="56935" end="56945" title="Mario Pani" label="Mario Pani"/>
<link wikidata="Q254662" start="56950" end="56967" title="Enrique del Moral" label="Enrique del Moral"/>
<link wikidata="Q2146288" start="57063" end="57093" title="historic center of Mexico City" label="historic center of Mexico City"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="57113" end="57132" title="World Heritage Site" label="World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="57136" end="57142" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q5061367" start="57157" end="57193" title="Central Library (UNAM)" label="Biblioteca Central (Central Library)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="57268" end="57284" title="Gustavo Saavedra" label="Gustavo Saavedra"/>
<link wikidata="Q5951322" start="57286" end="57299" title="Juan Martínez Gutiérrez" label="Juan Martínez"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378325" start="57304" end="57322" title="Juan O&amp;#x27;Gorman" label="Juan O&amp;#x27;Gorman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091141" start="57732" end="57748" title="José Vasconcelos" label="José Vasconcelos"/>
<link wikidata="Q315647" start="58118" end="58140" title="David Alfaro Siqueiros" label="David Alfaro Siqueiros"/>
<link wikidata="Q767558" start="59189" end="59215" title="Estadio Olímpico Universitario" label="Estadio Olímpico México 68"/>
<link wikidata="Q8429" start="59258" end="59279" title="1968 Summer Olympics" label="Olympic Games of 1968"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143000" start="59531" end="59536" title="Pumas UNAM" label="Pumas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4005964" start="60801" end="60828" title="Universum (UNAM)" label="Universum Museo de Ciencias"/>
<link wikidata="Q2751011" start="62065" end="62084" title="Viveros de Coyoacán" label="Viveros de Coyoacán"/>
<link wikidata="Q675877" start="63163" end="63174" title="Anahuacalli Museum" label="Anahuacalli"/>
<link wikidata="Q13300" start="63499" end="63506" title="Nahuatl" label="Nahuatl"/>
<link wikidata="Q50647" start="63520" end="63536" title="Valley of Mexico" label="Valley of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139081" start="63882" end="63905" title="Palacio de Bellas Artes" label="Palacio de Bellas Artes"/>
<link wikidata="Q313122" start="64012" end="64031" title="Venustiano Carranza" label="Venustiano Carranza"/>
<link wikidata="Q2170072" start="64045" end="64065" title="Constitution of 1917" label="Constitution of 1917"/>
<link wikidata="Q146948" start="64554" end="64606" title="Ricardo Flores Magón" label="journalist and ideologue from the Mexican Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q320454" start="65850" end="65864" title="Estadio Azteca" label="Estadio Azteca"/>
<link wikidata="Q459090" start="65919" end="65931" title="Club América" label="Club América"/>
<link wikidata="Q164089" start="65936" end="65964" title="Mexican national soccer team" label="Mexican national soccer team"/>
<link wikidata="Q19317" start="66036" end="66050" title="FIFA World Cup" label="FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q935023" start="66081" end="66099" title="Clasico Capitalino" label="Clasico Capitalino"/>
<link wikidata="Q184711" start="66259" end="66270" title="Sister City" label="Sister City"/>
<link wikidata="Q107126" start="66274" end="66300" title="Arlington County, Virginia" label="Arlington County, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024913" start="66351" end="66373" title="Clifden, County Galway" label="Clifden, County Galway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2383884" start="66419" end="66440" title="Adolfo Aguilar Zínser" label="Adolfo Aguilar Zínser"/>
<link wikidata="Q315647" start="66442" end="66464" title="David Alfaro Siqueiros" label="David Alfaro Siqueiros"/>
<link wikidata="Q5271111" start="66466" end="66478" title="Diana Bracho" label="Diana Bracho"/>
<link wikidata="Q51545" start="66480" end="66491" title="Luis Buñuel" label="Luis Buñuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q539126" start="66493" end="66511" title="Wojciech Cejrowski" label="Wojciech Cejrowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q7326" start="66513" end="66526" title="Hernán Cortés" label="Hernán Cortés"/>
<link wikidata="Q210900" start="66528" end="66545" title="Pedro de Alvarado" label="Pedro de Alvarado"/>
<link wikidata="Q124057" start="66547" end="66562" title="Dolores del Río" label="Dolores del Río"/>
<link wikidata="Q17198321" start="66564" end="66585" title="Marcela Del Río Reyes" label="Marcela Del Río Reyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q296691" start="66587" end="66614" title="Miguel de la Madrid Hurtado" label="Miguel de la Madrid Hurtado"/>
<link wikidata="Q2173389" start="66616" end="66639" title="Miguel Ángel de Quevedo" label="Miguel Ángel de Quevedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q23880" start="66641" end="66651" title="Lila Downs" label="Lila Downs"/>
<link wikidata="Q230586" start="66653" end="66667" title="Laura Esquivel" label="Laura Esquivel"/>
<link wikidata="Q458612" start="66669" end="66696" title="Emilio Fernández" label="Emilio (El Indio) Fernández"/>
<link wikidata="Q2163832" start="66698" end="66710" title="Adolfo Gilly" label="Adolfo Gilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q41130" start="66712" end="66732" title="Jorge Ibargüengoitia" label="Jorge Ibargüengoitia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5588" start="66734" end="66745" title="Frida Kahlo" label="Frida Kahlo"/>
<link wikidata="Q313044" start="66747" end="66757" title="Diego Luna" label="Diego Luna"/>
<link wikidata="Q230314" start="66759" end="66779" title="La Malinche" label="Marina (La Malinche)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6844690" start="66781" end="66802" title="Miguel Moreno Arreola" label="Miguel Moreno Arreola"/>
<link wikidata="Q63667" start="66804" end="66817" title="Salvador Novo" label="Salvador Novo"/>
<link wikidata="Q187410" start="66819" end="66832" title="Zelia Nuttall" label="Zelia Nuttall"/>
<link wikidata="Q690304" start="66834" end="66846" title="Sergio Pitol" label="Sergio Pitol"/>
<link wikidata="Q171128" start="66848" end="66860" title="Diego Rivera" label="Diego Rivera"/>
<link wikidata="Q315633" start="66862" end="66887" title="Carlos Salinas de Gortari" label="Carlos Salinas de Gortari"/>
<link wikidata="Q4889308" start="66889" end="66905" title="Benjamin Travers" label="Benjamin Travers"/>
<link wikidata="Q33391" start="66907" end="66919" title="Leon Trotsky" label="Leon Trotsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q7549945" start="66921" end="66933" title="Soberano Jr." label="Soberano Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q1026652" start="66968" end="66976" title="Calexico (band)" label="Calexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q19881097" start="67031" end="67046" title="Edge of the Sun" label="Edge of the Sun"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="311778" wikidata="Q794552" url="?curid=311778" title="Montréal–Mirabel International Airport">
<text>Montréal–Mirabel International Airport , originally called Montréal International Airport, widely known as Mirabel and branded as YMX International Aerocity of Mirabel, is a cargo and former international passenger airport in Mirabel, Quebec, Canada, northwest of Montreal. It opened on October 4, 1975, and the last commercial passenger flight took off on October 31, 2004.

The airport&#x27;s main traffic are cargo flights, but it is also home to MEDEVAC and general aviation flights, and hosts a manufacturing plant for Airbus, where final assembly of the Airbus A220 (formerly Bombardier CSeries) is conducted. Bombardier Aviation produced the Bombardier CRJ700 series of regional jets at the factory until early 2021. The former passenger terminal apron is now a racing course, and the terminal building was demolished in 2016.

Prior to the demolition of the passenger terminal, Montréal–Mirabel International Airport was classified as an airport of entry (AOE) by Nav Canada and was staffed by the Canada Border Services Agency (CBSA). A smaller AOE is still available at the Hélibellule FBO. It is part of the National Airports System. It was one of two airports in Canada with sufficient right-of-way that can be expanded to accommodate 50 million passengers per year, the other being Toronto Pearson International Airport. A lack of traffic meant that Mirabel was never expanded beyond its first phase. As a result of a controversial expropriation, Mirabel was the largest airport in the world by surface area, with a planned area of , until surpassed by King Fahd International Airport in 1999. In 1989, of the were deeded back to their original owners.

The airport was intended to replace the existing Dorval Airport as the eastern air gateway to Canada. Accordingly, from 1975 to 1997, all international flights to and from Montreal (except for flights to and from the United States) were required to use Mirabel. Mirabel&#x27;s distant location, its inadequate transport links to urban centres and the continued operation of domestic flights from Dorval Airport, made Mirabel very unpopular with travellers and airlines. It did not help that Montreal&#x27;s economy declined relative to that of Toronto during the 1970s and 1980s, while newer long-range airliners no longer needed to refuel in Montreal prior to trans-Atlantic flights, so passenger levels never approached the levels that had been anticipated. The original plan to eventually close Dorval was discarded, and Mirabel thus turned out to be a white elephant.

A decision was made to consolidate Montreal&#x27;s passenger traffic at Dorval, with scheduled flights and charter flights being shifted in 1997 and 2004, so Mirabel was relegated to the role of a cargo airport. In 2004, Dorval Airport was renamed Montréal–Pierre Elliott Trudeau International Airport, after the Canadian Prime Minister whose government initiated the Mirabel project, the aim of which was to close and replace the Dorval airport. During the 2000s, Dorval was renovated and expanded, which enabled it to handle the passenger levels that the Trudeau government initially claimed would require two airports. Between 2008 and 2018, Mirabel&#x27;s air traffic more than tripled due to the use of private passenger flights, helicopter flights and flight schools, leading to Aéroports de Montréal renaming the airport to YMX International Aerocity of Mirabel to emphasize it as a business facility.

==Development==
===Background===
In the 1960s, Montreal experienced a tremendous economic boom. Massive construction projects, including the Montreal Metro and those linked with the hosting of Expo 67, brought the city international status. More and more visitors were arriving to the city, especially by airplane but not always by choice. The federal government required European airlines to make Montreal their only Canadian destination. That resulted in 15–20% annual growth in passenger traffic at the city&#x27;s Dorval Airport. As noise levels rose due to the increased flights, a nighttime restriction on flights was imposed as a temporary measure to placate nearby residents, but this would not be a long-term solution. At the time runway expansion at Dorval would have required the expensive acquisition of land.

Optimistic about the city&#x27;s future and its continuing ability to attract more and more visitors, government officials decided to build a new airport that would be more than able to absorb increased passenger traffic well into the 21st century.

The Canadian Department of Transport studied five possible sites for Montreal&#x27;s new airport: Saint-Jean-sur-Richelieu ( to the southeast), Vaudreuil-Dorion ( to the west), Joliette ( to the north), St-Amable ( to the southeast), and Ste-Scholastique ( to the northwest).

The federal government proposed that the airport should be located at Vaudreuil-Dorion. Not only was it well served by existing road and rail routes, but it was close enough to both Ottawa and Montreal to serve as the gateway for both cities. However, Quebec Premier Robert Bourassa, who had a frosty relationship with Prime Minister Pierre Trudeau, reportedly did not want such an important project to be placed so close to the provincial border fearing the exodus of airport workers to Ontario. The Bourassa government preferred that the new airport be situated in Drummondville ( to the east where it could be a gateway to Quebec City as well as Montreal.

===Expropriation===

In March 1969, the federal and provincial governments reached a compromise to locate at the St. Scholastique site, and proposals were drawn up to expropriate , an area larger than the entire city of Montreal. This area is served only by a long road link via Autoroute 15 and Autoroute 50. An additional link via Autoroute 13 was planned but never completed. Also planned was the connection of Autoroute 50 to the Ottawa/Gatineau area, a goal which would not be achieved until decades later, in 2012.

The federal government expropriation resulted in making Mirabel the world&#x27;s largest airport by property area. The airport&#x27;s operations zone, which encompassed what was eventually built plus expansion room, amounted to only , about 19% of the total area of the airport. The federal government planned to use the excess land as a noise buffer and as an industrial development zone (which was never started). This attracted the ire of the people of St. Scholastique who protested vehemently against the expropriation of their land. Nevertheless, construction started in June 1970 under the auspices of BANAIM, a government organization formed to build the airport. The architects charged with the design were Papineau, Gérin-Lajoie, LeBlanc, Edwards.

Urban rail transit – the system was to be capable of speeds from for the Montréal–Mirabel run – initially to be called TRRAMM (&quot;Transport Rapide Régional Aéroportuaire Montréal–Mirabel&quot;), was intended to be completed at a later date. However, it never got beyond the drawing board. The TRRAMM system was also intended to eventually be expanded to other parts of the Montreal region. The major stumbling block for the TRRAMM project was funding. The federal, provincial, and municipal governments never managed to find enough cash to fund the highly ambitious and expensive rapid transit project. Thus, Mirabel was forced to cope with an inadequate road system and non-existent rail transit, supplemented only by express buses.

==Operational history and decline==
Montréal–Mirabel International Airport opened for business on October 4, 1975, in time for the 1976 Summer Olympics. In the rush to get the airport open in time for the Olympics, it was decided to transfer flights to Mirabel in two stages. International flights were transferred immediately, while domestic and US flights would continue to be served by Dorval airport until 1982. To ensure Mirabel&#x27;s survival, all international flights for Montreal were banned from Dorval from 1975 to 1997. 

The federal government originally predicted that Dorval would be completely saturated by 1985 as part of its justification for building Mirabel. They also projected that 20 million passengers would be passing through Montreal&#x27;s airports annually, with 17 million of those through Mirabel. However, several factors dramatically reduced the amount of projected air traffic into Dorval.

Montreal began to decline in importance as an aviation hub after 1974 because of the increasing use of longer-range jets that did not need to refuel in Montreal before crossing the Atlantic from the major Western North American cities. The use of longer-range aircraft was made more attractive by national energy policies that provided Montreal refineries with feedstock at prices substantially below world prices, starting in 1975 and ending in the 1980s with the drop in world oil prices. Montreal was also overtaken by Toronto as Canada&#x27;s main business centre around this time, due to the Quebec nationalism and French-only language laws that caused numerous companies and non-French residents to move to Toronto.

More importantly, the simultaneous operation of Mirabel solely for international flights and Dorval only for continental flights made Montreal less attractive to airlines and travelers alike, in contrast to other cities with multi-airport systems (New York City, Tokyo) where each airport operates independently in allowing international flights to connect to domestic flights. The planned but unbuilt highways and incomplete train routes connecting Mirabel to Montreal compounded the problem. Montrealers grew to resent Mirabel as they were forced to travel far out of town for international flights, as while Dorval was only 20 minutes away from the city core, it took 50 minutes to get to Mirabel even in ideal traffic conditions. International passengers who used Montreal in transit to another destination in Canada or to the United States had to take hour-long bus rides for connections from their international flights at Mirabel to their domestic flights at Dorval, unnecessarily complicating their journeys. Many international airlines, faced with the stark economic reality of operating two eastern Canadian points of entry, opted to bypass Montreal altogether and shifted their routes to Toronto Pearson with its straightforward domestic and US connections. 
By 1991, Mirabel and Dorval were handling only a total of 8 million passengers and 112,000 tons of cargo annually, while Toronto Pearson was handling 18.5 million passengers and 312,000 tons of cargo. Mirabel alone never managed to exceed 3 million passengers per year in its existence as a passenger airport. It soon became apparent that the additional capacity from the opening of Mirabel became redundant. Although this redundancy would have been resolved if Dorval was decommissioned as originally intended, public pressure in support of Dorval prevented its planned closure. Another obstacle of the planned transfer from Dorval to Mirabel was Air Canada&#x27;s desire to keep flights in Dorval, with its proximity to AVEOS workshops, and the connections in Pearson Airport.

The simultaneous operating of both Montreal airports without permitting connections resulted in Dorval being overtaken in traffic first by Toronto, then Vancouver and then relegated to fourth by Calgary for a period of time, as international airlines were slow to return to Dorval after it resumed handling international flights in 1997. Only Air Transat held out at Mirabel until the very end, operating the last commercial flight which departed to Paris on October 31, 2004.

Over time, the decreasing passenger flights began to take a toll on businesses within Mirabel. Particularly notable was the 354-room Chateau Aeroport-Mirabel hotel adjacent to the terminal, which was forced to shut down in 2002 after 25 years of operation.

===Debate===
In the late 1990s, &quot;Maclean&#x27;s&quot; magazine interviewed one resident, whose farm was expropriated, who said that his land was sacrificed to save the city. He was particularly critical of the Trudeau government for not closing Dorval as well as failing to recognize Mirabel&#x27;s potential, as no legislation similar to the Wright Amendment in the United States was enacted that would force airlines to use Mirabel instead of Dorval.

Supporters of making Mirabel the sole international airport of Montreal pointed out that it had the capacity to be expanded significantly to meeting growing future demand, unlike Dorval. They also noted that Dorval could be closed and its land be developed for prime real estate, and some of the profits could go towards improving access routes to Mirabel and/or the airport itself.

The initial location of Mirabel was supposed to be a major justification for the project not only because of its expansion room but also the afforded buffer, which would significantly reduce noise pollution in urban areas.

===21st century===
The C$716 million expansion of Dorval from 2000 to 2005 gave it the ability to serve 20 million passengers a year, accomplishing one of the goals that was to be met with the construction of Mirabel. (In the 1970s, the federal government had projected that 20 million passengers would be passing through Montreal&#x27;s airports annually by 1985, with 17 million through Mirabel.) Aéroports de Montréal financed all of these improvements itself, with no government grants.

Today, Montréal–Mirabel International Airport is used almost exclusively for cargo flights, with passenger operations having ceased on October 31, 2004, 29 years after the airport&#x27;s opening and many years of limited, primarily charter service. Bombardier Aerospace launches newly constructed units from its factory at Mirabel.

With very little and then no airline service, and with many empty spaces inside its terminal, Mirabel was the setting of several movies, TV series, and commercials for many years. The 2004 film &quot;The Terminal&quot; features the mezzanine overlooking the immigration desks and the baggage carousels directly behind them, the tarmac and the main terminal entrance (with a digitally added New York skyline reflection). All other terminal scenes were shot on a soundstage.

In 2006, I-Parks Creative Industries, a French firm that specializes in the creation of urban tourist attractions, and Oger International SA, the global engineering company owned by the family of slain former Lebanese prime minister and entrepreneur Rafik Hariri, entered into an agreement to turn Mirabel into a theme park. The proposed concept of the park is based on the theme of water and outer space. By August 2008, negotiations, market research, and technical assessments were continuously delayed, and construction not started.

In December 2006, in a move he called &quot;correcting a historical injustice&quot;, Prime Minister Stephen Harper announced the return of 4,450 ha of farmland expropriated to build Mirabel airport. About 125 farmers, who rent their land from the federal government, were permitted to buy it back. Harper said he was pleased to finish the work started by former prime minister, Brian Mulroney, who unlocked a major parcel of expropriated land during his first term in office in 1985.

In May 2007, it was reported that the International Center of Advanced Racing had signed a 25-year lease with Aéroports de Montréal to use part of the airport as a race track. At the same time, fixed-base operator Hélibellule opened a facility at the site to cater for the private jets that were expected. The company also provides a passenger service from Mirabel to destinations in Canada and the United States. They operate three different types of helicopters; Bell 222, Robinson R22 and Aérospatiale Gazelle. As of 2019, international passengers and crew can be processed at the Hélibellule FBO. A total of 15 people can be processed from general aviation aircraft.
In August 2007, AirMédic moved from its base at Montréal/Saint-Hubert Airport to Mirabel. AirMédic is a non-profit humane foundation serving the population of Quebec and its visitors with the service of air ambulances. It offers MEDEVAC flights using a Eurocopter Dauphin.

In August 2008, the former Agence métropolitaine de transport said it was willing to extend its commuter rail service to the airport if passenger traffic were to return. The Deux-Montagnes station is only some from the airport.

In July 2010, the ADM confirmed that I-Parks Creative Industries&#x27;s long-delayed AeroDream project was dead, officially cancelling it. At present there are no plans for any alternative development at the site.

From 2011, the NASCAR Canadian Tire Series, drag racing, and other forms of motorsport began running on the airport&#x27;s runways and surrounding areas, on what is known as Circuit ICAR.

On September 16, 2013, the Bombardier CS100 took its maiden flight for the first time, making the inaugural flight of the CSeries, from Mirabel Airport, accompanied by a Global 5000 chase plane.

===Demolition of terminal building===

On May 1, 2014, Aeroports de Montréal confirmed that Mirabel Airport&#x27;s terminal building would be demolished, citing its high maintenance cost as a reason, as well as its facilities being unfit for commercial aviation needs and lacking any economic viability. Aéroports de Montréal had spent $30 million in maintenance over a decade, while renovations to keep it operational were estimated at $25 million. Several reports suggested that it would simply be less expensive to rebuild a new smaller budget terminal to attract the interests of ultra low cost carriers, such as Flair Airlines, Lynx Air or Swoop, however no plans for a return to commercial air services at Mirabel ever materialized. Mirabel Mayor Jean Bouchard was disappointed as the demolition would result in a significant loss of tax revenues for his municipality.

A demolition contract was awarded to Delsan on September 16, 2014, which proceeded with the demolition of the terminal building and surrounding parking structures. Demolition costs had been estimated up to $15 million and were expected to take less than a year to complete. Demolition of the terminal building began in mid-November 2014 and was completed in August 2016. The adjacent abandoned Chateau Aeroport hotel, and its connecting terminal skyway, were left standing, albeit in a deteriorating state.

=== Renewal of airport activity ===
Between 2008 and 2018, Mirabel airport&#x27;s air traffic more than tripled. The trend rose sharply as of 2016 with the increase of use of the terminal by private passenger flights, helicopter flights and a rise in nearby flight schools. Nolinor offers daily flights abroad for employees of various companies, and many medical airplanes now use Mirabel airport as well. Consequently, the airport&#x27;s air traffic control tower was refurbished and reopened with air traffic controllers specifically trained for it, following a decision in early 2019.

On July 11, 2016, Aéroports de Montréal announced that Pama Manufacturing planned to build a medical supply plant on a part of the site of the former passenger terminal complex, and that Mirajet was building an airpark at the foot of the air traffic control tower with 20 hangars available for lease to civil and business aviation clients. Other tenants at the time included Bombardier Aerospace, Pratt &amp; Whitney Canada&#x27;s Mirabel Aerospace Centre, Stelia Aerospace (formerly Aerolia), L3 Communication Mas, Avianor and Nolinor, as well as specialized services, creating a total of 3,700 direct jobs at the airport. The Bombardier CSeries (now the Airbus A220 series) continues to be assembled at Mirabel.

On May 9, 2019, Aéroports de Montréal announced that the airport would be renamed as &#x27;YMX International Aerocity of Mirabel&#x27; as part of ADM&#x27;s new branding. Under this brand, business will be the main focus of Mirabel while Montréal-Trudeau will be branded as a travel destination.

On January 30, 2020, Mirabel airport became a Class C airspace twelve years after becoming a flight service station due to a resurgence in air traffic volume. More than 69,000 movements were reported in 2017, and 72,000 in 2018. The air traffic control service is in service 16 hours a day, from 6:00 AM to 10:00 PM local time. The Class C control zone becomes an advisory Class E — Mirabel was a Class E airspace since 2008 — when the tower isn&#x27;t in operation.

==Architecture and layout==
Mirabel was designed to be eventually expanded to six runways and six terminal buildings, with a separate STOLport also planned. The expansion was supposed to occur in a number of phases and be completed by 2000, with the expectation of serving at least 60 million passengers by the year 2025. However, the airport never got beyond the first phase of construction, and by October 2005 runway 11/29 was closed leaving only runway 06/24 operational. In December 2009 runway 11/29 reopened with a length of and in April 2012 was restored to its length.

From the farthest reach of the parking lot to the airplane seat, one could walk as little as . A train station was also built in the basement for the planned TRRAMM commuter rail service by Société de transport de Montréal (CTCUM), right below the main passenger concourse (and more recently Agence métropolitaine de transport, successor to CTCUM, had planned to extend the Saint-Jérôme line to the airport.).

The airport was designed by architects Papineau Gérin-Lajoie Le Blanc, who met at McGill&#x27;s School of Architecture in the 1950s (under the tutelage of John Bland), founded their company in 1960, and parted ways in 1973 before the airport opened its doors after Papineau and another architect, Gordon Buchanan Edwards, left the firm. Mirabel&#x27;s terminal carried over the bureau&#x27;s award-winning Expo 67 Quebec pavilion design. A minimalist dark glass box sitting on top of a concrete bunker housing maintenance services, the terminal was hailed as an architectural triumph when it first opened.

Passengers walked as little as going from the curb to the gate. Once there, passengers would be transported to their aircraft by Passenger Transfer Vehicles (PTVs), rather than walking through jetways. The PTVs, similar to those at Washington Dulles International Airport, ran from the terminal to the aircraft parking spot on the ramp. It was reported by Radio-Canada/Canadian Broadcasting Corporation that each of these vehicles had cost up to C$ 400,000 at the time. To eventually make connections between flights easier, the terminal also included a few jetways, in a smaller concourse called the Aeroquay, accessible via a tunnel and later connected directly to the main concourse.

The planners were inspired by Dallas Fort Worth International Airport&#x27;s planned design scheme, which utilized a central &quot;spine road&quot; through the middle of the airport, bringing the main surface transport artery through the center of the airport, with decentralized terminals arranged along the spine road. This spine road was planned to have four lanes, with the capacity to expand to eight lanes, and room made in the median for an automated people mover to connect the terminals.

The six planned runways were to be arranged in three pairs of parallel runways. Two pairs were to be oriented northeast–southwest (the prevailing wind direction), and one pair would be oriented east–west (crosswind). These were to provide capacity for 160 takeoffs and landings every hour, allowing 630,000 annual movements. The runways&#x27; lengths would have varied, with the shortest being 3,048 meters (10,000 feet), and the longest being 4,572 meters (15,000 feet). The separate STOLport would have a 610-meter (2,000 feet) runway.

The airport had provisions for large cargo areas, aircraft maintenance an area for general aviation, and an airport industrial park.

==Unbuilt passenger rail service (TRRAMM)==
TRRAMM (Transport Rapide Régional Aéroportuaire Montréal-Mirabel) was a planned airport rail link between Mirabel and downtown Montreal. It was intended to have been completed by 1980, and to eventually be expanded to serve other parts of the greater Montreal region. Trains were to reach speeds of 160 km per hour (100 miles per hour), and to travel between the airport and downtown Montreal in 30 minutes.

==Airlines and destinations==
===Passenger===
There are no longer any scheduled public operations at the airport. As of 2019, Mirabel does have a passenger terminal for private flights as well as helicopter flights. In addition, Mirabel airport was used for daily flights transporting employees for various mining companies by the Nolinor airline company.

====Former passenger operations====
Mirabel opened with service from local airlines Air Canada, Canadian Pacific Airlines and Nordair, as well as airlines from more than fifteen countries, including Aer Lingus, Aeroflot, Air France, Alitalia, British Airways, Czechoslovak Airlines, El Al, Iberia, KLM, Lufthansa, Olympic Airways, Sabena, Scandinavian Airlines, Swissair and TAP Air Portugal. These airlines had their national country flags posted in front of the terminal on the inauguration of Mirabel.

Other airlines that served Mirabel at some point included Aerolíneas Argentinas, Aeroméxico, Air India, Air Liberté, Allegheny Airlines, Business Express Airlines (operating as Northwest Airlink), Continental Airlines, Corsairfly, Cubana de Aviación, Eastern Air Lines, Finnair, Jaro International, Jat Airways, LAN Chile, LOT Polish Airlines, Northwest Airlines, Pan Am, People Express Airlines, Presidential Airways, Royal Air Maroc, Royal Jordanian, TAROM, USAir and Varig. Most gradually lost faith in Mirabel and either transferred to Dorval in 1997 or pulled out of Montreal altogether.

Several charter airlines also served Mirabel, such as Wardair, Nolisair, Canada 3000 and Royal Aviation. All four have either merged or gone bankrupt. In 2004, Skyservice and Air Transatlantic were the only charter airlines still in operation at Mirabel when passenger service ended. Air Transat is the only charter airline that started operations at Mirabel and stayed until the end of passenger service in 2004.

===Cargo===

==Statistics==
==Other facilities==
* Airbus (formerly Bombardier Aerospace) houses its A220 assembly line on the property of Mirabel Airport.
* Bell Helicopter manufactures all its commercial helicopters at a plant located adjacent to the airport. It once served as the assembly plant for Bell 505 helicopters.
* Nolisair (Nationair), during its existence, had its head office in the Nationair Building on the airport property.

==Incidents and accidents==
The following accidents or notable incidents occurred either at the airport, or involved aircraft using the airport:

* January 21, 1995: Royal Air Maroc Flight 205, a Boeing 747-400 preparing to depart for New York City and Casablanca, was being de-iced by Canadian Airlines groundcrew, while its engines were running. Due to a communications error, the pilot believed de-icing was complete and started taxiing forward. Two deicing vehicles that were still in place in front of both horizontal stabilizers were knocked down, causing fatal injuries for three de-icing crew members and serious injuries to the two drivers.
* June 18, 1998: Propair Flight 420, a Fairchild Swearingen Metroliner flying from Dorval International Airport (now Montréal-Trudeau International Airport) to Peterborough Airport in Peterborough, Ontario, experienced a wing/engine fire during the initial climb. It attempted an emergency landing at Mirabel, but crashed near the beginning of the runway, in part due to a landing gear failure. The two pilots and the nine passengers on board were killed.
* September 11, 2001, Mirabel International Airport participated in Operation Yellow Ribbon and took in 10 diverted flights that had been bound for the closed airspace over the United States.

==See also==
* List of airports in the Montreal area
* Mirabel Aerospace Centre
* Kertajati International Airport — another &quot;white elephant&quot; airport with similar premise to Montreal Mirabel airport.
* Pickering Airport, a proposed second airport intended to serve Toronto, conceived around the same time that Mirabel was built
* Rickenbacker International Airport — another airport that primarily serves cargo flights

==Notes==
* Financial Times of Canada. (1975). &quot;Mirabel&quot;. Special ed. Don Mills, ON: Financial Times of Canada.
* Aeroports de Montréal ADM History
* Durivage, Simon.&quot;Mirabel, airport of the year 2000.&quot; Montreal, Montreal. September 8, 1992. Video Archive.
* Radio-Canada, &quot;De Mirabel à Dorval&quot;, May 14, 1999, Web archive 

==References==
==Further reading==

==External links==
* 
* Page about Mirabel Airport in the Canadian Owners &amp; Pilots Association &quot;Places to Fly&quot; Airport Directory
* The airport whose demise was caused by rail absence a critique of the Mirabel Airport closure

* Krauss, Clifford. &quot;End of Era Near in Montreal for White-Elephant Airport.&quot; &quot;The New York Times&quot;. October 3, 2004.
* Sim, Cheryl. &quot;YMX: Migration, Land, and Loss after Mirabel.&quot; A gallery installation featuring two repurposed passenger information displays from the airport terminal. Held in the Department of Communication Studies&#x27; Media Gallery, Concordia University, Montreal (Feb 28 - Mar 10 2017) and Galerie POPOP (Belgo Building, 372 rue Ste-Catherine O., Montreal), Mar 29 - Apr 13 2017. Technical notes on the information displays used in the installation.. These &#x27;Solari&#x27; signs are now part of the Montreal Signs Project.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q794552" start="0" end="38" title="Montréal–Mirabel International Airport" label="Montréal–Mirabel International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q794552" start="59" end="89" title="Montréal–Mirabel International Airport" label="Montréal International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q794552" start="107" end="114" title="Montréal–Mirabel International Airport" label="Mirabel"/>
<link wikidata="Q794552" start="130" end="167" title="Montréal–Mirabel International Airport" label="YMX International Aerocity of Mirabel"/>
<link wikidata="Q319224" start="174" end="179" title="cargo" label="cargo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248784" start="215" end="222" title="airport" label="airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q141921" start="226" end="241" title="Mirabel, Quebec" label="Mirabel, Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="264" end="272" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057026" start="412" end="425" title="Cargo airline" label="cargo flights"/>
<link wikidata="Q655177" start="450" end="457" title="MEDEVAC" label="MEDEVAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571929" start="462" end="478" title="general aviation" label="general aviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2311" start="524" end="530" title="Airbus" label="Airbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q426074" start="560" end="571" title="Airbus A220" label="Airbus A220"/>
<link wikidata="Q891779" start="616" end="635" title="Bombardier Aviation" label="Bombardier Aviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q962677" start="649" end="673" title="Bombardier CRJ700 series" label="Bombardier CRJ700 series"/>
<link wikidata="Q4993068" start="677" end="689" title="regional jet" label="regional jet"/>
<link wikidata="Q573970" start="754" end="759" title="Airport apron" label="apron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075664" start="946" end="962" title="airport of entry" label="airport of entry"/>
<link wikidata="Q978285" start="972" end="982" title="Nav Canada" label="Nav Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q532090" start="1006" end="1035" title="Canada Border Services Agency" label="Canada Border Services Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q2666895" start="1119" end="1143" title="National Airports System (Canada)" label="National Airports System"/>
<link wikidata="Q242066" start="1295" end="1332" title="Toronto Pearson International Airport" label="Toronto Pearson International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q911155" start="1566" end="1597" title="King Fahd International Airport" label="King Fahd International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q736627" start="1716" end="1730" title="Montréal–Trudeau International Airport" label="Dorval Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="2211" end="2218" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q877152" start="2523" end="2537" title="white elephant" label="white elephant"/>
<link wikidata="Q794552" start="3371" end="3408" title="Montréal–Mirabel International Airport" label="YMX International Aerocity of Mirabel"/>
<link wikidata="Q392377" start="3591" end="3605" title="Montreal Metro" label="Montreal Metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344988" start="3643" end="3650" title="Expo 67" label="Expo 67"/>
<link wikidata="Q141977" start="4621" end="4645" title="Saint-Jean-sur-Richelieu" label="Saint-Jean-sur-Richelieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q141711" start="4667" end="4683" title="Vaudreuil-Dorion" label="Vaudreuil-Dorion"/>
<link wikidata="Q141760" start="4700" end="4708" title="Joliette" label="Joliette"/>
<link wikidata="Q3461735" start="4726" end="4735" title="Saint-Amable, Quebec" label="St-Amable"/>
<link wikidata="Q3464418" start="4761" end="4777" title="Sainte-Scholastique, Quebec" label="Ste-Scholastique"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930" start="4982" end="4988" title="Ottawa" label="Ottawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2911019" start="5052" end="5066" title="Premier of Quebec" label="Quebec Premier"/>
<link wikidata="Q650980" start="5067" end="5082" title="Robert Bourassa" label="Robert Bourassa"/>
<link wikidata="Q839078" start="5119" end="5133" title="Prime Minister of Canada" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q8619" start="5134" end="5148" title="Pierre Trudeau" label="Pierre Trudeau"/>
<link wikidata="Q141940" start="5367" end="5380" title="Drummondville" label="Drummondville"/>
<link wikidata="Q422404" start="5500" end="5507" title="Government of Canada" label="federal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112634" start="5512" end="5522" title="Government of Quebec" label="provincial"/>
<link wikidata="Q2872832" start="5739" end="5751" title="Quebec Autoroute 15" label="Autoroute 15"/>
<link wikidata="Q431020" start="5756" end="5768" title="Quebec Autoroute 50" label="Autoroute 50"/>
<link wikidata="Q2872829" start="5793" end="5805" title="Quebec Autoroute 13" label="Autoroute 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q668850" start="5894" end="5909" title="National Capital Region (Canada)" label="Ottawa/Gatineau"/>
<link wikidata="Q166332" start="6005" end="6018" title="Eminent domain" label="expropriation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3491904" start="6741" end="6751" title="Urban rail" label="Urban rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q8444" start="7610" end="7630" title="1976 Summer Olympics" label="1976 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q765633" start="8378" end="8389" title="Aviation" label="air traffic"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="8585" end="8593" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q106993358" start="8609" end="8630" title="Western North America" label="Western North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067781" start="9024" end="9049" title="Charter of the French Language" label="French-only language laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q242066" start="10326" end="10341" title="Toronto-Pearson International Airport" label="Toronto Pearson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2874219" start="11119" end="11124" title="Aveos Fleet Performance" label="AVEOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q321224" start="11330" end="11339" title="Vancouver International Airport" label="Vancouver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160343" start="11372" end="11379" title="Calgary International Airport" label="Calgary"/>
<link wikidata="Q407869" start="11520" end="11531" title="Air Transat" label="Air Transat"/>
<link wikidata="Q5087518" start="11788" end="11812" title="Chateau Aeroport-Mirabel" label="Chateau Aeroport-Mirabel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1184850" start="11951" end="11965" title="Maclean&amp;#x27;s" label="Maclean&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q8038183" start="12261" end="12277" title="Wright Amendment" label="Wright Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q684740" start="12639" end="12650" title="real estate" label="real estate"/>
<link wikidata="Q92251" start="12947" end="12962" title="noise pollution" label="noise pollution"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13017" end="13036" title="Dorval Airport#Terminal expansion (2000–2007)" label="expansion of Dorval"/>
<link wikidata="Q318766" start="14005" end="14017" title="The Terminal" label="The Terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q192778" start="14529" end="14541" title="Rafik Hariri" label="Rafik Hariri"/>
<link wikidata="Q194195" start="14592" end="14597" title="amusement park" label="theme"/>
<link wikidata="Q206" start="14916" end="14930" title="Stephen Harper" label="Stephen Harper"/>
<link wikidata="Q128563" start="15194" end="15208" title="Brian Mulroney" label="Brian Mulroney"/>
<link wikidata="Q670113" start="15495" end="15514" title="fixed-base operator" label="fixed-base operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062135" start="15574" end="15586" title="business jet" label="private jets"/>
<link wikidata="Q34486" start="15753" end="15763" title="helicopter" label="helicopter"/>
<link wikidata="Q749986" start="15766" end="15774" title="Bell 222" label="Bell 222"/>
<link wikidata="Q39652" start="15776" end="15788" title="Robinson R22" label="Robinson R22"/>
<link wikidata="Q794595" start="15793" end="15813" title="Aérospatiale Gazelle" label="Aérospatiale Gazelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571929" start="15945" end="15961" title="general aviation" label="general aviation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15988" end="15996" title="AirMédic" label="AirMédic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432648" start="16020" end="16049" title="Montréal/Saint-Hubert Airport" label="Montréal/Saint-Hubert Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q39663" start="16225" end="16243" title="Eurocopter Dauphin" label="Eurocopter Dauphin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3095509" start="16420" end="16442" title="Deux-Montagnes station" label="Deux-Montagnes station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1791387" start="16705" end="16732" title="NASCAR Canadian Tire Series" label="NASCAR Canadian Tire Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q16258391" start="16864" end="16876" title="Circuit ICAR" label="Circuit ICAR"/>
<link wikidata="Q426074" start="16906" end="16922" title="Bombardier CSeries" label="Bombardier CS100"/>
<link wikidata="Q373171" start="17049" end="17060" title="Global 5000" label="Global 5000"/>
<link wikidata="Q17147947" start="17615" end="17630" title="low cost carrier terminal" label="budget terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q190915" start="17659" end="17682" title="low cost carriers" label="ultra low cost carriers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4038797" start="17692" end="17706" title="Flair Airlines" label="Flair Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q4038071" start="17708" end="17716" title="Lynx Air" label="Lynx Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q47508526" start="17720" end="17725" title="Swoop (airline)" label="Swoop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361100" start="18397" end="18403" title="skyway" label="skyway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3342900" start="18733" end="18740" title="Nolinor Aviation" label="Nolinor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2944910" start="19479" end="19503" title="Mirabel Aerospace Centre" label="Mirabel Aerospace Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633050" start="20106" end="20122" title="Class C airspace" label="Class C airspace"/>
<link wikidata="Q5459334" start="20153" end="20175" title="flight service station" label="flight service station"/>
<link wikidata="Q221395" start="20293" end="20320" title="Air traffic control" label="air traffic control service"/>
<link wikidata="Q184590" start="20610" end="20616" title="runway" label="runway"/>
<link wikidata="Q849706" start="20626" end="20634" title="airport terminal" label="terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2824089" start="20662" end="20670" title="STOLport" label="STOLport"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501349" start="21138" end="21149" title="parking lot" label="parking lot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412403" start="21272" end="21285" title="commuter rail" label="commuter rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1817151" start="21297" end="21329" title="Société de transport de Montréal" label="Société de transport de Montréal"/>
<link wikidata="Q392496" start="21399" end="21433" title="Agence métropolitaine de transport" label="Agence métropolitaine de transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q3239074" start="21481" end="21498" title="Saint-Jérôme line" label="Saint-Jérôme line"/>
<link wikidata="Q28034714" start="21932" end="21947" title="Québec Pavilion" label="Quebec pavilion"/>
<link wikidata="Q247739" start="22183" end="22187" title="Gate (airport)" label="gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q6887150" start="22254" end="22281" title="Mobile lounge" label="Passenger Transfer Vehicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061299" start="22318" end="22324" title="Jet bridge" label="jetway"/>
<link wikidata="Q466835" start="22357" end="22396" title="Washington Dulles International Airport" label="Washington Dulles International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q573970" start="22456" end="22460" title="Airport ramp" label="ramp"/>
<link wikidata="Q461761" start="22481" end="22527" title="Canadian Broadcasting Corporation" label="Radio-Canada/Canadian Broadcasting Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1104069" start="22571" end="22573" title="Canadian dollar" label="C$"/>
<link wikidata="Q459096" start="22843" end="22882" title="Dallas Fort Worth International Airport" label="Dallas Fort Worth International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q639030" start="23271" end="23283" title="people mover" label="people mover"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192191" start="24108" end="24125" title="airport rail link" label="airport rail link"/>
<link wikidata="Q185339" start="24878" end="24888" title="Air Canada" label="Air Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q986941" start="24890" end="24915" title="Canadian Pacific Airlines" label="Canadian Pacific Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q3343575" start="24920" end="24927" title="Nordair" label="Nordair"/>
<link wikidata="Q83716" start="24993" end="25003" title="Aer Lingus" label="Aer Lingus"/>
<link wikidata="Q58707" start="25005" end="25013" title="Aeroflot" label="Aeroflot"/>
<link wikidata="Q131005" start="25015" end="25025" title="Air France" label="Air France"/>
<link wikidata="Q153975" start="25027" end="25035" title="Alitalia" label="Alitalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8766" start="25037" end="25052" title="British Airways" label="British Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q192653" start="25054" end="25075" title="Czech Airlines" label="Czechoslovak Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q208489" start="25077" end="25082" title="El Al" label="El Al"/>
<link wikidata="Q187972" start="25084" end="25090" title="Iberia (airline)" label="Iberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q181912" start="25092" end="25095" title="KLM" label="KLM"/>
<link wikidata="Q9325" start="25097" end="25106" title="Lufthansa" label="Lufthansa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2021591" start="25108" end="25123" title="Olympic Airways" label="Olympic Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q141146" start="25125" end="25131" title="Sabena" label="Sabena"/>
<link wikidata="Q187854" start="25133" end="25154" title="Scandinavian Airlines" label="Scandinavian Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q694098" start="25156" end="25164" title="Swissair" label="Swissair"/>
<link wikidata="Q208232" start="25169" end="25185" title="TAP Air Portugal" label="TAP Air Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q83535" start="25358" end="25379" title="Aerolíneas Argentinas" label="Aerolíneas Argentinas"/>
<link wikidata="Q381563" start="25381" end="25391" title="Aeroméxico" label="Aeroméxico"/>
<link wikidata="Q69906" start="25393" end="25402" title="Air India" label="Air India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585679" start="25404" end="25415" title="Air Liberté" label="Air Liberté"/>
<link wikidata="Q2837839" start="25417" end="25435" title="Allegheny Airlines" label="Allegheny Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q5001726" start="25437" end="25462" title="Business Express Airlines" label="Business Express Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q874625" start="25477" end="25494" title="Northwest Airlink" label="Northwest Airlink"/>
<link wikidata="Q216486" start="25497" end="25517" title="Continental Airlines" label="Continental Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q385366" start="25519" end="25529" title="Corsairfly" label="Corsairfly"/>
<link wikidata="Q849910" start="25531" end="25549" title="Cubana de Aviación" label="Cubana de Aviación"/>
<link wikidata="Q611742" start="25551" end="25568" title="Eastern Air Lines" label="Eastern Air Lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q201821" start="25570" end="25577" title="Finnair" label="Finnair"/>
<link wikidata="Q6160443" start="25579" end="25597" title="Jaro International" label="Jaro International"/>
<link wikidata="Q12428657" start="25599" end="25610" title="Jat Airways" label="Jat Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q649178" start="25612" end="25621" title="LATAM Chile" label="LAN Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q204268" start="25623" end="25642" title="LOT Polish Airlines" label="LOT Polish Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q309174" start="25644" end="25662" title="Northwest Airlines" label="Northwest Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q8681" start="25664" end="25670" title="Pan Am" label="Pan Am"/>
<link wikidata="Q634777" start="25672" end="25695" title="People Express Airlines (1980s)" label="People Express Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241415" start="25697" end="25717" title="Presidential Airways (scheduled)" label="Presidential Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q866103" start="25719" end="25734" title="Royal Air Maroc" label="Royal Air Maroc"/>
<link wikidata="Q824225" start="25736" end="25751" title="Royal Jordanian" label="Royal Jordanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q240656" start="25753" end="25758" title="TAROM" label="TAROM"/>
<link wikidata="Q208046" start="25760" end="25765" title="USAir" label="USAir"/>
<link wikidata="Q861197" start="25770" end="25775" title="Varig" label="Varig"/>
<link wikidata="Q428008" start="25948" end="25955" title="Wardair" label="Wardair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1966880" start="25957" end="25965" title="Nolisair" label="Nolisair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031924" start="25967" end="25978" title="Canada 3000" label="Canada 3000"/>
<link wikidata="Q3445869" start="25983" end="25997" title="Royal Aviation" label="Royal Aviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2293459" start="26054" end="26064" title="Skyservice Airlines" label="Skyservice"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26069" end="26086" title="Air Transatlantic" label="Air Transatlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q407869" start="26178" end="26189" title="Air Transat" label="Air Transat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2311" start="26360" end="26366" title="Airbus" label="Airbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q891779" start="26377" end="26397" title="Bombardier Aerospace" label="Bombardier Aerospace"/>
<link wikidata="Q815723" start="26467" end="26482" title="Bell Helicopter" label="Bell Helicopter"/>
<link wikidata="Q15830622" start="26612" end="26620" title="Bell 505" label="Bell 505"/>
<link wikidata="Q1966880" start="26636" end="26644" title="Nolisair" label="Nolisair"/>
<link wikidata="Q866103" start="26918" end="26933" title="Royal Air Maroc" label="Royal Air Maroc"/>
<link wikidata="Q906937" start="26948" end="26962" title="Boeing 747-400" label="Boeing 747-400"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="26987" end="27000" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q7903" start="27005" end="27015" title="Casablanca" label="Casablanca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434081" start="27027" end="27033" title="de-ice" label="de-ice"/>
<link wikidata="Q627115" start="27038" end="27055" title="Canadian Airlines" label="Canadian Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q3605083" start="27056" end="27066" title="groundcrew" label="groundcrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421250" start="27184" end="27191" title="taxiing" label="taxiing"/>
<link wikidata="Q39058384" start="27419" end="27437" title="Propair Flight 420" label="Propair Flight 420"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393122" start="27441" end="27472" title="Fairchild Swearingen Metroliner" label="Fairchild Swearingen Metroliner"/>
<link wikidata="Q736627" start="27519" end="27557" title="Montréal-Trudeau International Airport" label="Montréal-Trudeau International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q905906" start="27562" end="27582" title="Peterborough Airport" label="Peterborough Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q776930" start="27586" end="27607" title="Peterborough, Ontario" label="Peterborough, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q263421" start="27775" end="27787" title="landing gear" label="landing gear"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="27860" end="27878" title="September 11 attacks" label="September 11, 2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630861" start="27926" end="27949" title="Operation Yellow Ribbon" label="Operation Yellow Ribbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q272730" start="28017" end="28025" title="airspace" label="airspace"/>
<link wikidata="Q6605495" start="28066" end="28103" title="List of airports in the Montreal area" label="List of airports in the Montreal area"/>
<link wikidata="Q2944910" start="28106" end="28130" title="Mirabel Aerospace Centre" label="Mirabel Aerospace Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q889070" start="28133" end="28164" title="Kertajati International Airport" label="Kertajati International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q7190804" start="28262" end="28279" title="Pickering Airport" label="Pickering Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432595" start="28390" end="28424" title="Rickenbacker International Airport" label="Rickenbacker International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="29204" end="29222" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="311781" wikidata="Q3898096" url="?curid=311781" title="Paul Krassner">
<text>Paul Krassner (April 9, 1932 – July 21, 2019) was an American writer and satirist. He was the founder, editor, and a frequent contributor to the freethought magazine &quot;The Realist&quot;, first published in 1958. Krassner became a key figure in the counterculture of the 1960s as a member of Ken Kesey&#x27;s Merry Pranksters and a founding member of the Yippies, a term he is credited with coining.

== Early life ==
Krassner was a child violin prodigy and performed at Carnegie Hall in 1939 at age six. His parents practiced Judaism, but Krassner chose to be firmly secular, considering religion &quot;organized superstition&quot;. He majored in journalism at Baruch College (then a branch of the City College of New York) and began performing as a comedian under the name Paul Maul. He recalled:

While in college, I started working for an anti-censorship paper, &quot;The Independent&quot;. After I left college I started working there full time. So, I never had a normal job where I had to be interviewed and wear a suit and tie. I became their managing editor and also did freelance stuff for &quot;Mad&quot; magazine. But &quot;Mad&quot; was aimed at a teenage audience, and there was no satirical magazine for adults. So it was a kind of organic evolution toward &quot;The Realist&quot;, which was essentially a combination of satire and alternative journalism.

During the late 1950s and early 1960s, he was active in politically edged humor and satire. Krassner was a founder of the Youth International Party (Yippies) in 1967, even credited with coining the word &quot;Yippie,&quot; and a member of Ken Kesey&#x27;s Merry Pranksters, famous for prankster activism. He was a close protégé of the controversial comedian Lenny Bruce, and the editor of Bruce&#x27;s autobiography, &quot;How to Talk Dirty and Influence People&quot;. With the encouragement of Bruce, Krassner started to perform standup comedy in 1961 at the Village Gate in New York.

In 1963, he created what Kurt Vonnegut described as

&quot;a miracle of compressed intelligence nearly as admirable for potent simplicity, in my opinion, as Einstein&#x27;s e=mc2.&quot; Vonnegut explained: &quot;With the Vietnam War going on, and with its critics discounted and scorned by the government and the mass media, Krassner put on sale a red, white and blue poster that said FUCK COMMUNISM. At the beginning of the 1960s, FUCK was believed to be so full of bad magic as to be unprintable. ... By having FUCK and COMMUNISM fight it out in a single sentence, Krassner wasn&#x27;t merely being funny as heck. He was demonstrating how preposterous it was for so many people to be responding to both words with such cockamamie Pavlovian fear and alarm.

== &quot;The Realist&quot; ==

&quot;The Realist&quot; was published on a fairly regular schedule during the 1960s, then on an irregular schedule after the early 1970s. In 1966, Krassner published &quot;The Realist&quot;″s controversial &quot;Disneyland Memorial Orgy&quot; poster, illustrated by Wally Wood (he later made this famed black-and-white poster available in a digital color version). Krassner published a red, white and blue poster that read &quot;Fuck Communism&quot;, and enclosed copies with an issue of &quot;The Realist&quot;. He also mailed one to FBI Director J. Edgar Hoover with a note that said &quot;I hope you get a chuckle out of the enclosed patriotic poster.&quot; Krassner&#x27;s hope was that he would be arrested for sending obscene material through the mail, which would allow him to get publicity for his magazine. He was disappointed when no prosecution resulted.

Krassner&#x27;s most notorious satire was the article &quot;The Parts That Were Left Out of the Kennedy Book&quot;, which followed the censorship of William Manchester&#x27;s 1967 book on the John F. Kennedy assassination, &quot;The Death of a President&quot;. At the climax of the grotesque-genre short-story, Lyndon B. Johnson is described as having sexually penetrated the bullet-hole wound in the throat of John F. Kennedy&#x27;s corpse. According to Elliot Feldman, &quot;Some members of the mainstream press and other Washington political wonks, including Daniel Ellsberg of Pentagon Papers fame, actually believed this incident to be true.&quot; In a 1995 interview for the magazine &quot;Adbusters&quot;, Krassner commented: &quot;People across the country believed – if only for a moment – that an act of presidential necrophilia had taken place. It worked because Jackie Kennedy had created so much curiosity by censoring the book she authorized – William Manchester&#x27;s &quot;The Death Of A President&quot; – because what I wrote was a metaphorical truth about LBJ&#x27;s personality presented in a literary context, and because the imagery was so shocking, it broke through the notion that the war in Vietnam was being conducted by sane men.&quot;

In 1966, he reprinted in &quot;The Realist&quot; an excerpt from the academic journal the &quot;Journal of the American Medical Association&quot;, but presenting it as original material. The article dealt with drinking glasses, tennis balls and other foreign bodies found in patients&#x27; rectums. Some accused him of having a perverted mind, and a subscriber wrote &quot;I found the article thoroughly repellent. I trust you know what you can do with your magazine.&quot;

Krassner revived &quot;The Realist&quot; as a much smaller newsletter during the mid-1980s when material from the magazine was collected in &quot;The Best of the Realist: The 60&#x27;s Most Outrageously Irreverent Magazine&quot; (Running Press, 1985). The final issue of &quot;The Realist&quot; was #146 (Spring, 2001).

== Books ==
Krassner was a prolific writer. In 1971, he published a collection of his favorite works for &quot;The Realist&quot;, as &quot;How A Satirical Editor Became A Yippie Conspirator In Ten Easy Years&quot;. In 1981 he published the satirical story &quot;Tales of Tongue Fu&quot;, in which the hilarious misadventures of the Japanese-American man Tongue Fu are mixed with a wicked social commentary. In 1994, he published his autobiography &quot;Confessions of a Raving, Unconfined Nut: Misadventures in Counter-Culture&quot;. In July 2009, City Lights Publishers released &quot;Who&#x27;s to Say What&#x27;s Obscene?&quot;, a collection of satirical essays that explore contemporary comedy and obscenity in politics and culture.

He published three collections of drug stories. The first collection, &quot;Pot Stories for the Soul&quot; (1999), is from other authors and is about marijuana. &quot;Psychedelic Trips for the Mind&quot; (2001), is written by Krassner himself and collects stories on LSD. The third, &quot;Magic Mushrooms and Other Highs&quot; (2004), is by Krassner too, and deals with magic mushrooms, ecstasy, peyote, mescaline, THC, opium, cocaine, ayahuasca, belladonna, ketamine, PCP, STP, &quot;toad slime&quot;, and more.

== Other activities ==
In 1962 Krassner published an anonymous interview with Dr Robert Spencer detailing his involvement in illegal but safe abortions. Subsequent to the publication, he received calls from women asking to be put in contact with the interviewee. Krassner was later subpoenaed to appear before grand juries investigating abortion crime.

In 1965 he contributed to the Free University of New York a lecture entitled &quot;Why the New York Times is funnier than Mad Magazine&quot;. In 1968, Krassner signed the &quot;Writers and Editors War Tax Protest&quot; pledge, vowing to refuse tax payments in protest against the Vietnam War.

In the 1960s, Krassner was a regular contributor to several men&#x27;s magazines including &quot;Cavalier&quot; and &quot;Playboy&quot;. &quot;Cavalier&quot; hired Krassner for $1,000 per month to write a column called &quot;The Naked Emperor.&quot; In 1971, Krassner worked as a weekend radio personality and disk jockey at San Francisco&#x27;s ABC-FM radio affiliate, KSFX, (subsequently KGO-FM). Under the pseudonym &quot;Rumpelforeskin&quot;, he satirized culture and politics while espousing his atheism. He was also a contributor to early issues of &quot;Mad magazine&quot;. He often appeared as a stand-up comedian, and he was among those featured in the 2005 documentary &quot;The Aristocrats&quot;. Krassner was also a prolific lecturer and was a frequent speaker at both the Starwood Festival and the WinterStar Symposium. In 1998 he was featured at the Rock &amp; Roll Hall of Fame with Wavy Gravy during their exhibit entitled &quot;I Want to Take You Higher: The Psychedelic Era 1965–1969&quot;. He was a columnist for &quot;The Nation&quot;, &quot;AVN Online&quot; and &quot;High Times&quot;. He also blogged at &quot;The Huffington Post&quot; and &quot;The Rag Blog&quot;.

Krassner wrote about the Patty Hearst trial and possible connections between the Symbionese Liberation Army and the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI).

Krassner&#x27;s legs appeared in John Lennon and Yoko Ono&#x27;s 1971 film &quot;Up Your Legs Forever&quot;.

Singer Cass Elliot greatly admired Krassner. In a 1968 interview with &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; she expressed her desire for Krassner to write the liner notes for her new solo album. &quot;I met him with Timothy Leary,&quot; Elliot said, &quot;and I fell instantly in love with his entire mind and body, and I would do anything for him. He&#x27;s a hopeless idealist. I asked him to write my liner notes and he was delighted. He asked me what to write. I said write about the Yippies or write about anything; just write what you would like people to read, it doesn&#x27;t have to do with the album.&quot;

== Awards ==
Krassner is the only person to have won awards from both &quot;Playboy&quot; magazine (for satire) and the Feminist Party Media Workshop (for journalism). In 2000, he was given a Firecracker Alternative Book Award for &quot;High Times Presents Paul Krassner&#x27;s Pot Stories for the Soul&quot;. In 2001, he was the first living man to be inducted into the Counterculture Hall of Fame, which took place at the Cannabis Cup in Amsterdam. He received an American Civil Liberties Union Uppie (Upton Sinclair) Award for dedication to freedom of expression, and, according to the FBI files, he was described by the FBI as &quot;a raving, unconfined nut&quot;. George Carlin commented: &quot;The FBI was right, this man is dangerous – and funny; and necessary.&quot; In 2005 he received a Grammy nomination for Best Album Notes for his essay on the 6-CD package &quot;Lenny Bruce: Let the Buyer Beware&quot;.

== Criticism ==
Krassner was criticized, along with many males on the Left, in Robin Morgan&#x27;s feminist manifesto, &quot;Goodbye to All That,&quot; written in 1970:

Goodbye to lovely &quot;pro-Women&#x27;s Liberationist&quot; Paul Krassner, with all his astonished anger that women have lost their sense of humor &quot;on this issue&quot; and don&#x27;t laugh any more at little funnies that degrade and hurt them: farewell to the memory of his &quot;Instant Pussy&quot; aerosol-can poster, to his column for the woman-hating men&#x27;s magazine &quot;Cavalier&quot;, to his dream of a Rape-In against legislators&#x27; wives, to his Scapegoats and Realist Nuns and cute anecdotes about the little daughter he sees as often as any properly divorced Scarsdale middle-aged father; goodbye forever to the notion that a man is my brother who, like Paul, buys a prostitute for the night as a birthday gift for a male friend, or who, like Paul, reels off the names in alphabetical order of people in the women&#x27;s movement he has fucked, reels off names in the best locker-room tradition—as proof that he&#x27;s no sexist oppressor.

== Personal life and death ==
Krassner married Jeanne Johnson in 1963 and had one daughter named Holly. They later divorced. In 1985, Krassner moved to Venice, California where he met his wife of 32 years, artist and videographer Nancy Cain, one of the original Videofreex and founder of Camnet. They moved to Desert Hot Springs, California in 2002. Krassner suffered for several years from a neurological disease, and died on July 21, 2019, at his home in Desert Hot Springs.

== Writings ==

=== Books ===
* 1981: &quot;Tales of Tongue Fu&quot; (And/Or Press)
* 1994: &quot;Confessions of a Raving, Unconfined Nut: Misadventures in the Counter-Culture&quot; (Touchstone) 
* 2000: &quot;Sex, Drugs, and the Twinkie Murders&quot; (Loompanics Unlimited) 
* 2005: &quot;One Hand Jerking: Reports From an Investigative Satirist&quot;, Foreword by Harry Shearer, Introduction by Lewis Black (Seven Stories Press) 

=== Collections of drug stories ===
* 1999: &quot;High Times Presents Paul Krassner&#x27;s Pot Stories for the Soul&quot;. Various authors. Compiled by Krassner with a foreword by Harlan Ellison (High Times) 
* 2001: &quot;Paul Krassner&#x27;s Psychedelic Trips for the Mind&quot; (High Times Press) 
* 2004: &quot;Magic Mushrooms and Other Highs: From Toad Slime to Ecstasy&quot; (Ten Speed Press) 

=== Articles collections books ===
* 1961: &quot;Paul Krassner&#x27;s Impolite Interviews&quot; (Lyle Stuart)
* 1971: &quot;How a Satirical Editor Became a Yippie Conspirator in Ten Easy Years&quot; (Putnam)
* 1985: &quot;The Best of the Realist: The 60&#x27;s Most Outrageously Irreverent Magazine&quot; (Running Press) 
* 1996: &quot;The Winner of the Slow Bicycle Race: The Satirical Writings of Paul Krassner&quot; Introduction by Kurt Vonnegut (Seven Stories Press) 
* 2002: &quot;Murder at the Conspiracy Convention: And Other American Absurdities&quot; introduced by George Carlin (Barricade Books, Inc.) 
* 2009: &quot;Who&#x27;s to Say What&#x27;s Obscene? Politics, Culture and Comedy in America Today&quot; (City Lights Publishers) 

=== Articles ===
* &quot;My Acid Trip with Groucho.&quot; &quot;High Times&quot; (Feb. 1981), retrieved at &quot;Sir Bacon&quot; blog.
* &quot;New York Press&quot;, vol. 16, no. 34 (August 19, 2003).
* &quot;High Times&quot; (February 13, 2004).
* &quot;High Times&quot; (May 19, 2004).
* &quot;High Times&quot; (June 10, 2004).
* &quot;High Times&quot; (July 2, 2004).
* &quot;The Blame Game.&quot; &quot;Huffington Post&quot; (August 26, 2005).
* &quot;Life Among the Neo-Pagans.&quot; &quot;The Nation&quot; (August 29, 2005).
* &quot;Summer of Love: 40 Years Later.&quot; &quot;San Francisco Chronicle&quot; (May 20, 2007).
* (January 11, 2008). Preface of the book &quot;Tales of Tongue Fu&quot;.
* &quot;High Times&quot; (December 24, 2003).
* &quot;Stoner Stand-ups: Pot Comics Speak Out.&quot; &quot;High Times&quot; (Oct. 2011).

== Interviews ==
* 1999: &quot;Paul Krassner&#x27;s Impolite Interviews&quot; (Seven Stories Press) 
* 2004: Sep 23, WBAI 99.5 FM New York City, Radio Unnameable: host Bob Fass interviews Paul Krassner
* 2006: 
* 2006: 
* 2006: 
* 2006: &quot;Generation on Fire: Voices of Protest from the 1960s&quot; by Jeff Kisseloff
* 2007: Beatdom&#x27;s Interview with Paul Krassner
* 2009: &quot;In the Jester&#x27;s Court: Paul Krassner On The Virtues Of Irreverence, Indecency, And Illegal Drugs&quot; by David Kupfer (Sun Magazine Jan. 2009) 
* 2009: 
* 2010: &quot;Interview With Paul Krassner&quot; from &quot;SexIs Magazine&quot;
* 2010–2011: Thorne Dreyer&#x27;s three Rag Radio interviews with Paul Krassner.
* 2011: Interviewed by Marc Maron
* 2012: &quot;Paul Krassner is Still Smokin&#x27; at 80&quot; Interview by Jonah Raskin, &quot;The Rag Blog&quot;, June 7, 2012

== Discography ==
Stand-up comedy recordings:

* 1996: &quot;We Have Ways of Making You Laugh&quot; (Mercury Records)
* 1997: &quot;Brain Damage Control&quot; (Mercury Records)
* 1999: &quot;Sex, Drugs and the Antichrist: Paul Krassner at MIT&quot; (Sheridan Square Entertainment)
* 2000: &quot;Campaign In the Ass&quot; (Artemis Records)
* 2002: &quot;Irony Lives&quot; (Artemis Records)
* 2004: &quot;The Zen Bastard Rides Again&quot; (Artemis Records)

== Filmography ==
* 1972: &quot;Dynamite Chicken&quot;
* 1983: &quot;Cocaine Blues&quot;
* 1987: &quot;The Wilton North Report&quot; (TV series)
* 1990: &quot;Flashing on the Sixties: A Tribal Document&quot;
* 1998: &quot;Lenny Bruce: Swear to Tell the Truth&quot;
* 1999: &quot;The Source&quot;
* 2003: &quot;Maybe Logic: The Lives and Ideas of Robert Anton Wilson&quot;
* 2005: &quot;The Aristocrats&quot;
* 2006: &quot;Gonzo Utopia&quot;
* 2006: &quot;The U.S. vs. John Lennon&quot;
* 2006: &quot;Darryl Henriques Is in Show Business&quot;
* 2008: &quot;&quot; (TV mini-series)
* 2008: &quot;Looking for Lenny&quot;
* 2009: &quot;Make &#x27;Em Laugh: The Funny Business of America&quot; (PBS)

== See also ==
* Camp Summerlane
* List of peace activists

== References ==
== External links ==
* 
* recorded on 10/06/05 at The New York Society for Ethical Culture, 63 min., mp3 format
* &quot;The Realist&quot; Archive Project at ep.tc
* &quot;The Realist&quot; website
* &quot;Excerpt&quot; from &quot;Confessions of a Raving Unconfined Nut: Misadventures in the Counter-Culture&quot;
* Articles by Paul Krassner at &quot;The Rag Blog&quot;
* Interview with Paul Krassner by Stephen McKiernan, Binghamton University Libraries Center for the Study of the 1960s, March 10, 2010</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3898096" start="0" end="13" title="Paul Krassner" label="Paul Krassner"/>
<link wikidata="Q210115" start="145" end="156" title="freethought" label="freethought"/>
<link wikidata="Q7759687" start="172" end="183" title="The Realist" label="The Realist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995893" start="252" end="279" title="counterculture of the 1960s" label="counterculture of the 1960s"/>
<link wikidata="Q244390" start="295" end="304" title="Ken Kesey" label="Ken Kesey"/>
<link wikidata="Q661922" start="312" end="328" title="Merry Pranksters" label="Merry Pranksters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1890424" start="358" end="365" title="Youth International Party" label="Yippies"/>
<link wikidata="Q200959" start="474" end="487" title="Carnegie Hall" label="Carnegie Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="530" end="537" title="Judaism" label="Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q809633" start="665" end="679" title="Baruch College" label="Baruch College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093910" start="702" end="726" title="City College of New York" label="City College of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q15501071" start="875" end="890" title="Lyle Stuart" label="The Independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q312086" start="1108" end="1111" title="Mad (magazine)" label="Mad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1890424" start="1496" end="1521" title="Youth International Party" label="Youth International Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q244390" start="1613" end="1622" title="Ken Kesey" label="Ken Kesey"/>
<link wikidata="Q661922" start="1630" end="1646" title="Merry Pranksters" label="Merry Pranksters"/>
<link wikidata="Q460876" start="1732" end="1743" title="Lenny Bruce" label="Lenny Bruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q5918795" start="1797" end="1835" title="How to Talk Dirty and Influence People" label="How to Talk Dirty and Influence People"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128095" start="1934" end="1946" title="Village Gate" label="Village Gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q49074" start="1986" end="1999" title="Kurt Vonnegut" label="Kurt Vonnegut"/>
<link wikidata="Q937" start="2118" end="2126" title="Einstein" label="Einstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q35875" start="2134" end="2139" title="e=mc2" label="e=mc2"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="2182" end="2193" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q212737" start="2693" end="2702" title="Pavlovian" label="Pavlovian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7759687" start="2757" end="2768" title="The Realist" label="The Realist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7759687" start="2963" end="2987" title="Disneyland Memorial Orgy" label="Disneyland Memorial Orgy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1304824" start="3017" end="3027" title="Wally Wood" label="Wally Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q210435" start="3299" end="3314" title="J. Edgar Hoover" label="J. Edgar Hoover"/>
<link wikidata="Q7759687" start="3678" end="3726" title="The Parts That Were Left Out of the Kennedy Book" label="The Parts That Were Left Out of the Kennedy Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q354125" start="3767" end="3785" title="William Manchester" label="William Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q193484" start="3810" end="3839" title="John F. Kennedy assassination" label="John F. Kennedy assassination"/>
<link wikidata="Q7729464" start="3847" end="3871" title="The Death of a President" label="The Death of a President"/>
<link wikidata="Q569250" start="3886" end="3892" title="Climax (narrative)" label="climax"/>
<link wikidata="Q218248" start="3900" end="3909" title="grotesque" label="grotesque"/>
<link wikidata="Q9640" start="3929" end="3946" title="Lyndon B. Johnson" label="Lyndon B. Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q9696" start="4029" end="4044" title="John F. Kennedy" label="John F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q431085" start="4180" end="4195" title="Daniel Ellsberg" label="Daniel Ellsberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q9724" start="4199" end="4214" title="Pentagon Papers" label="Pentagon Papers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1993575" start="4314" end="4323" title="Adbusters" label="Adbusters"/>
<link wikidata="Q165421" start="4492" end="4506" title="Jackie Kennedy" label="Jackie Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q737498" start="4951" end="4967" title="academic journal" label="academic journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470970" start="4978" end="5021" title="Journal of the American Medical Association" label="Journal of the American Medical Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q2394278" start="6226" end="6248" title="City Lights Publishers" label="City Lights Publishers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2845" start="6566" end="6575" title="marijuana" label="marijuana"/>
<link wikidata="Q23118" start="6683" end="6686" title="LSD" label="LSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q336358" start="6786" end="6801" title="Psilocybin mushroom" label="magic mushrooms"/>
<link wikidata="Q69488" start="6803" end="6810" title="MDMA" label="ecstasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q271937" start="6812" end="6818" title="peyote" label="peyote"/>
<link wikidata="Q193140" start="6820" end="6829" title="mescaline" label="mescaline"/>
<link wikidata="Q190067" start="6831" end="6834" title="Tetrahydrocannabinol" label="THC"/>
<link wikidata="Q46452" start="6836" end="6841" title="opium" label="opium"/>
<link wikidata="Q41576" start="6843" end="6850" title="cocaine" label="cocaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q380436" start="6852" end="6861" title="ayahuasca" label="ayahuasca"/>
<link wikidata="Q156091" start="6863" end="6873" title="Atropa belladonna" label="belladonna"/>
<link wikidata="Q243547" start="6875" end="6883" title="ketamine" label="ketamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q407324" start="6885" end="6888" title="Phencyclidine" label="PCP"/>
<link wikidata="Q62267185" start="6890" end="6893" title="2,5-Dimethoxy-4-methylamphetamine" label="STP"/>
<link wikidata="Q408915" start="6901" end="6911" title="bufotenin" label="toad slime"/>
<link wikidata="Q7349957" start="7008" end="7025" title="Robert Spencer (doctor)" label="Dr Robert Spencer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323789" start="7240" end="7252" title="grand juries" label="grand juries"/>
<link wikidata="Q5500136" start="7314" end="7341" title="Free University of New York" label="Free University of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q17004557" start="7461" end="7496" title="Writers and Editors War Tax Protest" label="Writers and Editors War Tax Protest"/>
<link wikidata="Q5054760" start="7675" end="7683" title="Cavalier (magazine)" label="Cavalier"/>
<link wikidata="Q150820" start="7700" end="7707" title="Playboy" label="Playboy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6335228" start="7948" end="7952" title="KOSF" label="KSFX"/>
<link wikidata="Q312086" start="8139" end="8151" title="Mad (magazine)" label="Mad magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3281221" start="8263" end="8278" title="The Aristocrats (film)" label="The Aristocrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q7602662" start="8363" end="8380" title="Starwood Festival" label="Starwood Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q7602662" start="8389" end="8409" title="WinterStar Symposium" label="WinterStar Symposium"/>
<link wikidata="Q179191" start="8442" end="8470" title="Rock &amp;amp; Roll Hall of Fame" label="Rock &amp;amp; Roll Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q2552910" start="8476" end="8486" title="Wavy Gravy" label="Wavy Gravy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5979624" start="8523" end="8548" title="I Want to Take You Higher" label="I Want to Take You Higher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897630" start="8616" end="8626" title="The Nation" label="The Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q379049" start="8640" end="8650" title="AVN Online" label="AVN Online"/>
<link wikidata="Q2706528" start="8667" end="8677" title="High Times" label="High Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q18049522" start="8710" end="8729" title="The Huffington Post" label="The Huffington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q7759255" start="8746" end="8758" title="The Rag Blog" label="The Rag Blog"/>
<link wikidata="Q229556" start="8792" end="8804" title="Patty Hearst" label="Patty Hearst"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429446" start="8848" end="8874" title="Symbionese Liberation Army" label="Symbionese Liberation Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="8883" end="8914" title="Federal Bureau of Investigation" label="Federal Bureau of Investigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203" start="8956" end="8967" title="John Lennon" label="John Lennon"/>
<link wikidata="Q117012" start="8972" end="8980" title="Yoko Ono" label="Yoko Ono"/>
<link wikidata="Q64768499" start="9004" end="9024" title="Up Your Legs Forever" label="Up Your Legs Forever"/>
<link wikidata="Q49734" start="9040" end="9051" title="Cass Elliot" label="Cass Elliot"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="9109" end="9122" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q211731" start="9237" end="9250" title="Timothy Leary" label="Timothy Leary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1890424" start="9509" end="9516" title="Yippies" label="Yippies"/>
<link wikidata="Q150820" start="9715" end="9722" title="Playboy" label="Playboy"/>
<link wikidata="Q126264992" start="9831" end="9865" title="Firecracker Alternative Book Award" label="Firecracker Alternative Book Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q5176948" start="10010" end="10037" title="Counterculture Hall of Fame" label="Counterculture Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q948858" start="10063" end="10075" title="Cannabis Cup" label="Cannabis Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q21637" start="10105" end="10135" title="American Civil Liberties Union" label="American Civil Liberties Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q216134" start="10143" end="10157" title="Upton Sinclair" label="Upton Sinclair"/>
<link wikidata="Q150651" start="10308" end="10321" title="George Carlin" label="George Carlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="10436" end="10442" title="Grammy Award" label="Grammy"/>
<link wikidata="Q460876" start="10515" end="10526" title="Lenny Bruce" label="Lenny Bruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q450796" start="10636" end="10648" title="Robin Morgan" label="Robin Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2300959" start="11311" end="11320" title="Scarsdale" label="Scarsdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q17088698" start="11955" end="11965" title="Videofreex" label="Videofreex"/>
<link wikidata="Q28451084" start="12241" end="12253" title="And/Or Press" label="And/Or Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q15120881" start="12424" end="12444" title="Loompanics Unlimited" label="Loompanics Unlimited"/>
<link wikidata="Q345325" start="12537" end="12550" title="Harry Shearer" label="Harry Shearer"/>
<link wikidata="Q180252" start="12568" end="12579" title="Lewis Black" label="Lewis Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q7457481" start="12581" end="12600" title="Seven Stories Press" label="Seven Stories Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q311253" start="12784" end="12798" title="Harlan Ellison" label="Harlan Ellison"/>
<link wikidata="Q2706528" start="12800" end="12810" title="High Times" label="High Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q7699319" start="12986" end="13001" title="Ten Speed Press" label="Ten Speed Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q15501071" start="13102" end="13113" title="Lyle Stuart" label="Lyle Stuart"/>
<link wikidata="Q7379979" start="13311" end="13324" title="Running Press" label="Running Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q49074" start="13440" end="13453" title="Kurt Vonnegut" label="Kurt Vonnegut"/>
<link wikidata="Q150651" start="13579" end="13592" title="George Carlin" label="George Carlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4863479" start="13594" end="13609" title="Barricade Books" label="Barricade Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q2394278" start="13724" end="13746" title="City Lights Publishers" label="City Lights Publishers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2706528" start="13814" end="13824" title="High Times" label="High Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q31176" start="13893" end="13907" title="New York Press" label="New York Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q2706528" start="13958" end="13968" title="High Times" label="High Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q2706528" start="14004" end="14014" title="High Times" label="High Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q2706528" start="14045" end="14055" title="High Times" label="High Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q2706528" start="14087" end="14097" title="High Times" label="High Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q18049522" start="14156" end="14171" title="Huffington Post" label="Huffington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897630" start="14244" end="14254" title="The Nation" label="The Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q139103" start="14332" end="14355" title="San Francisco Chronicle" label="San Francisco Chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2706528" start="14460" end="14470" title="High Times" label="High Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q2706528" start="14558" end="14568" title="High Times" label="High Times"/>
<link wikidata="" start="14832" end="14884" title="Generation on Fire: Voices of Protest from the 1960s" label="Generation on Fire: Voices of Protest from the 1960s"/>
<link wikidata="Q7796382" start="15228" end="15241" title="Thorne Dreyer" label="Thorne Dreyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4506422" start="15947" end="15963" title="Dynamite Chicken" label="Dynamite Chicken"/>
<link wikidata="Q7775033" start="16018" end="16041" title="The Wilton North Report" label="The Wilton North Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211256" start="16194" end="16204" title="The Source (documentary)" label="The Source"/>
<link wikidata="Q3281221" start="16301" end="16316" title="The Aristocrats (film)" label="The Aristocrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736835" start="16370" end="16394" title="The U.S. vs. John Lennon" label="The U.S. vs. John Lennon"/>
<link wikidata="Q22986522" start="16415" end="16431" title="Darryl Henriques" label="Darryl Henriques"/>
<link wikidata="Q22061004" start="16629" end="16644" title="Camp Summerlane" label="Camp Summerlane"/>
<link wikidata="Q2921049" start="16647" end="16670" title="List of peace activists" label="List of peace activists"/>
<link wikidata="Q16975154" start="16846" end="16851" title="ep.tc" label="ep.tc"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="311782" wikidata="Q1325591" url="?curid=311782" title="New York City Transit Authority">
<text>The New York City Transit Authority (also known as NYCTA, the TA, or simply Transit, and branded as MTA New York City Transit) is a public-benefit corporation in the U.S. state of New York that operates public transportation in New York City. Part of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, the busiest and largest transit system in North America, the NYCTA has a daily ridership of 8million trips (over 2.5billion annually).

The NYCTA operates the following systems:
* New York City Subway, a rapid transit system serving Manhattan, the Bronx, Brooklyn, and Queens
* Staten Island Railway, a rapid transit line on Staten Island (operated by the subsidiary Staten Island Rapid Transit Operating Authority)
* New York City Bus, an extensive bus network serving all five boroughs (operated by the subsidiary MTA Regional Bus Operations)

==Name==

As part of establishing a common corporate identity, the Metropolitan Transportation Authority in 1994 assigned popular names to each of its subsidiaries and affiliates. The New York City Transit Authority is now known popularly as &quot;MTA New York City Transit (NYCT)&quot;, (or more specifically on the vehicles, &quot;MTA New York City Bus&quot; and &quot;MTA New York City Subway&quot;), though the former remains its legal name for documents and contracts. Newer contracts and RFPs, however, have also used the popular name. The corporation is also sometimes referred to as the &quot;TA&quot; (for &quot;Transit Authority&quot;).

==Management structure==
The chairman and members of the MTA, by statute, also serve as the chairman and members of the Transit Authority, and serve as the directors of the Manhattan and Bronx Surface Transit Operating Authority. The executive director of the MTA is, &quot;ex officio&quot;, executive director of the Transit Authority.

The Transit Authority has its own management structure which is responsible for its day-to-day operations, with executive personnel reporting to the agency president. The position of president was vacant , following the resignation of Andy Byford. Sarah Feinberg and Craig Cipriano served as interim presidents until May 2, 2022, when Richard Davey was hired to assume the role on a permanent basis. When Davey left in June 2024, Demetrius Crichlow took over as interim president; Crichlow became the official president on October 23, 2024. 

==History==
===Background===
The subway system today is composed of what once were three separate systems in competition with one another. Two of them were built and operated by private companies: August Belmont&#x27;s Interborough Rapid Transit Company (IRT) and the Brooklyn–Manhattan Transit Corporation (BMT). The third, the public Independent Subway System (IND) was owned and operated by the City of New York. The IRT and BMT systems were acquired by the city on June 1, 1940, for $317,000,000 and consolidated with the IND into the New York City Board of Transportation (NYCBOT).

The buses on Staten Island had been operated by a private company operating under a franchise that expired in 1946. When it became known that the company would not renew its franchise, a group of residents in the borough organized the Isle Transportation Company, to continue operation. This group ran into financial difficulties and the city took over the company on February 23, 1947. The city then controlled all of the bus routes on Staten Island. On March 30, 1947, the City took over the bus lines of the North Shore Bus Company, which comprised half of the privately owned lines in Queens, after that company went into financial troubles. On September 24, 1948, the City acquired five bus lines in Manhattan for similar reasons.

The surface operation of the BOT was a costly operation, resulting from the various equipment that was required, including trolley cars, trolley coaches, gasoline and diesel buses, of which many were obsolete and in need of replacement.

During World War II, the New York City Transit System showed an operating surplus on the five-cent fare, because gasoline was rationed and auto riders had to abandon their cars for subway and bus travel. Factories began to work around the clock, and therefore business boomed. Transit repairs were kept at a minimum as basic materials were in short supply for civilian use. Operating revenues were raised and maintenance costs were reduced, but as a result, the future problems of deferred maintenance and falling ridership were to come. In 1946, costs rose and profits turned to losses, and to obtain needed funds, the fare was raised in 1948 to ten cents on the subways and elevated, and to seven cents on the surface lines. This increase only produced a revenue surplus for a single year. In 1951 a uniform ten-cent fare was established on both the rapid transit and surface lines. Operating deficits continued to add up and public dissatisfaction with the transit system grew, as equipment was deteriorating, and train schedules being difficult to abide by.

===Formation of the TA===
In March 1953, the Board of Transportation was abolished, and was replaced by the New York City Transit Authority (NYCTA). The NYCTA formally succeeded the BOT on June 15, 1953, being composed of five unsalaried members. Hugh Casey was elected as the agency&#x27;s chairman at the authority&#x27;s first meeting. The new Transit Authority was modeled after the existing Port of New York Authority which now calls itself the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey and Triborough Bridge and Tunnel Authority, the latter of which is also now part of the MTA. At this time, the city government leased the IRT, BMT, and IND subway lines and the surface system (buses and, until 1956 street cars). A major goal of the formation of the NYCTA was to remove transit policy, and especially the setting of the transit fare, from City politics. The fare was increased to fifteen cents on July 25, 1953, and a token was introduced for paying subway and elevated fares. Bus and trolley fares continued to be paid by cash only.

In July 1953, the NYCTA proposed spending $1,065,000,000 over six years, expanding the city&#x27;s subway system through new lines and connections between the IND and BMT Divisions. The most important new lines were a Second Avenue subway, including a Chrystie Street connection to the Williamsburg and Manhattan Bridge and a rebuilt DeKalb Avenue junction in Brooklyn, IRT Utica Avenue and Nostrand Avenue extensions into southeast Brooklyn, and the extension of subway service to the Rockaway Peninsula using the Long Island Railroad&#x27;s Rockaway Beach Branch. Only the Chrystie Street connection, the rebuilt DeKalb Avenue Junction, and the Rockaway Line were built between 1954 and 1967.

One provision in the 1953 law that created NYCTA demanded that by July 1955, the agency create a plan to sell its bus and trolley routes to private operators. In the beginning of 1955, it was reported that the NYCTA&#x27;s surface operations cost seven million dollars more to operate annually than it collected in revenue from the fare box. By privatizing the surface operations, and as a result focusing on subways, the NYCTA could then meet its operating costs. Two Manhattan private operators, New York City Omnibus and Surface Transportation, in March 1955, expressed interest in taking control of the five-route NYCTA bus operation in that borough. In the other boroughs there was no interest in taking over the routes in Brooklyn and Staten Island, and there was little interest in Queens. In April 1955, laws were passed by the New York State legislature to change the NYCTA into a three-member salaried panel to become in effect on July 1, 1955. This allowed its members to devote their full-time to managing New York&#x27;s transit system. As part of this law, the provision that required surface operations to be sold was removed. The Chairman of the NYCTA then became Charles Patterson.

One major problem that the NYCTA inherited from the Board of Transportation was the age of the subway cars from the IRT and BMT. The first new cars were the R16s, totaling 200 in quantity, which first appeared in January 1955 when they were put in service on the J train. These cars were introduced with automatic thermostats and dampers to control the heat and ventilation systems based on the air temperature outside. Additional subway cars were also ordered and delivered between 1960 and 1965; the R27s, the R30s and R32s for the IND/BMT lines, and R29s, R33s and R36s for the IRT (2,350 cars). Between 1966 and 1969, an additional 1,000 cars, split between the R38, R40, and R42 orders, were placed into service. The last of the original BMT Standard stock was retired by 1969, along with the last prewar IRT equipment.

On July 5, 1966, the fare was increased to twenty cents.

As with all mass transit in the United States the TA requires assistance for its capital costs and to cover operational needs, however, the very high ridership of New York City&#x27;s subway system has enabled it to pay 67 percent of its operating costs from fares and advertising. Historically, the TA&#x27;s capital requirements were met by the city and state jointly, but this support was withdrawn, primarily by Governor Rockefeller, in the 1960s.

In 1965, mayoral candidate John Lindsay pledged to use the toll revenues from the Triborough Bridge and Tunnel Authority (TBTA) to offset the NYCTA&#x27;s deficits. In January 1966, New York State, with the help of Governor Nelson Rockefeller, purchased the Long Island Rail Road from its corporate parent, the Pennsylvania Railroad, and it became part of the Metropolitan Commuter Transportation Authority (MCTA). Rockefeller saw the difficulty that John Lindsay, who had since won the mayoral election, had in his plan to use the TBTA surpluses for the NYCTA, and decided to expand the MCTA to give it oversight to the NYCTA and the TBTA. The MCTA would be renamed the Metropolitan Transportation Authority (MTA). Tied to a bill with the creation of the MTA was a $2.5billion bond issue that would be approved or disapproved by voters in November 1967. A majority of the bonds would go to the state&#x27;s mass transit systems, with a majority going to New York City, and to Nassau, Suffolk, Westchester, Putnam, Dutchess, Rockland, and Orange Counties. The day prior to the election, two brand new R40 cars were displayed on the IND Sixth Avenue Line at Herald Square. The bond issue passed, and the MTA was set to take over the NYCTA in 1968. The night before December 31, 1967, the NYCTA and the TWU made an agreement to avoid a strike. The deal gave NYCTA workers the ability to retire with about half-pay after twenty years if the employee was over fifty years old. This would later cause problems, as large numbers of transit workers would retire to take advantage of these benefits. On March 1, 1968, the NYCTA, and its subsidiary, the Manhattan and Bronx Surface Transit Operating Authority (MaBSTOA), were placed under the control of, and are now affiliates of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority (MTA).

===2017–2021: transit crisis===

In 2017, New York governor Andrew Cuomo declared a state of emergency for the MTA due to various incidents involving the NYCTA&#x27;s subway and bus systems. At the time, only 65 percent of weekday trains reached their destinations on time, the lowest rate since a transit crisis in the 1970s. To a lesser extent, New York City buses operated by the MTA were also affected. To resolve these issues, a &quot;Subway Action Plan&quot; was revealed, as well as a &quot;Bus Action Plan&quot;.

=== COVID-19 pandemic ===
Beginning March 25, 2020, service on buses and subways was reduced due to decreased ridership during the first wave of the COVID-19 pandemic in New York City. In late March, NYCTA interim president Sarah Feinberg stated that a shutdown &quot;feels misguided to me&quot; and was &quot;not on the table&quot;. Feinberg also spoke in favor of hazard pay for front-line workers. In April 2020, four City Council members requested that subway service be temporarily suspended due to the spread of COVID-19 in the subway system. Also that April, Feinberg called the MTA &quot;the most aggressive transit agency in the country in acting quickly and decisively to protect our workforce&quot;. By April 22, 2020, COVID-19 had killed 83 agency employees; the agency announced that their families would be eligible for $500,000 in death benefits. Over 100 employees had died of COVID-19 .

Starting in May 2020, stations were closed overnight for cleaning; the overnight closures were announced as a temporary measure that would be ended once the pandemic was over. Trains and stations were cleaned more than usual.

==Presidents==

==Strikes==
Employees of the New York City Transit Authority assigned to the New York City Subway and in Brooklyn, Manhattan, and the Bronx are members of the Transport Workers Union of America Local 100, with Queens and Staten Island bus personnel represented by various Amalgamated Transit Union locals.

In 1949, the Transport Workers Union and the Board of Transportation, under Mayor Willian O&#x27;Dwyer signed a Memorandum of Understanding that gave the right to represent all of the system&#x27;s workers to the TWU. In 1954 an NYCTA-wide representation election took place. It gave TWU exclusive collective bargaining rights for all hourly workers for the NYCTA, except for those in the Queens and Staten Island Bus Divisions, which remained a part of the Amalgamated Association of Street Electric Railway and Motor Coach Employees of America, which became the Amalgamated Transit Union in 1964. After looking at the Brotherhood of Locomotive Engineers as their model, NYCTA motorman formed their own union in 1954, a Motormen&#x27;s Benevolent Association (MBA) to further their interests. In 1956 they went on strike on a hot June day, tying up service on the BMT Division. Its president, Theodore Loos, and its leadership were fired after the strike, but were reinstated after agreeing not to strike again.

On December 16, 1957, another representation election for the TWU was scheduled, and the motormen from the MBA did not want to have a small role in the TWU, and threatened to strike, but were stopped by court injunctions. As a result, the motormen wanted to hold an election for the representation of their craft independent of the NYCTA-wide elections. The management of the NYCTA did not recognize the MBA as a bargaining unit as the TWU officially represented the motormen. A request for a separate election was denied, and as a result the motormen wanted to show their power and to acquire their own representation. As a result, on December 9, 1957, the motormen went on strike, resulting in subway service being reduced in half for eight days. Riders using the IND lines in Queens, the Bronx, and Upper Manhattan, and the southern Brooklyn lines of the BMT were the hardest hit. The leaders of the MBA were punished after going against injunctions prohibiting strikes. Afterwards, the MBA leaders were punished, and on the first morning of the strike, the MBA president Theodore Loos and three other MBA officials were arrested and sent to jail. While they were in jail, MBA executive secretary Frank Zelano was acting head of the MBA and bargained on their behalf. In 1958, the TWU and the MBA reached a settlement. The motormen became a separate United Motormen&#x27;s Division within the TWU and benefitted from a fund for skilled craft workers. Theodore Loos became its head.

On New Year&#x27;s Day, in 1966, a 12-day strike was started with the aid of Mike Quill. This strike started after the union member&#x27;s contracts had expired, and with large economic demands from the union. After the 1966 New York City transit strike, the Taylor Law was passed making public employee strikes illegal in the state of New York.

Despite the Taylor Law, there was still an 11-day strike in 1980. Thirty-four thousand union members struck in order to call for increased wages.

On December 20, 2005, another strike occurred. Workers walked off at 3 a.m. and the NYCTA stopped operating. Later that day, State Supreme Court Justice Theodore Jones warned the transit union that there would be a fine of $1million for each day the TA is shut down. Also for each day the workers missed during the strike they would be fined two days&#x27; pay. Ultimately, the Judge fined the union $2.5million, charged employees two days&#x27; wages for every day they were out on strike, and imposed individual fines on the union&#x27;s officers. Most significantly, the courts indefinitely suspended the Union&#x27;s dues checkoff and refused to restore it for nearly 18 months. The strike was over by December 23, after several contract negotiations; the original contract, agreed to by Local 100 and the Transit Authority as a result of the strike, was ultimately imposed on both parties by an arbitrator. More than four months after the strike ended, the courts imposed a brief jail term on Local 100 president Roger Toussaint for his role in the strike.

In 2008–09, MTA management once again refused to sign off on an agreement with Local 100 for a successor to the collective bargaining agreement, which expired early in 2009. This time, the Union chose to pursue the arbitration process provided by the Taylor Law rather than strike in support of its demands. On August 11, 2009, after months of community meetings and dozens of witnesses, the state arbitration panel issued its award. However, the MTA refused to comply with the award, forcing the Union to go to court to seek to enforce it. On December 11, 2009, State Supreme Court Justice Peter Sherwood issued a decision upholding the arbitration award in all respects. The MTA had not indicated whether it appealed this decision.

==TripPlanner==
In December 2006, MTA New York City Transit launched TripPlanner, its online travel itinerary service. TripPlanner offers users customized subway, bus, and walking directions within all five boroughs of New York City, as well as service alerts and service advisories for planned track work. The service was developed and is maintained by NYC Transit and its outside vendor, Trapeze Group. It is accessed through the MTA website.

Similar to MapQuest, which offers driving directions, TripPlanner provides search fields for starting address and destination address, and allows end users to navigate the complexity of the subway and bus system by narrowing their options to subway, local bus or express bus only, minimizing the number of transfers or time, and adjusting the walking distance to and from the transit stop.

In October 2007, NYCT launched TripPlanner On the Go! This service allows users with mobile access to the web to obtain travel itineraries while away from a desk or laptop computer. TripPlanner On the Go! was made applicable for cellular phone, PDA, or Blackberry users, and offered the same three-option travel directions along with real-time service alerts. The back end programming for On the Go! was &quot;developed using XHTML technology and the latest Microsoft Dot Net Framework in a clustered environment.&quot; By the end of October 2007, more than 5,000 daily customers were using TripPlanner.

In February 2008, NYCT announced an upgrade to the mapping system using NAVTEQ and Microsoft Virtual Earth software similar to mapping sites such as Google Maps and MapQuest. The new software offered more accurate street grids, included business and points of interest, and allowed users to view the maps in aerial, and 3-D points of view. To date, the aerial and 3D views are not available on TripPlanner&#x27;s mobile service.

In June 2008, NYCT announced it had reached 10,000 daily visitors to TripPlanner. Since the announcement, the number of visits to the service eclipsed the number of telephone calls to the agency&#x27;s travel information hotline. The following month, Trip Planner launched as a widget application, allowing users to add it to their personalized homepage, blog, or website.

The Trip Planner has since largely replaced the NYCTA call center on NYC Transit&#x27;s phone number.

==Fare collection==

In November 1993, a fare system called the MetroCard was introduced, which allowed riders to use cards that have stored value to pay fares equal to the amount paid at a subway station booth or vending machine. Designed and initially operated by Cubic Transportation Systems, the MetroCard was enhanced in 1997 to allow passengers to make free transfers between subways and buses within two hours; several MetroCard-only transfers between subway stations were added in 2001. With the addition of unlimited-ride MetroCards in 1998, the New York City Transit system was the last major transit system in the United States, with the exception of BART in San Francisco, to introduce passes for unlimited bus and rapid transit travel. Unlimited-ride MetroCards are available for 7-day and 30-day periods. One-day &quot;Fun Pass&quot; and 14-day cards were also introduced but have since been discontinued.

In April 2016, MTA solicited proposals for a contactless &quot;New Fare Payment System&quot; to replace the MetroCard by 2022. On October 23, 2017, it was announced that the MetroCard would be phased out and replaced by OMNY, a contactless fare payment system also made by Cubic, with fare payment being made using Apple Pay, Google Pay, debit/credit cards with near-field communication technology, or radio-frequency identification cards. The announcement calls for the expansion of this system to a general-use electronic fare payment system at 500 subway turnstiles and on 600 buses by late 2018, with all buses and subway stations using electronic fare collection by 2020. However, support for the MetroCard is slated to remain in place until April 2024. , the fare for a subway or local bus ride is $2.90, while the fare for an express bus ride is $7.00.

==See also==

*Transportation in New York City
*History of transportation in New York City
*New York City transit fares
*MetroCard
*Service animal policy of MTA

==References==
==External links==
*New York City Transit: official site
*nycsubway.org: New York City Subway Resources
*Transport Workers Union Local 100
*New York City Transit: Trip Planner site
* New York City Transit Authority Collective Bargaining Agreements at the Kheel Center for Labor-Management Documentation and Archives, Cornell University Library</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1325591" start="4" end="35" title="New York City Transit Authority" label="New York City Transit Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325591" start="51" end="56" title="New York City Transit Authority" label="NYCTA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325591" start="58" end="64" title="New York City Transit Authority" label="the TA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325591" start="76" end="83" title="New York City Transit Authority" label="Transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325591" start="100" end="125" title="New York City Transit Authority" label="MTA New York City Transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7015127" start="132" end="158" title="New York state public-benefit corporations" label="public-benefit corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="166" end="176" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="180" end="188" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q178512" start="203" end="224" title="public transportation" label="public transportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="228" end="241" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146109" start="255" end="292" title="Metropolitan Transportation Authority" label="Metropolitan Transportation Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="336" end="349" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q11369842" start="373" end="382" title="ridership" label="ridership"/>
<link wikidata="Q7733" start="474" end="494" title="New York City Subway" label="New York City Subway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5503" start="498" end="511" title="rapid transit" label="rapid transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q11299" start="527" end="536" title="Manhattan" label="Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q18426" start="538" end="547" title="the Bronx" label="the Bronx"/>
<link wikidata="Q18419" start="549" end="557" title="Brooklyn" label="Brooklyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q18424" start="563" end="569" title="Queens" label="Queens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273068" start="572" end="593" title="Staten Island Railway" label="Staten Island Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q18432" start="619" end="632" title="Staten Island" label="Staten Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273068" start="661" end="708" title="Staten Island Rapid Transit Operating Authority" label="Staten Island Rapid Transit Operating Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q5638" start="744" end="747" title="bus" label="bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4386993" start="810" end="837" title="MTA Regional Bus Operations" label="MTA Regional Bus Operations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146109" start="907" end="944" title="Metropolitan Transportation Authority" label="Metropolitan Transportation Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q4386993" start="1167" end="1200" title="MTA Regional Bus Operations" label="&amp;quot;MTA New York City Bus&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7733" start="1205" end="1241" title="New York City Subway" label="&amp;quot;MTA New York City Subway&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q4386993" start="1661" end="1716" title="MTA Regional Bus Operations" label="Manhattan and Bronx Surface Transit Operating Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q4760483" start="2061" end="2072" title="Andy Byford" label="Andy Byford"/>
<link wikidata="Q760909" start="2566" end="2580" title="August Belmont Jr." label="August Belmont"/>
<link wikidata="Q2523955" start="2588" end="2622" title="Interborough Rapid Transit Company" label="Interborough Rapid Transit Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q2926164" start="2637" end="2675" title="Brooklyn–Manhattan Transit Corporation" label="Brooklyn–Manhattan Transit Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3097594" start="2705" end="2730" title="Independent Subway System" label="Independent Subway System"/>
<link wikidata="Q28186672" start="2908" end="2945" title="New York City Board of Transportation" label="New York City Board of Transportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7056667" start="3468" end="3491" title="North Shore Bus Company" label="North Shore Bus Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q908666" start="5445" end="5486" title="Port Authority of New York and New Jersey" label="Port Authority of New York and New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q999168" start="5491" end="5529" title="MTA Bridges and Tunnels" label="Triborough Bridge and Tunnel Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q8035221" start="8732" end="8757" title="World&amp;#x27;s Fair Lo-V (New York City Subway car)" label="last prewar IRT equipment"/>
<link wikidata="Q6784097" start="8830" end="8863" title="Public transportation in the United States" label="mass transit in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q4386993" start="10916" end="10971" title="MTA Regional Bus Operations" label="Manhattan and Bronx Surface Transit Operating Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146109" start="11047" end="11084" title="Metropolitan Transportation Authority" label="Metropolitan Transportation Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q11673" start="11153" end="11165" title="Andrew Cuomo" label="Andrew Cuomo"/>
<link wikidata="Q216227" start="11177" end="11195" title="state of emergency" label="state of emergency"/>
<link wikidata="Q4386993" start="11440" end="11459" title="MTA Regional Bus Operations" label="New York City buses"/>
<link wikidata="Q88641716" start="11764" end="11798" title="COVID-19 pandemic in New York City" label="COVID-19 pandemic in New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q93570553" start="11839" end="11853" title="Sarah Feinberg" label="Sarah Feinberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q84263196" start="12345" end="12353" title="COVID-19" label="COVID-19"/>
<link wikidata="Q3537776" start="12922" end="12956" title="Transport Workers Union of America" label="Transport Workers Union of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q4739373" start="13035" end="13060" title="Amalgamated Transit Union" label="Amalgamated Transit Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q196627" start="15573" end="15592" title="New Year&amp;#x27;s Day" label="New Year&amp;#x27;s Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q6848486" start="15647" end="15657" title="Mike Quill" label="Mike Quill"/>
<link wikidata="Q3118377" start="15790" end="15823" title="1966 New York City transit strike" label="1966 New York City transit strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q7690039" start="15829" end="15839" title="Taylor Law" label="Taylor Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q3118381" start="15967" end="15981" title="1980 New York City transit strike" label="strike in 1980"/>
<link wikidata="Q3118383" start="16086" end="16109" title="2005 New York City transit strike" label="another strike occurred"/>
<link wikidata="Q3439504" start="17082" end="17097" title="Roger Toussaint" label="Roger Toussaint"/>
<link wikidata="Q7835566" start="18252" end="18265" title="Trapeze Software" label="Trapeze Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q34929" start="19668" end="19670" title="Three-dimensional space" label="3D"/>
<link wikidata="Q3097883" start="20275" end="20284" title="MetroCard" label="MetroCard"/>
<link wikidata="Q8428168" start="20329" end="20357" title="Stored-value card" label="cards that have stored value"/>
<link wikidata="Q5192235" start="20477" end="20505" title="Cubic Transportation Systems" label="Cubic Transportation Systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q6591923" start="20652" end="20685" title="List of New York City Subway transfer stations" label="transfers between subway stations"/>
<link wikidata="Q610120" start="20873" end="20877" title="BART" label="BART"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="20881" end="20894" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q64223567" start="21352" end="21356" title="OMNY" label="OMNY"/>
<link wikidata="Q625903" start="21360" end="21384" title="Contactless payment" label="contactless fare payment"/>
<link wikidata="Q18010990" start="21447" end="21456" title="Apple Pay" label="Apple Pay"/>
<link wikidata="Q19834616" start="21458" end="21468" title="Google Pay (payment method)" label="Google Pay"/>
<link wikidata="Q273353" start="21494" end="21518" title="near-field communication" label="near-field communication"/>
<link wikidata="Q104954" start="21534" end="21564" title="radio-frequency identification" label="radio-frequency identification"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321208" start="22008" end="22039" title="Transportation in New York City" label="Transportation in New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q16191421" start="22041" end="22083" title="History of transportation in New York City" label="History of transportation in New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q7013335" start="22085" end="22112" title="New York City transit fares" label="New York City transit fares"/>
<link wikidata="Q3097883" start="22114" end="22123" title="MetroCard" label="MetroCard"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22125" end="22153" title="Metropolitan Transportation Authority#Service animals" label="Service animal policy of MTA"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="311788" wikidata="Q907605" url="?curid=311788" title="There Is Nothing Left to Lose">
<text>There Is Nothing Left to Lose is the third studio album by American rock band Foo Fighters, released on November 2, 1999, through Roswell and RCA Records. It marked the first studio credit for drummer Taylor Hawkins, and is often seen as a departure from the band&#x27;s previous work, showcasing a softer, more experimental sound. Vocalist and guitarist Dave Grohl has called it his favorite Foo Fighters album, stating that it was &quot;totally based on melody&quot; and that the recording process was a serene experience. The album was recorded using only three musicians; Grohl, Hawkins, and bassist Nate Mendel in the basement of Grohl&#x27;s home in Alexandria, Virginia. 

&quot;There Is Nothing Left to Lose&quot; won the Grammy Award for Best Rock Album in 2001, marking the band&#x27;s first ever Grammy win. The band would go on to win the Grammy for Best Rock Album for three of their next four studio releases (&quot;One by One&quot;; &quot;Echoes, Silence, Patience &amp; Grace&quot;; and &quot;Wasting Light&quot;).

&quot;There Is Nothing Left to Lose&quot; is Foo Fighters&#x27; first album to be entirely released and marketed by RCA Records since their departure from Capitol Records after the release of &quot;The Colour and the Shape&quot; two years earlier. Their two previous studio albums, originally distributed by Capitol, were since then distributed by RCA.

==Background==
Prior to recording, guitarist Franz Stahl was fired, as frontman Dave Grohl felt the guitarist had not found his place in the band. At that point, Grohl decided that the band would just be a three-piece for the record, along with bassist Nate Mendel and drummer Taylor Hawkins. Having just slaved themselves in the studio making the last record &quot;The Colour and the Shape&quot; and losing two band members in the process, he decided to buy a house in Alexandria, Virginia and make the record in its basement without any record company presence during production. This was helped by the Foo Fighters&#x27; leaving Capitol Records after president Gary Gersh left the label. Grohl named his home facility Studio 606, at first saying, &quot;It&#x27;s just one of those numbers that&#x27;s everywhere. Like when you wake up in the middle of the night and it&#x27;s 6:06, or you see a license plate that says 606.&quot; He later told the full story of the number&#x27;s significance in a July 20, 2020, Instagram post: spending the evening with his father in 1985, he received a particularly searing &quot;what do you want to do with your life&quot; lecture that defines the bittersweet moment he finally communicated to his father the depth of his commitment to becoming a professional musician, before sneaking out. &quot;606&quot; was his father&#x27;s apartment number.

Grohl set up the studio with the help of Adam Kasper, who eventually co-produced the album. The biggest challenge, according to Grohl, was making the record sound good without computer programs such as Pro Tools or AutoTune. Dave Grohl notes that he had: &quot;[...] been living in Los Angeles for about a year and a half, just being a drunk, getting fucked up every night and doing horrible shit, and I&#x27;d finally gotten sick of that new car smell. So I bought this great house in Virginia and told everyone I was building a studio in the basement. It was literally a basement with sleeping bags on the walls!&quot;In a 1999 interview during the production of the album, Grohl commented on what the song &quot;Ain&#x27;t It the Life&quot; meant to him:&quot;Ain&#x27;t It the Life&quot; I think is the one song that I would love to play on my porch [...] Living in Los Angeles for a year and a half, I think it ignited that hatred that I&#x27;d had for so long of things that are false, and glamorous, and just not real. Getting back to Virginia was such a nice feeling of community, family, and the D.C. music scene, old friends, and things that I&#x27;d never lost but felt like I needed &quot;more of&quot; in my life. So &quot;Ain&#x27;t It the Life&quot; is just kind of about living the quiet, Virginia life.

In 2006, Grohl stated that: &quot;It was all about just settling into the next phase of your life, that place where you can sit back and relax because there had been so much crazy shit in the past three years. At that point it was me, Taylor and Nate and we were best friends. It was one of the most relaxing times of my whole life. All we did was eat chili, drink beer and whiskey and record whenever we felt like it. When I listen to that record it totally brings me back to that basement. I remember how it smelled and how it was in the Spring so the windows were open and we&#x27;d do vocals until you could hear the birds through the microphone. And more than any other record I&#x27;ve ever done, that album does that to me.&quot;

==Title and artwork==
The title emerged to Grohl as he talked to a friend &quot;about when you experience these emotions after you&#x27;ve been through a long, difficult period and you finally give into this feeling that, quite simply, there is nothing left to lose. It can seem... positive, desperate and reckless.&quot; The frontman also said that it represented the band&#x27;s mood during production: &quot;we just wrote off and played like all bets were off. No one was forcing us to be there, so it had to be fun—and the songs had to be the best we could possibly come up with at the time.&quot;

The cover art features the band&#x27;s initials on the back of Grohl&#x27;s neck.

==Release and promotion==
After the album was ready, the band signed with RCA Records to distribute the album. For promotion, the label focused on &quot;getting the Foo Fighters brand out there&quot;, setting up the band&#x27;s official website, and arranging appearances on broadcast television and events such as the Gravity Games. &quot;There Is Nothing Left to Lose&quot; was released in an Enhanced CD featuring the music video for the first single, &quot;Learn to Fly&quot;, along with song lyrics and photographs.

While the album was recorded as a three-piece, Grohl decided that he still needed a second guitarist for the live performances. After open auditions in which 35 musicians were tested, the band hired Chris Shiflett, whom Grohl considered the best guitarist and singer who auditioned, and &quot;he fit in with the rest of us so well&quot;, particularly for his background in punk rock bands. In September 1999, the band performed club dates in New York and Los Angeles, to both showcase the new songs and test Shiflett&#x27;s performance with the group. The There Is Nothing Left To Lose tour started in 2000. The North American leg was overlapped with the Red Hot Chili Peppers&#x27; Californication Tour.

Early pressings of the disc included a temporary tattoo, similar to the one featured on the album cover. The album was also re-released in 2001 in Australia as a two-CD edition which offers a second VCD disc of four videos and one bonus track, &quot;Fraternity&quot;. This version also came with a special release album cover. The cover featured Australian Olympic swimmer, Michael Klim, with the aforementioned temporary tattoo on his shoulder. 

==Critical reception==

Reviews for &quot;There Is Nothing Left to Lose&quot; were generally positive. &quot;Rolling Stone&quot;″s Greg Kot rated the album three-and-a-half out of five stars. He started by explaining that &quot;the first thirty seconds [...] are a bridge to singer Dave Grohl&#x27;s past.&quot; He stated further, comparing the album to the Goo Goo Dolls&#x27; &quot;Iris&quot;, that &quot;[Grohl&#x27;s] punk background makes him allergic to string sections.&quot; However, he said that it &quot;nonetheless marks a departure, with greater emphasis on melody and actual singing.&quot; In a retrospective review, AllMusic&#x27;s Stephen Thomas Erlewine rated the album four out of five stars, explaining that &quot;it is the first Foo Fighters album that sounds like the work of a unified, muscular band, and the first one that rocks &quot;really&quot; hard.&quot; Furthermore, he stated that it &quot;has a stripped-down sound and an immediate attack that makes even the poppier numbers rock hard.&quot; He concluded that &quot;[Foo Fighters] make it sound easy and fun [...] they&#x27;re getting better as they&#x27;re losing members and growing older, which is certainly a rarity in rock &amp; roll.&quot;

In another retrospective review, a reviewer for Sputnikmusic rated it 3.5 out of 5 points. He explained that it was &quot;consistent and includes sufficient highlights&quot; overall. He went on to state that &quot;Stacked Actors&quot; &quot;successfully utilizes some cool guitar effects as well as the quiet/loud formula that the band has become known for.&quot; He further stated that &quot;Breakout&quot; &quot;is a really satisfying mix of melody and rock that ends up a genuinely memorable tune.&quot; However, he stated that &quot;&quot;Headwires&quot; [...] musically begins like a mediocre mid-80&#x27;s radio-rock effort and then simply lacks the necessary grunt to salvage it later on.&quot; Comparing the album to &quot;The Colour and the Shape&quot;, he stated that while the newer album is &quot;more consistent&quot;, &quot;a number of tracks ... [are] rather straight-forward and lacking that certain memorable factor which so helped its predecessor.&quot;

== In popular culture ==

=== Use in &quot;Daria&quot; ===
Many songs from the album were used throughout the fourth season of MTV&#x27;s &quot;Daria&quot;. &quot;Headwires&quot;, the ninth track from &quot;There is Nothing Left to Lose&quot;, was featured in the ending credits of &quot;Psycho Therapy&quot;, the eighth episode of the fourth season. That episode originally aired on MTV on June 28, 2000. The song &quot;Aurora&quot; was featured in the ending credits of &quot;Groped by an Angel&quot;, the eleventh episode of the fourth season. That episode originally aired on MTV on July 19, 2000. &quot;Learn to Fly&quot; was used on two occasions in &quot;Daria&quot;. It first appeared in &quot;Of Human Bonding&quot;, the seventh episode of the fourth season. That episode originally aired on MTV on April 14, 2000. The song was also used in the second &quot;Daria&quot; movie &quot;Is It College Yet?&quot;, which originally aired on MTV on January 21, 2002.

Additionally, in the first &quot;Daria&quot; movie &quot;Is It Fall Yet?&quot;, Grohl voiced the character Daniel Dotson, the Ashfield art instructor. That movie originally aired on MTV on August 27, 2000.

=== Use in &quot;Me, Myself &amp; Irene&quot; ===
The album&#x27;s fourth single, &quot;Breakout&quot;, was featured in the 2000 Farrelly brothers comedy film &quot;Me, Myself &amp; Irene&quot; and its accompanying soundtrack. The music video for &quot;Breakout&quot; is itself a parody of the film. It shows Grohl with split personalities, akin to that of Jim Carrey&#x27;s character in the film, Charlie Baileygates. Promotional posters of the film appear in the music video.

==Awards==
Grammy Awards
==Track listing==

==Personnel==
===Foo Fighters===
*Dave Grohl – vocals, guitars, drums &amp; percussion, loops, Mellotron on &quot;Next Year&quot;, talk box on &quot;Generator&quot;, production, art direction
*Nate Mendel – bass, production, art direction
*Taylor Hawkins – drums &amp; percussion, production, art direction

===Production===
*Adam Kasper – producer, recording, mixing 
*Andy Wallace – mixing 
*John Nelson – assistant mixing engineer 
*Tod Reiger – assistant mixing engineer 
*Bob Ludwig – mastering
*Henry Marquez – art direction
*Danny Clinch – photography
*Management – G.A.S Entertainment Co.

==Charts==

===Weekly charts===

===Year-end charts===


==Certifications==


==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q482994" start="43" end="55" title="studio album" label="studio album"/>
<link wikidata="Q11399" start="68" end="72" title="Rock music" label="rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q483718" start="78" end="90" title="Foo Fighters" label="Foo Fighters"/>
<link wikidata="Q55632006" start="130" end="137" title="Roswell Records" label="Roswell"/>
<link wikidata="Q202585" start="142" end="153" title="RCA Records" label="RCA Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q312395" start="201" end="215" title="Taylor Hawkins" label="Taylor Hawkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640319" start="312" end="324" title="experimental music" label="experimental"/>
<link wikidata="Q12006" start="355" end="365" title="Dave Grohl" label="Dave Grohl"/>
<link wikidata="Q345294" start="604" end="615" title="Nate Mendel" label="Nate Mendel"/>
<link wikidata="Q234852" start="623" end="631" title="basement" label="basement"/>
<link wikidata="Q88" start="656" end="676" title="Alexandria, Virginia" label="Alexandria, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q691892" start="730" end="762" title="Grammy Award for Best Rock Album" label="Grammy Award for Best Rock Album"/>
<link wikidata="Q777063" start="766" end="770" title="43rd Grammy Awards" label="2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="807" end="813" title="Grammy Award" label="Grammy"/>
<link wikidata="Q907578" start="930" end="940" title="One by One (Foo Fighters album)" label="One by One"/>
<link wikidata="Q752268" start="954" end="991" title="Echoes, Silence, Patience &amp;amp; Grace" label="Echoes, Silence, Patience &amp;amp; Grace"/>
<link wikidata="Q521826" start="1009" end="1022" title="Wasting Light" label="Wasting Light"/>
<link wikidata="Q968646" start="1230" end="1254" title="The Colour and the Shape" label="The Colour and the Shape"/>
<link wikidata="Q2728860" start="1431" end="1442" title="Franz Stahl" label="Franz Stahl"/>
<link wikidata="Q12006" start="1466" end="1476" title="Dave Grohl" label="Dave Grohl"/>
<link wikidata="Q345294" start="1639" end="1650" title="Nate Mendel" label="Nate Mendel"/>
<link wikidata="Q312395" start="1663" end="1677" title="Taylor Hawkins" label="Taylor Hawkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q968646" start="1752" end="1776" title="The Colour and the Shape" label="The Colour and the Shape"/>
<link wikidata="Q88" start="1856" end="1876" title="Alexandria, Virginia" label="Alexandria, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q193023" start="2018" end="2033" title="Capitol Records" label="Capitol Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q3331612" start="2815" end="2826" title="Adam Kasper" label="Adam Kasper"/>
<link wikidata="Q247670" start="2976" end="2985" title="Pro Tools" label="Pro Tools"/>
<link wikidata="Q784762" start="2989" end="2997" title="AutoTune" label="AutoTune"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="3260" end="3268" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="3816" end="3824" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="3879" end="3883" title="Washington D.C." label="D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q202585" start="5593" end="5604" title="RCA Records" label="RCA Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q5598051" start="5838" end="5851" title="Gravity Games" label="Gravity Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156992" start="5914" end="5925" title="Enhanced CD" label="Enhanced CD"/>
<link wikidata="Q2454549" start="5980" end="5992" title="Learn to Fly" label="Learn to Fly"/>
<link wikidata="Q269624" start="6240" end="6254" title="Chris Shiflett" label="Chris Shiflett"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071" start="6414" end="6423" title="punk rock" label="punk rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q10708" start="6696" end="6717" title="Red Hot Chili Peppers" label="Red Hot Chili Peppers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5021324" start="6724" end="6744" title="Californication Tour" label="Californication Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q715561" start="7121" end="7133" title="Michael Klim" label="Michael Klim"/>
<link wikidata="Q730046" start="7553" end="7566" title="Goo Goo Dolls" label="Goo Goo Dolls"/>
<link wikidata="Q1932351" start="7579" end="7583" title="Iris (Goo Goo Dolls song)" label="Iris"/>
<link wikidata="Q43359" start="9522" end="9525" title="MTV" label="MTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165866" start="9539" end="9544" title="Daria" label="Daria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2454549" start="10003" end="10015" title="Learn to Fly" label="Learn to Fly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2824428" start="10286" end="10304" title="Is It College Yet?" label="Is It College Yet?"/>
<link wikidata="Q3561531" start="10421" end="10436" title="Is It Fall Yet?" label="Is It Fall Yet?"/>
<link wikidata="Q2706964" start="10659" end="10667" title="Breakout (Foo Fighters song)" label="Breakout"/>
<link wikidata="Q262337" start="10700" end="10717" title="Farrelly brothers" label="Farrelly brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q844506" start="10736" end="10758" title="Me, Myself &amp;amp; Irene" label="Me, Myself &amp;amp; Irene"/>
<link wikidata="Q40504" start="10928" end="10938" title="Jim Carrey" label="Jim Carrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="11061" end="11074" title="Grammy Awards" label="Grammy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q12006" start="11128" end="11138" title="Dave Grohl" label="Dave Grohl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758908" start="11182" end="11187" title="Loop (music)" label="loops"/>
<link wikidata="Q212483" start="11189" end="11198" title="Mellotron" label="Mellotron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778683" start="11225" end="11233" title="talk box" label="talk box"/>
<link wikidata="Q345294" start="11287" end="11298" title="Nate Mendel" label="Nate Mendel"/>
<link wikidata="Q312395" start="11334" end="11348" title="Taylor Hawkins" label="Taylor Hawkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q3331612" start="11420" end="11431" title="Adam Kasper" label="Adam Kasper"/>
<link wikidata="Q527921" start="11464" end="11476" title="Andy Wallace (producer)" label="Andy Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q981970" start="11571" end="11581" title="Bob Ludwig" label="Bob Ludwig"/>
<link wikidata="Q3702268" start="11626" end="11638" title="Danny Clinch" label="Danny Clinch"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="311789" wikidata="Q2000338" url="?curid=311789" title="Touch (Eurythmics album)">
<text>Touch is the third studio album by British pop duo Eurythmics, released on 14 November 1983 by RCA Records. It became the duo&#x27;s first number-one album on the UK Albums Chart, and also peaked at number seven on the US &quot;Billboard&quot; 200. It has since been certified Platinum in both the United Kingdom and the United States. The album spawned the singles &quot;Who&#x27;s That Girl?&quot;, &quot;Right by Your Side&quot; and &quot;Here Comes the Rain Again&quot;, all of which reached the top 10 of the UK Singles Chart.

The album was listed 500th on &quot;Rolling Stone&quot;″s &quot;The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time&quot; in 2003, and again on a revised list in 2012, at number 492.

==Background==
By the time &quot;Touch&quot; was released, Eurythmics had achieved international success with their single &quot;Sweet Dreams (Are Made of This)&quot; and the album of the same name. Preceded by the single &quot;Who&#x27;s That Girl?&quot;, &quot;Touch&quot; was recorded and mixed in about three weeks at Eurythmics&#x27; own London studio facility, The Church.

An accompanying remix album, &quot;Touch Dance&quot;, was released in May 1984.

===2005 reissue===
On 14 November 2005, Sony BMG repackaged and re-released Eurythmics&#x27; back catalogue as &quot;2005 Deluxe Edition Reissues&quot;. Each of their eight studio albums&#x27; original track listings were supplemented with bonus tracks and remixes.

==Critical reception==
===Accolades===
In 2000, &quot;Touch&quot; was voted number 221 in Colin Larkin&#x27;s &quot;All Time Top 1000 Albums&quot;. In 2012, &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; ranked &quot;Touch&quot; at number 492 on its list of &quot;The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time&quot;, calling the album &quot;divine synth pop&quot;. It had originally appeared at number 500 on the 2003 version of the list. &quot;Slant Magazine&quot; placed the album at number 47 on its list of &quot;The 100 Best Albums of the 1980s&quot;.

==Track listing==

==Personnel==
Credits adapted from the liner notes of &quot;Touch&quot;.

===Eurythmics===
* Annie Lennox – lead vocals, backing vocals, keyboards, flute, arrangements
* David A. Stewart – guitars, keyboards, dulcimer, xylophone, backing vocals, drum sequencer, synthesiser sequencer, arrangements

===Additional musicians===
* Dick Cuthell – trumpet, flugelhorn, cornet
* Dean Garcia – bass guitar
* Michael Kamen – string arrangements, string conducting
* British Philharmonic Orchestra – strings
* Martin Dobson – baritone saxophone on &quot;Right by Your Side&quot;

===Technical===
* David A. Stewart – production
* Jon Bavin – engineering

===Artwork===
* Peter Ashworth – outer sleeve photography
* Brian Aris – inner sleeve photography
* Laurence Stevens – art direction, design

==Charts==

===Weekly charts===

===Year-end charts===

==Certifications==



==References==
===Bibliography===</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q37073" start="43" end="46" title="Pop music" label="pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q207706" start="51" end="61" title="Eurythmics" label="Eurythmics"/>
<link wikidata="Q202585" start="95" end="106" title="RCA Records" label="RCA Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q719415" start="163" end="178" title="UK Albums Chart" label="UK Albums Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q188819" start="222" end="247" title="Billboard 200" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135018" start="372" end="393" title="Who&amp;#x27;s That Girl? (Eurythmics song)" label="Who&amp;#x27;s That Girl?"/>
<link wikidata="Q4994136" start="407" end="425" title="Right by Your Side (Eurythmics song)" label="Right by Your Side"/>
<link wikidata="Q385871" start="442" end="467" title="Here Comes the Rain Again" label="Here Comes the Rain Again"/>
<link wikidata="Q193259" start="514" end="530" title="UK Singles Chart" label="UK Singles Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="569" end="582" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q240550" start="597" end="632" title="Rolling Stone&amp;#x27;s 500 Greatest Albums of All Time" label="The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587664" start="830" end="861" title="Sweet Dreams (Are Made of This)" label="Sweet Dreams (Are Made of This)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069455" start="876" end="898" title="Sweet Dreams (Are Made of This) (album)" label="album of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135018" start="929" end="950" title="Who&amp;#x27;s That Girl? (Eurythmics song)" label="Who&amp;#x27;s That Girl?"/>
<link wikidata="Q47012686" start="1068" end="1078" title="The Church Studios" label="The Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1861266" start="1116" end="1127" title="Touch Dance" label="Touch Dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q3001888" start="1202" end="1210" title="Sony BMG" label="Sony BMG"/>
<link wikidata="Q5145275" start="1519" end="1531" title="Colin Larkin" label="Colin Larkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4729825" start="1545" end="1569" title="All Time Top 1000 Albums" label="All Time Top 1000 Albums"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="1592" end="1605" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q240550" start="1672" end="1707" title="Rolling Stone&amp;#x27;s 500 Greatest Albums of All Time" label="The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086297" start="1843" end="1857" title="Slant Magazine" label="Slant Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q151231" start="2068" end="2080" title="Annie Lennox" label="Annie Lennox"/>
<link wikidata="Q325389" start="2145" end="2161" title="David A. Stewart" label="David A. Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q341663" start="2184" end="2192" title="dulcimer" label="dulcimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q165666" start="2194" end="2203" title="xylophone" label="xylophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1924910" start="2303" end="2315" title="Dick Cuthell" label="Dick Cuthell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5246165" start="2348" end="2359" title="Dean Garcia" label="Dean Garcia"/>
<link wikidata="Q156300" start="2376" end="2389" title="Michael Kamen" label="Michael Kamen"/>
<link wikidata="Q808218" start="2492" end="2510" title="baritone saxophone" label="baritone saxophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7172574" start="2637" end="2651" title="Peter Ashworth" label="Peter Ashworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q40887841" start="2681" end="2691" title="Brian Aris" label="Brian Aris"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500889" start="2721" end="2737" title="Laurence Stevens" label="Laurence Stevens"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="311792" wikidata="Q7160472" url="?curid=311792" title="Peet Coombes">
<text>Peter George &quot;Peet&quot; Coombes (16 July 1953 – 30 March 1997) was an English guitarist, vocalist, and songwriter. He was the lead singer and primary songwriter of the group The Tourists, the first charting band to feature guitarist Dave Stewart and singer Annie Lennox, who later gained greater fame as the duo Eurythmics.

==The Catch and The Tourists==
Coombes was born in Bradford, England, but spent most of his early life in Sunderland, where he met Dave Stewart. Stewart introduced Coombes to Annie Lennox, whom he had met when she was working in a London restaurant. In 1976 the three formed a post-disco band called The Catch, which released one single &quot;Borderline/Black Blood&quot; that failed to chart. The band renamed itself The Tourists, adding bassist Eddie Chin and drummer Jim Toomey. Coombes played guitar, sang, and wrote most of The Tourists&#x27; original songs. After releasing their third album in 1980, the band dissolved.

==Post-Tourists==
Peet Coombes and Eddie Chin started a group called Acid Drops but it did not release recorded material. Coombes moved to London and did not perform during most of the 1980s. In 1992, he moved to Cornwall and created the band Diminished Responsibility with amateur producer and bassist Andy Brown, his wife Cathy, and Dave Farghally on drums. The band did not release any recordings.

In the 1990s, his health deteriorated, and by late 1996, he could no longer perform. He died in 1997 aged 43 due to cirrhosis of the liver related to long-term heavy consumption of alcohol.

Coombes&#x27; sons Joey and Robin Coombes formed the hip-hop group Task Force.

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7160472" start="0" end="37" title="Peet Coombes" label="Peter George &amp;quot;Peet&amp;quot; Coombes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2300672" start="180" end="192" title="The Tourists" label="The Tourists"/>
<link wikidata="Q325389" start="239" end="251" title="Dave Stewart (Eurythmics)" label="Dave Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q151231" start="263" end="275" title="Annie Lennox" label="Annie Lennox"/>
<link wikidata="Q207706" start="318" end="328" title="Eurythmics" label="Eurythmics"/>
<link wikidata="Q22905" start="382" end="390" title="Bradford" label="Bradford"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="392" end="399" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q188304" start="437" end="447" title="Sunderland, Tyne and Wear" label="Sunderland"/>
<link wikidata="Q58339" start="613" end="618" title="disco" label="disco"/>
<link wikidata="Q2300672" start="631" end="640" title="The Catch (British band)" label="The Catch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2300672" start="749" end="761" title="The Tourists" label="The Tourists"/>
<link wikidata="Q5335926" start="778" end="788" title="Eddie Chin" label="Eddie Chin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5335926" start="994" end="1004" title="Eddie Chin" label="Eddie Chin"/>
<link wikidata="Q23148" start="1172" end="1180" title="Cornwall" label="Cornwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q147778" start="1477" end="1486" title="cirrhosis" label="cirrhosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5093674" start="1571" end="1575" title="Chester P" label="Joey"/>
<link wikidata="Q20684081" start="1580" end="1593" title="Farma G" label="Robin Coombes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7687273" start="1619" end="1629" title="Task Force (band)" label="Task Force"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="311793" wikidata="Q2532955" url="?curid=311793" title="Volusius">
<text>Volusius or Volusia may refer to:

==People==
* Volusius, an annalist mentioned in the poetry of Catullus

==Places==
* Volusia, Florida, an unincorporated community
* Volusia County, Florida, a county in east-central Florida

==See also==
*Volusia gens, an ancient Roman gente</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2532955" start="0" end="8" title="Volusius" label="Volusius"/>
<link wikidata="Q2532955" start="12" end="19" title="Volusius" label="Volusia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="48" end="56" title="Volusius (Catullus)" label="Volusius"/>
<link wikidata="Q3779919" start="87" end="105" title="poetry of Catullus" label="poetry of Catullus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3563043" start="120" end="136" title="Volusia, Florida" label="Volusia, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q494541" start="168" end="191" title="Volusia County, Florida" label="Volusia County, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q61728252" start="241" end="253" title="Volusia gens" label="Volusia gens"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="311794" wikidata="Q3078283" url="?curid=311794" title="Newark Light Rail">
<text>The Newark Light Rail (NLR) is a light rail system serving Newark, New Jersey, and surrounding areas, owned by New Jersey Transit and operated by its bus operations division. The service consists of two segments, the original Newark City Subway (NCS), and the extension to Broad Street station. The City Subway opened on May 26, 1935, while the combined Newark Light Rail service was officially inaugurated on July 17, 2006.

==Newark City Subway==

The Newark City Subway is the longer and older of the two segments. It is a &quot;subway–surface&quot; line which runs underground from Penn Station to Warren Street, and above-ground north of Warren Street. Before becoming a part of the Newark Light Rail service, it was also known as the &quot;#7-City Subway line,&quot; an NJT Bus Operations route number carried over from its days when it was part of Public Service&#x27;s Transport of New Jersey subsidiary. The number still applies internally. During subway system closures, replacement buses would also bear the route number &quot;7 City Subway&quot;.

The segment is long and runs between Grove Street in Bloomfield and Newark Penn Station, a major transportation hub with connections to the PATH rapid transit system to Manhattan, multiple bus routes, and both Amtrak and New Jersey Transit Rail Operations trains.

=== History ===
The line opened in 1935 along the old Morris Canal right-of-way, from Broad Street (now known as Military Park) to Heller Parkway (now replaced by the nearby Branch Brook Park station). Works Progress Administration artists decorated the underground stations with Art Deco scenes from life on the defunct Morris Canal. The southernmost part, south of Warren Street, was capped with a new road, known as Raymond Boulevard. Only one grade crossing was present on the original subway; the line crosses Orange Street at grade so it can pass over the below-grade Delaware, Lackawanna and Western Railroad (now NJT Morristown Line) immediately to the north. The original Newark City Subway line had its own right-of-way and did not share city streets with local traffic, except at the Orange Street grade crossing.

Operation of the complete subway to the newly built Penn Station was delayed until 1937. The terminal below Penn Station has five tracks, two incoming and three outgoing, connected by two loop tracks. This part of the subway included a grade-separated junction with a connection to the lower level of the Newark Public Service Terminal that was used for only a few months (June to September).

An extension to a wooden station at North 6th Street or Franklin Avenue was opened in 1940, located north of the present Branch Brook Park station. In 1953 the line was cut back about one block to accommodate construction of a turning loop, and a new station, still called Franklin Avenue, was opened adjacent to Anthony Street. The station was enlarged in 2002 and renamed Branch Brook Park.

The subway was operated by Transport of New Jersey (formerly Public Service Coordinated Transport) as its No. 7 line. Other streetcar routes used parts of the subway, reaching street trackage at the locations shown below, ending as each route was closed and replaced by bus service:
* Public Service Terminal connection (and Cedar Street Subway), 1937 only: #13 Broad, #17 Paterson, #27 Mount Prospect, #43 Jersey City
* Warren Street ramp, 1935–1951: #21 Orange—West Orange via Market Street
* Central Avenue ramp, 1935–1947: #23 Central
* Orange Street crossing, 1935–1952: #21 Orange—West Orange via Orange Street
* Bloomfield Avenue ramp, 1935–1952: #29 Bloomfield

Until June 5, 1952, the Roseville Car House, on the south side of Main Street (on the No. 21 line) near the eastern city line of East Orange, was used for the No. 7 line. From that time until 2002, Newark Penn Station was used for storage and maintenance. A new shops and yard complex opened at the end of the extension to Grove Street.

Starting in January 1954, 30 PCC streetcars bought from Twin City Rapid Transit provided all service on the route. They were single-ended, requiring construction of a new turning loop at the Franklin Avenue terminal. The cars had been built 1946–1949 by the St. Louis Car Company and were sold by TCRT when that system went through a conversion to buses. Four cars were scrapped over the years, and two were sold to Shaker Heights Rapid Transit in 1978.

New Jersey Transit took over operations in 1980.

In 2001, new light rail cars built by Kinki Sharyo in Japan in 1999 replaced the PCCs. The last day of PCC service was August 24, 2001.
Some of the PCCs are stored in the Newark City Subway shop. Eleven were sold in 2004 to the San Francisco Municipal Railway for use on its F Market heritage streetcar line. One PCC, #15, was delivered to the Connecticut Trolley Museum in 2013 for restoration and display. One of the Shaker Heights cars has been restored by the Minnesota Transportation Museum, which operates it on a short stretch of track in western Minneapolis.

In 2005, eight PCCs were given to the City of Bayonne to be rehabilitated and operated along a proposed loop to serve the Peninsula at Bayonne Harbor, formerly Military Ocean Terminal at Bayonne (MOTBY). The proposed line would be connected to the 34th Street station of the Hudson-Bergen Light Rail.

On September 4, 2004, Broad Street Station was renamed Military Park Station, to avoid confusion with the terminal of the new route to the Newark Broad Street Station at University Avenue, operated by New Jersey Transit.

===Bloomfield extension===

On June 22, 2002, the Newark City Subway was extended to the suburbs of Belleville and Bloomfield along what had been the former Erie Railroad Orange Branch, now under Norfolk Southern ownership. New stations were opened at Silver Lake and Grove Street, and the Heller Parkway and Franklin Avenue stations were combined into a new Branch Brook Park station. The loop at Franklin Avenue was removed, since the new vehicles are bidirectional, unlike the old PCCs. A new loop, however, is in place at the Grove Street facility. All the street crossings on the extension are at-grade.

====Shared-track operation====
The original agreement gave sole operating privileges to Norfolk Southern between 11 pm and 5 am daily, but a new agreement allows passenger service to operate at all hours, with late-night service commencing on January 8, 2005. In exchange, Norfolk Southern can now operate during all off-peak hours, when passenger trains are infrequent.

==Broad Street Extension==

The Broad Street Extension is the second segment of the Newark Light Rail. It was planned as the first phase of the Newark-Elizabeth Rail Link. The line is long and connects Newark Penn Station to Broad Street Station. It branches off the older City Subway using the existing junction that had led to the Public Service terminal.

A new tunnel leads from the junction to a portal about two blocks north. The remaining section runs above ground. For a few blocks, the two tracks run on different streets a block or two apart. Both tracks serve the New Jersey Performing Arts Center at Center Street. The outbound track makes stops at Atlantic Street and at the Riverfront Square development (formerly a baseball stadium) at the Riverfront Stadium station. The inbound track makes a stop at Washington Park. The extension opened on July 17, 2006.

Construction began in 2002 with an estimated cost of $207.7 million, or about $40,000 per foot of track; it was completed within budget. Projections were for 4,000 average weekday boardings after one year, growing to about 7,000 in 2010. Actual weekday boardings in 2010 for both Newark Light Rail lines combined were reported at 9,000.

The art work at the new stations has a common theme, &quot;Riding with Sarah and Wayne.&quot; It is a tribute to Newark-born jazz greats Sarah Vaughan and Wayne Shorter, and includes the lyrics to Vaughan&#x27;s signature song, &quot;Send in the Clowns,&quot; and colored bricks representing the music notes.

The Broad Street Extension was intended to ease connections between Newark&#x27;s two rail stations. The two separate stations are a legacy of their roots in two separate railroads. Broad Street Station was once owned by the Lackawanna Railroad and its successor, the Erie Lackawanna Railway, while Penn Station was built and owned by the Pennsylvania Railroad. Previously, passengers wanting to transfer between Amtrak and the former PRR/Conrail commuter lines and the former (Erie) Lackawanna commuter lines had to make their own way (usually by taxi or bus) between the two stations.

== Fares ==
The Newark Light Rail is equivalent to a one-zone bus ride: a one-way ticket costs $1.80 (as of July 1, 2024), and is valid on the entire system for one hour after the ticket is validated. A special $0.85 &quot;Underground&quot; fare is available for trips that use only the subway between Warren Street and Penn Station, not the surface portion. Through-ticketing is available for connecting bus routes. Monthly and weekly NJ Transit bus and rail passes valid for one or more local bus zones, as well as transfers purchased on buses, are also accepted.

The Newark Light Rail, like most light rail systems in the United States, operates on a proof-of-payment system, in which riders must present their tickets upon request during random fare inspections by police officers, transit workers, or fare agents. Passengers must purchase tickets at ticket vending machines (TVMs) located on station platforms or near station entrances. The tickets can also be purchased via the New Jersey Transit mobile app. One-way, round-trip, and ten-trip tickets must then be validated, either by the app or with paper tickets, through automated validators located near the TVMs, which stamp the date and time on the ticket for 60 minutes of use. NJ Transit&#x27;s fare inspectors randomly check tickets on trains and at stations; fare evasion carries a fine of up to $100. On the PCC streetcars, cash fares (exact fare) were paid on board via farebox, except for a brief period starting in October 1999 prior to the introduction of LRVs, when proof-of-payment fare collection was instituted.

== Stations ==

=== Newark City Subway ===
=== Broad Street Extension ===
All stations are in Newark.

On weekdays, service operates separately between the two sections. On weekends, service operates jointly.

== Rolling stock ==

The Newark Light Rail system uses a new-model vehicle built by Kinki Sharyo of Japan. This model is the same one used by the Hudson-Bergen Light Rail system, although the ones used on the Newark Light Rail were built with slight modifications to the trucks and wheels due to the different rails used. Like the HBLR vehicles, the NLR vehicle is a double-articulated vehicle with three sections. Each of the two end sections has an operator&#x27;s cab at the far end, thus eliminating the need for the vehicle to turn itself around physically in order to reverse direction. Each end section also has seating for 16 passengers on an upper level, and seating for 13 passengers on the lower level, including one special fold-down seat next to an empty space that a passenger using a wheelchair may use. With these two sections, and a middle section that seats ten passengers (five on each side), the vehicle can comfortably accommodate 68 seated passengers and two wheelchairs. An additional 122 passengers could stand in the vehicle, if necessary. Vehicles can be coupled into two-unit sets. A contract to expand 10 of the 20 LRVs assigned to the Newark Light Rail system for the purpose of increasing passenger capacity was approved on July 9, 2014.

The Seashore Trolley Museum in Kennebunkport, ME acquired PCC #5 in 2011. The car represents the first piece of NJT rolling stock in the museum&#x27;s collection. The car is currently undergoing restoration and rehabilitation work so that it may operate on the museum&#x27;s -mile demonstration railway. Car #5 joins the museum&#x27;s already-extensive collection of PCC cars from numerous cities, including Boston, Pittsburgh, Dallas, San Francisco, Philadelphia, Washington, D.C., and Kansas CIty.

==Timeline==
* December 22, 1910: The Public Service Corporation first announces plans to build the subway, initially including a line under Broad Street from Bridge Street to Clinton Avenue
* October 3, 1934: The subway opens from Broad Street to Heller Parkway. The No. 21 line is routed onto the subway via the Warren Street Ramp and level junction at the Orange Street grade crossing. The No. 23 line is routed via the Norfolk Street Ramp. The No. 29 line starts using the Bloomfield Avenue Ramp.
* June 20, 1937: The extension to Newark Penn Station opens. This is the same day that the Hudson and Manhattan Railroad (present-day PATH) withdraws service from its Park Place terminal and first operates into its new alignment at Newark Penn Station. The No. 13, #27 and No. 43 lines are rerouted to Penn Station via the Cedar Street Subway; the No. 27 and No. 43 had used the lower level of the Newark Public Service Terminal. 
* June 21, 1937: The No. 17 line is rerouted via the Cedar Street Subway.
* July 18, 1937: The No. 13 and No. 17 lines stop using the Cedar Street Subway.
* December 29, 1937: The No. 27 line stops using the Cedar Street Subway.
* May 1, 1938: The No. 43 line stops using the Cedar Street Subway, ending all service on that connection.
* November 22, 1940: The extension to North 6th Street (later Franklin Avenue) opens.
* December 14, 1947: The No. 23 line stops using the Norfolk Street Ramp.
* March 1, 1951: The No. 21 line stops using the Warren Street Ramp.
* March 29, 1952: The No. 21 line stops using the level junction at the Orange Street grade crossing.
* March 30, 1952: The No. 29 line stops using the Bloomfield Avenue ramps.
* January 8, 1954: The first PCC car uses the subway.
* October 1980: NJ Transit takes over operations.
* August 21, 1999: The subway is closed for two weeks for an overhaul.
* September 7, 1999: The subway reopens.
* August 24, 2001: The PCC cars are retired from service.
* August 27, 2001: The new light rail vehicles begin operation.
* June 21, 2002: Heller Parkway closes.
* June 22, 2002: Silver Lake and Grove Street open.
* September 4, 2004: Broad Street is renamed Military Park.
* January 8, 2005: Additional late-night service is provided to Grove Street.
* July 17, 2006: The Newark City Subway extension opens, with service between Newark Penn Station and Newark Broad Street. Service is rebranded as the Newark Light Rail.

===Accidents===
The Newark City Subway has had a few accidents over the years:
* September 22, 1981 – Nine passengers injured when an incoming trolley rammed into the rear of a stationary trolley at Newark Penn Station.
* April 15, 2003 – A light rail vehicle was partially derailed at the grade crossing near Orange Street Station when a box truck rammed the vehicle from the side. The signal was in the light rail vehicle&#x27;s favor.
* August 23, 2008 – A dump truck making an illegal right turn crashed into a light rail vehicle at the Washington Park Station of the Broad Street segment causing it to partially derail. One passenger was injured.
* August 28, 2014 – A light rail vehicle crashed into a SUV between Atlantic Avenue and Broad Street. No passengers were injured.
* April 6, 2016 – A light rail vehicle was hit by a car on South Franklin Avenue. No passengers were injured.

==In popular culture==
* In November 2011 scenes for the movie &quot;The Dark Knight Rises&quot; were filmed at Military Park station.

==See also==
* Hudson–Bergen Light Rail
* River Line
* Light rail in the United States
* List of tram and light rail transit systems

==References==
===Citations===
===Bibliography===
* Edward Hamm, Jr., &quot;The Public Service Trolley Lines in New Jersey&quot;.
* DOT Docket FRA-2000-7335-7 and −8.

==External links==

* NJ Transit – Light Rail Schedules
* Newark Light Rail &amp; Proposals on Google Maps
* NYCSubway.org – Newark City Subway
* Abandoned Stations – Newark City Subway platforms
* Newark, New Jersey: The City Subway (Jon Bell website)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3078283" start="4" end="21" title="Newark Light Rail" label="Newark Light Rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q3078283" start="23" end="26" title="Newark Light Rail" label="NLR"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268865" start="33" end="43" title="light rail" label="light rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q25395" start="59" end="77" title="Newark, New Jersey" label="Newark, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q498553" start="111" end="129" title="New Jersey Transit" label="New Jersey Transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7009514" start="146" end="173" title="New Jersey Transit Bus Operations" label="its bus operations division"/>
<link wikidata="Q3078283" start="226" end="244" title="Newark Light Rail" label="Newark City Subway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3078283" start="246" end="249" title="Newark Light Rail" label="NCS"/>
<link wikidata="Q7016633" start="273" end="293" title="Broad Street Station (Newark)" label="Broad Street station"/>
<link wikidata="Q115755619" start="526" end="557" title="semi-metro" label="&amp;quot;subway–surface&amp;quot; line"/>
<link wikidata="Q43794341" start="855" end="869" title="Public Service Corporation" label="Public Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q7835134" start="877" end="900" title="Transport of New Jersey" label="Transport of New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q648622" start="1113" end="1123" title="Bloomfield, New Jersey" label="Bloomfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q1745642" start="1128" end="1147" title="Pennsylvania Station (Newark)" label="Newark Penn Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055811" start="1200" end="1204" title="PATH (rail system)" label="PATH"/>
<link wikidata="Q11299" start="1229" end="1238" title="Manhattan" label="Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q23239" start="1270" end="1276" title="Amtrak" label="Amtrak"/>
<link wikidata="Q7009519" start="1281" end="1315" title="New Jersey Transit Rail Operations" label="New Jersey Transit Rail Operations"/>
<link wikidata="Q6913637" start="1379" end="1391" title="Morris Canal" label="Morris Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6852112" start="1438" end="1451" title="Military Park (NLR station)" label="Military Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q4956348" start="1499" end="1524" title="Branch Brook Park station" label="Branch Brook Park station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200079" start="1527" end="1556" title="Works Progress Administration" label="Works Progress Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q173782" start="1605" end="1613" title="Art Deco" label="Art Deco"/>
<link wikidata="Q7298610" start="1744" end="1761" title="Raymond Boulevard" label="Raymond Boulevard"/>
<link wikidata="Q171448" start="1772" end="1786" title="grade crossing" label="grade crossing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183933" start="1899" end="1940" title="Delaware, Lackawanna and Western Railroad" label="Delaware, Lackawanna and Western Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1948559" start="1950" end="1965" title="Morristown Line" label="Morristown Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q17128254" start="2042" end="2054" title="Right-of-way (transportation)" label="right-of-way"/>
<link wikidata="Q1745642" start="2203" end="2215" title="Newark Penn Station" label="Penn Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q7016735" start="2456" end="2486" title="Newark Public Service Terminal" label="Newark Public Service Terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7016735" start="3224" end="3247" title="Newark Public Service Terminal" label="Public Service Terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5056901" start="3264" end="3283" title="Cedar Street Subway" label="Cedar Street Subway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7368716" start="3633" end="3642" title="Roseville, Newark, New Jersey" label="Roseville"/>
<link wikidata="Q988515" start="3738" end="3749" title="East Orange, New Jersey" label="East Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q928708" start="3976" end="3989" title="PCC streetcar" label="PCC streetcar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2246646" start="4003" end="4026" title="Twin City Rapid Transit" label="Twin City Rapid Transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7589579" start="4205" end="4226" title="St. Louis Car Company" label="St. Louis Car Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q2538049" start="4363" end="4391" title="Shaker Heights Rapid Transit" label="Shaker Heights Rapid Transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q498553" start="4402" end="4420" title="New Jersey Transit" label="New Jersey Transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268865" start="4465" end="4475" title="light rail" label="light rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1592306" start="4490" end="4502" title="Kinki Sharyo" label="Kinki Sharyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140138" start="4680" end="4711" title="San Francisco Municipal Railway" label="San Francisco Municipal Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137818" start="4727" end="4759" title="F Market &amp;amp; Wharves" label="F Market heritage streetcar line"/>
<link wikidata="Q5161642" start="4796" end="4822" title="Connecticut Trolley Museum" label="Connecticut Trolley Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q6868587" start="4916" end="4947" title="Minnesota Transportation Museum" label="Minnesota Transportation Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q36091" start="5006" end="5017" title="Minneapolis" label="Minneapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q812589" start="5066" end="5073" title="Bayonne, New Jersey" label="Bayonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q6852091" start="5142" end="5169" title="Peninsula at Bayonne Harbor" label="Peninsula at Bayonne Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6852091" start="5180" end="5214" title="Military Ocean Terminal at Bayonne" label="Military Ocean Terminal at Bayonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q4635446" start="5268" end="5279" title="34th Street (HBLR station)" label="34th Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357874" start="5295" end="5319" title="Hudson-Bergen Light Rail" label="Hudson-Bergen Light Rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q7016633" start="5461" end="5488" title="Broad Street Station (Newark)" label="Newark Broad Street Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q525775" start="5644" end="5654" title="Belleville, New Jersey" label="Belleville"/>
<link wikidata="Q648622" start="5659" end="5669" title="Bloomfield, New Jersey" label="Bloomfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353770" start="5701" end="5714" title="Erie Railroad" label="Erie Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321054" start="5740" end="5756" title="Norfolk Southern" label="Norfolk Southern"/>
<link wikidata="Q7516136" start="5796" end="5807" title="Silver Lake station" label="Silver Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q5611454" start="5812" end="5824" title="Grove Street station (Newark Light Rail)" label="Grove Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q171448" start="6143" end="6151" title="grade crossing" label="at-grade"/>
<link wikidata="Q7016590" start="6670" end="6696" title="Newark-Elizabeth Rail Link" label="Newark-Elizabeth Rail Link"/>
<link wikidata="Q7016633" start="6751" end="6771" title="Newark Broad Street Station" label="Broad Street Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q7016735" start="6859" end="6882" title="Newark Public Service Terminal" label="Public Service terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7009294" start="7101" end="7134" title="New Jersey Performing Arts Center" label="New Jersey Performing Arts Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q4816554" start="7187" end="7202" title="Atlantic Street station" label="Atlantic Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q7338199" start="7281" end="7307" title="Riverfront Stadium station" label="Riverfront Stadium station"/>
<link wikidata="Q7972102" start="7343" end="7358" title="Washington Park station (Newark Light Rail)" label="Washington Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q229513" start="7875" end="7888" title="Sarah Vaughan" label="Sarah Vaughan"/>
<link wikidata="Q317161" start="7893" end="7906" title="Wayne Shorter" label="Wayne Shorter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2704917" start="7972" end="7990" title="Send in the Clowns" label="Send in the Clowns"/>
<link wikidata="Q444183" start="8316" end="8339" title="Erie Lackawanna Railway" label="Erie Lackawanna Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197895" start="8387" end="8408" title="Pennsylvania Railroad" label="Pennsylvania Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q633760" start="8487" end="8494" title="Conrail" label="Conrail"/>
<link wikidata="Q14656678" start="9291" end="9307" title="proof-of-payment" label="proof-of-payment"/>
<link wikidata="Q657345" start="9492" end="9515" title="ticket machine" label="ticket vending machines"/>
<link wikidata="Q928708" start="10012" end="10025" title="PCC streetcar" label="PCC streetcar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268865" start="10164" end="10168" title="light rail vehicles" label="LRVs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1592306" start="10519" end="10531" title="Kinki Sharyo" label="Kinki Sharyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357874" start="10581" end="10605" title="Hudson-Bergen Light Rail" label="Hudson-Bergen Light Rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q5464305" start="11171" end="11185" title="Folding seat" label="fold-down seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2262335" start="11708" end="11731" title="Seashore Trolley Museum" label="Seashore Trolley Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q152061" start="12112" end="12118" title="Green Line (MBTA)" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q14111009" start="12120" end="12130" title="Pittsburgh Railways" label="Pittsburgh"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12132" end="12138" title="Dallas Area Rapid Transit#Precursor agencies" label="Dallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2037863" start="12155" end="12167" title="SEPTA" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q43794341" start="12243" end="12269" title="Public Service Corporation" label="Public Service Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055811" start="12840" end="12844" title="Port Authority Trans-Hudson" label="PATH"/>
<link wikidata="Q5056901" start="13029" end="13048" title="Cedar Street Subway" label="Cedar Street Subway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7016735" start="13104" end="13134" title="Newark Public Service Terminal" label="Newark Public Service Terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1745642" start="14525" end="14544" title="Newark Penn Station" label="Newark Penn Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q7016633" start="14549" end="14568" title="Newark Broad Street" label="Newark Broad Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q7099727" start="14928" end="14949" title="Orange Street (NLR station)" label="Orange Street Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q7972102" start="15159" end="15182" title="Washington Park (NLR station)" label="Washington Park Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q189330" start="15580" end="15601" title="The Dark Knight Rises" label="The Dark Knight Rises"/>
<link wikidata="Q6852112" start="15623" end="15636" title="Military Park (NLR station)" label="Military Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357874" start="15662" end="15686" title="Hudson–Bergen Light Rail" label="Hudson–Bergen Light Rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q2155505" start="15689" end="15699" title="River Line (New Jersey Transit)" label="River Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q6546224" start="15702" end="15733" title="Light rail in the United States" label="Light rail in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q117581" start="15736" end="15779" title="List of tram and light rail transit systems" label="List of tram and light rail transit systems"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="311795" wikidata="Q16461" url="?curid=311795" title="Nanaimo">
<text>Nanaimo ( ) is a city of about 100,000 on the east coast of Vancouver Island, in British Columbia, Canada. &quot;The Harbour City&quot; was previously known as the &quot;Hub City&quot;, which was attributed to its original layout design with streets radiating from the shoreline like the spokes of a wagon wheel, and to its relatively central location on Vancouver Island. Nanaimo is the headquarters of the Regional District of Nanaimo.

Nanaimo is served by the Island Highway along the east coast, the BC Ferries system, and its regional airport. It is also on the dormant Island Rail Corridor.

== History ==

The Indigenous peoples of the area that is now known as Nanaimo are the Snuneymuxw. An anglicized spelling and pronunciation of that word gave the city its current name.

The first Europeans known to reach Nanaimo Harbour were members of the 1791 Spanish voyage of Juan Carrasco, under the command of Francisco de Eliza. They gave it the name &quot;Bocas de Winthuysen&quot; after naval officer Francisco Javier Winthuysen y Pineda. When the British Hudson&#x27;s Bay Company (HBC) established a settlement here in 1852, they named it Colvile Town after HBC governor Andrew Colvile. In 1858 it was renamed as Nanaimo, after the local indigenous people. The city has been called &quot;The Harbour City&quot; since the lead-up to Expo 86.

The HBC attempted to start a coal mine at Port Rupert but the project had been unsuccessful. In 1850 Snuneymuxw Chief Che-wich-i-kan, commonly known as &quot;Coal Tyee&quot;, brought samples of coal to Victoria. A company clerk was dispatched and eventually the governor James Douglas visited the future site of Nanaimo.

While open to selling coal, the Snuneymuxw wished to retain control of it and retain the exclusive right to mine it. Chief Wun-wun-shum offered to sell coal for five barrels in exchange for one blanket. The HBC representative Joseph William McKay deemed this &quot;impertinent&quot;. The Snuneymuxw retained their rights to the resource for a while, but gradually lost them due to other tribes and miners from the failed Port Rupert project.

By 1852, the first shipment of Nanaimo coal was loaded on the &quot;Cadboro&quot;.

Construction of the Nanaimo Bastion began in 1853 and was finished in 1855.

On 27 November 1854, 24 coal miners and their families from England arrived at the settlement aboard the &quot;Beaver&quot; and &quot;Recovery&quot;. They had travelled seven months on the ship &quot;Princess Royal&quot; arriving at Esquimalt two days earlier. They transferred to the two smaller vessels for the trip to Colvile Town. They were greeted by Joseph William McKay and 21 Scottish miners.

During World War I, the provincial government established an Internment camp for Ukrainian detainees, many of them local, at a Provincial jail in Nanaimo. It operated from September 1914 to September 1915.

In the 1940s, lumber supplanted coal as the main business. Minetown Days have been celebrated in the neighbouring community of Lantzville to highlight some of the locale&#x27;s history.

In the late nineteenth century, numerous immigrants came from China and settled here. What was known as the first Chinatown in Nanaimo was founded during the gold rush years of the 1860s; it was the third largest in British Columbia. In 1884, because of mounting racial tensions related to the Dunsmuir coal company&#x27;s hiring of Chinese strikebreakers, the company helped move Chinatown to a location outside city limits.

In 1908, when two Chinese entrepreneurs bought the site and tried to raise rents, the community and 4,000 shareholders from across Canada combined forces and bought a site for the third Chinatown, at a new location focused on Pine Street. That third Chinatown burned down on 30 September 1960 but it was by then mostly derelict and abandoned. A fourth Chinatown, also called Lower Chinatown or &quot;new town&quot;, boomed for a while in the 1920s on Machleary Street.

==Location and geography==
Located on the east coast of Vancouver Island, Nanaimo is about north-west of Victoria, and west of Vancouver, separated by the Strait of Georgia, and linked to Vancouver via the Horseshoe Bay BC Ferries terminal in West Vancouver and the Duke Point terminal to the Tsawwassen ferry terminal in Tsawwassen. As the site of the main ferry terminal, Nanaimo is the gateway to many other destinations both on the northern part of the island—Tofino, Comox Valley, Parksville, Campbell River, Port Alberni, Rathtrevor Beach Provincial Park—and off its coast—Saysutshun, Protection Island, Gabriola Island, Valdes Island, and many other of the Gulf Islands. A private passenger ferry service connecting to Vancouver, named Hullo, began operating in August 2023.

Buttertubs Marsh is a bird sanctuary located in the middle of the city. The marsh covers approximately . Within this is the &quot;Buttertubs Marsh Conservation Area&quot;, owned by the Nature Trust of British Columbia.

===Climate===
Like much of coastal British Columbia, Nanaimo experiences a temperate climate with mild, rainy winters and warm, dry summers. Due to its relatively dry summers, the Köppen climate classification places it at the northernmost limits of the &quot;Csb&quot; or warm-summer Mediterranean zone. Other climate classification systems, such as Trewartha, place it firmly in the Oceanic zone (&quot;Do&quot;).

Nanaimo is usually shielded from the Aleutian Low&#x27;s influence by the mountains of central Vancouver Island, so that summers are unusually dry for its latitude and location—though summer drying as a trend is found in the immediate lee of the coastal ranges as far north as Skagway, Alaska.

Heavy snowfall does occasionally occur during winter, with a record daily total of on 12 February 1975, but the mean maximum cover is only .

The highest temperature ever recorded in Nanaimo was on 16 July 1941. The coldest temperature ever recorded was on 30 December 1968.

== Transportation ==
Nanaimo is served by two airports: Nanaimo Airport (YCD) with services to Vancouver (YVR), Toronto (YYZ), and Calgary (YYC) and Nanaimo Harbour Water Aerodrome (ZNA) with services to Vancouver Harbour (CXH), Vancouver Airport (YVR South Terminal), and Sechelt (YHS);.

Nanaimo also has three BC Ferry terminals located at Departure Bay, Duke Point, and downtown. The downtown terminal services Gabriola Island while Departure Bay and Duke Point service Horseshoe Bay and Tsawwassen respectively.

A private passenger ferry operates between Nanaimo Harbour and Protection Island. A seasonal passenger ferry operates between Swy-a-Lana Lagoon and Saysutshun (Newcastle Island Marine) Park.

Since 2023 Hullo has operated a high speed passenger-only ferry service between downtown Nanaimo and downtown Vancouver. Travel time between the cities is 75 minutes.

Highways 1, 19, and 19A traverse the city. Highway 19 (Nanaimo Parkway) acts as an expressway bypass to the west of Nanaimo while Highway 1, then Highway 19A traverses the length of Nanaimo as an arterial road within the city proper.

Bus service in the city is provided by Nanaimo Regional Transit and offers city-wide service as well as region service connecting Parksville and Qualicum Beach to the north, and Ladysmith and Duncan to the south.

The Island Rail Corridor passes through Nanaimo and has a base of operations and yard in the downtown waterfront area.

The Nanaimo Port Authority operates the inner Harbour Basin marina providing mooring for smaller vessels and the W. E. Mills Landing and Marina providing mooring for larger vessels. The Port Authority also operates two terminal facilities one at Assembly Wharf (near the downtown core) and the second at Duke Point for cargo operations. In 2011, the Authority completed the addition of a $22 million cruise ship terminal at Assembly Wharf capable of handling large cruise ships including providing Canada Border Services Agency clearance.

==Demographics==
In the 2021 Census of Population conducted by Statistics Canada, Nanaimo had a population of 99,863 living in 43,164 of its 45,138 total private dwellings, a change of from its 2016 population of 90,504. With a land area of , it had a population density of in 2021.

At the census metropolitan area (CMA) level in the 2021 census, the Nanaimo CMA had a population of living in of its total private dwellings, a change of from its 2016 population of . With a land area of , it had a population density of in 2021.

In 2016, the average age of a Nanaimoite is 45.5 years old, higher than the national median at 41.2.

In Nanaimo, there are 40,885 private dwellings, 39,165 which are occupied by usual residents (95.8% occupancy rate). The median value of these dwellings are $359,760, which is higher than the national median at $341,556. The average (after-tax) household income in Nanaimo is $48,469, lower than the national median at $54,089. The median individual income is $34,702, which is also lower than the national median ($38,977). The unemployment rate was 7.7%.

=== Ethnicity ===

*Note: Totals greater than 100% due to multiple origin responses.
=== Language ===
Nanaimo&#x27;s population is predominantly Anglophone. As of the 2016 census 86.7% of residents claimed English as their mother tongue. Other common first languages were Chinese Languages (2.0%), French (1.3%), German (1.2%) and Punjabi (1.0%).

=== Religion ===
According to the 2021 census, religious groups in Nanaimo included:
*Irreligion (60,365 persons or 62.2%)
*Christianity (31,135 persons or 32.1%)
*Sikhism (1,330 persons or 1.4%)
*Islam (1,000 persons or 1.0%)
*Hinduism (785 persons or 0.8%)
*Buddhism (650 persons or 0.7%)
*Judaism (230 persons or 0.2%)
*Indigenous Spirituality (170 persons or 0.2%)

==Economy==
The original economic driver was coal mining; however, the forestry industry supplanted it in the early 1960s with the building of the MacMillan Bloedel pulp mill at Harmac in 1958, named after Harvey MacMillan. Today the pulp mill is owned by the employees and local investors and injects well over half a million dollars a day into the local economy and makes the entire area smell like sulfur multiple times a year. The largest employer is the provincial government. The service, retail and tourism industries are also big contributors to the local economy.

Technological development on Nanaimo has been growing with companies such as &quot;Inuktun&quot; and the establishment of government-funded Innovation Island as a site to help Nanaimo-based technological start ups by giving them access to tools, education and venture capital.

The average sale price of houses in Nanaimo for 2011 was approximately $350,000. A recent surge of higher-density real estate development, centred in the Old City / Downtown area, as well as construction of a city-funded waterfront conference centre, has proven controversial. Proponents of these developments argue that they will bolster the city&#x27;s economy, while critics worry that they will block waterfront views and increase traffic congestion. Concerns have also been raised about the waterfront conference centre&#x27;s construction running over its proposed budget. Nanaimo has also been experiencing job growth in the technology sector.

==Media outlets==

Nanaimo is served by one newspaper: the &quot;Nanaimo News Bulletin&quot; (33,000 copies twice a week—audited), which is owned by Black Press. &quot;The Harbour City Star&quot;, also owned by publisher Black Press, was closed in 2016. On 29 January 2016, the 141-year-old &quot;Nanaimo Daily News&quot;, shut down. Nanaimo also hosts a bureau for CIVI-DT (CTV 2 Victoria, cable channel 12) and a satellite office for CHEK-DT (Independent, cable channel 6).

Nanaimo is also served by the Jim Pattison Group&#x27;s CHWF-FM (The Wolf) and CKWV-FM (The Wave), as well as CHLY-FM, an independent community campus radio station and Vista Radio&#x27;s CKAY-FM (ICON Radio). CBC Radio One is heard over CBU from Vancouver, with CBU-FM (CBC Music) and CBCV-FM available as HD Radio signals.

==Politics==

===Federal===
In the House of Commons of Canada, Nanaimo is represented by Lisa Marie Barron of the NDP, representing the riding of Nanaimo—Ladysmith since the 2021 election. The city was split into two separate ridings, Nanaimo—Cowichan (Jean Crowder, New Democratic Party), which includes South Nanaimo and Cassidy, and Nanaimo—Alberni (James Lunney, Independent elected as a Conservative), which includes North Nanaimo and Lantzville, until the 2012 federal electoral redistribution.

===Provincial===
In the Legislative Assembly of British Columbia, Nanaimo is represented by the ridings of Nanaimo-Lantzville (George Anderson, BC NDP) and Nanaimo-Gabriola Island (Sheila Malcolmson, BC NDP).
Leonard Krog resigned in 2018 to accept the position of Mayor of Nanaimo. In response, Sheila Malcolmson resigned from federal politics and successfully ran for the vacated position. She was re-elected in the 2024 British Columbia general election.

===Civic===

The mayor of Nanaimo is currently Leonard Krog, who replaced Bill Mackay in 2018.

The most well-known mayor Nanaimo ever had was Frank J. Ney, who instigated Nanaimo&#x27;s well-known bathtub races, which he regularly attended dressed as a pirate. There is a statue to commemorate Ney—dressed in his pirate costume—at Swy-a-Lana Lagoon, which is on the Nanaimo waterfront. Ney was also an MLA for the Social Credit party while he was mayor. An elementary school has been named in his honour.

Mark Bate became Nanaimo&#x27;s first mayor in 1875. He served an additional 15 one-year terms as mayor (1875–1879, 1881–1886, 1888–1889, and 1898–1900).

===Open government===
The city&#x27;s planning department has steadily produced enough municipal data to warrant a &quot;Time&quot; magazine article on open-government. Nanaimo has been dubbed &quot;the capital of Google Earth&quot;. Working directly with Google, the city fed it a wealth of information about its buildings, property lines, utilities and streets. The result is earth.nanaimo.ca, a wealth of city data viewed through the Google Earth 3D mapping program. Their Open Data Catalogue is available at data.nanaimo.ca.

==Education==
Nanaimo has over 30 elementary and secondary schools, most of which are public and are operated by School District 68 Nanaimo-Ladysmith.

Aspengrove School is a JrK-grade 12 Independent (private) school accredited as an International Baccalaureate World School and offers the IB Primary Years, IB Middle Years and IB Diploma programme and received a 10 out of 10 by the IB Organization (IBO) in 2011.

The &quot;Conseil scolaire francophone de la Colombie-Britannique&quot; operates two Francophone schools, &quot;École Océane&quot; primary school and the &quot;École secondaire de Nanaimo&quot;.

The main campus of Vancouver Island University is located in Nanaimo, which brings many international students, mostly East Asian, to the city.

== The Pacific Biological Station ==
The Pacific Biological Station, located on the north shore of Departure Bay, was established in 1908. It is the oldest fisheries research centre on the Pacific coast. Operated by Fisheries and Oceans Canada, the station forms a network with eight other scientific facilities.

==Museums==
The Nanaimo Art Gallery is a public art museum located downtown at 150 Commercial Street. In addition to contemporary exhibitions by local, national and international artists, the Gallery operates Art Lab which offers year-round art-based programs for learners of all ages. The Gallery also holds a collection of artwork, operates The Gallery Store, which features work by local artists and artisans, and runs Artists in the Schools, a program that operates across three school districts.

The Nanaimo Museum is a public historical museum located downtown on the traditional territory of the Snuneymuxw First Nation at 100 Museum Way.

The Vancouver Island Military Museum is a public military historical museum located at 100 Cameron Road.

== Arts and culture ==
The Port Theatre in downtown Nanaimo hosts many performers and shows during the year. 

The Nanaimo bar, which is a no-bake cookie bar with custard filling, is a Canadian dessert named after Nanaimo.

Nanaimo hosts the annual Nanaimo Marine Festival. Part of the festival includes the bathtub race. The race starts in the Nanaimo Harbour downtown, goes around Entrance Island, north-west to Winchelsea Islands by Nanoose Bay and finish in Departure Bay back in Nanaimo. Until the 1990s the race alternated between racing from Nanaimo to Vancouver and from Vancouver to Nanaimo.

== Sports and recreation ==
* Nanaimo is home to the largest sports club on Vancouver Island, Nanaimo United Football Club. NUFC is home to over 1,700 members, and is one of the oldest sports clubs in Canada, having been formed in 1903.
* Nanaimo is home to North America&#x27;s first legal, purpose-made bungee jumping bridge, operated by WildPlay Element Parks.
* Nanaimo is home to the Canadian Junior Football League&#x27;s Vancouver Island Raiders, who play at Caledonia Park.
* Nanaimo is home to the British Columbia Hockey League&#x27;s Nanaimo Clippers and to the Western Lacrosse Association&#x27;s Nanaimo Timbermen, both of which play at the Frank Crane Arena.
* Nanaimo is home to the Nanaimo Buccaneers of the Vancouver Island Junior Hockey League, who play at the Nanaimo Ice Centre.
* The Nanaimo NightOwls, of the West Coast League, play at Serauxmen Stadium.
* Football Nanaimo plays at Pioneer Park.
* Nanaimo is home to the Senior A lacrosse team the Timbermen of the Western Lacrosse Association. Nanaimo is also home to the Junior A Timbermen and Junior B Timbermen.
* Nanaimo is home to the Nanaimo Hornets Rugby Football Club, part of the British Columbia Rugby Union. Established in 1888 it is the second oldest rugby club in Western Canada. Their home ground and club is situated in Pioneer Park (since 1968).

== Notable people ==

*Iain Baird, professional soccer player
* Terry Beech, politician
* Red Carr, professional ice hockey player
* Gene Carr, professional ice hockey player
* Justin Chatwin, actor
* Glen Clark, 31st Premier of British Columbia
* Jimmy Claxton, baseball pitcher who broke US baseball&#x27;s racial colour barrier
* Raymond Collishaw, Canadian World War I flying ace
* Allison Crowe, singer-songwriter and pianist
* John DeSantis, actor
* Michael Edgson, swimmer
* Jodelle Ferland, actress
* David Gogo, blues guitarist
* Paul Gogo, keyboardist for the rock band Trooper
* Christopher Hart, actor and magician
* Al Hill (born 1955), ice hockey player and scout
* Bob Hindmarch, professor and ice hockey coach
* Constance Isherwood, lawyer
* Christine Jensen, Composer and conductor
* Ingrid Jensen, jazz trumpeter
* Susan Juby (born 1969), author
* Ethan Katzberg (born 2002), athlete, Olympic Gold Medal, 2023 Hammer throw world champion
* Diana Krall, jazz pianist and vocalist
* Tim Lander, poet
* Marc-André Leclerc, alpinist
* Callum Montgomery (born 1997), professional soccer player
* Susan Morgan (born 1949), Oregon politician
* Phil Olsen, Olympian javelin
* Steve Smith, professional downhill mountain biker
* Shane Sutcliffe (born 1975), boxer
* Kirsten Sweetland, triathlete
* May Tully, vaudeville actress, writer, director
* Lorna Vinden, wheelchair athlete
* Cameron Whitcomb, singer and songwriter
* Layla Zoe, blues and blues rock musician and songwriter
==Sister city==
Nanaimo has one sister city:
* Saitama (←Iwatsuki City), Saitama Prefecture, Japan, since 1996

==See also==
*1887 Nanaimo mine explosion

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==

*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q16461" start="0" end="7" title="Nanaimo" label="Nanaimo"/>
<link wikidata="Q170479" start="60" end="76" title="Vancouver Island" label="Vancouver Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973" start="81" end="97" title="British Columbia" label="British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095362" start="408" end="436" title="Regional District of Nanaimo" label="Regional District of Nanaimo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6083191" start="464" end="478" title="Island Highway" label="Island Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q795723" start="505" end="515" title="BC Ferries" label="BC Ferries"/>
<link wikidata="Q64833" start="528" end="548" title="Nanaimo Airport" label="its regional airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368477" start="576" end="596" title="Island Rail Corridor" label="Island Rail Corridor"/>
<link wikidata="Q103817" start="618" end="636" title="Indigenous peoples" label="Indigenous peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q55624" start="686" end="696" title="Snuneymuxw" label="Snuneymuxw"/>
<link wikidata="Q15260922" start="820" end="835" title="Nanaimo Harbour" label="Nanaimo Harbour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635390" start="879" end="892" title="Juan Carrasco (explorer)" label="Juan Carrasco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1628203" start="915" end="933" title="Francisco de Eliza" label="Francisco de Eliza"/>
<link wikidata="Q5866306" start="1009" end="1045" title="Francisco Javier Winthuysen y Pineda" label="Francisco Javier Winthuysen y Pineda"/>
<link wikidata="Q76039" start="1064" end="1089" title="Hudson&amp;#x27;s Bay Company" label="Hudson&amp;#x27;s Bay Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q4756653" start="1181" end="1195" title="Andrew Colvile" label="Andrew Colvile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384656" start="1342" end="1349" title="Expo 86" label="Expo 86"/>
<link wikidata="Q1015639" start="1394" end="1405" title="Prince Rupert, British Columbia" label="Port Rupert"/>
<link wikidata="Q6287978" start="1900" end="1920" title="Joseph William McKay" label="Joseph William McKay"/>
<link wikidata="Q4868345" start="2221" end="2236" title="Nanaimo Bastion" label="Nanaimo Bastion"/>
<link wikidata="Q14944797" start="2511" end="2520" title="Esquimalt" label="Esquimalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1668049" start="2741" end="2756" title="Internment camp" label="Internment camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q6487655" start="3014" end="3024" title="Lantzville, British Columbia" label="Lantzville"/>
<link wikidata="Q2132" start="4076" end="4084" title="Victoria, British Columbia" label="Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q24639" start="4098" end="4107" title="Vancouver" label="Vancouver"/>
<link wikidata="Q2258" start="4126" end="4143" title="Strait of Georgia" label="Strait of Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q795723" start="4191" end="4201" title="BC Ferries" label="BC Ferries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1656648" start="4264" end="4289" title="Tsawwassen ferry terminal" label="Tsawwassen ferry terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7849447" start="4293" end="4303" title="Tsawwassen, British Columbia" label="Tsawwassen"/>
<link wikidata="Q462564" start="4435" end="4441" title="Tofino, British Columbia" label="Tofino"/>
<link wikidata="Q5155247" start="4443" end="4455" title="Comox Valley" label="Comox Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438931" start="4457" end="4467" title="Parksville, British Columbia" label="Parksville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030509" start="4469" end="4483" title="Campbell River, British Columbia" label="Campbell River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022127" start="4485" end="4497" title="Port Alberni" label="Port Alberni"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473911" start="4499" end="4531" title="Rathtrevor Beach Provincial Park" label="Rathtrevor Beach Provincial Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q4231917" start="4550" end="4560" title="Saysutshun (Newcastle Island Marine) Park" label="Saysutshun"/>
<link wikidata="Q7251324" start="4562" end="4579" title="Protection Island (Nanaimo)" label="Protection Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472026" start="4581" end="4596" title="Gabriola Island" label="Gabriola Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q7909397" start="4598" end="4611" title="Valdes Island" label="Valdes Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q633848" start="4635" end="4647" title="Gulf Islands" label="Gulf Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q25653" start="4659" end="4674" title="passenger ferry" label="passenger ferry"/>
<link wikidata="Q121988685" start="4714" end="4719" title="Hullo (ferry)" label="Hullo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5003026" start="4754" end="4770" title="Buttertubs Marsh" label="Buttertubs Marsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="5154" end="5183" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen climate classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q13996" start="5259" end="5272" title="Mediterranean climate" label="Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q17174435" start="5325" end="5334" title="Trewartha climate classification scheme" label="Trewartha"/>
<link wikidata="Q182090" start="5359" end="5366" title="Oceanic climate" label="Oceanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q542694" start="5428" end="5440" title="Aleutian Low" label="Aleutian Low"/>
<link wikidata="Q615975" start="5668" end="5683" title="Skagway, Alaska" label="Skagway, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q64833" start="6018" end="6033" title="Nanaimo Airport" label="Nanaimo Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q3566422" start="6111" end="6142" title="Nanaimo Harbour Water Aerodrome" label="Nanaimo Harbour Water Aerodrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q795723" start="6275" end="6283" title="BC Ferry" label="BC Ferry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191496" start="6305" end="6318" title="Departure Bay ferry terminal" label="Departure Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1264419" start="6320" end="6330" title="Duke Point ferry terminal" label="Duke Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q107103862" start="6336" end="6344" title="Nanaimo Harbour ferry terminal" label="downtown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472026" start="6377" end="6392" title="Gabriola Island" label="Gabriola Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1628996" start="6436" end="6449" title="Horseshoe Bay ferry terminal" label="Horseshoe Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1656648" start="6454" end="6464" title="Tsawwassen Ferry Terminal" label="Tsawwassen"/>
<link wikidata="Q121988685" start="6683" end="6688" title="Hullo (ferry)" label="Hullo"/>
<link wikidata="Q918865" start="6840" end="6850" title="British Columbia Highway 1" label="Highways 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q918905" start="6852" end="6854" title="British Columbia Highway 19" label="19"/>
<link wikidata="Q918904" start="6860" end="6863" title="British Columbia Highway 19A" label="19A"/>
<link wikidata="Q6962375" start="7114" end="7138" title="Nanaimo Regional Transit" label="Nanaimo Regional Transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368477" start="7293" end="7313" title="Island Rail Corridor" label="Island Rail Corridor"/>
<link wikidata="Q532090" start="7907" end="7936" title="Canada Border Services Agency" label="Canada Border Services Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q42317745" start="7973" end="7998" title="2021 Canadian census" label="2021 Census of Population"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155740" start="8012" end="8029" title="Statistics Canada" label="Statistics Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053463" start="8240" end="8264" title="census metropolitan area" label="census metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="9185" end="9195" title="English language" label="Anglophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q42317745" start="9422" end="9433" title="2021 Canadian census" label="2021 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q6073649" start="9474" end="9484" title="Irreligion in Canada" label="Irreligion"/>
<link wikidata="Q12193115" start="9512" end="9524" title="Christianity in Canada" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3483773" start="9552" end="9559" title="Sikhism in Canada" label="Sikhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4022915" start="9585" end="9590" title="Islam in Canada" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q5766557" start="9616" end="9624" title="Hinduism in Canada" label="Hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4097993" start="9648" end="9656" title="Buddhism in Canada" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q16995" start="9680" end="9687" title="Judaism in Canada" label="Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q11937089" start="9711" end="9734" title="Mythologies of the indigenous peoples of the Americas" label="Indigenous Spirituality"/>
<link wikidata="Q6722042" start="9905" end="9922" title="MacMillan Bloedel" label="MacMillan Bloedel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9936" end="9942" title="Harmac" label="Harmac"/>
<link wikidata="Q5628491" start="9964" end="9980" title="H. R. MacMillan" label="Harvey MacMillan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282" start="10159" end="10165" title="Sulfur dioxide" label="sulfur"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10472" end="10489" title="Innovation Island" label="Innovation Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q129238" start="10536" end="10545" title="Startup company" label="start ups"/>
<link wikidata="Q4921504" start="11411" end="11422" title="Black Press" label="Black Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q14874574" start="11628" end="11635" title="CIVI-DT" label="CIVI-DT"/>
<link wikidata="Q2932063" start="11637" end="11642" title="CTV 2" label="CTV 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q2931433" start="11698" end="11705" title="CHEK-DT" label="CHEK-DT"/>
<link wikidata="Q7919007" start="11707" end="11718" title="Independent station (North America)" label="Independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356524" start="11769" end="11787" title="Jim Pattison Group" label="Jim Pattison Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q5011415" start="11795" end="11802" title="CHWF-FM" label="CHWF-FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q5012610" start="11818" end="11825" title="CKWV-FM" label="CKWV-FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q5011204" start="11849" end="11856" title="CHLY-FM" label="CHLY-FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436229" start="11883" end="11895" title="campus radio" label="campus radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7936435" start="11908" end="11919" title="Vista Radio" label="Vista Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5012294" start="11927" end="11934" title="CKAY-FM" label="CKAY-FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q5009037" start="11949" end="11962" title="CBC Radio One" label="CBC Radio One"/>
<link wikidata="Q5009311" start="11977" end="11980" title="CBU (AM)" label="CBU"/>
<link wikidata="Q5009306" start="12002" end="12008" title="CBU-FM" label="CBU-FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q5009015" start="12010" end="12019" title="CBC Music" label="CBC Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q5008998" start="12025" end="12032" title="CBCV-FM" label="CBCV-FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1563454" start="12046" end="12054" title="HD Radio" label="HD Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q383590" start="12100" end="12126" title="House of Commons of Canada" label="House of Commons of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q108686167" start="12154" end="12171" title="Lisa Marie Barron" label="Lisa Marie Barron"/>
<link wikidata="Q130765" start="12179" end="12182" title="New Democratic Party" label="NDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q2973938" start="12201" end="12207" title="electoral district (Canada)" label="riding"/>
<link wikidata="Q16979413" start="12211" end="12228" title="Nanaimo—Ladysmith" label="Nanaimo—Ladysmith"/>
<link wikidata="Q73837865" start="12239" end="12252" title="2021 Canadian federal election" label="2021 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q3335526" start="12300" end="12316" title="Nanaimo—Cowichan" label="Nanaimo—Cowichan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3171497" start="12318" end="12330" title="Jean Crowder" label="Jean Crowder"/>
<link wikidata="Q130765" start="12332" end="12352" title="New Democratic Party" label="New Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q970918" start="12401" end="12416" title="Nanaimo—Alberni" label="Nanaimo—Alberni"/>
<link wikidata="Q3161231" start="12418" end="12430" title="James Lunney" label="James Lunney"/>
<link wikidata="Q327591" start="12432" end="12443" title="Independent politician" label="Independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q488523" start="12457" end="12469" title="Conservative Party of Canada" label="Conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q5030807" start="12527" end="12564" title="Canadian federal electoral redistribution, 2012" label="2012 federal electoral redistribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323479" start="12591" end="12631" title="Legislative Assembly of British Columbia" label="Legislative Assembly of British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q127433231" start="12674" end="12692" title="Nanaimo-Lantzville" label="Nanaimo-Lantzville"/>
<link wikidata="Q130784262" start="12694" end="12709" title="George Anderson (Canadian politician)" label="George Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q919052" start="12711" end="12717" title="British Columbia New Democratic Party" label="BC NDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q127433236" start="12723" end="12746" title="Nanaimo-Gabriola Island" label="Nanaimo-Gabriola Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q22132668" start="12748" end="12765" title="Sheila Malcolmson" label="Sheila Malcolmson"/>
<link wikidata="Q919052" start="12767" end="12773" title="British Columbia New Democratic Party" label="BC NDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q6525470" start="12776" end="12788" title="Leonard Krog" label="Leonard Krog"/>
<link wikidata="Q104873510" start="12985" end="13023" title="2024 British Columbia general election" label="2024 British Columbia general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q6525470" start="13073" end="13085" title="Leonard Krog" label="Leonard Krog"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13100" end="13111" title="Bill Mackay" label="Bill Mackay"/>
<link wikidata="Q5488666" start="13169" end="13181" title="Frank J. Ney" label="Frank J. Ney"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="13803" end="13828" title="Time (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Time&amp;quot; magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q720829" start="13840" end="13855" title="open-government" label="open-government"/>
<link wikidata="Q95" start="13944" end="13950" title="Google" label="Google"/>
<link wikidata="Q42274" start="14125" end="14137" title="Google Earth" label="Google Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432214" start="14331" end="14367" title="School District 68 Nanaimo-Ladysmith" label="School District 68 Nanaimo-Ladysmith"/>
<link wikidata="Q4807867" start="14370" end="14387" title="Aspengrove School" label="Aspengrove School"/>
<link wikidata="Q56404208" start="14452" end="14492" title="International Baccalaureate" label="International Baccalaureate World School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5162804" start="14644" end="14699" title="Conseil scolaire francophone de la Colombie-Britannique" label="Conseil scolaire francophone de la Colombie-Britannique"/>
<link wikidata="Q7914214" start="14849" end="14876" title="Vancouver Island University" label="Vancouver Island University"/>
<link wikidata="Q180538" start="15131" end="15140" title="fishery" label="fisheries"/>
<link wikidata="Q430265" start="15164" end="15177" title="Pacific coast" label="Pacific coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q349666" start="15191" end="15218" title="Fisheries and Oceans Canada" label="Fisheries and Oceans Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q60775270" start="15795" end="15809" title="Nanaimo Museum" label="Nanaimo Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q55624" start="15893" end="15916" title="Snuneymuxw First Nation" label="Snuneymuxw First Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q112957869" start="16070" end="16082" title="Port Theatre" label="Port Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2885517" start="16158" end="16169" title="Nanaimo bar" label="Nanaimo bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4869098" start="16351" end="16363" title="Bathtub racing" label="bathtub race"/>
<link wikidata="Q15260922" start="16388" end="16403" title="Nanaimo Harbour" label="Nanaimo Harbour"/>
<link wikidata="Q5380666" start="16426" end="16441" title="Entrance Island (British Columbia)" label="Entrance Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q3335742" start="16479" end="16490" title="Nanoose Bay" label="Nanoose Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q193847" start="16950" end="16964" title="bungee jumping" label="bungee jumping"/>
<link wikidata="Q17515261" start="16985" end="17007" title="WildPlay Element Parks" label="WildPlay Element Parks"/>
<link wikidata="Q5030267" start="17034" end="17065" title="Canadian Junior Football League" label="Canadian Junior Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q7914206" start="17073" end="17097" title="Vancouver Island Raiders" label="Vancouver Island Raiders"/>
<link wikidata="Q913771" start="17152" end="17182" title="British Columbia Hockey League" label="British Columbia Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q2979382" start="17190" end="17206" title="Nanaimo Clippers" label="Nanaimo Clippers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564943" start="17218" end="17246" title="Western Lacrosse Association" label="Western Lacrosse Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q6962378" start="17254" end="17271" title="Nanaimo Timbermen" label="Nanaimo Timbermen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2979382" start="17299" end="17316" title="Frank Crane Arena" label="Frank Crane Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q24190673" start="17343" end="17361" title="Nanaimo Buccaneers" label="Nanaimo Buccaneers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7914204" start="17369" end="17406" title="Vancouver Island Junior Hockey League" label="Vancouver Island Junior Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q105906012" start="17450" end="17467" title="Nanaimo NightOwls" label="Nanaimo NightOwls"/>
<link wikidata="Q7984809" start="17476" end="17493" title="West Coast League" label="West Coast League"/>
<link wikidata="Q5980374" start="18005" end="18015" title="Iain Baird" label="Iain Baird"/>
<link wikidata="Q21716242" start="18046" end="18057" title="Terry Beech" label="Terry Beech"/>
<link wikidata="Q4703655" start="18072" end="18080" title="Red Carr" label="Red Carr"/>
<link wikidata="Q3100440" start="18115" end="18124" title="Gene Carr (ice hockey)" label="Gene Carr"/>
<link wikidata="Q129978" start="18159" end="18173" title="Justin Chatwin" label="Justin Chatwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530725" start="18183" end="18193" title="Glen Clark" label="Glen Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q7240349" start="18200" end="18227" title="Premier of British Columbia" label="Premier of British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16006730" start="18230" end="18243" title="Jimmy Claxton" label="Jimmy Claxton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2134138" start="18315" end="18332" title="Raymond Collishaw" label="Raymond Collishaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q452947" start="18368" end="18381" title="Allison Crowe" label="Allison Crowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q505634" start="18415" end="18428" title="John DeSantis" label="John DeSantis"/>
<link wikidata="Q14626641" start="18438" end="18452" title="Michael Edgson" label="Michael Edgson"/>
<link wikidata="Q144785" start="18464" end="18479" title="Jodelle Ferland" label="Jodelle Ferland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3017972" start="18491" end="18501" title="David Gogo" label="David Gogo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5577401" start="18521" end="18530" title="Gogo (Canadian musician)" label="Paul Gogo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5112492" start="18572" end="18588" title="Christopher Hart (actor)" label="Christopher Hart"/>
<link wikidata="Q4704036" start="18611" end="18618" title="Al Hill (ice hockey)" label="Al Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q99654674" start="18662" end="18675" title="Bob Hindmarch" label="Bob Hindmarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q105161408" start="18710" end="18729" title="Constance Isherwood" label="Constance Isherwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q15440383" start="18740" end="18756" title="Christine Jensen (musician)" label="Christine Jensen"/>
<link wikidata="Q533935" start="18783" end="18796" title="Ingrid Jensen" label="Ingrid Jensen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7648043" start="18815" end="18825" title="Susan Juby" label="Susan Juby"/>
<link wikidata="Q113575646" start="18848" end="18862" title="Ethan Katzberg" label="Ethan Katzberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q120722060" start="18905" end="18937" title="2023 World Athletics Championships – Men&amp;#x27;s hammer throw" label="2023 Hammer throw world champion"/>
<link wikidata="Q155879" start="18940" end="18951" title="Diana Krall" label="Diana Krall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7803799" start="18981" end="18991" title="Tim Lander" label="Tim Lander"/>
<link wikidata="Q77779842" start="19000" end="19018" title="Marc-André Leclerc" label="Marc-André Leclerc"/>
<link wikidata="Q61818669" start="19031" end="19048" title="Callum Montgomery" label="Callum Montgomery"/>
<link wikidata="Q26715246" start="19091" end="19103" title="Susan Morgan (politician)" label="Susan Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q11816147" start="19137" end="19147" title="Phil Olsen (athlete)" label="Phil Olsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q9345803" start="19168" end="19179" title="Steve Smith (cyclist)" label="Steve Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q4409027" start="19220" end="19235" title="Shane Sutcliffe" label="Shane Sutcliffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1743646" start="19257" end="19274" title="Kirsten Sweetland" label="Kirsten Sweetland"/>
<link wikidata="Q63442062" start="19289" end="19298" title="May Tully" label="May Tully"/>
<link wikidata="Q107631330" start="19339" end="19351" title="Lorna Vinden" label="Lorna Vinden"/>
<link wikidata="Q131620501" start="19374" end="19390" title="Cameron Whitcomb" label="Cameron Whitcomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q114049308" start="19416" end="19425" title="Layla Zoe" label="Layla Zoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q134635" start="19519" end="19526" title="Saitama (city)" label="Saitama"/>
<link wikidata="Q128186" start="19545" end="19563" title="Saitama Prefecture" label="Saitama Prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550226" start="19598" end="19625" title="1887 Nanaimo mine explosion" label="1887 Nanaimo mine explosion"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="311796" wikidata="Q531069" url="?curid=311796" title="Freedom From Religion Foundation">
<text>The Freedom From Religion Foundation (FFRF) is an American nonprofit organization that advocates for atheists, agnostics, and nontheists. Formed in 1976, FFRF promotes the separation of church and state, and challenges the legitimacy of many federal and state programs that are faith-based. It supports groups such as nonreligious students and clergy who want to leave their faith.

== History ==
The FFRF was co-founded by Anne Nicol Gaylor and her daughter, Annie Laurie Gaylor, in 1976 and was incorporated nationally on April 15, 1978, who split with Madalyn Murray O&#x27;Hair’s American Atheists, in response to O’Hair’s antisemitism. The organization was supported by over 19,000 members in 2012 and operated from an 1855-era building in Madison, Wisconsin, that once served as a church rectory.

In March 2011, FFRF, along with the Richard Dawkins Foundation for Reason and Science, began The Clergy Project, a confidential on-line community that supports clergy as they leave their faith. In 2012, it gave its first Freedom From Religion Foundation and Clergy Project &quot;Hardship Grant&quot; to Jerry DeWitt, a former pastor who left the ministry to join the atheist movement.

FFRF provides financial support to the Secular Student Alliance, an organization that has affiliate groups for nonreligious students on college campuses.

In 2015, FFRF announced Nonbelief Relief, a related organization that obtained and later gave up its federal tax-exempt status. Nonbelief Relief was unsuccessful in a lawsuit against the IRS because it lacked standing to challenge the Form 990 exemption that applies to churches. Nonbelief Relief is a humanitarian agency for atheists, agnostics, freethinkers, and their supporters. Nonbelief Relief was created by the executive board of FFRF to remediate conditions of human suffering and injustice on a global scale, whether the result of natural disasters, human actions or adherence to religious dogma.

On 7 November 2024, Kat Grant published an article titled &quot;What is a woman&quot;, on &quot;Freethought Now!&quot;, a website operated by the FFRF. The article argued that “any attempt to define womanhood on biological terms is inadequate” and that “a woman is whoever she says she is”. In response, Jerry Coyne wrote a rebuttal titled &quot;Biology Is Not Bigotry&quot;, defending the &quot;biological definition of ‘woman’ based on gamete type&quot;. Coyne&#x27;s rebuttal was initially published on &quot;Freethought Now!&quot;. However, the FFRF later retracted Coyne&#x27;s page. On 27 December, the FFRF published a statement saying that &quot;Publishing this post was an error of judgment, and we have decided to remove it as it does not reflect our values or principles&quot;. In response, Steven Pinker, Richard Dawkins and Jerry Coyne resigned. First Pinker and Dawkins resigned, and on December 29, 2024, Jerry Coyne resigned too from the board of honorary members of the FFRF to object against what they consider the problematic gender-ideological capture of the institute. Coyne stated that LGBTQ people have rights, but some of the desired rights are in conflict with rights of other groups in society.

== Media and publications ==
The FFRF publishes a newspaper, &quot;Freethought Today&quot;, ten times a year. Since 2006, as the Freethought Radio Network, FFRF has produced the &quot;Freethought Radio&quot; show, an hour-long show broadcast live on WXXM-FM Saturdays at 11 a.m. CDT. It had also been broadcast on Air America before that service ceased operation in March 2010. The show is hosted by the co-presidents of FFRF, Dan Barker and Annie Laurie Gaylor. Regular features include &quot;Theocracy Alert&quot; and &quot;Freethinkers Almanac&quot;. The latter highlights historic freethinkers, many of whom are also songwriters. The show&#x27;s intro and outro make use of John Lennon&#x27;s &quot;Imagine song&quot;.

Annie Laurie Gaylor, co-president of the FFRF, is the author of the nonfiction book on clergy child sexual abuse scandals &quot;Betrayal of Trust: Clergy Abuse of Children&quot; (out of print) and the editor of &quot;Women Without Superstition: No Gods – No Masters&quot; and the anthology &quot;Woe to the Women&quot;. She edited the FFRF newspaper &quot;Freethought Today&quot; until July 2008. Her husband, Dan Barker, author of &quot;Losing Faith in Faith: From Preacher to Atheist&quot;, &quot;Godless: How an Evangelical Preacher Became One of America&#x27;s Leading Atheists&quot;, &quot;The Good Atheist: Living a Purpose-Filled Life Without God&quot;, &quot;Life Driven Purpose&quot;, &quot;God: The Most Unpleasant Character in all Fiction&quot;, and &quot;Just Pretend: A Freethought Book for Children&quot;, is a musician and songwriter, a former Pentecostal Christian minister, and co-president of FFRF.

==Litigation and issues==
===Social programs===

====Social services====

In June 2004, the FFRF challenged the constitutionality of the White House Office of Faith-Based and Community Initiatives. The Foundation&#x27;s complaint alleged that &quot;the use of money appropriated by Congress under Article I, section 8, to fund conferences that various executive branch agencies hold to promote President Bush&#x27;s &#x27;Faith-Based and Community Initiatives conflicted with the First Amendment. The suit &quot;contended that the defendant officials violated the Establishment Clause by organizing national and regional conferences at which faith-based organizations allegedly &#x27;are singled out as being particularly worthy of federal funding because of their religious orientation, and the belief in God is extolled as distinguishing the claimed effectiveness of faith-based social services. The FFRF also alleged that &quot;the defendant officials &#x27;engage in myriad activities, such as making public appearances and giving speeches, throughout the United States, intended to promote and advocate for funding for faith-based organizations.&quot; The FFRF further asserted, &quot;Congressional appropriations [are] used to support the activities of the defendants.&quot;
In 2007 the Supreme Court ruled 5–4 that taxpayers do not have the right to challenge the constitutionality of expenditures made by the executive branch.

In May 2007, the FFRF, on behalf of Indiana taxpayers, challenged the creation of a chaplaincy pilot program for the Indiana Family and Social Services Administration (FSSA). The FSSA hired Pastor Michael L. Latham, a Baptist minister, in 2006, at a salary of $60,000 a year. In September 2007, in response to the FFRF&#x27;s suit, Indiana ended the program.

====Health care====
In April 2003, the FFRF, on behalf of Montana residents, sued the Montana Office of Rural Health and its executive director David M. Young along with the Montana State University-Bozeman and the Montana Faith-Health Cooperative. It was alleged that Young favored faith-based nursing parish programs for state funding. In October 2004, the Federal District Court for the District of Montana held that the state&#x27;s &quot;direct and preferential funding of inherently and pervasively religious parish nursing programs was undertaken for the impermissible purpose, and has the impermissible effect, of favoring and advancing the integration of religion into the provision of secular health care services.&quot; According to the court, the state funding of faith-based healthcare violated the First Amendment.

In April 2006, the FFRF sued to challenge the pervasive integration of &quot;spirituality&quot; into health care by the Department of Veteran Affairs. Specifically stating that the practice of asking patients about their religion in spiritual assessments, the use of chaplains to treat patients, and drug and alcohol treatment programs that incorporate religion violated the separation of state and church. The case was later dismissed after the &quot;Hein&quot; decision because of lack of standing.

====Education====
In 2001, the FFRF, on behalf of anonymous plaintiffs, sued the Rhea County School District. The plaintiffs alleged that weekly bible classes were being held for all students in the elementary schools. In June 2004, the Sixth Circuit Court of Appeals affirmed a district judgment holding that it was unconstitutional for the school district to &quot;teach the Bible as literal truth&quot; to students, including first graders.

In March 2005, the FFRF filed suit against the University of Minnesota because of its involvement with the Minnesota Faith Health Consortium, a partnership with Luther Seminary, which is affiliated with the Evangelical Lutheran Church of America, and Fairview Health Services, stating that state taxpayer funds are helping to fund a faith-based organization. In September 2005, the University agreed to end the partnership and to cease teaching &quot;courses on the intersection of faith and health&quot;, with the FFRF agreeing to drop its lawsuit.

In April 2005, the FFRF filed a lawsuit against the U.S. Department of Education because of its distribution of funds to the Alaska Christian College, a Bible college run by the Evangelical Covenant Church of Alaska. The foundation stated that in the students&#x27; first year at the college, they take only religious-based courses, and finish that year with a Certificate of Biblical Studies. The college, the foundation says, &quot;does not offer traditional college courses, such as math or English&quot;. In October 2005 the FFRF and the U.S. Department of Education settled the lawsuit, with the Department of Education agreeing not to distribute $435,000 of federal funds to the College.

A December 2020 article by Hemant Mehta outlined recent FFRF efforts. &quot;FFRF&quot; argues to limit official role of Pastor Mark Thornton at Boise State. A letter sent by the FFRF Staff Attorney Chris Line included:
&quot;Boise State football players have no government-imposed burden on their religion, so there is no need – or legitimate legal reason – for Boise State to provide a chaplain for them.&quot;
Legal Counsel for the University responded with the following:
&quot;We have been in communication with the Athletic Department to provide some education about this issue and to ensure measures are taken now and in the future to resolve the issue and establish appropriate constitutional boundaries. Mr. Thornton did not travel with the football team to our recent game in Wyoming and the university will no longer include a chaplain in its travel party. Written references to Mr. Thornton as the chaplain of the football team have been or are in the process of being removed and no future references will be made in writing or otherwise.&quot;
Mehta continues: &quot;None of that means students can&#x27;t seek Thornton out on their own. They’ve always been free to do that. But Thornton can&#x27;t – and shouldn&#x27;t – have any sort of official role there.&quot;

====Criminal justice programs====
In October 2000, the FFRF brought suit, as taxpayers in the state of Wisconsin, against Faith Works located in Milwaukee. Their case stated that a faith-based addiction-treatment program should not be used as a court-ordered treatment program using taxpayer funds. In January 2002, the ruling was decided in the FFRF&#x27;s favor; that receiving hundreds of thousands of dollars in public money is in violation of the Establishment Clause. The judge wrote &quot;Because I find that the Department of Workforce Development&#x27;s grant to Faith Works constitutes unrestricted, direct funding of an organization that engages in religious indoctrination, I conclude that this funding stream violates the establishment clause.&quot; On Appeal, in April 2003, the Seventh Circuit later ruled against the FFRF on the narrower issue of whether prisoners joining specific faith-based programs on their own free will are coerced by government endorsement of religion.

The FFRF brought a suit against the awarding of a federal grant to MentorKids USA, a group providing mentors to children of prisoners, alleging that only Christian mentors were hired and that they were to give monthly reports on the children&#x27;s religious activities. In January 2005, the court vacated HHS&#x27;s funding of this group citing &quot;federal funds have been used by the MentorKids program to advance religion in violation of the Establishment Clause&quot;.

In May 2006, the FFRF filed suit against the Federal Bureau of Prisons alleging that its decision to fund not only multi-faith-based but also single-faith-based programs violated constitutional standards for separation of state and church. The parties later agreed to a dismissal of that claim, but additional counts within the lawsuit, alleging separate violations, continued.

===Religion in the public sphere===

====Employment issues====
In 1995, the FFRF sued the state of Wisconsin for designating Good Friday as a state legal holiday. In 1996, the federal district court ruled that Wisconsin&#x27;s Good Friday holiday was indeed a First Amendment violation because, in reference to Wisconsin&#x27;s Good Friday holiday law, the &quot;promotion of Christianity is the primary purpose of the law.&quot;

==== Public funding ====
FFRF opposed the city of Versailles, Kentucky helping a church get federal funding to create a local disaster relief center.

The FFRF is filling a lawsuit on behalf of four residents against the state of South Carolina to oppose the funding to Christian Learning Centers of Greenville County to build a private religious school, and the FFRF is challenging that it is unconstitutional. 

====Religious displays on public property====
In December 2007, the FFRF, on behalf of a group of concerned Green Bay residents and invoking the First Amendment rights of all of the city&#x27;s residents, sued the city because of the placement of a nativity scene at Green Bay&#x27;s city hall. Before the case was heard, the city removed the nativity scene. The judge then dismissed the suit, citing lack of jurisdiction. Since the nativity scene already was removed and a moratorium imposed on future such displays, there remained no basis for continued dispute. He went on to say, &quot;&quot;the plaintiffs have already won&quot;. ... the Plaintiffs have won a concrete victory that changes the circumstances on the ground.&quot;

In 2011, in response to the refusal of the city of Warren, Michigan, to remove a nativity display in the civic center, the FFRF sought to place a winter solstice display. The mayor refused the request and the FFRF brought suit. The suit was dismissed by Judge Zatkoff of the U.S. District Court; the dismissal was upheld by the U.S. 6th Circuit Court in 2013.

In September 2011, the FFRF, along with the American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU), sued the Giles County, Virginia, school district on behalf of anonymous plaintiffs. A display of the Ten Commandments had been placed beside a copy of the U.S. Constitution at Giles County public schools. Prior to the suit, in January and June 2011, the FFRF and the ACLU had sent letters to the school board requesting removal of the display. The school superintendent ordered that the displays of the Ten Commandments be removed. The Giles County school board met in June 2011 and voted to overturn the superintendent&#x27;s decision to remove the display. After the suit was filed, the school board in 2012 agreed to remove the display and to pay attorneys&#x27; fees.

In November 2011, Wisconsin Governor Scott Walker referred to the Capitol&#x27;s Christmas tree as a &quot;Christmas tree&quot; instead of a &quot;holiday tree&quot;. The FFRF, which opposed prior efforts to restore the name to &quot;Christmas tree&quot; objected to the title.

In May 2012, the FFRF, acting on a complaint from a resident, asked the city of Woonsocket, Rhode Island, to remove a Latin cross from a World War I and II memorial on public land. The city refused to do so. The FFRF states that it is currently looking for a plaintiff in the area to represent for a suit, which the FFRF have yet to do, citing the difficulty with another case that occurred with another plaintiff in the state, Jessica Ahlquist, in the case &quot;Ahlquist v. Cranston&quot;.

On July 24, 2012, after receiving a letter from the FFRF, the Steubenville, Ohio, city council decided to remove the image of the Christ the King Chapel at the Franciscan University of Steubenville from its town logo.

In August 2012, the FFRF, on behalf of a resident, threatened a lawsuit challenging a Latin cross that had been displayed on top of the water tower of Whiteville, Tennessee. After the FFRF wrote three initial letters, but before the lawsuit was filed, the town removed one arm of the cross. The removal cost the town $4,000, and as part of the settlement the town paid $20,000 in the FFRF&#x27;s attorneys fees. The town also agreed never to replace the missing arm and not to place other crosses on public property.

In August 2012, the FFRF, on behalf of a Montana resident, sued the United States Forest Service. A special use permit for the placement of a statue of Jesus on federal land was granted in 1954 at the request of the Knights of Columbus. The Forest Service continued to grant renewals of the permit until 2010. When the Service declined to renew, the Knights declined to remove the statue citing &quot;tradition&quot; and the &quot;historical&quot; value of the statue. After on-line protests the statue was allowed to stay and the permit granted. The FFRF filed suit in February 2012. In June 2013, a federal judge found in favor of the defendants, allowing the statue to remain. In August 2013, the FFRF filed an appeal of the decision. The Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals rejected FFRF&#x27;s arguments and upheld the memorial.

In 2012, the FFRF wrote several letters to Prudhommes Restaurant, in Columbia, Pennsylvania, explaining that offering a 10% discount to Sunday patrons who present a church bulletin is a violation of state and federal law, specifically the Civil Rights Act of 1964. The individual who brought the matter to the FFRF&#x27;s attention has filed a discrimination complaint with the Pennsylvania Human Relations Commission. The FFRF was only involved in an advisory capacity. The Pennsylvania Human Relations Commission entered a final order allowing the restaurant to continue the church bulletin discount.

A lighted cross in a public park in Honesdale, Pennsylvania, was removed by the borough in 2018 after complaints from FFRF. Not far from the park a solar-powered 28-foot cross was erected by a local resident on his own property.

====Prayer in government/schools====

In October 2008, the FFRF filed suit against the U.S. government over the statute establishing the National Day of Prayer (NDoP). In 2010, Federal judge Barbara Brandriff Crabb ruled it unconstitutional as it is &quot;an inherently religious exercise that serves no secular function&quot;. This ruling was appealed by the U.S. government. In April 2011, the U.S. Seventh Circuit Court of Appeals dismissed the FFRF&#x27;s challenge to the NDoP, holding that the FFRF did not have standing to challenge the NDoP statute or proclamations and that only the President was injured enough to challenge the NDoP statute.

The FFRF, in January 2013, after receiving a complaint from a resident, asked the city council of Rapid City, South Dakota, to eliminate its practice of beginning each city council meeting with a Christian prayer. After the FFRF sent a second letter in February 2013, the mayor stated at that time that prayers would continue.

Joseph Richardson, of Lake County, Florida, delivered a secular invocation on behalf of &quot;non-religious citizens&quot; at a county commission meeting on Tuesday, December 6, 2022. Following the invocation the director of Lake County Public Works Fred Schneider took the microphone and delivered a prayer at the request of the Lake County Commissioner Sean Parks.
Christopher Line, an FFRF attorney, wrote a letter to the Lake County Commission Chairman Kirby Smith stating, &quot;This Christian prayer, delivered because the invocation Mr. Richardson gave was not sufficiently Christian, was discriminatory, unconstitutional, and a slap in the face to all of Lake County&#x27;s non-Christian citizens. [...] as long as the board continues to allow citizens to deliver invocations to begin its meetings, it must treat all invocations the same, with no ‘corrective’ Christian prayer offered after a non-Christian prayer has finished.&quot;
Sean Parks stated that he was, &quot;saddened to hear that Mr. Richardson felt he was mistreated during the invocation&quot; and &quot;We would welcome them [the Central FL Freethought Community] back if they wish to lead the invocation in the future.&quot;

In 2022, while Samuel Felinton was a high school junior, he was forced to attend a Christian revival while attending Huntington High School. He was obliged to stay and watch the assembly despite attempting to leave. This assembly would later make international news, by causing a multi-day walkout alongside Max Nibert and himself, including hundreds of their peers. In 2023, Felinton, alongside other parents, students, and the Freedom From Religion Foundation, settled a lawsuit against the Cabell County Board of Education to implement a ban on teacher-run religious events being held within school hours on campus.

===Internal Revenue Service===

====Parish exemption====
The FFRF filed suit against the IRS over the parish exemption that allows &quot;ministers of the gospel&quot; to claim part of their salary as an income-tax-free housing allowance. This was originally filed in 2009, in California, then subsequently dropped and re-filed in 2011, in Wisconsin, because of standing. In August 2012, a federal judge stated that the suit could go forward. In August 2013, the Justice Department argued that leaders of an atheist group may qualify for the parish exemption. Gaylor states &quot;this is not what we are after&quot;, going on to say that the government should not give religious groups any special treatment.

On November 21, 2013, a federal judge ruled in the FFRF&#x27;s favor. In January 2014, the Department of Justice filed an appeal in federal court. In November 2014, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit issued its decision, concluding that the federal tax code provision that treats church-provided housing allowances to ministers as income tax-free must stand.

====Electioneering====
In November 2012, the FFRF filed a lawsuit against the IRS for not enforcing its own electioneering laws. The FFRF cited in its suit the placement of full-page ads by the Billy Graham Evangelistic Association; the diocese requiring priests to read a statement urging Catholics to vote; and the institution of &quot;Pulpit Freedom Sunday&quot;. The group claimed that not enforcing the federal tax codes that prohibit tax-exempt religious organizations from electioneering is a violation of the First Amendment of the Constitution. The group stated that the increasing involvement of religious institutions in politics was &quot;blatantly and deliberately flaunting the electioneering restrictions&quot;.
The IRS had filed a motion to dismiss in federal court, but in August 2013 it was decided that the lawsuit could proceed stating that the FFRF &quot;has standing to seek an order requiring the IRS to treat religious organizations no more favorably than it treats the Foundation&quot;. In 2014, the federal judge dismissed the lawsuit after the parties reached an agreement.

==State capitol signs==

===Florida===
In December 2013, the FFRF was permitted to hang a banner at the capitol after a nativity scene was placed by a private group.

===Illinois===
On December 23, 2009, William J. Kelly, conservative activist and candidate for Illinois Comptroller, attempted to remove a FFRF sign at a Christmas display. The case was dismissed on several grounds, including that the lawsuit ran afoul of the First Amendment prohibition against content-based discrimination and that the plaintiff&#x27;s rights had not been violated.

===Washington===
A plaque with the same text as the Wisconsin State Capitol sign was displayed for the 2008 Christmas season at the state capitol in Olympia, Washington, next to a nativity scene. The sign was stolen and then later found and returned to the state capitol. The addition of the sign incited a large number of individuals and groups to request other additions, such as a Festivus pole, a request by the Westboro Baptist Church for a sign stating &quot;Santa Claus will take you to hell&quot; (among other things), a sign paying homage to the Flying Spaghetti Monster, and many others.

===Wisconsin===
The FFRF maintains a sign in the Wisconsin State Capitol during the Christmas season, which reads:
In 2013, a natural nativity featuring Charles Darwin, Albert Einstein and Mark Twain as the three wise men, the Statue of Liberty and an astronaut as angels and an African American girl baby doll to represent that &quot;humankind was birthed in Africa&quot; was added.

===Texas State Capitol===
In 2015, the FFRF applied to put a &quot;secular Nativity&quot; scene in the Texas State Capitol. The scene featured the Bill of Rights, three Founding Fathers, and the Statue of Liberty and a sign that wished everyone a &quot;Happy Winter Solstice&quot;. The then governor of Texas, Greg Abbott, demanded it be removed. Following a series of legal challenges, in 2018, a three-judge panel of the Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals ruled that FFRF&#x27;s rights were violated. The Court also vacated the ruling of the trial court and sent the case back for consideration of FFRF&#x27;s request for an injunction.

===Rhode Island===
In 2013, the FFRF was allowed to place a sign in the rotunda, after complaints from its members, as a response to the crèches and other religious symbols that are already in place at the statehouse.

===Dayton, Tennessee===

On July 14, 2017, a statue of Clarence Darrow was unveiled in Dayton, Tennessee, on the Rhea County Courthouse lawn, funded by a $150,000 donation from the FFRF. The courthouse was the site of the historic 1925 Scopes Monkey Trial wherein Darrow unsuccessfully defended a teacher, John T. Scopes, who was found guilty of teaching evolution in a public school in violation of what was then a Tennessee state law. The statue was placed just a few feet away from a statue of William Jennings Bryan, Darrow&#x27;s creationist opponent in the trial, which had been erected in 2005 by nearby Bryan College.

===Athens, Texas===

In 2011, the FFRF filed a letter of complaint regarding the placement of a nativity scene on Henderson County courthouse property. After it was decided that the nativity scene would remain, the FFRF petitioned to have its own banner placed on the site, but county officials declined to discuss its placement. The FFRF banner was placed without permission on the courthouse property, but was soon removed. The banner stated: &quot;At this season of the winter solstice, let reason prevail. There are no Gods, no devils, no angels, no Heaven or Hell. There is only our natural world. Religion is but a myth and superstition that hardens hearts and enslaves minds&quot;. In April 2012, the county judge denied FFRF&#x27;s request to place the same banner on the courthouse property.

==Events and activities==
FFRF has held conventions since 1977, one year after the group formed and one year prior to its official incorporation. Conventions have included speakers such as Christopher Hitchens, awards presented to recognize contributions to the advancement of the freethought community, FFRF held NonPrayer Breakfasts, with what it described as moments of bedlam instead of moments of silence, and piano music by FFRF co-president Dan Barker.

The Emperor Has No Clothes Award has been awarded by FFRF since 1999 in recognition of what it called &quot;plain speaking&quot; on the shortcomings of religion by public figures. Past recipients include:
==Finances==

In 2013, Charity Navigator gave FFRF a four-star rating and reported that FFRF had revenues of US$3,878,938, with a net surplus (after expenses) of $1,715,563 and net assets of $11,519,770. Officer compensation for the &quot;co-presidents&quot;, husband and wife Dan Barker and Annie Laurie Gaylor, was $88,700 and $86,500 ($175,200 combined) or approximately 10% of the net surplus.

==See also==
* Irreligion
** Anti-clericalism
** Antireligion
** Antitheism
** Atheist feminism
** Irreligion in the United States
** Recovering from Religion
* Concepts
** Ceremonial deism
** Religious discrimination
* Separation of church and state in the United States
** Americans United for Separation of Church and State
** Church tax
** In God We Trust
* Criticism of religion
** Forced conversion
** Freedom of thought
* Organizations
** American Atheists
** Freethought Association of Canada
==References==
==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q531069" start="4" end="36" title="Freedom From Religion Foundation" label="Freedom From Religion Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q531069" start="38" end="42" title="Freedom From Religion Foundation" label="FFRF"/>
<link wikidata="Q163740" start="59" end="81" title="nonprofit organization" label="nonprofit organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q7066" start="101" end="109" title="atheism" label="atheists"/>
<link wikidata="Q288928" start="111" end="120" title="agnosticism" label="agnostics"/>
<link wikidata="Q871396" start="126" end="136" title="nontheism" label="nontheists"/>
<link wikidata="Q16729217" start="424" end="441" title="Anne Nicol Gaylor" label="Anne Nicol Gaylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4769354" start="460" end="479" title="Annie Laurie Gaylor" label="Annie Laurie Gaylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q461980" start="555" end="581" title="Madalyn Murray O&amp;#x27;Hair" label="Madalyn Murray O&amp;#x27;Hair"/>
<link wikidata="Q463426" start="584" end="601" title="American Atheists" label="American Atheists"/>
<link wikidata="Q22649" start="627" end="639" title="antisemitism" label="antisemitism"/>
<link wikidata="Q43788" start="745" end="763" title="Madison, Wisconsin" label="Madison, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2149337" start="840" end="889" title="Richard Dawkins Foundation for Reason and Science" label="Richard Dawkins Foundation for Reason and Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q20715607" start="897" end="915" title="The Clergy Project" label="The Clergy Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q16198579" start="1107" end="1119" title="Jerry DeWitt" label="Jerry DeWitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3477561" start="1229" end="1253" title="Secular Student Alliance" label="Secular Student Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q973587" start="1532" end="1535" title="Internal Revenue Service" label="IRS"/>
<link wikidata="Q22905923" start="1580" end="1588" title="Form 990" label="Form 990"/>
<link wikidata="Q4227192" start="2257" end="2268" title="Jerry Coyne" label="Jerry Coyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q211050" start="2391" end="2397" title="gamete" label="gamete"/>
<link wikidata="Q212730" start="2755" end="2768" title="Steven Pinker" label="Steven Pinker"/>
<link wikidata="Q44461" start="2770" end="2785" title="Richard Dawkins" label="Richard Dawkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q4227192" start="2790" end="2801" title="Jerry Coyne" label="Jerry Coyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q7957906" start="3425" end="3432" title="WXXM-FM" label="WXXM-FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q2828179" start="3489" end="3500" title="Air America Radio" label="Air America"/>
<link wikidata="Q742825" start="3602" end="3612" title="Dan Barker" label="Dan Barker"/>
<link wikidata="Q4769354" start="3617" end="3636" title="Annie Laurie Gaylor" label="Annie Laurie Gaylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203" start="3853" end="3864" title="John Lennon" label="John Lennon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1971" start="3878" end="3885" title="Imagine (John Lennon song)" label="Imagine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4769354" start="3899" end="3918" title="Annie Laurie Gaylor" label="Annie Laurie Gaylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q742825" start="4309" end="4319" title="Dan Barker" label="Dan Barker"/>
<link wikidata="Q483978" start="4758" end="4769" title="Pentecostal" label="Pentecostal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7994895" start="4954" end="5013" title="White House Office of Faith-Based and Neighborhood Partnerships" label="White House Office of Faith-Based and Community Initiatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q7689659" start="5114" end="5134" title="Taxing and Spending Clause" label="Article I, section 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q7994895" start="5239" end="5276" title="White House Office of Faith-Based and Neighborhood Partnerships" label="Faith-Based and Community Initiatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308297" start="5381" end="5401" title="Establishment Clause of the First Amendment" label="Establishment Clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q24906286" start="5459" end="5483" title="faith-based organization" label="faith-based organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q208762" start="6337" end="6345" title="chaplain" label="chaplain"/>
<link wikidata="Q93191" start="6471" end="6478" title="Baptist" label="Baptist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1861687" start="6787" end="6819" title="Montana State University" label="Montana State University-Bozeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5699645" start="7889" end="7905" title="Hein v. Freedom From Religion Foundation" label="&amp;quot;Hein&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q39046055" start="8026" end="8053" title="Rhea School District" label="Rhea County School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q238101" start="8437" end="8460" title="University of Minnesota" label="University of Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q6705636" start="8551" end="8566" title="Luther Seminary" label="Luther Seminary"/>
<link wikidata="Q5430813" start="8641" end="8665" title="Fairview Health Services" label="Fairview Health Services"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9066" end="9090" title=" Alaska Bible College" label="Alaska Christian College"/>
<link wikidata="Q16222316" start="9663" end="9675" title="Hemant Mehta" label="Hemant Mehta"/>
<link wikidata="Q891082" start="9780" end="9791" title="Boise State" label="Boise State"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400015" start="12431" end="12456" title="Federal Bureau of Prisons" label="Federal Bureau of Prisons"/>
<link wikidata="Q40317" start="12890" end="12901" title="Good Friday" label="Good Friday"/>
<link wikidata="Q31732" start="14426" end="14442" title="Nativity scene" label="nativity display"/>
<link wikidata="Q21637" start="14750" end="14780" title="American Civil Liberties Union" label="American Civil Liberties Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q951290" start="14798" end="14820" title="Giles County, Virginia" label="Giles County, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q34623" start="14890" end="14906" title="Ten Commandments" label="Ten Commandments"/>
<link wikidata="Q54276" start="15821" end="15845" title="Woonsocket, Rhode Island" label="Woonsocket, Rhode Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q6187075" start="16169" end="16185" title="Jessica Ahlquist" label="Jessica Ahlquist"/>
<link wikidata="Q4695198" start="16205" end="16225" title="Ahlquist v. Cranston" label="Ahlquist v. Cranston"/>
<link wikidata="Q986432" start="16296" end="16314" title="Steubenville, Ohio" label="Steubenville, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5483039" start="16394" end="16431" title="Franciscan University of Steubenville" label="Franciscan University of Steubenville"/>
<link wikidata="Q2875291" start="16604" end="16625" title="Whiteville, Tennessee" label="Whiteville, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046799" start="17187" end="17206" title="Knights of Columbus" label="Knights of Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133892" start="17870" end="17892" title="Columbia, Pennsylvania" label="Columbia, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q7137436" start="17966" end="17981" title="church bulletin" label="church bulletin"/>
<link wikidata="Q585962" start="18040" end="18064" title="Civil Rights Act of 1964" label="Civil Rights Act of 1964"/>
<link wikidata="Q6972140" start="18772" end="18794" title="National Day of Prayer" label="National Day of Prayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4858771" start="18826" end="18849" title="Barbara Brandriff Crabb" label="Barbara Brandriff Crabb"/>
<link wikidata="Q2515622" start="18859" end="18875" title="unconstitutional" label="unconstitutional"/>
<link wikidata="Q213325" start="19386" end="19410" title="Rapid City, South Dakota" label="Rapid City, South Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q501029" start="19638" end="19658" title="Lake County, Florida" label="Lake County, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q131404824" start="20832" end="20847" title="Samuel Felinton" label="Samuel Felinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5945368" start="20934" end="20956" title="Huntington High School (West Virginia)" label="Huntington High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q494129" start="21310" end="21342" title="Cabell County, West Virginia" label="Cabell County Board of Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q847301" start="22629" end="22643" title="electioneering" label="electioneering"/>
<link wikidata="Q42735" start="24325" end="24344" title="Olympia, Washington" label="Olympia, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q31732" start="24356" end="24370" title="nativity scene" label="nativity scene"/>
<link wikidata="Q2115975" start="24560" end="24568" title="Festivus" label="Festivus"/>
<link wikidata="Q692942" start="24592" end="24615" title="Westboro Baptist Church" label="Westboro Baptist Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q12044" start="24731" end="24755" title="Flying Spaghetti Monster" label="Flying Spaghetti Monster"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915273" start="24824" end="24847" title="Wisconsin State Capitol" label="Wisconsin State Capitol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035" start="24928" end="24942" title="Charles Darwin" label="Charles Darwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q937" start="24944" end="24959" title="Albert Einstein" label="Albert Einstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q7245" start="24964" end="24974" title="Mark Twain" label="Mark Twain"/>
<link wikidata="Q9202" start="25002" end="25019" title="Statue of Liberty" label="Statue of Liberty"/>
<link wikidata="Q5605224" start="25470" end="25481" title="Greg Abbott" label="Greg Abbott"/>
<link wikidata="Q449791" start="26070" end="26085" title="Clarence Darrow" label="Clarence Darrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020730" start="26102" end="26119" title="Dayton, Tennessee" label="Dayton, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7320293" start="26128" end="26150" title="Rhea County Courthouse" label="Rhea County Courthouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q642342" start="26251" end="26270" title="Scopes Monkey Trial" label="Scopes Monkey Trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q935427" start="26321" end="26335" title="John T. Scopes" label="John T. Scopes"/>
<link wikidata="Q205282" start="26512" end="26534" title="William Jennings Bryan" label="William Jennings Bryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q130352" start="26550" end="26561" title="creationist" label="creationist"/>
<link wikidata="Q4980029" start="26626" end="26639" title="Bryan College" label="Bryan College"/>
<link wikidata="Q112793" start="26756" end="26772" title="Henderson County, Texas" label="Henderson County"/>
<link wikidata="Q49081" start="27633" end="27653" title="Christopher Hitchens" label="Christopher Hitchens"/>
<link wikidata="Q742825" start="27892" end="27902" title="Dan Barker" label="Dan Barker"/>
<link wikidata="Q58721" start="28524" end="28534" title="Irreligion" label="Irreligion"/>
<link wikidata="Q478004" start="28538" end="28554" title="Anti-clericalism" label="Anti-clericalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q565005" start="28558" end="28570" title="Antireligion" label="Antireligion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5522978" start="28574" end="28584" title="Antitheism" label="Antitheism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115134" start="28588" end="28604" title="Atheist feminism" label="Atheist feminism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3154571" start="28608" end="28639" title="Irreligion in the United States" label="Irreligion in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q21016105" start="28643" end="28667" title="Recovering from Religion" label="Recovering from Religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q4662144" start="28682" end="28698" title="Ceremonial deism" label="Ceremonial deism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2029282" start="28702" end="28726" title="Religious discrimination" label="Religious discrimination"/>
<link wikidata="Q17166064" start="28729" end="28780" title="Separation of church and state in the United States" label="Separation of church and state in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q2378366" start="28784" end="28835" title="Americans United for Separation of Church and State" label="Americans United for Separation of Church and State"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195104" start="28839" end="28849" title="Church tax" label="Church tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q270871" start="28853" end="28868" title="In God We Trust" label="In God We Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q838083" start="28871" end="28892" title="Criticism of religion" label="Criticism of religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q4378806" start="28896" end="28913" title="Forced conversion" label="Forced conversion"/>
<link wikidata="Q277569" start="28917" end="28935" title="Freedom of thought" label="Freedom of thought"/>
<link wikidata="Q463426" start="28955" end="28972" title="American Atheists" label="American Atheists"/>
<link wikidata="Q755043" start="28976" end="29009" title="Freethought Association of Canada" label="Freethought Association of Canada"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="311798" wikidata="Q3001961" url="?curid=311798" title="Cracked Rear View">
<text>Cracked Rear View is the debut studio album by Hootie &amp; the Blowfish, released on July 5, 1994, by Atlantic Records. Released to positive critical reviews, it eventually became one of the highest-selling albums in the United States, and also one of the best-selling albums worldwide, with over 20 million units.

==Recording, release, and promotion==
Hootie and the Blowfish were established in 1986 and while they had recorded some self-released promos, such as 1993&#x27;s &quot;Kootchypop&quot; EP, this was their first full-length release. Some of the songs on &quot;Cracked Rear View&quot; had been previously recorded on these demos and had been honed by the band in live performances for several years. Don Gehman was chosen by A&amp;R man Tim Sommer as a producer because of his previous work with John Mellencamp and R.E.M. Gehman&#x27;s career had been in commercial decline for several years after having had successes in the 1980s, so he pivoted to accepting lower-profile artists, smaller budgets, and being more efficient in the studio to cut costs. It cost US$200,000 to make and the label invested a relatively moderate $75,000 to Gehman for producing ( and $, respectively). The recording and mixing process took 28 days, made up of 20 days of recording and 8 mixing; he kept costs down by mixing the album himself and providing his own equipment for the band to use. In 1996, Gehman reflected on the expectations of the release, stating that no one at Atlantic Records expected it to be a blockbuster, but possibly selling a few hundred thousand copies to establish the band an audience building on their existing South Carolina fan base; as sales took off, the label became more invested and the promotion caused sales to continue to grow. Gehman later produced and mixed &quot;Fairweather Johnson&quot; (1996), &quot;Musical Chairs&quot; (1998), and &quot;Looking for Lucky&quot; (2005) by the band.

The album was promoted by a string of music videos, singles, and promotional tour appearances. Hootie &amp; the Blowfish had been performing approximately 300 shows a year at this point and continued touring throughout the mid-1990s to support &quot;Cracked Rear View&quot;, including high-profile television appearances, including three episodes of &quot;Late Show with David Letterman&quot;, and benefit concerts such as FarmAid. Atlantic successfully piloted a promotional strategy using low-power radio stations that targeted specific regional markets to promote &quot;Cracked Rear View&quot; and they expanded this project based on the strong sales of this album. Regular airplay on VH-1 also helped to grow the audience for this album.

==Reception==
===Commercial reception===
&quot;Cracked Rear View&quot; is Hootie &amp; the Blowfish&#x27;s most successful album. While initial sales were modest and it debuted at 127 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; 200, it topped that chart five times in 1995 and was the best-selling album of 1995 in the United States, selling 7 million copies, besting the second-place &quot;Crazysexycool&quot; by 2.2 million. This won the 1995 &quot;Billboard&quot; Music Award for Top &quot;Billboard&quot; 200 Album. Sales were strong enough that Hootie &amp; the Blowfish were the best-selling group of 1996 in adult contemporary and pop music as well, between this album and follow-up &quot;Fairweather Johnson&quot; and in April of that year, &quot;Time&quot; reported that &quot;Cracked Rear View&quot; had generated over US$100 million in gross revenues for Atlantic Records (). Both of the band&#x27;s first two efforts were in the top 20 albums of 1996; &quot;Cracked Rear View&quot; was 20th, selling 1.9 million copies. In 1995 to 1996, &quot;Cracked Rear View&quot; sold more than 100,000 copies per week for 40 weeks. This was during an industry-wide trend of depressed sales in both the United States and Canada.

The album moved 10 million certified sales by October 1995, reaching 12 million by February 1996, which made it the fifth-best selling debut album and this increased by another million sales by June, reaching fourth place. A 1999 assessment that it had sold 16 million copies made it the most copies of a debut album sold. It had sold 10.2 million copies in the United States per Nielsen SoundScan by 2012, with an additional 3 million copies sold through CD clubs, which are not included in SoundScan&#x27;s total. It is the joint 19th-best-selling album of all time in the United States, rising to 10th place if one excludes compilations. Internationally, &quot;Cracked Rear View&quot; reached number one in Canada, where it was also the best-selling album of the year at over 800,000 units and also topped charts in New Zealand. In 1999, it was one of the 62 inaugural diamond certifications by the Recording Industry Association of America, placing at 16 with 15 million sales and was certified 22× platinum (double diamond) by 2018. Alongside Led Zeppelin&#x27;s fourth album, it is the best-selling release on Atlantic and is the album with the fourth-most weeks topping the &quot;Billboard&quot; 200 from the label.

The massive commercial success of the band led to some backlash, specifically centered on their music being bland or middle of the road soft rock and being out of step with trends like gangsta rap or grunge, as well as the band&#x27;s comical name. For instance, in late 1995, Chris Norris of &quot;New York&quot; wrote that the year in rock music was summed up by Hootie &amp; the Blowfish, which he critiqued for being &quot; normal&quot; and making &quot;willfully centrist rock&quot;. Reassessments in the 2010s have been more kind to the band, noting their importance to 1990s rock music and as younger fans from the 1990s have grown up with nostalgia for the group. In particular, the 25th anniversary of this album led outlets such as &quot;Consequence of Sound&quot; to note that there was an audience for mid-tempo rock music with solid songwriting that did not reflect the wake of Nirvana&#x27;s huge success with &quot;Nevermind&quot; in 1991 and by artists that had no interest in trying to be cool. In &quot;The Dallas Observer&quot;, Preston Jones noted that the critical backlash had long ago subsided and that the band&#x27;s &quot;material has aged extraordinarily well, fond remembrances aside&quot; including live performances touring for their 2019 release &quot;Imperfect Circle&quot;.

===Critical reception===
Critical reviews of &quot;Cracked Rear View&quot; were mostly positive. Editors at AllMusic rated this album 4.5 out of 5 stars, with critic Stephen Thomas Erlewine writing that the album as &quot;the success story of 1994/1995&quot; and continued, &quot;although Hootie &amp; the Blowfish aren&#x27;t innovative, they deliver the goods, turning out an album of solid, rootsy folk-rock songs that have simple, powerful hooks&quot;. A revie for retailers by &quot;Billboard&quot; compared the music to Counting Crows and John Mellencamp and spotlighted &quot;Hold My Hand&quot; as particularly accessible. Robert Christgau rated the album a B and praised Darius Rucker&#x27;s &quot;gruff grit [which] adds an extra layer of substance&quot; to the simple songwriting and musicianship and noted the importance of mainstream white audiences hearing about black issues from a black singer.

The band won for Grammy Award for Best New Artist and &quot;Let Her Cry&quot; won Grammy Award for Best Pop Performance by a Duo or Group with Vocals at the 38th Annual Grammy Awards.

==Track listing==
All songs written by Mark Bryan, Dean Felber, Darius Rucker and Jim &quot;Soni&quot; Sonefeld, except where noted.
# &quot;Hannah Jane&quot; – 3:33
# &quot;Hold My Hand&quot; – 4:15
# &quot;Let Her Cry&quot; – 5:08
# &quot;Only Wanna Be with You&quot; – 3:46
# &quot;Running from an Angel&quot; – 3:37
# &quot;I&#x27;m Goin&#x27; Home&quot; – 4:10
# &quot;Drowning&quot; – 5:01
# &quot;Time&quot; – 4:53
# &quot;Look Away&quot; – 2:38
# &quot;Not Even the Trees&quot; – 4:37
# &quot;Goodbye&quot; – 4:05
:Includes hidden track &quot;Sometimes I Feel Like a Motherless Child&quot; (traditional) – 0:53

In 2001, the album was re-released on DVD-Audio with the disc featuring a discography, photo gallery, and video of a live performance of &quot;Drowning&quot;.

The 25th anniversary edition from 2019 includes the following bonus discs:

Disc 2: B-sides, Outtakes, Pre-LP Independent Recordings
#&quot;All That I Believe&quot; – 3:29
#&quot;I Go Blind&quot; (Neil Osborne, Phil Comparelli, Brad Merritt, Darryl Neudorf) – 3:13
#&quot;Almost Home&quot; – 4:02
#&quot;Fine Line&quot; – 3:33
#&quot;Where Were You&quot; – 3:55
#&quot;Hey, Hey What Can I Do&quot; (John Bonham, John Paul Jones, Jimmy Page, Robert Plant) – 3:56
#&quot;The Old Man and Me&quot; – &quot;Kootchypop&quot; Version – 4:29
#&quot;Hold My Hand&quot; – &quot;Kootchypop&quot; Version – 5:07
#&quot;If You&#x27;re Going My Way&quot; – &quot;Kootchypop&quot; Version – 3:29
#&quot;Sorry&#x27;s Not Enough&quot; – &quot;Kootchypop&quot; Version – 4:04
#&quot;Only Wanna Be with You&quot; – &quot;Kootchypop&quot; Version – 3:41
#&quot;Running from an Angel&quot; – 1991 Version – 3:57
#&quot;Time&quot; – 1991 Version – 4:28
#&quot;Let Her Cry&quot; – 1991 Version – 5:02
#&quot;Drowning&quot; – 1991 Version – 5:50
#&quot;I Don&#x27;t Understand&quot; – 5:50
#&quot;Little Girl&quot; – 2:50
#&quot;Look Away&quot; – 1990 Version – 2:58
#&quot;Let My People Go&quot; – 2:37
#&quot;Hold My Hand&quot; – 1990 Version – 4:40

Disc 3: Live at Nick&#x27;s Fat City, Pittsburgh, PA, February 3, 1995
#&quot;Hannah Jane&quot; – 3:36
#&quot;I Go Blind&quot; – 3:04
#&quot;Not Even the Trees&quot; – 4:40
#&quot;If You&#x27;re Going My Way&quot; – 3:31
#&quot;Look Away&quot; – 2:36
#&quot;Fine Line&quot; – 3:23
#&quot;Let Her Cry&quot; – 5:15
#&quot;Motherless Child&quot; – 0:54
#&quot;I&#x27;m Goin&#x27; Home&quot; – 4:37
#&quot;Use Me&quot; – 5:00
#&quot;Running from an Angel&quot; – 4:06
#&quot;Sorry&#x27;s Not Enough&quot; – 4:17
#&quot;Drowning&quot; – 6:12
#&quot;The Old Man and Me&quot; – 4:20
#&quot;Only Wanna Be with You&quot; – 3:53
#&quot;Time&quot; – 5:12
#&quot;Goodbye&quot; – 3:54
#&quot;The Ballad of John and Yoko&quot; (Lennon-McCartney) – 2:55
#&quot;Hold My Hand&quot; – 5:31
#&quot;Love the One You&#x27;re With&quot; (Stephen Stills) – 2:50

DVD
*5.1 Surround Sound mix of the original album
Hi-Res 24/96 Bonus Tracks 
*&quot;All That I Believe&quot;
*&quot;I Go Blind&quot;
*&quot;Almost Home&quot;
*&quot;Fine Line&quot;
*&quot;Where Were You&quot;
Music videos:
*&quot;Hold My Hand&quot;
*&quot;Let Her Cry&quot;
*&quot;Only Wanna Be with You&quot;
*&quot;Time&quot;
*&quot;Drowning&quot; – Live

==Personnel==
Hootie &amp; the Blowfish
* Mark Bryan – electric guitar, acoustic guitar, vocal percussion, mandolin on &quot;Only Wanna Be with You&quot;, piano on &quot;Not Even the Trees&quot;, 
* Dean Felber – bass guitar, clavinet, vocals, piano on &quot;Only Wanna Be with You&quot;
* Darius Rucker – vocals, acoustic guitar, percussion
* Jim &quot;Soni&quot; Sonefeld – drums, percussion, vocals, piano on &quot;Look Away&quot; and &quot;Goodbye&quot;, glasses on &quot;Not Even the Trees&quot;

Additional musicians
* David Crosby – background vocals on &quot;Hold My Hand&quot;
* Lili Haydn – violin on &quot;Look Away&quot; and &quot;Running from an Angel&quot;
* John Nau – piano on &quot;I&#x27;m Goin&#x27; Home&quot;, Hammond organ

Production
* Jean Cronin – art direction
* Don Gehman – production, engineering, mixing
* Michael McLaughlin – photography
* Wade Norton – assistant engineering
* Gena Rankin – production coordination
* Eddy Schreyer – mastering
* Tim Sommer – artists and repertoire
* Liz Sroka – assistant mixing

==Charts==
===Weekly charts===
===Year-end charts===


===Decade-end charts===
==Certifications and sales==




==See also==
* List of 1994 albums

==References==
==External links==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1476499" start="47" end="72" title="Hootie &amp;amp; the Blowfish" label="Hootie &amp;amp; the Blowfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q202440" start="103" end="119" title="Atlantic Records" label="Atlantic Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q468514" start="192" end="235" title="List of best-selling albums in the United States" label="highest-selling albums in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q305282" start="257" end="286" title="List of best-selling albums" label="best-selling albums worldwide"/>
<link wikidata="Q10314623" start="485" end="495" title="Kootchypop" label="Kootchypop"/>
<link wikidata="Q220935" start="637" end="642" title="demo (music)" label="demos"/>
<link wikidata="Q5292661" start="714" end="724" title="Don Gehman" label="Don Gehman"/>
<link wikidata="Q610225" start="739" end="746" title="Artists and repertoire" label="A&amp;amp;R"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804313" start="751" end="761" title="Tim Sommer" label="Tim Sommer"/>
<link wikidata="Q345431" start="810" end="825" title="John Mellencamp" label="John Mellencamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q134969" start="830" end="836" title="R.E.M." label="R.E.M."/>
<link wikidata="Q17085328" start="1311" end="1317" title="Audio mixing (recorded music)" label="mixing"/>
<link wikidata="Q202440" start="1474" end="1490" title="Atlantic Records" label="Atlantic Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q3064560" start="1801" end="1820" title="Fairweather Johnson" label="Fairweather Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3328531" start="1841" end="1855" title="Musical Chairs (Hootie &amp;amp; the Blowfish album)" label="Musical Chairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3259244" start="1880" end="1897" title="Looking for Lucky" label="Looking for Lucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q858778" start="2281" end="2311" title="Late Show with David Letterman" label="Late Show with David Letterman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1850936" start="2323" end="2338" title="benefit concert" label="benefit concert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396782" start="2348" end="2355" title="FarmAid" label="FarmAid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2015033" start="2416" end="2440" title="Low-power broadcasting" label="low-power radio stations"/>
<link wikidata="Q203078" start="2613" end="2617" title="VH-1" label="VH-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q188819" start="2859" end="2884" title="Billboard 200" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q869575" start="3044" end="3057" title="Crazysexycool" label="Crazysexycool"/>
<link wikidata="Q378988" start="3268" end="3286" title="adult contemporary" label="adult contemporary"/>
<link wikidata="Q37073" start="3291" end="3300" title="pop music" label="pop music"/>
<link wikidata="Q3064560" start="3349" end="3368" title="Fairweather Johnson" label="Fairweather Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="3408" end="3412" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q850210" start="3506" end="3513" title="revenue" label="revenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067041" start="4262" end="4279" title="Nielsen SoundScan" label="Nielsen SoundScan"/>
<link wikidata="Q468514" start="4414" end="4470" title="List of best-selling albums in the United States" label="19th-best-selling album of all time in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="4592" end="4598" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="4701" end="4712" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q241365" start="4754" end="4761" title="Music recording sales certification" label="diamond"/>
<link wikidata="Q200863" start="4784" end="4825" title="Recording Industry Association of America" label="Recording Industry Association of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503026" start="4885" end="4893" title="RIAA certification" label="platinum"/>
<link wikidata="Q201940" start="4930" end="4962" title="Led Zeppelin&amp;#x27;s fourth album" label="Led Zeppelin&amp;#x27;s fourth album"/>
<link wikidata="Q3328660" start="5223" end="5241" title="middle of the road (music)" label="middle of the road"/>
<link wikidata="Q217191" start="5242" end="5251" title="soft rock" label="soft rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q753679" start="5291" end="5302" title="gangsta rap" label="gangsta rap"/>
<link wikidata="Q11365" start="5306" end="5312" title="grunge" label="grunge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507987" start="5405" end="5413" title="New York (magazine)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q12151852" start="5753" end="5762" title="nostalgia" label="nostalgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4036498" start="5854" end="5874" title="Consequence of Sound" label="Consequence of Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q11649" start="5997" end="6004" title="Nirvana (band)" label="Nirvana"/>
<link wikidata="Q17444" start="6036" end="6045" title="Nevermind" label="Nevermind"/>
<link wikidata="Q5211375" start="6127" end="6146" title="The Dallas Observer" label="The Dallas Observer"/>
<link wikidata="Q66360694" start="6389" end="6405" title="Imperfect Circle" label="Imperfect Circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q31181" start="6522" end="6530" title="AllMusic" label="AllMusic"/>
<link wikidata="Q976031" start="6580" end="6603" title="Stephen Thomas Erlewine" label="Stephen Thomas Erlewine"/>
<link wikidata="Q485240" start="6902" end="6911" title="Billboard (magazine)" label="Billboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q178549" start="6940" end="6954" title="Counting Crows" label="Counting Crows"/>
<link wikidata="Q345431" start="6959" end="6974" title="John Mellencamp" label="John Mellencamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q314382" start="7044" end="7060" title="Robert Christgau" label="Robert Christgau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1453643" start="7342" end="7374" title="Grammy Award for Best New Artist" label="Grammy Award for Best New Artist"/>
<link wikidata="Q17020456" start="7385" end="7396" title="Let Her Cry (song)" label="Let Her Cry"/>
<link wikidata="Q747902" start="7407" end="7474" title="Grammy Award for Best Pop Performance by a Duo or Group with Vocals" label="Grammy Award for Best Pop Performance by a Duo or Group with Vocals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542306" start="7482" end="7507" title="38th Annual Grammy Awards" label="38th Annual Grammy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q6766895" start="7549" end="7559" title="Mark Bryan" label="Mark Bryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q445405" start="7574" end="7587" title="Darius Rucker" label="Darius Rucker"/>
<link wikidata="Q17010324" start="7684" end="7696" title="Hold My Hand (Hootie &amp;amp; the Blowfish song)" label="Hold My Hand"/>
<link wikidata="Q17020456" start="7718" end="7729" title="Let Her Cry (song)" label="Let Her Cry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7094262" start="7751" end="7773" title="Only Wanna Be with You" label="Only Wanna Be with You"/>
<link wikidata="Q16962900" start="7884" end="7892" title="Drowning (Hootie &amp;amp; the Blowfish song)" label="Drowning"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804875" start="7914" end="7918" title="Time (Hootie &amp;amp; the Blowfish song)" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q927803" start="8042" end="8054" title="hidden track" label="hidden track"/>
<link wikidata="Q605190" start="8061" end="8101" title="Sometimes I Feel Like a Motherless Child" label="Sometimes I Feel Like a Motherless Child"/>
<link wikidata="Q117678" start="8168" end="8177" title="DVD-Audio" label="DVD-Audio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5977252" start="8469" end="8479" title="I Go Blind" label="I Go Blind"/>
<link wikidata="Q3304321" start="8659" end="8681" title="Hey, Hey What Can I Do" label="Hey, Hey What Can I Do"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418935" start="10198" end="10225" title="The Ballad of John and Yoko" label="The Ballad of John and Yoko"/>
<link wikidata="Q239177" start="10233" end="10249" title="Lennon-McCartney" label="Lennon-McCartney"/>
<link wikidata="Q6692000" start="10298" end="10327" title="Love the One You&amp;#x27;re With" label="Love the One You&amp;#x27;re With"/>
<link wikidata="Q354496" start="10335" end="10349" title="Stephen Stills" label="Stephen Stills"/>
<link wikidata="Q238612" start="10364" end="10382" title="5.1 Surround Sound" label="5.1 Surround Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q6766895" start="10759" end="10769" title="Mark Bryan" label="Mark Bryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q78987" start="10772" end="10787" title="electric guitar" label="electric guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q31561" start="10789" end="10804" title="acoustic guitar" label="acoustic guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2529779" start="10806" end="10822" title="vocal percussion" label="vocal percussion"/>
<link wikidata="Q302497" start="10824" end="10832" title="mandolin" label="mandolin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5994" start="10872" end="10877" title="piano" label="piano"/>
<link wikidata="Q46185" start="10930" end="10941" title="bass guitar" label="bass guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1099153" start="10943" end="10951" title="clavinet" label="clavinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q27939" start="10953" end="10959" title="Singing" label="vocals"/>
<link wikidata="Q445405" start="11007" end="11020" title="Darius Rucker" label="Darius Rucker"/>
<link wikidata="Q133163" start="11048" end="11058" title="Percussion instrument" label="percussion"/>
<link wikidata="Q128309" start="11093" end="11097" title="Drum kit" label="drum"/>
<link wikidata="Q370560" start="11242" end="11254" title="David Crosby" label="David Crosby"/>
<link wikidata="Q798487" start="11257" end="11274" title="Backing vocalist" label="background vocals"/>
<link wikidata="Q51603" start="11305" end="11315" title="Lili Haydn" label="Lili Haydn"/>
<link wikidata="Q8355" start="11318" end="11324" title="violin" label="violin"/>
<link wikidata="Q105891" start="11448" end="11461" title="Hammond organ" label="Hammond organ"/>
<link wikidata="Q706364" start="11490" end="11503" title="art director" label="art direction"/>
<link wikidata="Q5292661" start="11506" end="11516" title="Don Gehman" label="Don Gehman"/>
<link wikidata="Q183945" start="11519" end="11529" title="Record producer" label="production"/>
<link wikidata="Q128124" start="11531" end="11542" title="Audio engineer" label="engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q6884071" start="11544" end="11550" title="Mixing engineer" label="mixing"/>
<link wikidata="Q11633" start="11574" end="11585" title="photography" label="photography"/>
<link wikidata="Q421031" start="11682" end="11691" title="Audio mastering" label="mastering"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804313" start="11694" end="11704" title="Tim Sommer" label="Tim Sommer"/>
<link wikidata="Q610225" start="11707" end="11729" title="artists and repertoire" label="artists and repertoire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2332028" start="11889" end="11908" title="List of 1994 albums" label="List of 1994 albums"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="311799" wikidata="Q1782948" url="?curid=311799" title="Tennessee State University">
<text>Tennessee State University (Tennessee State, Tenn State, or TSU) is a public historically black land-grant university in Nashville, Tennessee, United States. Founded in 1912, it is the only state-funded historically black university in Tennessee. It is a member-school of the Thurgood Marshall College Fund. Tennessee State University offers 41 bachelor&#x27;s degrees, 23 master&#x27;s degrees, and eight doctoral degrees. It is classified as &quot;R2: Doctoral Universities – High research activity&quot;.

==History==
The university was established as the Tennessee Agricultural &amp; Industrial State Normal School for Negroes in 1912. Its dedication was held on January 16, 1913. It changed its name to Tennessee Agricultural &amp; Industrial State Normal College in 1925. Two years later, in 1927, it became known as Tennessee Agricultural &amp; Industrial State College.

In 1941, the Tennessee General Assembly directed the Board of Education to upgrade the educational program of the college. Three years later the first master&#x27;s degrees were awarded and by 1946 the college was fully accredited by the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools.

Significant expansion occurred during the presidency of Walter S. Davis between 1943 and 1968. The postwar period resulted in the construction of &quot;70 percent of the school&#x27;s facilities&quot; and the establishment of the graduate school and four other schools.

In 1968, the college officially changed its name to Tennessee State University. In 1979, the University of Tennessee at Nashville merged into Tennessee State due to a court mandate.

In 2022, Tennessee State University was awarded $250 million from the state legislature. The funds were intended to upgrade facilities and academic programs on campus. At the time of the award, the $250 million investment was the largest single investment into a historically black institution in the history of the country.

In 2023, Tennessee State&#x27;s most well known graduate, Oprah Winfrey, served as the official commencement speaker for the first time.

Tennessee State University is divided into eight schools and colleges and has seen steady growth since its inception. It remains the only public university in Nashville. Its health science program is the largest in the state and one of the largest in the nation.

On March 28, 2024, Tennessee Governor Bill Lee signed legislation that removed all of the school&#x27;s board of trustees and replaced them with new members, subject to legislative confirmation. Characterizing the school as a “remarkable institution” he said, “I’m pleased to appoint these highly qualified individuals who will work alongside administrators and students to further secure TSU’s place as a leading institution.”

State legislation authorizing the governor to vacate the board of trustees was prompted by the numerous instances of financial and procedural mismanagement uncovered in recent school audits. Representative Ryan Williams specifically noted that the $250 million appropriation made by the legislature in 2022 was “completely blown through” and not used for infrastructure improvements as intended.

==Campus==
The main campus has more than 65 buildings, and is located in a residential setting at 3500 John A. Merritt Blvd in Nashville, Tennessee. Tennessee State&#x27;s main campus has the most acres of any college campus in Nashville. The Avon Williams campus is located downtown, near the center of the Nashville business and government district. Tennessee State offers on-campus housing to students. There are on-campus dorms and two apartment complexes for upperclassmen. On-campus facilities include dormitories Wilson Hall, Watson Hall, Eppse Hall, Boyd Hall, Rudolph Hall, Hale Hall, as well as the Ford Complex and New Residence Complex, TSU&#x27;s two on-campus apartment complexes.

==Academics==

The university is accredited by the Commission on Colleges of the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools (SACS) to award associate degrees, baccalaureate degrees, master&#x27;s degrees, and doctoral degree. It is classified among &quot;R2: Doctoral Universities – High research activity&quot;.

The university is organized into the following colleges:

*College of Agriculture, Human, and Natural Sciences
*College of Business
*College of Education
*College of Engineering
*College of Health Sciences
*College of Liberal Arts
*College of Life and Physical Sciences
*College of Public Service
*University Honors College
*School of Graduate and Professional Studies

The College of Business is accredited by the Association to Advance Collegiate Schools of Business (AACSB). It was the first institution in Nashville to earn the accreditation of both its undergraduate and graduate business programs in 1994. The psychology program is accredited by the American Psychological Association. Programs in the College of Engineering are accredited by the Accreditation Board for Engineering and Technology (ABET) or the National Association of Industrial Technology (NAIT). The Master of Public Health program was accredited in 2015 by the Council on Education for Public Health (CEPH).

==Student activities==
===Athletics===

Tennessee State University sponsors seven men&#x27;s and eight women&#x27;s teams in National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA) sanctioned sports. The school competes in the NCAA&#x27;s Division I Football Championship Subdivision and is a member of the Ohio Valley Conference (OVC). As a member of the OVC, Tennessee State is one of three Division I HBCU athletic programs that are not members of either the Mid-Eastern Athletic Conference (MEAC) or Southwestern Athletic Conference (SWAC), whose members are primarily HBCU institutions. TSU has a rivalry with Tennessee Tech and Kentucky State University.

===Student organizations===
There are over 60 registered student organizations on campus including the Student Government Association, Aristocrat of Bands (AOB), and many fraternities and sororities.

==Notable alumni==

===Aviation===
===Civil rights===
===Education===
===Entertainment ===
===Politics===
===Science and technology===
===Sports===
==See also==

* List of Tennessee State University presidents
* Southern Heritage Classic
* &quot;From the Rough&quot;

==References==
==Further reading==
* Lovett, Bobby L. &quot;A Touch of Greatness: A History of Tennessee State University&quot; (Mercer University Press, 2012) 340 pp.

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1782948" start="0" end="26" title="Tennessee State University" label="Tennessee State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1782948" start="28" end="43" title="Tennessee State University" label="Tennessee State"/>
<link wikidata="Q1782948" start="45" end="55" title="Tennessee State University" label="Tenn State"/>
<link wikidata="Q1782948" start="60" end="63" title="Tennessee State University" label="TSU"/>
<link wikidata="Q875538" start="70" end="76" title="Public university" label="public"/>
<link wikidata="Q1620945" start="77" end="95" title="Historically black colleges and universities" label="historically black"/>
<link wikidata="Q615150" start="96" end="117" title="land-grant university" label="land-grant university"/>
<link wikidata="Q23197" start="121" end="141" title="Nashville, Tennessee" label="Nashville, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7799283" start="276" end="306" title="Thurgood Marshall College Fund" label="Thurgood Marshall College Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q163727" start="345" end="367" title="bachelor&amp;#x27;s degree" label="bachelor&amp;#x27;s degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q183816" start="373" end="393" title="master&amp;#x27;s degree" label="master&amp;#x27;s degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q849697" start="406" end="421" title="doctoral degree" label="doctoral degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q4223026" start="430" end="440" title="Carnegie Classification of Institutions of Higher Education" label="classified"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569646" start="1117" end="1161" title="Southern Association of Colleges and Schools" label="Southern Association of Colleges and Schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q7966029" start="1220" end="1235" title="Walter S. Davis" label="Walter S. Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7896425" start="1528" end="1564" title="University of Tennessee at Nashville" label="University of Tennessee at Nashville"/>
<link wikidata="Q7700086" start="1688" end="1705" title="Tennessee General Assembly" label="state legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q55800" start="2002" end="2015" title="Oprah Winfrey" label="Oprah Winfrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q58321685" start="2384" end="2392" title="Bill Lee (Tennessee politician)" label="Bill Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q16887039" start="2981" end="2994" title="Ryan Williams (American politician)" label="Ryan Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q209465" start="3192" end="3198" title="campus" label="campus"/>
<link wikidata="Q23197" start="3299" end="3319" title="Nashville, Tennessee" label="Nashville, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q4829254" start="3415" end="3428" title="Avon Williams" label="Avon Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q5758323" start="3901" end="3911" title="Higher education accreditation in the United States" label="accredited"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569646" start="3949" end="3993" title="Southern Association of Colleges and Schools" label="Southern Association of Colleges and Schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q14625016" start="4010" end="4026" title="associate degree" label="associate degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q163727" start="4029" end="4049" title="baccalaureate degree" label="baccalaureate degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q183816" start="4052" end="4072" title="master&amp;#x27;s degree" label="master&amp;#x27;s degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q849697" start="4079" end="4094" title="doctoral degree" label="doctoral degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q4223026" start="4102" end="4112" title="Carnegie Classification of Institutions of Higher Education" label="classified"/>
<link wikidata="Q744144" start="4599" end="4652" title="Association to Advance Collegiate Schools of Business" label="Association to Advance Collegiate Schools of Business"/>
<link wikidata="Q466587" start="4840" end="4874" title="American Psychological Association" label="American Psychological Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q4650304" start="4937" end="4987" title="Accreditation Board for Engineering and Technology" label="Accreditation Board for Engineering and Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q4810091" start="5002" end="5047" title="National Association of Industrial Technology" label="National Association of Industrial Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q5176560" start="5122" end="5160" title="Council on Education for Public Health" label="Council on Education for Public Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q271805" start="5295" end="5335" title="National Collegiate Athletic Association" label="National Collegiate Athletic Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842604" start="5401" end="5411" title="NCAA Division I" label="Division I"/>
<link wikidata="Q86660967" start="5412" end="5445" title="NCAA Division I Football Championship Subdivision" label="Football Championship Subdivision"/>
<link wikidata="Q951748" start="5469" end="5491" title="Ohio Valley Conference" label="Ohio Valley Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q941010" start="5624" end="5655" title="Mid-Eastern Athletic Conference" label="Mid-Eastern Athletic Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q946006" start="5666" end="5698" title="Southwestern Athletic Conference" label="Southwestern Athletic Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q1620945" start="5735" end="5739" title="HBCU" label="HBCU"/>
<link wikidata="Q877998" start="5927" end="5957" title="Student Government Association" label="Student Government Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q4791015" start="5959" end="5978" title="Aristocrat of Bands" label="Aristocrat of Bands"/>
<link wikidata="Q6599280" start="6189" end="6234" title="List of Tennessee State University presidents" label="List of Tennessee State University presidents"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569973" start="6237" end="6262" title="Southern Heritage Classic" label="Southern Heritage Classic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088298" start="6271" end="6285" title="From the Rough" label="From the Rough"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="311802" wikidata="Q356938" url="?curid=311802" title="Chad Channing">
<text>Chad Channing (born January 31, 1967) is an American musician who is best known as the drummer of the rock band Nirvana from 1988 to 1990, during which time they recorded and released their debut album &quot;Bleach&quot;; he also appears on &quot;Polly&quot; in the follow-up album &quot;Nevermind&quot;. He currently sings and plays bass in the band Before Cars.

==Biography==

===Early life===
Channing was born on January 31, 1967, in Santa Rosa, California, to Wayne and Burnyce Channing. Wayne was a radio disc jockey and the family was constantly moving all over the country due to different jobs being offered to him. At 13, Chad shattered his femur in an accident during gym class. Over the years of rehabilitation and surgeries, he discovered music; he started playing music with a bass guitar that his parents bought him. The bass filled Chad&#x27;s time as he was unable to go to school. When he was out of his leg casts, his parents bought him a drum set to help build strength in his legs.

Channing joined a band with future Nirvana guitarist Jason Everman called Stonecrow in 1985. Everman had known Channing since fifth grade, and the two had played in bands together in high school. Later, while working as a sauté cook on Bainbridge Island, Washington, Channing started the band Tick-Dolly-Row with Chris Karr, John Hurd and Ben Shepherd, also a Bainbridge Islander, who would later become the bassist for Soundgarden. Tick-Dolly-Row shared a bill with Nirvana, who at the time were going under the name Bliss. Not long after, a mutual friend introduced Channing to Kurt Cobain and Krist Novoselic, who were searching for a drummer. The three got together several times for jam sessions before they started playing shows.

===Nirvana===
In June 1988, a few weeks after Channing joined Nirvana, they recorded their first single &quot;Love Buzz&quot;, also marking their Sub Pop debut. Nirvana began the recording sessions for &quot;Bleach&quot; on Christmas Eve 1988, finishing toward the end of January 1989. Everman, a friend of the band, agreed to pay money for recording. &quot;Bleach&quot; was released on June 15, 1989. Channing played drums with the exception of &quot;Floyd the Barber&quot; and &quot;Paper Cuts&quot;, which featured Melvins drummer Dale Crover from sessions prior to Channing joining the band. Reissues of &quot;Bleach&quot; included the song &quot;Downer&quot;, which also had Crover from those sessions.

In April 1990, Nirvana recorded eight songs at Smart Studios with producer Butch Vig for the band&#x27;s sophomore album, although the sessions were halted after Cobain lost his voice. During these sessions Cobain and Novoselic became disenchanted with Channing&#x27;s drumming, and Channing expressed frustration at not being actively involved in songwriting. These creative and artistic differences culminated in Channing&#x27;s departure after their April-May 1990 tour, a mutual decision within the band. Nirvana used the Smart recordings as a demo to secure a new contract with a major label and the band re-recorded the tracks for a new studio album in the fall of 1990, recruiting Dave Grohl as their new drummer who adopted many of Channing&#x27;s drum parts. Although uncredited (until the Deluxe edition), the version of &quot;Polly&quot; used on &quot;Nevermind&quot; is the original version the band recorded with Channing on percussion, the only song carried over from the Smart sessions.

Due to Nirvana&#x27;s popularity and longevity, the issuing of their older work continued, both during the band&#x27;s existence and following their demise. The 1992 compilation &quot;Incesticide&quot; featured the tracks &quot;Dive&quot;, &quot;Stain&quot;, and &quot;Big Long Now&quot;, all crediting Channing as drummer. Live versions of &quot;Polly&quot; and &quot;Breed&quot; that included Channing appeared on &quot;From the Muddy Banks of the Wishkah&quot;, a live album released in 1996. The 2004 &quot;With the Lights Out&quot; box set featured a DVD of a December 1988 Nirvana rehearsal, as well as seven songs scattered across the first two discs of the set, all with Channing on drums.

Following Nirvana&#x27;s induction into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in December 2013, Channing said in an interview with the Radio.com website that he perceived the recognition as a gift for his daughter. However, Channing was later informed of his omission via text message, and was not included in the April 2014 induction, as the accolade only applied to Cobain, Novoselic and Grohl. Channing did attend the ceremony, and his replacement Dave Grohl made a point to publicly thank Channing for his contributions to the band and noted that some of Nirvana&#x27;s most recognizable drum riffs, such as those on &quot;In Bloom&quot;, were in fact written by Channing.

===Post-Nirvana work===
After leaving Nirvana, Channing formed the Fire Ants who released the &quot;Stripped&quot; EP on Dekema Records in 1992, produced by Jack Endino, who had produced &quot;Bleach&quot;. Members of the Fire Ants included Brian Wood (vocals) and Kevin Wood (guitars), brothers of the late Mother Love Bone singer Andrew Wood, and bassist Dan McDonald. Channing and McDonald collaborated again in 1998 with John Hurd and Erik Spicer, forming The Methodists who released the album &quot;Cookie&quot;.

Chad stepped from behind the drum set to front his new project Before Cars, which released the single &quot;Old Chair&quot; in 2006. They released their debut album &quot;Walk Back&quot; in 2008, again produced by Jack Endino. Channing supplies lead vocals and bass on all tracks as well as some acoustic guitar.

==Discography==
===With Tic Dolly Row===
* &quot;Live&quot; demo (1987)

===With Nirvana===

===With Fire Ants===
* &quot;Ant Acid&quot; 7&quot; (1992)
* &quot;Stripped&quot; EP (1992)

===With The Methodists===
* &quot;Cookie&quot; (1998)

===With Before Cars===
* &quot;Old Chair&quot; EP (2006)
* &quot;Walk Back&quot; (2008)
* &quot;How We Run&quot; (2013)

==References==
==External links==
*Official MySpace for Chad Channing and Before Cars
*Red Band MySpace
*Fire Ants MySpace
*The Methodists MySpace
*Rockstage Brasil</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q356938" start="0" end="13" title="Chad Channing" label="Chad Channing"/>
<link wikidata="Q11399" start="102" end="106" title="Rock music" label="rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q11649" start="112" end="119" title="Nirvana (band)" label="Nirvana"/>
<link wikidata="Q218513" start="208" end="214" title="Bleach (Nirvana album)" label="Bleach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1575153" start="247" end="252" title="Polly (Nirvana song)" label="Polly"/>
<link wikidata="Q17444" start="288" end="297" title="Nevermind" label="Nevermind"/>
<link wikidata="Q11649" start="1040" end="1047" title="Nirvana (band)" label="Nirvana"/>
<link wikidata="Q443395" start="1058" end="1071" title="Jason Everman" label="Jason Everman"/>
<link wikidata="Q803903" start="1241" end="1270" title="Bainbridge Island, Washington" label="Bainbridge Island, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q962323" start="1344" end="1356" title="Ben Shepherd" label="Ben Shepherd"/>
<link wikidata="Q174817" start="1425" end="1436" title="Soundgarden" label="Soundgarden"/>
<link wikidata="Q11649" start="1472" end="1479" title="Nirvana (band)" label="Nirvana"/>
<link wikidata="Q8446" start="1585" end="1596" title="Kurt Cobain" label="Kurt Cobain"/>
<link wikidata="Q428798" start="1601" end="1616" title="Krist Novoselic" label="Krist Novoselic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753055" start="1852" end="1861" title="Love Buzz" label="Love Buzz"/>
<link wikidata="Q778673" start="1888" end="1895" title="Sub Pop" label="Sub Pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q218513" start="1950" end="1956" title="Bleach (Nirvana album)" label="Bleach"/>
<link wikidata="Q385618" start="2260" end="2267" title="Melvins" label="Melvins"/>
<link wikidata="Q451088" start="2276" end="2287" title="Dale Crover" label="Dale Crover"/>
<link wikidata="Q3962978" start="2498" end="2511" title="Smart Studios" label="Smart Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q451084" start="2526" end="2535" title="Butch Vig" label="Butch Vig"/>
<link wikidata="Q12006" start="3139" end="3149" title="Dave Grohl" label="Dave Grohl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1575153" start="3288" end="3293" title="Polly (Nirvana song)" label="Polly"/>
<link wikidata="Q17444" start="3314" end="3323" title="Nevermind (album)" label="Nevermind"/>
<link wikidata="Q652087" start="3638" end="3649" title="Incesticide" label="Incesticide"/>
<link wikidata="Q96376463" start="3682" end="3686" title="Dive (Nirvana song)" label="Dive"/>
<link wikidata="Q765421" start="3823" end="3828" title="Breed (song)" label="Breed"/>
<link wikidata="Q945101" start="3876" end="3911" title="From the Muddy Banks of the Wishkah" label="From the Muddy Banks of the Wishkah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140480" start="3965" end="3984" title="With the Lights Out" label="With the Lights Out"/>
<link wikidata="Q179191" start="4197" end="4223" title="Rock and Roll Hall of Fame" label="Rock and Roll Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q12006" start="4597" end="4607" title="Dave Grohl" label="Dave Grohl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129976" start="4773" end="4781" title="In Bloom" label="In Bloom"/>
<link wikidata="Q5252796" start="4945" end="4959" title="Dekema Records" label="Dekema Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q427917" start="4981" end="4992" title="Jack Endino" label="Jack Endino"/>
<link wikidata="Q104840418" start="5089" end="5099" title="Kevin Wood (guitarist)" label="Kevin Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053623" start="5132" end="5148" title="Mother Love Bone" label="Mother Love Bone"/>
<link wikidata="Q381777" start="5156" end="5167" title="Andrew Wood (singer)" label="Andrew Wood"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="311803" wikidata="Q4198030" url="?curid=311803" title="Jehovist">
<text>Jehovist may refer to:

*Jehovist or Yahwist, an adherent of Yahwism
*Jahwist, one of the four sources of the Pentateuch (Torah)
*Jehovist, a person who maintains that the vowel points of the Hebrew name of Jehovah are its proper vowels
*Yehowists, a Russian Christian new religious movement
* Jehovists, a term pejorative for Jehovah&#x27;s Witnesses

==See also==
*Jehovah (disambiguation)
*Yahwistic (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4198030" start="0" end="8" title="Jehovist" label="Jehovist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3571322" start="61" end="68" title="Yahwism" label="Yahwism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1099313" start="70" end="77" title="Jahwist" label="Jahwist"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="207" end="214" title="Jehovah#Hebrew vowel points" label="Jehovah"/>
<link wikidata="Q174888" start="238" end="247" title="Yehowists" label="Yehowists"/>
<link wikidata="Q35269" start="327" end="351" title="Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witnesses" label="Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witnesses"/>
<link wikidata="Q6176505" start="367" end="391" title="Jehovah (disambiguation)" label="Jehovah (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q115598438" start="393" end="419" title="Yahwistic (disambiguation)" label="Yahwistic (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="311810" wikidata="Q1017352" url="?curid=311810" title="Rocco Baldelli">
<text>Rocco Daniel Baldelli (; born September 25, 1981) is an American former professional baseball outfielder and coach who is the manager of the Minnesota Twins of Major League Baseball (MLB). As a player, Baldelli quickly progressed through the minor leagues and made his big league debut with the Tampa Bay Devil Rays on opening day in 2003. Baldelli quickly established himself as an excellent hitter and outfielder, and placed third in voting for American League (AL) Rookie of the Year.

In , Baldelli&#x27;s promising career was derailed by channelopathy, a rare metabolic/muscular disorder which causes frequent soft tissue injuries and severe fatigue. He was unable to play at all in 2005 and missed significant time over the following seasons as doctors struggled to diagnose and treat his condition; from 2005 until his retirement in 2010, the former everyday center fielder spent long stretches on the disabled list and only once appeared in more than half of his team&#x27;s games. Baldelli signed a free-agent contract with his hometown Boston Red Sox in and appeared in 62 games as a backup outfielder and part-time designated hitter. Unsure if he was physically capable of continuing his playing career, he returned to the Rays organization as a minor league coach in December 2009. As the season progressed, he decided to attempt another comeback and began rehabbing in the Rays&#x27; minor league system. Baldelli returned to the major leagues in September and hit a pinch-hit home run in his first at-bat. He appeared in 10 games over the last month of the regular season and was included on the Rays&#x27; playoff roster, but severe muscle cramping during the team&#x27;s first round series forced him out of the lineup, at which point he decided to end his playing career at age 29.

After retiring as a player, Baldelli spent three years in the Tampa Bay Rays organization as a roving minor league instructor and special assistant to baseball operations. He was named the club&#x27;s first base coach before the season and was promoted to major league field coordinator in November .

Baldelli was named manager of the Minnesota Twins after the season. In , he led them to 101 wins and an AL Central Division title and was named the 2019 American League manager of the year. At 38 years old, he was the youngest manager to win the award.

==Early life==
Rocco Daniel Baldelli was born to Dan and Michele Baldelli in Woonsocket, Rhode Island. Rocco Baldelli attended the PEGASUS Gifted and Talented middle-school program at La Salle Academy in Providence. He played baseball for the Rhode Island Tides, an AAU ball club. Then he switched to Bishop Hendricken High School in Warwick, Rhode Island, for high school. During his senior year at Bishop Hendricken High School, he pulled his oblique muscle, but still managed to hit .531-5-13 with nine steals in only 32 at-bats. Not only did Baldelli excel at sports, but in the classroom as well. There he posted a 4.25 grade point average. On the SAT, he scored 1300, and considered attending University of North Carolina, Wake Forest University, Princeton University and Yale University. He was also a four sport star, earning all-state honors in baseball, indoor track, basketball, and volleyball.

==Professional baseball career==
===Minor leagues===
The Tampa Bay Devil Rays picked Baldelli in the first round (6th overall) of the 2000 Major League Baseball draft, so he decided to decline an athletic scholarship offer from Wake Forest and signed with Tampa Bay for $2.25 million. He began his professional career with the Princeton Devil Rays, the team&#x27;s High Rookie League affiliate.

Initially, Baldelli had to adjust to professional baseball. Says Baldelli, &quot;In Princeton, I had a hard time with all parts of the game…I didn&#x27;t know how to play the game. Coming out of high school, I&#x27;d just come up to the plate and swing as hard as I could every time and try to smoke the ball. I didn&#x27;t know about hitting mechanics, breaking pitches or reading pitchers.&quot;

Baldelli overcame his struggles as a hitter and quickly rose through the Tampa Bay organization. In 2000, he was ranked the Tampa Bay Devil Rays&#x27; ninth-best prospect. In 2001, he was considered the fifth-best prospect in the organization. By 2002, just two years after being drafted sixth overall, he won the Baseball America Minor League Player of the Year Award.

===Tampa Bay Devil Rays/Tampa Rays===
====2003–04: Early success====
Baldelli made his major league debut on Opening Day , starting in center field. He and fellow rookie outfielder Carl Crawford would be two of the few bright spots on a Devil Rays team that lost 91 games. Baldelli finished the 2003 season batting .289 with 11 home runs, 78 RBI, 89 runs scored and 27 stolen bases. He also finished in the top ten in many hitting categories in the American League. He was seventh in at bats with 637, tenth in hits 184, tied Ichiro Suzuki in eighth place with eight triples, and fourth in singles with 133.
He also led the AL in outfield assists and ranked 2nd in range factor, indicating that he was one of the best defensive outfielders in baseball. Baldelli came in third in the voting for 2003 AL Rookie of the Year behind New York Yankees&#x27; outfielder Hideki Matsui and winner Ángel Berroa of the Kansas City Royals.

Baldelli had a similar sophomore campaign in , batting .280 with 16 home runs, 74 runs batted in, 79 runs scored and 17 stolen bases. His defensive statistics were again among the league&#x27;s best, as he led the AL in range factor and finished 4th in outfield assists.

====2005–06: Injuries and renewed success====
Baldelli started the season on the disabled list after tearing his anterior cruciate ligament over the offseason while playing baseball with his brother. He had surgery and was expected to be back by the All-Star break. However, he seriously injured his elbow while working out and needed Tommy John surgery to fix the damage, which led to months more rehabilitation.

After missing almost a full season and a half, Baldelli returned to the D-Rays&#x27; lineup against the Los Angeles Angels of Anaheim on June 7, 2006. Baldelli was a regular starter in the outfield for the rest of the 2006 campaign and had his best statistical season, hitting .302 with 16 home runs, 57 runs batted in, 57 runs scored and 10 stolen bases in only 364 at bats and again appearing among the league leaders in multiple defensive categories.

====2007–08: Medical issues====
In spring training before the 2007 season, Baldelli pulled his hamstring. The injury lingered, but Baldelli attempted to play, appearing in 35 games (15 as a designated hitter) and posting only a .204 batting average. He aggravated his hamstring in May and was placed on the DL on May 17. Doctors recommended a period of rest, after which Baldelli reported to the minor leagues for a rehab assignment. After several games, he injured his hamstring yet again and was shut down for the remainder of the 2007 season.

After these setbacks, Baldelli underwent extensive medical testing to determine the reasons for his muscle problems and worsening fatigue after even brief workouts. Doctors discovered some &quot;metabolic and/or mitochondrial abnormalities&quot; and began trying to design a medical plan to improve the condition.
Baldelli attempted to return to game action during spring training in 2008, but his continuing physical problems made it impossible. On March 12, he held an emotional press conference in which he announced that he would be once again placed on the disabled list as he tried to find an effective treatment for his mysterious ailment. Though he did not retire, the future of his baseball career was in doubt. Accordingly, on April 1, 2008, the Rays declined Baldelli&#x27;s contract option for the following season (2009), potentially making him a free agent after the season.

After further medical consultations, Baldelli&#x27;s doctors found a combination of medications and nutritional supplements that seemed to improve his condition. On May 29, 2008, he began playing in extended spring training games, and in mid-June was sent to play in the Rays&#x27; minor league system for further rehabilitation and conditioning in the hope that he might return to the majors during the 2008 season.

====Return to the field====
On August 10, 2008, Baldelli was activated and started in right field for the Rays in a game against the Seattle Mariners. Baldelli had been growing a beard for months as a &quot;symbol of his rehabilitation&quot; and shaved it off before playing. In the contest, he had an RBI single as well as a diving catch before coming out of the game after the 5th inning.

Baldelli ended up appearing in 28 games for the Rays in 2008, mainly as a DH and pinch hitter but occasionally playing in right or left field. He hit .263 with 4 home runs and 13 RBI, and was deemed valuable enough to be included in the Rays&#x27; postseason roster as they made the playoffs for the first time.

Baldelli made an impact in his limited post-season playing time. In Game 3 of the 2008 American League Championship Series, Baldelli hit a three-run home run off Boston&#x27;s Paul Byrd in the eighth inning to help the Rays take a 2-1 series lead. In the decisive Game 7 of the ALCS, his RBI single in the fifth inning gave the Rays their first lead of the game en route to winning their first American League pennant. In Game 2 of the World Series against the Philadelphia Phillies, Baldelli made a double play by catching a fly ball and throwing back to first baseman Carlos Peña in time to beat Jayson Werth. Finally, in Game 5, Baldelli hit a solo home run in the top of the seventh that tied the game for the Rays, although it wouldn&#x27;t prevent the Rays from losing the game and ultimately the series.

Because of Baldelli&#x27;s performance in the 2008 ALCS, many become aware about mitochondrial disease and how it affects the many people that have it. One article reported that a child with mitochondrial disease pretends he is Baldelli when he is at bat. During the Red Sox series, the United Mitochondrial Disease Foundation created a page on its website where children and parents could post notes for Baldelli. One such post read &quot;I am a nine year old boy with Mito. I also like to play baseball. Great home run in the playoffs, I am cheering for you at home. How are you feeling?&quot;

Overall, Baldelli hit .200 in 20 postseason at-bats with 2 HRs and 6 RBIs. While improved, his medical condition prevented him from playing in back-to-back games, and he sometimes sat down to rest on the field during breaks in the action.

After the season, Baldelli was the recipient of the 2008 Tony Conigliaro Award, which is annually presented to a major league player who has &quot;overcome adversity through the attributes of spirit, determination and courage that were trademarks of Tony Conigliaro.&quot;

====New diagnosis====
During the 2008-09 offseason, further medical testing indicated that Baldelli suffers from a form of mitochondrial channelopathy, which makes his condition less serious and more treatable than previous diagnoses had suggested. Mitochondrial channelopathy is a rare cell disorder that affects ions in neurological &quot;pathways&quot; and causes severe muscle fatigue and can be life-threatening, but Baldelli was diagnosed with a moderate form which can be managed with medication and diet. However, in Baldelli&#x27;s case, the condition was complicated by lingering symptoms of Lyme disease, which he contracted as a teenager.

===Boston Red Sox===
On January 8, 2009, Baldelli signed a one-year deal with the Boston Red Sox, reported to be worth a base of $500,000 plus up to $6.75 million in incentives. As Baldelli grew up in New England, much of his family were Red Sox fans and he considered it a &quot;childhood dream&quot; to play for the team. He continued to wear number 5, becoming the first Red Sox player to wear that number since the departure of fan favorite Nomar Garciaparra in 2004.

Baldelli hit his first home run for the Red Sox on May 9, 2009, at Fenway Park against his old team, the Rays. For much of the season, however, he continued to struggle through physical ailments, landing on the 15-day DL twice and sitting out numerous contests with hamstring pulls and other issues.

For the year, Baldelli appeared in 62 games for the Red Sox, hitting .253 with seven home runs, 23 RBI, and a stolen base. Boston made the playoffs as the AL wildcard team, but a shoulder injury kept Baldelli off the team&#x27;s postseason roster. After the season, he became a free agent.

===Return to the Rays===
During spring training 2010, Baldelli returned to the Tampa Bay Rays as a special assistant to observe and coach players in the organization&#x27;s minor league system on baserunning and outfield defense. While his continuing fatigue problems and a lingering shoulder issue made it impossible for him to play baseball, he expressed the desire to eventually return to the field with the Rays if his physical condition improved. On July 19, 2010, Baldelli signed a minor league deal with the Rays and joined the Charlotte Stone Crabs, the team&#x27;s Class A affiliate. He gradually increased his playing time and was promoted to Triple-A with the Durham Bulls on August 16. The club stated that his health and success on the field would determine if he would be called up to the majors later on in the season.

On September 1, Baldelli was called up to the major league squad to serve as a designated hitter, pinch hitter, and reserve outfielder. On September 5, in his first at-bat since returning to the Rays&#x27; roster, Baldelli hit an 8th inning pinch hit 2-run home run against the Baltimore Orioles in Camden Yards and finished the game in right field. Baldelli played occasionally throughout September, was included on the Rays&#x27; postseason roster, and started at DH for the first game of the 2010 playoffs against the Texas Rangers. However, he suffered muscle cramping during the game and had to be removed for a pinch hitter, and the Rays replaced him on their playoff roster the next day, again putting his playing career in doubt.

===Retirement as player===
Baldelli privately decided to retire soon after his medical condition forced him out of the 2010 ALDS, but Rays&#x27; executive Andrew Friedman advised him to take some time to think about the decision before announcing it publicly. After three months of consideration, Baldelli officially announced his retirement on January 26, 2011, at 29 years old, stating that due to his illness, &quot;I physically don&#x27;t feel like I should be playing anymore.&quot; He remained in the Rays organization as a &quot;special adviser&quot; working in scouting and player development.

Though Baldelli&#x27;s career was cut short, he remained popular among Rays fans. The team invited him to throw the ceremonial first pitch before Game 4 of the 2013 ALDS and the fans at Tropicana Field gave him a standing ovation.

===Playing style===
Baldelli was a balanced ballplayer who could hit for average and power, had good speed in the field and on the basepaths, and a strong throwing arm. As a promising young player, some baseball observers opined that Baldelli&#x27;s skillset reminded them of Hall of Fame centerfielder Joe DiMaggio, with veteran scout Al LaMacchia claiming that Baldelli had the potential to be &quot;Joe&#x27;s twin&quot;.

==Coaching career==
After ending his playing career in 2011, Baldelli remained with the Rays organization as a Special Assistant for Baseball Operations and roving minor league hitting and outfield defense instructor. In December 2014, Baldelli was named the Rays&#x27; first base coach under new manager Kevin Cash, who had been Baldelli&#x27;s teammate on the club in 2005. Before the 2017 season, the Rays organization promoted Baldelli to the newly created role of major-league field coordinator, which involved analyzing the tendencies of opposing hitters, coaching defensive skills to players, and helping the team implement defensive strategies during games.

==Managerial career==
===Twins===
After the 2018 season, Baldelli was a popular candidate for several managerial positions and was interviewed for that position by several major league clubs. On October 25, 2018, he was introduced as the new manager of the Minnesota Twins. After posting 78 wins the previous season, the Twins won 101 games and the American League Central division in Baldelli&#x27;s first season at the helm. On November 12, 2019, Baldelli was named American League manager of the year for the 2019 MLB season, beating out New York Yankees manager Aaron Boone and Tampa Bay Rays manager Kevin Cash, who finished second and third, respectively. At 38 years old, he was the youngest winner of the award. In 2020, he was the youngest manager in major league baseball.

In 2022 he led all major league managers in challenges, with 51, and tied for the lead in overturns (26) with Buck Showalter (who made 33 challenges).

Throughout his career with the Twins, Baldelli’s struggles with injuries has been compared to current Twins All-Star Byron Buxton. Buxton himself has credited this similarity to helping him towards trying to avoid the same fate as Baldelli’s playing career.

===Managerial record===


==Personal life==
After a decade of being together, Baldelli married his girlfriend Allie in July 2021. Daughter Louisa was born in September of that year. Fraternal twins Nino and Enzo were born in September 2023.

In 2004, Baldelli was inducted into the Rhode Island Italian-American Hall of Fame. Baldelli has listed his other interests as traveling, fishing and playing the bass guitar. He is the son of Dan and Michelle Baldelli and has two brothers, Nicholas (a dentist) and Dante. His brother Dante played college baseball for the Boston College Eagles baseball team. He resides both in St. Pete Beach, Florida and Rhode Island, where his parents still live.

Baldelli is a horse owner with an interest in breeding and racing Thoroughbreds.

Baldelli is the nephew of Woonsocket mayor and former Rhode Island state representative Lisa Baldelli-Hunt. Baldelli, a registered Democrat, has donated money to various Democrat candidates, including Bernie Sanders in 2016 and Joe Biden in 2020. 

Baldelli is an avid music fan, who names Phish, the Grateful Dead, Greensky Bluegrass, JRAD and Spafford among his favorite groups. 

==References==
==External links==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1017352" start="0" end="21" title="Rocco Baldelli" label="Rocco Daniel Baldelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q5369" start="85" end="93" title="baseball" label="baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142885" start="94" end="104" title="outfielder" label="outfielder"/>
<link wikidata="Q865935" start="109" end="114" title="Coach (baseball)" label="coach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186921" start="126" end="133" title="Manager (baseball)" label="manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q604879" start="141" end="156" title="Minnesota Twins" label="Minnesota Twins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="160" end="181" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q84129" start="242" end="255" title="Minor league baseball" label="minor leagues"/>
<link wikidata="Q650865" start="295" end="315" title="Tampa Bay Rays" label="Tampa Bay Devil Rays"/>
<link wikidata="Q2628156" start="334" end="338" title="2003 Major League Baseball season" label="2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q465469" start="447" end="462" title="American League" label="American League"/>
<link wikidata="Q259080" start="468" end="486" title="Rookie of the Year (award)" label="Rookie of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q2936142" start="543" end="556" title="channelopathy" label="channelopathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458306" start="615" end="626" title="soft tissue" label="soft tissue"/>
<link wikidata="Q9690" start="647" end="654" title="fatigue" label="fatigue"/>
<link wikidata="Q39631" start="751" end="758" title="Physician" label="doctors"/>
<link wikidata="Q5059480" start="866" end="880" title="center fielder" label="center fielder"/>
<link wikidata="Q5281221" start="909" end="922" title="disabled list" label="disabled list"/>
<link wikidata="Q213959" start="1046" end="1060" title="Boston Red Sox" label="Boston Red Sox"/>
<link wikidata="Q727270" start="1126" end="1143" title="designated hitter" label="designated hitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q650865" start="1862" end="1876" title="Tampa Bay Rays" label="Tampa Bay Rays"/>
<link wikidata="Q865935" start="2001" end="2017" title="first base coach" label="first base coach"/>
<link wikidata="Q604879" start="2136" end="2151" title="Minnesota Twins" label="Minnesota Twins"/>
<link wikidata="Q800048" start="2255" end="2290" title="Major League Baseball Manager of the Year Award" label="American League manager of the year"/>
<link wikidata="Q54276" start="2433" end="2457" title="Woonsocket, Rhode Island" label="Woonsocket, Rhode Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q6465085" start="2540" end="2556" title="La Salle Academy (Rhode Island)" label="La Salle Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917591" start="2657" end="2686" title="Bishop Hendricken High School" label="Bishop Hendricken High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917591" start="2756" end="2785" title="Bishop Hendricken High School" label="Bishop Hendricken High School"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2801" end="2808" title="Abdominal external oblique muscle#Oblique strain" label="oblique"/>
<link wikidata="Q18185" start="2981" end="3000" title="grade point average" label="grade point average"/>
<link wikidata="Q334113" start="3009" end="3012" title="SAT" label="SAT"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191202" start="3055" end="3083" title="University of North Carolina" label="University of North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q392667" start="3085" end="3107" title="Wake Forest University" label="Wake Forest University"/>
<link wikidata="Q21578" start="3109" end="3129" title="Princeton University" label="Princeton University"/>
<link wikidata="Q49112" start="3134" end="3149" title="Yale University" label="Yale University"/>
<link wikidata="Q650865" start="3320" end="3340" title="Tampa Bay Devil Rays" label="Tampa Bay Devil Rays"/>
<link wikidata="Q4597597" start="3397" end="3429" title="2000 Major League Baseball draft" label="2000 Major League Baseball draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q4813771" start="3459" end="3479" title="athletic scholarship" label="athletic scholarship"/>
<link wikidata="Q7244999" start="3590" end="3610" title="Princeton Rays" label="Princeton Devil Rays"/>
<link wikidata="Q84129" start="3628" end="3656" title="Rookie League" label="High Rookie League affiliate"/>
<link wikidata="Q650865" start="4182" end="4202" title="Tampa Bay Devil Rays" label="Tampa Bay Devil Rays"/>
<link wikidata="Q4866433" start="4372" end="4426" title="Baseball America Minor League Player of the Year Award" label="Baseball America Minor League Player of the Year Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1037431" start="4610" end="4623" title="Carl Crawford" label="Carl Crawford"/>
<link wikidata="Q534851" start="4757" end="4765" title="home run" label="home run"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154724" start="4771" end="4774" title="runs batted in" label="RBI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210151" start="4779" end="4790" title="runs scored" label="runs scored"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195130" start="4798" end="4810" title="stolen bases" label="stolen bases"/>
<link wikidata="Q465469" start="4878" end="4893" title="American League" label="American League"/>
<link wikidata="Q600" start="4955" end="4968" title="Ichiro Suzuki" label="Ichiro Suzuki"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045147" start="5059" end="5075" title="Assist (baseball)" label="outfield assists"/>
<link wikidata="Q7292700" start="5094" end="5106" title="range factor" label="range factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q594227" start="5223" end="5249" title="MLB Rookie of the Year Award" label="2003 AL Rookie of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q213417" start="5257" end="5273" title="New York Yankees" label="New York Yankees"/>
<link wikidata="Q954080" start="5291" end="5304" title="Hideki Matsui" label="Hideki Matsui"/>
<link wikidata="Q3034836" start="5316" end="5328" title="Ángel Berroa" label="Ángel Berroa"/>
<link wikidata="Q744530" start="5336" end="5354" title="Kansas City Royals" label="Kansas City Royals"/>
<link wikidata="Q534851" start="5425" end="5433" title="home run" label="home run"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154724" start="5439" end="5453" title="runs batted in" label="runs batted in"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210151" start="5458" end="5469" title="runs scored" label="runs scored"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195130" start="5477" end="5489" title="stolen bases" label="stolen bases"/>
<link wikidata="Q611127" start="5742" end="5768" title="anterior cruciate ligament" label="anterior cruciate ligament"/>
<link wikidata="Q948562" start="5964" end="5982" title="Tommy John surgery" label="Tommy John surgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q743309" start="6148" end="6177" title="Los Angeles Angels of Anaheim" label="Los Angeles Angels of Anaheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q534851" start="6334" end="6342" title="home run" label="home run"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154724" start="6348" end="6362" title="runs batted in" label="runs batted in"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210151" start="6367" end="6378" title="runs scored" label="runs scored"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195130" start="6386" end="6398" title="stolen bases" label="stolen bases"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208705" start="6411" end="6417" title="at bat" label="at bat"/>
<link wikidata="Q669904" start="6534" end="6549" title="spring training" label="spring training"/>
<link wikidata="Q196002" start="6594" end="6603" title="hamstring" label="hamstring"/>
<link wikidata="Q727270" start="6689" end="6706" title="designated hitter" label="designated hitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q84129" start="6895" end="6908" title="Minor League Baseball" label="minor leagues"/>
<link wikidata="Q935710" start="7258" end="7285" title="mitochondrial disease" label="mitochondrial abnormalities"/>
<link wikidata="Q969772" start="7906" end="7916" title="free agent" label="free agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q3466338" start="8340" end="8351" title="2008 Tampa Bay Rays season" label="2008 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q466586" start="8487" end="8503" title="Seattle Mariners" label="Seattle Mariners"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054505" start="9141" end="9181" title="2008 American League Championship Series" label="2008 American League Championship Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q213959" start="9221" end="9227" title="Boston Red Sox" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q994484" start="9235" end="9244" title="Paul Byrd" label="Paul Byrd"/>
<link wikidata="Q465469" start="9453" end="9468" title="American League" label="American League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149730" start="9495" end="9507" title="2008 World Series" label="World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q650840" start="9520" end="9541" title="Philadelphia Phillies" label="Philadelphia Phillies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043157" start="9629" end="9640" title="Carlos Peña" label="Carlos Peña"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185189" start="9657" end="9669" title="Jayson Werth" label="Jayson Werth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054505" start="9917" end="9926" title="2008 American League Championship Series" label="2008 ALCS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154724" start="10537" end="10541" title="Run batted in" label="RBIs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3405340" start="10765" end="10786" title="Tony Conigliaro Award" label="Tony Conigliaro Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q3531727" start="10958" end="10973" title="Tony Conigliaro" label="Tony Conigliaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q2936142" start="11119" end="11132" title="channelopathy" label="channelopathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q201989" start="11584" end="11596" title="Lyme disease" label="Lyme disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q213959" start="11716" end="11730" title="Boston Red Sox" label="Boston Red Sox"/>
<link wikidata="Q18389" start="11835" end="11846" title="New England" label="New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187214" start="12079" end="12096" title="Nomar Garciaparra" label="Nomar Garciaparra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058194" start="12547" end="12555" title="2009 American League Division Series" label="playoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q16961124" start="13234" end="13255" title="Charlotte Stone Crabs" label="Charlotte Stone Crabs"/>
<link wikidata="Q106610111" start="13273" end="13290" title="Class A (baseball)" label="Class A affiliate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5359555" start="13352" end="13360" title="Triple-A (baseball)" label="Triple-A"/>
<link wikidata="Q2581129" start="13370" end="13382" title="Durham Bulls" label="Durham Bulls"/>
<link wikidata="Q209897" start="13632" end="13644" title="pinch hitter" label="pinch hitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q650816" start="13812" end="13829" title="Baltimore Orioles" label="Baltimore Orioles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141174" start="13833" end="13845" title="Camden Yards" label="Camden Yards"/>
<link wikidata="Q465494" start="14029" end="14042" title="2010 American League Division Series" label="2010 playoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q329816" start="14055" end="14068" title="Texas Rangers (baseball)" label="Texas Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q465494" start="14392" end="14401" title="2010 ALDS" label="2010 ALDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q4757026" start="14428" end="14443" title="Andrew Friedman" label="Andrew Friedman"/>
<link wikidata="Q14872766" start="15036" end="15045" title="2013 American League Division Series" label="2013 ALDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810119" start="15062" end="15077" title="Tropicana Field" label="Tropicana Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q297142" start="15411" end="15423" title="Joe DiMaggio" label="Joe DiMaggio"/>
<link wikidata="Q4704267" start="15444" end="15456" title="Al LaMacchia" label="Al LaMacchia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243189" start="15839" end="15849" title="Kevin Cash" label="Kevin Cash"/>
<link wikidata="Q604879" start="16458" end="16473" title="Minnesota Twins" label="Minnesota Twins"/>
<link wikidata="Q800048" start="16669" end="16704" title="Major League Baseball Manager of the Year Award" label="American League manager of the year"/>
<link wikidata="Q4661865" start="16767" end="16778" title="Aaron Boone" label="Aaron Boone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243189" start="16806" end="16816" title="Kevin Cash" label="Kevin Cash"/>
<link wikidata="Q5004319" start="17254" end="17266" title="Byron Buxton" label="Byron Buxton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4947821" start="17960" end="17990" title="Boston College Eagles baseball" label="Boston College Eagles baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q57200" start="18016" end="18039" title="St. Pete Beach, Florida" label="St. Pete Beach, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387" start="18044" end="18056" title="Rhode Island" label="Rhode Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q210826" start="18155" end="18168" title="Thoroughbreds" label="Thoroughbreds"/>
<link wikidata="Q54276" start="18197" end="18207" title="Woonsocket, Rhode Island" label="Woonsocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q1734753" start="18225" end="18258" title="Rhode Island House of Representatives" label="Rhode Island state representative"/>
<link wikidata="Q112682506" start="18259" end="18277" title="Lisa Baldelli-Hunt" label="Lisa Baldelli-Hunt"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="311819" wikidata="Q243303" url="?curid=311819" title="RAR (file format)">
<text>RAR is a proprietary archive file format that supports data compression, error correction and file spanning. It was developed in 1993 by Russian software engineer Eugene Roshal and the software is licensed by &quot;win.rar GmbH&quot;. The name &quot;RAR&quot; stands for &quot;Roshal Archive&quot;.

== File format ==
The filename extensions used by RAR are codice_1 for the data volume set and codice_2 for the recovery volume set. Previous versions of RAR split large archives into several smaller files, creating a &quot;multi-volume archive&quot;. Numbers were used in the file extensions of the smaller files to keep them in the proper sequence. The first file used the extension codice_1, then codice_4 for the second, and then codice_5, codice_6, etc.

RAR compression applications and libraries (including GUI based WinRAR application for Windows, console rar utility for different OSes and others) are proprietary software, to which Alexander L. Roshal, the elder brother of Eugene Roshal, holds the copyright. Version 3 of RAR is based on Lempel-Ziv (LZSS) and prediction by partial matching (PPM) compression, specifically the PPMd implementation of PPMII by Dmitry Shkarin.

The minimum size of a RAR file is 20 bytes. The maximum size of a RAR file is 9,223,372,036,854,775,807 (263−1) bytes, which is one byte less than 8 EiB.

===Versions===
The RAR file format revision history:
* 1.3 – the first public version, does not have the &quot;Rar!&quot; signature.
* 1.5 – changes are not known.
* 2.0 – released with WinRAR 2.0 and Rar for MS-DOS 2.0; features the following changes:
** Multimedia compression for true color bitmap images and uncompressed audio.
** Up to 1 MB compression dictionary.
** Introduces archives data recovery protection record.
* 2.9 – released in WinRAR version 3.00. Feature changes in this version include:
** File extensions is changed from &quot;{volume name}.rar, {volume name}.r00, {volume name}.r01, etc.&quot; to &quot;{volume name}.part001.rar, {volume name}.part002.rar, etc.&quot;
** Encryption of both file data and file headers.
** Improves compression algorithm using 4 MB dictionary size, Dmitry Shkarin&#x27;s PPMII algorithm for file data.
** Optional creation of &quot;recovery volumes&quot; (.rev files) for error correction, which can be used to reconstruct missing files in a volume set.
** Support for archive files larger than 9 GB.
** Support for Unicode file names stored in UTF-16 little endian format.
* 5.0 – supported by WinRAR 5.0 (released April 2013) and later. Changes in this version:
** Maximum compression dictionary size increased to 1 GB (default for WinRAR 5.x is 32 MB and 4 MB for WinRAR 4.x).
** Maximum path length for files in RAR and ZIP archives is increased up to 2048 characters.
** Support for Unicode file names stored in UTF-8 format.
** Faster compression and decompression.
** Multicore decompression support.
** Greatly improves recovery.
** Optional AES encryption increased from 128-bit to 256-bit.
** Optional 256-bit BLAKE2 file hash instead of a default 32-bit CRC32 file checksum.
** Optional duplicate file detection.
** Optional NTFS hard and symbolic links.
** Optional Quick Open Record. Rar4 archives had to be parsed before opening as file names were spread throughout the archive, slowing operation particularly with slower devices such as optical drives, and reducing the integrity of damaged archives. Rar5 can optionally create a &quot;quick open record&quot;, a special archive block at the end of the file that contains the names of files included, allowing archives to be opened faster.
** Removes specialized compression algorithms for Itanium executables, text, raw audio (WAV), and raw image (BMP) files; consequently some files of these types compress better in the older RAR (4) format with these options enabled than in RAR5.
* 5.0+ – partially supported by WinRAR 5.0 and later. Fully supported by WinRAR 7.0 (released February 2024) and later. Changes in this version:
** Compression dictionary up to 64 GB.
** Improved compression by the addition of &quot;Alternate search algorithm&quot;.
** Maximum path length limit increased from 2047 to 65535 characters.

;Notes
== Software ==


===Native operating system support===
RARlab&#x27;s native software is available for Microsoft Windows (named WinRAR), Linux, FreeBSD, macOS, and Android; archive extraction is supported natively in ChromeOS. WinRAR and RAR for Android support the graphical user interface (GUI); other versions named RAR run as console commands.
===Creating RAR files===
RAR files can only be created with proprietary WinRAR (Windows), RAR for Android, command-line RAR (available for Windows, macOS, Linux, and FreeBSD), and other software that has written permission from Alexander Roshal or uses copyrighted code under license from Roshal. The software license agreements forbid reverse engineering.

===Third-party software for extracting RAR files===
Several programs can unpack the file format.
* RARLAB distributes the C++ source code and binaries for a command-line codice_7 program. The license permits its use to produce software capable of unpacking, but not creating, RAR archives, without having to pay a fee. It is not a free software license.
* 7-Zip, a free and open-source program, starting from 7-Zip version 15.06 beta can unpack RAR5 archives, using the RARLAB unrar code.
* PeaZip is a free RAR unarchiver, licensed under the LGPLv3-or-later and via 7-Zip can unpack RAR archives, using RARLAB unrar.
* The Unarchiver is a proprietary freeware software unarchiver for Mac for RAR and other formats. It was previously free software licensed under the LGPLv2.1-or-later, up to version 3.11.1 (released 2016), which at the time provided a free-software implementation of extraction of RAR versions up to RAR5. There is a free software (LGPLv2.1-or-later) command-line version, , forked from 2016, which runs on Mac, Windows, and Linux. 
* UNRARLIB (UniquE RAR File Library) was an obsolete free software unarchiving library called &quot;unrarlib&quot;, licensed under the GPLv2-or-later. It could only decompress archives created by RAR versions prior to 2.9; archives created by RAR 2.9 and later use different formats not supported by this library. The original development-team ended work on this library in 2007.
* libarchive, a free and open-source library for reading and writing a variety of archive formats, with partial support for all RAR versions, including RAR5. The code was written from scratch using RAR&#x27;s “technote.txt” format description.
* Microsoft announced (May 23, 2023) native support for additional archive formats in Windows 11, including tar, 7-zip, rar, gz and many others using the libarchive open-source project. Recently (July 16, 2023), there have been Insider builds that have native support. It’s said to come out in version 23H2.

==Other uses of &quot;rar&quot;==
The filename extension &quot;rar&quot; is also used by the unrelated Resource Adapter aRchive file format.

== See also ==
* .cbr
* List of archive formats
* Comparison of archive formats
* Comparison of file archivers
* Data corruption, Bit rot, Disc rot

== External links ==
* RARLAB FTP download website, current and old versions of WinRAR and RAR
* RAR 5.0 archive file format

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q243303" start="0" end="3" title="RAR (file format)" label="RAR"/>
<link wikidata="Q2720536" start="9" end="20" title="proprietary format" label="proprietary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351368" start="21" end="40" title="archive file format" label="archive file format"/>
<link wikidata="Q2493" start="55" end="71" title="data compression" label="data compression"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062839" start="73" end="89" title="error correction" label="error correction"/>
<link wikidata="Q5448360" start="94" end="107" title="file spanning" label="file spanning"/>
<link wikidata="Q961412" start="163" end="176" title="Eugene Roshal" label="Eugene Roshal"/>
<link wikidata="Q186157" start="322" end="340" title="filename extension" label="filename extension"/>
<link wikidata="Q242747" start="824" end="830" title="WinRAR" label="WinRAR"/>
<link wikidata="Q961412" start="984" end="997" title="Eugene Roshal" label="Eugene Roshal"/>
<link wikidata="Q22670963" start="1049" end="1059" title="LZ77 and LZ78" label="Lempel-Ziv"/>
<link wikidata="Q2679" start="1061" end="1065" title="LZSS" label="LZSS"/>
<link wikidata="Q2541" start="1071" end="1101" title="prediction by partial matching" label="prediction by partial matching"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136880" start="1265" end="1290" title="9,223,372,036,854,775,807" label="9,223,372,036,854,775,807"/>
<link wikidata="Q8799" start="1336" end="1339" title="exbibyte" label="EiB"/>
<link wikidata="Q79735" start="1685" end="1687" title="Megabyte" label="MB"/>
<link wikidata="Q79735" start="2125" end="2127" title="megabyte" label="MB"/>
<link wikidata="Q2541" start="2167" end="2182" title="Prediction by partial matching" label="PPMII algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q55611017" start="2268" end="2284" title="Error correction code" label="error correction"/>
<link wikidata="Q79738" start="2393" end="2395" title="gigabyte" label="GB"/>
<link wikidata="Q8819" start="2412" end="2419" title="Unicode" label="Unicode"/>
<link wikidata="Q740701" start="2441" end="2447" title="UTF-16" label="UTF-16"/>
<link wikidata="Q79738" start="2614" end="2616" title="gigabyte" label="GB"/>
<link wikidata="Q79735" start="2647" end="2649" title="megabyte" label="MB"/>
<link wikidata="Q8819" start="2784" end="2791" title="Unicode" label="Unicode"/>
<link wikidata="Q193537" start="2813" end="2818" title="UTF-8" label="UTF-8"/>
<link wikidata="Q190746" start="2946" end="2949" title="Advanced Encryption Standard" label="AES"/>
<link wikidata="Q15279482" start="3016" end="3022" title="BLAKE2" label="BLAKE2"/>
<link wikidata="Q15994998" start="3061" end="3066" title="CRC32" label="CRC32"/>
<link wikidata="Q183205" start="3132" end="3136" title="NTFS" label="NTFS"/>
<link wikidata="Q79738" start="4026" end="4028" title="gigabyte" label="GB"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="4293" end="4310" title="Microsoft Windows" label="Microsoft Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q388" start="4327" end="4332" title="Linux" label="Linux"/>
<link wikidata="Q34236" start="4334" end="4341" title="FreeBSD" label="FreeBSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q14116" start="4343" end="4348" title="macOS" label="macOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q94" start="4354" end="4361" title="Android (operating system)" label="Android"/>
<link wikidata="Q79531" start="4407" end="4415" title="ChromeOS" label="ChromeOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q782543" start="4456" end="4480" title="graphical user interface" label="graphical user interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q242747" start="4610" end="4616" title="WinRAR" label="WinRAR"/>
<link wikidata="Q189053" start="4645" end="4657" title="Command-line interface" label="command-line"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407" start="5018" end="5021" title="C++" label="C++"/>
<link wikidata="Q341" start="5227" end="5240" title="free software" label="free software"/>
<link wikidata="Q215051" start="5252" end="5257" title="7-Zip" label="7-Zip"/>
<link wikidata="Q506883" start="5261" end="5281" title="free and open-source software" label="free and open-source"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275912" start="5387" end="5393" title="PeaZip" label="PeaZip"/>
<link wikidata="Q192897" start="5439" end="5454" title="GNU Lesser General Public License" label="LGPLv3-or-later"/>
<link wikidata="Q788083" start="5516" end="5530" title="The Unarchiver" label="The Unarchiver"/>
<link wikidata="Q341" start="5630" end="5643" title="free software" label="free software"/>
<link wikidata="Q192897" start="5663" end="5680" title="GNU Lesser General Public License" label="LGPLv2.1-or-later"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603" start="6082" end="6096" title="GNU General Public License" label="GPLv2-or-later"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283" start="6573" end="6582" title="Microsoft" label="Microsoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q107269746" start="6657" end="6667" title="Windows 11" label="Windows 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q64374525" start="6725" end="6735" title="libarchive" label="libarchive"/>
<link wikidata="Q429157" start="6983" end="7007" title="Resource Adapter aRchive" label="Resource Adapter aRchive"/>
<link wikidata="Q507860" start="7039" end="7043" title=".cbr" label=".cbr"/>
<link wikidata="Q6606126" start="7046" end="7069" title="List of archive formats" label="List of archive formats"/>
<link wikidata="Q6606126" start="7072" end="7101" title="Comparison of archive formats" label="Comparison of archive formats"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188465" start="7104" end="7132" title="Comparison of file archivers" label="Comparison of file archivers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3326322" start="7135" end="7150" title="Data corruption" label="Data corruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390705" start="7152" end="7159" title="Data degradation" label="Bit rot"/>
<link wikidata="Q5281392" start="7161" end="7169" title="Disc rot" label="Disc rot"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="311821" wikidata="Q186363" url="?curid=311821" title="Gothic Revival architecture">
<text>Gothic Revival (also referred to as Victorian Gothic or neo-Gothic) is an architectural movement that after a gradual build-up beginning in the second half of the 17th century became a widespread movement in the first half of the 19th century, mostly in England. Increasingly serious and learned admirers sought to revive medieval Gothic architecture, intending to complement or even supersede the neoclassical styles prevalent at the time. Gothic Revival draws upon features of medieval examples, including decorative patterns, finials, lancet windows, and hood moulds. By the middle of the 19th century, Gothic Revival had become the pre-eminent architectural style in the Western world, only to begin to fall out of fashion in the 1880s and early 1890s.

The Gothic Revival movement&#x27;s roots are intertwined with philosophical movements associated with Catholicism and a re-awakening of high church or Anglo-Catholic belief concerned by the growth of religious nonconformism. The &quot;Anglo-Catholic&quot; tradition of religious belief and style became known for its intrinsic appeal in the third quarter of the 19th century. Gothic Revival architecture varied considerably in its faithfulness to both the ornamental styles and construction principles of its medieval ideal, sometimes amounting to little more than pointed window frames and touches of neo-Gothic decoration on buildings otherwise created on wholly 19th-century plans, using contemporary materials and construction methods; most notably, this involved the use of iron and, after the 1880s, steel in ways never seen in medieval exemplars.

In parallel with the ascendancy of neo-Gothic styles in 19th century England, interest spread to the rest of Europe, Australia, Africa and the Americas; the 19th and early 20th centuries saw the construction of very large numbers of Gothic Revival structures worldwide. The influence of Revivalism had nevertheless peaked by the 1870s. New architectural movements, sometimes related, as in the Arts and Crafts movement, and sometimes in outright opposition, such as Modernism, gained ground, and by the 1930s the architecture of the Victorian era was generally condemned or ignored. The later 20th century saw a revival of interest, manifested in the United Kingdom by the establishment of the Victorian Society in 1958.

==Roots==
The rise of evangelicalism in the eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries saw in England a reaction in the high church movement which sought to emphasise the continuity between the established church and the pre-Reformation Catholic church. Architecture, in the form of the Gothic Revival, became one of the main weapons in the high church&#x27;s armoury. The Gothic Revival was also paralleled and supported by &quot;medievalism&quot;, which had its roots in antiquarian concerns with survivals and curiosities. As &quot;industrialisation&quot; progressed, a reaction against machine production and the appearance of factories also grew. Proponents of the picturesque such as Thomas Carlyle and Augustus Pugin took a critical view of industrial society and portrayed pre-industrial medieval society as a golden age. To Pugin, Gothic architecture was infused with the Christian values that had been supplanted by classicism and were being destroyed by industrialisation.

Gothic Revival also took on political connotations, with the &quot;rational&quot; and &quot;radical&quot; Neoclassical style being seen as associated with republicanism and liberalism (as evidenced by its use in the United States and to a lesser extent in Republican France). In contrast, the more spiritual and traditional Gothic Revival became associated with monarchism and conservatism, which was reflected by the choice of styles for the rebuilt government centres of the British Parliament&#x27;s Palace of Westminster in London, the Canadian Parliament Buildings in Ottawa and the Hungarian Parliament Building in Budapest.

In English literature, the architectural Gothic Revival and classical Romanticism gave rise to the Gothic novel genre, beginning with &quot;The Castle of Otranto&quot; (1764) by Horace Walpole, and inspired a 19th-century genre of medieval poetry that stems from the pseudo-bardic poetry of &quot;Ossian&quot;. Poems such as &quot;Idylls of the King&quot; by Alfred, Lord Tennyson recast specifically modern themes in medieval settings of Arthurian romance. In German literature, the Gothic Revival also had a grounding in literary fashions.

==Survival and revival==
Gothic architecture began at the Basilica of Saint Denis near Paris, and the Cathedral of Sens in 1140 and ended with a last flourish in the early 16th century with buildings like Henry VII&#x27;s Chapel at Westminster. However, Gothic architecture did not die out completely in the 16th century but instead lingered in on-going cathedral-building projects; at Oxford and Cambridge Universities, and in the construction of churches in increasingly isolated rural districts of England, France, Germany, the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth and in Spain.

=== Britain and Ireland ===
St Columb&#x27;s Cathedral, in Derry, may be considered &#x27;Gothic Survival&#x27;, as it was completed in 1633 in a Perpendicular Gothic style. Similarly, Gothic architecture survived in some urban settings during the later 17th century, as shown in Oxford and Cambridge, where some additions and repairs to Gothic buildings were considered to be more in keeping with the style of the original structures than contemporary Baroque.

In contrast, Dromore Cathedral, built in 1660/1661, immediately after the end of the Protectorate, revived Early English forms, demonstrating the restitution of the monarchy and claiming Ireland for the English crown. At the same time, the Great Hall of Lambeth Palace, that had been despoiled by the Puritans, was rebuilt in a mixture of Baroque and older Gothic forms, demonstrating the restitution of the Anglican Church. These two buildings can be said to herald the onset of Gothic Revival architecture, several decades before it became mainstream. Sir Christopher Wren&#x27;s Tom Tower for Christ Church, University of Oxford, consciously set out to imitate Cardinal Wolsey&#x27;s architectural style. Writing to Dean Fell in 1681, he noted; &quot;I resolved it ought to be Gothic to agree with the Founder&#x27;s work&quot;, adding that to do otherwise would lead to &quot;an unhandsome medley&quot;. Pevsner suggests that he succeeded &quot;to the extent that innocent visitors never notice the difference&quot;. It was followed in 1697–1704 by the rebuilding of Collegiate Church of St Mary in Warwick as a stone-vaulted hall church, whereas the burnt church had been a basilica with timbered roofs. Also in Warwickshire, in 1729/30, the nave and aisles of the church of St Nicholas at Alcester were rebuilt by Edward and Thomas Woodward, the exterior in Gothic forms but with a Neoclassical interior. At the same time, 1722–1746, Nicholas Hawksmoor added the west towers to Westminster Abbey, which made him a pioneer of Gothic Revival completions of medieval buildings, which from the late 19th century were increasingly disapproved of, although work in this style continued into the 20th century. Back in Oxford, the redecoration of the dining hall at University College between 1766 and 1768 has been described as &quot;the first major example of the Gothic Revival style in Oxford&quot;.

=== Continental Europe ===

Throughout France in the 16th and 17th centuries, churches continued to be built following Gothic principles (structure of the buildings, application of tracery) such as St-Eustache (1532–1640, façade 1754) in Paris and Orléans Cathedral (1601–1829). This newer construction incorporated some little changes like the use of round arches instead of pointed arches and the application of some Classical details, until largely being replaced in new construction with the arrival of Baroque architecture.

In Bologna, in 1646, the Baroque architect Carlo Rainaldi constructed Gothic vaults (completed 1658) for the Basilica of San Petronio in Bologna, which had been under construction since 1390; there, the Gothic context of the structure overrode considerations of the current architectural mode. Similarly, in St. Salvator&#x27;s Cathedral of Bruges, the timbered medieval vaults of nave and choir were replaced by &quot;Gothic&quot; stone vaults in 1635 resp. 1738/39. Guarino Guarini, a 17th-century Theatine monk active primarily in Turin, recognized the &quot;Gothic order&quot; as one of the primary systems of architecture and made use of it in his practice.

Even in Central Europe of the late 17th and 18th centuries, where Baroque dominated, some architects continued to use elements of the Gothic style. The most important example is Johann Santini Aichel, whose Pilgrimage Church of Saint John of Nepomuk in Žďár nad Sázavou, Czech Republic, represents a peculiar and creative synthesis of Baroque and Gothic. An example of another and less striking use of the Gothic style in the time is the Basilica of Our Lady of Hungary in Márianosztra, Hungary, whose choir (adjacent to a Baroque nave) was long considered authentically Gothic, because the 18th-century architect used medieval shapes to emphasize the continuity of the monastic community with its 14th-century founders.

=== Romantic challenges ===
During the mid-18th century rise of Romanticism, an increased interest and awareness of the Middle Ages among influential connoisseurs created a more appreciative approach to selected medieval arts, beginning with church architecture, the tomb monuments of royal and noble personages, stained glass, and late Gothic illuminated manuscripts. Other Gothic arts, such as tapestries and metalwork, continued to be disregarded as barbaric and crude, however sentimental and nationalist associations with historical figures were as strong in this early revival as purely aesthetic concerns.

German Romanticists (including philosopher and writer Goethe and architect Karl Friedrich Schinkel), began to appreciate the picturesque character of ruins—&quot;picturesque&quot; becoming a new aesthetic quality—and those mellowing effects of time that the Japanese call &quot;wabi-sabi&quot; and that Horace Walpole independently admired, mildly tongue-in-cheek, as &quot;the true rust of the Barons&#x27; wars&quot;. The &quot;Gothick&quot; details of Walpole&#x27;s Twickenham villa, Strawberry Hill House begun in 1749, appealed to the rococo tastes of the time, and were fairly quickly followed by James Talbot at Lacock Abbey, Wiltshire. By the 1770s, thoroughly neoclassical architects such as Robert Adam and James Wyatt were prepared to provide Gothic details in drawing-rooms, libraries and chapels and, for William Beckford at Fonthill in Wiltshire, a complete romantic vision of a Gothic abbey.

Some of the earliest architectural examples of the revived are found in Scotland. Inveraray Castle, constructed from 1746 for the Duke of Argyll, with design input from William Adam, displays the incorporation of turrets. The architectural historian John Gifford writes that the castellations were the &quot;symbolic assertion of the still quasi-feudal power [the duke] exercised over the inhabitants within his heritable jurisdictions&quot;. Most buildings were still largely in the established Palladian style, but some houses incorporated external features of the Scots baronial style. Robert Adam&#x27;s houses in this style include Mellerstain and Wedderburn in Berwickshire and Seton Castle in East Lothian, but it is most clearly seen at Culzean Castle, Ayrshire, remodelled by Adam from 1777. The eccentric landscape designer Batty Langley even attempted to &quot;improve&quot; Gothic forms by giving them classical proportions.

A younger generation, taking Gothic architecture more seriously, provided the readership for John Britton&#x27;s series &quot;Architectural Antiquities of Great Britain&quot;, which began appearing in 1807. In 1817, Thomas Rickman wrote an &quot;Attempt...&quot; to name and define the sequence of Gothic styles in English ecclesiastical architecture, &quot;a text-book for the architectural student&quot;. Its long antique title is descriptive: &quot;Attempt to discriminate the styles of English architecture from the Conquest to the Reformation; preceded by a sketch of the Grecian and Roman orders, with notices of nearly five hundred English buildings&quot;. The categories he used were Norman, Early English, Decorated, and Perpendicular. It went through numerous editions, was still being republished by 1881, and has been reissued in the 21st century.

The most common use for Gothic Revival architecture was in the building of churches. Major examples of Gothic cathedrals in the U.S. include the cathedrals of St. John the Divine and St. Patrick in New York City and the Washington National Cathedral on Mount St. Alban in northwest Washington, D.C. One of the biggest churches in Gothic Revival style in Canada is the Basilica of Our Lady Immaculate in Guelph, Ontario.

Gothic Revival architecture remained one of the most popular and long-lived of the many revival styles of architecture. Although it began to lose force and popularity after the third quarter of the 19th century in commercial, residential and industrial fields, some buildings such as churches, schools, colleges and universities were still constructed in the Gothic style, often known as &quot;Collegiate Gothic&quot;, which remained popular in England, Canada and in the United States until well into the early to mid-20th century. Only when new materials, like steel and glass along with concern for function in everyday working life and saving space in the cities, meaning the need to build up instead of out, began to take hold did the Gothic Revival start to disappear from popular building requests.

==Gothic Revival in the other decorative arts==

The revived Gothic style was not limited to architecture. Classical Gothic buildings of the 12th to 16th Centuries were a source of inspiration to 19th-century designers in numerous fields of work. Architectural elements such as pointed arches, steep-sloping roofs and fancy carvings like lace and lattice work were applied to a wide range of Gothic Revival objects. Some examples of Gothic Revival influence can be found in heraldic motifs in coats of arms, furniture with elaborate painted scenes like the whimsical Gothic detailing in English furniture is traceable as far back as Lady Pomfret&#x27;s house in Arlington Street, London (1740s), and Gothic fretwork in chairbacks and glazing patterns of bookcases is a familiar feature of Chippendale&#x27;s &quot;Director&quot; (1754, 1762), where, for example, the three-part bookcase employs Gothic details with Rococo profusion, on a symmetrical form. Abbotsford in the Scottish Borders, rebuilt from 1816 by Sir Walter Scott and paid for by the profits from his hugely successful, historical novels, exemplifies the &quot;Regency Gothic&quot; style. Gothic Revival also includes the reintroduction of medieval clothes and dances in historical re-enactments staged especially in the second part of the 19th century, although one of the first, the Eglinton Tournament of 1839, remains the most famous.

During the Bourbon Restoration in France (1814–1830) and the Louis-Philippe period (1830–1848), Gothic Revival motifs start to appear, together with revivals of the Renaissance and of Rococo. During these two periods, the vogue for medieval things led craftsmen to adopt Gothic decorative motifs in their work, such as bell turrets, lancet arches, trefoils, Gothic tracery and rose windows. This style was also known as &quot;Cathedral style&quot; (&quot;À la catédrale&quot;).

By the mid-19th century, Gothic traceries and niches could be inexpensively re-created in wallpaper, and Gothic blind arcading could decorate a ceramic pitcher. Writing in 1857, J. G. Crace, an influential decorator from a family of influential interior designers, expressed his preference for the Gothic style: &quot;In my opinion there is no quality of lightness, elegance, richness or beauty possessed by any other style... [or] in which the principles of sound construction can be so well carried out&quot;. The illustrated catalogue for the Great Exhibition of 1851 is replete with Gothic detail, from lacemaking and carpet designs to heavy machinery. Nikolaus Pevsner&#x27;s volume on the exhibits at the Great Exhibition, &quot;High Victorian Design&quot; published in 1951, was an important contribution to the academic study of Victorian taste and an early indicator of the later 20th century rehabilitation of Victorian architecture and the objects with which they decorated their buildings.

In 1847, eight thousand British crown coins were minted in proof condition with the design using an ornate reverse in keeping with the revived style. Considered by collectors to be particularly beautiful, they are known as &#x27;Gothic crowns&#x27;. The design was repeated in 1853, again in proof. A similar two shilling coin, the &#x27;Gothic florin&#x27; was minted for circulation from 1851 to 1887.

==Romanticism and nationalism==
French neo-Gothic had its roots in the French medieval Gothic architecture, where it was created in the 12th century. Gothic architecture was sometimes known during the medieval period as the &quot;Opus Francigenum&quot;, (the &quot;French Art&quot;). French scholar Alexandre de Laborde wrote in 1816 that &quot;Gothic architecture has beauties of its own&quot;, which marked the beginning of the Gothic Revival in France. Starting in 1828, Alexandre Brogniart, the director of the Sèvres porcelain manufactory, produced fired enamel paintings on large panes of plate glass, for King Louis-Philippe&#x27;s Chapelle royale de Dreux, an important early French commission in Gothic taste, preceded mainly by some Gothic features in a few &quot;jardins paysagers&quot;.

The French Gothic Revival was set on more sound intellectual footings by a pioneer, Arcisse de Caumont, who founded the Societé des Antiquaires de Normandie at a time when &quot;antiquaire&quot; still meant a connoisseur of antiquities, and who published his great work on architecture in French Normandy in 1830. The following year Victor Hugo&#x27;s historical romance novel &quot;The Hunchback of Notre-Dame&quot; appeared, in which the great Gothic cathedral of Paris was at once a setting and a protagonist in a hugely popular work of fiction. Hugo intended his book to awaken a concern for the surviving Gothic architecture left in Europe, however, rather than to initiate a craze for neo-Gothic in contemporary life. In the same year that &quot;Notre-Dame de Paris&quot; appeared, the new restored Bourbon monarchy established an office in the Royal French Government of Inspector-General of Ancient Monuments, a post which was filled in 1833 by Prosper Mérimée, who became the secretary of a new Commission des Monuments Historiques in 1837. This was the Commission that instructed Eugène Viollet-le-Duc to report on the condition of the Abbey of Vézelay in 1840. Following this, Viollet le Duc set out to restore most of the symbolic buildings in France including Notre Dame de Paris, Vézelay, Carcassonne, Roquetaillade castle, Mont-Saint-Michel Abbey on its peaked coastal island, Pierrefonds, and the Palais des Papes in Avignon. When France&#x27;s first prominent neo-Gothic church was built, the Basilica of Saint-Clotilde, Paris, begun in 1846 and consecrated in 1857, the architect chosen was of German extraction, Franz Christian Gau, (1790–1853); the design was significantly modified by Gau&#x27;s assistant, Théodore Ballu, in the later stages, to produce the pair of &quot;flèches&quot; that crown the west end.

In Germany, there was a renewal of interest in the completion of Cologne Cathedral. Begun in 1248, it was still unfinished at the time of the revival. The 1820s &quot;Romantic&quot; movement brought a new appreciation of the building, and construction work began once more in 1842, marking a German return for Gothic architecture. St. Vitus Cathedral in Prague, begun in 1344, was also completed in the mid-19th and early 20th centuries. The importance of the Cologne completion project in German-speaking lands has been explored by Michael J. Lewis, &quot;The Politics of the German Gothic Revival: August Reichensperger&quot;. Reichensperger was himself in no doubt as to the cathedral&#x27;s central position in Germanic culture; &quot;Cologne Cathedral is German to the core, it is a national monument in the fullest sense of the word, and probably the most splendid monument to be handed down to us from the past&quot;.

Because of Romantic nationalism in the early 19th century, the Germans, French and English all claimed the original Gothic architecture of the 12th century era as originating in their own country. The English boldly coined the term &quot;Early English&quot; for &quot;Gothic&quot;, a term that implied Gothic architecture was an English creation. In his 1832 edition of &quot;Notre Dame de Paris&quot;, author Victor Hugo said &quot;Let us inspire in the nation, if it is possible, love for the national architecture&quot;, implying that &quot;Gothic&quot; is France&#x27;s national heritage. In Germany, with the completion of Cologne Cathedral in the 1880s, at the time its summit was the world&#x27;s tallest building, the cathedral was seen as the height of Gothic architecture. Other major completions of Gothic cathedrals were of Regensburger Dom (with twin spires completed from 1869 to 1872), Ulm Münster (with a 161-meter tower from 1890) and St. Vitus Cathedral in Prague (1844–1929).

In Belgium, a 15th-century church in Ostend burned down in 1896. King Leopold II funded its replacement, the Saint Peter&#x27;s and Saint Paul&#x27;s Church, a cathedral-scale design which drew inspiration from the neo-Gothic Votive Church in Vienna and Cologne Cathedral. In Mechelen, the largely unfinished building drawn in 1526 as the seat of the Great Council of The Netherlands, was not actually built until the early 20th century, although it closely followed Rombout II Keldermans&#x27;s Brabantine Gothic design, and became the &#x27;new&#x27; north wing of the City Hall. In Florence, the Duomo&#x27;s temporary façade erected for the Medici-House of Lorraine nuptials in 1588–1589, was dismantled, and the west end of the cathedral stood bare again until 1864, when a competition was held to design a new façade suitable to Arnolfo di Cambio&#x27;s original structure and the fine campanile next to it. This competition was won by Emilio De Fabris, and so work on his polychrome design and panels of mosaic was begun in 1876 and completed by 1887, creating the Neo-Gothic western façade.

Eastern Europe also saw much Revival construction; in addition to the Hungarian Parliament Building in Budapest, the Bulgarian National Revival saw the introduction of Gothic Revival elements into its vernacular ecclesiastical and residential architecture. The largest project of the Slavine School is the Lopushna Monastery cathedral (1850–1853), though later churches such as Saint George&#x27;s Church, Gavril Genovo display more prominent vernacular Gothic Revival features.

In Scotland, while a similar Gothic style to that used further south in England was adopted by figures including Frederick Thomas Pilkington (1832–1898) in secular architecture it was marked by the re-adoption of the Scots baronial style. Important for the adoption of the style in the early 19th century was Abbotsford, which became a model for the modern revival of the baronial style. Common features borrowed from 16th- and 17th-century houses included battlemented gateways, crow-stepped gables, pointed turrets and machicolations. The style was popular across Scotland and was applied to many relatively modest dwellings by architects such as William Burn (1789–1870), David Bryce (1803–1876), Edward Blore (1787–1879), Edward Calvert () and Robert Stodart Lorimer (1864–1929) and in urban contexts, including the building of Cockburn Street in Edinburgh (from the 1850s) as well as the National Wallace Monument at Stirling (1859–1869). The reconstruction of Balmoral Castle as a baronial palace and its adoption as a royal retreat from 1855 to 1858 confirmed the popularity of the style.

In the United States, the first &quot;Gothic stile&quot; church (as opposed to churches with Gothic elements) was Trinity Church on the Green, New Haven, Connecticut. It was designed by Ithiel Town between 1812 and 1814, while he was building his Federalist-style Center Church, New Haven next to this radical new &quot;Gothic-style&quot; church. Its cornerstone was laid in 1814, and it was consecrated in 1816. It predates St Luke&#x27;s Church, Chelsea, often said to be the first Gothic-revival church in London. Though built of trap rock stone with arched windows and doors, parts of its tower and its battlements were wood. Gothic buildings were subsequently erected by Episcopal congregations in Connecticut at St John&#x27;s in Salisbury (1823), St John&#x27;s in Kent (1823–1826) and St Andrew&#x27;s in Marble Dale (1821–1823). These were followed by Town&#x27;s design for Christ Church Cathedral (Hartford, Connecticut) (1827), which incorporated Gothic elements such as buttresses into the fabric of the church. St. Paul&#x27;s Episcopal Church in Troy, New York, was constructed in 1827–1828 as an exact copy of Town&#x27;s design for Trinity Church, New Haven, but using local stone; due to changes in the original, St. Paul&#x27;s is closer to Town&#x27;s original design than Trinity itself. In the 1830s, architects began to copy specific English Gothic and Gothic Revival Churches, and these &quot;&#x27;mature Gothic Revival&#x27; buildings made the domestic Gothic style architecture which preceded it seem primitive and old-fashioned&quot;.

There are many examples of Gothic Revival architecture in Canada. The first major structure was Notre-Dame Basilica in Montreal, Quebec, which was designed in 1824. The capital, Ottawa, Ontario, was predominantly a 19th-century creation in the Gothic Revival style. The Parliament Hill buildings were the preeminent example, of which the original library survives today (after the rest was destroyed by fire in 1916). Their example was followed elsewhere in the city and outlying areas, showing how popular the Gothic Revival movement had become. Other examples of Canadian Gothic Revival architecture in Ottawa are the Victoria Memorial Museum, (1905–1908), the Royal Canadian Mint, (1905–1908), and the Connaught Building, (1913–1916), all by David Ewart.

==Gothic as a moral force==

===Pugin and &quot;truth&quot; in architecture===
In the late 1820s, A. W. N. Pugin, still a teenager, was working for two highly visible employers, providing Gothic detailing for luxury goods. For the Royal furniture makers Morel and Seddon he provided designs for redecorations for the elderly George IV at Windsor Castle in a Gothic taste suited to the setting. For the royal silversmiths Rundell Bridge and Co., Pugin provided designs for silver from 1828, using the 14th-century Anglo-French Gothic vocabulary that he would continue to favour later in designs for the new Palace of Westminster. Between 1821 and 1838 Pugin and his father published a series of volumes of architectural drawings, the first two entitled, &quot;Specimens of Gothic Architecture&quot;, and the following three, &quot;Examples of Gothic Architecture&quot;, that were to remain both in print and the standard references for Gothic Revivalists for at least the next century.

In &quot;Contrasts: or, a Parallel between the Noble Edifices of the Middle Ages, and similar Buildings of the Present Day&quot; (1836), Pugin expressed his admiration not only for medieval art but for the whole medieval ethos, suggesting that Gothic architecture was the product of a purer society. In &quot;The True Principles of Pointed or Christian Architecture&quot; (1841), he set out his &quot;two great rules of design: 1st, that there should be no features about a building which are not necessary for convenience, construction or propriety; 2nd, that all ornament should consist of enrichment of the essential construction of the building&quot;. Urging modern craftsmen to seek to emulate the style of medieval workmanship as well as reproduce its methods, Pugin sought to reinstate Gothic as the true Christian architectural style.

Pugin&#x27;s most notable project was the Houses of Parliament in London, after its predecessor was largely destroyed in a fire in 1834. His part in the design consisted of two campaigns, 1836–1837 and again in 1844 and 1852, with the classicist Charles Barry as his nominal superior. Pugin provided the external decoration and the interiors, while Barry designed the symmetrical layout of the building, causing Pugin to remark, &quot;All Grecian, Sir; Tudor details on a classic body&quot;.

===Ruskin and Venetian Gothic===

John Ruskin supplemented Pugin&#x27;s ideas in his two influential theoretical works, &quot;The Seven Lamps of Architecture&quot; (1849) and &quot;The Stones of Venice&quot; (1853). Finding his architectural ideal in Venice, Ruskin proposed that Gothic buildings excelled above all other architecture because of the &quot;sacrifice&quot; of the stone-carvers in intricately decorating every stone. In this, he drew a contrast between the physical and spiritual satisfaction which a medieval craftsman derived from his work, and the lack of these satisfactions afforded to modern, industrialised labour.

By declaring the Doge&#x27;s Palace to be &quot;the central building of the world&quot;, Ruskin argued the case for Gothic government buildings as Pugin had done for churches, though mostly only in theory. When his ideas were put into practice, Ruskin often disliked the result, although he supported many architects, such as Thomas Newenham Deane and Benjamin Woodward, and was reputed to have designed some of the corbel decorations for that pair&#x27;s Oxford University Museum of Natural History. A major clash between the Gothic and Classical styles in relation to governmental offices occurred less than a decade after the publication of &quot;The Stones of Venice&quot;. A public competition for the construction of a new Foreign Office in Whitehall saw the decision to award first place to a Gothic design by George Gilbert Scott overturned by the Prime Minister, Lord Palmerston, who successfully demanded a building in the Italianate style.

===Ecclesiology and funerary style===
In England, the Church of England was undergoing a revival of Anglo-Catholic and ritualist ideology in the form of the Oxford Movement, and it became desirable to build large numbers of new churches to cater for the growing population, and cemeteries for their hygienic burials. This found ready exponents in the universities, where the ecclesiological movement was forming. Its proponents believed that Gothic was the &quot;only&quot; style appropriate for a parish church, and favoured a particular era of Gothic architecture – the &quot;decorated&quot;. The Cambridge Camden Society, through its journal &quot;The Ecclesiologist&quot;, was so savagely critical of new church buildings that were below its exacting standards and its pronouncements were followed so avidly that it became the epicentre of the flood of Victorian restoration that affected most of the Anglican cathedrals and parish churches in England and Wales.

St Luke&#x27;s Church, Chelsea, was a new-built Commissioner&#x27;s Church of 1820–1824, partly built using a grant of £8,333 towards its construction with money voted by Parliament as a result of the Church Building Act 1818. It is often said to be the first Gothic Revival church in London, and, as Charles Locke Eastlake put it: &quot;probably the only church of its time in which the main roof was groined throughout in stone&quot;. Nonetheless, the parish was firmly low church, and the original arrangement, modified in the 1860s, was as a &quot;preaching church&quot; dominated by the pulpit, with a small altar and wooden galleries over the nave aisle.

The development of the private major metropolitan cemeteries was occurring at the same time as the movement; Sir William Tite pioneered the first cemetery in the Gothic style at West Norwood in 1837, with chapels, gates, and decorative features in the Gothic manner, attracting the interest of contemporary architects such as George Edmund Street, Barry, and William Burges. The style was immediately hailed a success and universally replaced the previous preference for classical design.

Not every architect or client was swept away by this tide. Although Gothic Revival succeeded in becoming an increasingly familiar style of architecture, the attempt to associate it with the notion of high church superiority, as advocated by Pugin and the ecclesiological movement, was anathema to those with ecumenical or nonconformist principles. Alexander &quot;Greek&quot; Thomson launched a famous attack; &quot;We are told we should adopt [Gothic] because it is the Christian style, and this most impudent assertion has been accepted as sound doctrine even by earnest and intelligent Protestants; whereas it ought only to have force with those who believe that Christian truth attained its purest and most spiritual development at the period when this style of architecture constituted its corporeal form&quot;. Those rejecting the link between Gothic and Catholicism looked to adopt it solely for its aesthetic romantic qualities, to combine it with other styles, or look to northern European Brick Gothic for a more plain appearance; or in some instances all three of these, as at the non-denominational Abney Park Cemetery in east London, designed by William Hosking FSA in 1840.

==Viollet-le-Duc and Iron Gothic==

France had lagged slightly in entering the neo-Gothic scene, but produced a major figure in the revival in Eugène Viollet-le-Duc. As well as a powerful and influential theorist, Viollet-le-Duc was a leading architect whose genius lay in restoration. He believed in restoring buildings to a state of completion that they would not have known even when they were first built, theories he applied to his restorations of the walled city of Carcassonne, and to Notre-Dame and Sainte Chapelle in Paris. In this respect he differed from his English counterpart Ruskin, as he often replaced the work of mediaeval stonemasons. His rational approach to Gothic stood in stark contrast to the revival&#x27;s romanticist origins. Throughout his career he remained in a quandary as to whether iron and masonry should be combined in a building. Iron, in the form of iron anchors, had been used in the most ambitious buildings of medieval Gothic, especially but not only for tracery.

It had in fact been used in &quot;Gothic&quot; buildings since the earliest days of the revival. In some cases, cast iron enabled something like a perfection of medieval design. It was only with Ruskin and the archaeological Gothic&#x27;s demand for historical truth that iron, whether it was visible or not, was deemed improper for a Gothic building. Ultimately, the utility of iron won out: &quot;substituting a cast iron shaft for a granite, marble or stone column is not bad, but one must agree that it cannot be considered as an innovation, as the introduction of a new principle. Replacing a stone or wooden lintel by an iron breastsummer is very good&quot;. He strongly opposed illusion, however: reacting against the casing of a cast iron pillar in stone, he wrote; &quot;il faut que la pierre paraisse bien être de la pierre; le fer, du fer; le bois, du bois&quot; (stone must appear to be stone; iron, iron; wood, wood).

The arguments against modern construction materials began to collapse in the mid-19th century as great prefabricated structures such as the glass and iron Crystal Palace and the glazed courtyard of the Oxford University Museum of Natural History were erected, which appeared to embody Gothic principles. Between 1863 and 1872 Viollet-le-Duc published his &quot;Entretiens sur l&#x27;architecture&quot;, a set of daring designs for buildings that combined iron and masonry. Though these projects were never realised, they influenced several generations of designers and architects, notably Antoni Gaudí in Spain and, in England, Benjamin Bucknall, Viollet&#x27;s foremost English follower and translator, whose masterpiece was Woodchester Mansion. The flexibility and strength of cast-iron freed neo-Gothic designers to create new structural Gothic forms impossible in stone, as in Calvert Vaux&#x27;s cast-iron Gothic bridge in Central Park, New York dating from the 1860. Vaux enlisted openwork forms derived from Gothic blind-arcading and window tracery to express the spring and support of the arching bridge, in flexing forms that presage Art Nouveau.

==Collegiate Gothic==

In the United States, Collegiate Gothic was a late and literal resurgence of the English Gothic Revival, adapted for American college and university campuses. The term &quot;Collegiate Gothic&quot; originated from American architect Alexander Jackson Davis&#x27;s handwritten description of his own &quot;English Collegiate Gothic Mansion&quot; of 1853 for the Harrals of Bridgeport. By the 1890s, the movement was known as &quot;Collegiate Gothic&quot;.

The firm of Cope &amp; Stewardson was an early and important exponent, transforming the campuses of Bryn Mawr College, Princeton University and the University of Pennsylvania in the 1890s. In 1872, Abner Jackson, the President of Trinity College, Connecticut, visited Britain, seeking models and an architect for a planned new campus for the college. William Burges was chosen and he drew up a four-quadrangled masterplan, in his Early French style. Lavish illustrations were produced by Axel Haig. However, the estimated cost, at just under one million dollars, together with the sheer scale of the plans, thoroughly alarmed the College Trustees and only one-sixth of the plan was executed, the present Long Walk, with Francis H. Kimball acting as local, supervising, architect, and Frederick Law Olmsted laying out the grounds. Hitchcock considers the result, &quot;perhaps the most satisfactory of all of [Burges&#x27;s] works and the best example anywhere of Victorian Gothic collegiate architecture&quot;.

The movement continued into the 20th century, with Cope &amp; Stewardson&#x27;s campus for Washington University in St. Louis (1900–1909), Charles Donagh Maginnis&#x27;s buildings at Boston College (1910s) (including Gasson Hall), Ralph Adams Cram&#x27;s design for the Princeton University Graduate College (1913), and James Gamble Rogers&#x27; reconstruction of the campus of Yale University (1920s). Charles Klauder&#x27;s Gothic Revival skyscraper on the University of Pittsburgh&#x27;s campus, the Cathedral of Learning (1926) exhibited Gothic stylings both inside and out, while using modern technologies to make the building taller.

==Vernacular adaptations and the revival in Oceania==

Carpenter Gothic houses and small churches became common in North America and other places in the late 19th century. These structures adapted Gothic elements such as pointed arches, steep gables, and towers to traditional American light-frame construction. The invention of the scroll saw and mass-produced wood moldings allowed a few of these structures to mimic the florid fenestration of the High Gothic. But, in most cases, Carpenter Gothic buildings were relatively unadorned, retaining only the basic elements of pointed-arch windows and steep gables. A well-known example of Carpenter Gothic is a house in Eldon, Iowa, that Grant Wood used for the background of his painting American Gothic.

===Australia===
Australia, in particular in Melbourne and Sydney, saw the construction of large numbers of Gothic Revival buildings. William Wardell (1823–1899) was among the country&#x27;s most prolific architects; born and trained in England, after emigrating his most notable Australian designs include St Patrick&#x27;s Cathedral, Melbourne and St John&#x27;s College and St Mary&#x27;s Cathedral in Sydney. In common with many other 19th century architects, Wardell could deploy different styles at the command of his clients; Government House, Melbourne is Italianate. His banking house for the English, Scottish and Australian Bank in Melbourne has been described as &quot;the Australian masterpiece of neo-Gothic&quot;. This claim has also been made for Edmund Blacket&#x27;s MacLaurin Hall at the University of Sydney, which sits in the quadrangle complex described as &quot;arguably the most important group of Gothic and Tudor Revival style architecture in Australia&quot;.

===New Zealand===

Benjamin Mountfort, born in Britain, trained in Birmingham, and subsequently resident in Canterbury, New Zealand imported the Gothic Revival style to his adopted country and designed Gothic Revival churches in both wood and stone, notably in the city of Christchurch. 

Frederick Thatcher designed wooden churches in the Gothic Revival style, for example Old St. Paul&#x27;s, Wellington, contributing to what has been described as New Zealand&#x27;s &quot;one memorable contribution to world architecture&quot;. St Mary of the Angels, Wellington by Frederick de Jersey Clere is in the French Gothic style, and was the first Gothic design church built in ferro-concrete. Other examples in Wellington include John Sydney Swan&#x27;s now-demolished Erskine College.

The style also found favour in the southern New Zealand city of Dunedin, where the wealth brought in by the Otago gold rush of the 1860s allowed for substantial stone edifices to be constructed, using hard, dark breccia stone and a local white limestone, Oamaru stone. Among them were Maxwell Bury&#x27;s University of Otago Registry Building and the Dunedin Law Courts by John Campbell.

===Pacific islands===
Several examples of Gothic Revival architecture can be found among the buildings of the Pacific islands. Notable among these is Sacred Heart Church in Levuka, Fiji, built by Father Louyot in 1858. This unusual structure consists of a church and presbytery in a local version of Carpenter Gothic alongside a stone church tower.

==Global Gothic==

Henry-Russell Hitchcock, the architectural historian, noted the spread of the Gothic Revival in the 19th and early 20th centuries, &quot;wherever English culture extended – as far as the West Coast of the United States and to the remotest Antipodes&quot;. The British Empire, almost at its geographic peak at the height of the Gothic Revival, assisted or compelled this spread. The English-speaking dominions, Canada, Australia particularly the state of Victoria and New Zealand generally adopted British styles in toto (see above); other parts of the empire saw regional adaptations. India saw the construction of many such buildings, in styles termed Indo-Saracenic or Hindu-Gothic. Notable examples include Chhatrapati Shivaji Terminus (formerly Victoria Terminus) and the Taj Mahal Palace Hotel, both in Mumbai. At the hill station of Shimla, the summer capital of British India, an attempt was made to recreate the Home counties in the foothills of the Himalayas. Although Gothic Revival was the predominant architectural style, alternatives were also deployed; Rashtrapati Niwas, the former Viceregal Lodge, has been variously described as Scottish Baronial Revival, Tudor Revival and Jacobethan.

Other examples in the east include the late 19th century Church of the Saviour, Beijing, constructed on the orders of the Guangxu Emperor and designed by the Catholic missionary and architect Alphonse Favier; and the Wat Niwet Thammaprawat in the Bang Pa-In Royal Palace in Bangkok, by the Italian Joachim Grassi. In Indonesia, (the former colony of the Dutch East Indies), the Jakarta Cathedral was begun in 1891 and completed in 1901 by Dutch architect Antonius Dijkmans; while further north in the islands of the Philippines, the San Sebastian Church, designed by architects Genaro Palacios and Gustave Eiffel, was consecrated in 1891 in the still Spanish colony. Church building in South Africa was extensive, with little or no effort to adopt vernacular forms. Robert Gray, the first bishop of Cape Town, wrote; &quot;I am sure we do not overestimate the importance of real Churches built after the fashion of our English churches&quot;. He oversaw the construction of some fifty such buildings between 1848 and his death in 1872. South America saw a later flourishing of the Revival, particularly in church architecture, for example the Metropolitan Cathedral of São Paulo in Brazil by the German Maximilian Emil Hehl, the Basilica of the National Vow in Ecuador, the Sanctuary of Las Lajas in Colombia, the Basílica de Nuestra Señora del Perpetuo Socorro in Chile, or the Cathedral of La Plata in Argentina.

==20th and 21st centuries==

The Gothic style dictated the use of structural members in compression, leading to tall, buttressed buildings with interior columns of load-bearing masonry and tall, narrow windows. But, by the start of the 20th century, technological developments such as the steel frame, the incandescent light bulb and the elevator made this approach obsolete. Steel framing supplanted the non-ornamental functions of rib vaults and flying buttresses, providing wider open interiors with fewer columns interrupting the view.

Some architects persisted in using Neo-Gothic tracery as applied ornamentation to an iron skeleton underneath, for example in Cass Gilbert&#x27;s 1913 Woolworth Building skyscraper in New York and Raymond Hood&#x27;s 1922 Tribune Tower in Chicago. The Tower Life Building in San Antonio, completed in 1929, is noted for the arrays of decorative gargoyles on its upper floors. But, over the first half of the century, Neo-Gothic was supplanted by Modernism, although some modernist architects saw the Gothic tradition of architectural form entirely in terms of the &quot;honest expression&quot; of the technology of the day, and saw themselves as heirs to that tradition, with their use of rectangular frames and exposed iron girders.

In spite of this, the Gothic Revival continued to exert its influence, simply because many of its more massive projects were still being built well into the second half of the 20th century, such as Giles Gilbert Scott&#x27;s Liverpool Cathedral and the Washington National Cathedral (1907–1990). Ralph Adams Cram became a leading force in American Gothic, with his most ambitious project the Cathedral of St. John the Divine in New York (claimed to be the largest cathedral in the world), as well as Collegiate Gothic buildings at Princeton University. Cram said &quot;the style hewn out and perfected by our ancestors [has] become ours by uncontested inheritance&quot;.

Though the number of new Gothic Revival buildings declined sharply after the 1930s, they continue to be built. St Edmundsbury Cathedral, the cathedral of Bury St Edmunds in Suffolk, was expanded and reconstructed in a neo-Gothic style between the late 1950s and 2005, and a commanding stone central tower was added. A new church in the Gothic style is planned for St. John Vianney Parish in Fishers, Indiana. The Whittle Building at Peterhouse, University of Cambridge, opened in 2016, matches the neo-Gothic style of the rest of the courtyard in which it is situated.

==Appreciation==
By 1872, the Gothic Revival was mature enough in the United Kingdom that Charles Locke Eastlake, an influential professor of design, could produce &quot;A History of the Gothic Revival&quot;. Kenneth Clark&#x27;s, &quot;The Gothic Revival. An Essay&quot;, followed in 1928, in which he described the Revival as &quot;the most widespread and influential artistic movement which England has ever produced.&quot; The architect and writer Harry Stuart Goodhart-Rendel covered the subject of the Revival in an appreciative way in his Slade Lectures in 1934. But the conventional early 20th century view of the architecture of the Gothic Revival was strongly dismissive, critics writing of &quot;the nineteenth century architectural tragedy&quot;, ridiculing &quot;the uncompromising ugliness&quot; of the era&#x27;s buildings and attacking the &quot;sadistic hatred of beauty&quot; of its architects. The 1950s saw further signs of a recovery in the reputation of Revival architecture. John Steegman&#x27;s study, &quot;Consort of Taste&quot; (re-issued in 1970 as &quot;Victorian Taste&quot;, with a foreword by Nikolaus Pevsner), was published in 1950 and began a slow turn in the tide of opinion &quot;towards a more serious and sympathetic assessment.&quot; In 1958, Henry-Russell Hitchcock published his &quot;Architecture: Nineteenth and Twentieth Centuries&quot;, as part of the Pelican History of Art series edited by Nikolaus Pevsner. Hitchcock devoted substantial chapters to the Gothic Revival, noting that, while &quot;there is no more typical nineteenth-century product than a Victorian Gothic church&quot;, the success of the Victorian Gothic saw its practitioners design mansions, castles, colleges, and parliaments. The same year saw the foundation of the Victorian Society in England and, in 1963, the publication of &quot;Victorian Architecture&quot;, an influential collection of essays edited by Peter Ferriday. By 2008, the fiftieth anniversary of the founding of the Victorian Society, the architecture of the Gothic Revival was more fully appreciated with some of its leading architects receiving scholarly attention and some of its best buildings, such as George Gilbert Scott&#x27;s St Pancras Station Hotel, being magnificently restored. The Society&#x27;s 50th anniversary publication, &quot;Saving A Century&quot;, surveyed a half-century of losses and successes, reflected on the changing perceptions toward Victorian architecture and concluded with a chapter entitled &quot;The Victorians Victorious&quot;.

==Gallery==

===Europe===
===North America===
===South America===
===Australia and New Zealand===
===Asia===
===Decorative arts===
== See also ==

===Sub-varieties of the Gothic Revival style===
=== Locale ===
==Footnotes==
==References==
==Sources==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
*
* 
* 
* 
* 
*
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
*
*
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


==Further reading==
* Christian Amalvi, &quot;Le Goût du moyen âge&quot; (Paris: Plon), 1996. The first French monograph on French Gothic Revival.
* &quot;&quot;Le Gothique retrouvé&quot; avant Viollet-le-Duc&quot;. Exhibition, 1979. The first French exhibition concerned with French Neo-Gothic.
* Hunter-Stiebel, Penelope, &quot;Of Knights and Spires: Gothic Revival in France and Germany&quot;, 1989. .
* Phoebe B Stanton, &quot;Pugin&quot; (New York: Viking Press, 1972, ©1971). .
* Summerson, Sir John, 1948. &quot;Viollet-le-Duc and the rational point of view&quot;, collected in &quot;Heavenly Mansions and other essays on Architecture&quot;.
* Sir Thomas G. Jackson, &quot;Modern Gothic Architecture&quot; (1873), &quot;Byzantine and Romanesque Architecture&quot; (1913), and the three-volume &quot;Gothic Architecture in France, England and Italy&quot; (1901).

==External links==

* Basilique Sainte-Clotilde, Paris (archived copy)
* Canada by Design: Parliament Hill, Ottawa at Library and Archives Canada (archived copy)
* Books, Research and Information (archived copy)
* Proyecto Documenta&#x27;s entries for neo-Gothic elements at the Valparaíso&#x27;s churches (archived copy)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q186363" start="0" end="14" title="Gothic Revival architecture" label="Gothic Revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q186363" start="36" end="52" title="Gothic Revival architecture" label="Victorian Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q186363" start="56" end="66" title="Gothic Revival architecture" label="neo-Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q32880" start="74" end="96" title="Architectural style" label="architectural movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q176483" start="331" end="350" title="Gothic architecture" label="Gothic architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q54111" start="398" end="410" title="Neoclassical architecture" label="neoclassical"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406758" start="529" end="535" title="finial" label="finial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060585" start="538" end="551" title="lancet window" label="lancet window"/>
<link wikidata="Q1959517" start="558" end="568" title="hood mould" label="hood mould"/>
<link wikidata="Q160381" start="675" end="688" title="Western world" label="Western world"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="860" end="871" title="Catholicism" label="Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070069" start="894" end="905" title="high church" label="high church"/>
<link wikidata="Q541235" start="909" end="923" title="Anglo-Catholic" label="Anglo-Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216982" start="1900" end="1910" title="Revivalism (architecture)" label="Revivalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q330369" start="2007" end="2031" title="Arts and Crafts movement" label="Arts and Crafts movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q245188" start="2079" end="2088" title="Modern architecture" label="Modernism"/>
<link wikidata="Q182688" start="2146" end="2159" title="Victorian era" label="Victorian era"/>
<link wikidata="Q4011305" start="2307" end="2324" title="Victorian Society" label="Victorian Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q194253" start="2357" end="2371" title="evangelicalism" label="evangelicalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070069" start="2454" end="2465" title="high church" label="high church"/>
<link wikidata="Q12562" start="2559" end="2570" title="Reformation" label="Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q12348939" start="2765" end="2776" title="medievalism" label="medievalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5697103" start="2807" end="2818" title="antiquarian" label="antiquarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q202398" start="2869" end="2886" title="industrialisation" label="industrialisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q151403" start="3024" end="3038" title="Thomas Carlyle" label="Thomas Carlyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q313288" start="3043" end="3057" title="Augustus Pugin" label="Augustus Pugin"/>
<link wikidata="Q170292" start="3260" end="3270" title="classicism" label="classicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q202398" start="3299" end="3316" title="industrialisation" label="industrialisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q877848" start="3474" end="3487" title="republicanism" label="republicanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6216" start="3492" end="3502" title="liberalism" label="liberalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="3575" end="3585" title="French Revolution" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q216669" start="3681" end="3691" title="monarchism" label="monarchism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7169" start="3696" end="3708" title="conservatism" label="conservatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q62408" start="3822" end="3843" title="Palace of Westminster" label="Palace of Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1589289" start="3868" end="3888" title="Parliament Hill" label="Parliament Buildings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930" start="3892" end="3898" title="Ottawa" label="Ottawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q11819" start="3907" end="3936" title="Hungarian Parliament Building" label="Hungarian Parliament Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q37068" start="4021" end="4032" title="Romanticism" label="Romanticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q20669641" start="4050" end="4062" title="Gothic novel" label="Gothic novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q548576" start="4091" end="4112" title="The Castle of Otranto" label="The Castle of Otranto"/>
<link wikidata="Q309903" start="4129" end="4143" title="Horace Walpole" label="Horace Walpole"/>
<link wikidata="Q6071395" start="4225" end="4238" title="bardic poetry" label="bardic poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q15837802" start="4248" end="4254" title="Ossian" label="Ossian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2227196" start="4282" end="4300" title="Idylls of the King" label="Idylls of the King"/>
<link wikidata="Q173869" start="4310" end="4331" title="Alfred, Lord Tennyson" label="Alfred, Lord Tennyson"/>
<link wikidata="Q45792" start="4390" end="4399" title="King Arthur" label="Arthurian"/>
<link wikidata="Q181287" start="4412" end="4429" title="German literature" label="German literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q176483" start="4519" end="4538" title="Gothic architecture" label="Gothic architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q184407" start="4552" end="4575" title="Basilica of Saint Denis" label="Basilica of Saint Denis"/>
<link wikidata="Q489014" start="4596" end="4613" title="Cathedral of Sens" label="Cathedral of Sens"/>
<link wikidata="Q3306162" start="4699" end="4722" title="Henry VII Lady Chapel" label="Henry VII&amp;#x27;s Chapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="4880" end="4886" title="Oxford University" label="Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q35794" start="4891" end="4900" title="Cambridge University" label="Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q172107" start="5025" end="5055" title="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth" label="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2558810" start="5099" end="5125" title="St Columb&amp;#x27;s Cathedral" label="St Columb&amp;#x27;s Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q163584" start="5130" end="5135" title="Derry" label="Derry"/>
<link wikidata="Q15609295" start="5217" end="5237" title="Perpendicular Gothic" label="Perpendicular Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q34217" start="5351" end="5357" title="Oxford" label="Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q350" start="5362" end="5371" title="Cambridge" label="Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q840829" start="5524" end="5531" title="Baroque architecture" label="Baroque"/>
<link wikidata="Q2942902" start="5547" end="5564" title="Dromore Cathedral" label="Dromore Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987351" start="5615" end="5631" title="the Protectorate" label="the Protectorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q750752" start="5641" end="5654" title="Early English architecture" label="Early English"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130266" start="5788" end="5802" title="Lambeth Palace" label="Lambeth Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q137073" start="5835" end="5843" title="Puritans" label="Puritans"/>
<link wikidata="Q170373" start="6088" end="6108" title="Christopher Wren" label="Sir Christopher Wren"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817860" start="6116" end="6125" title="Tom Tower" label="Tom Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q745967" start="6130" end="6143" title="Christ Church, Oxford" label="Christ Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="6145" end="6165" title="University of Oxford" label="University of Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q206512" start="6198" end="6220" title="Thomas Wolsey" label="Cardinal Wolsey&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q6232906" start="6253" end="6262" title="John Fell (bishop)" label="Dean Fell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7179533" start="6442" end="6449" title="Pevsner Architectural Guides" label="Pevsner"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146959" start="6605" end="6633" title="Collegiate Church of St Mary, Warwick" label="Collegiate Church of St Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q549761" start="6637" end="6644" title="Warwick" label="Warwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q728266" start="6664" end="6675" title="hall church" label="hall church"/>
<link wikidata="Q163687" start="6713" end="6721" title="basilica" label="basilica"/>
<link wikidata="Q23140" start="6751" end="6763" title="Warwickshire" label="Warwickshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012025" start="6829" end="6837" title="Alcester" label="Alcester"/>
<link wikidata="Q54111" start="6922" end="6934" title="Neoclassical architecture" label="Neoclassical"/>
<link wikidata="Q366674" start="6974" end="6992" title="Nicholas Hawksmoor" label="Nicholas Hawksmoor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5933" start="7018" end="7035" title="Westminster Abbey" label="Westminster Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q81087" start="7298" end="7316" title="University College, Oxford" label="University College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338207" start="7635" end="7646" title="Saint-Eustache, Paris" label="St-Eustache"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366553" start="7685" end="7702" title="Orléans Cathedral" label="Orléans Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891" start="7970" end="7977" title="Bologna" label="Bologna"/>
<link wikidata="Q37853" start="7992" end="7999" title="Baroque" label="Baroque"/>
<link wikidata="Q372066" start="8010" end="8024" title="Carlo Rainaldi" label="Carlo Rainaldi"/>
<link wikidata="Q189771" start="8037" end="8050" title="Vault (architecture)" label="Gothic vaults"/>
<link wikidata="Q810103" start="8076" end="8100" title="Basilica of San Petronio" label="Basilica of San Petronio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378149" start="8275" end="8304" title="St. Salvator&amp;#x27;s Cathedral" label="St. Salvator&amp;#x27;s Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q12994" start="8308" end="8314" title="Bruges" label="Bruges"/>
<link wikidata="Q323281" start="8435" end="8450" title="Guarino Guarini" label="Guarino Guarini"/>
<link wikidata="Q495" start="8501" end="8506" title="Turin" label="Turin"/>
<link wikidata="Q27509" start="8639" end="8653" title="Central Europe" label="Central Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q472688" start="8809" end="8830" title="Jan Santini Aichel" label="Johann Santini Aichel"/>
<link wikidata="Q752318" start="8838" end="8880" title="Pilgrimage Church of Saint John of Nepomuk" label="Pilgrimage Church of Saint John of Nepomuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q394453" start="8884" end="8900" title="Žďár nad Sázavou" label="Žďár nad Sázavou"/>
<link wikidata="Q31190725" start="9069" end="9100" title="Basilica of Our Lady of Hungary" label="Basilica of Our Lady of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188098" start="9104" end="9116" title="Márianosztra" label="Márianosztra"/>
<link wikidata="Q37068" start="9417" end="9428" title="Romanticism" label="Romanticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q12348939" start="9473" end="9484" title="Middle Ages in history" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="9565" end="9573" title="medieval" label="medieval"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477112" start="9967" end="9986" title="German Romanticism" label="German Romanticists"/>
<link wikidata="Q5879" start="10021" end="10027" title="Goethe" label="Goethe"/>
<link wikidata="Q151759" start="10042" end="10065" title="Karl Friedrich Schinkel" label="Karl Friedrich Schinkel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1627825" start="10092" end="10103" title="picturesque" label="picturesque"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142664" start="10245" end="10254" title="wabi-sabi" label="wabi-sabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q309903" start="10270" end="10284" title="Horace Walpole" label="Horace Walpole"/>
<link wikidata="Q7622436" start="10455" end="10476" title="Strawberry Hill House" label="Strawberry Hill House"/>
<link wikidata="Q122960" start="10508" end="10514" title="rococo" label="rococo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148460" start="10587" end="10599" title="Lacock Abbey" label="Lacock Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q312635" start="10669" end="10680" title="Robert Adam" label="Robert Adam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350728" start="10685" end="10696" title="James Wyatt" label="James Wyatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435890" start="10806" end="10814" title="Fonthill Abbey" label="Fonthill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1671720" start="10958" end="10974" title="Inveraray Castle" label="Inveraray Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q335347" start="11006" end="11020" title="Archibald Campbell, 3rd Duke of Argyll" label="Duke of Argyll"/>
<link wikidata="Q2424824" start="11045" end="11057" title="William Adam (architect)" label="William Adam"/>
<link wikidata="Q264649" start="11372" end="11381" title="Palladian" label="Palladian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6813083" start="11513" end="11524" title="Mellerstain" label="Mellerstain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7979038" start="11529" end="11539" title="Wedderburn Castle" label="Wedderburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7456774" start="11560" end="11572" title="Seton Castle" label="Seton Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q899545" start="11621" end="11635" title="Culzean Castle" label="Culzean Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2411316" start="11710" end="11723" title="Batty Langley" label="Batty Langley"/>
<link wikidata="Q323785" start="12030" end="12044" title="Thomas Rickman" label="Thomas Rickman"/>
<link wikidata="Q136693" start="12506" end="12512" title="Norman architecture" label="Norman"/>
<link wikidata="Q750752" start="12514" end="12527" title="Early English Period" label="Early English"/>
<link wikidata="Q750752" start="12529" end="12538" title="Decorated Gothic" label="Decorated"/>
<link wikidata="Q15609295" start="12544" end="12557" title="Perpendicular Period" label="Perpendicular"/>
<link wikidata="Q865655" start="12834" end="12853" title="Cathedral of St. John the Divine" label="St. John the Divine"/>
<link wikidata="Q624556" start="12858" end="12869" title="St. Patrick&amp;#x27;s Cathedral (Manhattan)" label="St. Patrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q668710" start="12895" end="12924" title="Washington National Cathedral" label="Washington National Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="12957" end="12973" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q5116958" start="13043" end="13074" title="Basilica of Our Lady Immaculate" label="Basilica of Our Lady Immaculate"/>
<link wikidata="Q504114" start="13078" end="13093" title="Guelph" label="Guelph, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216982" start="13184" end="13214" title="Revivalism (architecture)" label="revival styles of architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q5715992" start="14536" end="14548" title="Henrietta Louisa Fermor" label="Lady Pomfret"/>
<link wikidata="Q314278" start="14692" end="14703" title="Thomas Chippendale" label="Chippendale"/>
<link wikidata="Q246076" start="14859" end="14869" title="Abbotsford, Scottish Borders" label="Abbotsford"/>
<link wikidata="Q211113" start="14877" end="14893" title="Scottish Borders" label="Scottish Borders"/>
<link wikidata="Q79025" start="14916" end="14932" title="Walter Scott" label="Sir Walter Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q5348080" start="15254" end="15273" title="Eglinton Tournament" label="Eglinton Tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q207162" start="15320" end="15349" title="Bourbon Restoration in France" label="Bourbon Restoration in France"/>
<link wikidata="Q7771" start="15370" end="15384" title="Louis-Philippe" label="Louis-Philippe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="15474" end="15485" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q122960" start="15493" end="15499" title="Rococo" label="Rococo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6502179" start="15633" end="15640" title="Turret (architecture)" label="turrets"/>
<link wikidata="Q905612" start="15657" end="15664" title="trefoil" label="trefoil"/>
<link wikidata="Q174520" start="15686" end="15697" title="rose window" label="rose window"/>
<link wikidata="Q191529" start="15878" end="15887" title="wallpaper" label="wallpaper"/>
<link wikidata="Q2655922" start="15966" end="15977" title="John Gregory Crace (designer)" label="J. G. Crace"/>
<link wikidata="Q273095" start="16334" end="16350" title="Great Exhibition" label="Great Exhibition"/>
<link wikidata="Q61682" start="16445" end="16468" title="Nikolaus Pevsner" label="Nikolaus Pevsner&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q182688" start="16625" end="16634" title="Victorian era" label="Victorian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141751" start="16823" end="16828" title="Crown (British coin)" label="crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q388013" start="16850" end="16855" title="Proof coinage" label="proof"/>
<link wikidata="Q1809396" start="17136" end="17142" title="Two shillings (British coin)" label="florin"/>
<link wikidata="Q176483" start="17274" end="17302" title="Gothic architecture" label="medieval Gothic architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2362791" start="17495" end="17515" title="Alexandre de Laborde" label="Alexandre de Laborde"/>
<link wikidata="Q653307" start="17711" end="17739" title="Sèvres porcelain" label="Sèvres porcelain manufactory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7771" start="17808" end="17827" title="Louis-Philippe of France" label="King Louis-Philippe"/>
<link wikidata="Q736211" start="17835" end="17859" title="Chapelle royale de Dreux" label="Chapelle royale de Dreux"/>
<link wikidata="Q5502281" start="17970" end="17987" title="jardin paysager" label="jardins paysagers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2860647" start="18080" end="18098" title="Arcisse de Caumont" label="Arcisse de Caumont"/>
<link wikidata="Q535" start="18329" end="18340" title="Victor Hugo" label="Victor Hugo"/>
<link wikidata="Q191380" start="18379" end="18406" title="The Hunchback of Notre-Dame" label="The Hunchback of Notre-Dame"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981" start="18442" end="18467" title="Notre-Dame de Paris" label="Gothic cathedral of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q207162" start="18801" end="18808" title="Bourbon Restoration in France" label="Bourbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q160333" start="18949" end="18964" title="Prosper Mérimée" label="Prosper Mérimée"/>
<link wikidata="Q272912" start="19086" end="19107" title="Eugène Viollet-le-Duc" label="Eugène Viollet-le-Duc"/>
<link wikidata="Q217452" start="19142" end="19158" title="Abbey of Vézelay" label="Abbey of Vézelay"/>
<link wikidata="Q389269" start="19299" end="19310" title="Cité de Carcassonne" label="Carcassonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060046" start="19312" end="19332" title="Roquetaillade castle" label="Roquetaillade castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q651388" start="19334" end="19357" title="Mont-Saint-Michel Abbey" label="Mont-Saint-Michel Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q376699" start="19388" end="19399" title="Château de Pierrefonds" label="Pierrefonds"/>
<link wikidata="Q143463" start="19409" end="19425" title="Palais des Papes" label="Palais des Papes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6397" start="19429" end="19436" title="Avignon" label="Avignon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514062" start="19506" end="19532" title="Saint Clotilde Basilica" label="Basilica of Saint-Clotilde"/>
<link wikidata="Q76247" start="19627" end="19646" title="Franz Christian Gau" label="Franz Christian Gau"/>
<link wikidata="Q690231" start="19724" end="19738" title="Théodore Ballu" label="Théodore Ballu"/>
<link wikidata="Q4176" start="19895" end="19912" title="Cologne Cathedral" label="Cologne Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q5949" start="20161" end="20180" title="St. Vitus Cathedral" label="St. Vitus Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085" start="20184" end="20190" title="Prague" label="Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q263985" start="20767" end="20787" title="Romantic nationalism" label="Romantic nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q280268" start="21592" end="21608" title="Regensburger Dom" label="Regensburger Dom"/>
<link wikidata="Q852590" start="21620" end="21625" title="spire" label="spire"/>
<link wikidata="Q44562" start="21657" end="21668" title="Ulm Münster" label="Ulm Münster"/>
<link wikidata="Q5949" start="21708" end="21727" title="St. Vitus Cathedral" label="St. Vitus Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q12996" start="21789" end="21795" title="Ostend" label="Ostend"/>
<link wikidata="Q12967" start="21822" end="21832" title="Leopold II of Belgium" label="Leopold II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919977" start="21861" end="21908" title="Sint-Petrus-en-Pauluskerk" label="Saint Peter&amp;#x27;s and Saint Paul&amp;#x27;s Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q254476" start="21978" end="21991" title="Votive Church, Vienna" label="Votive Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="21995" end="22001" title="Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q162022" start="22028" end="22036" title="Mechelen" label="Mechelen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536828" start="22103" end="22135" title="Great Council of Mechelen" label="Great Council of The Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165053" start="22219" end="22240" title="Rombout II Keldermans" label="Rombout II Keldermans"/>
<link wikidata="Q956832" start="22248" end="22265" title="Brabantine Gothic" label="Brabantine Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044" start="22337" end="22345" title="Florence" label="Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q191739" start="22351" end="22356" title="Florence Cathedral" label="Duomo"/>
<link wikidata="Q315249" start="22587" end="22604" title="Arnolfo di Cambio" label="Arnolfo di Cambio"/>
<link wikidata="Q200334" start="22644" end="22653" title="campanile" label="campanile"/>
<link wikidata="Q2252872" start="22694" end="22710" title="Emilio De Fabris" label="Emilio De Fabris"/>
<link wikidata="Q133067" start="22763" end="22769" title="mosaic" label="mosaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11819" start="22922" end="22951" title="Hungarian Parliament Building" label="Hungarian Parliament Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q1004004" start="22969" end="22995" title="Bulgarian National Revival" label="Bulgarian National Revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q4266899" start="23158" end="23176" title="Lopushna Monastery" label="Lopushna Monastery"/>
<link wikidata="Q7401289" start="23230" end="23271" title="Saint George&amp;#x27;s Church, Gavril Genovo" label="Saint George&amp;#x27;s Church, Gavril Genovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5498850" start="23445" end="23472" title="Frederick Thomas Pilkington" label="Frederick Thomas Pilkington"/>
<link wikidata="Q3476363" start="23549" end="23563" title="Scots baronial" label="Scots baronial"/>
<link wikidata="Q23423" start="23789" end="23801" title="battlements" label="battlemented"/>
<link wikidata="Q1939660" start="23812" end="23830" title="crow-stepped gable" label="crow-stepped gable"/>
<link wikidata="Q6502179" start="23841" end="23848" title="Turret (architecture)" label="turrets"/>
<link wikidata="Q23398" start="23853" end="23867" title="machicolations" label="machicolations"/>
<link wikidata="Q8006170" start="23981" end="23993" title="William Burn" label="William Burn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5231854" start="24007" end="24018" title="David Bryce" label="David Bryce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1291717" start="24032" end="24044" title="Edward Blore" label="Edward Blore"/>
<link wikidata="Q5342197" start="24058" end="24072" title="Edward Calvert (architect)" label="Edward Calvert"/>
<link wikidata="Q2158075" start="24080" end="24102" title="Robert Stodart Lorimer" label="Robert Stodart Lorimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5139556" start="24164" end="24179" title="Cockburn Street, Edinburgh" label="Cockburn Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q931796" start="24234" end="24250" title="Wallace Monument" label="Wallace Monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q42049" start="24298" end="24313" title="Balmoral Castle" label="Balmoral Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7842679" start="24543" end="24570" title="Trinity Church on the Green" label="Trinity Church on the Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q381607" start="24615" end="24626" title="Ithiel Town" label="Ithiel Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400086" start="24676" end="24692" title="Federal architecture" label="Federalist-style"/>
<link wikidata="Q7594042" start="24854" end="24884" title="St Luke&amp;#x27;s Church, Chelsea" label="St Luke&amp;#x27;s Church, Chelsea"/>
<link wikidata="Q7835547" start="24962" end="24971" title="trap rock" label="trap rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q5108778" start="25313" end="25360" title="Christ Church Cathedral (Hartford, Connecticut)" label="Christ Church Cathedral (Hartford, Connecticut)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2322413" start="25454" end="25486" title="St. Paul&amp;#x27;s Episcopal Church (Troy, New York)" label="St. Paul&amp;#x27;s Episcopal Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q5587872" start="26020" end="26057" title="Gothic Revival architecture in Canada" label="Gothic Revival architecture in Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q887686" start="26089" end="26108" title="Notre-Dame Basilica (Montreal)" label="Notre-Dame Basilica"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="26112" end="26128" title="Montreal" label="Montreal, Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930" start="26171" end="26186" title="Ottawa" label="Ottawa, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q1589289" start="26263" end="26278" title="Parliament Hill" label="Parliament Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032232" start="26613" end="26637" title="Victoria Memorial Museum" label="Victoria Memorial Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647539" start="26656" end="26675" title="Royal Canadian Mint" label="Royal Canadian Mint"/>
<link wikidata="Q5161320" start="26698" end="26716" title="Connaught Building" label="Connaught Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q5233476" start="26738" end="26749" title="David Ewart" label="David Ewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q313288" start="26850" end="26864" title="Augustus Pugin" label="A. W. N. Pugin"/>
<link wikidata="Q130586" start="27077" end="27086" title="George IV of the United Kingdom" label="George IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q42646" start="27090" end="27104" title="Windsor Castle" label="Windsor Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7379767" start="27173" end="27195" title="Rundell and Bridge" label="Rundell Bridge and Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q184784" start="27457" end="27478" title="architectural drawing" label="architectural drawing"/>
<link wikidata="Q62408" start="28624" end="28644" title="Palace of Westminster" label="Houses of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q552584" start="28828" end="28841" title="Charles Barry" label="Charles Barry"/>
<link wikidata="Q179126" start="29109" end="29120" title="John Ruskin" label="John Ruskin"/>
<link wikidata="Q218578" start="29201" end="29232" title="The Seven Lamps of Architecture" label="The Seven Lamps of Architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q7766650" start="29250" end="29282" title="The Stones of Venice (book)" label="&amp;quot;The Stones of Venice&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q641" start="29326" end="29332" title="Venice" label="Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269" start="29689" end="29703" title="Industrial Revolution" label="industrialised"/>
<link wikidata="Q189883" start="29730" end="29748" title="Doge&amp;#x27;s Palace, Venice" label="Doge&amp;#x27;s Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q7792724" start="30039" end="30060" title="Thomas Newenham Deane" label="Thomas Newenham Deane"/>
<link wikidata="Q4889422" start="30065" end="30082" title="Benjamin Woodward" label="Benjamin Woodward"/>
<link wikidata="Q12537" start="30129" end="30135" title="corbel" label="corbel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760005" start="30169" end="30212" title="Oxford University Museum of Natural History" label="Oxford University Museum of Natural History"/>
<link wikidata="Q358834" start="30442" end="30456" title="Foreign and Commonwealth Office" label="Foreign Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q214820" start="30460" end="30469" title="Whitehall" label="Whitehall"/>
<link wikidata="Q681007" start="30530" end="30550" title="George Gilbert Scott" label="George Gilbert Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q193656" start="30585" end="30600" title="Henry John Temple, 3rd Viscount Palmerston" label="Lord Palmerston"/>
<link wikidata="Q615196" start="30646" end="30656" title="Italianate architecture" label="Italianate"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423963" start="30719" end="30736" title="Anglicanism" label="Church of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q541235" start="30765" end="30779" title="Anglo-Catholic" label="Anglo-Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q189819" start="30784" end="30793" title="Ritualism" label="ritualist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137662" start="30822" end="30837" title="Oxford Movement" label="Oxford Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2673742" start="31040" end="31064" title="ecclesiological movement" label="ecclesiological movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q750752" start="31243" end="31252" title="Decorated Period" label="decorated"/>
<link wikidata="Q2673742" start="31264" end="31288" title="Cambridge Camden Society" label="Cambridge Camden Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q7927358" start="31522" end="31543" title="Victorian restoration" label="Victorian restoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q7594042" start="31633" end="31663" title="St Luke&amp;#x27;s Church, Chelsea" label="St Luke&amp;#x27;s Church, Chelsea"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152869" start="31681" end="31707" title="Commissioner&amp;#x27;s Church" label="Commissioner&amp;#x27;s Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q11010" start="31804" end="31814" title="Parliament of the United Kingdom" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152869" start="31834" end="31858" title="Church Building Act 1818" label="Church Building Act 1818"/>
<link wikidata="Q5077219" start="31934" end="31956" title="Charles Locke Eastlake" label="Charles Locke Eastlake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323511" start="32105" end="32115" title="low church" label="low church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1575672" start="32326" end="32355" title="Magnificent Seven, London" label="major metropolitan cemeteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q8019436" start="32404" end="32420" title="William Tite" label="Sir William Tite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290155" start="32473" end="32485" title="West Norwood Cemetery" label="West Norwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q5538851" start="32621" end="32641" title="George Edmund Street" label="George Edmund Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q186265" start="32654" end="32668" title="William Burges" label="William Burges"/>
<link wikidata="Q3610803" start="33133" end="33168" title="Alexander Thomson" label="Alexander &amp;quot;Greek&amp;quot; Thomson"/>
<link wikidata="Q695863" start="33784" end="33796" title="Brick Gothic" label="Brick Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q124369" start="33896" end="33915" title="Abney Park Cemetery" label="Abney Park Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q8012532" start="33944" end="33963" title="William Hosking" label="William Hosking FSA"/>
<link wikidata="Q272912" start="34117" end="34138" title="Eugène Viollet-le-Duc" label="Eugène Viollet-le-Duc"/>
<link wikidata="Q6582" start="34446" end="34457" title="Carcassonne" label="Carcassonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981" start="34466" end="34476" title="Notre-Dame de Paris" label="Notre-Dame"/>
<link wikidata="Q193193" start="34481" end="34496" title="Sainte Chapelle" label="Sainte Chapelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370517" start="35593" end="35599" title="lintel" label="lintel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4961887" start="35611" end="35623" title="Bressummer" label="breastsummer"/>
<link wikidata="Q202902" start="36066" end="36080" title="The Crystal Palace" label="Crystal Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760005" start="36113" end="36156" title="Oxford University Museum of Natural History" label="Oxford University Museum of Natural History"/>
<link wikidata="Q25328" start="36500" end="36512" title="Antoni Gaudí" label="Antoni Gaudí"/>
<link wikidata="Q4888347" start="36539" end="36556" title="Benjamin Bucknall" label="Benjamin Bucknall"/>
<link wikidata="Q8032495" start="36637" end="36656" title="Woodchester Mansion" label="Woodchester Mansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577471" start="36792" end="36804" title="Calvert Vaux" label="Calvert Vaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q160409" start="36839" end="36851" title="Central Park" label="Central Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q34636" start="37054" end="37065" title="Art Nouveau" label="Art Nouveau"/>
<link wikidata="Q433770" start="37324" end="37347" title="Alexander Jackson Davis" label="Alexander Jackson Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5168338" start="37559" end="37580" title="Cope &amp;amp; Stewardson" label="Cope &amp;amp; Stewardson"/>
<link wikidata="Q995265" start="37647" end="37664" title="Bryn Mawr College" label="Bryn Mawr College"/>
<link wikidata="Q21578" start="37666" end="37686" title="Princeton University" label="Princeton University"/>
<link wikidata="Q49117" start="37695" end="37721" title="University of Pennsylvania" label="University of Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q4668138" start="37745" end="37758" title="Abner Jackson" label="Abner Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1927705" start="37777" end="37805" title="Trinity College (Connecticut)" label="Trinity College, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="37977" end="37989" title="French Gothic#Early Gothic" label="Early French"/>
<link wikidata="Q4830278" start="38035" end="38044" title="Axel Haig" label="Axel Haig"/>
<link wikidata="Q7842708" start="38251" end="38260" title="Trinity College Long Walk" label="Long Walk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1441527" start="38267" end="38285" title="Francis H. Kimball" label="Francis H. Kimball"/>
<link wikidata="Q364187" start="38331" end="38352" title="Frederick Law Olmsted" label="Frederick Law Olmsted"/>
<link wikidata="Q777403" start="38650" end="38684" title="Washington University in St. Louis" label="Washington University in St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5076912" start="38698" end="38721" title="Charles Donagh Maginnis" label="Charles Donagh Maginnis"/>
<link wikidata="Q49118" start="38742" end="38756" title="Boston College" label="Boston College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5526665" start="38776" end="38787" title="Gasson Hall" label="Gasson Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7287147" start="38790" end="38806" title="Ralph Adams Cram" label="Ralph Adams Cram"/>
<link wikidata="Q7245025" start="38829" end="38866" title="Princeton University Graduate College" label="Princeton University Graduate College"/>
<link wikidata="Q6134465" start="38879" end="38898" title="James Gamble Rogers" label="James Gamble Rogers"/>
<link wikidata="Q49112" start="38937" end="38952" title="Yale University" label="Yale University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5079833" start="38962" end="38977" title="Charles Klauder" label="Charles Klauder"/>
<link wikidata="Q235034" start="39018" end="39042" title="University of Pittsburgh" label="University of Pittsburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q797017" start="39062" end="39083" title="Cathedral of Learning" label="Cathedral of Learning"/>
<link wikidata="Q4365410" start="39255" end="39271" title="Carpenter Gothic" label="Carpenter Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2131593" start="39486" end="39510" title="light-frame construction" label="light-frame construction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183768" start="39533" end="39543" title="scroll saw" label="scroll saw"/>
<link wikidata="Q35473" start="39630" end="39642" title="Window" label="fenestration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1932782" start="39868" end="39879" title="Eldon, Iowa" label="Eldon, Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q217434" start="39886" end="39896" title="Grant Wood" label="Grant Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q464782" start="39937" end="39952" title="American Gothic" label="American Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8020020" start="40088" end="40103" title="William Wardell" label="William Wardell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138670" start="40261" end="40299" title="St Patrick&amp;#x27;s Cathedral, Melbourne" label="St Patrick&amp;#x27;s Cathedral, Melbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q7593580" start="40304" end="40326" title="St John&amp;#x27;s College, University of Sydney" label="St John&amp;#x27;s College"/>
<link wikidata="Q971514" start="40331" end="40355" title="St Mary&amp;#x27;s Cathedral, Sydney" label="St Mary&amp;#x27;s Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540458" start="40487" end="40514" title="Government House, Melbourne" label="Government House, Melbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q615196" start="40518" end="40528" title="Italianate architecture" label="Italianate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378140" start="40556" end="40593" title="English, Scottish and Australian Bank" label="English, Scottish and Australian Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q5339292" start="40717" end="40731" title="Edmund Blacket" label="Edmund Blacket"/>
<link wikidata="Q17051328" start="40739" end="40753" title="Great Hall of the University of Sydney" label="MacLaurin Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q487556" start="40761" end="40781" title="University of Sydney" label="University of Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q17028094" start="40801" end="40819" title="University of Sydney Quadrangle" label="quadrangle complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q202497" start="40960" end="40978" title="Benjamin Mountfort" label="Benjamin Mountfort"/>
<link wikidata="Q657004" start="41049" end="41072" title="Canterbury, New Zealand" label="Canterbury, New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q79990" start="41214" end="41226" title="Christchurch" label="Christchurch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5498831" start="41230" end="41248" title="Frederick Thatcher" label="Frederick Thatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q751768" start="41315" end="41346" title="Old St. Paul&amp;#x27;s, Wellington" label="Old St. Paul&amp;#x27;s, Wellington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1671102" start="41472" end="41505" title="St Mary of the Angels, Wellington" label="St Mary of the Angels, Wellington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1453071" start="41509" end="41534" title="Frederick de Jersey Clere" label="Frederick de Jersey Clere"/>
<link wikidata="Q23661" start="41648" end="41658" title="Wellington" label="Wellington"/>
<link wikidata="Q17421936" start="41667" end="41683" title="John Sydney Swan" label="John Sydney Swan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5395824" start="41706" end="41721" title="Erskine College, Wellington" label="Erskine College"/>
<link wikidata="Q133073" start="41788" end="41795" title="Dunedin" label="Dunedin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1573076" start="41832" end="41847" title="Otago gold rush" label="Otago gold rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q191250" start="41936" end="41943" title="breccia" label="breccia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2037213" start="41979" end="41991" title="Oamaru stone" label="Oamaru stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q6796082" start="42009" end="42021" title="Maxwell Bury" label="Maxwell Bury"/>
<link wikidata="Q7896039" start="42029" end="42066" title="University of Otago Registry Building" label="University of Otago Registry Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q18164698" start="42075" end="42093" title="Dunedin Law Courts" label="Dunedin Law Courts"/>
<link wikidata="Q6224985" start="42097" end="42110" title="John Campbell (architect)" label="John Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q20894717" start="42263" end="42282" title="Sacred Heart Church, Levuka" label="Sacred Heart Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q26692" start="42286" end="42292" title="Levuka" label="Levuka"/>
<link wikidata="Q712" start="42294" end="42298" title="Fiji" label="Fiji"/>
<link wikidata="Q4365410" start="42413" end="42429" title="Carpenter Gothic" label="Carpenter Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q327323" start="42482" end="42505" title="Henry-Russell Hitchcock" label="Henry-Russell Hitchcock"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="42742" end="42756" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q223832" start="42881" end="42890" title="dominions" label="dominions"/>
<link wikidata="Q3374557" start="43135" end="43149" title="Indo-Saracenic architecture" label="Indo-Saracenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q235884" start="43192" end="43220" title="Chhatrapati Shivaji Terminus" label="Chhatrapati Shivaji Terminus"/>
<link wikidata="Q19104" start="43258" end="43280" title="Taj Mahal Palace Hotel" label="Taj Mahal Palace Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156" start="43290" end="43296" title="Mumbai" label="Mumbai"/>
<link wikidata="Q83786" start="43321" end="43327" title="Shimla" label="Shimla"/>
<link wikidata="Q2912045" start="43333" end="43347" title="summer capital" label="summer capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q129286" start="43351" end="43364" title="British Raj" label="British India"/>
<link wikidata="Q795172" start="43402" end="43415" title="Home counties" label="Home counties"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451" start="43440" end="43449" title="Himalayas" label="Himalayas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7294995" start="43549" end="43566" title="Rashtrapati Niwas" label="Rashtrapati Niwas"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="43628" end="43653" title="Scottish baronial architecture#Scottish Baronial Revival" label="Scottish Baronial Revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q7851317" start="43655" end="43668" title="Tudor Revival architecture" label="Tudor Revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q6119627" start="43673" end="43683" title="Jacobethan" label="Jacobethan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2032749" start="43743" end="43773" title="Church of the Saviour, Beijing" label="Church of the Saviour, Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q299710" start="43808" end="43823" title="Guangxu Emperor" label="Guangxu Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1789009" start="43878" end="43893" title="Alphonse Favier" label="Alphonse Favier"/>
<link wikidata="Q13020706" start="43903" end="43925" title="Wat Niwet Thammaprawat" label="Wat Niwet Thammaprawat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2522114" start="43933" end="43956" title="Bang Pa-In Royal Palace" label="Bang Pa-In Royal Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1861" start="43960" end="43967" title="Bangkok" label="Bangkok"/>
<link wikidata="Q28054124" start="43984" end="43998" title="Joachim Grassi" label="Joachim Grassi"/>
<link wikidata="Q188161" start="44040" end="44057" title="Dutch East Indies" label="Dutch East Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q55519" start="44064" end="44081" title="Jakarta Cathedral" label="Jakarta Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q174968" start="44219" end="44239" title="San Sebastian Church (Manila)" label="San Sebastian Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q20882" start="44284" end="44298" title="Gustave Eiffel" label="Gustave Eiffel"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="44372" end="44384" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7344923" start="44452" end="44463" title="Robert Gray (bishop of Cape Town)" label="Robert Gray"/>
<link wikidata="Q2783707" start="44475" end="44481" title="Anglican Diocese of Cape Town" label="bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465" start="44485" end="44494" title="Cape Town" label="Cape Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q18" start="44722" end="44735" title="South America" label="South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050668" start="44829" end="44864" title="São Paulo Cathedral" label="Metropolitan Cathedral of São Paulo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6795704" start="44889" end="44909" title="Maximilian Emil Hehl" label="Maximilian Emil Hehl"/>
<link wikidata="Q4868435" start="44915" end="44943" title="Basílica del Voto Nacional" label="Basilica of the National Vow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2227269" start="44960" end="44982" title="Sanctuary of Las Lajas" label="Sanctuary of Las Lajas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5721976" start="45000" end="45047" title="Basílica de Nuestra Señora del Perpetuo Socorro" label="Basílica de Nuestra Señora del Perpetuo Socorro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050663" start="45065" end="45086" title="Cathedral of La Plata" label="Cathedral of La Plata"/>
<link wikidata="Q5157043" start="45190" end="45201" title="Compression member" label="compression"/>
<link wikidata="Q2313934" start="45266" end="45278" title="Load-bearing wall" label="load-bearing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1727909" start="45391" end="45402" title="steel frame" label="steel frame"/>
<link wikidata="Q47616" start="45408" end="45431" title="incandescent light bulb" label="incandescent light bulb"/>
<link wikidata="Q132911" start="45440" end="45448" title="elevator" label="elevator"/>
<link wikidata="Q935723" start="45535" end="45544" title="rib vault" label="rib vault"/>
<link wikidata="Q2690580" start="45550" end="45567" title="flying buttresses" label="flying buttresses"/>
<link wikidata="Q464603" start="45769" end="45781" title="Cass Gilbert" label="Cass Gilbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q217652" start="45794" end="45812" title="Woolworth Building" label="Woolworth Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q745903" start="45840" end="45852" title="Raymond Hood" label="Raymond Hood"/>
<link wikidata="Q2143136" start="45865" end="45878" title="Tribune Tower" label="Tribune Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q3535937" start="45895" end="45914" title="Tower Life Building" label="Tower Life Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q215194" start="45988" end="45996" title="gargoyle" label="gargoyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q878985" start="46089" end="46098" title="Modernism" label="Modernism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524274" start="46576" end="46595" title="Giles Gilbert Scott" label="Giles Gilbert Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q1866506" start="46603" end="46622" title="Liverpool Cathedral" label="Liverpool Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q668710" start="46631" end="46660" title="Washington National Cathedral" label="Washington National Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q7287147" start="46674" end="46690" title="Ralph Adams Cram" label="Ralph Adams Cram"/>
<link wikidata="Q865655" start="46770" end="46802" title="Cathedral of St. John the Divine" label="Cathedral of St. John the Divine"/>
<link wikidata="Q21578" start="46909" end="46929" title="Princeton University" label="Princeton University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1989407" start="47161" end="47185" title="St Edmundsbury Cathedral" label="St Edmundsbury Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q764754" start="47204" end="47219" title="Bury St Edmunds" label="Bury St Edmunds"/>
<link wikidata="Q23111" start="47223" end="47230" title="Suffolk" label="Suffolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2284046" start="47441" end="47457" title="Fishers, Indiana" label="Fishers, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q650068" start="47483" end="47493" title="Peterhouse, Cambridge" label="Peterhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q35794" start="47495" end="47518" title="University of Cambridge" label="University of Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5077219" start="47710" end="47732" title="Charles Locke Eastlake" label="Charles Locke Eastlake"/>
<link wikidata="Q371258" start="47829" end="47849" title="Kenneth Clark" label="Kenneth Clark&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q15485284" start="48072" end="48100" title="Harry Stuart Goodhart-Rendel" label="Harry Stuart Goodhart-Rendel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2293607" start="48166" end="48180" title="Slade Professor of Fine Art" label="Slade Lectures"/>
<link wikidata="Q61682" start="48745" end="48761" title="Nikolaus Pevsner" label="Nikolaus Pevsner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336200" start="49018" end="49040" title="Penguin Books" label="Pelican History of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q4011305" start="49404" end="49421" title="Victorian Society" label="Victorian Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q681007" start="49812" end="49832" title="George Gilbert Scott" label="George Gilbert Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q7590892" start="49840" end="49864" title="St. Pancras Renaissance London Hotel" label="St Pancras Station Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q552784" start="51010" end="51029" title="John Summerson" label="Summerson, Sir John"/>
<link wikidata="Q7790135" start="51175" end="51196" title="Thomas Graham Jackson" label="Sir Thomas G. Jackson"/>
</links>
</doc>
