<doc id="236331" wikidata="Q751722" url="?curid=236331" title="Sexual harassment">
<text>Sexual harassment is a type of harassment based on the sex or gender of a victim. It can involve offensive sexist or sexual behavior, verbal or physical actions, up to bribery, coercion, and assault. Harassment may be explicit or implicit, with some examples including making unwanted sexually colored remarks, actions that insult and degrade by gender, showing pornography, demanding or requesting sexual favors, offensive sexual advances, and any other unwelcome physical, verbal, or non-verbal (sometimes provocative) conduct based on sex. Sexual harassment includes a range of actions from verbal transgressions to sexual abuse or assault. Harassment can occur in many different social settings such as the workplace, the home, school, or religious institutions. Harassers or victims can be of any gender.

In modern legal contexts, sexual harassment is illegal. Laws surrounding sexual harassment generally do not prohibit simple teasing, offhand comments, or minor isolated incidents—that is due to the fact that they do not impose a &quot;general civility code&quot;. In the workplace, harassment may be considered illegal when it is frequent or severe, thereby creating a hostile or offensive work environment, or when it results in an adverse employment decision (such as the victim&#x27;s demotion, firing or quitting). The legal and social understanding of sexual harassment, however, varies by culture.

Sexual harassment by an employer is a form of illegal employment discrimination. For many businesses or organizations, preventing sexual harassment and defending employees from sexual harassment charges have become key goals of legal decision-making.

==Etymology and history==
The modern legal understanding of sexual harassment was first developed in the 1970s, although related concepts have existed in many cultures.

=== The term &quot;sexual harassment&quot; ===
Legal activist Catharine MacKinnon is generally credited with creating the laws surrounding sexual harassment in the United States with her 1979 book entitled &quot;Sexual Harassment of Working Women&quot;. She used the term that appeared in a 1973 report about discrimination called &quot;Saturn&#x27;s Rings&quot; by Mary Rowe, Ph.D. At the time, Rowe was the Special Assistant to the President and Chancellor for Women and Work at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT). Due to her efforts at MIT, the university was one of the first large organizations in the U.S. to develop specific policies and procedures aimed at stopping sexual harassment.

Rowe says that harassment of women in the workplace was being discussed in women&#x27;s groups in Massachusetts in the early 1970s. At Cornell University, instructor Lin Farley discovered that women in a discussion group repeatedly described being fired or quitting a job because they were harassed and intimidated by men. She and colleagues used the term &quot;sexual harassment&quot; to describe the problem and generate interest in a &quot;Speak Out&quot; in May 1975. She later described sexual harassment at length in 1975 testimony before the New York City Human Rights Commission. In the book &quot;In Our Time: Memoir of a Revolution&quot; (1999), journalist Susan Brownmiller says the women at Cornell became public activists after being asked for help by Carmita Dickerson Wood, a 44-year-old single mother who was being harassed by a faculty member at Cornell&#x27;s Department of Nuclear Physics. Farley wrote a book, &quot;Sexual Shakedown: The Sexual Harassment of Women on the Job&quot;, published by McGraw-Hill in 1978 and in a paperback version by Warner Books in 1980.

These activists, Lin Farley, Susan Meyer, and Karen Sauvigne, went on to form Working Women United, which, along with the Alliance Against Sexual Coercion (founded in 1976 by Freada Klein, Lynn Wehrli, and Elizabeth Cohn-Stuntz), was among the pioneer organizations to bring sexual harassment to public attention in the late 1970s. One of the first legal formulations of the concept of sexual harassment as consistent with sex discrimination and therefore prohibited behavior under Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 appeared in the 1979 seminal book by Catharine MacKinnon entitled &quot;Sexual Harassment of Working Women&quot;.

=== Key cases ===
Sexual harassment first became codified in U.S. law as the result of a series of sexual harassment cases in the 1970s and 1980s. Many of the early women pursuing these cases were African American, often former civil rights activists who applied principles of civil rights to sex discrimination.

&quot;Williams v. Saxbe&quot; (1976) and &quot;Paulette L. Barnes, Appellant, v. Douglas M. Costle, Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency&quot; (1977) determined it was sex discrimination to fire someone for refusing a supervisor&#x27;s advances. Around the same time, &quot;Bundy v. Jackson&quot; (1981) was the first federal appeals court case to hold that workplace sexual harassment was employment discrimination. Five years later the Supreme Court agreed with this holding in &quot;Meritor Savings Bank v. Vinson.&quot; Another pioneering legal case was &quot;Alexander v. Yale&quot; (1980), which established that the sexual harassment of female students could be considered sex discrimination under Title IX, and was thus illegal. The first class-action lawsuit, &quot;Jenson v. Eveleth Taconite Co.&quot;, was filed in 1988 (concluding nine years later).

=== Beyond sexual advances ===
The definition of sexual harassment has changed over time, and legal definitions now differ in some ways from those used by psychologists and other researchers. Over the 1980s and 1990s, psychologists defined &quot;gender harassment&quot; as a key subtype of sexual harassment. Gender harassment is a class of verbal or nonverbal behaviors that insult or provoke based on gender: examples include sexual comments or jokes, sexualized imagery, and comments based on gendered stereotypes. Notably, all of these examples were provided in Rowe&#x27;s original 1973 &quot;Saturn&#x27;s Rings&quot; report on sexual harassment and discrimination. There are many motivations for gender harassment, but two important ones are sexist beliefs and gender policing. Both factors cause gender harassment to reinforce existing gender roles, causing legal scholar Katherine Franke to label gender harassment as &quot;a technology of sexism.&quot;

Because gender harassment has nothing to do with sexual attraction and is not a type of sexual advance, it can be confusing that it is a type of sexual harassment, when the word &quot;sexual&quot; seems to imply underlying sexual desire. Some researchers have advocated for the term &quot;sexual harassment&quot; to be replaced with &quot;sex-based harassment&quot; to emphasize the fact that these types of harassment center on someone&#x27;s gender, not the presence of sexual desire in harassment.

In the late 1990s, some legal scholars began to advocate for more explicitly including gender harassment in sexual harassment law, but this was a minority view. Existing sexual harassment law frequently does cover some instances of gender harassment, but it is often viewed as less severe than other types of sexual harassment in a legal context. However, psychologists continue to emphasize study of gender harassment because it is by far the most common type of harassment and has major negative consequences both for the individuals faced with it and the groups who are exposed to repeated gender harassment. 

== Aspects ==
One of the difficulties in understanding sexual harassment is that it involves a range of behaviors. In most cases (although not in all cases) it is difficult for the victim to describe what they experienced. This can be related to difficulty classifying the situation or could be related to stress and humiliation experienced by the recipient. Moreover, behavior and motives vary between individual cases. Many instances of sexual harassment are not actually labelled that way by involved parties. For female victims, only in 1/4 of sexual harassment cases do victims self-label the incident as sexual harassment. The rate is even lower for male victims. However, whether victims label an incident as sexual harassment or not, they report the same levels of distress and negative impact. This labeling issue was first discovered after other researchers found that victims of rape are similarly unlikely to label their experience as rape.

=== Types of sexual harassment ===
Scientists commonly classify types of sexual harassment via Fitzgerald’s Tripartite Model of Sexual Harassment, which has been validated across gender, ethnicity, nation, and industry. The model divides sexual harassment into gender harassment, unwanted sexual attention, and sexual coercion. Gender harassment includes insults based on gender stereotypes, sexual slurs or imagery, and other degrading or hostile communications that aim to &quot;put people down and push them out&quot; due to their sex. There are two types of gender harassment: sexist hostility, like insulting gendered jokes, insults based on gender stereotypes, or even sabotage; and crude harassment, which includes gendered slurs and sexualized insults. In contrast, unwanted sexual attention refers to unwelcome sexual advances, like inappropriately talking about sex, pestering someone for sexual or romantic purposes, nonconsensual physical touch, and in extreme cases, sexual assault. Sexual coercion includes explicit and implicit attempts to bribe or threaten someone into sexual cooperation. Gender harassment is by far the most common type of sexual harassment, and coercion is the rarest, but popular awareness of harassment is the opposite, making it harder to identify and understand sexual harassment. Psychology researcher Lilia Cortina developed an iceberg model to describe the many behaviors of sexual harassment, showing how sexual coercion and unwanted sexual attention are the small set of harassment behaviors easily viewable on the surface, but the vast majority of sexual harassment types lie underneath the surface in the category of gender harassment.

=== Intersectional forms of sexual harassment ===
When men sexually harass men, it tends to take the form of gender harassment for the purpose of punishing their targets for deviating from traditional male gender roles. The harasser may see their victim as not fulfilling traditional masculinity values, whether they are gay, young or inexperienced. When women of color are sexually harassed, it often includes racial harassment, and when non-straight women are harassed, it often is a combination of sexual and heterosexist harassment. Both populations experience much greater harassment than people with only one of their intersecting identities. Racialized sexual harassment may involve sexual remarks that also bring up race, pet names with racial histories, or even explicitly racialized nicknames. All of these may be built off of existing stereotypes that combine race and gender.

=== Motivations for sexual harassment ===
Author Martha Langelan describes four different classes of harassers.
* A predatory harasser: a person who gets sexual thrills from humiliating others. This harasser may become involved in sexual extortion, and may frequently harass just to see how targets respond. Those who do not resist may even become targets for rape.
* A dominance harasser: the most common type, who engages in harassing behavior as an ego boost.
* Strategic or territorial harassers who seek to maintain privilege in jobs or physical locations, for example a man&#x27;s harassment of a female employee in a predominantly male occupation.
* A street harasser: Another type of sexual harassment performed in public places by strangers. Street harassment includes verbal and nonverbal behavior, remarks that are frequently sexual in nature and comment on physical appearance or a person&#x27;s presence in public.
The perpetrators of sexual harassment are more likely to be male than another gender. In one 2018 survey of U.S. federal workers, for their most-distressing sexual harassment incidents, 82% of the harassers were men. Researchers theorize that this is because sexual harassment is an expression of someone&#x27;s power in a way that protects or enhances that power, because it reinforces someone&#x27;s privileged status based on their gender. Because today&#x27;s societies empower men over people of other genders, sexual harassment is currently more likely to be perpetrated by men. This power-based theory of harassment also explains why sexual harassment often targets and punishes people for deviating from traditional gender roles. People are more likely to sexually harass when they hold hostile, sexist beliefs and believe in the gender binary, thinking that men and women should stay in certain proper roles. However, whether they actually harass others strongly depends on the situation: organizations that tolerate or don&#x27;t care about harassment, and places that prioritize men by numbers or leadership are very likely to have sexual harassment occur. Because harassment is often a reinforcement of power and gender roles, it shapes common forms of harassment. Harassment is often ambient: not targeted at an individual, but public or pervasive in a setting so that it affects many bystanders. Even targeted harassment can affect and harass other observers when it takes place publicly.

==Situations==
Sexual harassment may occur in a variety of circumstances and in places as varied as factories, schools, colleges, the theater, and the music business. Often, the perpetrator has or is about to have power or authority over the victim (owing to differences in social, political, educational or employment relationships as well as in age). Harassment relationships are specified in many ways:
* The perpetrator can be anyone, such as a client, a partner, a co-worker, a parent or legal guardian, relative, a teacher or professor, a student, a friend, or a stranger.
* Harassment can occur in varying locations, in schools, colleges, workplaces, in public, and in other places.
* Harassment can occur whether or not there are witnesses to it.
* The perpetrator may be completely unaware that their behavior is offensive or constitutes sexual harassment. The perpetrator may be completely unaware that their actions could be unlawful.
* Incidents of harassment can take place in situations in which the targeted person may not be aware of or understand what is happening.
* An incident may be a one-time occurrence.
* Adverse effects on harassed persons include stress, social withdrawal, sleep disorders, eating difficulties, and other impairments of health.
* The victim and perpetrator can be any gender.
* The incident may arise from misunderstanding by the perpetrator and/or the victim. These misunderstandings can be reasonable or unreasonable.
* The perpetrator may be motivated by many things, including wanting to belittle, embarrass, or intimidate the victim because of their sex, or in wanting to express sexual desire 
With the advent of the internet, social interactions, including sexual harassment, increasingly occur online, for example in video games or in chat rooms.

According to the 2014 PEW research statistics on online harassment, 25% of women and 13% of men between the ages of 18 and 24 have experienced sexual harassment while online.

=== In the workplace in the United States ===
The United States&#x27; Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) defines workplace sexual harassment as harassment based on a victim&#x27;s sex, including &quot;offensive remarks about a person&#x27;s sex&quot; or &quot;unwelcome sexual advances, requests for sexual favors, and other verbal or physical conduct of a sexual nature.&quot; Harassment is illegal &quot;when this conduct explicitly or implicitly affects an individual&#x27;s employment, unreasonably interferes with an individual&#x27;s work performance, or creates an intimidating, hostile, or offensive work environment&quot;. &quot;The challenged conduct must be unwelcome in the sense that the employee did not solicit or incite it, and in the sense that the employee regarded the conduct as undesirable or offensive.&quot; &quot;Particularly when the alleged harasser may have some reason (e.g., prior consensual relationship) to believe that the advances will be welcomed, it is important for the victim to communicate that the conduct is unwelcome.&quot;

Surveys vary widely in determining how frequently sexual harassment occurs in workplaces. A well-regarded 2003 meta-survey concluded that about 58% of women have been sexually harassed at work. Another survey concluded that 13% of male employees have been harassed at work. In a 2024 study, 42% of transgender employees reported having been sexually harassed at work. Women made 78.2% of the workplace sexual harassment complaints filed with the EEOC from 2018 to 2021. Only about 30% of workplace sexual harassment victims tell their supervisor or union representative about the harassment, and only 6-13% ever file a formal complaint. Managers often relabel sexual harassment claims as mere interpersonal disagreements and retaliation is common. Thus 43.5% of EEOC sexual harassment complaints included retaliation complaints in 2018-2021. A survey of harassment case plaintiffs found that 24% had been fired for complaining of harassment, and another 42% had resigned due to the harassment. 

Most workplace sexual harassment is perpetrated by coworkers or peers rather than managers. Workplace culture is one of the strongest determining factors for sexual harassment: sexual harassment is more likely in fields that are seen as traditionally masculine, or companies where men outnumber women, or leadership is dominated by men. Organizational tolerance of harassment, sexism, or alcohol use, and institutions with strong power hierarchies also increase the likelihood of harassment. Based on data from the EEOC, the industries with the most sexual harassment reports between 2005 and 2015 were restaurant and hospitality, health care, academia, and the military. Sources of harassment vary widely by industry. For nurses, 58% have been harassed by a patient, 26% by a colleague, and 19% by a patient&#x27;s acquaintances. In the U.S. military, 60% of sexual harassment is caused by a supervisor. For restaurant industry employees, around 66% of women and 50% of men have been sexually harassed by management, and around 80% of women and 55% of men had been sexually harassed by customers.

Most sexual harassment at work takes the form of gender harassment. A far smaller number of harassment victims report experiencing sexual coercion at work: this was about 4% of women surveyed across factory settings and academia in 1997. Workplace sexual harassment is frequently repeated, with less than a third of victims describing harassment as a one-time occurrence, and many stating it had lasted for weeks to months. Whether sexual harassment incidents include physical harassment usually depends on industry: around 50% of sexual harassment complaints by blue-collar workers included a physical component, compared to 32% of complaints by managers. A study of harassment legal cases in 1986-1995 found that more than half of their instances of workplace harassment happened entirely outside of the normal workplace, with a third including letters, phone calls, or visits to the victim&#x27;s house. 

In 1991, Anita Hill witnessed and testified to the Senate Judiciary Committee against Supreme Court of the United States nominee Clarence Thomas, citing sexual harassment. Hill said on October 11, 1991, in televised hearings that Thomas had sexually harassed her while he was her supervisor at the Department of Education and the EEOC. According to Hill, Thomas asked her out socially many times during her two years of employment as his assistant, and after she declined his requests, he used work situations to discuss sexual subjects and push advances. Since Hill testified in 1991, the term &quot;sexual harassment&quot; became known outside academic and legal circles, and the number of cases reported in the United States and Canada increased markedly, climbing steadily since. Sexual harassment is discussed a lot in modern society. People are becoming more and more concerned about the laws of sexual harassment therein. Many school groups are focusing on this matter.
In 1994, Paula Jones, a civil servant and former Arkansas state employee, sued President Bill Clinton for sexual harassment. In the initial lawsuit, Jones cited Clinton for sexual harassment at a hotel in 1991. Following a series of civil suits and appeals the case was settled in 1998. President Clinton reached an out-of-court settlement with Jones, agreeing to pay her $850,000 but acknowledging no wrongdoing.

====Sexual bribery====
A sexual bribe is the solicitation of sex, any sexual activity or other sex-linked behavior for a promise of elevation in work status or pay. It is in an employment setting in which a sexual relationship with an employer or superior is made an explicit or implied condition for obtaining/retaining employment or its benefits. A sexual bribe may be either overt or subtle but falls under the type of quid pro quo sexual harassment.

==== Girl watching ====

Girl watching is considered a game amongst men in which they sexually evaluate women. This game is a form of sexual harassment, one that is very common in the workplace. This game, just like other forms of sexual harassment are not the actions of an individual outside of the norm, but rather of those within it. An analysis of sexual harassment surveys, conducted by Ilies, revealed that when the question regarding sexual harassment was phrased &#x27;if women had ever experienced sexual harassment&#x27; then the frequency of women&#x27;s responses was 24%, whereas if women were asked &#x27;if they had experienced sexually harassing behaviors&#x27; then the frequency was 58%.

Beth Quinn (2002), the author of &quot;Sexual Harassment and Masculinity: The Power and Meaning of &#x27;Girl Watching originally was not researching girl watching when she stumbled upon the game, however, Quinn (2002) stated that her work was more exploratory than confirmatory, explaining why she continued exploring the idea of Girl Watching. At first, Quinn was researching the difference between what women and men see as sexual harassment. It was through the interviews (43) that she conducted that she noticed an occurrence of the game upon her interviews with men. As well as interviews Quinn (2002) observed the participants of her interviews and gathered more information regarding the game through said observations. She learned that men, usually when in a group, will watch the women around them and make comments towards them.

Quinn (2002) found that men saw no problems with this and simply thought of it as a game that caused no harm to the women. According to Quinn, men are able to excuse sexual harassment, becomes it is not seen as such to them; men see it as a &#x27;game&#x27; or &#x27;playing&#x27;. Men, as well, use humor to sexually harass women. Through humor, men can make crude remarks, and if caught can claim that it was only a joke and that women need to loosen up. This results in the continuation of sexual harassment against women. Through instances like these, men sexually harassing women or their advances are encouraged, in turn forcing women to reject men politely, only resulting in more sexual advances from men. Through Quinn (2002) asking men to imagine themselves as women, they unintentionally revealed the harm it causes women. The men began to claim they would make sure to dress appropriately and in ways to not draw the attention of other men so that they would not be targeted. It was this information that revealed the harm Girl Watching caused to women. Quinn continued to learn more about men&#x27;s feelings towards the game and its effect on women through her interviews. Quinn learned that it was fun for men until they got caught. If a woman looked towards the group that was watching her during their remarks or said something to them, it would make things awkward and no longer the fun game they were playing. This is because men were looking at women as objects and as soon as the women made notice of them or they got caught, they would become a subject objecting, ruining their game because she was no longer an object for their enjoyment. Women are seen as objects, with no feelings or thoughts, not as subjects.

This sexual harassment not only occurs because of men&#x27;s attraction to women, but rather more as a power move. Similar to most cases of sexual harassment, men tend to harass as a way of staying in power. When men feel threatened, they will resort to sexual harassment as a way of maintaining their power. Men also harass as a way of maintaining their masculinity, especially when they feel it is threatened. When some men feel that their masculinity or their gender are threatened, they may resort to sexual harassment as a means of reinforcing their dominance and assuring themselves of their identity. Along with this, when men felt threatened, the likelihood of their participation in sexual harassing behaviors increased. There is an unequal power balance between men and women, and this is a result of sexual harassment. This power balance being unequal is partly rooted in the sexual harassment of women by men with a view to the perpetuation of the latter&#x27;s power.

=== In the military ===
Studies of sexual harassment have found that it is markedly more common in the military than in civilian settings. In 2018, an estimated 20,500 people in the US armed forces (about 13,000 women and 7,500 men) were assaulted, up from 14,900 in 2016. A Canadian study found that key risk factors associated with military settings are the typically young age of personnel, the &#x27;isolated and integrated&#x27; nature of accommodation, the minority status of women, and the disproportionate number of men in senior positions. The traditionally masculine values and behaviors that are rewarded and reinforced in military settings, as well as their emphasis on conformity and obedience, are also thought to play a role. Canadian research has also found that the risk increases during deployment on military operations.

While some male military personnel are sexually harassed, women are substantially more likely to be affected. Women who are younger and joined the military at a younger age face a greater risk, according to American, British and French research.

Child recruits (under the age of 18) and children in cadet forces also face an elevated risk. In the UK, for example, hundreds of complaints of the sexual abuse of cadets have been recorded since 2012. In Canada, one in ten complaints of sexual assault in military settings are from child cadets or their parents.

Individuals detained by the military are also vulnerable to sexual harassment. During the Iraq War, for example, personnel of the US army and US Central Intelligence Agency committed a number of human rights violations against detainees in the Abu Ghraib prison, including rape, sodomy, and other forms of sexual abuse.

Although the risk of sexual misconduct in the armed forces is widely acknowledged, personnel are frequently reluctant to report incidents, typically out of fear of reprisals, according to research in Australia, Canada, France, the UK, and the US.

Women affected by sexual harassment are more likely than other women to suffer stress-related mental illness afterwards. Research in the US found that when sexual abuse of female military personnel is psychiatrically traumatic, the odds of suffering from post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) after deployment on operations increase by a factor of nine.

== Measurement ==

Despite the prevalence of sexual harassment as a global issue, a large gap remains in research done on its measurement. The need for a robust and reliable measurement method to study and express the frequency of sexual harassment is higher than ever. It is important to have well-grounded results from surveys and other methods to learn how to educate, treat, and prevent the occurrence of sexual harassment. Providing empirical evidence on sexual harassment enforces its status as a widespread issue rather than an issue of the individual.

=== Research design ===

==== Sampling techniques ====
Sampling techniques are important to all types of research. The sampling matters because it affects the generalizability of the results and how they can used to better understand sexual harassment. Two methods of sampling include probability sampling and non-probability sampling which both provide different strengths and weaknesses to the study.

Probability sampling involves taking a sample from a subset of the population using random selection. The random selection used in probability sampling is key to making the results generalizable to the population that is being studied, which makes it more used than other nonrandom methods. Although the use of probability sampling has its perks, the data may not be representative or generalizable because the research is limited to certain contexts/environments. Sampling just people in a particular environment makes the results only applicable to that environment. For example, the results from a study of sexual harassment done in an office space in China cannot apply to the occurrence of sexual harassment at an American university. Similarly, if the sample being used is too small it cannot apply and be generalized to the larger population.

Despite its potential for bias, non-probability sampling may be used in cases where the research lacks funding or the number of participants available to sample from is small. The selection of participants in non-probability sampling is nonrandom and is often the most convenient. Many of the early studies of sexual harassment such the survey by Working Women&#x27;s Institute (1975) and the Redbook Survey; have relied on connivence/non-probability sampling to conduct their research. The sampling was often done at conventions, meetings, or sent out in letters or magazines.

===== Importance of wording =====
In every study used to measure sexual harassment, the wording of questions, introductions, definitions and other parts of the survey or interview can impact the responses. Language can be used in many ways to get certain responses from the participants.

Work done by Psychologist Mary Koss describes a problem in wording used to ask participants about sexual violence and how this can impact the results and assumption of prevalence. Koss explained the problem with other estimation methods was that the prevalence of sexual violence was skewed because the beliefs of the people being asked were that nonconsensual heterosexual sex was normative. Many sociologists believe that heterosexual relationships often involve nonconsensual sex that has been normalized because of the roles men and women fill in society. Men are dominant and aggressive, and women submit to their advances. This normality around nonconsensual heterosexual sex causes the spread of rape myths and the misrepresentation of rape prevalence in society. To combat this bias, Koss created a new instrument used neutral wording in her questions to dig deeper into their experiences with nonconsensual sex. She focused on women college students and found the prevalence of rape was much higher than was being reported. Koss&#x27; work displayed the importance of wording in surveys and her work received a lot of attention both good and bad.

=== History ===
Past measurement methods relied on simple checklists of what was considered sexual harassment, but these lacked reliability and validity which made results invalid and non-generalizable. These past methods left many unanswered questions on how to measure sexual harassment in the best way.

The first attempt at creating a way to classify and measure sexual harassment was created in 1980. Before there was a legal framework to follow, Till (1980) created a system based on a sample of college women, that classified different sexual harassment behaviors into five categories: Gender harassment, seductive behavior, sexual bribery, sexual coercion, sexual imposition, or assault.

Later in 1992, Gruber created another classification system that included 11 specific types of harassment organized into three categories in decreasing order of severity. The three categories were verbal requests, verbal remarks, nonverbal displays.

==== Early surveys ====
These early surveys lacked scientific methods of sampling, but they clearly demonstrated the prevalence of sexual harassment and were cited to prove the importance of sexual harassment as a social issue.

===== Working Women&#x27;s United (WWU) =====
Working Women&#x27;s United (WWU) created one of the first studies to measure sexual harassment. The survey was given out during a speak out event designed to ask women about their experiences with sexual harassment. 155 women responded to the survey and 7 out 10 experienced sexual harassment. The respondents&#x27; occupations ranged from teacher to factory worker. This helped them conclude that sexual harassment was happening in all workplaces. Although this survey was not scientific, it was the first of its kind and inspired may other organizations and researchers to conduct studies of their own.

===== Working Office Workers (WOW) =====
Women Office Workers (WOW) created a survey in 1975 that surveyed 15,000 women about their experiences and feelings about their workplace including the prevalence of sexual harassment. 1/3 of the respondents reported that they had experienced &quot;direct sexual harassment&quot;.

===== Redbook Survey =====
In 1975, the Redbook Survey was created and was used to survey women on a naval base on their experiences with sexual harassment. A survey was included in an issue of the Redbook magazine gathered data from 9,000 respondents. 81% of respondents reported they had experienced sexual harassment. This survey was then used again in other environments to test the prevalence of sexual harassment, proving its high external validity.

===== US Merit System Protection Board (USMSPB) =====
From 1981 to 1987, The US Merit System Protection Board (USMSPB) created another classification system and data collection method. The Office of Merit Systems Review and Studies (MSPBs) created this scientific survey to measure sexual harassment in the federal workplace in response to the many questions people were posing around workplace sexual harassment. The survey was created after reviewing past research, cases of sexual harassment, and by working with community members, academic researchers and federal officials. After revisions and testing, the final survey was created. They tested the survey on a stratified random sample from employees in the executive branch from a different sexes, minorities, salaries, and organizations. The survey was conducted from May 1978 – May 1980. In this model, seven harassing behaviors were classified into three levels of severity: less severe, moderately severe, and most severe. Examples of these levels were: less severe: unwelcome sexual remarks, suggestive looks and gestures, and deliberate touching, moderately severe: pressure for dates, pressure for sexual favors, and unwelcome letters and telephone calls, and most severe: actual or attempted rape or sexual assault. This data collection method requires participants to indicate if they had experienced the behavior described. They found that 42% of women and 15% of men had experienced and reported sexual harassment in the workplace. They also received more details information on who was more likely to report/experience sexual harassment and what types of harassment were taking place. They also observed the consequences of harassment which was mostly reported as victims leaving their jobs. Overall, concluded that harassment in widespread, has negative consequences, and impacts a variety of victims. This method has been critiqued because it ignores the need for reliability and validity of its measures.

===== Uniform Crime Report (UCR) =====
The Uniform Crime Report (UCR) served as the basis for reaching statistics on the prevalence of rape against women in the 1980s. Although this survey were useful, it was often criticized for underestimating the true prevalence of rape. Critics argued that one of the main issues with the UCR was that it relied on reported crimes for its reports of prevalence, but many rapes are not reported or are mishandled which skews the data.

===== Sexual Experiences Questionnaire (SEQ) =====
Developed by Fitzgerald et al. in 1988, the Sexual Experiences Questionnaire (SEQ), was the first attempt to study the prevalence of sexual harassment in a scientific manner. The SEQ used self-reporting and required participants to respond with the answer that they felt best described their experience. They picked from three options on a scale measure: never, once, and more than once. The scenarios were only listed in behavior terms, and they did not use the word sexual harassment until the end to avoid confounding variables of self-labeling. The survey resulted in frequencies and percentages used in statistical analyses. The test was retested multiple times and produced reliable and valid results. The SEQ is very widely used in a variety of environments and cultures. The SEQ is often cited as the best instrument of measurement available. Example questions included: Have you ever been in a situation where a supervisor or coworker habitually told suggestive stories or offensive jokes?. Despite the high praise for the SEQ, there are also several critiques on its design. For example, the wording of the questions causes skewed answers, and the scoring method can only produce frequency distributions.

===== SEQ-W (1995) =====
Fitzgerald et al. (1995), created and tested the SEQ-W, an updated version of the SEQ considering the critiques. Their framework consists of three dimensions: sexual coercion, unwanted sexual attention, and gender harassment. They defined gender harassment as behaviors, both verbal and nonverbal that project/express violent and insulting feelings about women. Examples of this include gestures, taunts, hazing, threats, sexual slurs, etc. Gender harassment is the most widespread form of harassment but its typically ignored because it is not seen as big of an issue as other forms of sexual harassment. Sexual coercion includes the exchange of sexual acts/favors for job related benefits (quid pro quo). This model was tested on different samples of women from a variety of occupations, education levels, and cultures. After testing, the model was found to be structurally valid across different settings and cultures. The model was reported as reliable, efficient, valid, and practical.

===== Sexual Experiences Survey (SES) =====
In an attempt to go beyond the past methods and create a more accurate representation of the occurrence of rape and other sexual victimizations, Koss and colleagues developed a new measurement tool called the Sexual Experiences Survey (SES). The SES included a legal definition of rape, accounted for other experiences of sexual harassment/assault and used graphic language and &quot;behaviorally specific&quot; questions to cue the victims recall.

The SES and its first testing caused a large increase in the research done on rape. Despite its strengths, the SES was critiqued for using broad and &quot;poorly phrased&quot; definitions and question. They argued that the language used caused women report that they had experienced a form of sexual harassment but not been raped. These critics concluded that the SES overestimates rape.

In 1992, the SES went through a redesign and a new name. The now called National Crime Victimization Survey (NCVS) built on the critiques from the past survey and built a brand-new methodological tool.

===== Nationwide Crime Victimization Survey (NCVS) =====
The Nationwide Crime Victimization Survey (NCVS) annually conducts research and reports information about different types of criminal victimization such as robbery, theft, household burglary and sexual victimization The NCVS has been conducted since 1973 and uses the same methods as when it was created which makes it the only source to compare the prevalence of sexual harassment across time.

To investigate this claim of underestimation of rape, the National Research Council held a panel to review and identify the errors within the NCVS. The conclusion from this panel was that the NCVS had several methodological problems that caused this underestimation of rape and sexual assault.

One of the main issues with NCVS was that using language that is focused on crime and victimization which caused respondents to answer different ways. Whether respondents did not want to label their experiences as rape or if they feared that their perpetrator was going to be punished the use of language was leading to inaccurate results. Additionally, the NCVS fails to protect the privacy of its participants. The interviewer has to ask one of the questions to everyone 12 and older in a certain house. This causes everyone asked in that area aware of the others&#x27; participation and what questions everyone is being asked. This risk of lack of privacy could lead respondents to not answer honestly, or answer in a socially desirable way. Finally, the NCVS has limited definitions of rape that lead to confusion and ambiguity.

=== College sexual harassment surveys ===
==== National College Women Sexual Victimization Survey (NCVS) vs National Violence Against Women Survey (NVAW) ====
Two of the widely used surveys, the NCVS and the NVAW can be compared to examine the strengths and weakness of each and how this impacts their results.The sample used for the National College Women Sexual Victimization Survey was made of 233 higher education institutions (194 four-year institutions and 39 two-year institutions) in the United States with 1,000 students or more. The sampling method used was a stratified sampling method to pick institutions and then a random sample was taken of students. The sample size who took the survey was 4,446 students. The National Violence Against Women Survey used the same sampling method but had slightly different sample numbers. The title of the surveys and the survey description were different. The NCVS named their survey &quot;The Extent and Nature of Sexual Victimization of College Women&quot; and the NVAW named it &quot;Victimization Among College Women&quot;.

The methods used were also similar, such as that both the surveys were given by professionally trained women interviewers. The interviews were completed using a computer assisted telephone interviewing system (CATI). The average interview time was longer for the NCVS than the NVAW (25.9 minutes vs 12.7 minutes). They both had similar response rates, but the NVAW had a higher response rate oof 91.6% compared the NCVS rate of 85.6%.

The surveys gave the same introduction to the interview with the same wording:

&quot;As you may recall, the purpose of the study is to better understand the extent and nature of criminal victimization among college women. Regardless of whether or not you have ever personally been victimized, your answers will help us to understand and deal with the problem of victimizations at your campus and nationally.&quot;

The two surveys used different definitions of completed rape, attempted rape, and threat of rape. The NCVS used a broader definition of completed rape that included other instances other than just penile vaginal penetration, whereas the NVAW used a more objective and narrow definition. Attempted rape and threat of rape was defined by the NVAW more broadly and included the element of psychological coercion as an element of force.

The two surveys first had the women answer the survey questions to determine if they had experienced an incident of victimization, then if they had they would fill out an incident report to determine the nature of victimization.

The estimates of rape were statistically lower for the NVAW study than the estimates from the NSCVS. The difference in estimation is due to the use of wide definition and behaviorally specific questions used in the NSCVS.

The differences in these methods displays the important implications of measurement methods such as the importance of the wording of questions and language used in introductions or interviews because this can influence responses.

==== National College Women Sexual Victimization Survey (NCWSV) ====
Through an experiment, Bonnie Fisher, and colleagues (1996) created the NCWSV to compare the wording of questions to see how the results from the NCVS would compare to the NCWSV. The NCWSV questions included behavioral specific questions rather than questions centered around confusing terminology that was not clearly defined. Specifically, the NCVS does not ask about rape occurring when incapacitated (due to drugs or alcohol). The results of this study were shocking because they found that the wording used in the NCVS caught less than 10% of the incidents of rape that the NCWSV did. These results lead to suggestions that the NCVS needed to be reworked or a new survey needed to be created to accurately measure sexual assault.

==== Online College Social Life Survey (OCSLS) ====
The Online College Social Life Survey, used from 2005 to 2011, asked questions about incapacitated and attempted rape. The respondents were asked to answer these questions: &quot;Since you started college, has someone tried to physically force you to have sexual intercourse, but you got out of the situation without having intercourse?&quot; and &quot;Since you started college, has someone had sexual intercourse with you that you did not want when you were drunk, passed out, asleep, drugged, or otherwise incapacitated?&quot;. This survey resulted in small estimations of rape. The reason for this underestimation is that they did not ask questions that would include unwanted touching/grabbing or psychological coercion. Other college surveys such as the Campus Sexual Assault (CSA) survey, created in 2007, had limited samples, only drawing responses few universities making data inapplicable to most of the female college population.

==== Self Labeling, Latent Class Cluster (LCC), and Behavioral Experiences ====
A study done by Nielsen et al. (2010), tested three different estimation/measurement methods to investigate the strengths and weaknesses of different methods of measurement. Current research methods are often criticized for having faulty research design that impacts the validity of the results. The results are often biased due to variations in the operational definitions and the lack of representative samples. The article expresses the importance of accurate measurement methods because the conclusions taken from these studies are used to make judgements for prevention and treatment of sexual harassment. The three methods of surveying tested were Self labeling, Latent Class Cluster (LCC) modeling and behavioral experiences.

* Self Labeling
** Self-labeling is a good method because it is easy to administer and does not take up a lot of space on the survey. But it does not provide details on the nature of their experiences or how frequent the experience is. Self-labeling is also very subjective because it forces the participant to define sexual harassment themselves and that definition may differ based on the individual. Finally, self-labeling might make some participants feel threatened to admit that they are victims/label themselves 
* Latent Class Cluster (LCC)
** Latent Class Cluster (LCC) is beneficial because it creates several different groups based on the nature and frequency of the respondents&#x27; experiences rather than creating just two groups of respondents (harassed or non-harassed). It also shows stronger predictive validity.
* Behavioral Experiences
** Behavioral experiences method is effective because its more objective and does not make them label their experiences. They suggest that the best measurement method is a combination of the LCC and behavioral experience approach.

==== Bergen Sexual Harassment Scale (BSHS) ====
The Bergen Sexual Harassment Scale (BSHS) consists of two parts. The first part measures exposure to sexual harassment by asking participants to respond to 11 items categorized into different types of sexual harassment: unwanted verbal sexual attention, unwanted physical sexual behaviors, and sexual pressure. The second part asks participants to indicate if they believe they had been exposed to sexual harassment at work in the time. They answered it with (no, yes to a certain extent, or yes to a large extent). They were not given a definition of sexual harassment when doing part two.

==== Computer Based Interaction Model ====
A new measure created by Maass and colleagues using a computer-based model that measures gender harassment through behavior. Male participants are told they are interacting with a female partner through the computer. They want to see if the participants will send harassing content/messages to the partner (computer). They found that men were more likely to harass their partner if the partner threatened the males standing in gender hierarchy/masculinity (example: partner identifies as feminist). This article presents an alternative measure than other studies. This article forces the male participants to imagine themselves in scenarios and answer on what behavior they would most likely do. They were attempting to determine if men were more likely to harass a female coworker if that coworker was threatening their masculinity.

== Prevention ==

Sexual harassment is a longstanding and ubiquitous social issue, but it is often normalized, left unacknowledged, and even trivialized. Certain settings make harassment more likely, making it an institutional and societal problem that can be solved by changes at the organizational and cultural level. However, many attempted institutional interventions are not motivated by an understanding of how harassment works, and are instead chosen because they are simple or they fit a legal minimum standard. This has resulted in a wide range of intervention styles and research on their effectiveness, with changing and sometimes conflicting conclusions.

=== Organizational changes ===
Harassment in large organizations like workplaces or schools can be predicted by certain aspects of the organization: if these change, the amount of harassment can change. The first step to decreasing organizational harassment is talking about it, acknowledging how large of a problem it is and signalling a willingness to find real solutions.

Organizational tolerance for sexual harassment is a large factor in enabling harassment. If leadership is vocal about not tolerating harassment and actively intervenes when it comes up, this limits harassment in the organization. Leaders who commit themselves to decreasing harassment by joining dedicated task forces and putting personal effort into working on the problem are likely to drive the organization to change. Leaders are also effective at limiting harassment because they can design creative solutions, operating outside of basic processes or policies that are ineffective at curbing harassment. Finally, leaders serve as role models to the rest of the organization, and their stance on harassment can shape organizational culture. This is especially important for decreasing intersectional sexual harassment. For one example, having school leaders be educated on allyship and signaling institutional support for smaller student populations can result in lower harassment of LGBTQ students at those schools.

Organizational structure also affects harassment within an organization. If employees feel more secure in their jobs due to their contract structure, they are less likely to be harassed. If an organization promotes a more respectful culture, it can also reduce sexual harassment. This has additional benefits in that incivility tends to disproportionately alienate women and people of color. Changes that increase engagement with an organization, or employee job satisfaction, often serve to reduce harassment at the same time.

Gender imbalances at an organization are a large factor in the likelihood of sexual harassment. Changing an organization&#x27;s practices and structure so that power is more equally distributed across people regardless of their gender can decrease harassment. Hiring, retaining, and promoting people into positions of power in ways that even out gender imbalances also reduces harassment. Studies have mostly examined this in the context of increasing women&#x27;s power in workspaces dominated by men.

=== Training and awareness ===
Prevention strategies often start with raising awareness and advocating for cultures and organizations to stop tolerating harassment. Sexual harassment and assault may be prevented by secondary school, college, and workplace education programs. At least one program for fraternity men produced &quot;sustained behavioral change&quot;.

Many sororities and fraternities in the United States take preventive measures against hazing and hazing activities during the participants&#x27; pledging processes (which may often include sexual harassment). Many Greek organizations and universities nationwide have anti-hazing policies that explicitly recognize various acts and examples of hazing, and offer preventive measures for such situations.

Current workplace anti-sexual harassment training programs, policies, and reporting mechanisms have little evidence of effectiveness. Many trainings succeed at teaching people about harassment-related laws and policies but not on acting better, and &quot;some studies suggest that training may in fact backfire, reinforcing gendered stereotypes that place women at a disadvantage&quot;. There is evidence that ineffective trainings can make men scared to interact with women due to heightened fears that they will be falsely accused of harassment, thus leading to gender-based discrimination. 

In-person trainings that are customized to one workplace and involve active tasks, lasting longer than a few hours, have more evidence of effectiveness and less chance of backfiring. How leaders have signaled their intentions behind the trainings is also important: employees react differently to trainings depending on why they think their manager is providing the training. Anti-harassment training that solely targets managers is also effective, because it is often presented in a way that reduces managers&#x27; defensiveness at receiving the training. These often present harassment as a common issue that managers must root out, and managers are treated as potential allies who are being taught new techniques, rather than potential harassers.

Evidence has shown that bystander intervention training is a more effective method for changing harassment culture than standard anti-harassment trainings. Bystander intervention focuses on teaching positive skills that people can use to intervene if they see harassment or other problems happening. These trainings don&#x27;t make students as defensive as sexual harassment trainings: students are taught positive skills rather than told what to avoid, and are treated as potential allies rather than harassers. Systematic, well-made bystander intervention training has been shown to decrease the amount of harassment where it is implemented in higher education institutions.

=== Non-institutional methods ===
In settings where people don&#x27;t receive institutional support against sexual harassment, people find their own safety, advocacy, and response mechanisms. People have organized public protests and performance art to raise awareness of street harassment in their communities and decrease tolerance for it. There is evidence that people grow less likely to sexually harass or believe harassment myths when they learn about how harassment affects victims through personal stories. Projects like HARASSmap and Hollaback! collect harassment stories to raise awareness and lower tolerance for harassment in certain communities, using the stories to safely intervene and educate people about stopping harassment where it is prevalent. 

The use of audio and video recording can help in documenting sexual harassment for use in reporting. Audio recording apps are available for use on smartphones, and can for instance be used during job interviews.

== Impact ==
The impact of sexual harassment can vary. In research carried out by the EU Fundamental Rights Agency, 17,335 female victims of sexual assault were asked to name the feelings that resulted from the most serious incident of sexual assault that they had encountered since the age of 15. &#x27;Anger, annoyance, and embarrassment were the most common emotional responses, with 45% of women feeling anger, 41% annoyance, and 36% embarrassment. Furthermore, close to one in three women (29%) who has experienced sexual harassment have said that they felt fearful as a result of the most serious incident, while one in five (20%) victims say that the most serious incident made themselves feel ashamed of what had taken place. In other situations, harassment may lead to temporary or prolonged stress or depression depending on the recipient&#x27;s psychological abilities to cope and the type of harassment and the social support or lack thereof for the recipient. Harnois and Bastos (2018) show an association between women&#x27;s perceptions of workplace sexual harassment and self-reported physical health. In addition, a study conducted in 2010 indicated that workplace sexual harassment is linked to greater mental health issues and lower job satisfaction, regardless of assessment technique or gender. Psychologists and social workers report that severe or chronic sexual harassment can have the same psychological effects as rape or sexual assault. For example, in 1995, Judith Coflin committed suicide after chronic sexual harassment by her bosses and coworkers. Her family was later awarded six million dollars in punitive and compensatory damages. Victims who do not submit to harassment may also experience various forms of retaliation, including isolation and bullying.

As an overall social and economic effect every year, sexual harassment deprives women from active social and economic participation and costs hundreds of millions of dollars in lost educational and professional opportunities for mostly girls and women. However, the quantity of men implied in these conflicts is significant.

===Coping===
Sexual harassment, by definition, is unwanted and not to be tolerated. There are ways, however, for offended and injured people to overcome the resultant psychological effects, remain in or return to society, regain healthy feelings within personal relationships when they were affected by the outside relationship trauma, regain social approval, and recover the ability to concentrate and be productive in educational and work environments. These include stress management and therapy, cognitive-behavioral therapy, friends and family support, and advocacy.

Immediate psychological and legal counseling are recommended since self-treatment may not release stress or remove trauma, and simply reporting to authorities may not have the desired effect, may be ignored, or may further injure the victim at its response.

A 1991 study done by K.R. Yount found three dominant strategies developed by a sample of women coal miners to manage sexual harassment on the job: the &quot;lady&quot;, the &quot;flirt&quot;, and the &quot;tomboy&quot;.
The &quot;ladies&quot; were typically the older women workers who tended to disengage from the men, kept their distance, avoided using profanity, avoided engaging in any behavior that might be interpreted as suggestive. They also tended to emphasize by their appearance and manners that they were ladies. The consequences for the &quot;ladies&quot; were that they were the targets of the least amount of come-ons, teasing and sexual harassment, but they also accepted the least prestigious and lowest-paid jobs.

The &quot;flirts&quot; were most often the younger single women. As a defense mechanism, they pretended to be flattered when they were the targets of sexual comments. Consequently, they became perceived as the &quot;embodiment of the female stereotype... as particularly lacking in potential and were given the fewest opportunities to develop job skills and to establish social and self-identities as miners.&quot;

The &quot;tomboys&quot; were generally single women, but were older than the &quot;flirts&quot;. They attempted to separate themselves from the female stereotype and focused on their status as coal miners and tried to develop a &quot;thick skin&quot;. They responded to harassment with humor, comebacks, sexual talk of their own, or reciprocation. As a result, they were often viewed as sluts or sexually promiscuous and as women who violated the sexual double standard. Consequently, they were subjected to intensified and increased harassment by some men. It was not clear whether the tomboy strategy resulted in better or worse job assignments.

The findings of this study may be applicable to other work settings, including factories, restaurants, offices, and universities. The study concludes that individual strategies for coping with sexual harassment are not likely to be effective and may have unexpected negative consequences for the workplace and may even lead to increased sexual harassment. Women who try to deal with sexual harassment on their own, regardless of what they do, seem to be in a no-win situation. For example, after an anti-groping device allowing victims to mark their assailants with an invisible ink stamp has been released in Japan, some experts claimed it is wrong to put the onus on the victim.

===Common effects on the victims===
Common psychological, academic, professional, financial, and social effects of sexual harassment and retaliation:
* Becoming publicly sexualized (i.e. groups of people &quot;evaluate&quot; the victim to establish if he or she is &quot;worth&quot; the sexual attention or the risk to the harasser&#x27;s career)
* Being objectified and humiliated by scrutiny and gossip
* Decreased work or school performance as a result of stress conditions; increased absenteeism in fear of harassment repetition
* Defamation of character and reputation
* Effects on sexual life and relationships: can put extreme stress upon relationships with significant others, sometimes resulting in divorce
* Firing and refusal for a job opportunity can lead to loss of job or career, loss of income
* Having one&#x27;s personal life offered up for public scrutiny—the victim becomes the &quot;accused&quot;, and his or her dress, lifestyle, and private life will often come under attack.
* Having to drop courses, change academic plans, or leave school (loss of tuition) in fear of harassment repetition or as a result of stress
* Having to relocate to another city, another job, or another school
* Loss of references/recommendations
* Loss of trust in environments similar to where the harassment occurred
* Loss of trust in the types of people that occupy similar positions as the harasser or his or her colleagues, especially in case they are not supportive, difficulties or stress on peer relationships, or relationships with colleagues
* Psychological stress and health impairment
* Weakening of support network, or being ostracized from professional or academic circles (friends, colleagues, or family may distance themselves from the victim, or shun him or her altogether)

Some of the psychological and health effects that can occur in someone who has been sexually harassed as a result of stress and humiliation:
depression; anxiety; panic attacks; sleeplessness; nightmares; shame; guilt; difficulty concentrating; headaches; fatigue; loss of motivation; stomach problems; eating disorders (such as weight loss or gain); alcoholism; feeling betrayed, violated, angry, violent towards the perpetrator, powerless or out of control; increased blood pressure; loss of confidence or self-esteem; withdrawal; isolation; overall loss of trust in people; traumatic stress; post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD); complex post-traumatic stress disorder; suicidal thoughts or attempts, and suicide.

===Post-complaint retaliation and backlash===

Retaliation and backlash against a victim are very common, particularly a complainant. Victims who speak out against sexual harassment are often labeled troublemakers who are on their own &quot;power trips&quot;, or who are looking for attention. Similar to cases of rape or sexual assault, the victim often becomes the accused, with their appearance, private life, and character likely to fall under intrusive scrutiny and attack. Excuses for victim blaming include clothing and behavior. They risk hostility and isolation from colleagues, supervisors, teachers, fellow students, and even friends. They may become the targets of mobbing or relational aggression.

Women are not necessarily sympathetic to other women complainants who have been sexually harassed. If the harasser was male, internalized sexism (or jealousy over the sexual attention towards the victim) may encourage some women to react with as much hostility towards the complainant as some male colleagues. Fear of being targeted for harassment or retaliation themselves may also cause some women to respond with hostility. For example, when Lois Jenson filed her lawsuit against Eveleth Taconite Co., the women shunned her both at work and in the community—many of these women later joined her suit. Women may even project hostility onto the victim in order to bond with their male coworkers and build trust.

Retaliation has occurred when a sexual harassment victim suffers a negative action as a result of the harassment. For example, a complainant be given poor evaluations or low grades, have their projects sabotaged, be denied work or academic opportunities, have their work hours cut back, and other actions against them which undermine their productivity, or their ability to advance at work or school, being fired after reporting sexual harassment or leading to unemployment as they may be suspended, asked to resign, or be fired from their jobs altogether. Retaliation can even involve further sexual harassment, and also stalking and cyberstalking of the victim. Moreover, a school professor or employer accused of sexual harassment, or who is the colleague of a perpetrator, can use their power to see that a victim is never hired again (blacklisting), or never accepted to another school.

Of the women who have approached her to share their own experiences of being sexually harassed by their teachers, feminist writer Naomi Wolf wrote in 2004:
I am ashamed of what I tell them: that they should indeed worry about making an accusation because what they fear is likely to come true. Not one of the women I have heard from had an outcome that was not worse for her than silence. One, I recall, was drummed out of the school by peer pressure. Many faced bureaucratic stonewalling. Some women said they lost their academic status as golden girls overnight; grants dried up, letters of recommendation were no longer forthcoming. No one was met with a coherent process that was not weighted against them. Usually, the key decision-makers in the college or university—especially if it was a private university—joined forces to, in effect, collude with the faculty member accused; to protect not him necessarily but the reputation of the university, and to keep information from surfacing in a way that could protect other women. The goal seemed to be not to provide a balanced forum, but damage control.

Another woman who was interviewed by sociologist Helen Watson said, &quot;Facing up to the crime and having to deal with it in public is probably worse than suffering in silence. I found it to be a lot worse than the harassment itself.&quot;

===Backlash stress===
Backlash stress is stress resulting from an uncertainty regarding changing norms for interacting with women in the workplace. Backlash stress now deters many male workers from befriending female colleagues, or providing them with any assistance, such as holding doors open. As a result, women are being handicapped by a lack of the necessary networking and mentorship.

== Women of color ==
The sexual harassment women of color face are often ignored when discussions about sexual harassment women face occur. Harassment of women of color tends to stem from racial discrimination. Poor African American women are more likely to experience sexual harassment but less likely to be seen as a victim. It is conditions like these that make it difficult for women of color to report sexual harassment, allowing the cycle to continue. Earlier studies revealed that there was no difference between the sexual harassment rates of white women and women of color. However, there is evidence that reveals women of color deal with sexual harassment, this sexual harassment is on more severe lines.

Race and gender influence most of the sexual harassment that women of color face. Women of color are less likely to report sexual harassment if the perpetrator is the same race. This is known as the code of silence. This is influenced by the race of the harasser, and predominately affects women of color. Black women do not usually see things that a white woman would claim to be sexual harassment because they are accustomed to it, it is normal to them and so there is not much of a problem.

Something that is unique to the sexual harassment of women of color is the common bond factor. The common bond factor is when a man of color sees someone of their own race or culture, and they feel as if it is okay to sexually harass them. They think that they can act and talk without regard to the law because they feel as if it is not being broken.

The perception of sexual harassment from women of color includes racism and sexism whereas white women&#x27;s perception only includes sexism. There is this interlocking of relations, commonly known as intersectionality, within the sexual harassment women of color face, between racism and sexism. White women, when speaking about sexual harassment, speak from the role of a victim whereas women of color speak from the role of a harasser. Women of color, as well, have stereotypes taken into consideration when it comes to harassment. These stereotypes make it difficult for women of color to come forward about sexual harassment, as they will likely not be believed. For instance, there is the stereotype that Latin women are super emotional and tend to overreact. This stereotype may be conveyed when a Latin woman comes forward about sexual harassment, resulting in her claim not being taken seriously. Speaking up results in stereotypes being put on the person coming forward, making them uncomfortable with doing so. Similarly, it is difficult for women of color to be supported when speaking out, as their experiences are different from those of white women, as is the case of Anita Hill. Particularly, the feminist movement is geared towards helping white women rather than women of color due to women of color&#x27;s experiences being foreign. In turn, women of color do not join feminist movements or groups because they do not see their experiences reflected.

There is a relationship between legal status and sexual harassment; there is an intersectionality between them. Citizen status can influence women experiencing or reporting sexual harassment. Being undocumented can make it difficult to come forward for fear of being deported. White women with citizenship say that sexual harassment is unwanted behavior, women of color without citizenship found it difficult to explain what they thought sexual harassment was, but that it did include race. This however makes it difficult for Black women to differentiate sexual harassment in the workplace from sexual harassment in society.

==Organizational policies and procedures==
Most companies have policies against sexual harassment; however, these policies are not designed and should not attempt to &quot;regulate romance&quot; which goes against human urges.

Act upon a report of harassment inside the organization should be:
When organizations do not take the respective satisfactory measures for properly investigating, stress and psychological counseling and guidance, and just deciding of the problem this could lead to:
* Decreased productivity and increased team conflict
* Decreased study or job satisfaction
* Loss of students and staff. Loss of students who leave school and staff resignations to avoid harassment. Resignations and firings of alleged harassers.
* Decreased productivity and increased absenteeism by staff or students experiencing harassment
* Decrease in success at meeting academic and financial goals
* Increased health-care and sick-pay costs because of the health consequences of harassment or retaliation
* The knowledge that harassment is permitted can undermine ethical standards and discipline in the organization in general, as staff or students lose respect for, and trust in, their seniors who indulge in, or turn a blind eye to, or treat improperly sexual harassment
* If the problem is ignored or not treated properly, a company&#x27;s or school&#x27;s image can suffer
* High jury awards for the employee, attorney fees and litigation costs if the problem is ignored or not treated properly (in case of firing the victim) when the complainants are advised to and take the issue to court.

Studies show that organizational climate (an organization&#x27;s tolerance, policy, procedure etc.) and workplace environment are essential for understanding the conditions in which sexual harassment is likely to occur, and the way its victims will be affected (yet, research on specific policy and procedure, and awareness strategies is lacking). Another element which increases the risk for sexual harassment is the job&#x27;s gender context (having few women in the close working environment or practicing in a field which is perceived as atypical for women).

Although research on occupational sexual assault is still in its infancy, the European Union reports that 40–50% of women report having encountered inappropriate sexual conduct or sexual harassment at work (World Health Organization, 2012). According to Burn (2018), In order to reduce sexual harassment, organisational climates and circumstances that support sexual harassment must change. Changes to the normative environments that sustain sexual harassment include the adoption of explicit anti-harassment rules and practices. Sexual harassment rules have the potential to deter sexual harassment and provide victims with channels for redress. According to Medeiros (2019), the current endeavor puts out a framework for creating workplace sexual harassment prevention programmes and is based on research on training and development, college sexual assault, and workplace sexual harassment. The suggestions for preventing sexual harassment are mostly based on the research on sexual assault on college campuses. The persistent curiosity in and study of educational institutions for sexual assault preventative measures, despite this approach&#x27;s shortcomings, has produced a database of researched interventions that fills in the gaps left by the dearth of empirical studies on sexual assault preventive interventions. Additionally, sexual harassment and assault have been characterized as a continuum where less severe behaviors have the potential to escalate into more violent acts over time if left unchecked (Department of Defence, 2014; Fitzgerald,1993). Hence, even if sexual harassment and assault are distinct behavior&#x27;s, their increasing prevalence indicates that interventions ought to address the entire range of behaviors&#x27;, particularly considering the restricted time and financial resources allocated to educational programs.

According to Dr. Orit Kamir, the most effective way to avoid sexual harassment in the workplace, and also influence the public&#x27;s state of mind, is for the employer to adopt a clear policy prohibiting sexual harassment and to make it very clear to their employees. Many women prefer to make a complaint and to have the matter resolved within the workplace rather than to &quot;air out the dirty laundry&quot; with a public complaint and be seen as a traitor by colleagues, superiors and employers, adds Kamir.

Most prefer a pragmatic solution that would stop the harassment and prevent future contact with the harasser rather than turning to the police. More about the difficulty in turning an offense into a legal act can be found in Felstiner &amp; Sarat&#x27;s (1981) study, which describes three steps a victim (of any dispute) must go through before turning to the justice system: naming—giving the assault a definition, blaming—understanding who is responsible for the violation of rights and facing them, and finally, claiming—turning to the authorities.

==Evolution of law in different jurisdictions==
It may include a range of actions from mild transgressions to sexual abuse or sexual assault. Sexual harassment is a form of illegal employment discrimination in many countries, and is a form of abuse (sexual and psychological abuses) and bullying.

The Declaration on the Elimination of Violence Against Women classifies violence against women into three categories: that occurring in the family, that occurring within the general community, and that perpetrated or condoned by the State. The term &quot;sexual harassment&quot; is used in defining violence occurring in the general community, which is defined as: &quot;Physical, sexual and psychological violence occurring within the general community, including rape, sexual abuse, sexual harassment and intimidation at work, in educational institutions and elsewhere, trafficking in women and forced prostitution.&quot;

Sexual harassment is subject to a directive in the European Union. The United States&#x27; Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) states, &quot;It is unlawful to harass a person (an applicant or employee) because of that person&#x27;s sex.&quot;

In India, the case of &quot;Vishakha and others v State of Rajasthan&quot; in 1997 has been credited with establishing sexual harassment as illegal. In Israel, the 1988 Equal Employment Opportunity Law made it a crime for an employer to retaliate against an employee who had rejected sexual advances, but it was not until 1998 that the Israeli Sexual Harassment Law made such behavior illegal.

In May 2002, the European Union Council and Parliament amended a 1976 Council Directive on the equal treatment of men and women in employment to prohibit sexual harassment in the workplace, naming it a form of sex discrimination and violation of dignity. This Directive required all Member States of the European Union to adopt laws on sexual harassment, or amend existing laws to comply with the Directive by October 2005.

In 2005, China added new provisions to the &quot;Law on Women&#x27;s Right Protection&quot; to include sexual harassment. In 2006, &quot;The Shanghai Supplement&quot; was drafted to help further define sexual harassment in China.

Sexual harassment was specifically criminalized for the first time in modern Egyptian history in June 2014.

, sexual harassment remains legal in Kuwait and Djibouti.

===Varied legal guidelines and definitions===
The United Nations General Recommendation 19 to the convention on the Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination Against Women defines sexual harassment of women to include:

such unwelcome sexually determined behavior as physical contact and advances, sexually colored remarks, showing pornography and sexual demands, whether by words or actions. Such conduct can be humiliating and may constitute a health and safety problem; it is discriminatory when the woman has reasonable ground to believe that her objection would disadvantage her in connection with her employment, including recruitment or promotion, or when it creates a hostile working environment.

While such conduct can be harassment of women by men, many laws around the world which prohibit sexual harassment recognize that both men and women may be harassers or victims of sexual harassment. However, most claims of sexual harassment are made by women.

There are many similarities, and also important differences in laws and definitions used around the world.

===Africa===
====Egypt====
Sexual harassment is rife in Egypt. A 2013 study from the United Nations showed that 99.3 percent of Egyptian women have suffered some form of sexual harassment. Authorities punish women when they do speak out.

====Morocco====
In 2016, a stricter law proscribing sexual harassment was proposed in Morocco specifying fines and a possible jail sentence of up to 6 months. The existing law against harassment was reported to not be upheld, as harassment was not reported to police by victims and even when reported, was not investigated by police or prosecuted by the courts.
On June 1, 2023, a Moroccan court sentenced a 32-year-old man to two years in prison for sexually harassing and forcibly kissing a woman inside a church.

===Australia===
The Sex Discrimination Act 1984 defines sexual harassment as &quot;... a person sexually harasses another person (the person harassed ) if: (a) the person makes an unwelcome sexual advance, or an unwelcome request for sexual favours, to the person harassed; or (b) engages in other unwelcome conduct of a sexual nature in relation to the person harassed; in circumstances in which a reasonable person, having regard to all the circumstances, would have anticipated the possibility that the person harassed would be offended, humiliated or intimidated.&quot;

===Europe===
In the European Union, there is a directive on sexual harassment. The &quot;Directive 2002/73/EC – equal treatment of 23 September 2002 amending Council Directive 76/207/EEC on the implementation of the principle of equal treatment for men and women as regards access to employment, vocational training and promotion, and working conditions&quot; states:
For the purposes of this Directive, the following definitions shall apply: (...)
* sexual harassment: where any form of unwanted verbal, non-verbal or physical conduct of a sexual nature occurs, with the purpose or effect of violating the dignity of a person, in particular when creating an intimidating, hostile, degrading, humiliating or offensive environment
Harassment and sexual harassment within the meaning of this Directive shall be deemed to be discrimination on the grounds of sex and therefore prohibited.

The Convention on preventing and combating violence against women and domestic violence also addresses the issue of sexual harassment (Article 40), using a similar definition.

====Denmark====
Sexual harassment is defined as when any verbal, non-verbal or physical action is used to change a victim&#x27;s sexual status against the will of the victim and resulting in the victim feeling inferior or hurting the victim&#x27;s dignity. Men and women are looked upon as equal, and any action trying to change the balance in status with the differences in sex as a tool, is also sexual harassment. In the workplace, jokes, remarks, etc., are only deemed discriminatory if the employer has stated so in their written policy. Law number 1385 of December 21, 2005 regulates this area.

====France====
In France, both the Criminal Code and the Labor Code are relevant to the issue of sexual harassment. Until May 4, 2012, article 222-33 of the French Criminal Code described sexual harassment as &quot;The fact of harassing anyone in order to obtain favors of a sexual nature&quot;. Since 2002, it recognized the possibility of sexual harassment between co-workers and not only by supervisors. On May 4, 2012, the Supreme Court of France quashed the definition of the criminal code as being too vague. The 2012 decision resulted from a law on priority preliminary rulings on the issue of constitutionality. As a consequence of this decision, all pending procedures before criminal courts were cancelled. Several feminist NGOs, such as AFVT, criticized this decision. President François Hollande, the Minister of Justice (Christiane Taubira) and the Minister of Equality (Najat Belkacem) asked that a new law be voted rapidly. As a result, &quot;LOI n°2012-954 du 6 août 2012&quot; was voted in, providing a new definition. In addition to criminal provisions, the French Labor code also prohibits sexual harassment. The legislator voted a law in 2008 that copied the 2002/73/EC Directive definition without modifying the French Labour Code.

According to Abigail C. Saguy in her book &quot;What is Sexual Harassment: From Capitol Hill to the Sorbonne&quot;, &quot;According to French penal law, sexual harassment is also different from rape and sexual assault in that it does not involve physical contact. Rather, with sexual harassment, economic dependence and official authority alone are used to pressure a person into having sexual relations(pg.24).&quot;

====Germany====

In June 2016, the governing coalition decided about the key points of a tightening of the law governing sexual offenses (Sexualstrafrecht, literally: law on the punishment of sexual delicts). On July 7, 2016, the Bundestag passed the resolution and by fall of that year, the draft bill will be presented to the second chamber, the Bundesrat. By this change, sexual harassment shall become punishable under the &quot;Sexualstrafrecht&quot;.

Now sexual harassment is punishable by law according to § 184i of the law governing sexual offenses. The law only states unwanted physical contact as sexual haressment but has been extended in 2020 to include &quot;cybergrooming&quot; as well.

====Greece====
In response to the EU Directive 2002/73/EC, Greece enacted Law 3488/2006 (O.G.A.&#x27;.191). The law specifies that sexual harassment is a form of gender-based discrimination in the workplace. Victims also have the right to compensation. Prior to this law, the policy on sexual harassment in Greece was very weak. Sexual harassment was not defined by any law, and victims could only use general laws, which were very poor in addressing the issue.

====Russia====
As of 2023, there is no formal law in Russia that prohibits or criminalizes repeated sexual harassment or any sexual advancements that result in women or men losing their jobs or some other adverse effects that can be proven in a court of law. Per articles 132-133 of the Criminal Code of Russian Federation (CC RF) only criminal sexual conduct is outlawed, including all non-consensual sex between individuals: rape, sex with underage etc. Per article 133 (previously, Article 118 of CC RF 1990) various kinds of extortion and coercion are also criminalized.

According to the Moscow Center for Gender Studies study published in 1997, practically in all cases authorities did not investigate or enforce these articles.

In 2008, &quot;The Daily Telegraph&quot; quoted a survey in which &quot;100 percent of female professionals [in Russia] said they had been subjected to sexual harassment by their bosses, 32 per cent said they had had intercourse with them at least once and another seven per cent claimed to have been raped.&quot;

====Switzerland====
A ban on discrimination was included in the Federal Constitution (Article 4, Paragraph 2 of the old Federal Constitution) in 1981 and adopted in Article 8, paragraph 2 of the revised Constitution. The ban on sexual harassment in the workplace forms part of the Federal Act on Gender Equality (GEA) of 24 March 1995, where it is one of several provisions which prohibit discrimination in employment and which are intended to promote equality. Article 4 of the GEA defines the circumstances, Article 5 legal rights and Article 10 protection against dismissal during the complaints procedure. Article 328, paragraph 1 of the Code of Obligations (OR), Article 198 (2) of the Penal Code (StGB) and Article 6, paragraph 1 of the Employment Act (ArG) contain further statutory provisions on the ban on sexual harassment. The ban on sexual harassment is intended exclusively for employers, within the scope of their responsibility for protection of legal personality, mental and physical well-being and health.

Article 4 of the GEA of 1995 discusses the topic of sexual harassment in the workplace: &quot;Any harassing behaviour of a sexual nature or other behaviour related to the person&#x27;s sex that adversely affects the dignity of women or men in the workplace is discriminatory. Such behaviour includes in particular threats, the promise of advantages, the use of coercion and the exertion of pressure in order to obtain favours of a sexual nature.&quot;

====United Kingdom====
The Discrimination Act of 1975 was modified to establish sexual harassment as a form of discrimination in 1986. It states that harassment occurs where there is unwanted conduct on the ground of a person&#x27;s sex or unwanted conduct of a sexual nature and that conduct has the purpose or effect of violating a person&#x27;s dignity, or of creating an intimidating, hostile, degrading, humiliating or offensive environment for them. If an employer treats someone less favourably because they have rejected, or submitted to, either form of harassment described above, this is also harassment. In March 2021, a study by UN Women UK found out that 97% of young women 18-24 have experienced some sort of sexual harassment.

Sexual harassment is also now considered discrimination under the Equality Act 2010. The Equality Act 2010 merged over 116 separate pieces of legislation under one act that protects the rights of citizens and promotes equality for all people. The new law strengthened the protection of individuals from discrimination in a number of areas. It is designed to protect individuals from discrimination on the basis of age, disability, gender reassignment, marriage and civil partnership, pregnancy and maternity, race, religion or belief, sex, and sexual orientation. It covers a wide range of areas, including employment, education, housing, public accommodations, and the provision of goods and services. Under the Equality Act 2010, it is unlawful to discriminate against someone on the basis of any of these protected characteristics. This includes direct discrimination, indirect discrimination, harassment, and victimization. The Act also places a duty on public authorities, such as local councils and government departments, to consider the impact of their policies and decisions on people who have protected characteristics, and to take steps to promote equality of opportunity and to eliminate discrimination.

Although the 2010 Equality Act is in place, many are pushing the UK government to put even more policies in place to stop sexual harassment in the workplace. One group in particular, &quot;This is Not Working&quot;, acts because according to recent surveys done by the Women and Equalities Committee, workplace sexual harassment is still very prevalent, even with the current legislation. The movement pushes for even more employers to take responsibility and proactively prevent sexual harassment.

=== Asia ===
==== China ====
In China, the 2005 Law for the Protection of Women&#x27;s Rights and Interests of the People&#x27;s Republic of China states &quot;sexual harassment against women is prohibited&quot; although the law does not explicitly define what sexual harassment is.

Sexual harassment is still pervasive within Chinese culture. A 2018 survey of female journalists revealed that 80% had experienced unwanted behavior, and an online survey of college students from all 34 provinces the same year revealed that 75% of female students and 35% of male students had experienced sexual harassment.

==== Lebanon ====
As of 2020, it is estimated that one in four women in Lebanon have been subjected to some form of unsolicited sexual advance, ranging from verbal to physical. On 21 December 2020, the Lebanese Parliament passed a law criminalizing sexual harassment. There was no national legislation to directly criminalize sexual harassment prior, with draft laws being proposed several times without effect.

====India====
Sexual harassment in India is termed &quot;Eve teasing&quot; and is described as: unwelcome sexual gesture or behaviour whether directly or indirectly as sexually colored remarks; physical contact and advances; showing pornography; a demand or request for sexual favours; any other unwelcome physical, verbal or non-verbal conduct being sexual in nature or passing sexually offensive and unacceptable remarks. The critical factor is the unwelcomeness of the behaviour, thereby making the impact of such actions on the recipient more relevant rather than intent of the perpetrator. According to the Indian constitution, sexual harassment infringes the fundamental right of a woman to gender equality under Article 14 and her right to life and live with dignity under Article 21.

In 1997, the Supreme Court of India in a Public Interest Litigation defined sexual harassment at workplace, preventive measures and redress mechanism. The judgment is popularly known as Vishaka Judgment. In April 2013, India enacted its own law on sexual harassment in the workplace—The Sexual Harassment of Women at Workplace (Prevention, Prohibition and Redressal) Act, 2013. Almost 16 years after the Supreme Court&#x27;s landmark guidelines on prevention of sexual harassment in the workplace (known as the &quot;Vishaka Guidelines&quot;), the Act has endorsed many of the guidelines, and is a step towards codifying gender equality. The Act is intended to include all women employees in its ambit, including those employed in the unorganized sector, as well as domestic workers. The Indian law does not permit the victim or complainant to take assistance of a legal professional in the inquiry, however, in Arti Devi Vs Jawaharlal Nehru University, the High Court of Delhi permitted the complainant to avail the services of a counsel as her defence assistant.

The Act has identified sexual harassment as a violation of the fundamental rights of a woman to equality under articles 14 and 15 of the Constitution of India and her right to life and to live with dignity under article 21 of the Constitution; as well as the right to practice any profession or to carry on any occupation, trade or business which includes a right to a safe environment free from sexual harassment. The Act also states that the protection against sexual harassment and the right to work with dignity are universally recognized human rights by international conventions and instruments such as Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination against Women, which has been ratified on the 25th June, 1993 by the Government of India.

The Criminal Law (Amendment) Act, 2013 introduced changes to the Indian Penal Code, making sexual harassment an expressed offense under Section 354 A, which is punishable up to three years of imprisonment and or with fine. The Amendment also introduced new sections making acts like disrobing a woman without consent, stalking and sexual acts by person in authority an offense.

====Israel====
The 1998 Israeli Sexual Harassment Law interprets sexual harassment broadly, and prohibits the behavior as a discriminatory practice, a restriction of liberty, an offense to human dignity, a violation of every person&#x27;s right to elementary respect, and an infringement of the right to privacy. Additionally, the law prohibits intimidation or retaliation thus related to sexual harassment are defined by the law as &quot;prejudicial treatment&quot;.

====Japan====
The Department of Labor received 11,289 consultations regarding sexual harassment (approximately 60% from female workers, 5% from male workers, and 35% from others) in 2014. However, given the generally low rate of reported sexual offenders (about 10%), the dark figure of sexual harassers is believed to be substantial, with 34.7% of full-time employees experiencing sexual harassment, according to the Japan Institute for Labor Policy and Training.

It appeared most dramatically in Japanese discourse in 1989, when a court case in Fukuoka ruled in favor of a woman who had been subjected to the spreading of sexual rumors by a co-worker. When the case was first reported, it spawned a flurry of public interest: 10 books were published, including English-language feminist guidebooks to &#x27;how not to harass women&#x27; texts for men. Sekuhara was named 1989&#x27;s &#x27;Word of the Year&#x27;. The case was resolved in the victim&#x27;s favor in 1992, awarding her about $13,000 in damages, the first sexual harassment lawsuit in Japanese history. Laws then established two forms of sexual harassment: &quot;taika-gata&quot;, in which rewards or penalties are explicitly linked to sexual acts, and &quot;kankyo-gata&quot;, in which the environment is made unpleasant through sexual talk or jokes, touching, or hanging sexually explicit posters. This applies to everyone in an office, including customers.

====Malaysia====
In Malaysia, sexual harassment as defined by the Employment Act 1955 , is &quot;any unwanted conduct of a sexual nature, whether verbal, non-verbal, visual, gestural or physical, directed at a person which is offensive, humiliating or a threat to their well-being&quot;. The Act does not distinguish between male and female or employer and employee. As such, sexual harassment can be committed by a female against a male, or an employee against an employer.

Sexual harassment is common, and since 2010 trains on the Malaysian Railway have included pink-colored women-only cars as a means of cutting down on it. There are also women-only buses in Kuala Lumpur since 2010. In 2011, the government launched a women-only taxi service in the greater Kuala Lumpur area. The taxis have women drivers, and operate on an on-call basis.

==== New Zealand ====
In 2018, Statistics New Zealand published the Survey of Working Life findings, which queried employed individuals about their work schedules, employment circumstances, and level of job satisfaction and work-life balance. 9% of males and 14% of women reported having dealt with bullying, harassment, or discrimination at work in the preceding year. Any invitation for sexual activity, whether direct or indirect, is considered sexual harassment according to the Employment Relations Act of 2000.  The individual harassing the victim may be a boss, an employee, a volunteer, a coworker, an employer&#x27;s representative, or even a customer, contractor, or supplier who is not an employee.

Health and Safety at Work Act 2015, the duties of PCBU (person undertaking a business or undertaking) responsibility according to the act 36, subpart 2, Duties of PCBU is

·       “The provision and maintenance of a work environment that is without risks to health and safety”; and

·       “The provision and maintenance of safe plant and structures”; and

·       “The provision and maintenance of safe systems of work”; and

·       “The safe use, handling, and storage of plants, substances, and structures”.

As per the Employment Relations Act 2000, it is possible for you to file a personal grievance. A worker may file a personal grievance against their employer. You have 12 months from the date when the assault happened or became aware of your knowledge, whichever comes first.

Employment Relations (Extended Time for Personal Grievance for Sexual Harassment) Amendment Act 2023 and, section 54 amended states, an explanation in simple terms of the resources that are available for resolving issues with relationships at work, in relation to the 12-month period that must pass before filing a personal grievance under section 114(1) if the grievance relates to sexual harassment under section 103(1)(d).

Human Rights Act 1993 under 62 sexual harassment states that, in the course of engaging in any of the activities covered by the provisions of subsection (3), it is illegal for anyone to ask another person for sexual relations, sexual contact, or any other type of sexual activity when doing so contains an implicit or overt guarantee of favorable treatment. During one&#x27;s engagement in each of the areas where subsection (3) applies, it is forbidden for an individual to subject another individual to the conduct of the actions that follow:

(a) a conduct that is unwanted or offensive to that individual (regardless of whether that is communicated to the first-mentioned individual); and

(b) an act that is either repeated or of a significant nature as to negatively impact that individual in relation to any of the regions where subsection (3) applies.

==== Pakistan ====
Pakistan introduced the &quot;Protection Against Harassment of Women at the Workplace Act&quot; in 2010. This law defines the act of harassment as. &quot;[A]ny unwelcome sexual advance, request for sexual favors or other verbal or written communication or physical conduct of a sexual nature or sexually demeaning attitude, causing interference with work performance or creating an intimidating, hostile or offensive work environment, or the attempt to punish the complainant for refusal to such a request or is made a condition for employment.&quot; Pakistan adopted a Code of Conduct for Gender Justice in the Workplace that will deal with cases of sexual harassment. The Alliance Against Sexual Harassment (AASHA) announced they would be working with the committee to establish guidelines for the proceedings. AASHA defines sexual harassment similarly to the United States.

====Philippines====
The Anti-Sexual Harassment Act of 1995 was enacted:

primarily to protect and respect the dignity of workers, employees, and applicants for employment as well as students in educational institutions or training centers. This law, consisting of ten sections, provides for a clear definition of work, education or training-related sexual harassment and specifies the acts constituting sexual harassment. It likewise provides for the duties and liabilities of the employer in cases of sexual harassment, and sets penalties for violations of its provisions. A victim of sexual harassment is not barred from filing a separate and independent action for damages and other relief aside from filing the charge for sexual harassment.

Assistant Solicitor General Derek Puertollano was dismissed from service over 3 administrative charges for violations of RA 7877 &quot;The Anti-Sexual Harassment Act of 1995&quot; filed by a complaint from his legal interns. He was convicted of the grave offense of sexual harassment through unwanted touching of private part of the body, and the less grave offenses of sexual harassment through unwanted touching or brushing against a victim&#x27;s body, and through surreptitiously looking at a person&#x27;s private part. &quot;These harrowing incidents left complainants traumatized, scarring them both for life,” said Lucas Bersamin in his decision dated February 20, 2024. Menardo Guevarra appointed an OIC to the vacated legal division.

===United States===
====Evolution of sexual harassment law====
=====Workplace=====
In the United States, the Civil Rights Act of 1964 prohibits employment discrimination based on race, sex, color, national origin or religion. was initially intended to only combat sexual harassment of women, but the prohibition of sex discrimination covers both men and women. This discrimination occurs when the sex of the worker is made as a condition of employment (i.e. all female waitpersons or male carpenters) or where this is a job requirement that does not mention sex but ends up preventing many more persons of one sex than the other from the job (such as height and weight limits). This act only applies to employers with 15 or more employees.

&quot;Barnes v. Train&quot; (1974) is commonly viewed as the first sexual harassment case in America, even though the term &quot;sexual harassment&quot; was not used. In 1976, &quot;Williams v. Saxbe&quot; established sexual harassment as a form of sex discrimination when sexual advances by a male supervisor towards a female employee, if proven, would be deemed an artificial barrier to employment placed before one gender and not another. In 1980 the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) issued regulations defining sexual harassment and stating it was a form of sex discrimination prohibited by the Civil Rights Act of 1964. In the 1986 case of &quot;Meritor Savings Bank v. Vinson&quot;, the Supreme Court first recognized &quot;sexual harassment&quot; as a violation of Title VII, established the standards for analyzing whether the conduct was welcome and levels of employer liability, and that speech or conduct in itself can create a &quot;hostile environment&quot;. This case filed by Mechelle Vinson ruled that the sexual conduct between the subordinate and supervisor could not be deemed voluntary due to the hierarchical relationship between the two positions in the workplace. Following the ruling in &quot;Meritor Savings Bank v. Vinson&quot;, reported sexual harassment cases grew from 10 cases being registered by the EEOC per year before 1986 to 624 case being reported in the subsequent following year. This number of reported cases to the EEOC rose to 2,217 in 1990 and then 4,626 by 1995.

The Civil Rights Act of 1991 added provisions to Title VII protections including expanding the rights of women to sue and collect compensatory and punitive damages for sexual discrimination or harassment, and the case of &quot;Ellison v. Brady&quot; (US Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit – 924 F.2d 872 (9th Cir. 1991)) resulted in rejecting the reasonable person standard in favor of the &quot;reasonable woman standard&quot; which allowed for cases to be analyzed from the perspective of the complainant and not the defendant. However, some legal scholars have argued this does not go far enough and that the reasonable person standard also needs to take intersectionality into account. Also in 1991, &quot;Jenson v. Eveleth Taconite Co.&quot; became the first sexual harassment case to be given class action status paving the way for others. Seven years later, in 1998, through that same case, new precedents were established that increased the limits on the &quot;discovery&quot; process in sexual harassment cases, that then allowed psychological injuries from the litigation process to be included in assessing damages awards. In the same year, the courts concluded in &quot;Faragher v. City of Boca Raton, Florida&quot;, and &quot;Burlington v. Ellerth&quot;, that employers are liable for harassment by their employees. Moreover, &quot;Oncale v. Sundowner Offshore Services&quot; set the precedent for same-sex harassment, and sexual harassment without motivation of &quot;sexual desire&quot;, stating that any discrimination based on sex is actionable so long as it places the victim in an objectively disadvantageous working condition, regardless of the gender of either the victim, or the harasser.

In the 2006 case of &quot;Burlington Northern &amp; Santa Fe Railway Co. v. White&quot;, the standard for retaliation against a sexual harassment complainant was revised to include any adverse employment decision or treatment that would be likely to dissuade a &quot;reasonable worker&quot; from making or supporting a charge of discrimination.

During 2007 alone, the U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission and related state agencies received 12,510 new charges of sexual harassment on the job. In &quot;Astra USA v. Bildman&quot;, 914 N.E.2d 36 (Mass. 2009), applying New York&#x27;s faithless servant doctrine, the court held that a company&#x27;s employee who had engaged in financial misdeeds and sexual harassment must &quot;forfeit all of his salary and bonuses for the period of disloyalty.&quot; The court held that this was the case even if the employee &quot;otherwise performed valuable services&quot;, and that the employee was not entitled to recover restitution for the value of those other services.

The 2010 case, &quot;Reeves v. C.H. Robinson Worldwide, Inc.&quot; ruled that a hostile work environment can be created in a workplace where sexually explicit language and pornography are present. A hostile workplace may exist even if it is not targeted at any particular employee.

From 2010 through 2016, approximately 17% of sexual harassment complaints filed with the EEOC were made by men.

=====Education=====
Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972 (United States) states &quot;No person in the United States shall, on the basis of sex, be excluded from participation in, be denied the benefits of, or be subjected to discrimination under any education program or activity receiving Federal financial assistance.&quot;

In &quot;Franklin v. Gwinnett County Public Schools&quot; (1992), the U.S. Supreme Court held that private citizens could collect damage awards when teachers sexually harassed their students. In &quot;Bethel School District No. 403 v. Fraser&quot; (1986), the courts ruled that schools have the power to discipline students if they use &quot;obscene, profane language or gestures&quot; which could be viewed as substantially interfering with the educational process, and inconsistent with the &quot;fundamental values of public school education&quot;. Under regulations issued in 1997 by the U.S. Department of Education, which administers Title IX, school districts should be held responsible for harassment by educators if the harasser &quot;was aided in carrying out the sexual harassment of students by his or her position of authority with the institution.&quot; In &quot;Davis v. Monroe County Board of Education&quot;, and &quot;Murrell v. School Dist. No. 1&quot;, 1999, schools were assigned liability for peer-to-peer sexual harassment if the plaintiff sufficiently demonstrated that the administration&#x27;s response shows &quot;deliberate indifference&quot; to &quot;actual knowledge&quot; of discrimination.

====Additionally====
There are a number of legal options for a complainant in the U.S.: mediation, filing with the EEOC or filing a claim under a state Fair Employment Practices (FEP) statute (both are for workplace sexual harassment), filing a common law tort, etc. Not all sexual harassment will be considered severe enough to form the basis for a legal claim. However, most often there are several types of harassing behaviors present, and there is no minimum level for harassing conduct under the law. The section below &quot;EEOC Definition&quot; describes the legal definitions that have been created for sexual harassment in the workplace. Definitions similar to the EEOC definition have been created for academic environments in the U.S. Department of Education Sexual Harassment Guidance.

====EEOC Definition====
The Equal Employment Opportunity Commission claims that it is unlawful to harass an applicant or employee of any sex in the workplace. The harassment could include sexual harassment. The EEOC says that the victim and harasser could be any gender and that the other does not have to be of the opposite sex. The law does not ban offhand comments, simple teasing, or incidents that are not very serious. If the harassment gets to the point where it creates a harsh work environment, it will be taken care of. In 1980, the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission produced a set of guidelines for defining and enforcing Title VII (in 1984 it was expanded to include educational institutions). The EEOC defines sexual harassment as:

Unwelcome sexual advances, requests for sexual favors, or other verbal or physical conduct of a sexual nature when:

# Submission to such conduct was made either explicitly or implicitly a term or condition of an individual&#x27;s employment,
# Submission to or rejection of such conduct by an individual was used as the basis for employment decisions affecting such individual, or
# Such conduct has the purpose or effect of unreasonably interfering with an individual&#x27;s work performance or creating an intimidating, hostile, or offensive working environment.

1. and 2. are called &quot;quid pro quo&quot; (Latin for &quot;this for that&quot; or &quot;something for something&quot;). They are essentially &quot;sexual bribery&quot;, or promising of benefits, and &quot;sexual coercion&quot;.

Type 3. known as &quot;hostile work environment&quot;, is by far the most common form. This form is less clear cut and is more subjective.

Note: A workplace harassment complainant &quot;must&quot; file with the EEOC and receive a &quot;right to sue&quot; clearance, before they can file a lawsuit against a company in federal court.

=====&quot;Quid pro quo&quot; sexual harassment=====
Quid pro quo means &quot;this for that&quot;. In the workplace, this occurs when a job benefit is directly tied to an employee submitting to unwelcome sexual advances. For example, a supervisor promises an employee a raise if he or she will go out on a date with him or her, or tells an employee he or she will be fired if he or she does not sleep with him or her. Quid pro quo harassment also occurs when an employee makes an evaluative decision, or provides or withholds professional opportunities based on another employee&#x27;s submission to verbal, nonverbal or physical conduct of a sexual nature. Quid pro quo harassment is equally unlawful whether the victim resists and suffers the threatened harm or submits and thus avoids the threatened harm.

===== Hostile environment sexual harassment=====
This occurs when an employee is subjected to comments of a sexual nature, unwelcome physical contact, or offensive sexual materials as a regular part of the work environment. For the most part, a single isolated incident will not be enough to prove hostile environment harassment unless it involves extremely outrageous and egregious conduct. The courts will try to decide whether the conduct is both &quot;serious&quot; and &quot;frequent&quot;. Supervisors, managers, co-workers and even customers can be responsible for creating a hostile environment.

The line between &quot;quid pro quo&quot; and &quot;hostile environment&quot; harassment is not always clear and the two forms of harassment often occur together. For example, an employee&#x27;s job conditions are affected when a sexually hostile work environment results in a constructive discharge. At the same time, a supervisor who makes sexual advances toward a subordinate employee may communicate an implicit threat to retaliate against her if she does not comply.

&quot;Hostile environment&quot; harassment may acquire characteristics of &quot;quid pro quo&quot; harassment if the offending supervisor abuses his authority over employment decisions to force the victim to endure or participate in the sexual conduct. Sexual harassment may culminate in a retaliatory discharge if a victim tells the harasser or her employer she will no longer submit to the harassment, and is then fired in retaliation for this protest. Under these circumstances it would be appropriate to conclude that both harassment and retaliation in violation of section 704(a) of Title VII have occurred.

=====Sexual orientation discrimination=====
In the United States, there are no federal laws prohibiting discrimination against employees based on their sexual orientation. However, Executive Order 13087, signed by President Bill Clinton, outlaws discrimination based on sexual orientation against federal government employees. If a small business owner owns his or her business in a state where there is a law against sexual orientation discrimination, the owner must abide to the law regardless of there not being a federal law. Twenty states and the District of Columbia have laws against this form of discrimination in the workplace. These states include California, Connecticut, Colorado, Hawaii, Illinois, Iowa, Maine, Maryland, Massachusetts, Minnesota, Nevada, New Hampshire, New Jersey, New Mexico, New York, Oregon, Rhode Island, Vermont, Washington, and Wisconsin. For example, California has laws in place to protect employees who may have been discriminated against based upon sexual orientation or perceived sexual orientation. California law prohibits discrimination against those &quot;with traits not stereotypically associated with their gender&quot;, such as mannerisms, appearance, or speech. Sexual orientation discrimination comes up, for instance, when employers enforce a dress code, permit women to wear makeup but not men, or require men and women to only use restrooms designated for their particular sex regardless of whether they are transgender.

=====Retaliation=====
Retaliation has occurred when an employee suffers a &quot;negative action&quot; after he or she has made a report of sexual harassment, file a grievance, assist someone else with a complaint, or participate in discrimination prevention activities. Negative actions can include being fired, demotion, suspension, denial of promotion, poor evaluation, unfavorable job reassignment—any adverse employment decision or treatment that would be likely to dissuade a &quot;reasonable worker&quot; from making or supporting a charge of discrimination. (See &quot;Burlington Northern &amp; Santa Fe Railway Co. v. White&quot;.) Retaliation is as illegal as the sexual harassment itself, but also as difficult to prove. Also, retaliation is illegal even if the original charge of sexual harassment was not proven.

=====New Jersey=====
New Jersey was historically known to have one of the strongest anti-sexual harassment laws in the United States. The Law Against Discrimination used to hold an employer liable if the sexual harassment was done by a member of upper-level management. In 2015, the New Jersey Supreme Court modified the precedence in the State of New Jersey and prevented the company from being liable if they had a well-published and enforced anti-harassment policy. Accordingly, if a policy existed and was enforced, the victim or witness to the sexual harassment would need to complain about the conduct. The company would not be liable if they investigate the matter and take some remedial measures to make sure that the harassment stops. The company only becomes liable if the activity occurs again. (See &quot;Aguas v. NJ&quot;.)

=====Military=====
In January 2022, sexual harassment was made illegal under U.S. military law under an executive order by president Joe Biden.

== Criticism ==
Though the phrase &quot;sexual harassment&quot; is generally acknowledged to include clearly damaging and morally deplorable behavior, its boundaries can be broad and controversial. Accordingly, misunderstandings can occur. In the US, sexual harassment law has been criticized by persons such as the criminal defense lawyer Alan Dershowitz and the legal writer and libertarian Eugene Volokh, for imposing limits on the right to free speech.

Jana Rave, professor in organizational studies at the Queen&#x27;s School of Business, criticized sexual harassment policy in the &quot;Ottawa Business Journal&quot; as helping maintain archaic stereotypes of women as &quot;delicate, asexual creatures&quot; who require special protection when at the same time complaints are lowering company profits. Camille Paglia says that young girls can end up acting in such ways as to make sexual harassment easier, such that for example, by acting &quot;nice&quot; they can become a target. Paglia commented in an interview with &quot;Playboy&quot;, &quot;Realize the degree to which your niceness may invoke people to say lewd and pornographic things to you—sometimes to violate your niceness. The more you blush, the more people want to do it.&quot;

Other critics assert that sexual harassment is a very serious problem, but current views focus too heavily on sexuality rather than on the type of conduct that undermines the ability of women or men to work together effectively. Viki Shultz, a law professor at Yale University comments, &quot;Many of the most prevalent forms of harassment are designed to maintain work—particularly the more highly rewarded lines of work—as bastions of male competence and authority.&quot; Feminist Jane Gallop sees this evolution of the definition of sexual harassment as coming from a &quot;split&quot; between what she calls &quot;power feminists&quot; who are pro-sex (like herself) and what she calls &quot;victim feminists&quot;, who are not. She argues that the split has helped lead to a &quot;perversion&quot; of the definition of sexual harassment, which used to be about sexism but has come to be about anything that is sexual.

There is also concern over abuses of sexual harassment policy by individuals as well as by employers and administrators using false or frivolous accusations as a way of expelling employees they want to eliminate for other reasons. These employees often have virtually no recourse thanks to the at-will law in most US states.

O&#x27;Donohue and Bowers outlined 14 possible pathways to false allegations of sexual harassment: &quot;lying, borderline personality disorder, histrionic personality disorder, psychosis, gender prejudice, substance abuse, dementia, false memories, false interpretations, biased interviews, sociopathy, personality disorders not otherwise specified.&quot;

There is also discussion of whether some recent trends towards more revealing clothing and permissive habits have created a more sexualized general environment, in which some forms of communication are unfairly labeled harassment, but are simply a reaction to greater sexualization in everyday environments.

There are many debates about how organizations should deal with sexual harassment. Some observers feel strongly that organizations should be held to a zero tolerance standard of &quot;Must report—must investigate—must punish.&quot;

Others write that those who feel harassed should in most circumstances have a choice of options.

Sexual harassment laws may also be used unfairly applied in effect. Unsolicited sexual advances were considered more disturbing and more discomforting when perpetrated by an unattractive opposite sex colleague than when perpetrated by an attractive opposite sex colleague.

== In media and literature ==

* &quot;678&quot;, a film focusing on the sexual harassment of women in Egypt
* &quot;9 to 5&quot;, a comedy film starring Jane Fonda, Lily Tomlin, and Dolly Parton, about three women who are subjected to constant bullying and sexual harassment by their boss.
* In the pilot episode of the US comedy series &quot;Ally McBeal&quot;, Ally leaves her job at her first firm because of unwanted attention from and groping by a male co-worker.
* &quot;The Ballad of Little Jo&quot;, a film based on the true story of a woman living in the frontier west who disguises herself as a man to protect herself from the sexual harassment and abuse of women all too common in that environment
* &quot;Bombshell&quot;, a 2019 film based upon the accounts of the women at Fox News who set out to expose CEO Roger Ailes for sexual harassment.
* &quot;Disclosure&quot;, a film starring Michael Douglas and Demi Moore in which a man is sexually harassed by his female superior, who tries to use the situation to destroy his career by claiming that he was the sexual harasser
* &quot;Disgrace&quot;, a novel about a South African literature professor whose career is ruined after he has an affair with a student.
* The Fox television musical-drama show &quot;Glee&quot; deals with issues around sexual harassment in the episodes &quot;The Power of Madonna&quot;, &quot;Never Been Kissed&quot; and &quot;The First Time&quot;.
* &quot;Hostile Advances: The Kerry Ellison Story&quot;: television movie about &quot;Ellison v. Brady&quot;, the case that set the &quot;reasonable woman&quot; precedent in sexual harassment law
* The 1961 musical &quot;How to Succeed in Business Without Really Trying&quot; deals with themes of both consensual office romance and unwelcome sexual harassment; one man is fired for making a pass at the wrong woman, and another man is warned via a song called &quot;A Secretary is Not a Toy&quot;.
* &quot;Hunter&#x27;s Moon&quot;, a novel by Karen Robards, deals with a female&#x27;s experience of sexual harassment in the workplace.
* &quot;In the Company of Men&quot;, a film about two male coworkers who, angry at women, plot to seduce and maliciously toy with the emotions of a deaf subordinate who works at the same company
* The AMC television drama show &quot;Mad Men&quot;, set in the 1960s, depicts sexual harassment and coercive behavior.
* &quot;The Magdalene Sisters&quot;, a film based on the true stories of young women imprisoned for &quot;bringing shame upon their families&quot; by being raped, sexually abused, flirting, or simply being pretty, and subsequently subjected to sexual harassment and abuse by the nuns and priests in the Magdalene asylums in Ireland.
* &quot;Les Misérables&quot;, a musical based on the novel by Victor Hugo. The character Fantine is fired from her job after refusing to have sex with her supervisor.
* &quot;North Country&quot;, a 2005 film depicting a fictionalized account of &quot;Jenson v. Eveleth Taconite Co.&quot;, the first sexual harassment class action lawsuit in the US.
* &quot;Oleanna&quot;, an American play by David Mamet, later a film starring William H. Macy. A college professor is accused of sexual harassment by a student. The film deals with the moral controversy as it never becomes clear which character is correct.
* &quot;Pretty Persuasion&quot;, a film starring Evan Rachel Wood and James Woods in which students turn the tables on a lecherous and bigoted teacher. A scathingly satirical film of sexual harassment and discrimination in schools, and attitudes towards females in media and society.
* &quot;War Zone&quot;, a documentary about street harassment
* Commander Jeffrey Gordon, a military spokesman at Guantanamo Bay, complained that a reporter had been sexually harassing him.

== See also ==

== References ==
=== Citations ===
=== Sources ===

* Boland, Mary L. &quot;Sexual Harassment: Your Guide to Legal Action &quot;. Naperville, Illinois: Sphinx Publishing, 2002. .
== Further reading ==
* 
* Coburn, Jennifer. (1995). &quot;Take Back Your Power: A Working Woman&#x27;s Response to Sexual Harassment&quot;. ism press. 
* Drawing the Line: Sexual Harassment on Campus. American Association of University Women. 2006.
* Hostile Hallways: Bullying, Teasing, and Sexual Harassment in School. American Association of University Women. 2002.
* Dromm, Keith (2012). &quot;Sexual Harassment: An Introduction to the Conceptual and Ethical Issues&quot;. Broadview Press. .
* Friedman, Gabrielle S., and James Q. Whitman. &quot;The European transformation of harassment law: discrimination versus dignity.&quot; &quot;Columbia Journal of European Law&quot; 9 (2002): 241+.
* LaLonde, Jane; O&#x27;Shea, Tracy (1998). &quot;Sexual Harassment: A Practical Guide to the Law, Your Rights, and Your Options for Taking Action&quot;. St. Martin&#x27;s Griffin. .
* MacKinnon, Catharine A. (1979). &quot;Sexual Harassment of Working Women: A Case of Sex Discrimination&quot;. Yale University Press. .
* 
* Morewitz, Stephen J. (1996). Sexual Harassment and Social Change in American Society. Lanham, MD: Austin &amp; Winfield, Publishers, University Press of America, Inc., Rowman &amp; Littlefield Pub. Group. ISBN 978-1880921760
* Patai, Daphne. &quot;Heterophobia: Sexual Harassment and the Future of Feminism&quot;. Lanham: Rowman and Littlefield, 1999. .
* Pina, Afroditi, and Theresa A. Gannon. &quot;An overview of the literature on antecedents, perceptions and behavioural consequences of sexual harassment.&quot; &quot;Journal of Sexual Aggression&quot; 18.2 (2012): 209–232. online
* Roberts, Barry S.; Mann, Richard A. &quot;Sexual Harassment In The Workplace: A Primer&quot; .
* Saguy, Abigail C. (2003). &quot;What is Sexual Harassment: From Capitol Hill to the Sorbonne&quot; (Berkeley. University of California Press, 2003).
*Uggen, Christopher; Powers, Ráchael A.; McLaughlin, Heather; Blackstone, Amy (2021). &quot;&quot;. &quot;Annual Review of Criminology&quot;. 4 (1): 33–51.
* Wadham, John, et al. &quot;Blackstone&#x27;s guide to the Equality Act 2010&quot; (Oxford University Press, 2010) in UK; online.
* Zippel, Kathrin S. &quot;The politics of sexual harassment: A comparative study of the United States, the European Union, and Germany&quot; (Cambridge University Press, 2006).

== External links ==
* U.S. Dept. Of Education Sexual Harassment Resources
* Committee for Children: Bullying and sexual harassment in schools</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q751722" start="0" end="17" title="Sexual harassment" label="Sexual harassment"/>
<link wikidata="Q3240539" start="31" end="41" title="harassment" label="harassment"/>
<link wikidata="Q608" start="399" end="412" title="sexual favors" label="sexual favors"/>
<link wikidata="Q43414" start="619" end="631" title="sexual abuse" label="sexual abuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q673281" start="635" end="642" title="sexual assault" label="assault"/>
<link wikidata="Q48277" start="802" end="808" title="gender" label="gender"/>
<link wikidata="Q2606784" start="1470" end="1495" title="employment discrimination" label="employment discrimination"/>
<link wikidata="Q528159" start="1900" end="1919" title="Catharine MacKinnon" label="Catharine MacKinnon"/>
<link wikidata="Q106588751" start="2204" end="2213" title="Mary Rowe" label="Mary Rowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q49108" start="2323" end="2360" title="Massachusetts Institute of Technology" label="Massachusetts Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q49115" start="2680" end="2698" title="Cornell University" label="Cornell University"/>
<link wikidata="Q13562992" start="2711" end="2721" title="Lin Farley" label="Lin Farley"/>
<link wikidata="Q434521" start="3212" end="3229" title="Susan Brownmiller" label="Susan Brownmiller"/>
<link wikidata="Q56778948" start="3310" end="3332" title="Carmita Dickerson Wood" label="Carmita Dickerson Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q56778948" start="3712" end="3732" title="Working Women United" label="Working Women United"/>
<link wikidata="Q110852790" start="3756" end="3788" title="Alliance Against Sexual Coercion" label="Alliance Against Sexual Coercion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5494136" start="3809" end="3821" title="Freada Klein" label="Freada Klein"/>
<link wikidata="Q585962" start="4116" end="4157" title="Civil Rights Act of 1964" label="Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964"/>
<link wikidata="Q16954510" start="4877" end="4893" title="Bundy v. Jackson" label="Bundy v. Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641851" start="4921" end="4942" title="United States courts of appeals" label="federal appeals court"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="5041" end="5054" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q6819556" start="5089" end="5119" title="Meritor Savings Bank v. Vinson" label="Meritor Savings Bank v. Vinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4720519" start="5167" end="5184" title="Alexander v. Yale" label="Alexander v. Yale"/>
<link wikidata="Q3133007" start="5308" end="5316" title="Title IX" label="Title IX"/>
<link wikidata="Q6180008" start="5378" end="5408" title="Jenson v. Eveleth Taconite Co." label="Jenson v. Eveleth Taconite Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q5531002" start="6234" end="6249" title="gender policing" label="gender policing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2672163" start="6310" end="6322" title="Gender role" label="gender roles"/>
<link wikidata="Q110623968" start="6346" end="6362" title="Katherine Franke" label="Katherine Franke"/>
<link wikidata="Q9332" start="7650" end="7658" title="behavior" label="behavior"/>
<link wikidata="Q123414" start="7852" end="7858" title="stress (biology)" label="stress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136859" start="7863" end="7874" title="humiliation" label="humiliation"/>
<link wikidata="Q16034269" start="11732" end="11747" title="Street harassment" label="street harasser"/>
<link wikidata="Q25107" start="13719" end="13724" title="Power (social and political)" label="power"/>
<link wikidata="Q15177665" start="15270" end="15284" title="sexual harassment in video gaming" label="in video games"/>
<link wikidata="Q3673184" start="15550" end="15589" title="Equal Employment Opportunity Commission" label="Equal Employment Opportunity Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q2850177" start="19571" end="19581" title="Anita Hill" label="Anita Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q452532" start="19613" end="19639" title="United States Senate Committee on the Judiciary" label="Senate Judiciary Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="19648" end="19682" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="Supreme Court of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q11142" start="19691" end="19706" title="Clarence Thomas" label="Clarence Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3673184" start="19892" end="19896" title="Equal Employment Opportunity Commission" label="EEOC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124" start="20628" end="20640" title="Bill Clinton" label="Bill Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q284868" start="21376" end="21388" title="quid pro quo" label="quid pro quo"/>
<link wikidata="Q178651" start="22582" end="22591" title="interview" label="interview"/>
<link wikidata="Q193181" start="22725" end="22733" title="Observation" label="observed"/>
<link wikidata="Q8473" start="25780" end="25788" title="military" label="military"/>
<link wikidata="Q206887" start="25797" end="25805" title="civilian" label="civilian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076509" start="26230" end="26253" title="Masculinity" label="traditionally masculine"/>
<link wikidata="Q221284" start="26359" end="26369" title="conformity" label="conformity"/>
<link wikidata="Q645883" start="26496" end="26514" title="military operation" label="military operation"/>
<link wikidata="Q545449" start="27170" end="27178" title="Iraq War" label="Iraq War"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="27210" end="27217" title="United States Army" label="US army"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="27222" end="27252" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="US Central Intelligence Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q8458" start="27275" end="27298" title="human rights violations" label="human rights violations"/>
<link wikidata="Q334740" start="27324" end="27341" title="Abu Ghraib prison" label="Abu Ghraib prison"/>
<link wikidata="Q47092" start="27353" end="27357" title="rape" label="rape"/>
<link wikidata="Q206426" start="27359" end="27365" title="sodomy" label="sodomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q123414" start="27728" end="27734" title="Stress (biology)" label="stress"/>
<link wikidata="Q12135" start="27743" end="27757" title="Mental disorder" label="mental illness"/>
<link wikidata="Q43414" start="27805" end="27817" title="sexual abuse" label="sexual abuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q654426" start="27850" end="27875" title="Psychological trauma" label="psychiatrically traumatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q202387" start="27904" end="27934" title="Posttraumatic stress disorder" label="post-traumatic stress disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q17884" start="52158" end="52163" title="LGBTQ" label="LGBTQ"/>
<link wikidata="Q159334" start="53440" end="53456" title="secondary school" label="secondary school"/>
<link wikidata="Q996839" start="53526" end="53536" title="fraternity" label="fraternity"/>
<link wikidata="Q879295" start="53679" end="53685" title="hazing" label="hazing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3721" start="53807" end="53825" title="Fraternities and sororities" label="Greek organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q55950666" start="55366" end="55388" title="bystander intervention" label="bystander intervention"/>
<link wikidata="Q17002792" start="56549" end="56558" title="HARASSmap" label="HARASSmap"/>
<link wikidata="Q11759187" start="56563" end="56573" title="Right to Be" label="Hollaback!"/>
<link wikidata="Q11461" start="56798" end="56803" title="Sound" label="audio"/>
<link wikidata="Q34508" start="56814" end="56823" title="Video recording" label="recording"/>
<link wikidata="Q22645" start="56934" end="56944" title="smartphone" label="smartphone"/>
<link wikidata="Q850171" start="56983" end="56996" title="job interview" label="job interview"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404268" start="59586" end="59603" title="stress management" label="stress management"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147152" start="59617" end="59645" title="cognitive-behavioral therapy" label="cognitive-behavioral therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1467001" start="62599" end="62609" title="sexualization" label="sexualized"/>
<link wikidata="Q332278" start="62917" end="62928" title="absenteeism" label="absenteeism"/>
<link wikidata="Q191783" start="62964" end="62974" title="Defamation" label="Defamation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11493441" start="63094" end="63111" title="significant other" label="significant other"/>
<link wikidata="Q123414" start="64338" end="64344" title="stress (biology)" label="stress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136859" start="64349" end="64360" title="humiliation" label="humiliation"/>
<link wikidata="Q42844" start="64362" end="64372" title="Major depressive disorder" label="depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q154430" start="64374" end="64381" title="anxiety" label="anxiety"/>
<link wikidata="Q696490" start="64383" end="64395" title="panic attack" label="panic attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q192692" start="64413" end="64422" title="nightmare" label="nightmare"/>
<link wikidata="Q152282" start="64425" end="64430" title="shame" label="shame"/>
<link wikidata="Q628939" start="64432" end="64437" title="guilt (emotion)" label="guilt"/>
<link wikidata="Q9690" start="64476" end="64483" title="fatigue (physical)" label="fatigue"/>
<link wikidata="Q373822" start="64523" end="64538" title="eating disorder" label="eating disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q15326" start="64571" end="64581" title="alcoholism" label="alcoholism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6010868" start="64753" end="64762" title="Solitude" label="isolation"/>
<link wikidata="Q659974" start="64780" end="64785" title="Trust (sociology)" label="trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q202387" start="64815" end="64845" title="post-traumatic stress disorder" label="post-traumatic stress disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q477502" start="64854" end="64892" title="complex post-traumatic stress disorder" label="complex post-traumatic stress disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q944142" start="64894" end="64911" title="Suicidal ideation" label="suicidal thoughts"/>
<link wikidata="Q10737" start="64929" end="64936" title="suicide" label="suicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q47092" start="65253" end="65257" title="rape" label="rape"/>
<link wikidata="Q1716206" start="65430" end="65444" title="victim blaming" label="victim blaming"/>
<link wikidata="Q207469" start="65616" end="65623" title="mobbing" label="mobbing"/>
<link wikidata="Q8191685" start="65627" end="65648" title="relational aggression" label="relational aggression"/>
<link wikidata="Q204244" start="66166" end="66173" title="shunning" label="shunned"/>
<link wikidata="Q193518" start="66567" end="66575" title="sabotage" label="sabotage"/>
<link wikidata="Q685744" start="66888" end="66893" title="Termination of employment" label="fired"/>
<link wikidata="Q163942" start="66987" end="66995" title="stalking" label="stalking"/>
<link wikidata="Q3242086" start="67000" end="67013" title="cyberstalking" label="cyberstalking"/>
<link wikidata="Q5245941" start="67335" end="67370" title="Sexual harassment in education" label="sexually harassed by their teachers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7252" start="67372" end="67380" title="Feminism" label="feminist"/>
<link wikidata="Q237875" start="67388" end="67398" title="Naomi Wolf" label="Naomi Wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q784843" start="67695" end="67708" title="peer pressure" label="peer pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q2072081" start="69046" end="69060" title="women of color" label="women of color"/>
<link wikidata="Q12332701" start="69191" end="69212" title="racial discrimination" label="racial discrimination"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516555" start="70769" end="70786" title="intersectionality" label="intersectionality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516555" start="72119" end="72136" title="intersectionality" label="intersectionality"/>
<link wikidata="Q831922" start="74282" end="74304" title="organizational climate" label="organizational climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q43414" start="77862" end="77874" title="sexual abuse" label="sexual abuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q673281" start="77878" end="77892" title="sexual assault" label="sexual assault"/>
<link wikidata="Q7748" start="77925" end="77932" title="Law" label="illegal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2606784" start="77933" end="77958" title="employment discrimination" label="employment discrimination"/>
<link wikidata="Q600571" start="77995" end="78000" title="abuse" label="abuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339137" start="78013" end="78032" title="psychological abuse" label="psychological abuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q240126" start="78039" end="78047" title="bullying" label="bullying"/>
<link wikidata="Q612010" start="78054" end="78110" title="Declaration on the Elimination of Violence Against Women" label="Declaration on the Elimination of Violence Against Women"/>
<link wikidata="Q1800556" start="78122" end="78144" title="violence against women" label="violence against women"/>
<link wikidata="Q326124" start="78709" end="78740" title="Directive (European Union)" label="directive in the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="78746" end="78759" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q3673184" start="78766" end="78805" title="Equal Employment Opportunity Commission" label="Equal Employment Opportunity Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q15277986" start="78958" end="78998" title="Vishakha and others v State of Rajasthan" label="Vishakha and others v State of Rajasthan"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="79342" end="79356" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="80199" end="80213" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7458378" start="82000" end="82027" title="Sex Discrimination Act 1984" label="Sex Discrimination Act 1984"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="82575" end="82589" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q326124" start="82602" end="82611" title="Directive (European Union)" label="directive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1697391" start="83445" end="83528" title="Convention on preventing and combating violence against women and domestic violence" label="Convention on preventing and combating violence against women and domestic violence"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="84238" end="84244" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127218" start="84647" end="84670" title="Constitutional Council (France)" label="Supreme Court of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q157" start="85010" end="85027" title="François Hollande" label="François Hollande"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="86655" end="86661" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q747110" start="87346" end="87381" title="Criminal Code of Russia" label="Criminal Code of Russian Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q47092" start="87486" end="87490" title="rape" label="rape"/>
<link wikidata="Q192621" start="87810" end="87829" title="The Daily Telegraph" label="The Daily Telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q5384171" start="90392" end="90414" title="Equality Act 2010" label="the Equality Act 2010."/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="92079" end="92084" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q1615742" start="92534" end="92543" title="Provinces of China" label="provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q822" start="92728" end="92735" title="Lebanon" label="Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422275" start="92858" end="92877" title="Parliament of Lebanon" label="Lebanese Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="93104" end="93109" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q3351858" start="93126" end="93137" title="Eve teasing" label="Eve teasing"/>
<link wikidata="Q477108" start="93681" end="93700" title="Indian constitution" label="Indian constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q213380" start="93875" end="93897" title="Supreme Court of India" label="Supreme Court of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q3610538" start="93903" end="93929" title="Public Interest Litigation" label="Public Interest Litigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7251356" start="94145" end="94238" title="The Sexual Harassment of Women at Workplace (Prevention, Prohibition and Redressal) Act, 2013" label="The Sexual Harassment of Women at Workplace (Prevention, Prohibition and Redressal) Act, 2013"/>
<link wikidata="Q15277986" start="94379" end="94397" title="Vishaka Guidelines" label="Vishaka Guidelines"/>
<link wikidata="Q4320331" start="95693" end="95727" title="Criminal Law (Amendment) Act, 2013" label="Criminal Law (Amendment) Act, 2013"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519479" start="95754" end="95771" title="Indian Penal Code" label="Indian Penal Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265976" start="96809" end="96820" title="Dark figure of crime" label="dark figure"/>
<link wikidata="Q183054" start="98544" end="98559" title="women-only passenger car" label="women-only cars"/>
<link wikidata="Q108550961" start="101643" end="101714" title="Protection Against Harassment of Women at the Workplace Act, 2010" label="&amp;quot;Protection Against Harassment of Women at the Workplace Act&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q85740923" start="102293" end="102327" title="Alliance Against Sexual Harassment" label="Alliance Against Sexual Harassment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2553025" start="103866" end="103880" title="Lucas Bersamin" label="Lucas Bersamin"/>
<link wikidata="Q66221363" start="103922" end="103938" title="Menardo Guevarra" label="Menardo Guevarra"/>
<link wikidata="Q585962" start="104097" end="104121" title="Civil Rights Act of 1964" label="Civil Rights Act of 1964"/>
<link wikidata="Q2606784" start="104132" end="104157" title="employment discrimination" label="employment discrimination"/>
<link wikidata="Q3254959" start="104167" end="104171" title="Race (classification of human beings)" label="race"/>
<link wikidata="Q290" start="104173" end="104176" title="sex" label="sex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075" start="104178" end="104183" title="color" label="color"/>
<link wikidata="Q106432792" start="104185" end="104200" title="national origin" label="national origin"/>
<link wikidata="Q9174" start="104204" end="104212" title="religion" label="religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q93200" start="104303" end="104321" title="sex discrimination" label="sex discrimination"/>
<link wikidata="Q24884619" start="104735" end="104750" title="Barnes v. Train" label="Barnes v. Train"/>
<link wikidata="Q3673184" start="105183" end="105222" title="Equal Employment Opportunity Commission" label="Equal Employment Opportunity Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q6819556" start="105394" end="105424" title="Meritor Savings Bank v. Vinson" label="Meritor Savings Bank v. Vinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404417" start="105621" end="105630" title="legal liability" label="liability"/>
<link wikidata="Q5909451" start="105688" end="105707" title="hostile environment sexual harassment" label="hostile environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q6819556" start="105960" end="105990" title="Meritor Savings Bank v. Vinson" label="Meritor Savings Bank v. Vinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3673184" start="106074" end="106078" title="Equal Employment Opportunity Commission" label="EEOC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5124537" start="106254" end="106278" title="Civil Rights Act of 1991" label="Civil Rights Act of 1991"/>
<link wikidata="Q308922" start="106406" end="106413" title="damages" label="damages"/>
<link wikidata="Q2900682" start="106601" end="106618" title="reasonable person" label="reasonable person"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516555" start="106912" end="106929" title="intersectionality" label="intersectionality"/>
<link wikidata="Q6180008" start="106964" end="106994" title="Jenson v. Eveleth Taconite Co." label="Jenson v. Eveleth Taconite Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q2783852" start="107053" end="107065" title="class action" label="class action"/>
<link wikidata="Q902342" start="107223" end="107232" title="Discovery (law)" label="discovery"/>
<link wikidata="Q697327" start="107325" end="107335" title="litigation" label="litigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q21028478" start="107493" end="107514" title="Burlington v. Ellerth" label="Burlington v. Ellerth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7091751" start="107599" end="107636" title="Oncale v. Sundowner Offshore Services" label="Oncale v. Sundowner Offshore Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q4999263" start="107992" end="108047" title="Burlington Northern &amp;amp; Santa Fe Railway Co. v. White" label="Burlington Northern &amp;amp; Santa Fe Railway Co. v. White"/>
<link wikidata="Q68769534" start="108558" end="108575" title="faithless servant" label="faithless servant"/>
<link wikidata="Q21070984" start="109010" end="109049" title="Reeves v. C.H. Robinson Worldwide, Inc." label="Reeves v. C.H. Robinson Worldwide, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q291" start="109161" end="109172" title="pornography" label="pornography"/>
<link wikidata="Q5909451" start="109188" end="109205" title="hostile workplace" label="hostile workplace"/>
<link wikidata="Q3133007" start="109405" end="109413" title="Title IX" label="Title IX"/>
<link wikidata="Q861556" start="110318" end="110341" title="United States Department of Education" label="Department of Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q3133007" start="110361" end="110369" title="Title IX" label="Title IX"/>
<link wikidata="Q223871" start="111032" end="111041" title="mediation" label="mediation"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="111090" end="111095" title="U.S. state" label="state"/>
<link wikidata="Q158970" start="111200" end="111204" title="tort" label="tort"/>
<link wikidata="Q3673184" start="112286" end="112325" title="Equal Employment Opportunity Commission" label="Equal Employment Opportunity Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q284868" start="113089" end="113101" title="quid pro quo" label="quid pro quo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5909451" start="113318" end="113342" title="hostile work environment" label="hostile work environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q284868" start="115068" end="115080" title="quid pro quo" label="quid pro quo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419881" start="116313" end="116334" title="Executive Order 13087" label="Executive Order 13087"/>
<link wikidata="Q6279" start="119405" end="119414" title="Joe Biden" label="Joe Biden"/>
<link wikidata="Q512345" start="119733" end="119756" title="criminal defense lawyer" label="criminal defense lawyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q183058" start="119757" end="119772" title="Alan Dershowitz" label="Alan Dershowitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q178598" start="119798" end="119809" title="Libertarianism" label="libertarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3953757" start="119810" end="119823" title="Eugene Volokh" label="Eugene Volokh"/>
<link wikidata="Q22692" start="119861" end="119872" title="free speech" label="free speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q105424537" start="119929" end="119960" title="Queen&amp;#x27;s School of Business" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s School of Business"/>
<link wikidata="Q7109149" start="120011" end="120034" title="Ottawa Business Journal" label="Ottawa Business Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q255463" start="120227" end="120241" title="Camille Paglia" label="Camille Paglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q150820" start="120452" end="120459" title="Playboy" label="Playboy"/>
<link wikidata="Q49112" start="120931" end="120946" title="Yale University" label="Yale University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6152257" start="121153" end="121164" title="Jane Gallop" label="Jane Gallop"/>
<link wikidata="Q25047618" start="121288" end="121302" title="power feminist" label="power feminist"/>
<link wikidata="Q13411011" start="121318" end="121325" title="pro-sex" label="pro-sex"/>
<link wikidata="Q25047618" start="121366" end="121381" title="victim feminist" label="victim feminist"/>
<link wikidata="Q4812279" start="121888" end="121895" title="at-will" label="at-will"/>
<link wikidata="Q758234" start="123092" end="123104" title="Physical attraction" label="unattractive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335092" start="123231" end="123234" title="678 (film)" label="678"/>
<link wikidata="Q1466657" start="123309" end="123315" title="9 to 5 (film)" label="9 to 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q41142" start="123346" end="123356" title="Jane Fonda" label="Jane Fonda"/>
<link wikidata="Q229271" start="123358" end="123369" title="Lily Tomlin" label="Lily Tomlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q180453" start="123375" end="123387" title="Dolly Parton" label="Dolly Parton"/>
<link wikidata="Q244803" start="123536" end="123547" title="Ally McBeal" label="Ally McBeal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072616" start="123632" end="123639" title="groping" label="groping"/>
<link wikidata="Q1784664" start="123669" end="123692" title="The Ballad of Little Jo" label="The Ballad of Little Jo"/>
<link wikidata="Q14947899" start="123756" end="123769" title="American Old West" label="frontier west"/>
<link wikidata="Q58814589" start="123909" end="123918" title="Bombshell (2019 film)" label="Bombshell"/>
<link wikidata="Q186068" start="123978" end="123986" title="Fox News" label="Fox News"/>
<link wikidata="Q983981" start="124013" end="124024" title="Roger Ailes" label="Roger Ailes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330619" start="124056" end="124066" title="Disclosure (1994 film)" label="Disclosure"/>
<link wikidata="Q119798" start="124090" end="124105" title="Michael Douglas" label="Michael Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q43044" start="124110" end="124120" title="Demi Moore" label="Demi Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q958560" start="124286" end="124294" title="Disgrace (novel)" label="Disgrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q152178" start="124461" end="124465" title="Glee (TV series)" label="Glee"/>
<link wikidata="" start="124635" end="124676" title="Hostile Advances: The Kerry Ellison Story" label="Hostile Advances: The Kerry Ellison Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631702" start="124848" end="124896" title="How to Succeed in Business Without Really Trying (musical)" label="How to Succeed in Business Without Really Trying"/>
<link wikidata="Q6369994" start="125170" end="125183" title="Karen Robards" label="Karen Robards"/>
<link wikidata="Q2307324" start="125270" end="125291" title="In the Company of Men" label="In the Company of Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q294660" start="125463" end="125477" title="AMC (TV channel)" label="AMC television"/>
<link wikidata="Q223977" start="125495" end="125502" title="Mad Men" label="Mad Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q606723" start="125585" end="125606" title="The Magdalene Sisters" label="The Magdalene Sisters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346041" start="125880" end="125896" title="Magdalene asylum" label="Magdalene asylum"/>
<link wikidata="Q830581" start="125918" end="125932" title="Les Misérables (musical)" label="Les Misérables"/>
<link wikidata="Q535" start="125972" end="125983" title="Victor Hugo" label="Victor Hugo"/>
<link wikidata="Q774810" start="125999" end="126006" title="Fantine" label="Fantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q725423" start="126085" end="126098" title="North Country (film)" label="North Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q6180008" start="126161" end="126191" title="Jenson v. Eveleth Taconite Co." label="Jenson v. Eveleth Taconite Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q3350266" start="126267" end="126274" title="Oleanna (play)" label="Oleanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q269927" start="126302" end="126313" title="David Mamet" label="David Mamet"/>
<link wikidata="Q224159" start="126337" end="126352" title="William H. Macy" label="William H. Macy"/>
<link wikidata="Q638799" start="126524" end="126541" title="Pretty Persuasion" label="Pretty Persuasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q229230" start="126565" end="126581" title="Evan Rachel Wood" label="Evan Rachel Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q193105" start="126586" end="126597" title="James Woods" label="James Woods"/>
<link wikidata="Q7968563" start="126808" end="126816" title="War Zone (film)" label="War Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q6175930" start="126874" end="126888" title="Jeffrey D. Gordon" label="Jeffrey Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q123486400" start="128583" end="128600" title="Theresa Gannon" label="Theresa A. Gannon"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="236333" wikidata="Q6616854" url="?curid=236333" title="List of diseases (B)">
<text>This is a list of diseases starting with the letter &quot;B&quot;.

==Ba==
===Bab–Bam===
* Baber&#x27;s syndrome
* Babesiosis
* &quot;Bacillus cereus&quot; infection
* Bacterial endocarditis
* Bacterial food poisoning
* Bacterial gastroenteritis
* Bacterial meningitis
* Bacterial pneumonia
* Bacterial vaginosis
* Bagatelle–Cassidy syndrome
* Bahemuka–Brown syndrome
* Baker–Vinters syndrome
* Baker–Winegard syndrome
* Balantidiasis
* Ballard syndrome
* Ballistophobia
* Balo disease
* Balo&#x27;s concentric sclerosis
* Bamforth syndrome

===Ban===
* BANF acoustic neurinoma
* Bangstad syndrome
* Banki syndrome
* Bannayan–Zonana syndrome
* Banti&#x27;s syndrome
* Bantu siderosis

===Bar===
* Baraitser–Brett–Piesowicz syndrome
* Baraitser–Rodeck–Garner syndrome
* Barber–Say syndrome
* Barbiturate dependence
* Barbiturate overdose
* Bardet–Biedl syndrome
:* Bardet–Biedl syndrome, type 1
:* Bardet–Biedl syndrome, type 2
:* Bardet–Biedl syndrome, type 3
:* Bardet–Biedl syndrome, type 4
* Bare lymphocyte syndrome 2
* Bare lymphocyte syndrome
* Baritosis
* Barnicoat–Baraitser syndrome
* Barrett syndrome
* Barrow–Fitzsimmons syndrome
* Barth syndrome
* Bartonella infections
* Bartsocas–Papas syndrome
* Bartter syndrome, antenatal form
* Bartter syndrome, classic form

===Bas–Baz===
* Basal cell carcinoma
* Basal cell nevus anodontia abnormal bone mineralization
* Basal ganglia diseases
* Basan syndrome
* Basaran–Yilmaz syndrome
* Basedow&#x27;s coma
* Basilar artery migraines
* Basilar impression primary
* Bassoe syndrome
* Bathophobia
* Batrachophobia
* Battaglia–Neri syndrome
* Batten disease
* Batten–Turner muscular dystrophy
* Baughman syndrome
* Bazex–Dupré–Christol syndrome
* Bazopoulou–Kyrkanidou syndrome
* Baz Effect

==Bc–Bd==
* B-cell lymphomas
* Bd syndrome

==Be==
===Bea–Bel===
* Beals syndrome
* Beardwell syndrome
* Bébé–Collodion syndrome
* Becker disease
* Becker&#x27;s muscular dystrophy
* Becker&#x27;s nevus
* Beemer–Ertbruggen syndrome
* Beemer–Langer syndrome
* Behcet syndrome
* Behr syndrome
* Behrens–Baumann–Dust syndrome
* Bejel
* Bellini–Chiumello–Rinoldi syndrome
* Bell&#x27;s palsy

===Ben–Ber===
* Ben Ari Shuper Mimouni syndrome
* Benallegue–Lacete syndrome
* Bencze syndrome
* Benign astrocytoma
* Benign autosomal dominant myopathy
* Benign congenital hypotonia
* Benign essential blepharospasmass
* Benign essential tremor syndrome
* Benign familial hematuria
* Benign familial infantile convulsions
* Benign familial infantile epilepsy
* Benign fasciculation syndrome
* Benign lymphoma
* Benign mucosal pemphigoid
* Benign myoclonic epilepsy
* Benign paroxysmal positional vertigo
* Bentham Driessen Hanveld syndrome
* Benzodiazepine dependence
* Benzodiazepine overdose
* Benzodiazepine withdrawal syndrome
* Berardinelli–Seip congenital lipodystrophy
* Berdon syndrome
* Berger disease
* Beriberi
* Berlin breakage syndrome
* Berlin&#x27;s edema
* Berry aneurysm, cirrhosis, pulmonary emphysema, and cerebral calcification
* Berylliosis
* Beta ketothiolase deficiency
* Beta-galactosidase-1 deficiency
* Beta-mannosidosis
* Beta-sarcoglycanopathy
* Beta-thalassemia 
* Bethlem myopathy

==Bh==
* Bhaskar Jagannathan syndrome

==Bi==
===Bib–Bil===
* Bickel Fanconi glycogenosis
* Bicuspid aortic valve
* Bidirectional tachycardia
* Biemond syndrome
:* Biemond syndrome type 1
:* Biemond syndrome type 2
* Biermer disease
* Bifid nose dominant
* Bilateral renal agenesis dominant type
* Bilateral renal agenesis
* Biliary atresia, extrahepatic
* Biliary atresia, intrahepatic, non syndromic form
* Biliary atresia, intrahepatic, syndromic form
* Biliary atresia
* Biliary cirrhosis
* Biliary hypoplasia
* Biliary malformation renal tubular insufficiency
* Biliary tract cancer
* Billard Toutain Maheut syndrome
* Billet Bear syndrome

===Bin–Bix===
* Bindewald–Ulmer–Muller syndrome
* Binswanger&#x27;s disease
* Bipolar disorder
:* Bipolar I disorder
:* Bipolar II disorder
* Biotin deficiency
* Biotinidase deficiency 
* Bird headed dwarfism Montreal type
* Birdshot chorioretinopathy
* Birt–Hogg–Dubé syndrome
* Bixler–Christian–Gorlin syndrome

==Bj–Bk==
* Björnstad syndrome
* BK virus nephritis

==Bl==
===Bla–Ble===
* Black piedra
* Bladder and prostate diseases
* Bladder neoplasm
* Blamronesis
* Blaichman syndrome
* Blastoma
* Blastomycosis
* Blepharitis
* Blepharo cheilo dontic syndrome
* Blepharo facio skeletal syndrome
* Blepharo naso facial syndrome Van maldergem type
* Blepharoptosis-myopia-ectopia lentis syndrome
* Blepharonasofacial malformation syndrome
* Blepharophimosis nasal groove growth retardation
* Blepharophimosis ptosis esotropia syndactyly short
* Blepharophimosis ptosis syndactyly mental retardation
* Blepharophimosis syndrome Ohdo type
* Blepharophimosis, ptosis, epicanthus inversus
* Blepharophimosis
* Blepharoptosis aortic anomaly
* Blepharoptosis cleft palate ectrodactyly dental anomalies
* Blepharoptosis-myopia-ectopia lentis
* Blepharospasm
* Blethen–Wenick–Hawkins syndrome

===Blo–Blu===
* Blomstrand syndrome
* Blood coagulation disorders
* Blood platelet disorders
* Blood vessel disorder
* Bloom syndrome
* Blount&#x27;s disease
* Blue cone monochromatism
* Blue diaper syndrome
* Blue rubber bleb nevus

==Bo==
===Bod–Boo===
* BOD syndrome
* Boder syndrome
* Body dysmorphic disorder
* Boil
* Bolivian hemorrhagic fever
* Bone development disorder
* Bone dysplasia Azouz type
* Bone dysplasia corpus callosum agenesis
* Bone dysplasia lethal Holmgren type
* Bone dysplasia Moore type
* Bone fragility craniosynostosis proptosis hydrocephalus
* Bone marrow failure neurologic abnormalities
* Bone marrow failure
* Bone neoplasms
* Bone tumor (generic term)
* Bonneau–Beaumont syndrome
* Bonneman–Meinecke–Reich syndrome
* Bonnemann–Meinecke syndrome
* Bonnevie–Ullrich–Turner syndrome
* Book syndrome
* Boomerang dysplasia
* Booth– Haworth–Dilling syndrome

===Bor–Boy===
* Borderline personality disorder
* Borjeson syndrome
* Bork–Stender–Schmidt syndrome
* Borreliosis
* Borrone–Di Rocco–Crovato syndrome
* Boscherini–Galasso–Manca–Bitti syndrome
* Bosma–Henkin–Christiansen syndrome
* Bothriocephalosis
* Botulism
* Boucher-Neuhäuser syndrome
* Boudhina-Yedes-Khiari syndrome
* Bourneville&#x27;s disease
* Bowen&#x27;s disease
* Bowen–Conradi syndrome
* Bowenoid papulosis
* Bowen&#x27;s disease
* Bowing congenital short bones
* Bowing of long bones congenital
* Boylan–Dew–Greco syndrome

==Br==
===Bra===

====Brac====

=====Brach=====

======Brachi–Brachm======
* Brachioskeletogenital syndrome
* Brachman-de Lange syndrome

======Brachy======
Brachyc
* Brachycephalofrontonasal dysplasia
* Brachycephaly deafness cataract mental retardation
Brachyd
* Brachydactylous dwarfism Mseleni type
Brachydactyly
* Brachydactyly
Brachydactyly a – Brachydactyly s
* Brachydactyly absence of distal phalanges
* Brachydactyly anonychia
* Brachydactyly clinodactyly
* Brachydactyly dwarfism mental retardation
* Brachydactyly-elbow wrist dysplasia syndrome
* Brachydactyly hypertension
* Brachydactyly long thumb type
* Brachydactyly mesomelia mental retardation heart defects
* Brachydactyly nystagmus cerebellar ataxia
* Brachydactyly preaxial hallux varus
* Brachydactyly scoliosis carpal fusion
* Brachydactyly small stature face anomalies
* Brachydactyly Smorgasbord type
Brachydactyly t
* Brachydactyly tibial hypoplasia
* Brachydactyly type A1
* Brachydactyly type A2
* Brachydactyly type A3
* Brachydactyly type A5 nail dysplasia
* Brachydactyly type A6
* Brachydactyly type A7
* Brachydactyly type B
* Brachydactyly type C
* Brachydactyly type D
* Brachydactyly type E
* Brachydactyly types B and E combined
Brachym–Brachyt
* Brachymesomelia renal syndrome
* Brachymesophalangy 2 and 5
* Brachymesophalangy mesomelic short limbs osseous anomalies
* Brachymesophalangy type 2
* Brachymetapody anodontia hypotrichosis albinoidism
* Brachymorphism onychodysplasia dysphalangism syndrome
* Brachyolmia recessive Hobaek type
* Brachyolmia
* Brachytelephalangy characteristic facies Kallmann

====Brad–Braz====
* Braddock–Carey syndrome
* Braddock–Jones–Superneau syndrome
* Bradykinesia
* Brain cavernous angioma
* Brain neoplasms
* Brain stem neoplasms
* Branchial arch defects
* Branchial arch syndrome X linked
* Branchio-oculo-facial syndrome Hing type
* Branchio-oculo-facial syndrome
* Branchio-oto-renal syndrome (BOR syndrome)
* Brazilian hemorrhagic fever

===Bre–Bro===
* Breast cancer
:* Breast cancer, familial
* Breast and ovarian cancer
* Brief psychotic disorder
* Bright&#x27;s disease
* Brittle bone disease
:* Brittle bone syndrome lethal type
* Brittle cornea syndrome
* Broad beta disease
* Broad-betalipoproteinemia
* Bromidrosiphobia
* Bronchiectasis
* Bronchiectasis oligospermia
* Bronchiolitis obliterans with obstructive pulmonary disease
* Bronchiolotis obliterans organizing pneumonia (BOOP)
* Bronchitis, Chronic
* Bronchogenic cyst
* Bronchopulmonary amyloidosis
* Bronchopulmonary dysplasia
* Brown syndrome
* Brown-Séquard syndrome

===Bru===
* Brucellosis
* Bruck syndrome
* Brugada syndrome
* Brunoni syndrome
* Bruton type agammaglobulinemia
* Bruyn Scheltens syndrome

==Bu–Bz==
* Bubonic plague
* Budd–Chiari syndrome
* Buerger&#x27;s disease
* Bulbospinal amyotrophy, X-linked
* Bulimia nervosa
* Bull Nixon syndrome
* Bullous dystrophy macular type
* Bullous ichthyosiform erythroderma congenita
* Bullous pemphigoid
* Buntinx–Lormans–Martin syndrome
* Burkitt&#x27;s lymphoma
* Burn–Goodship syndrome
* Burnett–Schwartz–Berberian syndrome
* Burning mouth syndrome- Type 3
* Burning mouth syndrome
* Buruli ulcer
* Buschke–Ollendorff syndrome
* Bustos–Simosa–Pinto–Cisternas syndrome
* Buttiens–Fryns syndrome
* Butyrylcholinesterase deficiency
* Byssinosis

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q12136" start="18" end="25" title="disease" label="disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747726" start="91" end="112" title="Baber&amp;#x27;s syndrome" label="Baber&amp;#x27;s syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q797668" start="115" end="125" title="Babesiosis" label="Babesiosis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="128" end="165" title="Bacillus cereus#Pathogenesis" label="&amp;quot;Bacillus cereus&amp;quot; infection"/>
<link wikidata="Q2450598" start="168" end="190" title="Bacterial endocarditis" label="Bacterial endocarditis"/>
<link wikidata="Q272002" start="193" end="217" title="Bacterial food poisoning" label="Bacterial food poisoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q156103" start="220" end="245" title="Bacterial gastroenteritis" label="Bacterial gastroenteritis"/>
<link wikidata="Q48143" start="248" end="268" title="Bacterial meningitis" label="Bacterial meningitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3776920" start="271" end="290" title="Bacterial pneumonia" label="Bacterial pneumonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q804521" start="293" end="312" title="Bacterial vaginosis" label="Bacterial vaginosis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="315" end="341" title="Bagatelle–Cassidy syndrome" label="Bagatelle–Cassidy syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q657516" start="344" end="367" title="Bahemuka–Brown syndrome" label="Bahemuka–Brown syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="370" end="392" title="Baker–Vinters syndrome" label="Baker–Vinters syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="395" end="418" title="Baker–Winegard syndrome" label="Baker–Winegard syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2447562" start="421" end="434" title="Balantidiasis" label="Balantidiasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q896643" start="437" end="453" title="Ballard syndrome" label="Ballard syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="456" end="470" title="Ballistophobia" label="Ballistophobia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783645" start="473" end="485" title="Balo disease" label="Balo disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783645" start="488" end="520" title="Balo&amp;#x27;s concentric sclerosis" label="Balo&amp;#x27;s concentric sclerosis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="523" end="540" title="Bamforth syndrome" label="Bamforth syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935832" start="554" end="577" title="BANF acoustic neurinoma" label="BANF acoustic neurinoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q4855629" start="580" end="597" title="Bangstad syndrome" label="Bangstad syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q11853885" start="600" end="614" title="Banki syndrome" label="Banki syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q474254" start="617" end="641" title="Bannayan–Zonana syndrome" label="Bannayan–Zonana syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q3843800" start="644" end="665" title="Banti&amp;#x27;s syndrome" label="Banti&amp;#x27;s syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q4690019" start="668" end="683" title="Bantu siderosis" label="Bantu siderosis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="697" end="731" title="Baraitser–Brett–Piesowicz syndrome" label="Baraitser–Brett–Piesowicz syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="734" end="766" title="Baraitser–Rodeck–Garner syndrome" label="Baraitser–Rodeck–Garner syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q18616565" start="769" end="788" title="Barber–Say syndrome" label="Barber–Say syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q4261984" start="791" end="813" title="Barbiturate dependence" label="Barbiturate dependence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1184752" start="816" end="836" title="Barbiturate overdose" label="Barbiturate overdose"/>
<link wikidata="Q1678281" start="839" end="860" title="Bardet–Biedl syndrome" label="Bardet–Biedl syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1678281" start="864" end="893" title="Bardet–Biedl syndrome" label="Bardet–Biedl syndrome, type 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1678281" start="897" end="926" title="Bardet–Biedl syndrome" label="Bardet–Biedl syndrome, type 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1678281" start="930" end="959" title="Bardet–Biedl syndrome" label="Bardet–Biedl syndrome, type 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q1678281" start="963" end="992" title="Bardet–Biedl syndrome" label="Bardet–Biedl syndrome, type 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q16838027" start="995" end="1021" title="Bare lymphocyte syndrome 2" label="Bare lymphocyte syndrome 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q3508735" start="1024" end="1048" title="Bare lymphocyte syndrome" label="Bare lymphocyte syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2906693" start="1051" end="1060" title="Baritosis" label="Baritosis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1063" end="1091" title="Barnicoat–Baraitser syndrome" label="Barnicoat–Baraitser syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q808892" start="1094" end="1110" title="Barrett syndrome" label="Barrett syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1113" end="1140" title="Barrow–Fitzsimmons syndrome" label="Barrow–Fitzsimmons syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q928424" start="1143" end="1157" title="Barth syndrome" label="Barth syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q135006" start="1160" end="1181" title="Bartonella infections" label="Bartonella infections"/>
<link wikidata="Q9390213" start="1184" end="1208" title="Bartsocas–Papas syndrome" label="Bartsocas–Papas syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q790971" start="1211" end="1243" title="Bartter syndrome" label="Bartter syndrome, antenatal form"/>
<link wikidata="Q790971" start="1246" end="1276" title="Bartter syndrome" label="Bartter syndrome, classic form"/>
<link wikidata="Q809758" start="1294" end="1314" title="Basal cell carcinoma" label="Basal cell carcinoma"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1317" end="1372" title="Basal cell nevus anodontia abnormal bone mineralization" label="Basal cell nevus anodontia abnormal bone mineralization"/>
<link wikidata="Q4866181" start="1375" end="1397" title="Basal ganglia diseases" label="Basal ganglia diseases"/>
<link wikidata="Q22965397" start="1400" end="1414" title="Basan syndrome" label="Basan syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1417" end="1440" title="Basaran–Yilmaz syndrome" label="Basaran–Yilmaz syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1443" end="1462" title="Basedow&amp;#x27;s coma" label="Basedow&amp;#x27;s coma"/>
<link wikidata="Q133823" start="1465" end="1489" title="Basilar artery migraines" label="Basilar artery migraines"/>
<link wikidata="Q4867295" start="1492" end="1518" title="Basilar impression primary" label="Basilar impression primary"/>
<link wikidata="Q55782123" start="1521" end="1536" title="Bassoe syndrome" label="Bassoe syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q6898244" start="1539" end="1550" title="Bathophobia" label="Bathophobia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4297397" start="1553" end="1567" title="Batrachophobia" label="Batrachophobia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1570" end="1593" title="Battaglia–Neri syndrome" label="Battaglia–Neri syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753778" start="1596" end="1610" title="Batten disease" label="Batten disease"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1613" end="1645" title="Batten–Turner muscular dystrophy" label="Batten–Turner muscular dystrophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11686209" start="1648" end="1665" title="Baughman syndrome" label="Baughman syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q4875174" start="1668" end="1697" title="Bazex–Dupré–Christol syndrome" label="Bazex–Dupré–Christol syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1700" end="1730" title="Bazopoulou–Kyrkanidou syndrome" label="Bazopoulou–Kyrkanidou syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1733" end="1743" title="Baz Effect" label="Baz Effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q208414" start="1757" end="1773" title="B-cell lymphomas" label="B-cell lymphomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q911427" start="1776" end="1787" title="Bd syndrome" label="Bd syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q3508618" start="1812" end="1826" title="Beals syndrome" label="Beals syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q114658098" start="1829" end="1847" title="Beardwell syndrome" label="Beardwell syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1850" end="1873" title="Bébé–Collodion syndrome" label="Bébé–Collodion syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q587420" start="1876" end="1890" title="Becker disease" label="Becker disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484592" start="1893" end="1925" title="Becker&amp;#x27;s muscular dystrophy" label="Becker&amp;#x27;s muscular dystrophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q813705" start="1928" end="1947" title="Becker&amp;#x27;s nevus" label="Becker&amp;#x27;s nevus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1950" end="1976" title="Beemer–Ertbruggen syndrome" label="Beemer–Ertbruggen syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q4420146" start="1979" end="2001" title="Beemer–Langer syndrome" label="Beemer–Langer syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q911427" start="2004" end="2019" title="Behcet syndrome" label="Behcet syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q814547" start="2022" end="2035" title="Behr syndrome" label="Behr syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2038" end="2067" title="Behrens–Baumann–Dust syndrome" label="Behrens–Baumann–Dust syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q682798" start="2070" end="2075" title="Bejel" label="Bejel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2078" end="2112" title="Bellini–Chiumello–Rinoldi syndrome" label="Bellini–Chiumello–Rinoldi syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135338" start="2115" end="2132" title="Bell&amp;#x27;s palsy" label="Bell&amp;#x27;s palsy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2150" end="2181" title="Ben Ari Shuper Mimouni syndrome" label="Ben Ari Shuper Mimouni syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2184" end="2210" title="Benallegue–Lacete syndrome" label="Benallegue–Lacete syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2213" end="2228" title="Bencze syndrome" label="Bencze syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095252" start="2231" end="2249" title="Benign astrocytoma" label="Benign astrocytoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q831363" start="2252" end="2286" title="Benign autosomal dominant myopathy" label="Benign autosomal dominant myopathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753547" start="2289" end="2316" title="Benign congenital hypotonia" label="Benign congenital hypotonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q883863" start="2319" end="2349" title="Benign essential blepharospasm" label="Benign essential blepharospasm"/>
<link wikidata="Q693519" start="2355" end="2387" title="Benign essential tremor syndrome" label="Benign essential tremor syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1574609" start="2390" end="2415" title="Benign familial hematuria" label="Benign familial hematuria"/>
<link wikidata="Q4887955" start="2418" end="2455" title="Benign familial infantile convulsions" label="Benign familial infantile convulsions"/>
<link wikidata="Q4887955" start="2458" end="2492" title="Benign familial infantile epilepsy" label="Benign familial infantile epilepsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q817298" start="2495" end="2524" title="Benign fasciculation syndrome" label="Benign fasciculation syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q208414" start="2527" end="2542" title="Benign lymphoma" label="Benign lymphoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q627291" start="2545" end="2570" title="Benign mucosal pemphigoid" label="Benign mucosal pemphigoid"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2573" end="2598" title="Benign myoclonic epilepsy" label="Benign myoclonic epilepsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q817310" start="2601" end="2637" title="Benign paroxysmal positional vertigo" label="Benign paroxysmal positional vertigo"/>
<link wikidata="Q55785494" start="2640" end="2673" title="Bentham Driessen Hanveld syndrome" label="Bentham Driessen Hanveld syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q380409" start="2676" end="2701" title="Benzodiazepine dependence" label="Benzodiazepine dependence"/>
<link wikidata="Q4890788" start="2704" end="2727" title="Benzodiazepine overdose" label="Benzodiazepine overdose"/>
<link wikidata="Q6119887" start="2730" end="2764" title="Benzodiazepine withdrawal syndrome" label="Benzodiazepine withdrawal syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q3242224" start="2767" end="2809" title="Berardinelli–Seip congenital lipodystrophy" label="Berardinelli–Seip congenital lipodystrophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4891136" start="2812" end="2827" title="Berdon syndrome" label="Berdon syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146454" start="2830" end="2844" title="Berger disease" label="Berger disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q184084" start="2847" end="2855" title="Beriberi" label="Beriberi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250362" start="2858" end="2882" title="Berlin breakage syndrome" label="Berlin breakage syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q4892337" start="2885" end="2904" title="Berlin&amp;#x27;s edema" label="Berlin&amp;#x27;s edema"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2907" end="2981" title="Berry aneurysm, cirrhosis, pulmonary emphysema, and cerebral calcification" label="Berry aneurysm, cirrhosis, pulmonary emphysema, and cerebral calcification"/>
<link wikidata="Q684810" start="2984" end="2995" title="Berylliosis" label="Berylliosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4897218" start="2998" end="3026" title="Beta ketothiolase deficiency" label="Beta ketothiolase deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q5513690" start="3029" end="3060" title="Beta-galactosidase-1 deficiency" label="Beta-galactosidase-1 deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q291617" start="3063" end="3080" title="Beta-mannosidosis" label="Beta-mannosidosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1531322" start="3083" end="3105" title="Beta-sarcoglycanopathy" label="Beta-sarcoglycanopathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3616632" start="3108" end="3124" title="Beta-thalassemia" label="Beta-thalassemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q831363" start="3128" end="3144" title="Bethlem myopathy" label="Bethlem myopathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4901373" start="3155" end="3183" title="Bhaskar Jagannathan syndrome" label="Bhaskar Jagannathan syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q5572613" start="3208" end="3235" title="Bickel Fanconi glycogenosis" label="Bickel Fanconi glycogenosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q860167" start="3238" end="3259" title="Bicuspid aortic valve" label="Bicuspid aortic valve"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3262" end="3287" title="Bidirectional tachycardia" label="Bidirectional tachycardia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16944551" start="3290" end="3306" title="Biemond syndrome" label="Biemond syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q16944551" start="3310" end="3333" title="Biemond syndrome type 1" label="Biemond syndrome type 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q16944551" start="3337" end="3360" title="Biemond syndrome type 2" label="Biemond syndrome type 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346016" start="3363" end="3378" title="Biermer disease" label="Biermer disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q42848169" start="3381" end="3400" title="Bifid nose dominant" label="Bifid nose dominant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2019823" start="3403" end="3441" title="Bilateral renal agenesis dominant type" label="Bilateral renal agenesis dominant type"/>
<link wikidata="Q669435" start="3444" end="3468" title="Bilateral renal agenesis" label="Bilateral renal agenesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q659033" start="3471" end="3500" title="Biliary atresia, extrahepatic" label="Biliary atresia, extrahepatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q659033" start="3503" end="3552" title="Biliary atresia, intrahepatic, non syndromic form" label="Biliary atresia, intrahepatic, non syndromic form"/>
<link wikidata="Q659033" start="3555" end="3600" title="Biliary atresia, intrahepatic, syndromic form" label="Biliary atresia, intrahepatic, syndromic form"/>
<link wikidata="Q659033" start="3603" end="3618" title="Biliary atresia" label="Biliary atresia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072420" start="3621" end="3638" title="Biliary cirrhosis" label="Biliary cirrhosis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3641" end="3659" title="Biliary hypoplasia" label="Biliary hypoplasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4797658" start="3662" end="3710" title="Biliary malformation renal tubular insufficiency" label="Biliary malformation renal tubular insufficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q124292" start="3713" end="3733" title="Biliary tract cancer" label="Biliary tract cancer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3736" end="3767" title="Billard Toutain Maheut syndrome" label="Billard Toutain Maheut syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3770" end="3790" title="Billet Bear syndrome" label="Billet Bear syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3808" end="3839" title="Bindewald–Ulmer–Muller syndrome" label="Bindewald–Ulmer–Muller syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399293" start="3842" end="3867" title="Binswanger&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Binswanger&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q131755" start="3870" end="3886" title="Bipolar disorder" label="Bipolar disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q4915474" start="3890" end="3908" title="Bipolar I disorder" label="Bipolar I disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q4086956" start="3912" end="3931" title="Bipolar II disorder" label="Bipolar II disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q10264745" start="3934" end="3951" title="Biotin deficiency" label="Biotin deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q776026" start="3954" end="3976" title="Biotinidase deficiency" label="Biotinidase deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q55781692" start="3980" end="4014" title="Bird headed dwarfism Montreal type" label="Bird headed dwarfism Montreal type"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916140" start="4017" end="4043" title="Birdshot chorioretinopathy" label="Birdshot chorioretinopathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2532540" start="4046" end="4069" title="Birt–Hogg–Dubé syndrome" label="Birt–Hogg–Dubé syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4072" end="4104" title="Bixler–Christian–Gorlin syndrome" label="Bixler–Christian–Gorlin syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q4919794" start="4118" end="4136" title="Björnstad syndrome" label="Björnstad syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q582873" start="4139" end="4157" title="BK virus" label="BK virus nephritis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118807" start="4182" end="4194" title="Black piedra" label="Black piedra"/>
<link wikidata="Q118899717" start="4197" end="4226" title="Bladder and prostate diseases" label="Bladder and prostate diseases"/>
<link wikidata="Q504775" start="4229" end="4245" title="Bladder neoplasm" label="Bladder neoplasm"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4248" end="4259" title="Blamronesis" label="Blamronesis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4262" end="4280" title="Blaichman syndrome" label="Blaichman syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q882077" start="4283" end="4291" title="Blastoma" label="Blastoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q627368" start="4294" end="4307" title="Blastomycosis" label="Blastomycosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q845698" start="4310" end="4321" title="Blepharitis" label="Blepharitis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4324" end="4355" title="Blepharo cheilo dontic syndrome" label="Blepharo cheilo dontic syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4358" end="4390" title="Blepharo facio skeletal syndrome" label="Blepharo facio skeletal syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q7141967" start="4393" end="4441" title="Blepharo naso facial syndrome Van maldergem type" label="Blepharo naso facial syndrome Van maldergem type"/>
<link wikidata="Q55780371" start="4444" end="4489" title="Blepharoptosis-myopia-ectopia lentis syndrome" label="Blepharoptosis-myopia-ectopia lentis syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q7141967" start="4492" end="4532" title="Blepharonasofacial malformation syndrome" label="Blepharonasofacial malformation syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q883850" start="4535" end="4583" title="Blepharophimosis nasal groove growth retardation" label="Blepharophimosis nasal groove growth retardation"/>
<link wikidata="Q883850" start="4586" end="4636" title="Blepharophimosis ptosis esotropia syndactyly short" label="Blepharophimosis ptosis esotropia syndactyly short"/>
<link wikidata="Q883850" start="4639" end="4692" title="Blepharophimosis ptosis syndactyly mental retardation" label="Blepharophimosis ptosis syndactyly mental retardation"/>
<link wikidata="Q55787025" start="4695" end="4730" title="Blepharophimosis syndrome Ohdo type" label="Blepharophimosis syndrome Ohdo type"/>
<link wikidata="Q883850" start="4733" end="4778" title="Blepharophimosis, ptosis, epicanthus inversus" label="Blepharophimosis, ptosis, epicanthus inversus"/>
<link wikidata="Q883850" start="4781" end="4797" title="Blepharophimosis" label="Blepharophimosis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4800" end="4829" title="Blepharoptosis aortic anomaly" label="Blepharoptosis aortic anomaly"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4832" end="4889" title="Blepharoptosis cleft palate ectrodactyly dental anomalies" label="Blepharoptosis cleft palate ectrodactyly dental anomalies"/>
<link wikidata="Q55780371" start="4892" end="4928" title="Blepharoptosis-myopia-ectopia lentis" label="Blepharoptosis-myopia-ectopia lentis"/>
<link wikidata="Q883863" start="4931" end="4944" title="Blepharospasm" label="Blepharospasm"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4947" end="4978" title="Blethen–Wenick–Hawkins syndrome" label="Blethen–Wenick–Hawkins syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q5104520" start="4996" end="5015" title="Blomstrand syndrome" label="Blomstrand syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q890200" start="5018" end="5045" title="Blood coagulation disorders" label="Blood coagulation disorders"/>
<link wikidata="Q101026" start="5048" end="5072" title="Blood platelet disorders" label="Blood platelet disorders"/>
<link wikidata="Q65075660" start="5075" end="5096" title="Blood vessel disorder" label="Blood vessel disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1469646" start="5099" end="5113" title="Bloom syndrome" label="Bloom syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q624398" start="5116" end="5137" title="Blount&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Blount&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q18553394" start="5140" end="5164" title="Blue cone monochromatism" label="Blue cone monochromatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q503458" start="5167" end="5187" title="Blue diaper syndrome" label="Blue diaper syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q885574" start="5190" end="5212" title="Blue rubber bleb nevus" label="Blue rubber bleb nevus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5237" end="5249" title="BOD syndrome" label="BOD syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q7077978" start="5252" end="5266" title="Boder syndrome" label="Boder syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q844590" start="5269" end="5293" title="Body dysmorphic disorder" label="Body dysmorphic disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q193918" start="5296" end="5300" title="Boil" label="Boil"/>
<link wikidata="Q2700304" start="5303" end="5329" title="Bolivian hemorrhagic fever" label="Bolivian hemorrhagic fever"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5332" end="5357" title="Bone development disorder" label="Bone development disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q55782326" start="5360" end="5385" title="Bone dysplasia Azouz type" label="Bone dysplasia Azouz type"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5388" end="5427" title="Bone dysplasia corpus callosum agenesis" label="Bone dysplasia corpus callosum agenesis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5430" end="5465" title="Bone dysplasia lethal Holmgren type" label="Bone dysplasia lethal Holmgren type"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5468" end="5493" title="Bone dysplasia Moore type" label="Bone dysplasia Moore type"/>
<link wikidata="Q749409" start="5496" end="5551" title="Bone fragility craniosynostosis proptosis hydrocephalus" label="Bone fragility craniosynostosis proptosis hydrocephalus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5554" end="5598" title="Bone marrow failure neurologic abnormalities" label="Bone marrow failure neurologic abnormalities"/>
<link wikidata="Q7882181" start="5601" end="5620" title="Bone marrow failure" label="Bone marrow failure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328805" start="5623" end="5637" title="Bone neoplasms" label="Bone neoplasms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328805" start="5640" end="5665" title="Bone tumor (generic term)" label="Bone tumor (generic term)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5668" end="5693" title="Bonneau–Beaumont syndrome" label="Bonneau–Beaumont syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5696" end="5728" title="Bonneman–Meinecke–Reich syndrome" label="Bonneman–Meinecke–Reich syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5731" end="5758" title="Bonnemann–Meinecke syndrome" label="Bonnemann–Meinecke syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q202849" start="5761" end="5793" title="Bonnevie–Ullrich–Turner syndrome" label="Bonnevie–Ullrich–Turner syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5796" end="5809" title="Book syndrome" label="Book syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q4943512" start="5812" end="5831" title="Boomerang dysplasia" label="Boomerang dysplasia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5834" end="5865" title="Booth– Haworth–Dilling syndrome" label="Booth– Haworth–Dilling syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q208166" start="5883" end="5914" title="Borderline personality disorder" label="Borderline personality disorder"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5917" end="5934" title="Borjeson syndrome" label="Borjeson syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5937" end="5966" title="Bork–Stender–Schmidt syndrome" label="Bork–Stender–Schmidt syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q201989" start="5969" end="5980" title="Borreliosis" label="Borreliosis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5983" end="6016" title="Borrone–Di Rocco–Crovato syndrome" label="Borrone–Di Rocco–Crovato syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6019" end="6058" title="Boscherini–Galasso–Manca–Bitti syndrome" label="Boscherini–Galasso–Manca–Bitti syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6061" end="6095" title="Bosma–Henkin–Christiansen syndrome" label="Bosma–Henkin–Christiansen syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q600082" start="6098" end="6115" title="Bothriocephalosis" label="Bothriocephalosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q154865" start="6118" end="6126" title="Botulism" label="Botulism"/>
<link wikidata="Q55781749" start="6129" end="6155" title="Boucher-Neuhäuser syndrome" label="Boucher-Neuhäuser syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q55789829" start="6158" end="6188" title="Boudhina-Yedes-Khiari syndrome" label="Boudhina-Yedes-Khiari syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362721" start="6191" end="6217" title="Bourneville&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Bourneville&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q5749018" start="6220" end="6240" title="Bowen&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Bowen&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q18553398" start="6243" end="6265" title="Bowen–Conradi syndrome" label="Bowen–Conradi syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q895414" start="6268" end="6286" title="Bowenoid papulosis" label="Bowenoid papulosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5749018" start="6289" end="6309" title="Bowen&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Bowen&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550742" start="6312" end="6341" title="Bowing congenital short bones" label="Bowing congenital short bones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031536" start="6344" end="6375" title="Bowing of long bones congenital" label="Bowing of long bones congenital"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6378" end="6403" title="Boylan–Dew–Greco syndrome" label="Boylan–Dew–Greco syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6482" end="6512" title="Brachioskeletogenital syndrome" label="Brachioskeletogenital syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133289" start="6515" end="6541" title="Brachman-de Lange syndrome" label="Brachman-de Lange syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6572" end="6606" title="Brachycephalofrontonasal dysplasia" label="Brachycephalofrontonasal dysplasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q55783094" start="6609" end="6659" title="Brachycephaly deafness cataract mental retardation" label="Brachycephaly deafness cataract mental retardation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6670" end="6707" title="Brachydactylous dwarfism Mseleni type" label="Brachydactylous dwarfism Mseleni type"/>
<link wikidata="Q896643" start="6724" end="6737" title="Brachydactyly" label="Brachydactyly"/>
<link wikidata="Q5167190" start="6774" end="6815" title="Brachydactyly absence of distal phalanges" label="Brachydactyly absence of distal phalanges"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6818" end="6841" title="Brachydactyly anonychia" label="Brachydactyly anonychia"/>
<link wikidata="Q896643" start="6844" end="6870" title="Brachydactyly clinodactyly" label="Brachydactyly clinodactyly"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6873" end="6914" title="Brachydactyly dwarfism mental retardation" label="Brachydactyly dwarfism mental retardation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6543864" start="6917" end="6961" title="Brachydactyly-elbow wrist dysplasia syndrome" label="Brachydactyly-elbow wrist dysplasia syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q30314087" start="6964" end="6990" title="Brachydactyly hypertension" label="Brachydactyly hypertension"/>
<link wikidata="Q55780379" start="6993" end="7022" title="Brachydactyly long thumb type" label="Brachydactyly long thumb type"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7025" end="7081" title="Brachydactyly mesomelia mental retardation heart defects" label="Brachydactyly mesomelia mental retardation heart defects"/>
<link wikidata="Q16944551" start="7084" end="7125" title="Brachydactyly nystagmus cerebellar ataxia" label="Brachydactyly nystagmus cerebellar ataxia"/>
<link wikidata="Q32145314" start="7128" end="7163" title="Brachydactyly preaxial hallux varus" label="Brachydactyly preaxial hallux varus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7166" end="7203" title="Brachydactyly scoliosis carpal fusion" label="Brachydactyly scoliosis carpal fusion"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7206" end="7248" title="Brachydactyly small stature face anomalies" label="Brachydactyly small stature face anomalies"/>
<link wikidata="Q896643" start="7251" end="7281" title="Brachydactyly Smorgasbord type" label="Brachydactyly Smorgasbord type"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7300" end="7331" title="Brachydactyly tibial hypoplasia" label="Brachydactyly tibial hypoplasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q896643" start="7334" end="7355" title="Brachydactyly type A1" label="Brachydactyly type A1"/>
<link wikidata="Q896643" start="7358" end="7379" title="Brachydactyly type A2" label="Brachydactyly type A2"/>
<link wikidata="Q896643" start="7382" end="7403" title="Brachydactyly type A3" label="Brachydactyly type A3"/>
<link wikidata="Q896643" start="7406" end="7442" title="Brachydactyly type A5 nail dysplasia" label="Brachydactyly type A5 nail dysplasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q896643" start="7445" end="7466" title="Brachydactyly type A6" label="Brachydactyly type A6"/>
<link wikidata="Q896643" start="7469" end="7490" title="Brachydactyly type A7" label="Brachydactyly type A7"/>
<link wikidata="Q896643" start="7493" end="7513" title="Brachydactyly type B" label="Brachydactyly type B"/>
<link wikidata="Q896643" start="7516" end="7536" title="Brachydactyly type C" label="Brachydactyly type C"/>
<link wikidata="Q5136452" start="7539" end="7559" title="Brachydactyly type D" label="Brachydactyly type D"/>
<link wikidata="Q896643" start="7562" end="7582" title="Brachydactyly type E" label="Brachydactyly type E"/>
<link wikidata="Q896643" start="7585" end="7621" title="Brachydactyly types B and E combined" label="Brachydactyly types B and E combined"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7640" end="7670" title="Brachymesomelia renal syndrome" label="Brachymesomelia renal syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q896643" start="7673" end="7699" title="Brachymesophalangy 2 and 5" label="Brachymesophalangy 2 and 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q896643" start="7702" end="7760" title="Brachymesophalangy mesomelic short limbs osseous anomalies" label="Brachymesophalangy mesomelic short limbs osseous anomalies"/>
<link wikidata="Q896643" start="7763" end="7788" title="Brachymesophalangy type 2" label="Brachymesophalangy type 2"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7791" end="7841" title="Brachymetapody anodontia hypotrichosis albinoidism" label="Brachymetapody anodontia hypotrichosis albinoidism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7844" end="7897" title="Brachymorphism onychodysplasia dysphalangism syndrome" label="Brachymorphism onychodysplasia dysphalangism syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7900" end="7933" title="Brachyolmia recessive Hobaek type" label="Brachyolmia recessive Hobaek type"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7936" end="7947" title="Brachyolmia" label="Brachyolmia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165179" start="7950" end="7999" title="Brachytelephalangy characteristic facies Kallmann" label="Brachytelephalangy characteristic facies Kallmann"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8021" end="8044" title="Braddock–Carey syndrome" label="Braddock–Carey syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8047" end="8080" title="Braddock–Jones–Superneau syndrome" label="Braddock–Jones–Superneau syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036662" start="8083" end="8095" title="Bradykinesia" label="Bradykinesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1737261" start="8098" end="8121" title="Cavernous angioma" label="Brain cavernous angioma"/>
<link wikidata="Q233309" start="8124" end="8139" title="Brain neoplasms" label="Brain neoplasms"/>
<link wikidata="Q4955921" start="8142" end="8162" title="Brain stem neoplasms" label="Brain stem neoplasms"/>
<link wikidata="Q3496540" start="8165" end="8187" title="Branchial arch defects" label="Branchial arch defects"/>
<link wikidata="Q3496540" start="8190" end="8222" title="Branchial arch syndrome X linked" label="Branchial arch syndrome X linked"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8225" end="8265" title="Branchio-oculo-facial syndrome Hing type" label="Branchio-oculo-facial syndrome Hing type"/>
<link wikidata="Q9390211" start="8268" end="8298" title="Branchio-oculo-facial syndrome" label="Branchio-oculo-facial syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2280106" start="8301" end="8328" title="Branchio-oto-renal syndrome" label="Branchio-oto-renal syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q4958833" start="8346" end="8373" title="Brazilian hemorrhagic fever" label="Brazilian hemorrhagic fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q128581" start="8391" end="8404" title="Breast cancer" label="Breast cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q19000660" start="8408" end="8431" title="Hereditary breast—ovarian cancer syndrome" label="Breast cancer, familial"/>
<link wikidata="Q121734474" start="8434" end="8459" title="Breast and ovarian cancer" label="Breast and ovarian cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2787727" start="8462" end="8486" title="Brief psychotic disorder" label="Brief psychotic disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246646" start="8489" end="8510" title="Bright&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Bright&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q749409" start="8513" end="8533" title="Brittle bone disease" label="Brittle bone disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q749409" start="8537" end="8570" title="Brittle bone syndrome lethal type" label="Brittle bone syndrome lethal type"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141499" start="8573" end="8596" title="Brittle cornea syndrome" label="Brittle cornea syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2069207" start="8599" end="8617" title="Broad beta disease" label="Broad beta disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q2069207" start="8620" end="8645" title="Broad-betalipoproteinemia" label="Broad-betalipoproteinemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4386741" start="8648" end="8664" title="Bromidrosiphobia" label="Bromidrosiphobia"/>
<link wikidata="Q32778" start="8667" end="8681" title="Bronchiectasis" label="Bronchiectasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143515" start="8684" end="8711" title="Bronchiectasis oligospermia" label="Bronchiectasis oligospermia"/>
<link wikidata="Q614750" start="8714" end="8773" title="Bronchiolitis obliterans with obstructive pulmonary disease" label="Bronchiolitis obliterans with obstructive pulmonary disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q2012642" start="8776" end="8828" title="Bronchiolotis obliterans organizing pneumonia (BOOP)" label="Bronchiolotis obliterans organizing pneumonia (BOOP)"/>
<link wikidata="Q173022" start="8831" end="8850" title="Bronchitis, Chronic" label="Bronchitis, Chronic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4973829" start="8853" end="8870" title="Bronchogenic cyst" label="Bronchogenic cyst"/>
<link wikidata="Q816798" start="8873" end="8901" title="Bronchopulmonary amyloidosis" label="Bronchopulmonary amyloidosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q922640" start="8904" end="8930" title="Bronchopulmonary dysplasia" label="Bronchopulmonary dysplasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q991023" start="8933" end="8947" title="Brown syndrome" label="Brown syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q991037" start="8950" end="8972" title="Brown-Séquard syndrome" label="Brown-Séquard syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q156050" start="8986" end="8997" title="Brucellosis" label="Brucellosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3508623" start="9000" end="9014" title="Bruck syndrome" label="Bruck syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q599683" start="9017" end="9033" title="Brugada syndrome" label="Brugada syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9036" end="9052" title="Brunoni syndrome" label="Brunoni syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q283108" start="9055" end="9085" title="Bruton type agammaglobulinemia" label="Bruton type agammaglobulinemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q657516" start="9088" end="9112" title="Bruyn Scheltens syndrome" label="Bruyn Scheltens syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q217519" start="9126" end="9140" title="Bubonic plague" label="Bubonic plague"/>
<link wikidata="Q183098" start="9143" end="9163" title="Budd–Chiari syndrome" label="Budd–Chiari syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q746001" start="9166" end="9188" title="Buerger&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Buerger&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q1995327" start="9191" end="9223" title="Bulbospinal amyotrophy, X-linked" label="Bulbospinal amyotrophy, X-linked"/>
<link wikidata="Q64513386" start="9226" end="9241" title="Bulimia nervosa" label="Bulimia nervosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4867295" start="9244" end="9263" title="Bull Nixon syndrome" label="Bull Nixon syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9266" end="9296" title="Bullous dystrophy macular type" label="Bullous dystrophy macular type"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9299" end="9343" title="Bullous ichthyosiform erythroderma congenita" label="Bullous ichthyosiform erythroderma congenita"/>
<link wikidata="Q1004647" start="9346" end="9364" title="Bullous pemphigoid" label="Bullous pemphigoid"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9367" end="9398" title="Buntinx–Lormans–Martin syndrome" label="Buntinx–Lormans–Martin syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016605" start="9401" end="9424" title="Burkitt&amp;#x27;s lymphoma" label="Burkitt&amp;#x27;s lymphoma"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9427" end="9449" title="Burn–Goodship syndrome" label="Burn–Goodship syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9452" end="9487" title="Burnett–Schwartz–Berberian syndrome" label="Burnett–Schwartz–Berberian syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q230047" start="9490" end="9520" title="Burning mouth syndrome- Type 3" label="Burning mouth syndrome- Type 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q230047" start="9523" end="9545" title="Burning mouth syndrome" label="Burning mouth syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017169" start="9548" end="9560" title="Buruli ulcer" label="Buruli ulcer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5001316" start="9563" end="9590" title="Buschke–Ollendorff syndrome" label="Buschke–Ollendorff syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9593" end="9631" title="Bustos–Simosa–Pinto–Cisternas syndrome" label="Bustos–Simosa–Pinto–Cisternas syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9634" end="9657" title="Buttiens–Fryns syndrome" label="Buttiens–Fryns syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q7254644" start="9660" end="9692" title="Butyrylcholinesterase deficiency" label="Butyrylcholinesterase deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018652" start="9695" end="9705" title="Byssinosis" label="Byssinosis"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="236334" wikidata="Q46350" url="?curid=236334" title="Amicus curiae">
<text>An amicus curiae (; ) is an individual or organization that is not a party to a legal case, but that is permitted to assist a court by offering information, expertise, or insight that has a bearing on the issues in the case. Whether an &quot;amicus&quot; brief will be considered is typically under the court&#x27;s discretion. The phrase is legal Latin and the origin of the term has been dated to 1605–1615. The scope of &quot;amici curiae&quot; is generally found in the cases where broad public interests are involved and concerns regarding civil rights are in question.

In American law, an &quot;amicus curiae&quot; typically refers to what in some other jurisdictions is known as an intervenor: a person or organization who requests to provide legal submissions so as to offer a relevant alternative or additional perspective regarding the matters in dispute. In the American courts, the amicus may be referred to as an &quot;amicus&quot; brief. In other jurisdictions, such as Canada, an &quot;amicus curiae&quot; is a lawyer who is asked by the court to provide legal submissions regarding issues that would otherwise not be aired properly, often because one or both of the parties is not represented by counsel.

In international courts, legal submissions by intervenors are called amicus curiae observations.

== History ==
Direct or indirect connections between the &quot;amicus curiae&quot; figure and the Roman juridical experience are still debated. Some scholars simply explain the Latin expression with the fact that the cultural elites&#x27; (including the jurists&#x27;) language of the Anglo-Saxon world was Latin, so that many Latin legal terms first spread through English law, and then also in the Law of the United States. The Italian academic Giovanni Criscuoli, while admitting the theoretical possibility of eventually comparing it with the Roman figure of the &quot;consiliarius&quot;, concludes that: &quot;it is a figure of exclusive Anglo-Saxon blood&quot;.

Starting in the 9th century, it was incorporated into English law, and it was later extended to most common law systems. Later, it was introduced in international law, in particular concerning human rights. From there, it was integrated in some civil law systems (it has been, as at 2013, integrated into Argentina&#x27;s law system and Honduras&#x27;s 2010 civil procedures code). Today, it is used by the European Court of Human Rights, the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights, the Inter-American Court of Human Rights, the Court of Justice of the European Union and the Special Tribunal for Lebanon.

== Presentation ==
The role of an &quot;amicus&quot; was described by Lord Justice of Appeal Cyril Salmon in &quot;Allen v Sir Alfred McAlpine &amp; Sons Ltd&quot; [1968] 2 QB 229 at p. 266 F-G:

The situation most often noted in the press is when an advocacy group files a brief in a case before an appellate court in which it is not a litigant. Appellate cases are normally limited to the factual record and arguments coming from the lower court case under appeal; attorneys focus on the facts and arguments most favorable to their clients. Where a case may have broader implications, &quot;amicus curiae&quot; briefs are a way to articulate those concerns, so that the possibly broad legal or public policy implications of the court&#x27;s anticipated decisions will not depend solely on the positions and arguments advanced by the parties directly involved in the case.

In prominent cases, &quot;amici curiae&quot; are generally organizations with sizable legal budgets. In the United States, for example, non-profit legal advocacy organizations, such as the American Civil Liberties Union, the Landmark Legal Foundation, the Pacific Legal Foundation, the Electronic Frontier Foundation, the American Center for Law and Justice or the National Organization for the Reform of Marijuana Laws (NORML), frequently submit such briefs to advocate for or against a particular legal change or interpretation. If a decision could affect an entire industry, companies other than the litigants may wish to have their concerns heard. In the United States, federal courts often hear cases involving the constitutionality of state laws. Hence states may file briefs as &quot;amici curiae&quot; when their laws or interests are likely to be affected, as in the Supreme Court case &quot;McDonald v. Chicago,&quot; when thirty-two states under the aegis of Texas (and California independently) filed such briefs.

&quot;De facto amici curiae&quot; who do not file briefs may present in the print media and social media academic perspectives on the case. For example, if the law gives deference to a history of legislation of a certain topic, a historian may choose to evaluate the claim from their specialized expertise. Economists, statisticians, sociologists, etc. may choose to do the same. Newspaper editorials, blogs, and other opinion pieces arguably have the capability to influence Supreme Court decisions as &quot;de facto amici curiae&quot;. They are not, however, technically considered &quot;amici curiae,&quot; as they do not submit materials to the Court, do not need to ask for leave, and have no guarantee that they will be read.

==United States Supreme Court==
The Supreme Court of the United States has special rules for &quot;amicus curiae&quot; briefs sought to be filed in cases pending before it. Supreme Court Rule 37 states, in part, such a brief should cover &quot;relevant matter&quot; not dealt with by the parties which &quot;may be of considerable help&quot;. The cover of an &quot;amicus&quot; brief must identify which party the brief is supporting, or if the brief supports only affirmance or reversal. The Court also requires that all non-governmental amici identify those providing a monetary contribution to the preparation or submission of the brief. Briefs must be prepared in booklet format, and 40 copies must be served with the Court.

The Supreme Court has seen a steady increase of amicus in its proceedings. Between 2019 and 2020 97 percent included these filings with the sharpest increase coming after 1966 and only a few interventions in the earlier decades.

In the United States Supreme Court, unless the &quot;amicus&quot; brief is being filed by the federal government (or one of its officers or agents) or a U.S. state, permission of the court (by means of motion for leave) or mutual consent of the parties is generally required. Allowing an &quot;amicus curiae&quot; to present oral argument is considered &quot;extraordinary&quot;. The court can also appoint its own &quot;amicus curiae&quot; if neither party supports the decision of the lower court, which it has done at least 44 times.

Religious groups regularly file &quot;amicus&quot; briefs at the U.S. Supreme Court. Muslim organizations and individuals, for example, have filed &quot;amicus&quot; briefs on both sides of recent cases dealing with divisive cultural issues, such as same-sex marriage and expansive conceptions of gender identity.

The first &quot;amicus curiae&quot; to appear before the Supreme Court was Henry Clay, in , although he “did not prevail.”

==Canada==
In Canadian law, an &quot;amicus curiae&quot; is a lawyer, rather than an outside entity, who is asked by the Court to provide submissions in such a way as to make sure the legal issues affecting the interests of all parties are properly canvassed. Where one of the parties (e.g. the accused in a criminal case) is unrepresented (and is ineligible for or refuses to apply for legal aid), and the judge is concerned that this will leave that party at a significant disadvantage and risk a miscarriage of justice, the judge may appoint a lawyer as &quot;amicus curiae&quot;. The lawyer is not retained by and does not represent the unrepresented party as such, but has a responsibility to ensure that points of law of importance to the party&#x27;s case are brought to the attention of the court. For example, in the case of a criminal trial, the &quot;amicus&quot; will have the responsibility to ensure that the accused&#x27;s right to make full answer and defence is upheld. Examples of situations that could call for the appointment of &quot;amicus&quot; could include a highly complex or technical trial, an unsophisticated accused or one with cognitive or psychiatric challenges, or an unruly and disruptive accused. In some cases, when an accused has retained counsel for part of the trial but then fires that counsel, and if the judge finds that &quot;amicus&quot; is needed, the former counsel may be asked to remain as &quot;amicus&quot;, given their familiarity with the case.

Canadian courts may also appoint &quot;amici&quot; in situations in which a party is represented by counsel, but issues emerge in a highly specialized or technical area of the law, on which the judge wants submissions from a lawyer with special expertise in that area. For example, in &quot;R. v. Warren,&quot; 2022 ONSC 542, the judge appointed &quot;amicus&quot; to provide detailed submissions on the intersection between constitutional rights and prison law, explaining why this was normally outside the ken even of experienced criminal defence counsel.

Another situation in which &quot;amicus&quot; may be appointed is when an accused is self-represented in a trial for offences such as sexual assault or assault in a domestic violence context. An unrepresented accused has the right to cross-examine Crown witnesses, but it may be undesirable to permit him or her to personally cross-examine, for example, the complainant. As a result, the &quot;Criminal Code&quot; permits the judge to order that the accused will not personally cross-examine the witness, and to name an uninvolved lawyer to conduct the cross-examination in place of the accused.

The role commonly described as &quot;amicus curiae&quot; in the United States is known as an &quot;intervener&quot; in Canada.

==Italy==
In Italian law, &quot;amici curiae&quot; are &quot;nonprofit organizations and the institutional subjects, bearers of collective or diffuse interests related to the issue of constitutionality&quot; who &quot;may submit a written opinion to the constitutional Court&quot;.

== World Trade Organization (WTO) ==
The role of &quot;amicus curiae&quot; briefs in the World Trade Organization (WTO) dispute settlement system is controversial. The controversy arises due to the governmental nature of WTO disputes. As only WTO members have access to the system, any non-members such as non-governmental organizations (NGOs) are excluded and have no right to be heard. Thus the only way for them to contribute to a WTO decision is through &quot;amicus curiae&quot; briefs. To date there is a divergence in approaches in the WTO as to the admissibility of such briefs.

The first WTO case to comprehensively examine the admissibility of &quot;amicus curiae&quot; briefs was US – Shrimp. The case concerned a ban by the US on imports of all shrimp and shrimp products not caught with turtle excluder devices. The panel at first instance rejected the two &quot;amicus curiae&quot; briefs that were submitted by environmental groups, on the basis they were not expressly solicited by the panel under Article 13 of the Dispute Settlement Understanding of the WTO. This was overturned by the Appellate Body who held a panel had authority to accept, consider or reject briefs under Articles 12 and 13 of the Dispute Settlement Understanding regardless of whether they were expressly solicited.

The issue was re-examined in US – Lead and Bismuth II which concerned the imposition of duties by the US on certain imported hot rolled lead and bismuth carbon steel from the UK. The Panel at first instance affirmed the position in the US – Shrimp case and accepted two &quot;amicus curiae&quot; briefs that were submitted. On appeal, the Appellate Body relied on Article 17.9 of the Dispute Settlement Understanding and Rule 16(1) of the Working Procedures for Appellate Review to create rules to accept &quot;amicus curiae&quot; briefs. This was deemed as the source of legal authority to accept such briefs by an Appellate Body.

The next significant case to deal with &quot;amicus curiae&quot; briefs was EC – Asbestos, where the French government banned domestically produced and imported asbestos products. Of the five &quot;amicus curiae&quot; briefs received by the Panel, only two that were submitted by the European Community, were accepted. The panel did not provide any explanation as to why they were accepted or rejected. On appeal, the Appellate Body relied on Rule 16(1) of the &quot;Working Procedures for Appellate Review&quot; to create additional procedures to deal with the &quot;amicus curiae&quot; briefs. Of the 11 briefs submitted, the Appellate Body accepted none on the basis they failed to comply with these additional procedures.

==See also==
* Intervention (law)

==References==
==External links==
* Amicus curiae at the &quot;Merriam-Webster Online Dictionary&quot;
* Amicus curiae at the MSN Encarta Dictionary (2009-10-31)
* Definitions from Dictionary.com
* Amicus curiae at The Free Dictionary, Thesaurus and Encyclopedia</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1686000" start="69" end="74" title="Party (law)" label="party"/>
<link wikidata="Q41487" start="126" end="131" title="court" label="court"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062797" start="342" end="353" title="legal Latin" label="legal Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q692218" start="579" end="591" title="American law" label="American law"/>
<link wikidata="Q46350" start="927" end="951" title="Amicus curiae" label="&amp;quot;amicus&amp;quot; brief"/>
<link wikidata="Q181756" start="985" end="991" title="Canadian law" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q40348" start="1027" end="1033" title="lawyer" label="lawyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262438" start="1226" end="1245" title="international court" label="international court"/>
<link wikidata="Q2292948" start="1269" end="1280" title="Intervention (law)" label="intervenors"/>
<link wikidata="Q46350" start="1292" end="1318" title="Amicus curiae" label="amicus curiae observations"/>
<link wikidata="Q162314" start="1419" end="1445" title="Roman law" label="Roman juridical experience"/>
<link wikidata="Q80839" start="1628" end="1633" title="lingua franca" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062797" start="1648" end="1665" title="List of Latin legal terms" label="Latin legal terms"/>
<link wikidata="Q2721171" start="1687" end="1698" title="Law of the United Kingdom" label="English law"/>
<link wikidata="Q692218" start="1721" end="1745" title="Law of the United States" label="Law of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138780" start="2044" end="2055" title="English law" label="English law"/>
<link wikidata="Q30216" start="2091" end="2101" title="common law" label="common law"/>
<link wikidata="Q4394526" start="2139" end="2156" title="international law" label="international law"/>
<link wikidata="Q8458" start="2183" end="2195" title="human rights" label="human rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q5950118" start="2235" end="2244" title="Civil law (legal system)" label="civil law"/>
<link wikidata="Q414" start="2295" end="2304" title="Argentina" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q783" start="2327" end="2335" title="Honduras" label="Honduras"/>
<link wikidata="Q122880" start="2397" end="2427" title="European Court of Human Rights" label="European Court of Human Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q1589444" start="2433" end="2474" title="Inter-American Commission on Human Rights" label="Inter-American Commission on Human Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547804" start="2480" end="2516" title="Inter-American Court of Human Rights" label="Inter-American Court of Human Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q4951" start="2522" end="2560" title="Court of Justice of the European Union" label="Court of Justice of the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109786" start="2569" end="2597" title="Special Tribunal for Lebanon" label="Special Tribunal for Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148684" start="2693" end="2705" title="Cyril Salmon, Baron Salmon" label="Cyril Salmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q431603" start="2851" end="2865" title="interest group" label="advocacy group"/>
<link wikidata="Q4959031" start="2900" end="2915" title="appellate court" label="appellate court"/>
<link wikidata="Q697327" start="2937" end="2945" title="litigant" label="litigant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090817" start="3036" end="3047" title="lower court" label="lower court"/>
<link wikidata="Q21637" start="3664" end="3694" title="American Civil Liberties Union" label="American Civil Liberties Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q6484780" start="3700" end="3725" title="Landmark Legal Foundation" label="Landmark Legal Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7122531" start="3731" end="3755" title="Pacific Legal Foundation" label="Pacific Legal Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q624023" start="3761" end="3791" title="Electronic Frontier Foundation" label="Electronic Frontier Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q463684" start="3797" end="3832" title="American Center for Law &amp;amp; Justice" label="American Center for Law and Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967560" start="3840" end="3894" title="National Organization for the Reform of Marijuana Laws" label="National Organization for the Reform of Marijuana Laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="4134" end="4147" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q194907" start="4149" end="4163" title="United States federal courts" label="federal courts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2515622" start="4195" end="4212" title="constitutionality" label="constitutionality"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="4351" end="4364" title="United States Supreme Court" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q5360440" start="4376" end="4395" title="McDonald v. Chicago" label="McDonald v. Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q11033" start="4578" end="4589" title="print media" label="print media"/>
<link wikidata="Q202833" start="4594" end="4606" title="social media" label="social media"/>
<link wikidata="Q30849" start="4904" end="4908" title="blog" label="blog"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="4978" end="4991" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="5271" end="5305" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="Supreme Court of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q6917783" start="6397" end="6413" title="motion for leave" label="motion for leave"/>
<link wikidata="Q7099379" start="6520" end="6533" title="Oral argument in the United States" label="oral argument"/>
<link wikidata="Q319630" start="7123" end="7133" title="Henry Clay" label="Henry Clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q181756" start="7186" end="7198" title="Canadian law" label="Canadian law"/>
<link wikidata="Q707748" start="7559" end="7568" title="legal aid" label="legal aid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124012" start="7671" end="7693" title="miscarriage of justice" label="miscarriage of justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091694" start="9623" end="9636" title="Criminal Code (Canada)" label="Criminal Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q2135331" start="9967" end="9978" title="Italian law" label="Italian law"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825" start="10326" end="10350" title="World Trade Organization" label="World Trade Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q79913" start="10543" end="10573" title="non-governmental organizations" label="non-governmental organizations"/>
<link wikidata="Q3019624" start="11270" end="11302" title="Dispute Settlement Understanding" label="Dispute Settlement Understanding"/>
<link wikidata="Q4781004" start="11342" end="11356" title="Appellate Body" label="Appellate Body"/>
<link wikidata="Q104085" start="12338" end="12346" title="asbestos" label="asbestos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2292948" start="12919" end="12937" title="Intervention (law)" label="Intervention (law)"/>
<link wikidata="Q585329" start="13002" end="13035" title="Merriam-Webster Online Dictionary" label="Merriam-Webster Online Dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q231136" start="13065" end="13087" title="MSN Encarta" label="MSN Encarta Dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q16960686" start="13120" end="13134" title="Dictionary.com" label="Dictionary.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q4355609" start="13154" end="13201" title="The Free Dictionary" label="The Free Dictionary, Thesaurus and Encyclopedia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="236335" wikidata="Q6616856" url="?curid=236335" title="List of diseases (C)">
<text>This is a list of diseases starting with the letter &quot;C&quot;.


==C==
* C syndrome
* C1 esterase deficiency (angioedema)

==Ca==
===Cac–Cal===
* Cacchi–Ricci disease
* CACH syndrome
* Café au lait spots syndrome
* Caffeine-induced sleep disorder
* Caffey disease
* CAHMR syndrome
* Calcinosis cutis (see also CREST syndrome)
* Calciphylaxis
* Calculi
* Calderon–Gonzalez–Cantu syndrome
* Calloso genital dysplasia
* Callus disease
* Calpainopathy
* Calvarial doughnut lesions-bone fragility syndrome
* Calvarial hyperostosis

===Cam–Can===
* Camera–Marugo–Cohen syndrome
* Camfak syndrome
* Campomelia Cumming type
* Camptobrachydactyly
* Camptocormia
* Camptodactyly fibrous tissue hyperplasia skeletal dysplasia
* Camptodactyly joint contractures facial skeletal dysplasia
* Camptodactyly overgrowth unusual facies
* Camptodactyly syndrome Guadalajara type 1
* Camptodactyly syndrome Guadalajara type 2
* Camptodactyly-taurinuria syndrome
* Camptodactyly vertebral fusion
* Campylobacteriosis
* Camurati–Engelmann disease
* Canavan leukodystrophy
* Candidiasis
** Chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis
* Canga&#x27;s bead symptom
* Canine distemper
* Cannabis dependence
* Cannabis withdrawal
* Cantalamessa–Baldini–Ambrosi syndrome
* Cantu–Sanchez–Corona–Fragoso syndrome
* Cantu–Sanchez–Corona–Garcia syndrome
* Cantu–Sanchez–Corona–Hernandes syndrome

===Cap===
* Capillary leak syndrome
* Capillary leak syndrome with monoclonal gammopathy
* Capillary venous leptomeningeal angiomatosis
* Caplan&#x27;s syndrome
* CAPOS syndrome

===Car===

====Cara–Carc====
* Caratolo–Cilio–Pessagno syndrome
* Carbamoyl phosphate synthetase deficiency
* Carbamoyl phosphate synthetase I deficiency
* Carbohydrate deficient glycoprotein syndrome
* Carbon baby syndrome
* Carbonic anhydrase II deficiency
* Carcinoid syndrome
* Carcinoma of the vocal tract
* Carcinoma, squamous cell
* Carcinoma, squamous cell of head and neck
* Carcinophobia

====Card====

=====Cardi=====

======Cardia======
* Cardiac amyloidosis
* Cardiac and laterality defects
* Cardiac arrest
* Cardiac conduction defect, familial
* Cardiac diverticulum
* Cardiac hydatid cysts with intracavitary expansion
* Cardiac malformation
* Cardiac tamponade
* Cardiac valvular dysplasia, X-linked

======Cardio======
* Cardioauditory syndrome
* Cardioauditory syndrome of Sanchez-Cascos
* Cardiofacial syndrome short limbs
* Cardiofaciocutaneous syndrome
* Cardiogenital syndrome
* Cardiomelic syndrome Stratton Koehler type
* Cardiomyopathy:
** Arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy
** Cardiomyopathic lentiginosis
** Cardiomyopathy cataract hip spine disease
** Cardiomyopathy diabetes deafness
** Dilated cardiomyopathy: Cardiomyopathy dilated with conduction defect type 1, Cardiomyopathy dilated with conduction defect type 2, Cardiomyopathy, familial dilated
** Cardiomyopathy due to anthracyclines
** Cardiomyopathy hearing loss type t RNA lysine gene mutation
** Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: familial
** Cardiomyopathy hypogonadism metabolic anomalies
** Cardiomyopathy spherocytosis
** Cardiomyopathy, fatal fetal, due to myocardial calcification
** Cardiomyopathy, X linked, fatal infantile
** Restrictive cardiomyopathy
* Cardioskeletal myopathy-neutropenia
* Cardiospasm
* Cardiospondylocarpofacial syndrome

====Care–Carr====
* Caregiver syndrome
* Carey–Fineman–Ziter syndrome
* Carnevale–Canun–Mendoza syndrome
* Carnevale–Hernandez–Castillo syndrome
* Carnevale–Krajewska–Fischetto syndrome
* Carney syndrome
* Carnitine palmitoyl transferase deficiency
:* Carnitine palmitoyltransferase I deficiency
:* Carnitine palmitoyltransferase II deficiency
* Carnitine transporter deficiency
* Carnitine-acylcarnitine translocase deficiency
* Carnosinase deficiency
* Carnosinemia
* Caroli disease
* Carotenemia
* Carotid artery dissection
* Carpal deformity migrognathia microstomia
* Carpal tunnel syndrome
* Carpenter syndrome
* Carpenter–Hunter type
* Carpo tarsal osteolysis recessive
* Carpotarsal osteochondromatosis
* Carrington syndrome

====Cart====
* Cartilage hair hypoplasia like syndrome
* Cartilage–hair hypoplasia
* Cartilaginous neoplasms
* Cartwright–Nelson–Fryns syndrome

===Cas===
* Cassia–Stocco–Dos Santos syndrome
* Castleman&#x27;s disease
* Castro–Gago–Pombo–Novo syndrome

===Cat===
* Cat-cry syndrome – see Cri du chat syndrome
* Cat-eye syndrome aka Schmid–Fraccaro syndrome
* Cat-scratch disease

====Cata====
* Cataract
* Cataract, congenital ichthyosis
* Cataract aberrant oral frenula growth retardation
* Cataract anterior polar dominant
* Cataract-ataxia-deafness syndrome
* Cataract cardiomyopathy
* Cataract congenital autosomal dominant
* Cataract congenital dominant non nuclear
* Cataract congenital Volkmann type
* Cataract congenital with microphthalmia
* Cataract dental syndrome
* Cataract Hutterite type
* Cataract hypertrichosis mental retardation
* Cataract mental retardation hypogonadism
* Cataract microcornea syndrome
* Cataract microphthalmia septal defect
* Cataract skeletal anomalies
* Cataract, alopecia, sclerodactyly
* Cataract, congenital, with microcornea or slight microphthalmia
* Cataract, total congenital
* Cataract-glaucoma

====Catc–Cate====
* CATCH 22 syndrome
* Catecholamine hypertension
* Catel–Manzke syndrome

===Cau–Cay===
* Caudal appendage deafness
* Caudal duplication
* Caudal regression syndrome
* Causalgia
* Cavernous hemangioma
* Cavernous lymphangioma
* Cavernous sinus thrombosis
* Cayler syndrome

==Cc–Cd==
* CCA syndrome
* Ccge syndrome
* CCHS
* CDG syndrome
* CDG syndrome type 1A
* CDG syndrome type 1B
* CDG syndrome type 1C
* CDG syndrome type 2
* CDG syndrome type 3
* CDG syndrome type 4
* CDK4 linked melanoma

==Ce==
===Cec–Cep===
* Cecato De lima Pinheiro syndrome
* Celiac disease epilepsy occipital calcifications
* Celiac sprue
* Cenani–Lenz syndactylism
* Cennamo–Gangemi syndrome
* Central core disease
* Central diabetes insipidus
* Central nervous system protozoal infections
* Central serous chorioretinopathy
* Central type neurofibromatosis
* Centromeric instability immunodeficiency syndrome
* Centronuclear myopathy
* Centrotemporal epilepsy
* Cephalopolysyndactyly

===Cer===

====Cera====
* Ceramidase deficiency
* Ceramide trihexosidosis
* Ceraunophobia

====Cere====

=====Cereb=====

======Cerebe======
* Cerebellar agenesis
* Cerebellar ataxia areflexia pes cavus optic atrophy
* Cerebellar ataxia ectodermal dysplasia
* Cerebellar ataxia infantile with progressive external ophthalmoplegia
* Cerebellar ataxia, dominant pure
* Cerebellar degeneration
* Cerebellar degeneration, subacute
* Cerebellar hypoplasia
* Cerebellar hypoplasia endosteal sclerosis
* Cerebellar hypoplasia tapetoretinal degeneration
* Cerebellar parenchymal degeneration
* Cerebelloolivary atrophy
* Cerebelloparenchymal disorder 3
* Cerebellum agenesis hydrocephaly

======Cerebr======
* Cerebral amyloid angiopathy
* Cerebral amyloid angiopathy, familial
* Cerebral aneurysm
* Cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy
* Cerebral calcification cerebellar hypoplasia
* Cerebral calcifications opalescent teeth phosphaturia
* Cerebral cavernous malformation
* Cerebral cavernous malformations
* Cerebral gigantism
* Cerebral gigantism jaw cysts
* Cerebral hypoxia
* Cerebral malformations hypertrichosis claw hands
* Cerebral palsy
* Cerebral thrombosis
* Cerebral ventricle neoplasms
* Cerebro facio articular syndrome
* Cerebro facio thoracic dysplasia
* Cerebro oculo dento auriculo skeletal syndrome
* Cerebro oculo genital syndrome
* Cerebro oculo skeleto renal syndrome
* Cerebro reno digital syndrome
* Cerebroarthrodigital syndrome
* Cerebro-costo-mandibular syndrome
* Cerebro-oculo-facio-skeletal syndrome
* Cerebroretinal vasculopathy

====Cero–Cerv====
* Ceroid lipofuscinois, neuronal
* Ceroid lipofuscinois, neuronal 1, infantile
* Ceroid lipofuscinois, neuronal 2, late infantile
* Ceroid lipofuscinois, neuronal 3, juvenile
* Ceroid lipofuscinois, neuronal 4, adult type
* Ceroid lipofuscinois, neuronal 5, late infantile
* Ceroid lipofuscinois, neuronal 6, late infantile
* Cervical cancer
* Cervical hypertrichosis neuropathy
* Cervical hypertrichosis peripheral neuropathy
* Cervical ribs sprengel anomaly polydactyly
* Cervical spinal stenosis
* Cervical vertebral fusion
* Cervicooculoacoustic syndrome

==Ch==
===Cha===

====Chag–Chao====
* Chagas disease
* Chalazion
* Chanarin disease
* Chanarin–Dorfman syndrome ichthyosis
* Chancroid
* Chandler&#x27;s syndrome
* Chands syndrome
* Chang–Davidson–Carlson syndrome
* Chaotic atrial tachycardia

====Char====
* Char syndrome

=====Charcot=====
Charcot d
* Charcot disease
Charcot–Marie–Tooth disease
* Charcot–Marie–Tooth disease
* Charcot–Marie–Tooth disease deafness dominant type
* Charcot–Marie–Tooth disease deafness mental retardation
* Charcot–Marie–Tooth disease deafness recessive type
* Charcot–Marie–Tooth disease type 1 aplasia cutis congenita
* Charcot–Marie–Tooth disease type 1A
* Charcot–Marie–Tooth disease type 1B
* Charcot–Marie–Tooth disease type 1C
* Charcot–Marie–Tooth disease type 2A
* Charcot–Marie–Tooth disease type 2B1
* Charcot–Marie–Tooth disease type 2B2
* Charcot–Marie–Tooth disease type 2C
* Charcot–Marie–Tooth disease type 2D
* Charcot–Marie–Tooth disease type 4A
* Charcot–Marie–Tooth disease type 4B
* Charcot–Marie–Tooth disease with ptosis and parkinsonism
* Charcot–Marie–Tooth disease, intermediate form
* Charcot–Marie–Tooth disease, neuronal, type A
* Charcot–Marie–Tooth disease, neuronal, type B
* Charcot–Marie–Tooth disease, neuronal, type D
* Charcot–Marie–Tooth disease, X-linked type 2, recessive
* Charcot–Marie–Tooth disease, X-linked type 3, recessive
* Charcot–Marie–Tooth peroneal muscular atrophy, X-linked

=====Charg–Charl=====
* CHARGE syndrome
* Charles&#x27; disease
* Charlie M syndrome

====Chav====
* Chavany–Brunhes syndrome

===Che===
* Chediak–Higashi syndrome
* Cheilitis glandularis
* Chemke–Oliver–Mallek syndrome
* Chemodectoma
* Chemophobia
* Chen-Kung Ho–Kaufman–Mcalister syndrome
* Cherubism

===Chi–Chl===
* Chiari type 1 malformation
* Chiari–Frommel syndrome
* Chickenpox
* Chikungunya
* CHILD syndrome ichthyosis
* Childhood disintegrative disorder
* Childhood pustular psoriasis
* Chimerism
* Chinese restaurant syndrome
* Chitayat–Haj–Chahine syndrome
* Chitayat–Meunier–Hodgkinson syndrome
* Chitayat–Moore–Del Bigio syndrome
* Chitty–Hall–Baraitser syndrome
* Chitty–Hall–Webb syndrome
* Chlamydia
* Chlamydia pneumoniae
* Chlamydia trachomatis
* Chlamydial and gonococcal conjunctivitis

===Cho===

====Choa–Chol====
* Choanal atresia deafness cardiac defects dysmorphia
* Cholangiocarcinoma
* Cholangitis, primary sclerosing
* Cholecystitis
* Choledochal cyst, hand malformation
* Cholelithiasis
* Cholemia, familial
* Cholera
* Cholestasis
* Cholestasis pigmentary retinopathy cleft palate
* Cholestasis, progressive familial intrahepatic
* Cholestasis, progressive familial intrahepatic 1
* Cholestasis, progressive familial intrahepatic 2
* Cholestasis, progressive familial intrahepatic 3
* Cholestatic jaundice renal tubular insufficiency
* Cholesterol ester storage disease
* Cholesterol esterification disorder
* Cholesterol pneumonia

====Chon====
* Chondroblastoma
* Chondrocalcinosis
* Chondrocalcinosis familial articular
* Chondrodysplasia lethal recessive
* Chondrodysplasia pseudohermaphrodism syndrome
* Chondrodysplasia punctata
* Chondrodysplasia punctata 1, x-linked recessive
* Chondrodysplasia punctata with steroid sulfatase deficiency
* Chondrodysplasia punctata, brachytelephalangic
* Chondrodysplasia punctata, Sheffield type
* Chondrodysplasia situs inversus imperforate anus polydactyly
* Chondrodysplasia, Grebe type
* Chondrodystrophy
* Chondroectodermal dysplasia
* Chondroma (benign)
* Chondromalacia
* Chondromatosis (benign)
* Chondrosarcoma (malignant)
* Chondrysplasia punctata, humero-metacarpal type

====Chor====
* Chordoma
* Chorea
* Chorea acanthocytosis
* Chorea familial benign
* Chorea minor
* Choreoacanthocytosis amyotrophic
* Choreoathetosis familial paroxysmal
* Choriocarcinoma
* Chorioretinitis
* Chorioretinopathy dominant form microcephaly
* Choroid plexus cyst
* Choroid plexus neoplasms
* Choroidal atrophy alopecia
* Choroideremia
* Choroideremia hypopituitarism
* Choroiditis
* Choroiditis, serpiginous
* Choroido cerebral calcification syndrome infantile

===Chr===

====Chri====
* Christian–Demyer–Franken syndrome
* Christian–Johnson–Angenieta syndrome
* Christian syndrome
* Christianson–Fourie syndrome
* Christmas disease

====Chro====

=====Chrom=====
* Chromhidrosis

======Chromo======
Chromom–Chromop
* Chromomycosis
* Chromophobe renal carcinoma
Chromos
Chromosoma
* Chromosomal triplication
Chromosome
Chromosome 1
* Chromosome 1 ring
* Chromosome 1, 1p36 deletion syndrome
* Chromosome 1, deletion q21 q25
* Chromosome 1, duplication 1p21 p32
* Chromosome 1, monosomy 1p
* Chromosome 1, monosomy 1p22 p13
* Chromosome 1, monosomy 1p31 p22
* Chromosome 1, monosomy 1p32
* Chromosome 1, monosomy 1p34 p32
* Chromosome 1, monosomy 1q25 q32
* Chromosome 1, monosomy 1q32 q42
* Chromosome 1, monosomy 1q4
* Chromosome 1, q42 11 q42 12 duplication
* Chromosome 1, trisomy 1q32 qter
* Chromosome 1, trisomy 1q42 qter
* Chromosome 1, uniparental disomy 1q12 q21
Chromosome 10 – Chromosome 12
* Chromosome 10 ring
* Chromosome 10, distal trisomy 10q
* Chromosome 10, monosomy 10p
* Chromosome 10, monosomy 10q
* Chromosome 10, trisomy 10p
* Chromosome 10, trisomy 10pter p13
* Chromosome 10, trisomy 10q
* Chromosome 10, uniparental disomy of
* Chromosome 10p terminal deletion syndrome
* Chromosome 11, deletion 11p
* Chromosome 11, partial trisomy 11q
* Chromosome 11-14 translocation
* Chromosome 11p, partial deletion
* Chromosome 11q partial deletion
* Chromosome 11q trisomy
* Chromosome 12 ring
* Chromosome 12, 12p trisomy
* Chromosome 12, trisomy 12q
* Chromosome 12p deletion
* Chromosome 12p partial deletion
Chromosome 13 – Chromosome 15
* Chromosome 13 duplication
* Chromosome 13 ring
* Chromosome 13, partial monosomy 13q
* Chromosome 13p duplication
* Chromosome 13q deletion
* Chromosome 13q trisomy
* Chromosome 13q-mosaicism
* Chromosome 14 ring
* Chromosome 14 trisomy
* Chromosome 14, deletion 14q, partial duplication 14p
* Chromosome 14, trisomy mosaic
* Chromosome 14q, partial deletions
* Chromosome 14q, proximal duplication
* Chromosome 14q, terminal deletion
* Chromosome 14q, terminal duplication
* Chromosome 15 ring
* Chromosome 15, distal trisomy 15q
* Chromosome 15, trisomy mosaicism
* Chromosome 15q, partial deletion
* Chromosome 15q, tetrasomy
* Chromosome 15q, trisomy
Chromosome 16 – Chromosome 1q
* Chromosome 16, trisomy 16p
* Chromosome 16, trisomy 16q
* Chromosome 16, trisomy
* Chromosome 16, uniparental disomy
* Chromosome 17 trisomy
* Chromosome 17 deletion
* Chromosome 17 ring
* Chromosome 17, deletion 17q23 q24
* Chromosome 17, trisomy 17p
* Chromosome 17, trisomy 17p11 2
* Chromosome 17, trisomy 17q22
* Chromosome 18 long arm deletion syndrome
* Chromosome 18 mosaic monosomy
* Chromosome 18 ring
* Chromosome 18, deletion 18q23
* Chromosome 18, monosomy 18p
* Chromosome 18, tetrasomy 18p
* Chromosome 18, trisomy 18p
* Chromosome 18, trisomy 18q
* Chromosome 18, trisomy
* Chromosome 19 ring
* Chromosome 19, trisomy 19q
* Chromosome 1q, duplication 1q12 q21
Chromosome 2
* Chromosome 2, monosomy 2p22
* Chromosome 2, monosomy 2pter p24
* Chromosome 2, monosomy 2q
* Chromosome 2, monosomy 2q24
* Chromosome 2, monosomy 2q37
* Chromosome 2, trisomy 2p
* Chromosome 2, Trisomy 2p13 p21
* Chromosome 2, trisomy 2pter p24
* Chromosome 2, trisomy 2q
* Chromosome 2, trisomy 2q37
Chromosome 20 – Chromosome 22
* Chromosome 20 ring
* Chromosome 20, deletion 20p
* Chromosome 20, duplication 20p
* Chromosome 20, trisomy
* Chromosome 21 monosomy
* Chromosome 21 ring
* Chromosome 21, monosomy 21q22
* Chromosome 21, tetrasomy 21q
* Chromosome 21, uniparental disomy of
* Chromosome 22 ring
* Chromosome 22 trisomy mosaic
* Chromosome 22, microdeletion 22 q11
* Chromosome 22, monosome mosaic
* Chromosome 22, trisomy q11 q13
* Chromosome 22, trisomy
Chromosome 3
* Chromosome 3 duplication syndrome
* Chromosome 3, monosomy 3p
* Chromosome 3, monosomy 3p14 p11
* Chromosome 3, monosomy 3p2
* Chromosome 3, monosomy 3p25
* Chromosome 3, monosomy 3q13
* Chromosome 3, monosomy 3q21 23
* Chromosome 3, monosomy 3q27
* Chromosome 3, trisomy 3p
* Chromosome 3, trisomy 3p25
* Chromosome 3, trisomy 3q
* Chromosome 3, trisomy 3q13 2 q25
* Chromosome 3, Trisomy 3q2
Chromosome 4 – Chromosome 5
* Chromosome 4 ring
* Chromosome 4 short arm deletion
* Chromosome 4, monosomy 4p14 p16
* Chromosome 4, monosomy 4q
* Chromosome 4, monosomy 4q32
* Chromosome 4, monosomy distal 4q
* Chromosome 4, partial trisomy distal 4q
* Chromosome 4, Trisomy 4p
* Chromosome 4, trisomy 4q
* Chromosome 4, trisomy 4q21
* Chromosome 4, trisomy 4q25 qter
* Chromosome 5, monosomy 5q35
* Chromosome 5, trisomy 5p
* Chromosome 5, trisomy 5pter p13 3
* Chromosome 5, trisomy 5q
* Chromosome 5, uniparental disomy
Chromosome 6 – Chromosome 7
* Chromosome 6 ring
* Chromosome 6, deletion 6q13 q15
* Chromosome 6, monosomy 6p23
* Chromosome 6, monosomy 6q
* Chromosome 6, monosomy 6q1
* Chromosome 6, monosomy 6q2
* Chromosome 6, partial trisomy 6q
* Chromosome 6, trisomy 6p
* Chromosome 6, trisomy 6q
* Chromosome 7 ring
* Chromosome 7, monosomy 7q2
* Chromosome 7, monosomy 7q21
* Chromosome 7, monosomy 7q3
* Chromosome 7, monosomy
* Chromosome 7, partial monosomy 7p
* Chromosome 7, trisomy 7p
* Chromosome 7, trisomy 7p13 p12 2
* Chromosome 7, trisomy 7q
* Chromosome 7, trisomy mosaic
Chromosome 8 – Chromosome 9
* Chromosome 8 deletion
* Chromosome 8 ring
* Chromosome 8, monosomy 8p
* Chromosome 8, monosomy 8p2
* Chromosome 8, monosomy 8p23 1
* Chromosome 8, monosomy 8q
* Chromosome 8, mosaic trisomy
* Chromosome 8, partial trisomy
* Chromosome 8, trisomy 8p
* Chromosome 8, trisomy 8q
* Chromosome 8, trisomy
* Chromosome 9 inversion or duplication
* Chromosome 9 Ring
* Chromosome 9, duplication 9q21
* Chromosome 9, monosomy 9p
* Chromosome 9, partial monosomy 9p
* Chromosome 9, partial trisomy 9p
* Chromosome 9, tetrasomy 9p
* Chromosome 9, trisomy 9q
* Chromosome 9, trisomy 9q32
* Chromosome 9, trisomy mosaic
* Chromosome 9, trisomy
Chromosomes
* Chromosomes 1 and 2, monosomy 2q duplication 1p

=====Chron=====
* Chronic berylliosis
* Chronic bronchitis
* Chronic demyelinizing neuropathy with IgM monoclonal
* Chronic erosive gastritis
* Chronic fatigue immune dysfunction syndrome
* Chronic fatigue syndrome
* Chronic granulomatous disease
* Chronic hiccup
* Chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy
* Chronic lymphocytic leukemia
* Chronic mountain sickness
* Chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis
* Chronic myelogenous leukemia
* Chronic myelomonocytic leukemia
* Chronic necrotizing vasculitis
* Chronic neutropenia
* Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
* Chronic polyradiculoneuritis
* Chronic recurrent multifocal osteomyelitis
* Chronic renal failure
* Chronic spasmodic dysphonia
* Chronic, infantile, neurological, cutaneous, articular syndrome

===Chu–Chy===
* Chudley–Lowry–Hoar syndrome
* Chudley–Rozdilsky syndrome
* Chudley–Mccullough syndrome
* Churg–Strauss syndrome
* Chylous ascites

==Ci==
* Cicatricial pemphigoid
* Ciguatera fish poisoning
* Ciliary discoordination, due to random ciliary orientation
* Ciliary dyskinesia, due to transposition of ciliary microtubules
* Ciliary dyskinesia-bronchiectasis
* Cilliers–Beighton syndrome
* Cinchonism
* Circumscribed cutaneous aplasia of the vertex
* Circumscribed disseminated keratosis Jadassohn–Lew type
* Citrullinemia

==Cl==
===Cla===
* Clarkson disease
* Clayton–Smith–Donnai syndrome

===Cle===

====Clef====

=====Cleft=====

======Cleft h – Cleft l======
* Cleft hand absent tibia
* Cleft lip
* Cleft lip and palate malrotation cardiopathy
* Cleft lip and/or palate with mucous cysts of lower
* Cleft lip palate abnormal thumbs microcephaly
* Cleft lip palate deafness sacral lipoma
* Cleft lip palate dysmorphism Kumar type
* Cleft lip palate ectrodactyly
* Cleft lip palate incisor and finger anomalies
* Cleft lip palate mental retardation corneal opacity
* Cleft lip palate oligodontia syndactyly pili torti
* Cleft lip palate pituitary deficiency
* Cleft lip palate-tetraphocomelia
* Cleft lip with or without cleft palate
* Cleft lower lip cleft lateral canthi chorioretinal

======Cleft p – Cleft u======
* Cleft palate
* Cleft palate cardiac defect ectrodactyly
* Cleft palate colobomata radial synostosis deafness
* Cleft palate heart disease polydactyly absent tibia
* Cleft palate lateral synechia syndrome
* Cleft palate short stature vertebral anomalies
* Cleft palate stapes fixation oligodontia
* Cleft palate X linked
* Cleft tongue syndrome
* Cleft upper lip median cutaneous polyps

======Clefti======
* Clefting ectropion conical teeth

====Clei====
* Cleidocranial dysplasia
* Cleidocranial dysplasia micrognathia absent thumbs

===Cli–Clu===
* Cloacal exstrophy
* Clonal hypereosinophilia
* Clouston syndrome
* Cloverleaf skull bone dysplasia
* Cloverleaf skull micromelia thoracic dysplasia
* Clubfoot
* Cluster headache

==Cm==
* CMV antenatal infection

==Co==
===Coa–Cof===
* COACH syndrome
* Coal workers&#x27; pneumoconiosis
* Coarctation of aorta dominant
* Coarse face hypotonia constipation
* Coats disease
* Cocaine antenatal infection
* Cocaine dependence
* Cocaine fetopathy
* Cocaine intoxication
* Coccidioidomycosis
* Cochin Jewish Disorder
* Cockayne syndrome type 1
* Cockayne syndrome type 2
* Cockayne syndrome type 3
* Cockayne&#x27;s syndrome
* CODAS syndrome
* Codesette syndrome
* Coeliac disease

* Coenzyme Q cytochrome c reductase deficiency of
* Coffin–Lowry syndrome
* Coffin–Siris syndrome
* COFS syndrome

===Cog–Coh===
* Cogan–Reese syndrome
* Cogan syndrome
* Cohen-Gibson syndrome
* Cohen–Hayden syndrome
* Cohen–Lockood–Wyborney syndrome
* Cohen syndrome

===Col===

====Cola–Coll====
* Colavita–Kozlowski syndrome
*Cold abscess
* Cold agglutination syndrome
* Cold agglutinin disease
* Cold antibody hemolytic anemia
* Cold contact urticaria
* Cold urticaria
* Cole carpenter syndrome
* Coleman–Thome syndrome
* Colitis
* Collagen disorder
* Collagenous colitis
* Collaural fistula
* Collins–Pope syndrome
* Collins–Sakati syndrome

====Colo–Colv====
* Coloboma chorioretinal cerebellar vermis aplasia
* Coloboma hair abnormality
* Coloboma of choroid and retina
* Coloboma of eye lens
* Coloboma of iris
* Coloboma of lens ala nasi
* Coloboma of macula-brachydactyly type B syndrome
* Coloboma of macula
* Coloboma of optic nerve
* Coloboma of optic papilla
* Coloboma porencephaly hydronephrosis
* Coloboma uveal with cleft lip palate and mental retardation
* Coloboma, ocular
* Colobomata unilobar lung heart defect
* Colobomatous microphthalmia heart disease hearing
* Colobomatous microphthalmia
* Colon cancer, familial nonpolyposis
* Colonic atresia
* Colonic malakoplakia
* Color blindness
* Colorado tick fever
* Colver–Steer–Godman syndrome

===Com===
* Combarros–Calleja–Leno syndrome
* Combined hyperlipidemia, familial
* Combined malonic and methylmalonic aciduria
* Common cold
* Common mesentery
* Common variable immunodeficiency
* Compartment syndrome
* Complement component 2 deficiency
* Complement component receptor 1
* Complete atrioventricular canal
* Complex 1 mitochondrial respiratory chain deficiency
* Complex 2 mitochondrial respiratory chain deficiency
* Complex 3 mitochondrial respiratory chain deficiency
* Complex 4 mitochondrial respiratory chain deficiency
* Complex 5 mitochondrial respiratory chain deficiency
* Complex regional pain syndrome

===Con===

====Cond–Cone====
* Conduct disorder
* Conductive deafness malformed external ear
* Conductive hearing loss
* Condyloma acuminatum
* Condylomata lata
* Cone dystrophy
* Cone rod dystrophy amelogenesis imperfecta
* Cone-rod dystrophy

====Cong====

=====Conge=====

======Congen======
Congenital a – Congenital b
* Congenital absence of the uterus and vagina
* Congenital adrenal hyperplasia
** Congenital adrenal hyperplasia due to 11β-hydroxylase deficiency
** Congenital adrenal hyperplasia due to 17 alpha-hydroxylase deficiency
** Congenital adrenal hyperplasia due to 21-hydroxylase deficiency
** Congenital adrenal hyperplasia due to 3 beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase deficiency
** Congenital adrenal hyperplasia, lipoid
* Congenital afibrinogenemia
* Congenital alopecia X linked
* Congenital amputation
* Congenital aneurysms of the great vessels
* Congenital antithrombin III deficiency
* Congenital aplastic anemia
* Congenital arteriovenous shunt
* Congenital articular rigidity
* Congenital benign spinal muscular atrophy dominant
* Congenital brain disorder
* Congenital bronchobiliary fistula
Congenital c – Congenital g
* Congenital cardiovascular disorder
* Congenital cardiovascular malformations
* Congenital cardiovascular shunt
* Congenital central hypoventilation syndrome
* Congenital constricting band
* Congenital contractural arachnodactyly
* Congenital contractures
* Congenital craniosynostosis maternal hyperthyroiditis
* Congenital cystic adenomatoid malformation
* Congenital cystic eye multiple ocular and intracranial anomalies
* Congenital cytomegalovirus
* Congenital deafness
* Congenital diaphragmatic hernia
* Congenital disorder of glycosylation
* Congenital dyserythropoietic anemia
* Congenital erythropoietic porphyria
* Congenital facial diplegia
* Congenital fiber type disproportion
* Congenital gastrointestinal disorder
* Congenital generalized fibromatosis
* Congenital giant megaureter
Congenital h – Congenital l
* Congenital heart block
* Congenital heart disease ptosis hypodontia craniostosis
* Congenital heart disease radio ulnar synostosis mental retardation
* Congenital heart disorder
* Congenital heart septum defect
* Congenital hemidysplasia with ichthyosiform erythroderma and limbs defects
* Congenital hemolytic anemia
* Congenital hepatic fibrosis
* Congenital hepatic porphyria
* Congenital herpes simplex
* Congenital hypomyelination neuropathy
* Congenital hypothyroidism
* Congenital hypotrichosis milia
* Congenital ichthyosis, microcephalus, q­riplegia
* Congenital ichthyosis
* Congenital ichtyosiform erythroderma
* Congenital insensitivity to pain with anhidrosis
* Congenital kidney disorder
* Congenital limb deficiency
* Congenital lobar emphysema
Congenital m – Congenital s
* Congenital megacolon
* Congenital megaloureter
* Congenital mesoblastic nephroma
* Congenital microvillous atrophy
* Congenital mitral malformation
* Congenital mitral stenosis
* Congenital mixovirus
* Congenital mumps
* Congenital muscular dystrophy syringomyelia
* Congenital myopathy
* Congenital nephrotic syndrome
* Congenital nonhemolytic jaundice
* Congenital rubella
* Congenital short bowel
* Congenital short femur
* Congenital skeletal disorder
* Congenital skin disorder
* Congenital spherocytic anemia
* Congenital spherocytic hemolytic anemia
* Congenital stenosis of cervical medullary canal
* Congenital sucrose isomaltose malabsorption
* Congenital syphilis
Congenital t – Congenital v
* Congenital toxoplasmosis
* Congenital unilateral pulmonary hypoplasia
* Congenital vagal hyperreflexivity
* Congenital varicella syndrome

======Conges======
* Congestive heart failure

=====Conju=====
* Conjunctivitis ligneous
* Conjunctivitis with pseudomembrane
* Conjunctivitis

====Conn–Conv====
* Connective tissue dysplasia Spellacy type
* Connexin 26 anomaly
* Conn&#x27;s syndrome
* Conotruncal heart malformations
* Conradi–Hünermann syndrome
* Constitutional growth delay
* Constrictive bronchiolitis
* Contact dermatitis
:* Contact dermatitis, allergic
:* Contact dermatitis, irritant
:* Contact dermatitis, photocontact
* Continuous muscle fiber activity hereditary
* Continuous spike-wave during slow sleep syndrome
* Contractural arachnodactyly
* Contractures ectodermal dysplasia cleft lip palate
* Contractures hyperkeratosis lethal
* Contractures of feet-muscle atrophy-oculomotor apraxia
* Conversion disorder
* Convulsions benign familial neonatal dominant form
* Convulsions benign familial neonatal

===Coo–Cop===
* Cooks syndrome
* Cooley&#x27;s anemia
* Copper deficiency familial benign
* Copper transport disease
* Coproporhyria

===Cor===
* Cor biloculare
* Cor pulmonale
* Cor triatriatum

====Corm–Coro====
* Cormier–Rustin–Munnich syndrome
* Corneal anesthesia deafness mental retardation
* Corneal cerebellar syndrome
* Corneal crystals myopathy neuropathy
* Corneal dystrophy
* Corneal endothelium dystrophy
* Cornelia de Lange syndrome
* Corneodermatoosseous syndrome
* Coronal synostosis syndactyly jejunal atresia
* Coronaro-cardiac fistula
* Coronary arteries congenital malformation
* Coronary artery aneurysm
* Coronary heart disease
* Coronavirus disease 2019

====Corp–Cort====
* Corpus callosum agenesis
* Corpus callosum dysgenesis
* Corsello–Opitz syndrome
* Cortada–Koussef–Matsumoto syndrome
* Cortes-Lacassie syndrome
* Cortical blindness mental retardation polydactyly
* Cortical degeneration of the cerebellum parenchymatous
* Cortical dysplasia
* Cortical hyperostosis syndactyly
* Corticobasal degeneration

===Cos–Cox===
* Costello syndrome
* Costochondritis (otherwise Costal chondritis)
* Costocoracoid ligament congenitally short
* Cote–Adamopoulos–Pantelakis syndrome
* Cote–Katsantoni syndrome
* Cousin–Walbraum–Cegarra syndrome
* Covesdem syndrome
* Cowchock–Wapner–Kurtz syndrome
* Cowden&#x27;s disease
* Cowpox
* Coxoauricular syndrome

==Cr==
===Cra===

====Cram====
* Cramer–Niederdellmann syndrome
* Cramp
* Cramp fasciculation syndrome

====Cran====

=====Crand–Crane=====
* Crandall syndrome
* Crane–Heise syndrome

=====Crani=====

======Cranio======
* Cranio osteoarthropathy
Cranioa–Craniom
* Cranioacrofacial syndrome
* Craniodiaphyseal dysplasia
* Craniodigital syndrome mental retardation
* Cranioectodermal dysplasia
* Craniofacial and osseous defects mental retardation
* Craniofacial and skeletal defects
* Craniofacial deafness hand syndrome
* Craniofacial dysostosis arthrogryposis progeroid appearance
* Craniofacial dysostosis
* Craniofacial dysynostosis
* Craniofaciocardioskeletal syndrome
* Craniofaciocervical osteoglyphic dysplasia
* Craniofrontonasal dysplasia
* Craniofrontonasal syndrome Teebi type
* Craniometaphyseal dysplasia dominant type
* Craniometaphyseal dysplasia recessive type
* Craniomicromelic syndrome
Cranios–Craniot
* Craniostenosis cataract
* Craniostenosis with congenital heart disease mental retardation
* Craniostenosis
* Craniosynostosis alopecia brain defect
* Craniosynostosis arthrogryposis cleft palate
* Craniosynostosis autosomal dominant
* Craniosynostosis cleft lip palate arthrogryposis
* Craniosynostosis contractures cleft
* Craniosynostosis exostoses nevus epibulbar dermoid
* Craniosynostosis fibular aplasia
* Craniosynostosis Fontaine type
* Craniosynostosis Maroteaux Fonfria type
* Craniosynostosis mental retardation clefting syndrome
* Craniosynostosis mental retardation heart defects
* Craniosynostosis Philadelphia type
* Craniosynostosis radial aplasia syndrome
* Craniosynostosis synostoses hypertensive nephropathy
* Craniosynostosis Warman type
* Craniosynostosis, sagittal, with Dandy-Walker malformation and hydrocephalus
* Craniosynostosis
* Craniotelencephalic dysplasia

====Craw====
* Crawfurd syndrome

===Cre–Cro===
* Creatine deficiency
* Creeping disease
* CREST syndrome (Calcinosis Raynaud&#x27;s Esophagus Sclerodactyly Telangiectasia)
* Cretinism athyreotic
* Cretinism
* Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease
* Cri du chat syndrome aka cat&#x27;s cry or 5P- (5P minus) syndrome
* Crigler–Najjar syndrome
* Crisponi syndrome
* Criss-cross syndrome
* Criswick–Schepens syndrome
* Crohn&#x27;s disease of the esophagus
* Crohn&#x27;s disease
* Crome syndrome
* Cronkhite–Canada syndrome
* Crossed polydactyly type 1
* Crossed polysyndactyly
* Croup
* Crouzon syndrome
* Crouzonodermoskeletal syndrome
* Crow–Fukase syndrome

===Cry===
* Cryoglobulinemia
* Cryophobia
* Cryptococcosis
* Cryptogenic organized pneumopathy
* Cryptomicrotia brachydactyly syndrome excess fingers
* Cryptomicrotia brachydactyly syndrome
* Cryptophthalmos-syndactyly syndrome
* Cryptosporidiosis
* Cryptorchidism arachnodactyly mental retardation
* Cryroglobulinemia
* Crystal deposit disease

==Cu==
===Cul–Cus===
* Culler–Jones syndrome
* Curly hair ankyloblepharon nail dysplasia syndrome
* Currarino triad
* Curry–Hall syndrome
* Curry–Jones syndrome
* Curth–Macklin type ichthyosis hystrix
* Curtis–Rogers–Stevenson syndrome
* Cushing syndrome, familial
* Cushing&#x27;s symphalangism
* Cushing&#x27;s syndrome

===Cut===
* Cutaneous anthrax
* Cutaneous larva migrans
* Cutaneous lupus erythematosus
* Cutaneous photosensitivity colitis lethal
* Cutaneous T-cell lymphoma
* Cutaneous vascularitis
* Cutis Gyrata syndrome of Beare and Stevenson
* Cutis gyratum acanthosis nigricans craniosynostosis
* Cutis laxa
:* Cutis laxa, recessive
:* Cutis laxa corneal clouding mental retardation
:* Cutis laxa osteoporosis
:* Cutis laxa with joint laxity and retarded development
:* Cutis laxa, dominant type
:* Cutis laxa, recessive type 1
:* Cutis laxa, recessive type 2
* Cutis marmorata telangiectatica congenita
* Cutis verticis gyrata mental deficiency
* Cutis verticis gyrata thyroid aplasia mental retardation
* Cutis verticis gyrata
* Cutler Bass Romshe syndrome

==Cy–Cz==
* Cyanide poisoning
* Cyclic neutropenia
* Cyclic vomiting syndrome
* Cyclosporosis
* Cyclothymia
* Cyprus facial neuromusculoskeletal syndrome
* Cystathionine beta synthetase deficiency
* Cystic adenomatoid malformation of lung
* Cystic angiomatosis of bone, diffuse
* Cystic fibrosis gastritis megaloblastic anemia
* Cystic fibrosis
* Cystic hamartoma of lung and kidney
* Cystic hygroma lethal cleft palate
* Cystic hygroma
* Cystic medial necrosis of aorta
* Cystin transport, protein defect of
* Cystinosis
* Cystinuria
* Cystinuria-lysinuria
* Cytochrome C oxidase deficiency
* Cytomegalic inclusion disease
* Cytomegalovirus
* Cytoplasmic body myopathy
* Czeizel–Losonci syndrome
* Czeizel syndrome</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q12136" start="18" end="25" title="disease" label="disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760294" start="77" end="87" title="C syndrome" label="C syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129007" start="114" end="124" title="angioedema" label="angioedema"/>
<link wikidata="Q119280" start="150" end="170" title="Cacchi–Ricci disease" label="Cacchi–Ricci disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q3508563" start="173" end="186" title="CACH syndrome" label="CACH syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q856979" start="189" end="216" title="Café au lait spot" label="Café au lait spots syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q5017161" start="219" end="250" title="Caffeine-induced sleep disorder" label="Caffeine-induced sleep disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q3801522" start="253" end="267" title="Caffey disease" label="Caffey disease"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="270" end="284" title="CAHMR syndrome" label="CAHMR syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q5018783" start="287" end="303" title="Calcinosis cutis" label="Calcinosis cutis"/>
<link wikidata="Q763356" start="314" end="328" title="CREST syndrome" label="CREST syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026326" start="332" end="345" title="Calciphylaxis" label="Calciphylaxis"/>
<link wikidata="Q617079" start="348" end="355" title="Calculus (medicine)" label="Calculi"/>
<link wikidata="Q55781925" start="358" end="390" title="Calderon–Gonzalez–Cantu syndrome" label="Calderon–Gonzalez–Cantu syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="393" end="418" title="Calloso genital dysplasia" label="Calloso genital dysplasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2197452" start="421" end="435" title="Callus disease" label="Callus disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q17177467" start="438" end="451" title="Calpainopathy" label="Calpainopathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q55780509" start="454" end="504" title="Calvarial doughnut lesions-bone fragility syndrome" label="Calvarial doughnut lesions-bone fragility syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="507" end="529" title="Calvarial hyperostosis" label="Calvarial hyperostosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q9390215" start="547" end="575" title="Camera–Marugo–Cohen syndrome" label="Camera–Marugo–Cohen syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q5008650" start="578" end="593" title="Camfak syndrome" label="Camfak syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="596" end="619" title="Campomelia Cumming type" label="Campomelia Cumming type"/>
<link wikidata="Q896643" start="622" end="641" title="Camptobrachydactyly" label="Camptobrachydactyly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1723395" start="644" end="656" title="Camptocormia" label="Camptocormia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="659" end="718" title="Camptodactyly fibrous tissue hyperplasia skeletal dysplasia" label="Camptodactyly fibrous tissue hyperplasia skeletal dysplasia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="721" end="779" title="Camptodactyly joint contractures facial skeletal dysplasia" label="Camptodactyly joint contractures facial skeletal dysplasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4348144" start="782" end="821" title="Camptodactyly overgrowth unusual facies" label="Camptodactyly overgrowth unusual facies"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="824" end="865" title="Camptodactyly syndrome Guadalajara type 1" label="Camptodactyly syndrome Guadalajara type 1"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="868" end="909" title="Camptodactyly syndrome Guadalajara type 2" label="Camptodactyly syndrome Guadalajara type 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q55785364" start="912" end="945" title="Camptodactyly-taurinuria syndrome" label="Camptodactyly-taurinuria syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="948" end="978" title="Camptodactyly vertebral fusion" label="Camptodactyly vertebral fusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q683861" start="981" end="999" title="Campylobacteriosis" label="Campylobacteriosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q498487" start="1002" end="1028" title="Camurati–Engelmann disease" label="Camurati–Engelmann disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q2349546" start="1031" end="1053" title="Canavan leukodystrophy" label="Canavan leukodystrophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q273510" start="1056" end="1067" title="Candidiasis" label="Candidiasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3705799" start="1071" end="1104" title="Chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis" label="Chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5032332" start="1107" end="1132" title="Canga&amp;#x27;s bead symptom" label="Canga&amp;#x27;s bead symptom"/>
<link wikidata="Q601037" start="1135" end="1151" title="Canine distemper" label="Canine distemper"/>
<link wikidata="Q3743620" start="1154" end="1173" title="Cannabis dependence" label="Cannabis dependence"/>
<link wikidata="Q4358078" start="1176" end="1195" title="Cannabis withdrawal" label="Cannabis withdrawal"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1198" end="1235" title="Cantalamessa–Baldini–Ambrosi syndrome" label="Cantalamessa–Baldini–Ambrosi syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1238" end="1275" title="Cantu–Sanchez–Corona–Fragoso syndrome" label="Cantu–Sanchez–Corona–Fragoso syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1278" end="1314" title="Cantu–Sanchez–Corona–Garcia syndrome" label="Cantu–Sanchez–Corona–Garcia syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1317" end="1356" title="Cantu–Sanchez–Corona–Hernandes syndrome" label="Cantu–Sanchez–Corona–Hernandes syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q161964" start="1370" end="1393" title="Capillary leak syndrome" label="Capillary leak syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q161964" start="1396" end="1446" title="Capillary leak syndrome with monoclonal gammopathy" label="Capillary leak syndrome with monoclonal gammopathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1886238" start="1449" end="1493" title="Capillary venous leptomeningeal angiomatosis" label="Capillary venous leptomeningeal angiomatosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1034736" start="1496" end="1518" title="Caplan&amp;#x27;s syndrome" label="Caplan&amp;#x27;s syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q55345761" start="1521" end="1535" title="CAPOS syndrome" label="CAPOS syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1568" end="1600" title="Caratolo–Cilio–Pessagno syndrome" label="Caratolo–Cilio–Pessagno syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q7103627" start="1603" end="1644" title="Carbamoyl phosphate synthetase deficiency" label="Carbamoyl phosphate synthetase deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q5037834" start="1647" end="1690" title="Carbamoyl phosphate synthetase I deficiency" label="Carbamoyl phosphate synthetase I deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125675" start="1693" end="1737" title="Carbohydrate deficient glycoprotein syndrome" label="Carbohydrate deficient glycoprotein syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1740" end="1760" title="Carbon baby syndrome" label="Carbon baby syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516211" start="1763" end="1795" title="Carbonic anhydrase II deficiency" label="Carbonic anhydrase II deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q339547" start="1798" end="1816" title="Carcinoid syndrome" label="Carcinoid syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q852423" start="1819" end="1847" title="Carcinoma of the vocal tract" label="Carcinoma of the vocal tract"/>
<link wikidata="Q681817" start="1850" end="1874" title="Carcinoma, squamous cell" label="Carcinoma, squamous cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q681817" start="1877" end="1918" title="Carcinoma, squamous cell of head and neck" label="Carcinoma, squamous cell of head and neck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1734743" start="1921" end="1934" title="Carcinophobia" label="Carcinophobia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5038315" start="1988" end="2007" title="Cardiac amyloidosis" label="Cardiac amyloidosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q83851589" start="2010" end="2040" title="Cardiac and laterality defects" label="Cardiac and laterality defects"/>
<link wikidata="Q202837" start="2043" end="2057" title="Cardiac arrest" label="Cardiac arrest"/>
<link wikidata="Q110785267" start="2060" end="2095" title="Cardiac conduction defect, familial" label="Cardiac conduction defect, familial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141055" start="2098" end="2118" title="Cardiac diverticulum" label="Cardiac diverticulum"/>
<link wikidata="Q777087" start="2121" end="2171" title="Cardiac hydatid cysts with intracavitary expansion" label="Cardiac hydatid cysts with intracavitary expansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q939364" start="2174" end="2194" title="Cardiac malformation" label="Cardiac malformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q929313" start="2197" end="2214" title="Cardiac tamponade" label="Cardiac tamponade"/>
<link wikidata="Q5692507" start="2217" end="2253" title="Cardiac valvular dysplasia, X-linked" label="Cardiac valvular dysplasia, X-linked"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2276" end="2299" title="Cardioauditory syndrome" label="Cardioauditory syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2302" end="2343" title="Cardioauditory syndrome of Sanchez-Cascos" label="Cardioauditory syndrome of Sanchez-Cascos"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2346" end="2379" title="Cardiofacial syndrome short limbs" label="Cardiofacial syndrome short limbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097490" start="2382" end="2411" title="Cardiofaciocutaneous syndrome" label="Cardiofaciocutaneous syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q5547625" start="2414" end="2436" title="Cardiogenital syndrome" label="Cardiogenital syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2439" end="2481" title="Cardiomelic syndrome Stratton Koehler type" label="Cardiomelic syndrome Stratton Koehler type"/>
<link wikidata="Q847583" start="2484" end="2498" title="Cardiomyopathy" label="Cardiomyopathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2555727" start="2503" end="2550" title="Arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy" label="Arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1798016" start="2554" end="2582" title="Cardiomyopathic lentiginosis" label="Cardiomyopathic lentiginosis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2586" end="2627" title="Cardiomyopathy cataract hip spine disease" label="Cardiomyopathy cataract hip spine disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q4198677" start="2631" end="2663" title="Cardiomyopathy diabetes deafness" label="Cardiomyopathy diabetes deafness"/>
<link wikidata="Q283656" start="2667" end="2689" title="Dilated cardiomyopathy" label="Dilated cardiomyopathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q283656" start="2691" end="2743" title="Cardiomyopathy dilated with conduction defect type 1" label="Cardiomyopathy dilated with conduction defect type 1"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2745" end="2797" title="Cardiomyopathy dilated with conduction defect type 2" label="Cardiomyopathy dilated with conduction defect type 2"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2799" end="2831" title="Cardiomyopathy, familial dilated" label="Cardiomyopathy, familial dilated"/>
<link wikidata="Q417589" start="2835" end="2871" title="Cardiomyopathy due to anthracyclines" label="Cardiomyopathy due to anthracyclines"/>
<link wikidata="Q6718345" start="2875" end="2934" title="Cardiomyopathy hearing loss type t RNA lysine gene mutation" label="Cardiomyopathy hearing loss type t RNA lysine gene mutation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364270" start="2938" end="2965" title="Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy" label="Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364270" start="2967" end="2975" title="Cardiomyopathy, familial hypertrophic" label="familial"/>
<link wikidata="Q5547625" start="2979" end="3026" title="Cardiomyopathy hypogonadism metabolic anomalies" label="Cardiomyopathy hypogonadism metabolic anomalies"/>
<link wikidata="Q541244" start="3030" end="3058" title="Cardiomyopathy spherocytosis" label="Cardiomyopathy spherocytosis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3062" end="3122" title="Cardiomyopathy, fatal fetal, due to myocardial calcification" label="Cardiomyopathy, fatal fetal, due to myocardial calcification"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3126" end="3167" title="Cardiomyopathy, X linked, fatal infantile" label="Cardiomyopathy, X linked, fatal infantile"/>
<link wikidata="Q2151267" start="3171" end="3197" title="Restrictive cardiomyopathy" label="Restrictive cardiomyopathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q928424" start="3200" end="3235" title="Cardioskeletal myopathy-neutropenia" label="Cardioskeletal myopathy-neutropenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q661015" start="3238" end="3249" title="Cardiospasm" label="Cardiospasm"/>
<link wikidata="Q112740188" start="3252" end="3286" title="Cardiospondylocarpofacial syndrome" label="Cardiospondylocarpofacial syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q5038976" start="3308" end="3326" title="Caregiver syndrome" label="Caregiver syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3329" end="3357" title="Carey–Fineman–Ziter syndrome" label="Carey–Fineman–Ziter syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3360" end="3392" title="Carnevale–Canun–Mendoza syndrome" label="Carnevale–Canun–Mendoza syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3395" end="3432" title="Carnevale–Hernandez–Castillo syndrome" label="Carnevale–Hernandez–Castillo syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3435" end="3473" title="Carnevale–Krajewska–Fischetto syndrome" label="Carnevale–Krajewska–Fischetto syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044007" start="3476" end="3491" title="Carney syndrome" label="Carney syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q3358135" start="3494" end="3536" title="Systemic primary carnitine deficiency" label="Carnitine palmitoyl transferase deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q3043143" start="3540" end="3583" title="Carnitine palmitoyltransferase I deficiency" label="Carnitine palmitoyltransferase I deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033861" start="3587" end="3631" title="Carnitine palmitoyltransferase II deficiency" label="Carnitine palmitoyltransferase II deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q3358135" start="3634" end="3666" title="Carnitine transporter deficiency" label="Carnitine transporter deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q5044061" start="3669" end="3715" title="Carnitine-acylcarnitine translocase deficiency" label="Carnitine-acylcarnitine translocase deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q4353825" start="3718" end="3740" title="Carnosinase deficiency" label="Carnosinase deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q4353825" start="3743" end="3755" title="Carnosinemia" label="Carnosinemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044327" start="3758" end="3772" title="Caroli disease" label="Caroli disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q2940108" start="3775" end="3786" title="Carotenemia" label="Carotenemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3030636" start="3789" end="3814" title="Carotid artery dissection" label="Carotid artery dissection"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3817" end="3858" title="Carpal deformity migrognathia microstomia" label="Carpal deformity migrognathia microstomia"/>
<link wikidata="Q332293" start="3861" end="3883" title="Carpal tunnel syndrome" label="Carpal tunnel syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2272470" start="3886" end="3904" title="Carpenter syndrome" label="Carpenter syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3907" end="3928" title="Carpenter–Hunter type" label="Carpenter–Hunter type"/>
<link wikidata="Q56297474" start="3931" end="3964" title="Carpo tarsal osteolysis recessive" label="Carpo tarsal osteolysis recessive"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3967" end="3998" title="Carpotarsal osteochondromatosis" label="Carpotarsal osteochondromatosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q32540" start="4001" end="4020" title="Carrington syndrome" label="Carrington syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2964438" start="4037" end="4076" title="Cartilage hair hypoplasia like syndrome" label="Cartilage hair hypoplasia like syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2964438" start="4079" end="4104" title="Cartilage–hair hypoplasia" label="Cartilage–hair hypoplasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5047353" start="4107" end="4130" title="Cartilaginous neoplasms" label="Cartilaginous neoplasms"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4133" end="4165" title="Cartwright–Nelson–Fryns syndrome" label="Cartwright–Nelson–Fryns syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4179" end="4212" title="Cassia–Stocco–Dos Santos syndrome" label="Cassia–Stocco–Dos Santos syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1947302" start="4215" end="4239" title="Castleman&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Castleman&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4242" end="4273" title="Castro–Gago–Pombo–Novo syndrome" label="Castro–Gago–Pombo–Novo syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q752298" start="4310" end="4330" title="Cri du chat syndrome" label="Cri du chat syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199621" start="4333" end="4349" title="Cat-eye syndrome" label="Cat-eye syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q639776" start="4381" end="4400" title="Cat-scratch disease" label="Cat-scratch disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q127724" start="4417" end="4425" title="Cataract" label="Cataract"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4428" end="4459" title="Cataract, congenital ichthyosis" label="Cataract, congenital ichthyosis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4462" end="4511" title="Cataract aberrant oral frenula growth retardation" label="Cataract aberrant oral frenula growth retardation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4514" end="4546" title="Cataract anterior polar dominant" label="Cataract anterior polar dominant"/>
<link wikidata="Q55781723" start="4549" end="4582" title="Cataract-ataxia-deafness syndrome" label="Cataract-ataxia-deafness syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q26492825" start="4585" end="4608" title="Cataract cardiomyopathy" label="Cataract cardiomyopathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5160410" start="4611" end="4649" title="Congenital cataract" label="Cataract congenital autosomal dominant"/>
<link wikidata="Q5160410" start="4652" end="4692" title="Congenital cataract" label="Cataract congenital dominant non nuclear"/>
<link wikidata="Q5160410" start="4695" end="4728" title="Congenital cataract" label="Cataract congenital Volkmann type"/>
<link wikidata="Q5160410" start="4731" end="4770" title="Congenital cataract" label="Cataract congenital with microphthalmia"/>
<link wikidata="Q17144153" start="4773" end="4797" title="Cataract dental syndrome" label="Cataract dental syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4800" end="4823" title="Cataract Hutterite type" label="Cataract Hutterite type"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4826" end="4868" title="Cataract hypertrichosis mental retardation" label="Cataract hypertrichosis mental retardation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4871" end="4911" title="Cataract mental retardation hypogonadism" label="Cataract mental retardation hypogonadism"/>
<link wikidata="Q18589315" start="4914" end="4943" title="Cataract microcornea syndrome" label="Cataract microcornea syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530812" start="4946" end="4983" title="Cataract microphthalmia septal defect" label="Cataract microphthalmia septal defect"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4986" end="5013" title="Cataract skeletal anomalies" label="Cataract skeletal anomalies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7128426" start="5016" end="5049" title="Cataract, alopecia, sclerodactyly" label="Cataract, alopecia, sclerodactyly"/>
<link wikidata="Q18589315" start="5052" end="5115" title="Cataract, congenital, with microcornea or slight microphthalmia" label="Cataract, congenital, with microcornea or slight microphthalmia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5160410" start="5118" end="5144" title="Cataract, total congenital" label="Cataract, total congenital"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5147" end="5164" title="Cataract-glaucoma" label="Cataract-glaucoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q525642" start="5186" end="5203" title="CATCH 22 syndrome" label="CATCH 22 syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q271663" start="5206" end="5232" title="Catecholamine hypertension" label="Catecholamine hypertension"/>
<link wikidata="Q5051865" start="5235" end="5256" title="Catel–Manzke syndrome" label="Catel–Manzke syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5274" end="5299" title="Caudal appendage deafness" label="Caudal appendage deafness"/>
<link wikidata="Q65085947" start="5302" end="5320" title="Caudal duplication" label="Caudal duplication"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129947" start="5323" end="5349" title="Caudal regression syndrome" label="Caudal regression syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066311" start="5352" end="5361" title="Causalgia" label="Causalgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1737261" start="5364" end="5384" title="Cavernous hemangioma" label="Cavernous hemangioma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545750" start="5387" end="5409" title="Cavernous lymphangioma" label="Cavernous lymphangioma"/>
<link wikidata="Q4463723" start="5412" end="5438" title="Cavernous sinus thrombosis" label="Cavernous sinus thrombosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4812072" start="5441" end="5456" title="Cayler syndrome" label="Cayler syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q3508618" start="5470" end="5482" title="CCA syndrome" label="CCA syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5485" end="5498" title="Ccge syndrome" label="Ccge syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q979129" start="5501" end="5505" title="Ondine&amp;#x27;s curse" label="CCHS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125675" start="5508" end="5520" title="CDG syndrome" label="CDG syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q3508654" start="5523" end="5543" title="CDG syndrome type 1A" label="CDG syndrome type 1A"/>
<link wikidata="Q65066312" start="5546" end="5566" title="CDG syndrome type 1B" label="CDG syndrome type 1B"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125675" start="5569" end="5589" title="CDG syndrome type 1C" label="CDG syndrome type 1C"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125675" start="5592" end="5611" title="CDG syndrome type 2" label="CDG syndrome type 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125675" start="5614" end="5633" title="CDG syndrome type 3" label="CDG syndrome type 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125675" start="5636" end="5655" title="CDG syndrome type 4" label="CDG syndrome type 4"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5658" end="5678" title="CDK4 linked melanoma" label="CDK4 linked melanoma"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5703" end="5735" title="Cecato De lima Pinheiro syndrome" label="Cecato De lima Pinheiro syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5738" end="5786" title="Gluten-sensitive enteropathy–associated conditions#Visual and auditory disturbances" label="Celiac disease epilepsy occipital calcifications"/>
<link wikidata="Q11088" start="5789" end="5801" title="Coeliac disease" label="Celiac sprue"/>
<link wikidata="Q17083093" start="5804" end="5828" title="Cenani–Lenz syndactylism" label="Cenani–Lenz syndactylism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5831" end="5855" title="Cennamo–Gangemi syndrome" label="Cennamo–Gangemi syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q638975" start="5858" end="5878" title="Central core disease" label="Central core disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q12412172" start="5881" end="5907" title="Central diabetes insipidus" label="Central diabetes insipidus"/>
<link wikidata="Q353172" start="5910" end="5953" title="Central nervous system protozoal infections" label="Central nervous system protozoal infections"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431217" start="5956" end="5988" title="Central serous chorioretinopathy" label="Central serous chorioretinopathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935832" start="5991" end="6021" title="Central type neurofibromatosis" label="Central type neurofibromatosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1869923" start="6024" end="6073" title="Centromeric instability immunodeficiency syndrome" label="Centromeric instability immunodeficiency syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q782958" start="6076" end="6098" title="Centronuclear myopathy (including myotubular myopathy)" label="Centronuclear myopathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q488214" start="6101" end="6124" title="Centrotemporal epilepsy" label="Centrotemporal epilepsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3508649" start="6127" end="6148" title="Cephalopolysyndactyly" label="Cephalopolysyndactyly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396345" start="6176" end="6197" title="Ceramidase deficiency" label="Ceramidase deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q615645" start="6200" end="6223" title="Ceramide trihexosidosis" label="Ceramide trihexosidosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000742" start="6226" end="6239" title="Ceraunophobia" label="Ceraunophobia"/>
<link wikidata="Q18345210" start="6293" end="6312" title="Cerebellar agenesis" label="Cerebellar agenesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q55345761" start="6315" end="6366" title="Cerebellar ataxia areflexia pes cavus optic atrophy" label="Cerebellar ataxia areflexia pes cavus optic atrophy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6369" end="6407" title="Cerebellar ataxia ectodermal dysplasia" label="Cerebellar ataxia ectodermal dysplasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2026857" start="6410" end="6479" title="Cerebellar ataxia infantile with progressive external ophthalmoplegia" label="Cerebellar ataxia infantile with progressive external ophthalmoplegia"/>
<link wikidata="Q622925" start="6482" end="6514" title="Cerebellar ataxia, dominant pure" label="Cerebellar ataxia, dominant pure"/>
<link wikidata="Q29643762" start="6517" end="6540" title="Cerebellar degeneration" label="Cerebellar degeneration"/>
<link wikidata="Q29643762" start="6543" end="6576" title="Cerebellar degeneration, subacute" label="Cerebellar degeneration, subacute"/>
<link wikidata="Q2214869" start="6579" end="6600" title="Cerebellar hypoplasia" label="Cerebellar hypoplasia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6603" end="6644" title="Cerebellar hypoplasia endosteal sclerosis" label="Cerebellar hypoplasia endosteal sclerosis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6647" end="6695" title="Cerebellar hypoplasia tapetoretinal degeneration" label="Cerebellar hypoplasia tapetoretinal degeneration"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6698" end="6733" title="Cerebellar parenchymal degeneration" label="Cerebellar parenchymal degeneration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541975" start="6736" end="6760" title="Cerebelloolivary atrophy" label="Cerebelloolivary atrophy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6763" end="6794" title="Cerebelloparenchymal disorder 3" label="Cerebelloparenchymal disorder 3"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6797" end="6829" title="Cerebellum agenesis hydrocephaly" label="Cerebellum agenesis hydrocephaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q191562" start="6852" end="6879" title="Cerebral amyloid angiopathy" label="Cerebral amyloid angiopathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q191562" start="6882" end="6919" title="Cerebral amyloid angiopathy, familial" label="Cerebral amyloid angiopathy, familial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198391" start="6922" end="6939" title="Cerebral aneurysm" label="Cerebral aneurysm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022718" start="6942" end="7032" title="Cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy" label="Cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7035" end="7079" title="Cerebral calcification cerebellar hypoplasia" label="Cerebral calcification cerebellar hypoplasia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7082" end="7135" title="Cerebral calcifications opalescent teeth phosphaturia" label="Cerebral calcifications opalescent teeth phosphaturia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1737261" start="7138" end="7169" title="Cerebral cavernous malformation" label="Cerebral cavernous malformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1737261" start="7172" end="7204" title="Cerebral cavernous malformations" label="Cerebral cavernous malformations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770836" start="7207" end="7225" title="Cerebral gigantism" label="Cerebral gigantism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536720" start="7228" end="7256" title="Cerebral gigantism jaw cysts" label="Cerebral gigantism jaw cysts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2249526" start="7259" end="7275" title="Cerebral hypoxia" label="Cerebral hypoxia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7278" end="7326" title="Cerebral malformations hypertrichosis claw hands" label="Cerebral malformations hypertrichosis claw hands"/>
<link wikidata="Q210427" start="7329" end="7343" title="Cerebral palsy" label="Cerebral palsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588755" start="7346" end="7365" title="Cerebral thrombosis" label="Cerebral thrombosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q105402" start="7368" end="7396" title="Cerebral ventricle neoplasms" label="Cerebral ventricle neoplasms"/>
<link wikidata="Q7141967" start="7399" end="7431" title="Cerebro facio articular syndrome" label="Cerebro facio articular syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q55629168" start="7434" end="7466" title="Cerebro facio thoracic dysplasia" label="Cerebro facio thoracic dysplasia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7469" end="7515" title="Cerebro oculo dento auriculo skeletal syndrome" label="Cerebro oculo dento auriculo skeletal syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7518" end="7548" title="Cerebro oculo genital syndrome" label="Cerebro oculo genital syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7551" end="7587" title="Cerebro oculo skeleto renal syndrome" label="Cerebro oculo skeleto renal syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1915681" start="7590" end="7619" title="Cerebro reno digital syndrome" label="Cerebro reno digital syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7622" end="7651" title="Cerebroarthrodigital syndrome" label="Cerebroarthrodigital syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q29033216" start="7654" end="7687" title="Cerebro-costo-mandibular syndrome" label="Cerebro-costo-mandibular syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q914389" start="7690" end="7727" title="Cerebro-oculo-facio-skeletal syndrome" label="Cerebro-oculo-facio-skeletal syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q18209717" start="7730" end="7757" title="Cerebroretinal vasculopathy" label="Cerebroretinal vasculopathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4358039" start="7779" end="7809" title="Ceroid lipofuscinois, neuronal" label="Ceroid lipofuscinois, neuronal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4358039" start="7812" end="7855" title="Ceroid lipofuscinois, neuronal 1, infantile" label="Ceroid lipofuscinois, neuronal 1, infantile"/>
<link wikidata="Q4358039" start="7858" end="7906" title="Ceroid lipofuscinois, neuronal 2, late infantile" label="Ceroid lipofuscinois, neuronal 2, late infantile"/>
<link wikidata="Q4358039" start="7909" end="7951" title="Ceroid lipofuscinois, neuronal 3, juvenile" label="Ceroid lipofuscinois, neuronal 3, juvenile"/>
<link wikidata="Q4358039" start="7954" end="7998" title="Ceroid lipofuscinois, neuronal 4, adult type" label="Ceroid lipofuscinois, neuronal 4, adult type"/>
<link wikidata="Q4358039" start="8001" end="8049" title="Ceroid lipofuscinois, neuronal 5, late infantile" label="Ceroid lipofuscinois, neuronal 5, late infantile"/>
<link wikidata="Q4358039" start="8052" end="8100" title="Ceroid lipofuscinois, neuronal 6, late infantile" label="Ceroid lipofuscinois, neuronal 6, late infantile"/>
<link wikidata="Q160105" start="8103" end="8118" title="Cervical cancer" label="Cervical cancer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8121" end="8155" title="Cervical hypertrichosis neuropathy" label="Cervical hypertrichosis neuropathy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8158" end="8203" title="Cervical hypertrichosis peripheral neuropathy" label="Cervical hypertrichosis peripheral neuropathy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8206" end="8248" title="Cervical ribs sprengel anomaly polydactyly" label="Cervical ribs sprengel anomaly polydactyly"/>
<link wikidata="Q19596346" start="8251" end="8275" title="Cervical spinal stenosis" label="Cervical spinal stenosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774751" start="8278" end="8303" title="Cervical vertebral fusion" label="Cervical vertebral fusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q8001196" start="8306" end="8335" title="Cervicooculoacoustic syndrome" label="Cervicooculoacoustic syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q649558" start="8375" end="8389" title="Chagas disease" label="Chagas disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q769595" start="8392" end="8401" title="Chalazion" label="Chalazion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7003001" start="8404" end="8420" title="Chanarin disease" label="Chanarin disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q7003001" start="8423" end="8459" title="Chanarin–Dorfman syndrome ichthyosis" label="Chanarin–Dorfman syndrome ichthyosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q31798" start="8462" end="8471" title="Chancroid" label="Chancroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q17121503" start="8474" end="8498" title="Chandler&amp;#x27;s syndrome" label="Chandler&amp;#x27;s syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8501" end="8516" title="Chands syndrome" label="Chands syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1678281" start="8519" end="8550" title="Chang–Davidson–Carlson syndrome" label="Chang–Davidson–Carlson syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q209583" start="8553" end="8579" title="Chaotic atrial tachycardia" label="Chaotic atrial tachycardia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2411095" start="8596" end="8609" title="Char syndrome" label="Char syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052687" start="8641" end="8656" title="Charcot–Marie–Tooth disease" label="Charcot disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052687" start="8687" end="8714" title="Charcot–Marie–Tooth disease" label="Charcot–Marie–Tooth disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052687" start="8717" end="8767" title="Charcot–Marie–Tooth disease" label="Charcot–Marie–Tooth disease deafness dominant type"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052687" start="8770" end="8825" title="Charcot–Marie–Tooth disease" label="Charcot–Marie–Tooth disease deafness mental retardation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052687" start="8828" end="8879" title="Charcot–Marie–Tooth disease" label="Charcot–Marie–Tooth disease deafness recessive type"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052687" start="8882" end="8940" title="Charcot–Marie–Tooth disease" label="Charcot–Marie–Tooth disease type 1 aplasia cutis congenita"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052687" start="8943" end="8978" title="Charcot–Marie–Tooth disease" label="Charcot–Marie–Tooth disease type 1A"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052687" start="8981" end="9016" title="Charcot–Marie–Tooth disease" label="Charcot–Marie–Tooth disease type 1B"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052687" start="9019" end="9054" title="Charcot–Marie–Tooth disease" label="Charcot–Marie–Tooth disease type 1C"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052687" start="9057" end="9092" title="Charcot–Marie–Tooth disease" label="Charcot–Marie–Tooth disease type 2A"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052687" start="9095" end="9131" title="Charcot–Marie–Tooth disease" label="Charcot–Marie–Tooth disease type 2B1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052687" start="9134" end="9170" title="Charcot–Marie–Tooth disease" label="Charcot–Marie–Tooth disease type 2B2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052687" start="9173" end="9208" title="Charcot–Marie–Tooth disease" label="Charcot–Marie–Tooth disease type 2C"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052687" start="9211" end="9246" title="Charcot–Marie–Tooth disease" label="Charcot–Marie–Tooth disease type 2D"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052687" start="9249" end="9284" title="Charcot–Marie–Tooth disease" label="Charcot–Marie–Tooth disease type 4A"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052687" start="9287" end="9322" title="Charcot–Marie–Tooth disease" label="Charcot–Marie–Tooth disease type 4B"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052687" start="9325" end="9381" title="Charcot–Marie–Tooth disease" label="Charcot–Marie–Tooth disease with ptosis and parkinsonism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052687" start="9384" end="9430" title="Charcot–Marie–Tooth disease" label="Charcot–Marie–Tooth disease, intermediate form"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052687" start="9433" end="9478" title="Charcot–Marie–Tooth disease" label="Charcot–Marie–Tooth disease, neuronal, type A"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052687" start="9481" end="9526" title="Charcot–Marie–Tooth disease" label="Charcot–Marie–Tooth disease, neuronal, type B"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052687" start="9529" end="9574" title="Charcot–Marie–Tooth disease" label="Charcot–Marie–Tooth disease, neuronal, type D"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052687" start="9577" end="9632" title="Charcot–Marie–Tooth disease" label="Charcot–Marie–Tooth disease, X-linked type 2, recessive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052687" start="9635" end="9690" title="Charcot–Marie–Tooth disease" label="Charcot–Marie–Tooth disease, X-linked type 3, recessive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052687" start="9693" end="9748" title="Charcot–Marie–Tooth disease" label="Charcot–Marie–Tooth peroneal muscular atrophy, X-linked"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023604" start="9774" end="9789" title="CHARGE syndrome" label="CHARGE syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9792" end="9813" title="Charles&amp;#x27; disease" label="Charles&amp;#x27; disease"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9816" end="9834" title="Charlie M syndrome" label="Charlie M syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1947307" start="9851" end="9875" title="Chavany–Brunhes syndrome" label="Chavany–Brunhes syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q934034" start="9889" end="9913" title="Chediak–Higashi syndrome" label="Chediak–Higashi syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068997" start="9916" end="9937" title="Cheilitis glandularis" label="Cheilitis glandularis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9940" end="9969" title="Chemke–Oliver–Mallek syndrome" label="Chemke–Oliver–Mallek syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q581592" start="9972" end="9984" title="Chemodectoma" label="Chemodectoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q2055121" start="9987" end="9998" title="Chemophobia" label="Chemophobia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5923210" start="10001" end="10040" title="Chen-Kung Ho–Kaufman–Mcalister syndrome" label="Chen-Kung Ho–Kaufman–Mcalister syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q568865" start="10043" end="10052" title="Cherubism" label="Cherubism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071707" start="10070" end="10096" title="Chiari type 1 malformation" label="Chiari type 1 malformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433936" start="10099" end="10122" title="Chiari–Frommel syndrome" label="Chiari–Frommel syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q44727" start="10125" end="10135" title="Chickenpox" label="Chickenpox"/>
<link wikidata="Q243257" start="10138" end="10149" title="Chikungunya" label="Chikungunya"/>
<link wikidata="Q3508568" start="10152" end="10177" title="CHILD syndrome ichthyosis" label="CHILD syndrome ichthyosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q388722" start="10180" end="10213" title="Childhood disintegrative disorder" label="Childhood disintegrative disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q179945" start="10216" end="10244" title="Childhood pustular psoriasis" label="Childhood pustular psoriasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q281721" start="10247" end="10256" title="Chimerism" label="Chimerism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10259" end="10286" title="Glutamic acid (flavor)#Chinese restaurant syndrome" label="Chinese restaurant syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10289" end="10318" title="Chitayat–Haj–Chahine syndrome" label="Chitayat–Haj–Chahine syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10321" end="10357" title="Chitayat–Meunier–Hodgkinson syndrome" label="Chitayat–Meunier–Hodgkinson syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10360" end="10393" title="Chitayat–Moore–Del Bigio syndrome" label="Chitayat–Moore–Del Bigio syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10396" end="10426" title="Chitty–Hall–Baraitser syndrome" label="Chitty–Hall–Baraitser syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10429" end="10454" title="Chitty–Hall–Webb syndrome" label="Chitty–Hall–Webb syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q153356" start="10457" end="10466" title="Chlamydia infection" label="Chlamydia"/>
<link wikidata="Q62869737" start="10469" end="10489" title="Chlamydia pneumoniae" label="Chlamydia pneumoniae"/>
<link wikidata="Q131065" start="10492" end="10513" title="Chlamydia trachomatis" label="Chlamydia trachomatis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10516" end="10556" title="Chlamydial and gonococcal conjunctivitis" label="Chlamydial and gonococcal conjunctivitis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10589" end="10640" title="Choanal atresia deafness cardiac defects dysmorphia" label="Choanal atresia deafness cardiac defects dysmorphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q124292" start="10643" end="10661" title="Cholangiocarcinoma" label="Cholangiocarcinoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058608" start="10664" end="10695" title="Cholangitis, primary sclerosing" label="Cholangitis, primary sclerosing"/>
<link wikidata="Q376666" start="10698" end="10711" title="Cholecystitis" label="Cholecystitis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10714" end="10749" title="Choledochal cyst, hand malformation" label="Choledochal cyst, hand malformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q272714" start="10752" end="10766" title="Cholelithiasis" label="Cholelithiasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q133244" start="10769" end="10787" title="Cholemia" label="Cholemia, familial"/>
<link wikidata="Q12090" start="10790" end="10797" title="Cholera" label="Cholera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075923" start="10800" end="10811" title="Cholestasis" label="Cholestasis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10814" end="10861" title="Cholestasis pigmentary retinopathy cleft palate" label="Cholestasis pigmentary retinopathy cleft palate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018534" start="10864" end="10910" title="Cholestasis, progressive familial intrahepatic" label="Cholestasis, progressive familial intrahepatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018534" start="10913" end="10961" title="Cholestasis, progressive familial intrahepatic 1" label="Cholestasis, progressive familial intrahepatic 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018534" start="10964" end="11012" title="Cholestasis, progressive familial intrahepatic 2" label="Cholestasis, progressive familial intrahepatic 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018534" start="11015" end="11063" title="Cholestasis, progressive familial intrahepatic 3" label="Cholestasis, progressive familial intrahepatic 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q4797658" start="11066" end="11114" title="Cholestatic jaundice renal tubular insufficiency" label="Cholestatic jaundice renal tubular insufficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q6710283" start="11117" end="11150" title="Cholesterol ester storage disease" label="Cholesterol ester storage disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q6710283" start="11153" end="11188" title="Cholesterol esterification disorder" label="Cholesterol esterification disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q3824458" start="11191" end="11212" title="Cholesterol pneumonia" label="Cholesterol pneumonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076053" start="11229" end="11244" title="Chondroblastoma" label="Chondroblastoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q559082" start="11247" end="11264" title="Chondrocalcinosis" label="Chondrocalcinosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q64348505" start="11267" end="11303" title="Chondrocalcinosis familial articular" label="Chondrocalcinosis familial articular"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11306" end="11339" title="Chondrodysplasia lethal recessive" label="Chondrodysplasia lethal recessive"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11342" end="11387" title="Chondrodysplasia pseudohermaphrodism syndrome" label="Chondrodysplasia pseudohermaphrodism syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076060" start="11390" end="11415" title="Chondrodysplasia punctata" label="Chondrodysplasia punctata"/>
<link wikidata="Q8041561" start="11418" end="11465" title="Chondrodysplasia punctata 1, x-linked recessive" label="Chondrodysplasia punctata 1, x-linked recessive"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11468" end="11527" title="Chondrodysplasia punctata with steroid sulfatase deficiency" label="Chondrodysplasia punctata with steroid sulfatase deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q8041561" start="11530" end="11576" title="Chondrodysplasia punctata, brachytelephalangic" label="Chondrodysplasia punctata, brachytelephalangic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8041561" start="11579" end="11620" title="Chondrodysplasia punctata, Sheffield type" label="Chondrodysplasia punctata, Sheffield type"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11623" end="11683" title="Chondrodysplasia situs inversus imperforate anus polydactyly" label="Chondrodysplasia situs inversus imperforate anus polydactyly"/>
<link wikidata="Q9190289" start="11686" end="11714" title="Chondrodysplasia, Grebe type" label="Chondrodysplasia, Grebe type"/>
<link wikidata="Q5104522" start="11717" end="11733" title="Chondrodystrophy" label="Chondrodystrophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332448" start="11736" end="11763" title="Chondroectodermal dysplasia" label="Chondroectodermal dysplasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076078" start="11766" end="11784" title="Chondroma (benign)" label="Chondroma (benign)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076086" start="11787" end="11801" title="Chondromalacia" label="Chondromalacia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11804" end="11827" title="Chondromatosis (benign)" label="Chondromatosis (benign)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076087" start="11830" end="11844" title="Chondrosarcoma" label="Chondrosarcoma"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11859" end="11906" title="Chondrysplasia punctata, humero-metacarpal type" label="Chondrysplasia punctata, humero-metacarpal type"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076389" start="11923" end="11931" title="Chordoma" label="Chordoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076421" start="11934" end="11940" title="Chorea (disease)" label="Chorea"/>
<link wikidata="Q3338656" start="11943" end="11964" title="Chorea acanthocytosis" label="Chorea acanthocytosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q24977061" start="11967" end="11989" title="Chorea familial benign" label="Chorea familial benign"/>
<link wikidata="Q522163" start="11992" end="12004" title="Chorea minor" label="Chorea minor"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12007" end="12039" title="Choreoacanthocytosis amyotrophic" label="Choreoacanthocytosis amyotrophic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3042114" start="12042" end="12077" title="Choreoathetosis familial paroxysmal" label="Choreoathetosis familial paroxysmal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076481" start="12080" end="12095" title="Choriocarcinoma" label="Choriocarcinoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402851" start="12098" end="12113" title="Chorioretinitis" label="Chorioretinitis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12116" end="12160" title="Chorioretinopathy dominant form microcephaly" label="Chorioretinopathy dominant form microcephaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1237766" start="12163" end="12182" title="Choroid plexus cyst" label="Choroid plexus cyst"/>
<link wikidata="Q623668" start="12185" end="12209" title="Choroid plexus neoplasms" label="Choroid plexus neoplasms"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12212" end="12238" title="Choroidal atrophy alopecia" label="Choroidal atrophy alopecia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2397009" start="12241" end="12254" title="Choroideremia" label="Choroideremia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4831022" start="12257" end="12286" title="Choroideremia hypopituitarism" label="Choroideremia hypopituitarism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402851" start="12289" end="12300" title="Choroiditis" label="Choroiditis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7455142" start="12303" end="12327" title="Choroiditis, serpiginous" label="Choroiditis, serpiginous"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12330" end="12380" title="Choroido cerebral calcification syndrome infantile" label="Choroido cerebral calcification syndrome infantile"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12408" end="12441" title="Christian–Demyer–Franken syndrome" label="Christian–Demyer–Franken syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12444" end="12480" title="Christian–Johnson–Angenieta syndrome" label="Christian–Johnson–Angenieta syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q4681410" start="12483" end="12501" title="Christian syndrome" label="Christian syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12504" end="12532" title="Christianson–Fourie syndrome" label="Christianson–Fourie syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2562598" start="12535" end="12552" title="Christmas disease" label="Christmas disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q2966706" start="12586" end="12599" title="Chromhidrosis" label="Chromhidrosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2726043" start="12638" end="12651" title="Chromomycosis" label="Chromomycosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164529" start="12654" end="12681" title="Chromophobe renal carcinoma" label="Chromophobe renal carcinoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q844903" start="12703" end="12727" title="Chromosomal triplication" label="Chromosomal triplication"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12754" end="12771" title="Chromosome 1 ring" label="Chromosome 1 ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q3297103" start="12774" end="12810" title="Chromosome 1, 1p36 deletion syndrome" label="Chromosome 1, 1p36 deletion syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12813" end="12843" title="Chromosome 1, deletion q21 q25" label="Chromosome 1, deletion q21 q25"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12846" end="12880" title="Chromosome 1, duplication 1p21 p32" label="Chromosome 1, duplication 1p21 p32"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12883" end="12908" title="Chromosome 1, monosomy 1p" label="Chromosome 1, monosomy 1p"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12911" end="12942" title="Chromosome 1, monosomy 1p22 p13" label="Chromosome 1, monosomy 1p22 p13"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12945" end="12976" title="Chromosome 1, monosomy 1p31 p22" label="Chromosome 1, monosomy 1p31 p22"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12979" end="13006" title="Chromosome 1, monosomy 1p32" label="Chromosome 1, monosomy 1p32"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13009" end="13040" title="Chromosome 1, monosomy 1p34 p32" label="Chromosome 1, monosomy 1p34 p32"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13043" end="13074" title="Chromosome 1, monosomy 1q25 q32" label="Chromosome 1, monosomy 1q25 q32"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13077" end="13108" title="Chromosome 1, monosomy 1q32 q42" label="Chromosome 1, monosomy 1q32 q42"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13111" end="13137" title="Chromosome 1, monosomy 1q4" label="Chromosome 1, monosomy 1q4"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13140" end="13179" title="Chromosome 1, q42 11 q42 12 duplication" label="Chromosome 1, q42 11 q42 12 duplication"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13182" end="13213" title="Chromosome 1, trisomy 1q32 qter" label="Chromosome 1, trisomy 1q32 qter"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13216" end="13247" title="Chromosome 1, trisomy 1q42 qter" label="Chromosome 1, trisomy 1q42 qter"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13250" end="13291" title="Chromosome 1, uniparental disomy 1q12 q21" label="Chromosome 1, uniparental disomy 1q12 q21"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13324" end="13342" title="Chromosome 10 ring" label="Chromosome 10 ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282839" start="13345" end="13378" title="Chromosome 10, distal trisomy 10q" label="Chromosome 10, distal trisomy 10q"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13381" end="13408" title="Chromosome 10, monosomy 10p" label="Chromosome 10, monosomy 10p"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13411" end="13438" title="Chromosome 10, monosomy 10q" label="Chromosome 10, monosomy 10q"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13441" end="13467" title="Chromosome 10, trisomy 10p" label="Chromosome 10, trisomy 10p"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13470" end="13503" title="Chromosome 10, trisomy 10pter p13" label="Chromosome 10, trisomy 10pter p13"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282839" start="13506" end="13532" title="Chromosome 10, trisomy 10q" label="Chromosome 10, trisomy 10q"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13535" end="13571" title="Chromosome 10, uniparental disomy of" label="Chromosome 10, uniparental disomy of"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13574" end="13615" title="Chromosome 10p terminal deletion syndrome" label="Chromosome 10p terminal deletion syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1892153" start="13618" end="13645" title="Chromosome 11, deletion 11p" label="Chromosome 11, deletion 11p"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13648" end="13682" title="Chromosome 11, partial trisomy 11q" label="Chromosome 11, partial trisomy 11q"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13685" end="13715" title="Chromosome 11-14 translocation" label="Chromosome 11-14 translocation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1892153" start="13718" end="13750" title="Chromosome 11p, partial deletion" label="Chromosome 11p, partial deletion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1677755" start="13753" end="13784" title="Chromosome 11q partial deletion" label="Chromosome 11q partial deletion"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13787" end="13809" title="Chromosome 11q trisomy" label="Chromosome 11q trisomy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13812" end="13830" title="Chromosome 12 ring" label="Chromosome 12 ring"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13833" end="13859" title="Chromosome 12, 12p trisomy" label="Chromosome 12, 12p trisomy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13862" end="13888" title="Chromosome 12, trisomy 12q" label="Chromosome 12, trisomy 12q"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13891" end="13914" title="Chromosome 12p deletion" label="Chromosome 12p deletion"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13917" end="13948" title="Chromosome 12p partial deletion" label="Chromosome 12p partial deletion"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13981" end="14006" title="Chromosome 13 duplication" label="Chromosome 13 duplication"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14009" end="14027" title="Chromosome 13 ring" label="Chromosome 13 ring"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14030" end="14065" title="Chromosome 13, partial monosomy 13q" label="Chromosome 13, partial monosomy 13q"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14068" end="14094" title="Chromosome 13p duplication" label="Chromosome 13p duplication"/>
<link wikidata="Q24975503" start="14097" end="14120" title="Chromosome 13q deletion" label="Chromosome 13q deletion"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14123" end="14145" title="Chromosome 13q trisomy" label="Chromosome 13q trisomy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14148" end="14172" title="Chromosome 13q-mosaicism" label="Chromosome 13q-mosaicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2966732" start="14175" end="14193" title="Chromosome 14 ring" label="Chromosome 14 ring"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14196" end="14217" title="Chromosome 14 trisomy" label="Chromosome 14 trisomy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14220" end="14272" title="Chromosome 14, deletion 14q, partial duplication 14p" label="Chromosome 14, deletion 14q, partial duplication 14p"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14275" end="14304" title="Chromosome 14, trisomy mosaic" label="Chromosome 14, trisomy mosaic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14307" end="14340" title="Chromosome 14q, partial deletions" label="Chromosome 14q, partial deletions"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14343" end="14379" title="Chromosome 14q, proximal duplication" label="Chromosome 14q, proximal duplication"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14382" end="14415" title="Chromosome 14q, terminal deletion" label="Chromosome 14q, terminal deletion"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14418" end="14454" title="Chromosome 14q, terminal duplication" label="Chromosome 14q, terminal duplication"/>
<link wikidata="Q55788982" start="14457" end="14475" title="Chromosome 15 ring" label="Chromosome 15 ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113910" start="14478" end="14511" title="Chromosome 15, distal trisomy 15q" label="Chromosome 15, distal trisomy 15q"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14514" end="14546" title="Chromosome 15, trisomy mosaicism" label="Chromosome 15, trisomy mosaicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113911" start="14549" end="14581" title="Chromosome 15q, partial deletion" label="Chromosome 15q, partial deletion"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14584" end="14609" title="Chromosome 15q, tetrasomy" label="Chromosome 15q, tetrasomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113910" start="14612" end="14635" title="Chromosome 15q, trisomy" label="Chromosome 15q, trisomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q503642" start="14668" end="14694" title="Chromosome 16, trisomy 16p" label="Chromosome 16, trisomy 16p"/>
<link wikidata="Q503642" start="14697" end="14723" title="Chromosome 16, trisomy 16q" label="Chromosome 16, trisomy 16q"/>
<link wikidata="Q503642" start="14726" end="14748" title="Chromosome 16, trisomy" label="Chromosome 16, trisomy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14751" end="14784" title="Chromosome 16, uniparental disomy" label="Chromosome 16, uniparental disomy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14787" end="14808" title="Chromosome 17 trisomy" label="Chromosome 17 trisomy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14811" end="14833" title="Chromosome 17 deletion" label="Chromosome 17 deletion"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14836" end="14854" title="Chromosome 17 ring" label="Chromosome 17 ring"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14857" end="14890" title="Chromosome 17, deletion 17q23 q24" label="Chromosome 17, deletion 17q23 q24"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14893" end="14919" title="Chromosome 17, trisomy 17p" label="Chromosome 17, trisomy 17p"/>
<link wikidata="Q39656409" start="14922" end="14952" title="Chromosome 17, trisomy 17p11 2" label="Chromosome 17, trisomy 17p11 2"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14955" end="14983" title="Chromosome 17, trisomy 17q22" label="Chromosome 17, trisomy 17q22"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14986" end="15026" title="Chromosome 18 long arm deletion syndrome" label="Chromosome 18 long arm deletion syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15029" end="15058" title="Chromosome 18 mosaic monosomy" label="Chromosome 18 mosaic monosomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7334693" start="15061" end="15079" title="Chromosome 18 ring" label="Chromosome 18 ring"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15082" end="15111" title="Chromosome 18, deletion 18q23" label="Chromosome 18, deletion 18q23"/>
<link wikidata="Q4557543" start="15114" end="15141" title="Chromosome 18, monosomy 18p" label="Chromosome 18, monosomy 18p"/>
<link wikidata="Q2110688" start="15144" end="15172" title="Chromosome 18, tetrasomy 18p" label="Chromosome 18, tetrasomy 18p"/>
<link wikidata="Q457737" start="15175" end="15201" title="Chromosome 18, trisomy 18p" label="Chromosome 18, trisomy 18p"/>
<link wikidata="Q457737" start="15204" end="15230" title="Chromosome 18, trisomy 18q" label="Chromosome 18, trisomy 18q"/>
<link wikidata="Q457737" start="15233" end="15255" title="Chromosome 18, trisomy" label="Chromosome 18, trisomy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15258" end="15276" title="Chromosome 19 ring" label="Chromosome 19 ring"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15279" end="15305" title="Chromosome 19, trisomy 19q" label="Chromosome 19, trisomy 19q"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15308" end="15343" title="Chromosome 1q, duplication 1q12 q21" label="Chromosome 1q, duplication 1q12 q21"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15359" end="15386" title="Chromosome 2, monosomy 2p22" label="Chromosome 2, monosomy 2p22"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15389" end="15421" title="Chromosome 2, monosomy 2pter p24" label="Chromosome 2, monosomy 2pter p24"/>
<link wikidata="Q39048665" start="15424" end="15449" title="Chromosome 2, monosomy 2q" label="Chromosome 2, monosomy 2q"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15452" end="15479" title="Chromosome 2, monosomy 2q24" label="Chromosome 2, monosomy 2q24"/>
<link wikidata="Q574227" start="15482" end="15509" title="Chromosome 2, monosomy 2q37" label="Chromosome 2, monosomy 2q37"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15512" end="15536" title="Chromosome 2, trisomy 2p" label="Chromosome 2, trisomy 2p"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15539" end="15569" title="Chromosome 2, Trisomy 2p13 p21" label="Chromosome 2, Trisomy 2p13 p21"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15572" end="15603" title="Chromosome 2, trisomy 2pter p24" label="Chromosome 2, trisomy 2pter p24"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15606" end="15630" title="Chromosome 2, trisomy 2q" label="Chromosome 2, trisomy 2q"/>
<link wikidata="Q15428809" start="15633" end="15659" title="Chromosome 2, trisomy 2q37" label="Chromosome 2, trisomy 2q37"/>
<link wikidata="Q2966733" start="15692" end="15710" title="Chromosome 20 ring" label="Chromosome 20 ring"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15713" end="15740" title="Chromosome 20, deletion 20p" label="Chromosome 20, deletion 20p"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15743" end="15773" title="Chromosome 20, duplication 20p" label="Chromosome 20, duplication 20p"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15776" end="15798" title="Chromosome 20, trisomy" label="Chromosome 20, trisomy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15801" end="15823" title="Chromosome 21 monosomy" label="Chromosome 21 monosomy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15826" end="15844" title="Chromosome 21 ring" label="Chromosome 21 ring"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15847" end="15876" title="Chromosome 21, monosomy 21q22" label="Chromosome 21, monosomy 21q22"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15879" end="15907" title="Chromosome 21, tetrasomy 21q" label="Chromosome 21, tetrasomy 21q"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15910" end="15946" title="Chromosome 21, uniparental disomy of" label="Chromosome 21, uniparental disomy of"/>
<link wikidata="Q55785480" start="15949" end="15967" title="Chromosome 22 ring" label="Chromosome 22 ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426698" start="15970" end="15998" title="Chromosome 22 trisomy mosaic" label="Chromosome 22 trisomy mosaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q525642" start="16001" end="16036" title="Chromosome 22, microdeletion 22 q11" label="Chromosome 22, microdeletion 22 q11"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16039" end="16069" title="Chromosome 22, monosome mosaic" label="Chromosome 22, monosome mosaic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16072" end="16102" title="Chromosome 22, trisomy q11 q13" label="Chromosome 22, trisomy q11 q13"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426698" start="16105" end="16127" title="Chromosome 22, trisomy" label="Chromosome 22, trisomy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16143" end="16176" title="Chromosome 3 duplication syndrome" label="Chromosome 3 duplication syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q115801657" start="16179" end="16204" title="Chromosome 3, monosomy 3p" label="Chromosome 3, monosomy 3p"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16207" end="16238" title="Chromosome 3, monosomy 3p14 p11" label="Chromosome 3, monosomy 3p14 p11"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16241" end="16267" title="Chromosome 3, monosomy 3p2" label="Chromosome 3, monosomy 3p2"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16270" end="16297" title="Chromosome 3, monosomy 3p25" label="Chromosome 3, monosomy 3p25"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16300" end="16327" title="Chromosome 3, monosomy 3q13" label="Chromosome 3, monosomy 3q13"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16330" end="16360" title="Chromosome 3, monosomy 3q21 23" label="Chromosome 3, monosomy 3q21 23"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16363" end="16390" title="Chromosome 3, monosomy 3q27" label="Chromosome 3, monosomy 3q27"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16393" end="16417" title="Chromosome 3, trisomy 3p" label="Chromosome 3, trisomy 3p"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16420" end="16446" title="Chromosome 3, trisomy 3p25" label="Chromosome 3, trisomy 3p25"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16449" end="16473" title="Chromosome 3, trisomy 3q" label="Chromosome 3, trisomy 3q"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16476" end="16508" title="Chromosome 3, trisomy 3q13 2 q25" label="Chromosome 3, trisomy 3q13 2 q25"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16511" end="16536" title="Chromosome 3, Trisomy 3q2" label="Chromosome 3, Trisomy 3q2"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16567" end="16584" title="Chromosome 4 ring" label="Chromosome 4 ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q610075" start="16587" end="16618" title="Chromosome 4 short arm deletion" label="Chromosome 4 short arm deletion"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16621" end="16652" title="Chromosome 4, monosomy 4p14 p16" label="Chromosome 4, monosomy 4p14 p16"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16655" end="16680" title="Chromosome 4, monosomy 4q" label="Chromosome 4, monosomy 4q"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16683" end="16710" title="Chromosome 4, monosomy 4q32" label="Chromosome 4, monosomy 4q32"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16713" end="16745" title="Chromosome 4, monosomy distal 4q" label="Chromosome 4, monosomy distal 4q"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16748" end="16787" title="Chromosome 4, partial trisomy distal 4q" label="Chromosome 4, partial trisomy distal 4q"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16790" end="16814" title="Chromosome 4, Trisomy 4p" label="Chromosome 4, Trisomy 4p"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16817" end="16841" title="Chromosome 4, trisomy 4q" label="Chromosome 4, trisomy 4q"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16844" end="16870" title="Chromosome 4, trisomy 4q21" label="Chromosome 4, trisomy 4q21"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16873" end="16904" title="Chromosome 4, trisomy 4q25 qter" label="Chromosome 4, trisomy 4q25 qter"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16907" end="16934" title="Chromosome 5, monosomy 5q35" label="Chromosome 5, monosomy 5q35"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16937" end="16961" title="Chromosome 5, trisomy 5p" label="Chromosome 5, trisomy 5p"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16964" end="16997" title="Chromosome 5, trisomy 5pter p13 3" label="Chromosome 5, trisomy 5pter p13 3"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17000" end="17024" title="Chromosome 5, trisomy 5q" label="Chromosome 5, trisomy 5q"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17027" end="17059" title="Chromosome 5, uniparental disomy" label="Chromosome 5, uniparental disomy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17090" end="17107" title="Chromosome 6 ring" label="Chromosome 6 ring"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17110" end="17141" title="Chromosome 6, deletion 6q13 q15" label="Chromosome 6, deletion 6q13 q15"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17144" end="17171" title="Chromosome 6, monosomy 6p23" label="Chromosome 6, monosomy 6p23"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17174" end="17199" title="Chromosome 6, monosomy 6q" label="Chromosome 6, monosomy 6q"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17202" end="17228" title="Chromosome 6, monosomy 6q1" label="Chromosome 6, monosomy 6q1"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17231" end="17257" title="Chromosome 6, monosomy 6q2" label="Chromosome 6, monosomy 6q2"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17260" end="17292" title="Chromosome 6, partial trisomy 6q" label="Chromosome 6, partial trisomy 6q"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17295" end="17319" title="Chromosome 6, trisomy 6p" label="Chromosome 6, trisomy 6p"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17322" end="17346" title="Chromosome 6, trisomy 6q" label="Chromosome 6, trisomy 6q"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17349" end="17366" title="Chromosome 7 ring" label="Chromosome 7 ring"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17369" end="17395" title="Chromosome 7, monosomy 7q2" label="Chromosome 7, monosomy 7q2"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17398" end="17425" title="Chromosome 7, monosomy 7q21" label="Chromosome 7, monosomy 7q21"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17428" end="17454" title="Chromosome 7, monosomy 7q3" label="Chromosome 7, monosomy 7q3"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17457" end="17479" title="Chromosome 7, monosomy" label="Chromosome 7, monosomy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17482" end="17515" title="Chromosome 7, partial monosomy 7p" label="Chromosome 7, partial monosomy 7p"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17518" end="17542" title="Chromosome 7, trisomy 7p" label="Chromosome 7, trisomy 7p"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17545" end="17577" title="Chromosome 7, trisomy 7p13 p12 2" label="Chromosome 7, trisomy 7p13 p12 2"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17580" end="17604" title="Chromosome 7, trisomy 7q" label="Chromosome 7, trisomy 7q"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17607" end="17635" title="Chromosome 7, trisomy mosaic" label="Chromosome 7, trisomy mosaic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17666" end="17687" title="Chromosome 8 deletion" label="Chromosome 8 deletion"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17690" end="17707" title="Chromosome 8 ring" label="Chromosome 8 ring"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17710" end="17735" title="Chromosome 8, monosomy 8p" label="Chromosome 8, monosomy 8p"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17738" end="17764" title="Chromosome 8, monosomy 8p2" label="Chromosome 8, monosomy 8p2"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17767" end="17796" title="Chromosome 8, monosomy 8p23 1" label="Chromosome 8, monosomy 8p23 1"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17799" end="17824" title="Chromosome 8, monosomy 8q" label="Chromosome 8, monosomy 8q"/>
<link wikidata="Q2454191" start="17827" end="17855" title="Chromosome 8, mosaic trisomy" label="Chromosome 8, mosaic trisomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2454191" start="17858" end="17887" title="Chromosome 8, partial trisomy" label="Chromosome 8, partial trisomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2454191" start="17890" end="17914" title="Chromosome 8, trisomy 8p" label="Chromosome 8, trisomy 8p"/>
<link wikidata="Q2454191" start="17917" end="17941" title="Chromosome 8, trisomy 8q" label="Chromosome 8, trisomy 8q"/>
<link wikidata="Q2454191" start="17944" end="17965" title="Chromosome 8, trisomy" label="Chromosome 8, trisomy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17968" end="18005" title="Chromosome 9 inversion or duplication" label="Chromosome 9 inversion or duplication"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18008" end="18025" title="Chromosome 9 Ring" label="Chromosome 9 Ring"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18028" end="18058" title="Chromosome 9, duplication 9q21" label="Chromosome 9, duplication 9q21"/>
<link wikidata="Q3321253" start="18061" end="18086" title="Chromosome 9, monosomy 9p" label="Chromosome 9, monosomy 9p"/>
<link wikidata="Q3321253" start="18089" end="18122" title="Chromosome 9, partial monosomy 9p" label="Chromosome 9, partial monosomy 9p"/>
<link wikidata="Q381719" start="18125" end="18157" title="Chromosome 9, partial trisomy 9p" label="Chromosome 9, partial trisomy 9p"/>
<link wikidata="Q7706739" start="18160" end="18186" title="Chromosome 9, tetrasomy 9p" label="Chromosome 9, tetrasomy 9p"/>
<link wikidata="Q381719" start="18189" end="18213" title="Chromosome 9, trisomy 9q" label="Chromosome 9, trisomy 9q"/>
<link wikidata="Q381719" start="18216" end="18242" title="Chromosome 9, trisomy 9q32" label="Chromosome 9, trisomy 9q32"/>
<link wikidata="Q381719" start="18245" end="18273" title="Chromosome 9, trisomy mosaic" label="Chromosome 9, trisomy mosaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q381719" start="18276" end="18297" title="Chromosome 9, trisomy" label="Chromosome 9, trisomy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18312" end="18359" title="Chromosomes 1 and 2, monosomy 2q duplication 1p" label="Chromosomes 1 and 2, monosomy 2q duplication 1p"/>
<link wikidata="Q684810" start="18379" end="18398" title="Chronic berylliosis" label="Chronic berylliosis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18401" end="18419" title="Bronchitis#Chronic bronchitis" label="Chronic bronchitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4774221" start="18422" end="18474" title="Chronic demyelinizing neuropathy with IgM monoclonal" label="Chronic demyelinizing neuropathy with IgM monoclonal"/>
<link wikidata="Q172941" start="18477" end="18502" title="Chronic erosive gastritis" label="Chronic erosive gastritis"/>
<link wikidata="Q209733" start="18505" end="18548" title="Chronic fatigue immune dysfunction syndrome" label="Chronic fatigue immune dysfunction syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q209733" start="18551" end="18575" title="Chronic fatigue syndrome" label="Chronic fatigue syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165663" start="18578" end="18607" title="Chronic granulomatous disease" label="Chronic granulomatous disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q58952" start="18610" end="18624" title="Chronic hiccup" label="Chronic hiccup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088030" start="18627" end="18676" title="Chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy" label="Chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088156" start="18679" end="18707" title="Chronic lymphocytic leukemia" label="Chronic lymphocytic leukemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q582189" start="18710" end="18735" title="Chronic mountain sickness" label="Chronic mountain sickness"/>
<link wikidata="Q3705799" start="18738" end="18771" title="Chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis" label="Chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q729735" start="18774" end="18802" title="Chronic myelogenous leukemia" label="Chronic myelogenous leukemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088072" start="18805" end="18836" title="Chronic myelomonocytic leukemia" label="Chronic myelomonocytic leukemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q644318" start="18839" end="18869" title="Chronic necrotizing vasculitis" label="Chronic necrotizing vasculitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435822" start="18872" end="18891" title="Chronic neutropenia" label="Chronic neutropenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q199804" start="18894" end="18931" title="Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease" label="Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q3395796" start="18934" end="18962" title="Chronic polyradiculoneuritis" label="Chronic polyradiculoneuritis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2787011" start="18965" end="19007" title="Chronic recurrent multifocal osteomyelitis" label="Chronic recurrent multifocal osteomyelitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q736715" start="19010" end="19031" title="Chronic renal failure" label="Chronic renal failure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1782574" start="19034" end="19061" title="Chronic spasmodic dysphonia" label="Chronic spasmodic dysphonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q779203" start="19064" end="19127" title="Chronic, infantile, neurological, cutaneous, articular syndrome" label="Chronic, infantile, neurological, cutaneous, articular syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19145" end="19172" title="Chudley–Lowry–Hoar syndrome" label="Chudley–Lowry–Hoar syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19175" end="19201" title="Chudley–Rozdilsky syndrome" label="Chudley–Rozdilsky syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q9390217" start="19204" end="19231" title="Chudley–Mccullough syndrome" label="Chudley–Mccullough syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q32811" start="19234" end="19256" title="Churg–Strauss syndrome" label="Churg–Strauss syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q193889" start="19259" end="19274" title="Chylous ascites" label="Chylous ascites"/>
<link wikidata="Q627291" start="19285" end="19307" title="Cicatricial pemphigoid" label="Cicatricial pemphigoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q181831" start="19310" end="19334" title="Ciguatera fish poisoning" label="Ciguatera fish poisoning"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19337" end="19395" title="Ciliary discoordination, due to random ciliary orientation" label="Ciliary discoordination, due to random ciliary orientation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19398" end="19462" title="Ciliary dyskinesia, due to transposition of ciliary microtubules" label="Ciliary dyskinesia, due to transposition of ciliary microtubules"/>
<link wikidata="Q1690779" start="19465" end="19498" title="Ciliary dyskinesia-bronchiectasis" label="Ciliary dyskinesia-bronchiectasis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19501" end="19527" title="Cilliers–Beighton syndrome" label="Cilliers–Beighton syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q936656" start="19530" end="19540" title="Cinchonism" label="Cinchonism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19543" end="19588" title="Circumscribed cutaneous aplasia of the vertex" label="Circumscribed cutaneous aplasia of the vertex"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19591" end="19646" title="Circumscribed disseminated keratosis Jadassohn–Lew type" label="Circumscribed disseminated keratosis Jadassohn–Lew type"/>
<link wikidata="Q859142" start="19649" end="19662" title="Citrullinemia" label="Citrullinemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q161964" start="19683" end="19699" title="Capillary leak syndrome" label="Clarkson disease"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19702" end="19731" title="Clayton–Smith–Donnai syndrome" label="Clayton–Smith–Donnai syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q25379322" start="19807" end="19830" title="Cleft hand absent tibia" label="Cleft hand absent tibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q222634" start="19833" end="19842" title="Cleft lip" label="Cleft lip"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19845" end="19889" title="Cleft lip and palate malrotation cardiopathy" label="Cleft lip and palate malrotation cardiopathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033532" start="19892" end="19942" title="Cleft lip and/or palate with mucous cysts of lower" label="Cleft lip and/or palate with mucous cysts of lower"/>
<link wikidata="Q18021495" start="19945" end="19990" title="Cleft lip palate abnormal thumbs microcephaly" label="Cleft lip palate abnormal thumbs microcephaly"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19993" end="20032" title="Cleft lip palate deafness sacral lipoma" label="Cleft lip palate deafness sacral lipoma"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20035" end="20074" title="Cleft lip palate dysmorphism Kumar type" label="Cleft lip palate dysmorphism Kumar type"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20077" end="20106" title="Cleft lip palate ectrodactyly" label="Cleft lip palate ectrodactyly"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20109" end="20154" title="Cleft lip palate incisor and finger anomalies" label="Cleft lip palate incisor and finger anomalies"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20157" end="20208" title="Cleft lip palate mental retardation corneal opacity" label="Cleft lip palate mental retardation corneal opacity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7369769" start="20211" end="20261" title="Cleft lip palate oligodontia syndactyly pili torti" label="Cleft lip palate oligodontia syndactyly pili torti"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20264" end="20301" title="Cleft lip palate pituitary deficiency" label="Cleft lip palate pituitary deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q619428" start="20304" end="20336" title="Cleft lip palate-tetraphocomelia" label="Cleft lip palate-tetraphocomelia"/>
<link wikidata="Q222634" start="20339" end="20377" title="Cleft lip with or without cleft palate" label="Cleft lip with or without cleft palate"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20380" end="20430" title="Cleft lower lip cleft lateral canthi chorioretinal" label="Cleft lower lip cleft lateral canthi chorioretinal"/>
<link wikidata="Q222634" start="20464" end="20476" title="Cleft palate" label="Cleft palate"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20479" end="20519" title="Cleft palate cardiac defect ectrodactyly" label="Cleft palate cardiac defect ectrodactyly"/>
<link wikidata="Q4669630" start="20522" end="20572" title="Cleft palate colobomata radial synostosis deafness" label="Cleft palate colobomata radial synostosis deafness"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20575" end="20626" title="Cleft palate heart disease polydactyly absent tibia" label="Cleft palate heart disease polydactyly absent tibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7662457" start="20629" end="20667" title="Cleft palate lateral synechia syndrome" label="Cleft palate lateral synechia syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q55785908" start="20670" end="20716" title="Cleft palate short stature vertebral anomalies" label="Cleft palate short stature vertebral anomalies"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20719" end="20759" title="Cleft palate stapes fixation oligodontia" label="Cleft palate stapes fixation oligodontia"/>
<link wikidata="Q18039890" start="20762" end="20783" title="Cleft palate X linked" label="Cleft palate X linked"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20786" end="20807" title="Cleft tongue syndrome" label="Cleft tongue syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q47461585" start="20810" end="20849" title="Cleft upper lip median cutaneous polyps" label="Cleft upper lip median cutaneous polyps"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20872" end="20904" title="Clefting ectropion conical teeth" label="Clefting ectropion conical teeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q781618" start="20921" end="20944" title="Cleidocranial dysplasia" label="Cleidocranial dysplasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8061303" start="20947" end="20997" title="Cleidocranial dysplasia micrognathia absent thumbs" label="Cleidocranial dysplasia micrognathia absent thumbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5134736" start="21015" end="21032" title="Cloacal exstrophy" label="Cloacal exstrophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q30314608" start="21035" end="21059" title="Clonal hypereosinophilia" label="Clonal hypereosinophilia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5135822" start="21062" end="21079" title="Clouston syndrome" label="Clouston syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1787020" start="21082" end="21113" title="Cloverleaf skull bone dysplasia" label="Cloverleaf skull bone dysplasia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21116" end="21162" title="Cloverleaf skull micromelia thoracic dysplasia" label="Cloverleaf skull micromelia thoracic dysplasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162164" start="21165" end="21173" title="Clubfoot" label="Clubfoot"/>
<link wikidata="Q166907" start="21176" end="21192" title="Cluster headache" label="Cluster headache"/>
<link wikidata="Q6946" start="21203" end="21226" title="CMV antenatal infection" label="CMV antenatal infection"/>
<link wikidata="Q25326623" start="21251" end="21265" title="COACH syndrome" label="COACH syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q574329" start="21268" end="21301" title="Coal workers&amp;#x27; pneumoconiosis" label="Coal workers&amp;#x27; pneumoconiosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q616066" start="21304" end="21333" title="Coarctation of aorta dominant" label="Coarctation of aorta dominant"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21336" end="21370" title="Coarse face hypotonia constipation" label="Coarse face hypotonia constipation"/>
<link wikidata="Q915322" start="21373" end="21386" title="Coats disease" label="Coats disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q7240522" start="21389" end="21416" title="Cocaine antenatal infection" label="Cocaine antenatal infection"/>
<link wikidata="Q3743188" start="21419" end="21437" title="Cocaine dependence" label="Cocaine dependence"/>
<link wikidata="Q7240522" start="21440" end="21457" title="Cocaine fetopathy" label="Cocaine fetopathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5139133" start="21460" end="21480" title="Cocaine intoxication" label="Cocaine intoxication"/>
<link wikidata="Q868137" start="21483" end="21501" title="Coccidioidomycosis" label="Coccidioidomycosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5639341" start="21504" end="21526" title="Cochin Jewish Disorder" label="Cochin Jewish Disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q914389" start="21529" end="21553" title="Cockayne syndrome type 1" label="Cockayne syndrome type 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q914389" start="21556" end="21580" title="Cockayne syndrome type 2" label="Cockayne syndrome type 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q914389" start="21583" end="21607" title="Cockayne syndrome type 3" label="Cockayne syndrome type 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q914389" start="21610" end="21634" title="Cockayne&amp;#x27;s syndrome" label="Cockayne&amp;#x27;s syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q18034029" start="21637" end="21651" title="CODAS syndrome" label="CODAS syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21654" end="21672" title="Codesette syndrome" label="Codesette syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q11088" start="21675" end="21690" title="Coeliac disease" label="Coeliac disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q412832" start="21694" end="21741" title="Coenzyme Q cytochrome c reductase deficiency of" label="Coenzyme Q cytochrome c reductase deficiency of"/>
<link wikidata="Q1106881" start="21744" end="21765" title="Coffin–Lowry syndrome" label="Coffin–Lowry syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2348105" start="21768" end="21789" title="Coffin–Siris syndrome" label="Coffin–Siris syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q914389" start="21792" end="21805" title="COFS syndrome" label="COFS syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q17121503" start="21823" end="21843" title="Cogan–Reese syndrome" label="Cogan–Reese syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1106923" start="21846" end="21860" title="Cogan syndrome" label="Cogan syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q81923010" start="21863" end="21884" title="Cohen-Gibson syndrome" label="Cohen-Gibson syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q7251694" start="21887" end="21908" title="Cohen–Hayden syndrome" label="Cohen–Hayden syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21911" end="21942" title="Cohen–Lockood–Wyborney syndrome" label="Cohen–Lockood–Wyborney syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107087" start="21945" end="21959" title="Cohen syndrome" label="Cohen syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21992" end="22019" title="Colavita–Kozlowski syndrome" label="Colavita–Kozlowski syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q21503318" start="22021" end="22033" title="Cold abscess" label="Cold abscess"/>
<link wikidata="Q3961632" start="22036" end="22063" title="Cold agglutination syndrome" label="Cold agglutination syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q3961632" start="22066" end="22089" title="Cold agglutinin disease" label="Cold agglutinin disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q5142432" start="22092" end="22122" title="Cold antibody hemolytic anemia (disambiguation)" label="Cold antibody hemolytic anemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q187440" start="22125" end="22147" title="Cold contact urticaria" label="Cold contact urticaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q3552503" start="22150" end="22164" title="Cold urticaria" label="Cold urticaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q749409" start="22167" end="22190" title="Cole carpenter syndrome" label="Cole carpenter syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22193" end="22215" title="Coleman–Thome syndrome" label="Coleman–Thome syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2453464" start="22218" end="22225" title="Colitis" label="Colitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779300" start="22228" end="22245" title="Collagen disorder" label="Collagen disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q450470" start="22248" end="22267" title="Collagenous colitis" label="Collagenous colitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q55607918" start="22270" end="22287" title="Collaural fistula" label="Collaural fistula"/>
<link wikidata="Q55783172" start="22290" end="22311" title="Collins–Pope syndrome" label="Collins–Pope syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22314" end="22337" title="Collins–Sakati syndrome" label="Collins–Sakati syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1101694" start="22359" end="22407" title="Coloboma chorioretinal cerebellar vermis aplasia" label="Coloboma chorioretinal cerebellar vermis aplasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3961659" start="22410" end="22435" title="Coloboma hair abnormality" label="Coloboma hair abnormality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462309" start="22438" end="22468" title="Coloboma of choroid and retina" label="Coloboma of choroid and retina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462309" start="22471" end="22491" title="Coloboma of eye lens" label="Coloboma of eye lens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462309" start="22494" end="22510" title="Coloboma of iris" label="Coloboma of iris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462309" start="22513" end="22538" title="Coloboma of lens ala nasi" label="Coloboma of lens ala nasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q55780433" start="22541" end="22589" title="Coloboma of macula-brachydactyly type B syndrome" label="Coloboma of macula-brachydactyly type B syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462309" start="22592" end="22610" title="Coloboma of macula" label="Coloboma of macula"/>
<link wikidata="Q48987599" start="22613" end="22636" title="Coloboma of optic nerve" label="Coloboma of optic nerve"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462309" start="22639" end="22664" title="Coloboma of optic papilla" label="Coloboma of optic papilla"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22667" end="22703" title="Coloboma porencephaly hydronephrosis" label="Coloboma porencephaly hydronephrosis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22706" end="22765" title="Coloboma uveal with cleft lip palate and mental retardation" label="Coloboma uveal with cleft lip palate and mental retardation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462309" start="22768" end="22784" title="Coloboma, ocular" label="Coloboma, ocular"/>
<link wikidata="Q29982037" start="22787" end="22824" title="Colobomata unilobar lung heart defect" label="Colobomata unilobar lung heart defect"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023604" start="22827" end="22876" title="Colobomatous microphthalmia heart disease hearing" label="Colobomatous microphthalmia heart disease hearing"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22879" end="22906" title="Colobomatous microphthalmia" label="Colobomatous microphthalmia"/>
<link wikidata="Q783644" start="22909" end="22944" title="Colon cancer, familial nonpolyposis" label="Colon cancer, familial nonpolyposis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4597494" start="22947" end="22962" title="Colonic atresia" label="Colonic atresia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1789076" start="22965" end="22985" title="Colonic malakoplakia" label="Colonic malakoplakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q133696" start="22988" end="23003" title="Color blindness" label="Color blindness"/>
<link wikidata="Q319315" start="23006" end="23025" title="Colorado tick fever" label="Colorado tick fever"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23028" end="23056" title="Colver–Steer–Godman syndrome" label="Colver–Steer–Godman syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q55790053" start="23070" end="23101" title="Combarros–Calleja–Leno syndrome" label="Combarros–Calleja–Leno syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q5150905" start="23104" end="23137" title="Combined hyperlipidemia, familial" label="Combined hyperlipidemia, familial"/>
<link wikidata="Q55784284" start="23140" end="23183" title="Combined malonic and methylmalonic aciduria" label="Combined malonic and methylmalonic aciduria"/>
<link wikidata="Q12125" start="23186" end="23197" title="Common cold" label="Common cold"/>
<link wikidata="Q448023" start="23200" end="23216" title="Common mesentery" label="Common mesentery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472818" start="23219" end="23251" title="Common variable immunodeficiency" label="Common variable immunodeficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778968" start="23254" end="23274" title="Compartment syndrome" label="Compartment syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q13566093" start="23277" end="23310" title="Complement component 2 deficiency" label="Complement component 2 deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q5156411" start="23313" end="23344" title="Complement component receptor 1" label="Complement component receptor 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q390211" start="23347" end="23378" title="Complete atrioventricular canal" label="Complete atrioventricular canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q22326958" start="23381" end="23433" title="Complex 1 mitochondrial respiratory chain deficiency" label="Complex 1 mitochondrial respiratory chain deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q23542368" start="23436" end="23488" title="Complex 2 mitochondrial respiratory chain deficiency" label="Complex 2 mitochondrial respiratory chain deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23491" end="23543" title="Complex 3 mitochondrial respiratory chain deficiency" label="Complex 3 mitochondrial respiratory chain deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23546" end="23598" title="Complex 4 mitochondrial respiratory chain deficiency" label="Complex 4 mitochondrial respiratory chain deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23601" end="23653" title="Complex 5 mitochondrial respiratory chain deficiency" label="Complex 5 mitochondrial respiratory chain deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066311" start="23656" end="23686" title="Complex regional pain syndrome" label="Complex regional pain syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q596474" start="23719" end="23735" title="Conduct disorder" label="Conduct disorder"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23738" end="23780" title="Conductive deafness malformed external ear" label="Conductive deafness malformed external ear"/>
<link wikidata="Q1581308" start="23783" end="23806" title="Conductive hearing loss" label="Conductive hearing loss"/>
<link wikidata="Q208726" start="23809" end="23829" title="Condyloma acuminatum" label="Condyloma acuminatum"/>
<link wikidata="Q863710" start="23832" end="23848" title="Condylomata lata" label="Condylomata lata"/>
<link wikidata="Q147270" start="23851" end="23865" title="Cone dystrophy" label="Cone dystrophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6126829" start="23868" end="23910" title="Cone rod dystrophy amelogenesis imperfecta" label="Cone rod dystrophy amelogenesis imperfecta"/>
<link wikidata="Q147270" start="23913" end="23931" title="Cone-rod dystrophy" label="Cone-rod dystrophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473749" start="24013" end="24056" title="Congenital absence of the uterus and vagina" label="Congenital absence of the uterus and vagina"/>
<link wikidata="Q366868" start="24059" end="24089" title="Congenital adrenal hyperplasia" label="Congenital adrenal hyperplasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4127183" start="24093" end="24157" title="Congenital adrenal hyperplasia due to 11β-hydroxylase deficiency" label="Congenital adrenal hyperplasia due to 11β-hydroxylase deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q4127184" start="24161" end="24230" title="Congenital adrenal hyperplasia due to 17 alpha-hydroxylase deficiency" label="Congenital adrenal hyperplasia due to 17 alpha-hydroxylase deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q4127185" start="24234" end="24297" title="Congenital adrenal hyperplasia due to 21-hydroxylase deficiency" label="Congenital adrenal hyperplasia due to 21-hydroxylase deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q4127186" start="24301" end="24385" title="Congenital adrenal hyperplasia due to 3 beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase deficiency" label="Congenital adrenal hyperplasia due to 3 beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q4262866" start="24389" end="24427" title="Lipoid congenital adrenal hyperplasia" label="Congenital adrenal hyperplasia, lipoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q5160407" start="24430" end="24456" title="Congenital afibrinogenemia" label="Congenital afibrinogenemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q181391" start="24459" end="24487" title="Congenital alopecia X linked" label="Congenital alopecia X linked"/>
<link wikidata="Q5160408" start="24490" end="24511" title="Congenital amputation" label="Congenital amputation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24514" end="24555" title="Congenital aneurysms of the great vessels" label="Congenital aneurysms of the great vessels"/>
<link wikidata="Q416336" start="24558" end="24596" title="Congenital antithrombin III deficiency" label="Congenital antithrombin III deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q5160440" start="24599" end="24625" title="Congenital aplastic anemia" label="Congenital aplastic anemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q707837" start="24628" end="24658" title="Congenital arteriovenous shunt" label="Congenital arteriovenous shunt"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24661" end="24690" title="Congenital articular rigidity" label="Congenital articular rigidity"/>
<link wikidata="Q5160420" start="24693" end="24743" title="Congenital benign spinal muscular atrophy dominant" label="Congenital benign spinal muscular atrophy dominant"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24746" end="24771" title="Congenital brain disorder" label="Congenital brain disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q4907743" start="24774" end="24807" title="Congenital bronchobiliary fistula" label="Congenital bronchobiliary fistula"/>
<link wikidata="Q939364" start="24838" end="24872" title="Congenital cardiovascular disorder" label="Congenital cardiovascular disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q939364" start="24875" end="24914" title="Congenital cardiovascular malformations" label="Congenital cardiovascular malformations"/>
<link wikidata="Q5038334" start="24917" end="24948" title="Congenital cardiovascular shunt" label="Congenital cardiovascular shunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q979129" start="24951" end="24994" title="Congenital central hypoventilation syndrome" label="Congenital central hypoventilation syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q473753" start="24997" end="25025" title="Congenital constricting band" label="Congenital constricting band"/>
<link wikidata="Q3508618" start="25028" end="25066" title="Congenital contractural arachnodactyly" label="Congenital contractural arachnodactyly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1480291" start="25069" end="25092" title="Congenital contractures" label="Congenital contractures"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25095" end="25148" title="Congenital craniosynostosis maternal hyperthyroiditis" label="Congenital craniosynostosis maternal hyperthyroiditis"/>
<link wikidata="Q246040" start="25151" end="25193" title="Congenital cystic adenomatoid malformation" label="Congenital cystic adenomatoid malformation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25196" end="25260" title="Congenital cystic eye multiple ocular and intracranial anomalies" label="Congenital cystic eye multiple ocular and intracranial anomalies"/>
<link wikidata="Q6946" start="25263" end="25289" title="Congenital cytomegalovirus" label="Congenital cytomegalovirus"/>
<link wikidata="Q16035842" start="25292" end="25311" title="Congenital deafness" label="Congenital deafness"/>
<link wikidata="Q2163245" start="25314" end="25345" title="Congenital diaphragmatic hernia" label="Congenital diaphragmatic hernia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125675" start="25348" end="25384" title="Congenital disorder of glycosylation" label="Congenital disorder of glycosylation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5160422" start="25387" end="25422" title="Congenital dyserythropoietic anemia" label="Congenital dyserythropoietic anemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759389" start="25425" end="25460" title="Congenital erythropoietic porphyria" label="Congenital erythropoietic porphyria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418152" start="25463" end="25489" title="Congenital facial diplegia" label="Congenital facial diplegia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1956696" start="25492" end="25527" title="Congenital fiber type disproportion" label="Congenital fiber type disproportion"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25530" end="25566" title="Congenital gastrointestinal disorder" label="Congenital gastrointestinal disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q6029048" start="25569" end="25604" title="Congenital generalized fibromatosis" label="Congenital generalized fibromatosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547111" start="25607" end="25634" title="Congenital giant megaureter" label="Congenital giant megaureter"/>
<link wikidata="Q18558252" start="25665" end="25687" title="Congenital heart block" label="Congenital heart block"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25690" end="25745" title="Congenital heart disease ptosis hypodontia craniostosis" label="Congenital heart disease ptosis hypodontia craniostosis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25748" end="25814" title="Congenital heart disease radio ulnar synostosis mental retardation" label="Congenital heart disease radio ulnar synostosis mental retardation"/>
<link wikidata="Q939364" start="25817" end="25842" title="Congenital heart disorder" label="Congenital heart disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q939364" start="25845" end="25875" title="Congenital heart septum defect" label="Congenital heart septum defect"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25878" end="25952" title="Congenital hemidysplasia with ichthyosiform erythroderma and limbs defects" label="Congenital hemidysplasia with ichthyosiform erythroderma and limbs defects"/>
<link wikidata="Q5160435" start="25955" end="25982" title="Congenital hemolytic anemia" label="Congenital hemolytic anemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395683" start="25985" end="26012" title="Congenital hepatic fibrosis" label="Congenital hepatic fibrosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q823140" start="26015" end="26043" title="Congenital hepatic porphyria" label="Congenital hepatic porphyria"/>
<link wikidata="Q655331" start="26046" end="26071" title="Congenital herpes simplex" label="Congenital herpes simplex"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26074" end="26111" title="Congenital hypomyelination neuropathy" label="Congenital hypomyelination neuropathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q531012" start="26114" end="26139" title="Congenital hypothyroidism" label="Congenital hypothyroidism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26142" end="26172" title="Congenital hypotrichosis milia" label="Congenital hypotrichosis milia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26175" end="26223" title="Congenital ichthyosis, microcephalus, q­riplegia" label="Congenital ichthyosis, microcephalus, q­riplegia"/>
<link wikidata="Q523893" start="26226" end="26247" title="Congenital ichthyosis" label="Congenital ichthyosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3731836" start="26250" end="26286" title="Congenital ichtyosiform erythroderma" label="Congenital ichtyosiform erythroderma"/>
<link wikidata="Q501694" start="26289" end="26337" title="Congenital insensitivity to pain with anhidrosis" label="Congenital insensitivity to pain with anhidrosis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26340" end="26366" title="Congenital kidney disorder" label="Congenital kidney disorder"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26369" end="26395" title="Congenital limb deficiency" label="Congenital limb deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q188605" start="26398" end="26424" title="Congenital lobar emphysema" label="Congenital lobar emphysema"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343645" start="26455" end="26475" title="Congenital megacolon" label="Congenital megacolon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547111" start="26478" end="26501" title="Congenital megaloureter" label="Congenital megaloureter"/>
<link wikidata="Q6821415" start="26504" end="26535" title="Congenital mesoblastic nephroma" label="Congenital mesoblastic nephroma"/>
<link wikidata="Q4293116" start="26538" end="26569" title="microvillous atrophy" label="Congenital microvillous atrophy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26572" end="26602" title="Congenital mitral malformation" label="Congenital mitral malformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140794" start="26605" end="26631" title="Congenital mitral stenosis" label="Congenital mitral stenosis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26634" end="26654" title="Congenital mixovirus" label="Congenital mixovirus"/>
<link wikidata="Q176741" start="26657" end="26673" title="Congenital mumps" label="Congenital mumps"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26676" end="26719" title="Congenital muscular dystrophy syringomyelia" label="Congenital muscular dystrophy syringomyelia"/>
<link wikidata="Q112412" start="26722" end="26741" title="Congenital myopathy" label="Congenital myopathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2160802" start="26744" end="26773" title="Congenital nephrotic syndrome" label="Congenital nephrotic syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140000" start="26776" end="26808" title="Congenital nonhemolytic jaundice" label="Congenital nonhemolytic jaundice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1724539" start="26811" end="26829" title="Congenital rubella" label="Congenital rubella"/>
<link wikidata="Q662272" start="26832" end="26854" title="Congenital short bowel" label="Congenital short bowel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26857" end="26879" title="Congenital short femur" label="Congenital short femur"/>
<link wikidata="Q3251367" start="26882" end="26910" title="Congenital skeletal disorder" label="Congenital skeletal disorder"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26913" end="26937" title="Congenital skin disorder" label="Congenital skin disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q541244" start="26940" end="26969" title="Congenital spherocytic anemia" label="Congenital spherocytic anemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q541244" start="26972" end="27011" title="Congenital spherocytic hemolytic anemia" label="Congenital spherocytic hemolytic anemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q19596346" start="27014" end="27061" title="Congenital stenosis of cervical medullary canal" label="Congenital stenosis of cervical medullary canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q498826" start="27064" end="27107" title="Congenital sucrose isomaltose malabsorption" label="Congenital sucrose isomaltose malabsorption"/>
<link wikidata="Q5160454" start="27110" end="27129" title="Congenital syphilis" label="Congenital syphilis"/>
<link wikidata="Q154878" start="27160" end="27184" title="Congenital toxoplasmosis" label="Congenital toxoplasmosis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27187" end="27229" title="Congenital unilateral pulmonary hypoplasia" label="Congenital unilateral pulmonary hypoplasia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27232" end="27265" title="Congenital vagal hyperreflexivity" label="Congenital vagal hyperreflexivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q55787014" start="27268" end="27297" title="Congenital varicella syndrome" label="Congenital varicella syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q181754" start="27320" end="27344" title="Congestive heart failure" label="Congestive heart failure"/>
<link wikidata="Q6546687" start="27364" end="27387" title="Conjunctivitis ligneous" label="Conjunctivitis ligneous"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27390" end="27424" title="Conjunctivitis with pseudomembrane" label="Conjunctivitis with pseudomembrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q167844" start="27427" end="27441" title="Conjunctivitis" label="Conjunctivitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1583485" start="27463" end="27504" title="Connective tissue dysplasia Spellacy type" label="Connective tissue dysplasia Spellacy type"/>
<link wikidata="Q18025996" start="27507" end="27526" title="Connexin 26 anomaly" label="Connexin 26 anomaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1482922" start="27529" end="27549" title="Conn&amp;#x27;s syndrome" label="Conn&amp;#x27;s syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27552" end="27583" title="Conotruncal heart malformations" label="Conotruncal heart malformations"/>
<link wikidata="Q2964437" start="27586" end="27612" title="Conradi–Hünermann syndrome" label="Conradi–Hünermann syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164324" start="27615" end="27642" title="Constitutional growth delay" label="Constitutional growth delay"/>
<link wikidata="Q614750" start="27645" end="27671" title="Constrictive bronchiolitis" label="Constrictive bronchiolitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q783903" start="27674" end="27692" title="Contact dermatitis" label="Contact dermatitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q12077704" start="27696" end="27724" title="Allergic contact dermatitis" label="Contact dermatitis, allergic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799146" start="27728" end="27756" title="Irritant contact dermatitis" label="Contact dermatitis, irritant"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27760" end="27792" title="Contact dermatitis#Photocontact dermatitis" label="Contact dermatitis, photocontact"/>
<link wikidata="Q21503282" start="27795" end="27838" title="Continuous muscle fiber activity hereditary" label="Continuous muscle fiber activity hereditary"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27841" end="27889" title="Continuous spike-wave during slow sleep syndrome" label="Continuous spike-wave during slow sleep syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q3508618" start="27892" end="27919" title="Contractural arachnodactyly" label="Contractural arachnodactyly"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27922" end="27972" title="Contractures ectodermal dysplasia cleft lip palate" label="Contractures ectodermal dysplasia cleft lip palate"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27975" end="28009" title="Contractures hyperkeratosis lethal" label="Contractures hyperkeratosis lethal"/>
<link wikidata="Q48989140" start="28012" end="28066" title="Contractures of feet-muscle atrophy-oculomotor apraxia" label="Contractures of feet-muscle atrophy-oculomotor apraxia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051355" start="28069" end="28088" title="Conversion disorder" label="Conversion disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q4887956" start="28091" end="28141" title="Convulsions benign familial neonatal dominant form" label="Convulsions benign familial neonatal dominant form"/>
<link wikidata="Q4887956" start="28144" end="28180" title="Convulsions benign familial neonatal" label="Convulsions benign familial neonatal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5167190" start="28198" end="28212" title="Cooks syndrome" label="Cooks syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q185137" start="28215" end="28235" title="Cooley&amp;#x27;s anemia" label="Cooley&amp;#x27;s anemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q113380191" start="28238" end="28271" title="Copper deficiency familial benign" label="Copper deficiency familial benign"/>
<link wikidata="Q639203" start="28274" end="28298" title="Copper transport disease" label="Copper transport disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q271759" start="28301" end="28314" title="Coproporhyria" label="Coproporhyria"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28328" end="28342" title="Cor biloculare" label="Cor biloculare"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131786" start="28345" end="28358" title="Cor pulmonale" label="Cor pulmonale"/>
<link wikidata="Q5169382" start="28361" end="28376" title="Cor triatriatum" label="Cor triatriatum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28398" end="28429" title="Cormier–Rustin–Munnich syndrome" label="Cormier–Rustin–Munnich syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q7289967" start="28432" end="28478" title="Corneal anesthesia deafness mental retardation" label="Corneal anesthesia deafness mental retardation"/>
<link wikidata="Q24977255" start="28481" end="28508" title="Corneal cerebellar syndrome" label="Corneal cerebellar syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28511" end="28547" title="Corneal crystals myopathy neuropathy" label="Corneal crystals myopathy neuropathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044949" start="28550" end="28567" title="Corneal dystrophy" label="Corneal dystrophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464888" start="28570" end="28599" title="Corneal endothelium dystrophy" label="Corneal endothelium dystrophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133289" start="28602" end="28628" title="Cornelia de Lange syndrome" label="Cornelia de Lange syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q5171588" start="28631" end="28660" title="Corneodermatoosseous syndrome" label="Corneodermatoosseous syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28663" end="28708" title="Coronal synostosis syndactyly jejunal atresia" label="Coronal synostosis syndactyly jejunal atresia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28711" end="28735" title="Coronaro-cardiac fistula" label="Coronaro-cardiac fistula"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28738" end="28779" title="Coronary arteries congenital malformation" label="Coronary arteries congenital malformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5172183" start="28782" end="28806" title="Coronary artery aneurysm" label="Coronary artery aneurysm"/>
<link wikidata="Q844935" start="28809" end="28831" title="Coronary heart disease" label="Coronary heart disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q84263196" start="28834" end="28858" title="Coronavirus disease 2019" label="Coronavirus disease 2019"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135124" start="28880" end="28904" title="Corpus callosum agenesis" label="Corpus callosum agenesis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28907" end="28933" title="Corpus callosum dysgenesis" label="Corpus callosum dysgenesis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28936" end="28959" title="Corsello–Opitz syndrome" label="Corsello–Opitz syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28962" end="28996" title="Cortada–Koussef–Matsumoto syndrome" label="Cortada–Koussef–Matsumoto syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q30314657" start="28999" end="29023" title="Cortes Lacassie syndrome" label="Cortes-Lacassie syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29026" end="29075" title="Cortical blindness mental retardation polydactyly" label="Cortical blindness mental retardation polydactyly"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29078" end="29132" title="Cortical degeneration of the cerebellum parenchymatous" label="Cortical degeneration of the cerebellum parenchymatous"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316942" start="29135" end="29153" title="Cortical dysplasia" label="Cortical dysplasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3475955" start="29156" end="29188" title="Cortical hyperostosis syndactyly" label="Cortical hyperostosis syndactyly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755684" start="29191" end="29216" title="Corticobasal degeneration" label="Corticobasal degeneration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136492" start="29234" end="29251" title="Costello syndrome" label="Costello syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q5175170" start="29254" end="29269" title="Costochondritis" label="Costochondritis"/>
<link wikidata="Q175763" start="29281" end="29298" title="Costal chondritis" label="Costal chondritis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29302" end="29343" title="Costocoracoid ligament congenitally short" label="Costocoracoid ligament congenitally short"/>
<link wikidata="Q708165" start="29346" end="29382" title="Cote–Adamopoulos–Pantelakis syndrome" label="Cote–Adamopoulos–Pantelakis syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29385" end="29409" title="Cote–Katsantoni syndrome" label="Cote–Katsantoni syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q112108853" start="29412" end="29444" title="Cousin–Walbraum–Cegarra syndrome" label="Cousin–Walbraum–Cegarra syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475743" start="29447" end="29464" title="Covesdem syndrome" label="Covesdem syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q459896" start="29467" end="29497" title="Cowchock–Wapner–Kurtz syndrome" label="Cowchock–Wapner–Kurtz syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138188" start="29500" end="29521" title="Cowden&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Cowden&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066011" start="29524" end="29530" title="Cowpox" label="Cowpox"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29533" end="29555" title="Coxoauricular syndrome" label="Coxoauricular syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29590" end="29620" title="Cramer–Niederdellmann syndrome" label="Cramer–Niederdellmann syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006818" start="29623" end="29628" title="Cramp" label="Cramp"/>
<link wikidata="Q5181860" start="29631" end="29659" title="Cramp fasciculation syndrome" label="Cramp fasciculation syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q5181978" start="29699" end="29716" title="Crandall syndrome" label="Crandall syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q19277644" start="29719" end="29739" title="Crane–Heise syndrome" label="Crane–Heise syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q7243138" start="29779" end="29802" title="Cranio osteoarthropathy" label="Cranio osteoarthropathy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29821" end="29846" title="Cranioacrofacial syndrome" label="Cranioacrofacial syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q5182138" start="29849" end="29875" title="Craniodiaphyseal dysplasia" label="Craniodiaphyseal dysplasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q110127761" start="29878" end="29919" title="Craniodigital syndrome mental retardation" label="Craniodigital syndrome mental retardation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7451019" start="29922" end="29948" title="Cranioectodermal dysplasia" label="Cranioectodermal dysplasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q55629168" start="29951" end="30002" title="Craniofacial and osseous defects mental retardation" label="Craniofacial and osseous defects mental retardation"/>
<link wikidata="Q85754471" start="30005" end="30038" title="Craniofacial and skeletal defects" label="Craniofacial and skeletal defects"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30041" end="30076" title="Craniofacial deafness hand syndrome" label="Craniofacial deafness hand syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30079" end="30138" title="Craniofacial dysostosis arthrogryposis progeroid appearance" label="Craniofacial dysostosis arthrogryposis progeroid appearance"/>
<link wikidata="Q779250" start="30141" end="30164" title="Craniofacial dysostosis" label="Craniofacial dysostosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q779250" start="30167" end="30192" title="Craniofacial dysynostosis" label="Craniofacial dysynostosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5034093" start="30195" end="30229" title="Craniofaciocardioskeletal syndrome" label="Craniofaciocardioskeletal syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30232" end="30274" title="Craniofaciocervical osteoglyphic dysplasia" label="Craniofaciocervical osteoglyphic dysplasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5182141" start="30277" end="30304" title="Craniofrontonasal dysplasia" label="Craniofrontonasal dysplasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5182141" start="30307" end="30344" title="Craniofrontonasal syndrome Teebi type" label="Craniofrontonasal syndrome Teebi type"/>
<link wikidata="Q3710209" start="30347" end="30388" title="Craniometaphyseal dysplasia dominant type" label="Craniometaphyseal dysplasia dominant type"/>
<link wikidata="Q3710209" start="30391" end="30433" title="Craniometaphyseal dysplasia recessive type" label="Craniometaphyseal dysplasia recessive type"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30436" end="30461" title="Craniomicromelic syndrome" label="Craniomicromelic syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30480" end="30503" title="Craniostenosis cataract" label="Craniostenosis cataract"/>
<link wikidata="Q42755841" start="30506" end="30569" title="Craniostenosis with congenital heart disease mental retardation" label="Craniostenosis with congenital heart disease mental retardation"/>
<link wikidata="Q378183" start="30572" end="30586" title="Craniostenosis" label="Craniostenosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q25324175" start="30589" end="30627" title="Craniosynostosis alopecia brain defect" label="Craniosynostosis alopecia brain defect"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30630" end="30674" title="Craniosynostosis arthrogryposis cleft palate" label="Craniosynostosis arthrogryposis cleft palate"/>
<link wikidata="Q378183" start="30677" end="30712" title="Craniosynostosis autosomal dominant" label="Craniosynostosis autosomal dominant"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30715" end="30763" title="Craniosynostosis cleft lip palate arthrogryposis" label="Craniosynostosis cleft lip palate arthrogryposis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30766" end="30801" title="Craniosynostosis contractures cleft" label="Craniosynostosis contractures cleft"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30804" end="30854" title="Craniosynostosis exostoses nevus epibulbar dermoid" label="Craniosynostosis exostoses nevus epibulbar dermoid"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30857" end="30889" title="Craniosynostosis fibular aplasia" label="Craniosynostosis fibular aplasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q378183" start="30892" end="30922" title="Craniosynostosis Fontaine type" label="Craniosynostosis Fontaine type"/>
<link wikidata="Q618246" start="30925" end="30964" title="Craniosynostosis Maroteaux Fonfria type" label="Craniosynostosis Maroteaux Fonfria type"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30967" end="31020" title="Craniosynostosis mental retardation clefting syndrome" label="Craniosynostosis mental retardation clefting syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q42755841" start="31023" end="31072" title="Craniosynostosis mental retardation heart defects" label="Craniosynostosis mental retardation heart defects"/>
<link wikidata="Q378183" start="31075" end="31109" title="Craniosynostosis Philadelphia type" label="Craniosynostosis Philadelphia type"/>
<link wikidata="Q3508616" start="31112" end="31152" title="Craniosynostosis radial aplasia syndrome" label="Craniosynostosis radial aplasia syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31155" end="31207" title="Craniosynostosis synostoses hypertensive nephropathy" label="Craniosynostosis synostoses hypertensive nephropathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q378183" start="31210" end="31238" title="Craniosynostosis Warman type" label="Craniosynostosis Warman type"/>
<link wikidata="Q193003" start="31241" end="31317" title="Craniosynostosis, sagittal, with Dandy-Walker malformation and hydrocephalus" label="Craniosynostosis, sagittal, with Dandy-Walker malformation and hydrocephalus"/>
<link wikidata="Q378183" start="31320" end="31336" title="Craniosynostosis" label="Craniosynostosis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31339" end="31368" title="Craniotelencephalic dysplasia" label="Craniotelencephalic dysplasia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31385" end="31402" title="Crawfurd syndrome" label="Crawfurd syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q223600" start="31420" end="31439" title="Creatine deficiency" label="Creatine deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q17165" start="31442" end="31458" title="Creeping disease" label="Creeping disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q763356" start="31461" end="31475" title="CREST syndrome" label="CREST syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q472664" start="31545" end="31565" title="Cretinism athyreotic" label="Cretinism athyreotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q472664" start="31568" end="31577" title="Cretinism" label="Cretinism"/>
<link wikidata="Q49989" start="31580" end="31605" title="Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease" label="Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q752298" start="31608" end="31628" title="Cri du chat syndrome" label="Cri du chat syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140000" start="31677" end="31700" title="Crigler–Najjar syndrome" label="Crigler–Najjar syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q18033938" start="31703" end="31720" title="Crisponi syndrome" label="Crisponi syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31723" end="31743" title="Criss-cross syndrome" label="Criss-cross syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31746" end="31772" title="Criswick–Schepens syndrome" label="Criswick–Schepens syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472" start="31775" end="31812" title="Crohn&amp;#x27;s disease of the esophagus" label="Crohn&amp;#x27;s disease of the esophagus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472" start="31815" end="31835" title="Crohn&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Crohn&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q5187584" start="31838" end="31852" title="Crome syndrome" label="Crome syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422034" start="31855" end="31880" title="Cronkhite–Canada syndrome" label="Cronkhite–Canada syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31883" end="31909" title="Crossed polydactyly type 1" label="Crossed polydactyly type 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1595685" start="31912" end="31934" title="Crossed polysyndactyly" label="Crossed polysyndactyly"/>
<link wikidata="Q836356" start="31937" end="31942" title="Croup" label="Croup"/>
<link wikidata="Q779250" start="31945" end="31961" title="Crouzon syndrome" label="Crouzon syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q5189052" start="31964" end="31994" title="Crouzonodermoskeletal syndrome" label="Crouzonodermoskeletal syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2553422" start="31997" end="32017" title="Crow–Fukase syndrome" label="Crow–Fukase syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790371" start="32031" end="32047" title="Cryoglobulinemia" label="Cryoglobulinemia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32050" end="32060" title="Cryophobia" label="Cryophobia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470140" start="32063" end="32077" title="Cryptococcosis" label="Cryptococcosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2012642" start="32080" end="32113" title="Cryptogenic organized pneumopathy" label="Cryptogenic organized pneumopathy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32116" end="32168" title="Cryptomicrotia brachydactyly syndrome excess fingers" label="Cryptomicrotia brachydactyly syndrome excess fingers"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32171" end="32208" title="Cryptomicrotia brachydactyly syndrome" label="Cryptomicrotia brachydactyly syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425572" start="32211" end="32246" title="Cryptophthalmos-syndactyly syndrome" label="Cryptophthalmos-syndactyly syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359898" start="32249" end="32266" title="Cryptosporidiosis" label="Cryptosporidiosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q55785494" start="32269" end="32317" title="Cryptorchidism arachnodactyly mental retardation" label="Cryptorchidism arachnodactyly mental retardation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790371" start="32320" end="32337" title="Cryroglobulinemia" label="Cryroglobulinemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5191403" start="32340" end="32363" title="Crystal deposit disease" label="Crystal deposit disease"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32388" end="32409" title="Culler–Jones syndrome" label="Culler–Jones syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q11686209" start="32412" end="32462" title="Curly hair ankyloblepharon nail dysplasia syndrome" label="Curly hair ankyloblepharon nail dysplasia syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q5194974" start="32465" end="32480" title="Currarino triad" label="Currarino triad"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32483" end="32502" title="Curry–Hall syndrome" label="Curry–Hall syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q55783221" start="32505" end="32525" title="Curry–Jones syndrome" label="Curry–Jones syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32528" end="32565" title="Curth–Macklin type ichthyosis hystrix" label="Curth–Macklin type ichthyosis hystrix"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32568" end="32600" title="Curtis–Rogers–Stevenson syndrome" label="Curtis–Rogers–Stevenson syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q219102" start="32603" end="32629" title="Cushing syndrome, familial" label="Cushing syndrome, familial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057892" start="32632" end="32660" title="Cushing&amp;#x27;s symphalangism" label="Cushing&amp;#x27;s symphalangism"/>
<link wikidata="Q219102" start="32663" end="32686" title="Cushing&amp;#x27;s syndrome" label="Cushing&amp;#x27;s syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q129104" start="32700" end="32717" title="Cutaneous anthrax" label="Cutaneous anthrax"/>
<link wikidata="Q1597571" start="32720" end="32743" title="Cutaneous larva migrans" label="Cutaneous larva migrans"/>
<link wikidata="Q188297" start="32746" end="32775" title="Cutaneous lupus erythematosus" label="Cutaneous lupus erythematosus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32778" end="32819" title="Cutaneous photosensitivity colitis lethal" label="Cutaneous photosensitivity colitis lethal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5196687" start="32822" end="32847" title="Cutaneous T-cell lymphoma" label="Cutaneous T-cell lymphoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1613670" start="32850" end="32872" title="Cutaneous vascularitis" label="Cutaneous vascularitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4876717" start="32875" end="32919" title="Cutis Gyrata syndrome of Beare and Stevenson" label="Cutis Gyrata syndrome of Beare and Stevenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4876717" start="32922" end="32973" title="Cutis gyratum acanthosis nigricans craniosynostosis" label="Cutis gyratum acanthosis nigricans craniosynostosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2735907" start="32976" end="32986" title="Cutis laxa" label="Cutis laxa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2735907" start="32990" end="33011" title="Cutis laxa, recessive" label="Cutis laxa, recessive"/>
<link wikidata="Q3961699" start="33015" end="33061" title="Cutis laxa corneal clouding mental retardation" label="Cutis laxa corneal clouding mental retardation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2735907" start="33065" end="33088" title="Cutis laxa osteoporosis" label="Cutis laxa osteoporosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3961699" start="33092" end="33145" title="Cutis laxa with joint laxity and retarded development" label="Cutis laxa with joint laxity and retarded development"/>
<link wikidata="Q2735907" start="33149" end="33174" title="Cutis laxa, dominant type" label="Cutis laxa, dominant type"/>
<link wikidata="Q2735907" start="33178" end="33206" title="Cutis laxa, recessive type 1" label="Cutis laxa, recessive type 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q2735907" start="33210" end="33238" title="Cutis laxa, recessive type 2" label="Cutis laxa, recessive type 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997180" start="33241" end="33282" title="Cutis marmorata telangiectatica congenita" label="Cutis marmorata telangiectatica congenita"/>
<link wikidata="Q5196861" start="33285" end="33324" title="Cutis verticis gyrata mental deficiency" label="Cutis verticis gyrata mental deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="33327" end="33383" title="Cutis verticis gyrata thyroid aplasia mental retardation" label="Cutis verticis gyrata thyroid aplasia mental retardation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5196861" start="33386" end="33407" title="Cutis verticis gyrata" label="Cutis verticis gyrata"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="33410" end="33437" title="Cutler Bass Romshe syndrome" label="Cutler Bass Romshe syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q883082" start="33451" end="33468" title="Cyanide poisoning" label="Cyanide poisoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q5198214" start="33471" end="33489" title="Cyclic neutropenia" label="Cyclic neutropenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1857905" start="33492" end="33516" title="Cyclic vomiting syndrome" label="Cyclic vomiting syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q3008595" start="33519" end="33532" title="Cyclosporosis" label="Cyclosporosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q245590" start="33535" end="33546" title="Cyclothymia" label="Cyclothymia"/>
<link wikidata="Q55780466" start="33549" end="33592" title="Cyprus facial neuromusculoskeletal syndrome" label="Cyprus facial neuromusculoskeletal syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q994859" start="33595" end="33635" title="Cystathionine beta synthetase deficiency" label="Cystathionine beta synthetase deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q246040" start="33638" end="33677" title="Cystic adenomatoid malformation of lung" label="Cystic adenomatoid malformation of lung"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="33680" end="33716" title="Cystic angiomatosis of bone, diffuse" label="Cystic angiomatosis of bone, diffuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q29014927" start="33719" end="33765" title="Cystic fibrosis gastritis megaloblastic anemia" label="Cystic fibrosis gastritis megaloblastic anemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q178194" start="33768" end="33783" title="Cystic fibrosis" label="Cystic fibrosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q55790297" start="33786" end="33821" title="Cystic hamartoma of lung and kidney" label="Cystic hamartoma of lung and kidney"/>
<link wikidata="Q459896" start="33824" end="33858" title="Cystic hygroma lethal cleft palate" label="Cystic hygroma lethal cleft palate"/>
<link wikidata="Q459896" start="33861" end="33875" title="Cystic hygroma" label="Cystic hygroma"/>
<link wikidata="Q246048" start="33878" end="33909" title="Cystic medial necrosis of aorta" label="Cystic medial necrosis of aorta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149042" start="33912" end="33947" title="Cystin transport, protein defect of" label="Cystin transport, protein defect of"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149042" start="33950" end="33960" title="Cystinosis" label="Cystinosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149046" start="33963" end="33973" title="Cystinuria" label="Cystinuria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149046" start="33976" end="33996" title="Cystinuria-lysinuria" label="Cystinuria-lysinuria"/>
<link wikidata="Q306116" start="33999" end="34030" title="Cytochrome C oxidase deficiency" label="Cytochrome C oxidase deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q6946" start="34033" end="34062" title="Cytomegalic inclusion disease" label="Cytomegalic inclusion disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q6946" start="34065" end="34080" title="Cytomegalovirus" label="Cytomegalovirus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="34083" end="34108" title="Cytoplasmic body myopathy" label="Cytoplasmic body myopathy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="34111" end="34135" title="Czeizel–Losonci syndrome" label="Czeizel–Losonci syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q55782165" start="34138" end="34154" title="Czeizel syndrome" label="Czeizel syndrome"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="236337" wikidata="Q6616858" url="?curid=236337" title="List of diseases (D)">
<text>This is a list of diseases starting with the letter &quot;D&quot;.

==D==
* D ercole syndrome

==Da==
* Daentl Towsend Siegel syndrome
* Dahlberg Borer Newcomer syndrome
* Daish–Hardman–Lamont syndrome
* Dandy–Walker facial hemangioma
* Dandy–Walker malformation postaxial polydactyly
* Dandy–Walker syndrome recessive form
* Dandy–Walker malformation with mental retardation, basal ganglia disease, and seizures
* Dandy–Walker malformation with mental retardation, macrocephaly, myopia, and brachytelephalangy
* Dandy–Walker syndrome
* Daneman–Davy–Mancer syndrome
* Darier&#x27;s disease
* Davenport–Donlan syndrome
* DAVID syndrome
* Davis–Lafer syndrome

==De==

* De Barsy syndrome
* De Hauwere–Leroy–Adriaenssens syndrome
* DeSanctis–Cacchione syndrome

===Dea===

====Deaf====
* Deaf blind hypopigmentation

=====Deafn=====
* Deafness

======Deafne======
Deafness c – Deafness s
* Deafness conductive ptosis skeletal anomalies
* Deafness conductive stapedial ear malformation facial palsy
* Deafness congenital onychodystrophy recessive
* Deafness craniofacial syndrome
* Deafness enamel hypoplasia nail defects
* Deafness epiphyseal dysplasia short stature
* Deafness goiter stippled epiphyses
* Deafness hyperuricemia neurologic ataxia
* Deafness hypogonadism syndrome
* Deafness hypospadias metacarpal and metatarsal syndrome
* Deafness mesenteric diverticula of small bowel neuropathy
* Deafness mixed with perilymphatic Gusher, X-linked
* Deafness nephritis ano rectal malformation
* Deafness neurosensory pituitary dwarfism
* Deafness nonsyndromic, Connexin 26 linked
* Deafness oligodontia syndrome
* Deafness onychodystrophy dominant form
* Deafness peripheral neuropathy arterial disease
* Deafness progressive cataract autosomal dominant
* Deafness skeletal dysplasia lip granuloma
* Deafness symphalangism
Deafness v – Deafness x
* Deafness vitiligo achalasia
* Deafness white hair contractures papillomas
* Deafness X-linked, DFN3
* Deafness, autosomal dominant nonsyndromic sensorineural
* Deafness, isolated, due to mitochondrial transmission
* Deafness, neurosensory nonsyndromic recessive, DFN
* Deafness, X linked, DFN

====Deal====
* Deal–Barratt–Dillon syndrome

===Dec–Del===
* Deciduous skin
* Decompensated phoria
* Decompression sickness
* Deep vein thrombosis
* Dabbing Syndrome
* Defect in synthesis of adenosylcobalamin
* Defective apolipoprotein B-100
* Defective expression of HLA class 2
* Degenerative motor system disease
* Degenerative optic myopathy
* Degos disease
* Dehydratase deficiency
* Dejerine–Sottas disease
* Delayed ejaculation
* Delayed membranous cranial ossification
* Delayed sleep phase syndrome
* Delayed speech facial asymmetry strabismus ear lobe creases
* Deletion 6q16 q21
* Delirium
* Delirium tremens
* Delusional disorder
* Delleman–Oorthuys syndrome
* Delta-1-pyrroline-5-carboxylate dehydrogenase deficiency
* Delta-sarcoglycanopathy

===Dem–Dep===
* Dementia
** Dementia, alcohol
** Dementia progressive lipomembranous polycysta
** Dementia, familial British
** Dementia, frontotemporal
** Dementia, HIV
** Dementia pugilistica
** Dementia, vascular
** Dementia with Lewy bodies
* Demodicidosis
* Demyelinating disease
* Dengue fever
* Dennis–Cohen syndrome
* Dennis–Fairhurst–Moore syndrome
* Dent disease
* Dental aberrations steroid dehydrogenase deficienciency
* Dental caries
* Dental fluorosis
* Dental tissue neoplasm
* Dentatorubral-pallidoluysian atrophy
* Dentin dysplasia sclerotic bones
* Dentin dysplasia, coronal
* Dentin dysplasia, radicular
* Dentinogenesis imperfecta
* Dentophobia
* Dependent personality disorder
* Depersonalization derealization disorder
* Depression (clinical)
* Depressive personality disorder

===Der–Dev===
* Der(22)t(8;22)(q24.1;q11.1) syndrome
* Dercum&#x27;s disease aka Adiposis dolorosa
* Der Kaloustian–Jarudi–Khoury syndrome
* Der Kaloustian–Mcintosh–Silver syndrome
* Dermal dysplasia
* Dermatitis herpetiformis
* Dermatocardioskeletal syndrome Boronne type
* Dermatographic urticaria
* Dermatofibroma
* Dermatoleukodystrophy
* Dermatomyositis
* Dermatoosteolysis, Kirghizian type
* Dermatopathia pigmentosa reticularis
* Dermatophytids
* Dermatophytosis
* Dermochondrocorneal dystrophy of François
* Dermoodontodysplasia
* Desbuquois syndrome
* Desmin-related myofibrillar myopathy
* Desmoid disease
* Desmoid tumor
* Desmoplastic small round cell tumor
* Developmental coordination disorder
* Developmental delay epilepsy neonatal diabetes (DEND syndrome)
* Developmental delay hypotonia extremities hypertrophy
* Developmental dyslexia
* Developmental dysphasia familial
* Devic syndrome
* Devriendt–Legius–Fryns syndrome
* Devriendt–Vandenberghe–Fryns syndrome

===Dex===
* Dexamethasone sensitive hypertension
* Dextrocardia with situs inversus
* Dextrocardia
* Dextrocardia-bronchiectasis-sinusitis

==Dg==
* D-glycerate dehydrogenase deficiency
* D-Glyceric acidemia

==Di==

===Dia===

====Diab–Diam====
* Diabetes hypogonadism deafness mental retardation
* Diabetes insipidus
:* Diabetes insipidus, diabetes mellitus, optic atrophy
:* Diabetes insipidus, nephrogenic type 1
:* Diabetes insipidus, nephrogenic type 2
:* Diabetes insipidus, nephrogenic type 3
:* Diabetes insipidus, nephrogenic, dominant type
:* Diabetes insipidus, nephrogenic, recessive type
* Diabetes mellitus
** Diabetes mellitus type 1
** Diabetes mellitus type 2
* Diabetes persistent Müllerian ducts
* Diabetes, insulin dependent
* Diabetic angiopathy
* Diabetic embryopathy
* Diabetic nephropathy
* Diabetic neuropathy
* Diamond–Blackfan anemia

====Diap–Dias====
* Diaphragmatic agenesia
* Diaphragmatic agenesis radial aplasia omphalocele
* Diaphragmatic defect limb deficiency skull defect
* Diaphragmatic hernia abnormal face limb
* Diaphragmatic hernia exomphalos corpus callosum agenesis
* Diaphragmatic hernia upper limb defects
* Diaphragmatic hernia, congenital
* Diarrhea chronic with villous atrophy
* Diarrhea polyendocrinopathy infections X linked
* Diastematomyelia
* Diastrophic dysplasia

===Dib–Din===
* Dibasic aminoaciduria 2
* Dibasic aminoaciduria type 1
* Dicarboxylicaminoaciduria
* Die Smulders–Droog–Van Dijk syndrome
* Die Smulders–Vles–Fryns syndrome
* Diencephalic syndrome
* Dieterich&#x27;s disease
* Diethylstilbestrol antenatal infection
* Diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis
* Diffuse leiomyomatosis with Alport syndrome
* Diffuse neonatal hemangiomatosis
* Diffuse palmoplantar keratoderma, Bothnian type
* Diffuse panbronchiolitis
* Diffuse parenchymal lung disease
* DiGeorge syndrome
* Digestive duplication
* Digitorenocerebral syndrome
* Digoxin toxicity
* Dihydropteridine reductase deficiency
* Dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase deficiency
* Dilated cardiomyopathy
* Dimitri–Sturge–Weber syndrome
* Dincsoy–Salih–Patel syndrome
* Dinno–Shearer–Weisskopf syndrome

===Dio–Dip===
* Diomedi–Bernardi–Placidi syndrome
* Dionisi–Vici–Sabetta–Gambarara syndrome
* Diphallia
* Diphallus rachischisis imperforate anus
* Diphosphoglycerate mutase deficiency of erythrocyte
* Diphtheria
* Diplopia
** Diplopia, binocular
** Diplopia, monocular

===Dis–Div===
* Disaccharide intolerance iii
* Discoid lupus erythematosus
* Disinhibited attachment disorder
* Dislocation of the hip dysmorphism
* Disorder in the hormonal synthesis with or without goiter
* Disorganization syndrome
* Dissecting cellulitis of the scalp
* Dissociative amnesia
* Dissociative hysteria
* Dissociative fugue
* Dissociative identity disorder
* Distal arthrogryposis Moore–Weaver type
* Distal myopathy Markesbery–Griggs type
* Distal myopathy with vocal cord weakness
* Distal myopathy, Nonaka type
* Distal myopathy
* Distal primary acidosis, familial
* Distichiasis heart congenital anomalies
* Distomatosis
* Diverticulitis
* Diverticulosis

==Dk–Do==
* Dk phocomelia syndrome
* D-minus hemolytic uremic syndrome
* Dobrow syndrome
* Dominant cleft palate
* Dominant ichthyosis vulgaris
* Dominant zonular cataract
* Donnai Barrow syndrome
* DOOR syndrome
* Dopamine beta hydroxylase deficiency
* DOPA-responsive dystonia
* Double cortex
* Double discordia
* Double fingernail of fifth finger
* Double outlet left ventricle
* Double outlet right ventricle
* Double tachycardia induced by catecholamines
* Double uterus-hemivagina-renal agenesis
* Down syndrome
* Doxorubicin-induced cardiomyopathy
* Doyne honeycomb retinal dystrophy

==Dp–Du==
* D-plus hemolytic uremic syndrome
* Drachtman–Weinblatt–Sitarz syndrome
* Dracunculiasis
* Duane anomaly mental retardation
* Duane syndrome
* Dubin–Johnson syndrome
* Dubowitz syndrome
* Duchenne muscular dystrophy
* Duhring–Brocq disease
* Duhring&#x27;s disease
* Duker–Weiss–Siber syndrome
* Duodenal atresia tetralogy of Fallot
* Duodenal atresia
* Duplication of leg mirror foot
* Duplication of the thumb unilateral biphalangeal
* Duplication of urethra
* Dupont–Sellier–Chochillon syndrome
* Dupuytren subungual exostosis
* Dupuytren&#x27;s contracture
* Dust-induced lung disease

==Dw==
* Dwarfism
:* Dwarfism bluish sclerae
:* Dwarfism deafness retinitis pigmentosa
:* Dwarfism lethal type advanced bone age
:* Dwarfism mental retardation eye abnormality
:* Dwarfism short limb absent fibulas very short digits
:* Dwarfism stiff joint ocular abnormalities
:* Dwarfism syndesmodysplasic
:* Dwarfism tall vertebrae
:* Dwarfism thanatophoric
:* Dwarfism thin bones multiple fractures

==Dy==

===Dyg–Dyk===
* Dyggve–Melchior–Clausen syndrome
* Dykes–Markes–Harper syndrome

===Dys===

====Dysa–Dysk====
* Dysautonomia
* Dysbarism
* Dyscalculia
* Dyschondrosteosis nephritis
* Dyschromatosis universalis
* Dysencephalia splachnocystica or Meckel–Gruber
* Dysequilibrium syndrome
* Dyserythropoietic anemia, congenital
:* Dyserythropoietic anemia, congenital type 1
:* Dyserythropoietic anemia, congenital type 2
:* Dyserythropoietic anemia, congenital type 3
* Dysexecutive syndrome
* Dysferlinopathy
* Dysfibrinogenemia, familial
* Dysfibrinogenemia, acquired
* Dysgerminoma
* Dysgraphia
* Dysharmonic skeletal maturation muscular fiber disproportion
* Dyskeratosis congenita of Zinsser–Cole–Engman
* Dyskeratosis congenita
* Dyskeratosis follicularis
* Dyskinesia, drug induced
* Dyskinesia

====Dysm–Dyss====
* Dysmorphism abnormal vocalization mental retardation
* Dysmorphism cleft palate loose skin
* Dysmorphophobia
* Dysmyelination
* Dysosteosclerosis
* Dysostosis acral with facial and genital abnormalities
* Dysostosis peripheral
* Dysostosis Stanescu type
* Dysostosis
* Dyspareunia
* Dysphasic dementia, hereditary
* Dysphonia, chronic spasmodic
* Dysplasia epiphysealis hemimelica
* Dysplasia
* Dysplastic cortical hyperostosis
* Dysplastic nevus syndrome
* Dysprothrombinemia
* Dysraphism cleft lip palate limb reduction defects
* Dyssegmental dysplasia glaucoma
* Dyssegmental dysplasia Silverman–Handmaker type

====Dyst====
* Dysthymia
* Dystonia musculorum deformans
** Dystonia musculorum deformans type 1
** Dystonia musculorum deformans type 2
* Dystonia progressive with diurnal variation
* Dystonia
* Dystrophia myotonica
* Dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa
* Dystrophinopathy</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q12136" start="18" end="25" title="disease" label="disease"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="76" end="93" title="D ercole syndrome" label="D ercole syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q5208264" start="104" end="134" title="Daentl Towsend Siegel syndrome" label="Daentl Towsend Siegel syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q17125068" start="137" end="169" title="Dahlberg Borer Newcomer syndrome" label="Dahlberg Borer Newcomer syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="172" end="201" title="Daish–Hardman–Lamont syndrome" label="Daish–Hardman–Lamont syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="204" end="234" title="Dandy–Walker facial hemangioma" label="Dandy–Walker facial hemangioma"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="237" end="284" title="Dandy–Walker malformation postaxial polydactyly" label="Dandy–Walker malformation postaxial polydactyly"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="287" end="323" title="Dandy–Walker syndrome recessive form" label="Dandy–Walker syndrome recessive form"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="326" end="412" title="Dandy–Walker malformation with mental retardation, basal ganglia disease, and seizures" label="Dandy–Walker malformation with mental retardation, basal ganglia disease, and seizures"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="415" end="510" title="Dandy–Walker malformation with mental retardation, macrocephaly, myopia, and brachytelephalangy" label="Dandy–Walker malformation with mental retardation, macrocephaly, myopia, and brachytelephalangy"/>
<link wikidata="Q733493" start="513" end="534" title="Dandy–Walker syndrome" label="Dandy–Walker syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="537" end="565" title="Daneman–Davy–Mancer syndrome" label="Daneman–Davy–Mancer syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q580506" start="568" end="589" title="Darier&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Darier&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="592" end="617" title="Davenport–Donlan syndrome" label="Davenport–Donlan syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q105952622" start="620" end="634" title="DAVID syndrome" label="DAVID syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="637" end="657" title="Davis–Lafer syndrome" label="Davis–Lafer syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q3961699" start="669" end="686" title="De Barsy syndrome" label="De Barsy syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="689" end="727" title="De Hauwere–Leroy–Adriaenssens syndrome" label="De Hauwere–Leroy–Adriaenssens syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q3843801" start="730" end="758" title="DeSanctis–Cacchione syndrome" label="DeSanctis–Cacchione syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q8052144" start="786" end="813" title="Deaf blind hypopigmentation" label="Deaf blind hypopigmentation"/>
<link wikidata="Q12133" start="833" end="841" title="Deafness" label="Deafness"/>
<link wikidata="Q55781805" start="888" end="933" title="Deafness conductive ptosis skeletal anomalies" label="Deafness conductive ptosis skeletal anomalies"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="936" end="995" title="Deafness conductive stapedial ear malformation facial palsy" label="Deafness conductive stapedial ear malformation facial palsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154764" start="998" end="1043" title="Deafness congenital onychodystrophy recessive" label="Deafness congenital onychodystrophy recessive"/>
<link wikidata="Q5691660" start="1046" end="1076" title="Deafness craniofacial syndrome" label="Deafness craniofacial syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q55345705" start="1079" end="1118" title="Deafness enamel hypoplasia nail defects" label="Deafness enamel hypoplasia nail defects"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1121" end="1164" title="Deafness epiphyseal dysplasia short stature" label="Deafness epiphyseal dysplasia short stature"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1167" end="1201" title="Deafness goiter stippled epiphyses" label="Deafness goiter stippled epiphyses"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1204" end="1244" title="Deafness hyperuricemia neurologic ataxia" label="Deafness hyperuricemia neurologic ataxia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1247" end="1277" title="Deafness hypogonadism syndrome" label="Deafness hypogonadism syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1280" end="1335" title="Deafness hypospadias metacarpal and metatarsal syndrome" label="Deafness hypospadias metacarpal and metatarsal syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1338" end="1395" title="Deafness mesenteric diverticula of small bowel neuropathy" label="Deafness mesenteric diverticula of small bowel neuropathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9079046" start="1398" end="1448" title="Deafness mixed with perilymphatic Gusher, X-linked" label="Deafness mixed with perilymphatic Gusher, X-linked"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1451" end="1493" title="Deafness nephritis ano rectal malformation" label="Deafness nephritis ano rectal malformation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1496" end="1536" title="Deafness neurosensory pituitary dwarfism" label="Deafness neurosensory pituitary dwarfism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9079046" start="1539" end="1580" title="Deafness nonsyndromic, Connexin 26 linked" label="Deafness nonsyndromic, Connexin 26 linked"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1583" end="1612" title="Deafness oligodontia syndrome" label="Deafness oligodontia syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1615" end="1653" title="Deafness onychodystrophy dominant form" label="Deafness onychodystrophy dominant form"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1656" end="1703" title="Deafness peripheral neuropathy arterial disease" label="Deafness peripheral neuropathy arterial disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q55780429" start="1706" end="1754" title="Deafness progressive cataract autosomal dominant" label="Deafness progressive cataract autosomal dominant"/>
<link wikidata="Q5474830" start="1757" end="1798" title="Deafness skeletal dysplasia lip granuloma" label="Deafness skeletal dysplasia lip granuloma"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1801" end="1823" title="Deafness symphalangism" label="Deafness symphalangism"/>
<link wikidata="Q55781806" start="1850" end="1877" title="Deafness vitiligo achalasia" label="Deafness vitiligo achalasia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1880" end="1923" title="Deafness white hair contractures papillomas" label="Deafness white hair contractures papillomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q9079046" start="1926" end="1949" title="Deafness X-linked, DFN3" label="Deafness X-linked, DFN3"/>
<link wikidata="Q9079046" start="1952" end="2007" title="Deafness, autosomal dominant nonsyndromic sensorineural" label="Deafness, autosomal dominant nonsyndromic sensorineural"/>
<link wikidata="Q9079046" start="2010" end="2063" title="Deafness, isolated, due to mitochondrial transmission" label="Deafness, isolated, due to mitochondrial transmission"/>
<link wikidata="Q9079046" start="2066" end="2116" title="Deafness, neurosensory nonsyndromic recessive, DFN" label="Deafness, neurosensory nonsyndromic recessive, DFN"/>
<link wikidata="Q9079046" start="2119" end="2142" title="Deafness, X linked, DFN" label="Deafness, X linked, DFN"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2159" end="2187" title="Deal–Barratt–Dillon syndrome" label="Deal–Barratt–Dillon syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q17120550" start="2205" end="2219" title="Deciduous skin" label="Deciduous skin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3145111" start="2222" end="2242" title="Decompensated phoria" label="Decompensated phoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q460591" start="2245" end="2267" title="Decompression sickness" label="Decompression sickness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1762339" start="2270" end="2290" title="Deep vein thrombosis" label="Deep vein thrombosis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2293" end="2309" title="Dabbing Syndrome" label="Dabbing Syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q742500" start="2312" end="2352" title="Defect in synthesis of adenosylcobalamin" label="Defect in synthesis of adenosylcobalamin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4780235" start="2355" end="2385" title="Defective apolipoprotein B-100" label="Defective apolipoprotein B-100"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2388" end="2423" title="Defective expression of HLA class 2" label="Defective expression of HLA class 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q3221083" start="2426" end="2459" title="Degenerative motor system disease" label="Degenerative motor system disease"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2462" end="2489" title="Degenerative optic myopathy" label="Degenerative optic myopathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q911136" start="2492" end="2505" title="Degos disease" label="Degos disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q419897" start="2508" end="2530" title="Dehydratase deficiency" label="Dehydratase deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q845618" start="2533" end="2556" title="Dejerine–Sottas disease" label="Dejerine–Sottas disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142563" start="2559" end="2578" title="Delayed ejaculation" label="Delayed ejaculation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2581" end="2620" title="Delayed membranous cranial ossification" label="Delayed membranous cranial ossification"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470530" start="2623" end="2651" title="Delayed sleep phase syndrome" label="Delayed sleep phase syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2654" end="2713" title="Delayed speech facial asymmetry strabismus ear lobe creases" label="Delayed speech facial asymmetry strabismus ear lobe creases"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2716" end="2733" title="Deletion 6q16 q21" label="Deletion 6q16 q21"/>
<link wikidata="Q160796" start="2736" end="2744" title="Delirium" label="Delirium"/>
<link wikidata="Q209647" start="2747" end="2763" title="Delirium tremens" label="Delirium tremens"/>
<link wikidata="Q721073" start="2766" end="2785" title="Delusional disorder" label="Delusional disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q7077152" start="2788" end="2814" title="Delleman–Oorthuys syndrome" label="Delleman–Oorthuys syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2817" end="2873" title="Delta-1-pyrroline-5-carboxylate dehydrogenase deficiency" label="Delta-1-pyrroline-5-carboxylate dehydrogenase deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q7423586" start="2876" end="2899" title="Delta-sarcoglycanopathy" label="Delta-sarcoglycanopathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q83030" start="2917" end="2925" title="Dementia" label="Dementia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4713264" start="2929" end="2946" title="Alcohol dementia" label="Dementia, alcohol"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2950" end="2995" title="Dementia progressive lipomembranous polycysta" label="Dementia progressive lipomembranous polycysta"/>
<link wikidata="Q5432926" start="2999" end="3025" title="Familial British dementia" label="Dementia, familial British"/>
<link wikidata="Q18592" start="3029" end="3053" title="Frontotemporal dementia" label="Dementia, frontotemporal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3435504" start="3057" end="3070" title="HIV dementia" label="Dementia, HIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q5114004" start="3074" end="3094" title="Dementia pugilistica" label="Dementia pugilistica"/>
<link wikidata="Q583908" start="3098" end="3116" title="Vascular dementia" label="Dementia, vascular"/>
<link wikidata="Q101245788" start="3120" end="3145" title="Dementia with Lewy bodies" label="Dementia with Lewy bodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358140" start="3148" end="3161" title="Demodicidosis" label="Demodicidosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186703" start="3164" end="3185" title="Demyelinating disease" label="Demyelinating disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q30953" start="3188" end="3200" title="Dengue fever" label="Dengue fever"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3203" end="3224" title="Dennis–Cohen syndrome" label="Dennis–Cohen syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3227" end="3258" title="Dennis–Fairhurst–Moore syndrome" label="Dennis–Fairhurst–Moore syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q4420121" start="3261" end="3273" title="Dent disease" label="Dent disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q16978490" start="3276" end="3331" title="Dental aberrations steroid dehydrogenase deficienciency" label="Dental aberrations steroid dehydrogenase deficienciency"/>
<link wikidata="Q133772" start="3334" end="3347" title="Dental caries" label="Dental caries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427959" start="3350" end="3366" title="Dental fluorosis" label="Dental fluorosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143025" start="3369" end="3391" title="Dental tissue neoplasm" label="Dental tissue neoplasm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2280285" start="3394" end="3430" title="Dentatorubral-pallidoluysian atrophy" label="Dentatorubral-pallidoluysian atrophy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3433" end="3465" title="Dentin dysplasia sclerotic bones" label="Dentin dysplasia sclerotic bones"/>
<link wikidata="Q5259533" start="3468" end="3493" title="Dentin dysplasia, coronal" label="Dentin dysplasia, coronal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5259533" start="3496" end="3523" title="Dentin dysplasia, radicular" label="Dentin dysplasia, radicular"/>
<link wikidata="Q548984" start="3526" end="3551" title="Dentinogenesis imperfecta" label="Dentinogenesis imperfecta"/>
<link wikidata="Q143472" start="3554" end="3565" title="Dentophobia" label="Dentophobia"/>
<link wikidata="Q320719" start="3568" end="3598" title="Dependent personality disorder" label="Dependent personality disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q2338307" start="3601" end="3641" title="Depersonalization-derealization disorder" label="Depersonalization derealization disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q42844" start="3644" end="3665" title="Depression (clinical)" label="Depression (clinical)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5260921" start="3668" end="3699" title="Depressive personality disorder" label="Depressive personality disorder"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3717" end="3753" title="Small supernumerary marker chromosome#Der(22)t(8;22)(q24.1;q11.1" label="Der(22)t(8;22)(q24.1;q11.1) syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q96376250" start="3756" end="3777" title="Dercum&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Dercum&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q24977255" start="3802" end="3839" title="Der Kaloustian–Jarudi–Khoury syndrome" label="Der Kaloustian–Jarudi–Khoury syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3842" end="3881" title="Der Kaloustian–Mcintosh–Silver syndrome" label="Der Kaloustian–Mcintosh–Silver syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323713" start="3884" end="3900" title="Dermal dysplasia" label="Dermal dysplasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151507" start="3903" end="3927" title="Dermatitis herpetiformis" label="Dermatitis herpetiformis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3930" end="3973" title="Dermatocardioskeletal syndrome Boronne type" label="Dermatocardioskeletal syndrome Boronne type"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200268" start="3976" end="4000" title="Dermatographic urticaria" label="Dermatographic urticaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200237" start="4003" end="4017" title="Dermatofibroma" label="Dermatofibroma"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4020" end="4041" title="Dermatoleukodystrophy" label="Dermatoleukodystrophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q681160" start="4044" end="4059" title="Dermatomyositis" label="Dermatomyositis"/>
<link wikidata="Q55781814" start="4062" end="4096" title="Dermatoosteolysis, Kirghizian type" label="Dermatoosteolysis, Kirghizian type"/>
<link wikidata="Q5262702" start="4099" end="4135" title="Dermatopathia pigmentosa reticularis" label="Dermatopathia pigmentosa reticularis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5262708" start="4138" end="4152" title="Dermatophytids" label="Dermatophytids"/>
<link wikidata="Q1909343" start="4155" end="4170" title="Dermatophytosis" label="Dermatophytosis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4173" end="4214" title="Dermochondrocorneal dystrophy of François" label="Dermochondrocorneal dystrophy of François"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323713" start="4217" end="4237" title="Dermoodontodysplasia" label="Dermoodontodysplasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3501154" start="4240" end="4259" title="Desbuquois Syndrome" label="Desbuquois syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q3331452" start="4262" end="4298" title="Desmin-related myofibrillar myopathy" label="Desmin-related myofibrillar myopathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q475086" start="4301" end="4316" title="Desmoid disease" label="Desmoid disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q475086" start="4319" end="4332" title="Desmoid tumor" label="Desmoid tumor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5264831" start="4335" end="4370" title="Desmoplastic small round cell tumor" label="Desmoplastic small round cell tumor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269351" start="4373" end="4408" title="Developmental coordination disorder" label="Developmental coordination disorder"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4411" end="4457" title="Developmental delay epilepsy neonatal diabetes" label="Developmental delay epilepsy neonatal diabetes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4476" end="4529" title="Developmental delay hypotonia extremities hypertrophy" label="Developmental delay hypotonia extremities hypertrophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q132971" start="4532" end="4554" title="Dyslexia" label="Developmental dyslexia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4557" end="4589" title="Developmental dysphasia familial" label="Developmental dysphasia familial"/>
<link wikidata="Q611458" start="4592" end="4606" title="Devic syndrome" label="Devic syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4609" end="4640" title="Devriendt–Legius–Fryns syndrome" label="Devriendt–Legius–Fryns syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4643" end="4680" title="Devriendt–Vandenberghe–Fryns syndrome" label="Devriendt–Vandenberghe–Fryns syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q25339349" start="4694" end="4730" title="Dexamethasone sensitive hypertension" label="Dexamethasone sensitive hypertension"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456383" start="4733" end="4765" title="Dextrocardia with situs inversus" label="Dextrocardia with situs inversus"/>
<link wikidata="Q579665" start="4768" end="4780" title="Dextrocardia" label="Dextrocardia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1690779" start="4783" end="4820" title="Dextrocardia-bronchiectasis-sinusitis" label="Dextrocardia-bronchiectasis-sinusitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q85845764" start="4831" end="4867" title="D-glycerate dehydrogenase deficiency" label="D-glycerate dehydrogenase deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q5203266" start="4870" end="4889" title="D-Glyceric acidemia" label="D-Glyceric acidemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8032762" start="4930" end="4979" title="Diabetes hypogonadism deafness mental retardation" label="Diabetes hypogonadism deafness mental retardation"/>
<link wikidata="Q220551" start="4982" end="5000" title="Diabetes insipidus" label="Diabetes insipidus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153641" start="5004" end="5056" title="Diabetes insipidus, diabetes mellitus, optic atrophy" label="Diabetes insipidus, diabetes mellitus, optic atrophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2892779" start="5060" end="5098" title="Diabetes insipidus, nephrogenic type 1" label="Diabetes insipidus, nephrogenic type 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q2892779" start="5102" end="5140" title="Diabetes insipidus, nephrogenic type 2" label="Diabetes insipidus, nephrogenic type 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q2892779" start="5144" end="5182" title="Diabetes insipidus, nephrogenic type 3" label="Diabetes insipidus, nephrogenic type 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q2892779" start="5186" end="5232" title="Diabetes insipidus, nephrogenic, dominant type" label="Diabetes insipidus, nephrogenic, dominant type"/>
<link wikidata="Q2892779" start="5236" end="5283" title="Diabetes insipidus, nephrogenic, recessive type" label="Diabetes insipidus, nephrogenic, recessive type"/>
<link wikidata="Q12206" start="5286" end="5303" title="Diabetes mellitus" label="Diabetes mellitus"/>
<link wikidata="Q124407" start="5307" end="5331" title="Diabetes mellitus type 1" label="Diabetes mellitus type 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q3025883" start="5335" end="5359" title="Diabetes mellitus type 2" label="Diabetes mellitus type 2"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5362" end="5397" title="Diabetes persistent Müllerian ducts" label="Diabetes persistent Müllerian ducts"/>
<link wikidata="Q12206" start="5400" end="5427" title="Diabetes, insulin dependent" label="Diabetes, insulin dependent"/>
<link wikidata="Q489997" start="5430" end="5449" title="Diabetic angiopathy" label="Diabetic angiopathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335193" start="5452" end="5472" title="Diabetic embryopathy" label="Diabetic embryopathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129105" start="5475" end="5495" title="Diabetic nephropathy" label="Diabetic nephropathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2046550" start="5498" end="5517" title="Diabetic neuropathy" label="Diabetic neuropathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208654" start="5520" end="5543" title="Diamond–Blackfan anemia" label="Diamond–Blackfan anemia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5565" end="5587" title="Diaphragmatic agenesia" label="Diaphragmatic agenesia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5590" end="5639" title="Diaphragmatic agenesis radial aplasia omphalocele" label="Diaphragmatic agenesis radial aplasia omphalocele"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5642" end="5691" title="Diaphragmatic defect limb deficiency skull defect" label="Diaphragmatic defect limb deficiency skull defect"/>
<link wikidata="Q3508635" start="5694" end="5733" title="Diaphragmatic hernia abnormal face limb" label="Diaphragmatic hernia abnormal face limb"/>
<link wikidata="Q3508634" start="5736" end="5792" title="Diaphragmatic hernia exomphalos corpus callosum agenesis" label="Diaphragmatic hernia exomphalos corpus callosum agenesis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5795" end="5834" title="Diaphragmatic hernia upper limb defects" label="Diaphragmatic hernia upper limb defects"/>
<link wikidata="Q2163245" start="5837" end="5869" title="Diaphragmatic hernia, congenital" label="Diaphragmatic hernia, congenital"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5872" end="5909" title="Diarrhea chronic with villous atrophy" label="Diarrhea chronic with villous atrophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3508566" start="5912" end="5959" title="Diarrhea polyendocrinopathy infections X linked" label="Diarrhea polyendocrinopathy infections X linked"/>
<link wikidata="Q3026420" start="5962" end="5978" title="Diastematomyelia" label="Diastematomyelia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3335666" start="5981" end="6002" title="Diastrophic dysplasia" label="Diastrophic dysplasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3153671" start="6020" end="6043" title="Dibasic aminoaciduria 2" label="Dibasic aminoaciduria 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q3153671" start="6046" end="6074" title="Dibasic aminoaciduria type 1" label="Dibasic aminoaciduria type 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q16252204" start="6077" end="6102" title="Dicarboxylicaminoaciduria" label="Dicarboxylicaminoaciduria"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6105" end="6141" title="Die Smulders–Droog–Van Dijk syndrome" label="Die Smulders–Droog–Van Dijk syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6144" end="6176" title="Die Smulders–Vles–Fryns syndrome" label="Die Smulders–Vles–Fryns syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q9390543" start="6179" end="6200" title="Diencephalic syndrome" label="Diencephalic syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q55790152" start="6203" end="6227" title="Dieterich&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Dieterich&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q423989" start="6230" end="6268" title="Diethylstilbestrol antenatal infection" label="Diethylstilbestrol antenatal infection"/>
<link wikidata="Q742762" start="6271" end="6311" title="Diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis" label="Diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331116" start="6314" end="6357" title="Diffuse leiomyomatosis with Alport syndrome" label="Diffuse leiomyomatosis with Alport syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q5275418" start="6360" end="6392" title="Diffuse neonatal hemangiomatosis" label="Diffuse neonatal hemangiomatosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7128426" start="6395" end="6442" title="Diffuse palmoplantar keratoderma, Bothnian type" label="Diffuse palmoplantar keratoderma, Bothnian type"/>
<link wikidata="Q3085380" start="6445" end="6469" title="Diffuse panbronchiolitis" label="Diffuse panbronchiolitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153419" start="6472" end="6504" title="Interstitial lung disease" label="Diffuse parenchymal lung disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q525642" start="6507" end="6524" title="DiGeorge syndrome" label="DiGeorge syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6527" end="6548" title="Digestive duplication" label="Digestive duplication"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154764" start="6551" end="6578" title="Digitorenocerebral syndrome" label="Digitorenocerebral syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q151350" start="6581" end="6597" title="Digoxin toxicity" label="Digoxin toxicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q54889362" start="6600" end="6637" title="Dihydropteridine reductase deficiency" label="Dihydropteridine reductase deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q5276448" start="6640" end="6682" title="Dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase deficiency" label="Dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q283656" start="6685" end="6707" title="Dilated cardiomyopathy" label="Dilated cardiomyopathy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6710" end="6739" title="Dimitri–Sturge–Weber syndrome" label="Dimitri–Sturge–Weber syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6742" end="6770" title="Dincsoy–Salih–Patel syndrome" label="Dincsoy–Salih–Patel syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6773" end="6805" title="Dinno–Shearer–Weisskopf syndrome" label="Dinno–Shearer–Weisskopf syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6823" end="6856" title="Diomedi–Bernardi–Placidi syndrome" label="Diomedi–Bernardi–Placidi syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6859" end="6898" title="Dionisi–Vici–Sabetta–Gambarara syndrome" label="Dionisi–Vici–Sabetta–Gambarara syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227139" start="6901" end="6910" title="Diphallia" label="Diphallia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6913" end="6952" title="Diphallus rachischisis imperforate anus" label="Diphallus rachischisis imperforate anus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6955" end="7006" title="Diphosphoglycerate mutase deficiency of erythrocyte" label="Diphosphoglycerate mutase deficiency of erythrocyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q134649" start="7009" end="7019" title="Diphtheria" label="Diphtheria"/>
<link wikidata="Q775940" start="7022" end="7030" title="Diplopia" label="Diplopia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7034" end="7053" title="Diplopia#Binocular" label="Diplopia, binocular"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7057" end="7076" title="Diplopia#Monocular" label="Diplopia, monocular"/>
<link wikidata="Q3544712" start="7094" end="7122" title="Disaccharide intolerance iii" label="Disaccharide intolerance iii"/>
<link wikidata="Q1228801" start="7125" end="7152" title="Discoid lupus erythematosus" label="Discoid lupus erythematosus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3700220" start="7155" end="7187" title="Disinhibited attachment disorder" label="Disinhibited attachment disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q55783172" start="7190" end="7224" title="Dislocation of the hip dysmorphism" label="Dislocation of the hip dysmorphism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7227" end="7284" title="Disorder in the hormonal synthesis with or without goiter" label="Disorder in the hormonal synthesis with or without goiter"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7287" end="7311" title="Disorganization syndrome" label="Disorganization syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q7168463" start="7314" end="7348" title="Dissecting cellulitis of the scalp" label="Dissecting cellulitis of the scalp"/>
<link wikidata="Q18654" start="7351" end="7371" title="Dissociative amnesia" label="Dissociative amnesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2627467" start="7374" end="7395" title="Dissociative hysteria" label="Dissociative hysteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q951639" start="7398" end="7416" title="Dissociative fugue" label="Dissociative fugue"/>
<link wikidata="Q18657" start="7419" end="7449" title="Dissociative identity disorder" label="Dissociative identity disorder"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7452" end="7491" title="Distal arthrogryposis Moore–Weaver type" label="Distal arthrogryposis Moore–Weaver type"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7494" end="7532" title="Distal myopathy Markesbery–Griggs type" label="Distal myopathy Markesbery–Griggs type"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282843" start="7535" end="7575" title="Distal myopathy with vocal cord weakness" label="Distal myopathy with vocal cord weakness"/>
<link wikidata="Q5737853" start="7578" end="7606" title="Distal myopathy, Nonaka type" label="Distal myopathy, Nonaka type"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282843" start="7609" end="7624" title="Distal myopathy" label="Distal myopathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2896802" start="7627" end="7660" title="Distal primary acidosis, familial" label="Distal primary acidosis, familial"/>
<link wikidata="Q55780504" start="7663" end="7702" title="Distichiasis heart congenital anomalies" label="Distichiasis heart congenital anomalies"/>
<link wikidata="Q6972442" start="7705" end="7717" title="Distomatosis" label="Distomatosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066061" start="7720" end="7734" title="Diverticulitis" label="Diverticulitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q278158" start="7737" end="7751" title="Diverticulosis" label="Diverticulosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q773370" start="7765" end="7787" title="Dk phocomelia syndrome" label="Dk phocomelia syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q17165460" start="7790" end="7823" title="D-minus hemolytic uremic syndrome" label="D-minus hemolytic uremic syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7826" end="7841" title="Dobrow syndrome" label="Dobrow syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q222634" start="7844" end="7865" title="Dominant cleft palate" label="Dominant cleft palate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3765145" start="7868" end="7896" title="Dominant ichthyosis vulgaris" label="Dominant ichthyosis vulgaris"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7899" end="7924" title="Dominant zonular cataract" label="Dominant zonular cataract"/>
<link wikidata="Q3508634" start="7927" end="7949" title="Donnai Barrow syndrome" label="Donnai Barrow syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154764" start="7952" end="7965" title="DOOR syndrome" label="DOOR syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1242612" start="7968" end="8004" title="Dopamine beta hydroxylase deficiency" label="Dopamine beta hydroxylase deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q689777" start="8007" end="8031" title="DOPA-responsive dystonia" label="DOPA-responsive dystonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q17163513" start="8034" end="8047" title="Double cortex" label="Double cortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758730" start="8050" end="8066" title="Double discordia" label="Double discordia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8069" end="8102" title="Double fingernail of fifth finger" label="Double fingernail of fifth finger"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8105" end="8133" title="Double outlet left ventricle" label="Double outlet left ventricle"/>
<link wikidata="Q361648" start="8136" end="8165" title="Double outlet right ventricle" label="Double outlet right ventricle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649897" start="8168" end="8212" title="Double tachycardia induced by catecholamines" label="Double tachycardia induced by catecholamines"/>
<link wikidata="Q609944" start="8215" end="8254" title="Double uterus-hemivagina-renal agenesis" label="Double uterus-hemivagina-renal agenesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q47715" start="8257" end="8270" title="Down syndrome" label="Down syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q18936" start="8273" end="8307" title="Doxorubicin-induced cardiomyopathy" label="Doxorubicin-induced cardiomyopathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3842207" start="8310" end="8343" title="Doyne honeycomb retinal dystrophy" label="Doyne honeycomb retinal dystrophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q162266" start="8357" end="8389" title="D-plus hemolytic uremic syndrome" label="D-plus hemolytic uremic syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8392" end="8427" title="Drachtman–Weinblatt–Sitarz syndrome" label="Drachtman–Weinblatt–Sitarz syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q388646" start="8430" end="8444" title="Dracunculiasis" label="Dracunculiasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262684" start="8447" end="8479" title="Duane anomaly mental retardation" label="Duane anomaly mental retardation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262684" start="8482" end="8496" title="Duane syndrome" label="Duane syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1263039" start="8499" end="8521" title="Dubin–Johnson syndrome" label="Dubin–Johnson syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q574741" start="8524" end="8541" title="Dubowitz syndrome" label="Dubowitz syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1648484" start="8544" end="8571" title="Duchenne muscular dystrophy" label="Duchenne muscular dystrophy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8574" end="8595" title="Duhring–Brocq disease" label="Duhring–Brocq disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151507" start="8598" end="8620" title="Duhring&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Duhring&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8623" end="8649" title="Duker–Weiss–Siber syndrome" label="Duker–Weiss–Siber syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8652" end="8688" title="Duodenal atresia tetralogy of Fallot" label="Duodenal atresia tetralogy of Fallot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266401" start="8691" end="8707" title="Duodenal atresia" label="Duodenal atresia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8710" end="8740" title="Duplication of leg mirror foot" label="Duplication of leg mirror foot"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8743" end="8791" title="Duplication of the thumb unilateral biphalangeal" label="Duplication of the thumb unilateral biphalangeal"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8794" end="8816" title="Duplication of urethra" label="Duplication of urethra"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8819" end="8853" title="Dupont–Sellier–Chochillon syndrome" label="Dupont–Sellier–Chochillon syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q7632311" start="8856" end="8885" title="Dupuytren subungual exostosis" label="Dupuytren subungual exostosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330254" start="8888" end="8916" title="Dupuytren&amp;#x27;s contracture" label="Dupuytren&amp;#x27;s contracture"/>
<link wikidata="Q7075805" start="8919" end="8944" title="Dust-induced lung disease" label="Dust-induced lung disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q194101" start="8955" end="8963" title="Dwarfism" label="Dwarfism"/>
<link wikidata="Q749409" start="8967" end="8990" title="Dwarfism bluish sclerae" label="Dwarfism bluish sclerae"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8994" end="9032" title="Dwarfism deafness retinitis pigmentosa" label="Dwarfism deafness retinitis pigmentosa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9036" end="9074" title="Dwarfism lethal type advanced bone age" label="Dwarfism lethal type advanced bone age"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9078" end="9121" title="Dwarfism mental retardation eye abnormality" label="Dwarfism mental retardation eye abnormality"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9125" end="9177" title="Dwarfism short limb absent fibulas very short digits" label="Dwarfism short limb absent fibulas very short digits"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9181" end="9222" title="Dwarfism stiff joint ocular abnormalities" label="Dwarfism stiff joint ocular abnormalities"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9226" end="9252" title="Dwarfism syndesmodysplasic" label="Dwarfism syndesmodysplasic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9256" end="9279" title="Dwarfism tall vertebrae" label="Dwarfism tall vertebrae"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9283" end="9305" title="Dwarfism thanatophoric" label="Dwarfism thanatophoric"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9309" end="9347" title="Dwarfism thin bones multiple fractures" label="Dwarfism thin bones multiple fractures"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9373" end="9405" title="Dyggve–Melchior–Clausen syndrome" label="Dyggve–Melchior–Clausen syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9408" end="9436" title="Dykes–Markes–Harper syndrome" label="Dykes–Markes–Harper syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q620639" start="9469" end="9481" title="Dysautonomia" label="Dysautonomia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3709266" start="9484" end="9493" title="Dysbarism" label="Dysbarism"/>
<link wikidata="Q742672" start="9496" end="9507" title="Dyscalculia" label="Dyscalculia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9510" end="9537" title="Dyschondrosteosis nephritis" label="Dyschondrosteosis nephritis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5319369" start="9540" end="9566" title="Dyschromatosis universalis" label="Dyschromatosis universalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1915681" start="9569" end="9615" title="Dysencephalia splachnocystica or Meckel–Gruber" label="Dysencephalia splachnocystica or Meckel–Gruber"/>
<link wikidata="Q96476972" start="9618" end="9641" title="Dysequilibrium syndrome" label="Dysequilibrium syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q5160422" start="9644" end="9680" title="Dyserythropoietic anemia, congenital" label="Dyserythropoietic anemia, congenital"/>
<link wikidata="Q56014413" start="9684" end="9727" title="Dyserythropoietic anemia, congenital type 1" label="Dyserythropoietic anemia, congenital type 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q5160424" start="9731" end="9774" title="Dyserythropoietic anemia, congenital type 2" label="Dyserythropoietic anemia, congenital type 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q5160425" start="9778" end="9821" title="Dyserythropoietic anemia, congenital type 3" label="Dyserythropoietic anemia, congenital type 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q5319401" start="9824" end="9845" title="Dysexecutive syndrome" label="Dysexecutive syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1531322" start="9848" end="9863" title="Dysferlinopathy" label="Dysferlinopathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5319404" start="9866" end="9893" title="Dysfibrinogenemia, familial" label="Dysfibrinogenemia, familial"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9896" end="9923" title="Dysfibrinogenemia#Pathophysiology#Acquired dysfibrinogenemia" label="Dysfibrinogenemia, acquired"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269251" start="9926" end="9938" title="Dysgerminoma" label="Dysgerminoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q584560" start="9941" end="9951" title="Dysgraphia" label="Dysgraphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7267327" start="9954" end="10014" title="Dysharmonic skeletal maturation muscular fiber disproportion" label="Dysharmonic skeletal maturation muscular fiber disproportion"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10017" end="10062" title="Dyskeratosis congenita of Zinsser–Cole–Engman" label="Dyskeratosis congenita of Zinsser–Cole–Engman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3709312" start="10065" end="10087" title="Dyskeratosis congenita" label="Dyskeratosis congenita"/>
<link wikidata="Q580506" start="10090" end="10115" title="Dyskeratosis follicularis" label="Dyskeratosis follicularis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546328" start="10118" end="10142" title="Dyskinesia, drug induced" label="Dyskinesia, drug induced"/>
<link wikidata="Q629444" start="10145" end="10155" title="Dyskinesia" label="Dyskinesia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10177" end="10229" title="Dysmorphism abnormal vocalization mental retardation" label="Dysmorphism abnormal vocalization mental retardation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10232" end="10267" title="Dysmorphism cleft palate loose skin" label="Dysmorphism cleft palate loose skin"/>
<link wikidata="Q844590" start="10270" end="10285" title="Dysmorphophobia" label="Dysmorphophobia"/>
<link wikidata="Q105790271" start="10288" end="10302" title="Dysmyelination" label="Dysmyelination"/>
<link wikidata="Q29014957" start="10305" end="10322" title="Dysosteosclerosis" label="Dysosteosclerosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475743" start="10325" end="10379" title="Dysostosis acral with facial and genital abnormalities" label="Dysostosis acral with facial and genital abnormalities"/>
<link wikidata="Q24960553" start="10382" end="10403" title="Dysostosis peripheral" label="Dysostosis peripheral"/>
<link wikidata="Q55780455" start="10406" end="10430" title="Dysostosis Stanescu type" label="Dysostosis Stanescu type"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269307" start="10433" end="10443" title="Dysostosis" label="Dysostosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q120395" start="10446" end="10457" title="Dyspareunia" label="Dyspareunia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10460" end="10490" title="Dysphasic dementia, hereditary" label="Dysphasic dementia, hereditary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1782574" start="10493" end="10521" title="Dysphonia, chronic spasmodic" label="Dysphonia, chronic spasmodic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7839508" start="10524" end="10557" title="Dysplasia epiphysealis hemimelica" label="Dysplasia epiphysealis hemimelica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128996" start="10560" end="10569" title="Dysplasia" label="Dysplasia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10572" end="10604" title="Dysplastic cortical hyperostosis" label="Dysplastic cortical hyperostosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5319554" start="10607" end="10632" title="Dysplastic nevus syndrome" label="Dysplastic nevus syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q409166" start="10635" end="10653" title="Dysprothrombinemia" label="Dysprothrombinemia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10656" end="10706" title="Dysraphism cleft lip palate limb reduction defects" label="Dysraphism cleft lip palate limb reduction defects"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10709" end="10740" title="Dyssegmental dysplasia glaucoma" label="Dyssegmental dysplasia glaucoma"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10743" end="10790" title="Dyssegmental dysplasia Silverman–Handmaker type" label="Dyssegmental dysplasia Silverman–Handmaker type"/>
<link wikidata="Q427810" start="10807" end="10816" title="Dysthymia" label="Dysthymia"/>
<link wikidata="Q906492" start="10819" end="10848" title="Dystonia musculorum deformans" label="Dystonia musculorum deformans"/>
<link wikidata="Q656199" start="10852" end="10888" title="Dystonia musculorum deformans type 1" label="Dystonia musculorum deformans type 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q656199" start="10892" end="10928" title="Dystonia musculorum deformans type 2" label="Dystonia musculorum deformans type 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q689777" start="10931" end="10974" title="Dystonia progressive with diurnal variation" label="Dystonia progressive with diurnal variation"/>
<link wikidata="Q906492" start="10977" end="10985" title="Dystonia" label="Dystonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860507" start="10988" end="11008" title="Dystrophia myotonica" label="Dystrophia myotonica"/>
<link wikidata="Q3589131" start="11011" end="11043" title="Dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa" label="Dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q55785972" start="11046" end="11062" title="Dystrophinopathy" label="Dystrophinopathy"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="236338" wikidata="Q6616860" url="?curid=236338" title="List of diseases (E)">
<text>This is a list of diseases starting with the letter &quot;E&quot;.

==Eb==
* Ebola virus disease

==Ec==
===Ech===
* Echovirus infection

===Ect===

====Ecto====

=====Ectod=====

======Ectode======
* Ectodermal dysplasia absent dermatoglyphics
* Ectodermal dysplasia adrenal cyst
* Ectodermal dysplasia alopecia preaxial polydactyly
* Ectodermal dysplasia anhidrotic
* Ectodermal dysplasia arthrogryposis diabetes mellitus
* Ectodermal dysplasia Bartalos type
* Ectodermal dysplasia Berlin type
* Ectodermal dysplasia blindness
* Ectodermal dysplasia ectrodactyly macular dystrophy
* Ectodermal dysplasia hypohidrotic autosomal dominant
* Ectodermal dysplasia hypohidrotic hypothyroidism ciliary dyskinesia
* Ectodermal dysplasia Margarita type
* Ectodermal dysplasia mental retardation CNS malformation
* Ectodermal dysplasia mental retardation syndactyly
* Ectodermal dysplasia neurosensory deafness
* Ectodermal dysplasia osteosclerosis
* Ectodermal dysplasia tricho odonto onychial type
* Ectodermal dysplasia, hydrotic
* Ectodermal dysplasia, hypohidrotic, autosomal recessive
* Ectodermal dysplasia
* Ectodermic dysplasia anhidrotic cleft lip

=====Ectop=====
* Ectopia cordis
* Ectopia lentis
* Ectopia pupillae
* Ectopic coarctation
* Ectopic ossification familial type
* Ectopic pregnancy

====Ectr====
* Ectrodactyly cardiopathy dysmorphism
* Ectrodactyly cleft palate syndrome
* Ectrodactyly diaphragmatic hernia corpus callosum
* Ectrodactyly dominant form
* Ectrodactyly polydactyly
* Ectrodactyly recessive form
* Ectrodactyly
* Ectrodactyly–ectodermal dysplasia–cleft syndrome
* Ectropion inferior cleft lip and or palate

===Ecz===
* Eczema

==Ed–Eg==
* Edinburgh malformation syndrome
* Edwards–Patton–Dilly syndrome
* Edwards syndrome
* Eec syndrome without cleft lip palate
* Eec syndrome
* Eem syndrome
* Egg hypersensitivity
* Egg shaped pupils

==Eh–Ek==
* Ehlers–Danlos syndrome
* Ehrlichiosis
* Eijkman&#x27;s syndrome
* Eiken syndrome
* Eisenmenger syndrome
* Ekbom syndrome

==El–Em==
* Elattoproteus in context of NF
* Elective mutism
* Ectrodactyly–ectodermal dysplasia–cleft syndrome
* Electron transfer flavoprotein, deficiency of
* Elejalde syndrome
* Elephant man in context of NF
* Elephantiasis
* Elliott–Ludman–Teebi syndrome
* Ellis–Yale–Winter syndrome
* Ellis–van Creveld syndrome
* Emerinopathy
* Emery–Nelson syndrome
* Emery–Dreifuss muscular dystrophy, dominant type
* Emery–Dreifuss muscular dystrophy, X-linked
* Emery–Dreifuss muscular dystrophy
* Emetophobia
* Emphysema, congenital lobar
* Emphysema
* Emphysema-penoscrotal web-deafness-mental retardation
* Empty sella syndrome

==En==
===Ena–Enc===
* Enamel hypoplasia cataract hydrocephaly
* Encephalitis
* Encephalitis lethargica
* Encephalocraniocutaneous lipomatosis
* Encephalocele anencephaly
* Encephalocele anterior
* Encephalocele frontal
* Encephalocele
* Encephalomyelitis, myalgic
* Encephalomyelitis
* Encephalopathy
* Encephalopathy, chronic traumatic
* Encephalopathy, epileptic
* Encephalopathy, Fetal Alcohol
* Encephalopathy, Gluten
* Encephalopathy, Glycine
* Encephalopathy, Hashimoto&#x27;s
* Encephalopathy, Hepatic
* Encephalopathy, HIV associated
* Encephalopathy, Hypertensive
* Encephalopathy, Hypoxic ischemic
* Encephalopathy, Lyme
* Encephalopathy, Mitochondrial
* Encephalopathy, Neonatal
* Encephalopathy, Static
* Encephalopathy, Toxic
* Encephalopathy, transmissible spongiform
* Encephalopathy, Uremic
* Encephalopathy, Wernicke&#x27;s
* Encephalopathy intracerebral calcification retinal
* Encephalopathy progressive optic atrophy
* Encephalopathy subacute spongiform, Gerstmann-Sträussler
* Encephalopathy-basal ganglia-calcification
* Encephalopathy recurrent of childhood
* Encephalotrigeminal angiomatosis
* Enchondromatosis (benign)
* Enchondromatosis dwarfism deafness
* Enchondromatosis dwarfism calfness
* Encopresis

===End–Ent===
* Endocardial fibroelastosis
* Endocarditis, infective
* Endocarditis
* Endocrinopathy
* Endometrial stromal sarcoma
* Endometriosis
* Endomyocardial fibroelastosis
* Endomyocardial fibrosis
* Enetophobia
* Eng–Strom syndrome
* Engelhard–Yatziv syndrome
* Englemann disease
* Enolase deficiency type 1
* Enolase deficiency type 2
* Enolase deficiency type 3
* Enolase deficiency type 4
* Enolase deficiency
* Enterobiasis
* Enteropathica
* Enterovirus antenatal infection
* Entomophthoramycosis

===Enu–Env===
* Enuresis
* Envenomization by bothrops lanceolatus
* Envenomization by the Martinique lancehead viper
* Environment associated hypertension

==Eo==
* Eosinophilia
* Eosinophilia–myalgia syndrome
* Eosinophilic cryptitis
* Eosinophilic cystitis
* Eosinophilic fasciitis
* Eosinophilic gastroenteritis
* Eosinophilic granuloma
* Eosinophilic lymphogranuloma
* Eosinophilic pustular folliculitis
* Eosinophilic myocarditis
* Eosinophilic synovitis
* Eosophobia

==Ep==
===Epe===
* Ependymoblastoma
* Ependymoma

===Epi===
* Epicondylitis

====Epid====

=====Epide=====

======Epidem======
* Epidemic encephalitis
* Epidemic encephalomyelitis

======Epider======
Epiderma
* Epidermal nevus vitamin D resistant rickets
Epidermo
Epidermod–Epidermoi
* Epidermodysplasia verruciformis
* Epidermoid carcinoma
Epidermol
* Epidermolysa bullosa simplex and limb girdle muscular dystrophy
* Epidermolysis bullosa acquisita
* Epidermolysis bullosa dystrophica, Bart type
* Epidermolysis bullosa dystrophica, dominant type
* Epidermolysis bullosa herpetiformis, Dowling–Meara
* Epidermolysis bullosa intraepidermic
* Epidermolysis bullosa inversa dystrophica
* Epidermolysis bullosa simplex with anodontia, hair
* Epidermolysis bullosa simplex, Cockayne–Touraine type
* Epidermolysis bullosa simplex, Koebner type
* Epidermolysis bullosa simplex, Ogna type
* Epidermolysis bullosa, dermolytic
* Epidermolysis bullosa, generalized atrophic benign
* Epidermolysis bullosa, junctional, Herlitz–Pearson
* Epidermolysis bullosa, junctional, with pyloric atrophy
* Epidermolysis bullosa, junctional
* Epidermolysis bullosa, pretibial
* Epidermolysis bullosa
* Epidermolytic hyperkeratosis
* Epidermolytic palmoplantar keratoderma Vorner type

=====Epidi=====
* Epididymitis

====Epil–Epis====
* Epilepsia partialis continua
* Epilepsy
* Epilepsy benign neonatal familial
**Epilepsy benign neonatal familial 1
**Epilepsy benign neonatal familial 2
**Epilepsy benign neonatal familial 3
* Epilepsy juvenile absence
* Epilepsy mental deterioration Finnish type
* Epilepsy microcephaly skeletal dysplasia
* Epilepsy occipital calcifications
* Epilepsy progressive myoclonic
* Epilepsy telangiectasia
* Epilepsy with myoclono-astatic crisis
* Epilepsy, benign occipital
* Epilepsy, myoclonic progressive familial
* Epilepsy, nocturnal, frontal lobe type
* Epilepsy, partial, familial
* Epimerase deficiency
* Epimetaphyseal dysplasia cataract
* Epimetaphyseal skeletal dysplasia
* Epiphyseal dysplasia dysmorphism camptodactyly
* Epiphyseal dysplasia hearing loss dysmorphism
* Epiphyseal dysplasia multiple
* Epiphyseal stippling syndrome osteoclastic hyperplasia
* Epiphysealis hemimelica dysplasia

====Epit====
* Epithelial-myoepithelial carcinoma
* Epitheliopathy (APMPPE)
* Epitheliopathy, acute posterior multifocal placoid

===Epp–Eps===
* EPP (erythropoietic protoporphyria)
* Epstein-Barr virus mononucleosis
* Epstein syndrome

==Eq==
* Equinophobia

==Er==
* Erb–Duchenne palsy
* Erdheim disease
* Erdheim–Chester disease
* Ergophobia
* Eronen–Somer–Gustafsson syndrome
* Erosive pustular dermatosis of the scalp
* Erysipelas
* Erythema multiforme
* Erythema nodosum
* Erythermalgia
* Erythroblastopenia
* Erythroderma desquamativa of Leiner
* Erythroderma lethal congenital
* Erythrokeratodermia ataxia
* Erythrokeratodermia progressive symmetrica ichthyosis
* Erythrokeratodermia symmetrica progressiva
* Erythrokeratodermia variabilis ichthyosis
* Erythrokeratodermia variabilis, Mendes da Costa type
* Erythrokeratodermia with ataxia
* Erythrokeratolysis hiemalis ichthyosis
* Erythromelalgia
* Erythroplakia
* Erythroplasia of Queyrat
* Erythropoietic protoporphyria

==Es–Et==
* Escher–Hirt syndrome
* &quot;Escherichia coli&quot; infection
* Esophageal atresia associated anomalies
* Esophageal atresia coloboma talipes
* Esophageal atresia
* Esophageal disorder
* Esophageal duodenal atresia abnormalities of hands
* Esophageal neoplasm
* Esophageal varices
* Esophoria
* Esotropia
* Essential fatty acid deficiency
* Essential hypertension
* Essential iris atrophy
* Essential mixed cryoglobulinemia
* Essential thrombocytopenia
* Essential thrombocythemia - synonym of Essential thrombocytosis
* Essential thrombocytosis
* Esthesioneuroblastoma
* Ethylmalonic aciduria
* Ethylmalonic adipic aciduria

==Eu–Ew==
* Euhidrotic ectodermal dysplasia
* Eumycetoma
* Eunuchoidism familial
* Evan&#x27;s syndrome
* Ewing&#x27;s sarcoma

==Ex–Ey==
* Exencephaly
* Exercise induced anaphylaxis
* Exfoliative dermatitis
* Exner syndrome
* Exogenous lipoid pneumonia
* Exomphalos-macroglossia-gigantism syndrome
* Exophoria
* Exophthalmos
* Exostoses anetodermia brachydactyly type E
* Exostoses, multiple
** Exostoses, multiple, type 1
** Exostoses, multiple, type 2
** Exostoses, multiple, type 3
* Exostoses
* Exotropia
* Experimental allergic encephalomyelitis
* Exploding head syndrome
* Exstrophy of the bladder
* Exstrophy of the bladder-epispadias
* Exudative retinopathy familial, autosomal dominant
* Exudative retinopathy familial, autosomal recessive
* Exudative retinopathy familial, X linked, recessive
* Exudative retinopathy, familial
* Extrapyramidal disorder
* Extrasystoles short stature hyperpigmentation microcephaly
* Eye defects arachnodactyly cardiopathy
* Eyebrows duplication syndactyly</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q12136" start="18" end="25" title="disease" label="disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q51993" start="77" end="96" title="Ebola virus disease" label="Ebola virus disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q2271197" start="117" end="136" title="Echovirus" label="Echovirus infection"/>
<link wikidata="Q22965397" start="201" end="244" title="Ectodermal dysplasia absent dermatoglyphics" label="Ectodermal dysplasia absent dermatoglyphics"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="247" end="280" title="Ectodermal dysplasia adrenal cyst" label="Ectodermal dysplasia adrenal cyst"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="283" end="333" title="Ectodermal dysplasia alopecia preaxial polydactyly" label="Ectodermal dysplasia alopecia preaxial polydactyly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077955" start="336" end="367" title="Ectodermal dysplasia anhidrotic" label="Ectodermal dysplasia anhidrotic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="370" end="423" title="Ectodermal dysplasia arthrogryposis diabetes mellitus" label="Ectodermal dysplasia arthrogryposis diabetes mellitus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="426" end="460" title="Ectodermal dysplasia Bartalos type" label="Ectodermal dysplasia Bartalos type"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="463" end="495" title="Ectodermal dysplasia Berlin type" label="Ectodermal dysplasia Berlin type"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="498" end="528" title="Ectodermal dysplasia blindness" label="Ectodermal dysplasia blindness"/>
<link wikidata="Q5322931" start="531" end="582" title="Ectodermal dysplasia ectrodactyly macular dystrophy" label="Ectodermal dysplasia ectrodactyly macular dystrophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077955" start="585" end="637" title="Ectodermal dysplasia hypohidrotic autosomal dominant" label="Ectodermal dysplasia hypohidrotic autosomal dominant"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="640" end="707" title="Ectodermal dysplasia hypohidrotic hypothyroidism ciliary dyskinesia" label="Ectodermal dysplasia hypohidrotic hypothyroidism ciliary dyskinesia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="710" end="745" title="Ectodermal dysplasia Margarita type" label="Ectodermal dysplasia Margarita type"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="748" end="804" title="Ectodermal dysplasia mental retardation CNS malformation" label="Ectodermal dysplasia mental retardation CNS malformation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="807" end="857" title="Ectodermal dysplasia mental retardation syndactyly" label="Ectodermal dysplasia mental retardation syndactyly"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="860" end="902" title="Ectodermal dysplasia neurosensory deafness" label="Ectodermal dysplasia neurosensory deafness"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="905" end="940" title="Ectodermal dysplasia osteosclerosis" label="Ectodermal dysplasia osteosclerosis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="943" end="991" title="Ectodermal dysplasia tricho odonto onychial type" label="Ectodermal dysplasia tricho odonto onychial type"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077955" start="994" end="1024" title="Ectodermal dysplasia, hydrotic" label="Ectodermal dysplasia, hydrotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077955" start="1027" end="1082" title="Ectodermal dysplasia, hypohidrotic, autosomal recessive" label="Ectodermal dysplasia, hypohidrotic, autosomal recessive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323713" start="1085" end="1105" title="Ectodermal dysplasia" label="Ectodermal dysplasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5334319" start="1108" end="1149" title="Ectodermic dysplasia anhidrotic cleft lip" label="Ectodermic dysplasia anhidrotic cleft lip"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356194" start="1169" end="1183" title="Ectopia cordis" label="Ectopia cordis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1827028" start="1186" end="1200" title="Ectopia lentis" label="Ectopia lentis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1203" end="1219" title="Ectopia pupillae" label="Ectopia pupillae"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1222" end="1241" title="Ectopic coarctation" label="Ectopic coarctation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7248854" start="1244" end="1278" title="Ectopic ossification familial type" label="Ectopic ossification familial type"/>
<link wikidata="Q207087" start="1281" end="1298" title="Ectopic pregnancy" label="Ectopic pregnancy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1315" end="1351" title="Ectrodactyly cardiopathy dysmorphism" label="Ectrodactyly cardiopathy dysmorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5334319" start="1354" end="1388" title="Ectrodactyly cleft palate syndrome" label="Ectrodactyly cleft palate syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1391" end="1440" title="Ectrodactyly diaphragmatic hernia corpus callosum" label="Ectrodactyly diaphragmatic hernia corpus callosum"/>
<link wikidata="Q650026" start="1443" end="1469" title="Ectrodactyly dominant form" label="Ectrodactyly dominant form"/>
<link wikidata="Q55781848" start="1472" end="1496" title="Ectrodactyly polydactyly" label="Ectrodactyly polydactyly"/>
<link wikidata="Q650026" start="1499" end="1526" title="Ectrodactyly recessive form" label="Ectrodactyly recessive form"/>
<link wikidata="Q650026" start="1529" end="1541" title="Ectrodactyly" label="Ectrodactyly"/>
<link wikidata="Q5334319" start="1544" end="1592" title="Ectrodactyly–ectodermal dysplasia–cleft syndrome" label="Ectrodactyly–ectodermal dysplasia–cleft syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1595" end="1637" title="Ectropion inferior cleft lip and or palate" label="Ectropion inferior cleft lip and or palate"/>
<link wikidata="Q229256" start="1651" end="1657" title="Eczema" label="Eczema"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1671" end="1702" title="Edinburgh malformation syndrome" label="Edinburgh malformation syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1705" end="1734" title="Edwards–Patton–Dilly syndrome" label="Edwards–Patton–Dilly syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q457737" start="1737" end="1753" title="Edwards syndrome" label="Edwards syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q5334319" start="1756" end="1793" title="Eec syndrome without cleft lip palate" label="Eec syndrome without cleft lip palate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5334319" start="1796" end="1808" title="Eec syndrome" label="Eec syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q5322931" start="1811" end="1823" title="Eem syndrome" label="Eem syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q576179" start="1826" end="1846" title="Egg hypersensitivity" label="Egg hypersensitivity"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1849" end="1866" title="Egg shaped pupils" label="Egg shaped pupils"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141499" start="1880" end="1902" title="Ehlers–Danlos syndrome" label="Ehlers–Danlos syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2845432" start="1905" end="1917" title="Ehrlichiosis" label="Ehrlichiosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q107609" start="1920" end="1943" title="Eijkman&amp;#x27;s syndrome" label="Eijkman&amp;#x27;s syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q17119158" start="1946" end="1960" title="Eiken syndrome" label="Eiken syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q572695" start="1963" end="1983" title="Eisenmenger syndrome" label="Eisenmenger syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q4420141" start="1986" end="2000" title="Ekbom syndrome (disambiguation)" label="Ekbom syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q281115" start="2014" end="2044" title="Elattoproteus in context of NF" label="Elattoproteus in context of NF"/>
<link wikidata="Q5354941" start="2047" end="2062" title="Elective mutism" label="Elective mutism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5334319" start="2065" end="2113" title="Ectrodactyly–ectodermal dysplasia–cleft syndrome" label="Ectrodactyly–ectodermal dysplasia–cleft syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q59252171" start="2116" end="2161" title="Electron transfer flavoprotein, deficiency of" label="Electron transfer flavoprotein, deficiency of"/>
<link wikidata="Q5358728" start="2164" end="2181" title="Elejalde syndrome" label="Elejalde syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q281115" start="2184" end="2213" title="Elephant man in context of NF" label="Elephant man in context of NF"/>
<link wikidata="Q16775468" start="2216" end="2229" title="Elephantiasis" label="Elephantiasis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2232" end="2261" title="Elliott–Ludman–Teebi syndrome" label="Elliott–Ludman–Teebi syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2264" end="2290" title="Ellis–Yale–Winter syndrome" label="Ellis–Yale–Winter syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332448" start="2293" end="2319" title="Ellis–van Creveld syndrome" label="Ellis–van Creveld syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335642" start="2322" end="2334" title="Emerinopathy" label="Emerinopathy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2337" end="2358" title="Emery–Nelson syndrome" label="Emery–Nelson syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2361" end="2409" title="Emery–Dreifuss muscular dystrophy#Classification" label="Emery–Dreifuss muscular dystrophy, dominant type"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2412" end="2455" title="Emery–Dreifuss muscular dystrophy#Classification" label="Emery–Dreifuss muscular dystrophy, X-linked"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335642" start="2458" end="2491" title="Emery–Dreifuss muscular dystrophy" label="Emery–Dreifuss muscular dystrophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q175844" start="2494" end="2505" title="Emetophobia" label="Emetophobia"/>
<link wikidata="Q188605" start="2508" end="2535" title="Emphysema, congenital lobar" label="Emphysema, congenital lobar"/>
<link wikidata="Q188605" start="2538" end="2547" title="Emphysema" label="Emphysema"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2550" end="2603" title="Emphysema-penoscrotal web-deafness-mental retardation" label="Emphysema-penoscrotal web-deafness-mental retardation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339466" start="2606" end="2626" title="Empty sella syndrome" label="Empty sella syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2651" end="2690" title="Enamel hypoplasia cataract hydrocephaly" label="Enamel hypoplasia cataract hydrocephaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q199615" start="2693" end="2705" title="Encephalitis" label="Encephalitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369020" start="2708" end="2731" title="Encephalitis lethargica" label="Encephalitis lethargica"/>
<link wikidata="Q17540092" start="2734" end="2770" title="Encephalocraniocutaneous lipomatosis" label="Encephalocraniocutaneous lipomatosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q529292" start="2773" end="2798" title="Encephalocele anencephaly" label="Encephalocele anencephaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346023" start="2801" end="2823" title="Encephalocele anterior" label="Encephalocele anterior"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346023" start="2826" end="2847" title="Encephalocele frontal" label="Encephalocele frontal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346023" start="2850" end="2863" title="Encephalocele" label="Encephalocele"/>
<link wikidata="Q209733" start="2866" end="2892" title="Encephalomyelitis, myalgic" label="Encephalomyelitis, myalgic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1634879" start="2895" end="2912" title="Encephalomyelitis" label="Encephalomyelitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q576349" start="2915" end="2929" title="Encephalopathy" label="Encephalopathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5114004" start="2932" end="2965" title="Chronic traumatic encephalopathy" label="Encephalopathy, chronic traumatic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2968" end="2993" title="Encephalopathy, epileptic" label="Encephalopathy, epileptic"/>
<link wikidata="Q17002116" start="2996" end="3025" title="Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder" label="Encephalopathy, Fetal Alcohol"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3028" end="3050" title="Encephalopathy, Gluten" label="Encephalopathy, Gluten"/>
<link wikidata="Q3053945" start="3053" end="3076" title="Glycine encephalopathy" label="Encephalopathy, Glycine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4532132" start="3079" end="3111" title="Hashimoto&amp;#x27;s encephalopathy" label="Encephalopathy, Hashimoto&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q642548" start="3114" end="3137" title="Hepatic encephalopathy" label="Encephalopathy, Hepatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3435504" start="3140" end="3170" title="HIV-associated neurocognitive disorder" label="Encephalopathy, HIV associated"/>
<link wikidata="Q4138746" start="3173" end="3201" title="Hypertensive encephalopathy" label="Encephalopathy, Hypertensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q2249526" start="3204" end="3236" title="Cerebral hypoxia" label="Encephalopathy, Hypoxic ischemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q201989" start="3239" end="3259" title="Lyme disease" label="Encephalopathy, Lyme"/>
<link wikidata="Q2666433" start="3262" end="3291" title="MELAS syndrome" label="Encephalopathy, Mitochondrial"/>
<link wikidata="Q5832339" start="3294" end="3318" title="Neonatal encephalopathy" label="Encephalopathy, Neonatal"/>
<link wikidata="Q17002116" start="3321" end="3343" title="Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder" label="Encephalopathy, Static"/>
<link wikidata="Q7830379" start="3346" end="3367" title="Toxic encephalopathy" label="Encephalopathy, Toxic"/>
<link wikidata="Q703961" start="3370" end="3410" title="Transmissible spongiform encephalopathy" label="Encephalopathy, transmissible spongiform"/>
<link wikidata="Q13365776" start="3413" end="3435" title="Uremic encephalopathy" label="Encephalopathy, Uremic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1573307" start="3438" end="3469" title="Wernicke encephalopathy" label="Encephalopathy, Wernicke&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3472" end="3522" title="Encephalopathy intracerebral calcification retinal" label="Encephalopathy intracerebral calcification retinal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4357091" start="3525" end="3565" title="Encephalopathy progressive optic atrophy" label="Encephalopathy progressive optic atrophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q383228" start="3568" end="3624" title="Encephalopathy subacute spongiform, Gerstmann-Sträussler" label="Encephalopathy subacute spongiform, Gerstmann-Sträussler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1947307" start="3627" end="3669" title="Encephalopathy-basal ganglia-calcification" label="Encephalopathy-basal ganglia-calcification"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3672" end="3709" title="Encephalopathy recurrent of childhood" label="Encephalopathy recurrent of childhood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1886238" start="3712" end="3744" title="Encephalotrigeminal Angiomatosis" label="Encephalotrigeminal angiomatosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375429" start="3747" end="3772" title="Enchondromatosis (benign)" label="Enchondromatosis (benign)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3775" end="3809" title="Enchondromatosis dwarfism deafness" label="Enchondromatosis dwarfism deafness"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3812" end="3846" title="Enchondromatosis dwarfism calfness" label="Enchondromatosis dwarfism calfness"/>
<link wikidata="Q653027" start="3849" end="3859" title="Encopresis" label="Encopresis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5376225" start="3877" end="3903" title="Endocardial fibroelastosis" label="Endocardial fibroelastosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q82504" start="3906" end="3929" title="Endocarditis, infective" label="Endocarditis, infective"/>
<link wikidata="Q82504" start="3932" end="3944" title="Endocarditis" label="Endocarditis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2661443" start="3947" end="3961" title="Endocrinopathy" label="Endocrinopathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5376363" start="3964" end="3991" title="Endometrial stromal sarcoma" label="Endometrial stromal sarcoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q205764" start="3994" end="4007" title="Endometriosis" label="Endometriosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5376225" start="4010" end="4039" title="Endomyocardial fibroelastosis" label="Endomyocardial fibroelastosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2551272" start="4042" end="4065" title="Endomyocardial fibrosis" label="Endomyocardial fibrosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2268045" start="4068" end="4079" title="Enetophobia" label="Enetophobia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4082" end="4100" title="Eng–Strom syndrome" label="Eng–Strom syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4103" end="4128" title="Engelhard–Yatziv syndrome" label="Engelhard–Yatziv syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4131" end="4148" title="Englemann disease" label="Englemann disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q5379381" start="4151" end="4176" title="Enolase deficiency type 1" label="Enolase deficiency type 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q5379381" start="4179" end="4204" title="Enolase deficiency type 2" label="Enolase deficiency type 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q5379381" start="4207" end="4232" title="Enolase deficiency type 3" label="Enolase deficiency type 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q5379381" start="4235" end="4260" title="Enolase deficiency type 4" label="Enolase deficiency type 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q5379381" start="4263" end="4281" title="Enolase deficiency" label="Enolase deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1992236" start="4284" end="4296" title="Enterobiasis" label="Enterobiasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q937818" start="4299" end="4312" title="Enteropathica" label="Enteropathica"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4315" end="4346" title="Enterovirus antenatal infection" label="Enterovirus antenatal infection"/>
<link wikidata="Q5380626" start="4349" end="4369" title="Entomophthoramycosis" label="Entomophthoramycosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3448862" start="4387" end="4395" title="Enuresis" label="Enuresis"/>
<link wikidata="Q391459" start="4398" end="4436" title="Envenomization by bothrops lanceolatus" label="Envenomization by bothrops lanceolatus"/>
<link wikidata="Q391459" start="4439" end="4487" title="Envenomization by the Martinique lancehead viper" label="Envenomization by the Martinique lancehead viper"/>
<link wikidata="Q41861" start="4490" end="4525" title="Environment associated hypertension" label="Environment associated hypertension"/>
<link wikidata="Q505142" start="4536" end="4548" title="Eosinophilia" label="Eosinophilia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3508806" start="4551" end="4580" title="Eosinophilia–myalgia syndrome" label="Eosinophilia–myalgia syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4583" end="4605" title="Eosinophilic cryptitis" label="Eosinophilic cryptitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q16969155" start="4608" end="4629" title="Eosinophilic cystitis" label="Eosinophilic cystitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2325206" start="4632" end="4654" title="Eosinophilic fasciitis" label="Eosinophilic fasciitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q27555722" start="4657" end="4685" title="Eosinophilic gastroenteritis" label="Eosinophilic gastroenteritis"/>
<link wikidata="Q655982" start="4688" end="4710" title="Eosinophilic granuloma" label="Eosinophilic granuloma"/>
<link wikidata="Q2069545" start="4713" end="4741" title="Eosinophilic lymphogranuloma" label="Eosinophilic lymphogranuloma"/>
<link wikidata="Q5381904" start="4744" end="4778" title="Eosinophilic folliculitis" label="Eosinophilic pustular folliculitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q48770946" start="4781" end="4805" title="Eosinophilic myocarditis" label="Eosinophilic myocarditis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4808" end="4830" title="Eosinophilic synovitis" label="Eosinophilic synovitis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4833" end="4843" title="Eosophobia" label="Eosophobia"/>
<link wikidata="Q618660" start="4864" end="4880" title="Ependymoblastoma" label="Ependymoblastoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346753" start="4883" end="4893" title="Ependymoma" label="Ependymoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q5382596" start="4907" end="4920" title="Epicondylitis" label="Epicondylitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q199615" start="4974" end="4995" title="Epidemic encephalitis" label="Epidemic encephalitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q120487790" start="4998" end="5024" title="Epidemic encephalomyelitis" label="Epidemic encephalomyelitis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5056" end="5099" title="Epidermal nevus vitamin D resistant rickets" label="Epidermal nevus vitamin D resistant rickets"/>
<link wikidata="Q974691" start="5131" end="5162" title="Epidermodysplasia verruciformis" label="Epidermodysplasia verruciformis"/>
<link wikidata="Q681817" start="5165" end="5185" title="Epidermoid carcinoma" label="Epidermoid carcinoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q3124960" start="5198" end="5261" title="Epidermolysa bullosa simplex and limb girdle muscular dystrophy" label="Epidermolysa bullosa simplex and limb girdle muscular dystrophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3726860" start="5264" end="5295" title="Epidermolysis bullosa acquisita" label="Epidermolysis bullosa acquisita"/>
<link wikidata="Q4865135" start="5298" end="5342" title="Epidermolysis bullosa dystrophica, Bart type" label="Epidermolysis bullosa dystrophica, Bart type"/>
<link wikidata="Q3589131" start="5345" end="5393" title="Epidermolysis bullosa dystrophica, dominant type" label="Epidermolysis bullosa dystrophica, dominant type"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5396" end="5446" title="Epidermolysis bullosa herpetiformis, Dowling–Meara" label="Epidermolysis bullosa herpetiformis, Dowling–Meara"/>
<link wikidata="Q3124960" start="5449" end="5485" title="Epidermolysis bullosa intraepidermic" label="Epidermolysis bullosa intraepidermic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3589131" start="5488" end="5529" title="Epidermolysis bullosa inversa dystrophica" label="Epidermolysis bullosa inversa dystrophica"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5532" end="5582" title="Epidermolysis bullosa simplex with anodontia, hair" label="Epidermolysis bullosa simplex with anodontia, hair"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5585" end="5638" title="Epidermolysis bullosa simplex, Cockayne–Touraine type" label="Epidermolysis bullosa simplex, Cockayne–Touraine type"/>
<link wikidata="Q3124960" start="5641" end="5684" title="Epidermolysis bullosa simplex, Koebner type" label="Epidermolysis bullosa simplex, Koebner type"/>
<link wikidata="Q3124960" start="5687" end="5727" title="Epidermolysis bullosa simplex, Ogna type" label="Epidermolysis bullosa simplex, Ogna type"/>
<link wikidata="Q3589131" start="5730" end="5763" title="Epidermolysis bullosa, dermolytic" label="Epidermolysis bullosa, dermolytic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3726862" start="5766" end="5816" title="Epidermolysis bullosa, generalized atrophic benign" label="Epidermolysis bullosa, generalized atrophic benign"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5819" end="5869" title="Epidermolysis bullosa, junctional, Herlitz–Pearson" label="Epidermolysis bullosa, junctional, Herlitz–Pearson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3726862" start="5872" end="5927" title="Epidermolysis bullosa, junctional, with pyloric atrophy" label="Epidermolysis bullosa, junctional, with pyloric atrophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3726862" start="5930" end="5963" title="Epidermolysis bullosa, junctional" label="Epidermolysis bullosa, junctional"/>
<link wikidata="Q3589131" start="5966" end="5998" title="Epidermolysis bullosa, pretibial" label="Epidermolysis bullosa, pretibial"/>
<link wikidata="Q923020" start="6001" end="6022" title="Epidermolysis bullosa" label="Epidermolysis bullosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3801491" start="6025" end="6053" title="Epidermolytic hyperkeratosis" label="Epidermolytic hyperkeratosis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6056" end="6106" title="Epidermolytic palmoplantar keratoderma Vorner type" label="Epidermolytic palmoplantar keratoderma Vorner type"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344812" start="6126" end="6138" title="Epididymitis" label="Epididymitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4898733" start="6160" end="6188" title="Epilepsia partialis continua" label="Epilepsia partialis continua"/>
<link wikidata="Q41571" start="6191" end="6199" title="Epilepsy" label="Epilepsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4887956" start="6202" end="6235" title="Benign familial neonatal epilepsy" label="Epilepsy benign neonatal familial"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6238" end="6273" title="Benign familial neonatal epilepsy#BFNC1" label="Epilepsy benign neonatal familial 1"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6276" end="6311" title="Benign familial neonatal epilepsy#BFNC2" label="Epilepsy benign neonatal familial 2"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6314" end="6349" title="Benign familial neonatal epilepsy#BFNC3" label="Epilepsy benign neonatal familial 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q2346980" start="6352" end="6377" title="Epilepsy juvenile absence" label="Epilepsy juvenile absence"/>
<link wikidata="Q7059204" start="6380" end="6422" title="Epilepsy mental deterioration Finnish type" label="Epilepsy mental deterioration Finnish type"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6425" end="6465" title="Epilepsy microcephaly skeletal dysplasia" label="Epilepsy microcephaly skeletal dysplasia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6468" end="6501" title="Epilepsy occipital calcifications" label="Epilepsy occipital calcifications"/>
<link wikidata="Q7248853" start="6504" end="6534" title="Progressive myoclonus epilepsy" label="Epilepsy progressive myoclonic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6537" end="6560" title="Epilepsy telangiectasia" label="Epilepsy telangiectasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6947909" start="6563" end="6600" title="Epilepsy with myoclono-astatic crisis" label="Epilepsy with myoclono-astatic crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q28194839" start="6603" end="6629" title="Epilepsy, benign occipital" label="Epilepsy, benign occipital"/>
<link wikidata="Q7248853" start="6632" end="6672" title="Epilepsy, myoclonic progressive familial" label="Epilepsy, myoclonic progressive familial"/>
<link wikidata="Q3589157" start="6675" end="6713" title="Epilepsy, nocturnal, frontal lobe type" label="Epilepsy, nocturnal, frontal lobe type"/>
<link wikidata="Q7140388" start="6716" end="6743" title="Epilepsy, partial, familial" label="Epilepsy, partial, familial"/>
<link wikidata="Q17153517" start="6746" end="6766" title="Epimerase deficiency" label="Epimerase deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6769" end="6802" title="Epimetaphyseal dysplasia cataract" label="Epimetaphyseal dysplasia cataract"/>
<link wikidata="Q18966185" start="6805" end="6838" title="Epimetaphyseal skeletal dysplasia" label="Epimetaphyseal skeletal dysplasia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6841" end="6887" title="Epiphyseal dysplasia dysmorphism camptodactyly" label="Epiphyseal dysplasia dysmorphism camptodactyly"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6890" end="6935" title="Epiphyseal dysplasia hearing loss dysmorphism" label="Epiphyseal dysplasia hearing loss dysmorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1452604" start="6938" end="6967" title="Epiphyseal dysplasia multiple" label="Epiphyseal dysplasia multiple"/>
<link wikidata="Q7123066" start="6970" end="7024" title="Epiphyseal stippling syndrome osteoclastic hyperplasia" label="Epiphyseal stippling syndrome osteoclastic hyperplasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7839508" start="7027" end="7060" title="Epiphysealis hemimelica dysplasia" label="Epiphysealis hemimelica dysplasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5383691" start="7077" end="7111" title="Epithelial-myoepithelial carcinoma" label="Epithelial-myoepithelial carcinoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q4677946" start="7114" end="7137" title="Epitheliopathy (APMPPE)" label="Epitheliopathy (APMPPE)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4677946" start="7140" end="7190" title="Epitheliopathy, acute posterior multifocal placoid" label="Epitheliopathy, acute posterior multifocal placoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759600" start="7208" end="7243" title="EPP (erythropoietic protoporphyria)" label="EPP (erythropoietic protoporphyria)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7246" end="7278" title="Epstein-Barr virus mononucleosis" label="Epstein-Barr virus mononucleosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347729" start="7281" end="7297" title="Epstein syndrome" label="Epstein syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q5384517" start="7308" end="7320" title="Equinophobia" label="Equinophobia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736543" start="7331" end="7349" title="Erb–Duchenne palsy" label="Erb–Duchenne palsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349259" start="7352" end="7367" title="Erdheim disease" label="Erdheim disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349259" start="7370" end="7393" title="Erdheim–Chester disease" label="Erdheim–Chester disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q2724163" start="7396" end="7406" title="Ergophobia" label="Ergophobia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7409" end="7441" title="Eronen–Somer–Gustafsson syndrome" label="Eronen–Somer–Gustafsson syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2893515" start="7444" end="7484" title="Erosive pustular dermatosis of the scalp" label="Erosive pustular dermatosis of the scalp"/>
<link wikidata="Q207092" start="7487" end="7497" title="Erysipelas" label="Erysipelas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363732" start="7500" end="7519" title="Erythema multiforme" label="Erythema multiforme"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363738" start="7522" end="7538" title="Erythema nodosum" label="Erythema nodosum"/>
<link wikidata="Q524353" start="7541" end="7554" title="Erythermalgia" label="Erythermalgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3591490" start="7557" end="7575" title="Erythroblastopenia (disambiguation)" label="Erythroblastopenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3591492" start="7578" end="7613" title="Erythroderma desquamativa of Leiner" label="Erythroderma desquamativa of Leiner"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7616" end="7646" title="Erythroderma lethal congenital" label="Erythroderma lethal congenital"/>
<link wikidata="Q5396477" start="7649" end="7675" title="Erythrokeratodermia ataxia" label="Erythrokeratodermia ataxia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3591493" start="7678" end="7731" title="Erythrokeratodermia progressive symmetrica ichthyosis" label="Erythrokeratodermia progressive symmetrica ichthyosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3591493" start="7734" end="7776" title="Erythrokeratodermia symmetrica progressiva" label="Erythrokeratodermia symmetrica progressiva"/>
<link wikidata="Q3591493" start="7779" end="7820" title="Erythrokeratodermia variabilis ichthyosis" label="Erythrokeratodermia variabilis ichthyosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3591493" start="7823" end="7875" title="Erythrokeratodermia variabilis, Mendes da Costa type" label="Erythrokeratodermia variabilis, Mendes da Costa type"/>
<link wikidata="Q5396477" start="7878" end="7909" title="Erythrokeratodermia with ataxia" label="Erythrokeratodermia with ataxia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1976193" start="7912" end="7950" title="Erythrokeratolysis hiemalis ichthyosis" label="Erythrokeratolysis hiemalis ichthyosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q524353" start="7953" end="7968" title="Erythromelalgia" label="Erythromelalgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q897843" start="7971" end="7984" title="Erythroplakia" label="Erythroplakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5749018" start="7987" end="8011" title="Erythroplasia of Queyrat" label="Erythroplasia of Queyrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759600" start="8014" end="8043" title="Erythropoietic protoporphyria" label="Erythropoietic protoporphyria"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8057" end="8077" title="Escher–Hirt syndrome" label="Escher–Hirt syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q7144817" start="8080" end="8118" title="Pathogenic Escherichia coli" label="&amp;quot;Escherichia coli&amp;quot; infection"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755537" start="8121" end="8160" title="Esophageal atresia associated anomalies" label="Esophageal atresia associated anomalies"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8163" end="8198" title="Esophageal atresia coloboma talipes" label="Esophageal atresia coloboma talipes"/>
<link wikidata="Q298233" start="8201" end="8219" title="Esophageal atresia" label="Esophageal atresia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2912193" start="8222" end="8241" title="Esophageal disorder" label="Esophageal disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q5441566" start="8244" end="8294" title="Esophageal duodenal atresia abnormalities of hands" label="Esophageal duodenal atresia abnormalities of hands"/>
<link wikidata="Q372701" start="8297" end="8316" title="Esophageal neoplasm" label="Esophageal neoplasm"/>
<link wikidata="Q298278" start="8319" end="8337" title="Esophageal varices" label="Esophageal varices"/>
<link wikidata="Q5398647" start="8340" end="8349" title="Esophoria" label="Esophoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2720759" start="8352" end="8361" title="Esotropia" label="Esotropia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8364" end="8395" title="Essential fatty acid#Essential fatty acid deficiency" label="Essential fatty acid deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q988405" start="8398" end="8420" title="Essential hypertension" label="Essential hypertension"/>
<link wikidata="Q17121503" start="8423" end="8445" title="Essential iris atrophy" label="Essential iris atrophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790371" start="8448" end="8480" title="Essential mixed cryoglobulinemia" label="Essential mixed cryoglobulinemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q585285" start="8483" end="8509" title="Essential thrombocytopenia" label="Essential thrombocytopenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368780" start="8512" end="8537" title="Essential thrombocythemia" label="Essential thrombocythemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368780" start="8551" end="8575" title="Essential thrombocytosis" label="Essential thrombocytosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368780" start="8578" end="8602" title="Essential thrombocytosis" label="Essential thrombocytosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q256806" start="8605" end="8626" title="Esthesioneuroblastoma" label="Esthesioneuroblastoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547640" start="8629" end="8650" title="Ethylmalonic aciduria" label="Ethylmalonic aciduria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547640" start="8653" end="8681" title="Ethylmalonic adipic aciduria" label="Ethylmalonic adipic aciduria"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8695" end="8726" title="Euhidrotic ectodermal dysplasia" label="Euhidrotic ectodermal dysplasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759514" start="8729" end="8739" title="Eumycetoma" label="Eumycetoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q938107" start="8742" end="8763" title="Eunuchoidism familial" label="Eunuchoidism familial"/>
<link wikidata="Q3109873" start="8766" end="8786" title="Evan&amp;#x27;s syndrome" label="Evan&amp;#x27;s syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138580" start="8789" end="8809" title="Ewing&amp;#x27;s sarcoma" label="Ewing&amp;#x27;s sarcoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774245" start="8823" end="8834" title="Exencephaly" label="Exencephaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q25399683" start="8837" end="8865" title="Exercise induced anaphylaxis" label="Exercise induced anaphylaxis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363741" start="8868" end="8890" title="Exfoliative dermatitis" label="Exfoliative dermatitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7455128" start="8893" end="8907" title="Exner syndrome" label="Exner syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q3824458" start="8910" end="8936" title="Exogenous lipoid pneumonia" label="Exogenous lipoid pneumonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q521863" start="8939" end="8981" title="Exomphalos-macroglossia-gigantism syndrome" label="Exomphalos-macroglossia-gigantism syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q3062042" start="8984" end="8993" title="Exophoria" label="Exophoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q684383" start="8996" end="9008" title="Exophthalmos" label="Exophthalmos"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9011" end="9053" title="Exostoses anetodermia brachydactyly type E" label="Exostoses anetodermia brachydactyly type E"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952467" start="9056" end="9075" title="Hereditary Multiple Exostoses" label="Exostoses, multiple"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952467" start="9079" end="9106" title="Hereditary Multiple Exostoses" label="Exostoses, multiple, type 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952467" start="9110" end="9137" title="Hereditary Multiple Exostoses" label="Exostoses, multiple, type 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952467" start="9141" end="9168" title="Hereditary Multiple Exostoses" label="Exostoses, multiple, type 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384176" start="9171" end="9180" title="Exostoses" label="Exostoses"/>
<link wikidata="Q2556242" start="9183" end="9192" title="Exotropia" label="Exotropia"/>
<link wikidata="Q494066" start="9195" end="9234" title="Experimental allergic encephalomyelitis" label="Experimental allergic encephalomyelitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3106901" start="9237" end="9260" title="Exploding head syndrome" label="Exploding head syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q258858" start="9263" end="9287" title="Exstrophy of the bladder" label="Exstrophy of the bladder"/>
<link wikidata="Q258858" start="9290" end="9325" title="Exstrophy of the bladder-epispadias" label="Exstrophy of the bladder-epispadias"/>
<link wikidata="Q5432936" start="9328" end="9378" title="Exudative retinopathy familial, autosomal dominant" label="Exudative retinopathy familial, autosomal dominant"/>
<link wikidata="Q5432936" start="9381" end="9432" title="Exudative retinopathy familial, autosomal recessive" label="Exudative retinopathy familial, autosomal recessive"/>
<link wikidata="Q5432936" start="9435" end="9486" title="Exudative retinopathy familial, X linked, recessive" label="Exudative retinopathy familial, X linked, recessive"/>
<link wikidata="Q5432936" start="9489" end="9520" title="Exudative retinopathy, familial" label="Exudative retinopathy, familial"/>
<link wikidata="Q2608695" start="9523" end="9546" title="Extrapyramidal disorder" label="Extrapyramidal disorder"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9549" end="9607" title="Extrasystoles short stature hyperpigmentation microcephaly" label="Extrasystoles short stature hyperpigmentation microcephaly"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9610" end="9648" title="Eye defects arachnodactyly cardiopathy" label="Eye defects arachnodactyly cardiopathy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9651" end="9682" title="Eyebrows duplication syndactyly" label="Eyebrows duplication syndactyly"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="236339" wikidata="Q6616862" url="?curid=236339" title="List of diseases (F)">
<text>This is a list of diseases starting with the letter &quot;F&quot;.

==Fa==
===Fab===
* Fabry&#x27;s disease

===Fac===

====Face–Faci====
* Faces syndrome
* Facial asymmetry temporal seizures
* Facial clefting corpus callosum agenesis
* Facial cleft
* Facial dysmorphism macrocephaly myopia Dandy–Walker type
* Facial dysmorphism shawl scrotum joint laxity syndrome
* Facial femoral syndrome
* Facial paralysis
* Facies unusual arthrogryposis advanced skeletal malformations
* Facio digito genital syndrome recessive form
* Facio skeletal genital syndrome Rippberger type
* Facio thoraco genital syndrome
* Faciocardiomelic dysplasia lethal
* Faciocardiorenal syndrome
* Faciooculoacousticorenal syndrome
* Facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy

====Fact====
* Factor II deficiency
* Factor V deficiency
* Factor V Leiden mutation
* Factor VII deficiency
* Factor VIII deficiency
* Factor X deficiency, congenital
* Factor X deficiency
* Factor XI deficiency, congenital
* Factor XIII deficiency, congenital
* Factor XIII deficiency

===Fah–Fal===
* Fahr&#x27;s disease
* Fairbank disease
* Fallot tetralogy

===Fam===

====Fami====

=====Famil=====

======Famili======
Familial a – Familial i
* Familial ALS
* Familial ALS with dementia
* Familial adenomatous polyposis
* Familial amyloid polyneuropathy
* Familial aortic dissection
* Familial band heterotopia
* Familial cold autoinflamatory syndrome (FCAS)
* Familial colorectal cancer
* Familial deafness
* Familial dilated cardiomyopathy
* Familial dysautonomia
* Familial emphysema
* Familial eosinophilia
* Familial hyperchylomicronemia
* Familial hyperlipoproteinemia type I
* Familial hyperlipoproteinemia type III
* Familial hyperlipoproteinemia type IV
* Familial hyperlipoproteinemia
* Familial hypersensitivity pneumonitis
* Familial hypertension
* Familial hypopituitarism
* Familial hypothyroidism
* Familial intestinal polyatresia syndrome
Familial m – Familial w
* Familial Mediterranean fever
* Familial multiple lipomatosis
* Familial multiple trichodiscomas
* Familial myelofibrosis
* Familial nasal acilia
* Familial non-immune hyperthyroidism
* Familial opposable triphalangeal thumbs duplication
* Familial partial epilepsy with variable focus
* Familial periodic paralysis
* Familial polyposis
* Familial porencephaly
* Familial supernumerary nipples
* Familial symmetric lipomatosis
* Familial Treacher–Collins syndrome
* Familial veinous malformations
* Familial ventricular tachycardia
* Familial visceral myopathy
* Familial wilms tumor 2

===Fan–Faz===
* Fan death
* Fanconi anemia type 1
* Fanconi anemia type 2
* Fanconi anemia type 3
* Fanconi–Bickel syndrome
* Fanconi ichthyosis dysmorphism
* Fanconi like syndrome
* Fanconi pancytopenia
* Fanconi syndrome
* Fanconi syndrome, renal, with nephrocalcinosis and renal stones
* Fanconi anemia
* Fara–Chlupackova syndrome
* Farber&#x27;s disease
* Farmer&#x27;s lung
* Fas deficiency
* Fascioliasis
* Fatal familial insomnia
* Fatty liver
* Faulk–Epstein–Jones syndrome
* Faye–Petersen–Ward–Carey syndrome
* Fazio–Londe syndrome

==Fe==
===Fea–Fer===
* Fealty syndrome
* Febrile seizure
* Fechtner syndrome
* Feigenbaum–Bergeron–Richardson syndrome
* Feigenbaum–Bergeron syndrome
* Feingold syndrome
* Felty&#x27;s syndrome
* Female pseudohermaphrodism Genuardi type
* Female pseudohermaphroditism
* Female sexual arousal disorder
* Femoral facial syndrome
* Femur bifid with monodactylous ectrodactyly
* Femur fibula ulna syndrome
* Fenton–Wilkinson–Toselano syndrome
* Ferlini–Ragno–Calzolari syndrome
* Fernhoff–Blackston–Oakley syndrome
* Ferrocalcinosis cerebro vascular

===Fet===
* Fetal acitretin syndrome
* Fetal akinesia syndrome X linked
* Fetal alcohol syndrome
* Fetal aminopterin syndrome
* Fetal and neonatal alloimmune thrombocytopenia
* Fetal antihypertensive drugs syndrome
* Fetal brain disruption sequence
* Fetal cytomegalovirus syndrome
* Fetal diethylstilbestrol syndrome
* Fetal edema
* Fetal enterovirus syndrome
* Fetal hydantoin syndrome
* Fetal indomethacin syndrome
* Fetal iodine syndrome
* Fetal left ventricular aneurysm
* Fetal methimazole syndrome
* Fetal methyl mercury syndrome
* Fetal minoxidil syndrome
* Fetal parainfluenza virus type 3 syndrome
* Fetal parvovirus syndrome
* Fetal phenothiazine syndrome
* Fetal prostaglandin syndrome
* Fetal thalidomide syndrome
* Fetal warfarin syndrome

==Fg==
* FG syndrome

==Fi==
===Fib–Fil===
* Fiber type disproportion, congenital
* Fibrinogen deficiency, congenital
* Fibrochondrogenesis
* Fibrolipomatosis
* Fibroma
* Fibromatosis gingival hypertrichosis
* Fibromatosis multiple non ossifying
* Fibromatosis
* Fibromuscular dysplasia of arteries
* Fibromuscular dysplasia
* Fibromyalgia
* Fibrosarcoma
* Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis
* Fibrosing mediastinitis
* Fibrosis
* Fibrous dysplasia of bone
* Fibrous dysplasia
* Fibrodysplasia ossificans progressiva
* Fibula aplasia complex brachydactyly
* Fibular aplasia ectrodactyly
* Fibular hypoplasia femoral bowing oligodactyly
* Fibular hypoplasia scapulo pelvic dysplasia absent
* Fifth disease
* Filariasis
* Filippi syndrome

===Fin–Fit===
* Fine–Lubinsky syndrome
* Fingerprints absence syndactyly milia
* Finnish lethal neonatal metabolic syndrome
* Finnish type amyloidosis
* Finucane–Kurtz–Scott syndrome
* Fish poisoning
* Fish-eye disease
* Fissured tongue
* Fistulous vegetative verrucous hydradenoma
* Fitz-Hugh–Curtis syndrome
* Fitzsimmons–Walson–Mellor syndrome
* Fitzsimmons–Guilbert syndrome
* Fitzsimmons–McLachlan–Gilbert syndrome

==Fl==
* Flavimonas oryzihabitans
* Flesh eating bacteria
* Floaters
* Floating limb syndrome
* Floating-Harbor syndrome
* Florid cystic endosalpingiosis of the uterus
* Flotch syndrome
* Fluorosis
* Flynn–Aird syndrome

==Fo==
* Focal agyria pachygyria
* Focal alopecia congenital megalencephaly
* Focal dermal hypoplasia
* Focal dystonia
* Focal facial dermal dysplasia
* Focal or multifocal malformations in neuronal migration
* Foix–Chavany–Marie syndrome
* Foix–Alajouanine syndrome
* Follicular atrophoderma-basal cell carcinoma
* Follicular dendritic cell tumor
* Follicular hamartoma alopecia cystic fibrosis
* Follicular ichthyosis
* Follicular lymphoma
* Follicular lymphoreticuloma
* Fontaine–Farriaux–Blanckaert syndrome
* Forbes–Albright syndrome
* Forbes disease
* Foreign accent syndrome
* Forestier&#x27;s disease
* Formaldehyde poisoning
* Forney–Robinson–Pascoe syndrome
* Fountain syndrome
* Fournier gangrene
* Fowler–Christmas–Chapele syndrome
* Fowler&#x27;s syndrome
* Fox–Fordyce disease

==Fr==
===Fra===
* Fragile X syndrome
** Fragile X syndrome type 1
** Fragile X syndrome type 2
** Fragile X syndrome type 3
* Fragoso–Cid–Garcia–Hernandez syndrome
* Franceschetti–Klein syndrome
* Francheschini–Vardeu–Guala syndrome
* Francois dyscephalic syndrome
* Franek–Bocker–Kahlen syndrome
* Fraser–Jequier–Chen syndrome
* Fraser-like syndrome
* Fraser syndrome
* Frasier syndrome
* FRAXA syndrome
* FRAXD
* FRAXE syndrome

===Fre–Fri===
* Free sialic acid storage disease
* Freeman–Sheldon syndrome
* Freiberg&#x27;s disease
* Freire–Maia odontotrichomelic syndrome
* Freire–Maia–Pinheiro–Opitz syndrome
* Frenkel–Russe syndrome
* Frey&#x27;s syndrome
* Frias syndrome
* Fried–Goldberg–Mundel syndrome
* Friedel–Heid–Grosshans syndrome
* Friedman–Goodman syndrome
* Friedreich ataxia congenital glaucoma
* Friedreich&#x27;s ataxia

===Fro–Fru===
* Froelich&#x27;s syndrome
* Frölich&#x27;s syndrome
* Fronto nasal malformation cloacal exstrophy
* Frontofacionasal dysplasia type Al gazali
* Fronto-facio-nasal dysplasia
* Frontometaphyseal dysplasia
* Frontonasal dysplasia acromelic
* Frontonasal dysplasia Klippel–Feil syndrome
* Frontonasal dysplasia phocomelic upper limbs
* Frontonasal dysplasia
* Frontotemporal dementia
* Froster–Huch syndrome
* Froster–Iskenius–Waterson syndrome
* Fructose intolerance
* Fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase deficiency
* Fructose-1-phosphate aldolase deficiency, heredita
* Fructosemia, hereditary
* Fructosuria

===Fry===
* Frydman–Cohen–Ashenazi syndrome
* Frydman–Cohen–Karmon syndrome
* Fryer syndrome
* Fryns–Fabry–Remans syndrome
* Fryns–Hofkens–Fabry syndrome
* Fryns–Smeets–Thiry syndrome

==Fu==
* Fucosidosis type 1
* Fucosidosis
* Fugue state
* Fuhrmann–Rieger–De Sousa syndrome
* Fukuda–Miyanomae–Nakata syndrome
* Fukuyama-type muscular dystrophy
* Fumarase deficiency
* Fumaric aciduria
* Functioning pancreatic endocrine tumor
* Fuqua–Berkovitz syndrome
* Furlong–Kurczynski–Hennessy syndrome
* Furukawa–Takagi–Nakao syndrome
* Furunculous myiasis
* Fused mandibular incisors</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q12136" start="18" end="25" title="disease" label="disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q615645" start="87" end="107" title="Fabry&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Fabry&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q5424297" start="140" end="154" title="Faces syndrome" label="Faces syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="157" end="191" title="Facial asymmetry temporal seizures" label="Facial asymmetry temporal seizures"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="194" end="234" title="Facial clefting corpus callosum agenesis" label="Facial clefting corpus callosum agenesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5428558" start="237" end="249" title="Facial cleft" label="Facial cleft"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="252" end="308" title="Facial dysmorphism macrocephaly myopia Dandy–Walker type" label="Facial dysmorphism macrocephaly myopia Dandy–Walker type"/>
<link wikidata="Q7442226" start="311" end="365" title="Facial dysmorphism shawl scrotum joint laxity syndrome" label="Facial dysmorphism shawl scrotum joint laxity syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q18020133" start="368" end="391" title="Facial femoral syndrome" label="Facial femoral syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q7562539" start="394" end="410" title="Facial paralysis" label="Facial paralysis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="413" end="474" title="Facies unusual arthrogryposis advanced skeletal malformations" label="Facies unusual arthrogryposis advanced skeletal malformations"/>
<link wikidata="Q303123" start="477" end="521" title="Facio digito genital syndrome recessive form" label="Facio digito genital syndrome recessive form"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="524" end="571" title="Facio skeletal genital syndrome Rippberger type" label="Facio skeletal genital syndrome Rippberger type"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="574" end="604" title="Facio thoraco genital syndrome" label="Facio thoraco genital syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="607" end="640" title="Faciocardiomelic dysplasia lethal" label="Faciocardiomelic dysplasia lethal"/>
<link wikidata="Q17385141" start="643" end="668" title="Faciocardiorenal syndrome" label="Faciocardiorenal syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q3508634" start="671" end="704" title="Faciooculoacousticorenal syndrome" label="Faciooculoacousticorenal syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399182" start="707" end="745" title="Facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy" label="Facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q409166" start="762" end="782" title="Factor II deficiency" label="Factor II deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q422831" start="785" end="804" title="Factor V deficiency" label="Factor V deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q185986" start="807" end="831" title="Factor V Leiden mutation" label="Factor V Leiden mutation"/>
<link wikidata="Q18555032" start="834" end="855" title="Factor VII deficiency" label="Factor VII deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092064" start="858" end="880" title="Factor VIII deficiency" label="Factor VIII deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q18555036" start="883" end="914" title="Factor X deficiency, congenital" label="Factor X deficiency, congenital"/>
<link wikidata="Q18555036" start="917" end="936" title="Factor X deficiency" label="Factor X deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q419531" start="939" end="971" title="Factor XI deficiency, congenital" label="Factor XI deficiency, congenital"/>
<link wikidata="Q423712" start="974" end="1008" title="Factor XIII deficiency, congenital" label="Factor XIII deficiency, congenital"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393725" start="1011" end="1033" title="Factor XIII deficiency" label="Factor XIII deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1947307" start="1051" end="1070" title="Fahr&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Fahr&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q1452604" start="1073" end="1089" title="Fairbank disease" label="Fairbank disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126831" start="1092" end="1108" title="Fallot tetralogy" label="Fallot tetralogy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1197" end="1209" title="Familial ALS" label="Familial ALS"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1212" end="1238" title="Familial ALS with dementia" label="Familial ALS with dementia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369011" start="1241" end="1271" title="Familial adenomatous polyposis" label="Familial adenomatous polyposis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2844603" start="1274" end="1305" title="Familial amyloid polyneuropathy" label="Familial amyloid polyneuropathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5432930" start="1308" end="1334" title="Familial aortic dissection" label="Familial aortic dissection"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1337" end="1362" title="Familial band heterotopia" label="Familial band heterotopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3552503" start="1365" end="1410" title="Familial cold autoinflamatory syndrome (FCAS)" label="Familial cold autoinflamatory syndrome (FCAS)"/>
<link wikidata="Q188874" start="1413" end="1439" title="Familial colorectal cancer" label="Familial colorectal cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q16035842" start="1442" end="1459" title="Familial deafness" label="Familial deafness"/>
<link wikidata="Q283656" start="1462" end="1493" title="Familial dilated cardiomyopathy" label="Familial dilated cardiomyopathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2325854" start="1496" end="1517" title="Familial dysautonomia" label="Familial dysautonomia"/>
<link wikidata="Q622437" start="1520" end="1538" title="Familial emphysema" label="Familial emphysema"/>
<link wikidata="Q30314825" start="1541" end="1562" title="Familial eosinophilia" label="Familial eosinophilia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2349695" start="1565" end="1594" title="Familial hyperchylomicronemia" label="Familial hyperchylomicronemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079120" start="1597" end="1633" title="Familial hyperlipoproteinemia type I" label="Familial hyperlipoproteinemia type I"/>
<link wikidata="Q2069207" start="1636" end="1674" title="Familial hyperlipoproteinemia type III" label="Familial hyperlipoproteinemia type III"/>
<link wikidata="Q5432941" start="1677" end="1714" title="Familial hyperlipoproteinemia type IV" label="Familial hyperlipoproteinemia type IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079120" start="1717" end="1746" title="Familial hyperlipoproteinemia" label="Familial hyperlipoproteinemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q35890" start="1749" end="1786" title="Familial hypersensitivity pneumonitis" label="Familial hypersensitivity pneumonitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q988405" start="1789" end="1810" title="Familial hypertension" label="Familial hypertension"/>
<link wikidata="Q922411" start="1813" end="1837" title="Familial hypopituitarism" label="Familial hypopituitarism"/>
<link wikidata="Q16501" start="1840" end="1863" title="Familial hypothyroidism" label="Familial hypothyroidism"/>
<link wikidata="Q18554801" start="1866" end="1906" title="Familial intestinal polyatresia syndrome" label="Familial intestinal polyatresia syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144618" start="1933" end="1961" title="Familial Mediterranean fever" label="Familial Mediterranean fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q85760447" start="1964" end="1993" title="Familial multiple lipomatosis" label="Familial multiple lipomatosis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1996" end="2028" title="Familial multiple trichodiscomas" label="Familial multiple trichodiscomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752571" start="2031" end="2053" title="Familial myelofibrosis" label="Familial myelofibrosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q55788759" start="2056" end="2077" title="Familial nasal acilia" label="Familial nasal acilia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2080" end="2115" title="Familial non-immune hyperthyroidism" label="Familial non-immune hyperthyroidism"/>
<link wikidata="Q18019453" start="2118" end="2169" title="Familial opposable triphalangeal thumbs duplication" label="Familial opposable triphalangeal thumbs duplication"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2172" end="2217" title="Familial partial epilepsy with variable focus" label="Familial partial epilepsy with variable focus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788314" start="2220" end="2247" title="Familial periodic paralysis" label="Familial periodic paralysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369011" start="2250" end="2268" title="Familial polyposis" label="Familial polyposis"/>
<link wikidata="Q492129" start="2271" end="2292" title="Familial porencephaly" label="Familial porencephaly"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2295" end="2325" title="Familial supernumerary nipples" label="Familial supernumerary nipples"/>
<link wikidata="Q4887975" start="2328" end="2358" title="Familial symmetric lipomatosis" label="Familial symmetric lipomatosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q744790" start="2361" end="2395" title="Familial Treacher–Collins syndrome" label="Familial Treacher–Collins syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2398" end="2428" title="Familial veinous malformations" label="Familial veinous malformations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649897" start="2431" end="2463" title="Familial ventricular tachycardia" label="Familial ventricular tachycardia"/>
<link wikidata="Q15056772" start="2466" end="2492" title="Familial visceral myopathy" label="Familial visceral myopathy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2495" end="2517" title="Familial wilms tumor 2" label="Familial wilms tumor 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q303331" start="2535" end="2544" title="Fan death" label="Fan death"/>
<link wikidata="Q845779" start="2547" end="2568" title="Fanconi anemia type 1" label="Fanconi anemia type 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q845779" start="2571" end="2592" title="Fanconi anemia type 2" label="Fanconi anemia type 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q845779" start="2595" end="2616" title="Fanconi anemia type 3" label="Fanconi anemia type 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q5572613" start="2619" end="2642" title="Fanconi–Bickel syndrome" label="Fanconi–Bickel syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2645" end="2675" title="Fanconi ichthyosis dysmorphism" label="Fanconi ichthyosis dysmorphism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2678" end="2699" title="Fanconi like syndrome" label="Fanconi like syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q845779" start="2702" end="2722" title="Fanconi pancytopenia" label="Fanconi pancytopenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179460" start="2725" end="2741" title="Fanconi syndrome" label="Fanconi syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q4420121" start="2744" end="2807" title="Fanconi syndrome, renal, with nephrocalcinosis and renal stones" label="Fanconi syndrome, renal, with nephrocalcinosis and renal stones"/>
<link wikidata="Q845779" start="2810" end="2824" title="Fanconi anemia" label="Fanconi anemia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2827" end="2852" title="Fara–Chlupackova syndrome" label="Fara–Chlupackova syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396345" start="2855" end="2876" title="Farber&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Farber&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396859" start="2879" end="2897" title="Farmer&amp;#x27;s lung" label="Farmer&amp;#x27;s lung"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2900" end="2914" title="Fas deficiency" label="Fas deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q6972442" start="2917" end="2929" title="Fascioliasis" label="Fascioliasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q862872" start="2932" end="2955" title="Fatal familial insomnia" label="Fatal familial insomnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6058862" start="2958" end="2969" title="Fatty liver" label="Fatty liver"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2972" end="3000" title="Faulk–Epstein–Jones syndrome" label="Faulk–Epstein–Jones syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3003" end="3036" title="Faye–Petersen–Ward–Carey syndrome" label="Faye–Petersen–Ward–Carey syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399155" start="3039" end="3059" title="Fazio–Londe syndrome" label="Fazio–Londe syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3084" end="3099" title="Fealty syndrome" label="Fealty syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q127664" start="3102" end="3117" title="Febrile seizure" label="Febrile seizure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399440" start="3120" end="3137" title="Fechtner syndrome" label="Fechtner syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3140" end="3179" title="Feigenbaum–Bergeron–Richardson syndrome" label="Feigenbaum–Bergeron–Richardson syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3182" end="3210" title="Feigenbaum–Bergeron syndrome" label="Feigenbaum–Bergeron syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q5441566" start="3213" end="3230" title="Feingold syndrome" label="Feingold syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404470" start="3233" end="3254" title="Felty&amp;#x27;s syndrome" label="Felty&amp;#x27;s syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2273662" start="3257" end="3297" title="Female pseudohermaphrodism Genuardi type" label="Female pseudohermaphrodism Genuardi type"/>
<link wikidata="Q2273662" start="3300" end="3328" title="Female pseudohermaphroditism" label="Female pseudohermaphroditism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241252" start="3331" end="3361" title="Female sexual arousal disorder" label="Female sexual arousal disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q18020133" start="3364" end="3387" title="Femoral facial syndrome" label="Femoral facial syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q18020521" start="3390" end="3433" title="Femur bifid with monodactylous ectrodactyly" label="Femur bifid with monodactylous ectrodactyly"/>
<link wikidata="Q5442945" start="3436" end="3462" title="Femur fibula ulna syndrome" label="Femur fibula ulna syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3465" end="3499" title="Fenton–Wilkinson–Toselano syndrome" label="Fenton–Wilkinson–Toselano syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3502" end="3534" title="Ferlini–Ragno–Calzolari syndrome" label="Ferlini–Ragno–Calzolari syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3537" end="3571" title="Fernhoff–Blackston–Oakley syndrome" label="Fernhoff–Blackston–Oakley syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1947307" start="3574" end="3606" title="Ferrocalcinosis cerebro vascular" label="Ferrocalcinosis cerebro vascular"/>
<link wikidata="Q341500" start="3620" end="3644" title="Fetal acitretin syndrome" label="Fetal acitretin syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3647" end="3679" title="Fetal akinesia syndrome X linked" label="Fetal akinesia syndrome X linked"/>
<link wikidata="Q17002116" start="3682" end="3704" title="Fetal alcohol syndrome" label="Fetal alcohol syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3707" end="3733" title="Fetal aminopterin syndrome" label="Fetal aminopterin syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2622318" start="3736" end="3782" title="Fetal and neonatal alloimmune thrombocytopenia" label="Fetal and neonatal alloimmune thrombocytopenia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3785" end="3822" title="Fetal antihypertensive drugs syndrome" label="Fetal antihypertensive drugs syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3825" end="3856" title="Fetal brain disruption sequence" label="Fetal brain disruption sequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q5160416" start="3859" end="3889" title="Fetal cytomegalovirus syndrome" label="Fetal cytomegalovirus syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q423989" start="3892" end="3925" title="Fetal diethylstilbestrol syndrome" label="Fetal diethylstilbestrol syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1679678" start="3928" end="3939" title="Fetal edema" label="Fetal edema"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3942" end="3968" title="Fetal enterovirus syndrome" label="Fetal enterovirus syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q5445904" start="3971" end="3995" title="Fetal hydantoin syndrome" label="Fetal hydantoin syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q409231" start="3998" end="4025" title="Fetal indomethacin syndrome" label="Fetal indomethacin syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4028" end="4049" title="Fetal iodine syndrome" label="Fetal iodine syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4052" end="4083" title="Fetal left ventricular aneurysm" label="Fetal left ventricular aneurysm"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4086" end="4112" title="Fetal methimazole syndrome" label="Fetal methimazole syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q414075" start="4115" end="4144" title="Fetal methyl mercury syndrome" label="Fetal methyl mercury syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4147" end="4171" title="Fetal minoxidil syndrome" label="Fetal minoxidil syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2051533" start="4174" end="4215" title="Fetal parainfluenza virus type 3 syndrome" label="Fetal parainfluenza virus type 3 syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1679678" start="4218" end="4243" title="Fetal parvovirus syndrome" label="Fetal parvovirus syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4246" end="4274" title="Fetal phenothiazine syndrome" label="Fetal phenothiazine syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4277" end="4305" title="Fetal prostaglandin syndrome" label="Fetal prostaglandin syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q203174" start="4308" end="4334" title="Fetal thalidomide syndrome" label="Fetal thalidomide syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2549256" start="4337" end="4360" title="Fetal warfarin syndrome" label="Fetal warfarin syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q530142" start="4371" end="4382" title="FG syndrome" label="FG syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1956696" start="4407" end="4443" title="Fiber type disproportion, congenital" label="Fiber type disproportion, congenital"/>
<link wikidata="Q42417401" start="4446" end="4479" title="Fibrinogen deficiency, congenital" label="Fibrinogen deficiency, congenital"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071315" start="4482" end="4501" title="Fibrochondrogenesis" label="Fibrochondrogenesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q525075" start="4504" end="4520" title="Fibrolipomatosis" label="Fibrolipomatosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4667072" start="4523" end="4530" title="Fibroma" label="Fibroma"/>
<link wikidata="Q5563112" start="4533" end="4569" title="Fibromatosis gingival hypertrichosis" label="Fibromatosis gingival hypertrichosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1985123" start="4572" end="4607" title="Fibromatosis multiple non ossifying" label="Fibromatosis multiple non ossifying"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410851" start="4610" end="4622" title="Fibromatosis" label="Fibromatosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q688949" start="4625" end="4660" title="Fibromuscular dysplasia of arteries" label="Fibromuscular dysplasia of arteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q688949" start="4663" end="4686" title="Fibromuscular dysplasia" label="Fibromuscular dysplasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q540571" start="4689" end="4701" title="Fibromyalgia" label="Fibromyalgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362453" start="4704" end="4716" title="Fibrosarcoma" label="Fibrosarcoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q2290446" start="4719" end="4748" title="Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis" label="Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1581845" start="4751" end="4774" title="Fibrosing mediastinitis" label="Fibrosing mediastinitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q605709" start="4777" end="4785" title="Fibrosis" label="Fibrosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410864" start="4788" end="4813" title="Fibrous dysplasia of bone" label="Fibrous dysplasia of bone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410864" start="4816" end="4833" title="Fibrous dysplasia" label="Fibrous dysplasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410831" start="4836" end="4873" title="Fibrodysplasia ossificans progressiva" label="Fibrodysplasia ossificans progressiva"/>
<link wikidata="Q2718677" start="4876" end="4912" title="Fibula aplasia complex brachydactyly" label="Fibula aplasia complex brachydactyly"/>
<link wikidata="Q55780384" start="4915" end="4943" title="Fibular aplasia ectrodactyly" label="Fibular aplasia ectrodactyly"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4946" end="4992" title="Fibular hypoplasia femoral bowing oligodactyly" label="Fibular hypoplasia femoral bowing oligodactyly"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4995" end="5045" title="Fibular hypoplasia scapulo pelvic dysplasia absent" label="Fibular hypoplasia scapulo pelvic dysplasia absent"/>
<link wikidata="Q753654" start="5048" end="5061" title="Fifth disease" label="Fifth disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q815753" start="5064" end="5074" title="Filariasis" label="Filariasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q110127761" start="5077" end="5093" title="Filippi syndrome" label="Filippi syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q55783094" start="5111" end="5133" title="Fine–Lubinsky syndrome" label="Fine–Lubinsky syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q22965397" start="5136" end="5173" title="Fingerprints absence syndactyly milia" label="Fingerprints absence syndactyly milia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5514398" start="5176" end="5218" title="Finnish lethal neonatal metabolic syndrome" label="Finnish lethal neonatal metabolic syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q4394144" start="5221" end="5245" title="Finnish type amyloidosis" label="Finnish type amyloidosis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5248" end="5277" title="Finucane–Kurtz–Scott syndrome" label="Finucane–Kurtz–Scott syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5280" end="5294" title="Fish poisoning" label="Fish poisoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q3441028" start="5297" end="5313" title="Fish-eye disease" label="Fish-eye disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q2504473" start="5316" end="5331" title="Fissured tongue" label="Fissured tongue"/>
<link wikidata="Q7663355" start="5334" end="5376" title="Fistulous vegetative verrucous hydradenoma" label="Fistulous vegetative verrucous hydradenoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421272" start="5379" end="5404" title="Fitz-Hugh–Curtis syndrome" label="Fitz-Hugh–Curtis syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q657516" start="5407" end="5441" title="Fitzsimmons–Walson–Mellor syndrome" label="Fitzsimmons–Walson–Mellor syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q5455731" start="5444" end="5473" title="Fitzsimmons–Guilbert syndrome" label="Fitzsimmons–Guilbert syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5476" end="5514" title="Fitzsimmons–McLachlan–Gilbert syndrome" label="Fitzsimmons–McLachlan–Gilbert syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q7255078" start="5525" end="5549" title="Flavimonas oryzihabitans" label="Flavimonas oryzihabitans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145674" start="5552" end="5573" title="Flesh eating bacteria" label="Flesh eating bacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q142807" start="5576" end="5584" title="Floaters" label="Floaters"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5587" end="5609" title="Floating limb syndrome" label="Floating limb syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q5459852" start="5612" end="5636" title="Floating-Harbor syndrome" label="Floating-Harbor syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q5376410" start="5639" end="5683" title="Florid cystic endosalpingiosis of the uterus" label="Florid cystic endosalpingiosis of the uterus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5686" end="5701" title="Flotch syndrome" label="Flotch syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q4387380" start="5704" end="5713" title="Fluorosis (disambiguation)" label="Fluorosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5463653" start="5716" end="5735" title="Flynn–Aird syndrome" label="Flynn–Aird syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5746" end="5769" title="Focal agyria pachygyria" label="Focal agyria pachygyria"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5772" end="5812" title="Focal alopecia congenital megalencephaly" label="Focal alopecia congenital megalencephaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q5463847" start="5815" end="5838" title="Focal dermal hypoplasia" label="Focal dermal hypoplasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428695" start="5841" end="5855" title="Focal dystonia" label="Focal dystonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5463849" start="5858" end="5887" title="Focal facial dermal dysplasia" label="Focal facial dermal dysplasia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5890" end="5945" title="Focal or multifocal malformations in neuronal migration" label="Focal or multifocal malformations in neuronal migration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435202" start="5948" end="5975" title="Foix–Chavany–Marie syndrome" label="Foix–Chavany–Marie syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q5464172" start="5978" end="6003" title="Foix–Alajouanine syndrome" label="Foix–Alajouanine syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q4875174" start="6006" end="6050" title="Follicular atrophoderma-basal cell carcinoma" label="Follicular atrophoderma-basal cell carcinoma"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6053" end="6084" title="Follicular dendritic cell tumor" label="Follicular dendritic cell tumor"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6087" end="6132" title="Follicular hamartoma alopecia cystic fibrosis" label="Follicular hamartoma alopecia cystic fibrosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q523893" start="6135" end="6156" title="Follicular ichthyosis" label="Follicular ichthyosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q123251" start="6159" end="6178" title="Follicular lymphoma" label="Follicular lymphoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1947302" start="6181" end="6208" title="Follicular lymphoreticuloma" label="Follicular lymphoreticuloma"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6211" end="6248" title="Fontaine–Farriaux–Blanckaert syndrome" label="Fontaine–Farriaux–Blanckaert syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433936" start="6251" end="6275" title="Forbes–Albright syndrome" label="Forbes–Albright syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q494922" start="6278" end="6292" title="Forbes disease" label="Forbes disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q856736" start="6295" end="6318" title="Foreign accent syndrome" label="Foreign accent syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q742762" start="6321" end="6345" title="Forestier&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Forestier&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q161210" start="6348" end="6370" title="Formaldehyde poisoning" label="Formaldehyde poisoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q112740188" start="6373" end="6404" title="Forney–Robinson–Pascoe syndrome" label="Forney–Robinson–Pascoe syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q5474830" start="6407" end="6424" title="Fountain syndrome" label="Fountain syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q616449" start="6427" end="6444" title="Fournier gangrene" label="Fournier gangrene"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6447" end="6480" title="Fowler–Christmas–Chapele syndrome" label="Fowler–Christmas–Chapele syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q22965443" start="6483" end="6505" title="Fowler&amp;#x27;s syndrome" label="Fowler&amp;#x27;s syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1618019" start="6508" end="6527" title="Fox–Fordyce disease" label="Fox–Fordyce disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q221472" start="6548" end="6566" title="Fragile X syndrome" label="Fragile X syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q221472" start="6570" end="6595" title="Fragile X syndrome type 1" label="Fragile X syndrome type 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q221472" start="6599" end="6624" title="Fragile X syndrome type 2" label="Fragile X syndrome type 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q221472" start="6628" end="6653" title="Fragile X syndrome type 3" label="Fragile X syndrome type 3"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6656" end="6693" title="Fragoso–Cid–Garcia–Hernandez syndrome" label="Fragoso–Cid–Garcia–Hernandez syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q17121234" start="6696" end="6724" title="Franceschetti–Klein syndrome" label="Franceschetti–Klein syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6727" end="6762" title="Francheschini–Vardeu–Guala syndrome" label="Francheschini–Vardeu–Guala syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1459851" start="6765" end="6794" title="Francois dyscephalic syndrome" label="Francois dyscephalic syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6797" end="6826" title="Franek–Bocker–Kahlen syndrome" label="Franek–Bocker–Kahlen syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6829" end="6857" title="Fraser–Jequier–Chen syndrome" label="Fraser–Jequier–Chen syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6860" end="6880" title="Fraser-like syndrome" label="Fraser-like syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425572" start="6883" end="6898" title="Fraser syndrome" label="Fraser syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q5493754" start="6901" end="6917" title="Frasier syndrome" label="Frasier syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q221472" start="6920" end="6934" title="FRAXA syndrome" label="FRAXA syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q17930633" start="6937" end="6942" title="FRAXD" label="FRAXD"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6945" end="6959" title="FRAXE syndrome" label="FRAXE syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2280692" start="6977" end="7009" title="Free sialic acid storage disease" label="Free sialic acid storage disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q1315091" start="7012" end="7036" title="Freeman–Sheldon syndrome" label="Freeman–Sheldon syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1688105" start="7039" end="7062" title="Freiberg&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Freiberg&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7065" end="7103" title="Freire–Maia odontotrichomelic syndrome" label="Freire–Maia odontotrichomelic syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7106" end="7141" title="Freire–Maia–Pinheiro–Opitz syndrome" label="Freire–Maia–Pinheiro–Opitz syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7144" end="7166" title="Frenkel–Russe syndrome" label="Frenkel–Russe syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431371" start="7169" end="7189" title="Frey&amp;#x27;s syndrome" label="Frey&amp;#x27;s syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7192" end="7206" title="Frias syndrome" label="Frias syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7209" end="7239" title="Fried–Goldberg–Mundel syndrome" label="Fried–Goldberg–Mundel syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7242" end="7273" title="Friedel–Heid–Grosshans syndrome" label="Friedel–Heid–Grosshans syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7276" end="7301" title="Friedman–Goodman syndrome" label="Friedman–Goodman syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7304" end="7341" title="Friedreich ataxia congenital glaucoma" label="Friedreich ataxia congenital glaucoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q913856" start="7344" end="7368" title="Friedreich&amp;#x27;s ataxia" label="Friedreich&amp;#x27;s ataxia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276885" start="7386" end="7410" title="Froelich&amp;#x27;s syndrome" label="Froelich&amp;#x27;s syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276885" start="7413" end="7436" title="Frölich&amp;#x27;s syndrome" label="Frölich&amp;#x27;s syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7439" end="7482" title="Fronto nasal malformation cloacal exstrophy" label="Fronto nasal malformation cloacal exstrophy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7485" end="7526" title="Frontofacionasal dysplasia type Al gazali" label="Frontofacionasal dysplasia type Al gazali"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7529" end="7557" title="Fronto-facio-nasal dysplasia" label="Fronto-facio-nasal dysplasia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7560" end="7587" title="Frontometaphyseal dysplasia" label="Frontometaphyseal dysplasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3725646" start="7590" end="7621" title="Frontonasal dysplasia acromelic" label="Frontonasal dysplasia acromelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774751" start="7624" end="7667" title="Frontonasal dysplasia Klippel–Feil syndrome" label="Frontonasal dysplasia Klippel–Feil syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7670" end="7714" title="Frontonasal dysplasia phocomelic upper limbs" label="Frontonasal dysplasia phocomelic upper limbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3725646" start="7717" end="7738" title="Frontonasal dysplasia" label="Frontonasal dysplasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q18592" start="7741" end="7764" title="Frontotemporal dementia" label="Frontotemporal dementia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7767" end="7788" title="Froster–Huch syndrome" label="Froster–Huch syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7791" end="7825" title="Froster–Iskenius–Waterson syndrome" label="Froster–Iskenius–Waterson syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1609755" start="7828" end="7848" title="Hereditary fructose intolerance" label="Fructose intolerance"/>
<link wikidata="Q899507" start="7851" end="7889" title="Fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase deficiency" label="Fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1609755" start="7892" end="7942" title="Fructose-1-phosphate aldolase deficiency, heredita" label="Fructose-1-phosphate aldolase deficiency, heredita"/>
<link wikidata="Q1609755" start="7945" end="7968" title="Fructosemia, hereditary" label="Fructosemia, hereditary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2791374" start="7971" end="7982" title="Fructosuria" label="Fructosuria"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7996" end="8027" title="Frydman–Cohen–Ashenazi syndrome" label="Frydman–Cohen–Ashenazi syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8030" end="8059" title="Frydman–Cohen–Karmon syndrome" label="Frydman–Cohen–Karmon syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8062" end="8076" title="Fryer syndrome" label="Fryer syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8079" end="8106" title="Fryns–Fabry–Remans syndrome" label="Fryns–Fabry–Remans syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8109" end="8137" title="Fryns–Hofkens–Fabry syndrome" label="Fryns–Hofkens–Fabry syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8140" end="8167" title="Fryns–Smeets–Thiry syndrome" label="Fryns–Smeets–Thiry syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q177878" start="8178" end="8196" title="Fucosidosis type 1" label="Fucosidosis type 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q177878" start="8199" end="8210" title="Fucosidosis" label="Fucosidosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q951639" start="8213" end="8224" title="Fugue state" label="Fugue state"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8227" end="8260" title="Fuhrmann–Rieger–De Sousa syndrome" label="Fuhrmann–Rieger–De Sousa syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8263" end="8295" title="Fukuda–Miyanomae–Nakata syndrome" label="Fukuda–Miyanomae–Nakata syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1955377" start="8298" end="8330" title="Fukuyama-type muscular dystrophy" label="Fukuyama-type muscular dystrophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2823337" start="8333" end="8352" title="Fumarase deficiency" label="Fumarase deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q2823337" start="8355" end="8371" title="Fumaric aciduria" label="Fumaric aciduria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1981276" start="8374" end="8412" title="Functioning pancreatic endocrine tumor" label="Functioning pancreatic endocrine tumor"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8415" end="8439" title="Fuqua–Berkovitz syndrome" label="Fuqua–Berkovitz syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8442" end="8478" title="Furlong–Kurczynski–Hennessy syndrome" label="Furlong–Kurczynski–Hennessy syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8481" end="8511" title="Furukawa–Takagi–Nakao syndrome" label="Furukawa–Takagi–Nakao syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q304601" start="8514" end="8533" title="Furunculous myiasis" label="Furunculous myiasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3847191" start="8536" end="8561" title="Fused mandibular incisors" label="Fused mandibular incisors"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="236340" wikidata="Q6616865" url="?curid=236340" title="List of diseases (G)">
<text>This is a list of diseases starting with the letter &quot;G&quot;.

==Ga==
===Gal–Gap===
* Galactorrhea
* Galactocoele
* Galactokinase deficiency
* Galactorrhea hyperprolactinemia
* Galactosamine-6-sulfatase deficiency
* Galactose-1-phosphate uridylyltransferase deficiency
* Galactosemia
* Galloway Mowat syndrome
* Gamborg–Nielsen syndrome
* Game–Friedman–Paradice syndrome
* Gamma aminobutyric acid transaminase deficiency
* Gamma-cystathionase deficiency
* Gamma-sarcoglycanopathy
* Gamstorp episodic adynamy
* Ganglioglioma
* Gangliosidosis
** Gangliosidosis (Type2)(GM2)
** Gangliosidosis GM1 type 3
** Gangliosidosis type1
* Ganser syndrome
* GAPO syndrome
* Garchichiliosis

===Gar–Gau===
* Garcia–Torres–Guarner syndrome
* Gardner–Morrisson–Abbot syndrome
* Gardner–Silengo–Wachtel syndrome
* Gardner–Diamond syndrome
* Gardner&#x27;s syndrome
* Garret–Tripp syndrome
* Gas/bloat syndrome
* Gastric dumping syndrome
* Gastric lymphoma
* Gastritis, familial giant hypertrophic
* Gastrocutaneous syndrome
* Gastroenteritis, eosinophilic
* Gastro-enteropancreatic neuroendocrine tumor
* Gastroenteritis
* Gastroesophageal reflux
* Gastrointestinal autonomic nerve tumor
* Gastrointestinal neoplasm
* Gaucher disease
:* Gaucher disease type 1
:* Gaucher disease type 2
:* Gaucher disease type 3
:* Gaucher ichthyosis restrictive dermopathy
:* Gaucher-like disease

===Gay===
* Gay–Feinmesser–Cohen syndrome

==Ge==
===Gee–Gem===
* Geen Sandford Davison syndrome
* Gelatinous ascites
* Geleophysic dwarfism
* Gelineau disease
* Geliphobia
* Gemignani syndrome
* Gemss syndrome

===Gen–Ger===
* Gender dysphoria
* Genée-Wiedemann syndrome
* Generalized anxiety disorder (GAD)
* Generalized malformations in neuronal migration
* Generalized resistance to thyroid hormone
* Generalized seizure
* Generalized torsion dystonia
* Genes syndrome
* Genetic diseases, inborn
* Genetic reflex epilepsy
* Genetic susceptibility to infections caused by BCG
* Genital anomaly cardiomyopathy
* Genital dwarfism, Turner type
* Genital dwarfism
* Genital retraction syndrome (also known as koro)
* Genito palatocardiac syndrome
* Genu valgum, st. Helena familial
* Genu varum
* Genuphobia
* Geographic tongue
* German syndrome
* Germinal cell aplasia
* Gerodermia osteodysplastica
* Gershinibaruch–Leibo syndrome
* Gerstmann syndrome

===Ges===
* Gestational diabetes mellitus
* Gestational pemphigoid
* Gestational trophoblastic disease

==Gh==
* Ghosal syndrome
* Ghose–Sachdev–Kumar syndrome

==Gi==
* Gianotti-Crosti syndrome
* Giant axonal neuropathy
* Giant cell arteritis
* Giant cell myocarditis
* Giant congenital nevi
* Giant ganglionic hyperplasia
* Giant hypertrophic gastritis
* Giant mammary hamartoma
* Giant papillary conjunctivitis
* Giant pigmented hairy nevus
* Giant platelet syndrome
* Giardiasis
* Gibson&#x27;s Syndrome
* Giedion syndrome
* Gigantism advanced bone age hoarse cry
* Gigantism partial, nevi, hemihypertrophy, macrocephaly
* Gigantism
* Gilbert&#x27;s syndrome
* Gilles de la Tourette&#x27;s syndrome
* Gingival fibromatosis dominant
* Gingival fibromatosis facial dysmorphism
* Gingival fibrosis
* Gingivitis
* Gyrate atrophy of the choroid and retina
* Gitelman syndrome
* Gittings syndrome

==Gl==
===Gla–Gli===
* Glanzmann thrombasthenia
* Glass–Chapman–Hockley syndrome
* Glaucoma
** Glaucoma ecopia microspherophakia stiff joints short stature
** Glaucoma iridogoniodysgenesia
** Glaucoma sleep apnea
** Glaucoma type 1C
** Glaucoma, congenital
** Glaucoma, hereditary adult type 1A
** Glaucoma, hereditary juvenile type 1B
** Glaucoma, hereditary
** Glaucoma, primary infantile type 3A
** Glaucoma, primary infantile type 3B
* Glioblastoma
* Glioma
* Gliosarcoma

===Glo===
* Globel disaccharide intolerance
* Glomerulonephritis sparse hair telangiectases
* Glomerulonephritis
* Glomerulosclerosis
* Gloomy face syndrome
* Glossodynia
* Glossopalatine ankylosis micrognathia ear anomalies
* Glossopharyngeal neuralgia
* Glossophobia

===Glu===
* Glucagonoma
* Glucocorticoid deficiency, familial
* Glucocorticoid resistance
* Glucocorticoid sensitive hypertension
* Glucose 6 phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency
* Glucose-6-phosphate translocase deficiency
* Glucose-galactose malabsorption
* Glucosephosphate isomerase deficiency
* Glucosidase acid-1,4-alpha deficiency
* Glut2 deficiency
* Glutamate decarboxylase deficiency
* Glutamate-aspartate transport defect
* Glutaricaciduria I
* Glutaricaciduria II
* Glutaryl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency
* Glutathione synthetase deficiency

===Gly===
* Glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency
* Glycine synthase deficiency
* Glycogen storage disease
:* Glycogen storage disease type 1B
:* Glycogen storage disease type 1C
:* Glycogen storage disease type 1D
:* Glycogen storage disease type 6, due to phosphorylation
:* Glycogen storage disease type 7
:* Glycogen storage disease type 9
:* Glycogen storage disease type II
:* Glycogen storage disease type V
:* Glycogen storage disease type VI
:* Glycogen storage disease type VII
:* Glycogen storage disease type VIII
* Glycogenosis
:* Glycogenosis type II
:* Glycogenosis type III
:* Glycogenosis type IV
:* Glycogenosis type V
:* Glycogenosis type VI
:* Glycogenosis type VII
:* Glycogenosis type VIII
:* Glycogenosis, type 0
* Glycosuria

==Gm==
* GM2 gangliosidosis, 0 variant
* GM2-gangliosidosis, B, B1, AB variant
* GMS syndrome

==Go==
===Goi–Gon===
* Goitre
* Goldberg–Bull syndrome
* Goldberg syndrome
* Goldblatt–Wallis syndrome
* Goldblatt–Wallis–Zieff syndrome
* Goldblatt–Viljoen syndrome
* Goldenhar syndrome
* Goldskag–Cooks–Hertz syndrome
* Goldstein–Hutt syndrome
* Gollop–Coates syndrome
* Gollop syndrome
* Goltz syndrome
* Gombo syndrome
* Gomez and López-Hernández syndrome
* Gonadal dysgenesis
:* Gonadal dysgenesis mixed
:* Gonadal dysgenesis Turner type
:* Gonadal dysgenesis XY type associated anomalies
:* Gonadal dysgenesis, XX type
:* Gonadal dysgenesis, XY female type
:* Goniodysgenesis mental retardation short stature
* Gonococcal conjunctivitis
* Gonzales Del Angel syndrome

===Goo–Gou===
* Goodman camptodactyly
* Goodpasture pneumorenal syndrome
* Goodpasture&#x27;s syndrome
* Gordon hyperkaliemia-hypertension syndrome
* Gordon syndrome
* Gorham syndrome
* Gorham&#x27;s disease
* Gorham–Stout disease
* Gorlin–Bushkell–Jensen syndrome
* Gorlin–Chaudhry–Moss syndrome
* Gottron&#x27;s syndrome
* Gougerot–Blum syndrome
* Gougerot–Sjogren syndrome
* Gout
* Gouty nephropathy, familial

==Gr==
===Gra–Gri===
* Graft versus host disease
* Graham–Boyle–Troxell syndrome
* Grand–Kaine–Fulling syndrome
* Grant syndrome
* Granulocytopenia
* Granuloma annulare
* Granulomas, congenital cerebral
* Granulomatosis, lymphomatoid
* Granulomatous allergic angiitis
* Granulomatous hypophysitis
* Granulomatous rosacea
* Graphite pneumoconiosis
* Graves&#x27; disease
* Gray platelet syndrome
* Great vessels transposition
* Greenberg dysplasia
* Greig cephalopolysyndactyly syndrome GCPS
* Griscelli disease
* Grix–Blankenship–Peterson syndrome

===Gro–Gru===
* Groll–Hirschowitz syndrome
* Grosse syndrome
* Grover&#x27;s disease
* Growth deficiency brachydactyly unusual facies
* Growth delay, constitutional
* Growth hormone deficiency
* Growth mental deficiency syndrome of Myhre
* Growth retardation alopecia pseudoanodontia optic
* Growth retardation hydrocephaly lung hypoplasia
* Growth retardation mental retardation phalangeal hypoplasia
* Grubben–Decock–Borghgraef syndrome

==Gt–Gy==
* GTP cyclohydrolase deficiency
* Guanidinoacetate methyltransferase deficiency
* Guérin–Stern syndrome
* Guibaud–Vainsel syndrome
* Guillain–Barré syndrome
* Guizar–Vasquez–Luengas syndrome
* Guizar–Vasquez–Sanchez–Manzano syndrome
* Gunal–Seber–Basaran syndrome
* Gupta–Patton syndrome
* Gurrieri–Sammito–Bellussi syndrome
* Gusher syndrome
* Gymnophobia
* Gynecomastia
* Gyrate atrophy of the retina
* Gyrate atrophy</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q12136" start="18" end="25" title="disease" label="disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q278515" start="91" end="103" title="Galactorrhea" label="Galactorrhea"/>
<link wikidata="Q686131" start="106" end="118" title="Galactocoele" label="Galactocoele"/>
<link wikidata="Q5517825" start="121" end="145" title="Galactokinase deficiency" label="Galactokinase deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q5517828" start="148" end="179" title="Galactorrhea hyperprolactinemia" label="Galactorrhea hyperprolactinemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q580285" start="182" end="218" title="Galactosamine-6-sulfatase deficiency" label="Galactosamine-6-sulfatase deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q5517832" start="221" end="273" title="Galactose-1-phosphate uridylyltransferase deficiency" label="Galactose-1-phosphate uridylyltransferase deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q774483" start="276" end="288" title="Galactosemia" label="Galactosemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4357083" start="291" end="314" title="Galloway Mowat syndrome" label="Galloway Mowat syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="317" end="341" title="Gamborg–Nielsen syndrome" label="Gamborg–Nielsen syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q55781946" start="344" end="375" title="Game–Friedman–Paradice syndrome" label="Game–Friedman–Paradice syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="378" end="425" title="Gamma aminobutyric acid transaminase deficiency" label="Gamma aminobutyric acid transaminase deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q5201186" start="428" end="458" title="Gamma-cystathionase deficiency" label="Gamma-cystathionase deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q7423586" start="461" end="484" title="Gamma-sarcoglycanopathy" label="Gamma-sarcoglycanopathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3269843" start="487" end="512" title="Gamstorp episodic adynamy" label="Gamstorp episodic adynamy"/>
<link wikidata="Q460556" start="515" end="528" title="Ganglioglioma" label="Ganglioglioma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493513" start="531" end="545" title="Gangliosidosis" label="Gangliosidosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5513691" start="549" end="576" title="Gangliosidosis (Type2)(GM2)" label="Gangliosidosis (Type2)(GM2)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5513690" start="580" end="605" title="Gangliosidosis GM1 type 3" label="Gangliosidosis GM1 type 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q5513690" start="609" end="629" title="Gangliosidosis type1" label="Gangliosidosis type1"/>
<link wikidata="Q911160" start="632" end="647" title="Ganser syndrome" label="Ganser syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q5512866" start="650" end="663" title="GAPO syndrome" label="GAPO syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="666" end="681" title="Garchichiliosis" label="Garchichiliosis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="699" end="729" title="Garcia–Torres–Guarner syndrome" label="Garcia–Torres–Guarner syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="732" end="764" title="Gardner–Morrisson–Abbot syndrome" label="Gardner–Morrisson–Abbot syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="767" end="799" title="Gardner–Silengo–Wachtel syndrome" label="Gardner–Silengo–Wachtel syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q7124887" start="802" end="826" title="Gardner–Diamond syndrome" label="Gardner–Diamond syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1702335" start="829" end="852" title="Gardner&amp;#x27;s syndrome" label="Gardner&amp;#x27;s syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="855" end="876" title="Garret–Tripp syndrome" label="Garret–Tripp syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474190" start="879" end="897" title="Gas/bloat syndrome" label="Gas/bloat syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q239848" start="900" end="924" title="Gastric dumping syndrome" label="Gastric dumping syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2897350" start="927" end="943" title="Gastric lymphoma" label="Gastric lymphoma"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="946" end="984" title="Gastritis, familial giant hypertrophic" label="Gastritis, familial giant hypertrophic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5526827" start="987" end="1011" title="Gastrocutaneous syndrome" label="Gastrocutaneous syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q27555722" start="1014" end="1043" title="Gastroenteritis, eosinophilic" label="Gastroenteritis, eosinophilic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1981276" start="1046" end="1090" title="Gastro-enteropancreatic neuroendocrine tumor" label="Gastro-enteropancreatic neuroendocrine tumor"/>
<link wikidata="Q156103" start="1093" end="1108" title="Gastroenteritis" label="Gastroenteritis"/>
<link wikidata="Q223591" start="1111" end="1134" title="Gastroesophageal reflux" label="Gastroesophageal reflux"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1137" end="1175" title="Gastrointestinal autonomic nerve tumor" label="Gastrointestinal autonomic nerve tumor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5526839" start="1178" end="1203" title="Gastrointestinal neoplasm" label="Gastrointestinal neoplasm"/>
<link wikidata="Q861645" start="1206" end="1221" title="Gaucher disease" label="Gaucher disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q861645" start="1225" end="1247" title="Gaucher disease type 1" label="Gaucher disease type 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q861645" start="1251" end="1273" title="Gaucher disease type 2" label="Gaucher disease type 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q861645" start="1277" end="1299" title="Gaucher disease type 3" label="Gaucher disease type 3"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1303" end="1344" title="Gaucher ichthyosis restrictive dermopathy" label="Gaucher ichthyosis restrictive dermopathy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1348" end="1368" title="Gaucher-like disease" label="Gaucher-like disease"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1382" end="1411" title="Gay–Feinmesser–Cohen syndrome" label="Gay–Feinmesser–Cohen syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q39060033" start="1436" end="1466" title="Geen Sandford Davison syndrome" label="Geen Sandford Davison syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q574694" start="1469" end="1487" title="Gelatinous ascites" label="Gelatinous ascites"/>
<link wikidata="Q4676182" start="1490" end="1510" title="Geleophysic dwarfism" label="Geleophysic dwarfism"/>
<link wikidata="Q189561" start="1513" end="1529" title="Gelineau disease" label="Gelineau disease"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1532" end="1542" title="Geliphobia" label="Geliphobia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1545" end="1563" title="Gemignani syndrome" label="Gemignani syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q3961695" start="1566" end="1580" title="Gemss syndrome" label="Gemss syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049021" start="1598" end="1614" title="Gender dysphoria" label="Gender dysphoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2691713" start="1617" end="1641" title="Genée-Wiedemann syndrome" label="Genée-Wiedemann syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q845224" start="1644" end="1672" title="Generalized anxiety disorder" label="Generalized anxiety disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q17146964" start="1681" end="1728" title="Generalized malformations in neuronal migration" label="Generalized malformations in neuronal migration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515038" start="1731" end="1772" title="Generalized resistance to thyroid hormone" label="Generalized resistance to thyroid hormone"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532415" start="1775" end="1794" title="Generalized seizure" label="Generalized seizure"/>
<link wikidata="Q656199" start="1797" end="1825" title="Generalized torsion dystonia" label="Generalized torsion dystonia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1828" end="1842" title="Genes syndrome" label="Genes syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q200779" start="1845" end="1869" title="Genetic diseases, inborn" label="Genetic diseases, inborn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2895354" start="1872" end="1895" title="Genetic reflex epilepsy" label="Genetic reflex epilepsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q25324130" start="1898" end="1948" title="Genetic susceptibility to infections caused by BCG" label="Genetic susceptibility to infections caused by BCG"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1951" end="1981" title="Genital anomaly cardiomyopathy" label="Genital anomaly cardiomyopathy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1984" end="2013" title="Genital dwarfism, Turner type" label="Genital dwarfism, Turner type"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2016" end="2032" title="Genital dwarfism" label="Genital dwarfism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1080699" start="2035" end="2062" title="Genital retraction syndrome" label="Genital retraction syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1080699" start="2078" end="2082" title="koro (medicine)" label="koro"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2086" end="2115" title="Genito palatocardiac syndrome" label="Genito palatocardiac syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q55780787" start="2118" end="2150" title="Genu valgum, st. Helena familial" label="Genu valgum, st. Helena familial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550742" start="2153" end="2163" title="Genu varum" label="Genu varum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5533828" start="2166" end="2176" title="Genuphobia" label="Genuphobia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1981315" start="2179" end="2196" title="Geographic tongue" label="Geographic tongue"/>
<link wikidata="Q5445919" start="2199" end="2214" title="German syndrome" label="German syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q167050" start="2217" end="2238" title="Germinal cell aplasia" label="Germinal cell aplasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5552374" start="2241" end="2268" title="Gerodermia osteodysplastica" label="Gerodermia osteodysplastica"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2271" end="2300" title="Gershinibaruch–Leibo syndrome" label="Gershinibaruch–Leibo syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515119" start="2303" end="2321" title="Gerstmann syndrome" label="Gerstmann syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q126691" start="2335" end="2364" title="Gestational diabetes mellitus" label="Gestational diabetes mellitus"/>
<link wikidata="Q8280" start="2367" end="2389" title="Gestational pemphigoid" label="Gestational pemphigoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q3433884" start="2392" end="2425" title="Gestational trophoblastic disease" label="Gestational trophoblastic disease"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2436" end="2451" title="Ghosal syndrome" label="Ghosal syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2454" end="2482" title="Ghose–Sachdev–Kumar syndrome" label="Ghose–Sachdev–Kumar syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q475972" start="2493" end="2517" title="Gianotti-Crosti syndrome" label="Gianotti-Crosti syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q3338682" start="2520" end="2543" title="Giant axonal neuropathy" label="Giant axonal neuropathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q707816" start="2546" end="2566" title="Giant cell arteritis" label="Giant cell arteritis"/>
<link wikidata="Q17125239" start="2569" end="2591" title="Giant cell myocarditis" label="Giant cell myocarditis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5160447" start="2594" end="2615" title="Giant congenital nevi" label="Giant congenital nevi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2618" end="2646" title="Giant ganglionic hyperplasia" label="Giant ganglionic hyperplasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q975705" start="2649" end="2677" title="Giant hypertrophic gastritis" label="Giant hypertrophic gastritis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2680" end="2703" title="Giant mammary hamartoma" label="Giant mammary hamartoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q471521" start="2706" end="2736" title="Giant papillary conjunctivitis" label="Giant papillary conjunctivitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5160447" start="2739" end="2766" title="Giant pigmented hairy nevus" label="Giant pigmented hairy nevus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5558486" start="2769" end="2792" title="Giant platelet syndrome" label="Giant platelet syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q326071" start="2795" end="2805" title="Giardiasis" label="Giardiasis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2808" end="2830" title="Gibson&amp;#x27;s Syndrome" label="Gibson&amp;#x27;s Syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2833" end="2849" title="Giedion syndrome" label="Giedion syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2852" end="2890" title="Gigantism advanced bone age hoarse cry" label="Gigantism advanced bone age hoarse cry"/>
<link wikidata="Q281115" start="2893" end="2947" title="Gigantism partial, nevi, hemihypertrophy, macrocephaly" label="Gigantism partial, nevi, hemihypertrophy, macrocephaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q501829" start="2950" end="2959" title="Gigantism" label="Gigantism"/>
<link wikidata="Q752216" start="2962" end="2985" title="Gilbert&amp;#x27;s syndrome" label="Gilbert&amp;#x27;s syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q191779" start="2988" end="3025" title="Tourette syndrome" label="Gilles de la Tourette&amp;#x27;s syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q10282075" start="3028" end="3058" title="Gingival fibromatosis dominant" label="Gingival fibromatosis dominant"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3061" end="3101" title="Gingival fibromatosis facial dysmorphism" label="Gingival fibromatosis facial dysmorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q10282075" start="3104" end="3121" title="Gingival fibrosis" label="Gingival fibrosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q673083" start="3124" end="3134" title="Gingivitis" label="Gingivitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3629047" start="3137" end="3177" title="Gyrate atrophy of the choroid and retina" label="Gyrate atrophy of the choroid and retina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053120" start="3180" end="3197" title="Gitelman syndrome" label="Gitelman syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053120" start="3200" end="3217" title="Gittings syndrome" label="Gittings syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1529258" start="3242" end="3266" title="Glanzmann thrombasthenia" label="Glanzmann thrombasthenia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3269" end="3299" title="Glass–Chapman–Hockley syndrome" label="Glass–Chapman–Hockley syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q159701" start="3302" end="3310" title="Glaucoma" label="Glaucoma"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3314" end="3374" title="Glaucoma ecopia microspherophakia stiff joints short stature" label="Glaucoma ecopia microspherophakia stiff joints short stature"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3378" end="3407" title="Glaucoma iridogoniodysgenesia" label="Glaucoma iridogoniodysgenesia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3411" end="3431" title="Glaucoma sleep apnea" label="Glaucoma sleep apnea"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3435" end="3451" title="Glaucoma type 1C" label="Glaucoma type 1C"/>
<link wikidata="Q55785168" start="3455" end="3475" title="Glaucoma, congenital" label="Glaucoma, congenital"/>
<link wikidata="Q55785168" start="3479" end="3513" title="Glaucoma, hereditary adult type 1A" label="Glaucoma, hereditary adult type 1A"/>
<link wikidata="Q55785168" start="3517" end="3554" title="Glaucoma, hereditary juvenile type 1B" label="Glaucoma, hereditary juvenile type 1B"/>
<link wikidata="Q55785168" start="3558" end="3578" title="Glaucoma, hereditary" label="Glaucoma, hereditary"/>
<link wikidata="Q55785168" start="3582" end="3617" title="Glaucoma, primary infantile type 3A" label="Glaucoma, primary infantile type 3A"/>
<link wikidata="Q55785168" start="3621" end="3656" title="Glaucoma, primary infantile type 3B" label="Glaucoma, primary infantile type 3B"/>
<link wikidata="Q282142" start="3659" end="3671" title="Glioblastoma" label="Glioblastoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365309" start="3674" end="3680" title="Glioma" label="Glioma"/>
<link wikidata="Q609503" start="3683" end="3694" title="Gliosarcoma" label="Gliosarcoma"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3708" end="3739" title="Globel disaccharide intolerance" label="Globel disaccharide intolerance"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3742" end="3787" title="Glomerulonephritis sparse hair telangiectases" label="Glomerulonephritis sparse hair telangiectases"/>
<link wikidata="Q605006" start="3790" end="3808" title="Glomerulonephritis" label="Glomerulonephritis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5571239" start="3811" end="3829" title="Glomerulosclerosis" label="Glomerulosclerosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3335660" start="3832" end="3852" title="Gloomy face syndrome" label="Gloomy face syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q230047" start="3855" end="3866" title="Glossodynia" label="Glossodynia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3869" end="3920" title="Glossopalatine ankylosis micrognathia ear anomalies" label="Glossopalatine ankylosis micrognathia ear anomalies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136940" start="3923" end="3949" title="Glossopharyngeal neuralgia" label="Glossopharyngeal neuralgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2540262" start="3952" end="3964" title="Glossophobia" label="Glossophobia"/>
<link wikidata="Q770843" start="3978" end="3989" title="Glucagonoma" label="Glucagonoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q5572316" start="3992" end="4027" title="Glucocorticoid deficiency, familial" label="Glucocorticoid deficiency, familial"/>
<link wikidata="Q11798714" start="4030" end="4055" title="Glucocorticoid resistance" label="Glucocorticoid resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q25339349" start="4058" end="4095" title="Glucocorticoid sensitive hypertension" label="Glucocorticoid sensitive hypertension"/>
<link wikidata="Q848343" start="4098" end="4142" title="Glucose 6 phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency" label="Glucose 6 phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4145" end="4187" title="Glucose-6-phosphate translocase deficiency" label="Glucose-6-phosphate translocase deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q5572341" start="4190" end="4221" title="Glucose-galactose malabsorption" label="Glucose-galactose malabsorption"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4224" end="4261" title="Glucosephosphate isomerase deficiency" label="Glucosephosphate isomerase deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365789" start="4264" end="4301" title="Glucosidase acid-1,4-alpha deficiency" label="Glucosidase acid-1,4-alpha deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q5572613" start="4304" end="4320" title="Glut2 deficiency" label="Glut2 deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4323" end="4357" title="Glutamate decarboxylase deficiency" label="Glutamate decarboxylase deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q16252204" start="4360" end="4396" title="Glutamate-aspartate transport defect" label="Glutamate-aspartate transport defect"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547640" start="4399" end="4417" title="Glutaricaciduria I" label="Glutaricaciduria I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547640" start="4420" end="4439" title="Glutaricaciduria II" label="Glutaricaciduria II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140501" start="4442" end="4479" title="Glutaryl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency" label="Glutaryl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q102296856" start="4482" end="4515" title="Glutathione synthetase deficiency" label="Glutathione synthetase deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4529" end="4580" title="Glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency" label="Glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q3053945" start="4583" end="4610" title="Glycine synthase deficiency" label="Glycine synthase deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421738" start="4613" end="4637" title="Glycogen storage disease" label="Glycogen storage disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q630090" start="4641" end="4673" title="Glycogen storage disease type 1B" label="Glycogen storage disease type 1B"/>
<link wikidata="Q630090" start="4677" end="4709" title="Glycogen storage disease type 1C" label="Glycogen storage disease type 1C"/>
<link wikidata="Q630090" start="4713" end="4745" title="Glycogen storage disease type 1D" label="Glycogen storage disease type 1D"/>
<link wikidata="Q1947298" start="4749" end="4804" title="Glycogen storage disease type 6, due to phosphorylation" label="Glycogen storage disease type 6, due to phosphorylation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251847" start="4808" end="4839" title="Glycogen storage disease type 7" label="Glycogen storage disease type 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q1947298" start="4843" end="4874" title="Glycogen storage disease type 9" label="Glycogen storage disease type 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365789" start="4878" end="4910" title="Glycogen storage disease type II" label="Glycogen storage disease type II"/>
<link wikidata="Q787751" start="4914" end="4945" title="Glycogen storage disease type V" label="Glycogen storage disease type V"/>
<link wikidata="Q1947298" start="4949" end="4981" title="Glycogen storage disease type VI" label="Glycogen storage disease type VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251847" start="4985" end="5018" title="Glycogen storage disease type VII" label="Glycogen storage disease type VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q1947298" start="5022" end="5056" title="Glycogen storage disease type VIII" label="Glycogen storage disease type VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421738" start="5059" end="5071" title="Glycogenosis" label="Glycogenosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365789" start="5075" end="5095" title="Glycogenosis type II" label="Glycogenosis type II"/>
<link wikidata="Q494922" start="5099" end="5120" title="Glycogenosis type III" label="Glycogenosis type III"/>
<link wikidata="Q829150" start="5124" end="5144" title="Glycogenosis type IV" label="Glycogenosis type IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q787751" start="5148" end="5167" title="Glycogenosis type V" label="Glycogenosis type V"/>
<link wikidata="Q1947298" start="5171" end="5191" title="Glycogenosis type VI" label="Glycogenosis type VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251847" start="5195" end="5216" title="Glycogenosis type VII" label="Glycogenosis type VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q1947298" start="5220" end="5242" title="Glycogenosis type VIII" label="Glycogenosis type VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q5572606" start="5246" end="5266" title="Glycogenosis, type 0" label="Glycogenosis, type 0"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136213" start="5269" end="5279" title="Glycosuria" label="Glycosuria"/>
<link wikidata="Q917227" start="5290" end="5319" title="GM2 gangliosidosis, 0 variant" label="GM2 gangliosidosis, 0 variant"/>
<link wikidata="Q560337" start="5322" end="5359" title="GM2-gangliosidosis, B, B1, AB variant" label="GM2-gangliosidosis, B, B1, AB variant"/>
<link wikidata="Q5513797" start="5362" end="5374" title="GMS syndrome" label="GMS syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q165135" start="5399" end="5405" title="Goitre" label="Goitre"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5408" end="5430" title="Goldberg–Bull syndrome" label="Goldberg–Bull syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5433" end="5450" title="Goldberg syndrome" label="Goldberg syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5453" end="5478" title="Goldblatt–Wallis syndrome" label="Goldblatt–Wallis syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5481" end="5512" title="Goldblatt–Wallis–Zieff syndrome" label="Goldblatt–Wallis–Zieff syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5515" end="5541" title="Goldblatt–Viljoen syndrome" label="Goldblatt–Viljoen syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q769988" start="5544" end="5562" title="Goldenhar syndrome" label="Goldenhar syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5565" end="5594" title="Goldskag–Cooks–Hertz syndrome" label="Goldskag–Cooks–Hertz syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5597" end="5620" title="Goldstein–Hutt syndrome" label="Goldstein–Hutt syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5623" end="5645" title="Gollop–Coates syndrome" label="Gollop–Coates syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5648" end="5663" title="Gollop syndrome" label="Gollop syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q5463847" start="5666" end="5680" title="Goltz syndrome" label="Goltz syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5683" end="5697" title="Gombo syndrome" label="Gombo syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q25324175" start="5700" end="5734" title="Gomez and López-Hernández syndrome" label="Gomez and López-Hernández syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332427" start="5737" end="5755" title="Gonadal dysgenesis" label="Gonadal dysgenesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6883972" start="5759" end="5783" title="Gonadal dysgenesis mixed" label="Gonadal dysgenesis mixed"/>
<link wikidata="Q202849" start="5787" end="5817" title="Gonadal dysgenesis Turner type" label="Gonadal dysgenesis Turner type"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5821" end="5868" title="Gonadal dysgenesis XY type associated anomalies" label="Gonadal dysgenesis XY type associated anomalies"/>
<link wikidata="Q8042656" start="5872" end="5899" title="Gonadal dysgenesis, XX type" label="Gonadal dysgenesis, XX type"/>
<link wikidata="Q957751" start="5903" end="5937" title="Gonadal dysgenesis, XY female type" label="Gonadal dysgenesis, XY female type"/>
<link wikidata="Q5513797" start="5941" end="5989" title="Goniodysgenesis mental retardation short stature" label="Goniodysgenesis mental retardation short stature"/>
<link wikidata="Q131129" start="5992" end="6017" title="Gonococcal conjunctivitis" label="Gonococcal conjunctivitis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6020" end="6047" title="Gonzales Del Angel syndrome" label="Gonzales Del Angel syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6065" end="6086" title="Goodman camptodactyly" label="Goodman camptodactyly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345792" start="6089" end="6121" title="Goodpasture pneumorenal syndrome" label="Goodpasture pneumorenal syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345792" start="6124" end="6151" title="Goodpasture&amp;#x27;s syndrome" label="Goodpasture&amp;#x27;s syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q200745" start="6154" end="6196" title="Gordon hyperkaliemia-hypertension syndrome" label="Gordon hyperkaliemia-hypertension syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q708165" start="6199" end="6214" title="Gordon Syndrome" label="Gordon syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538277" start="6217" end="6232" title="Gorham syndrome" label="Gorham syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538277" start="6235" end="6256" title="Gorham&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Gorham&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6259" end="6279" title="Gorham–Stout disease" label="Gorham–Stout disease"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6282" end="6313" title="Gorlin–Bushkell–Jensen syndrome" label="Gorlin–Bushkell–Jensen syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6316" end="6345" title="Gorlin–Chaudhry–Moss syndrome" label="Gorlin–Chaudhry–Moss syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q4675775" start="6348" end="6371" title="Gottron&amp;#x27;s syndrome" label="Gottron&amp;#x27;s syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q5588184" start="6374" end="6396" title="Gougerot–Blum syndrome" label="Gougerot–Blum syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6399" end="6424" title="Gougerot–Sjogren syndrome" label="Gougerot–Sjogren syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q133087" start="6427" end="6431" title="Gout" label="Gout"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6434" end="6461" title="Gouty nephropathy, familial" label="Gouty nephropathy, familial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194520" start="6486" end="6511" title="Graft versus host disease" label="Graft versus host disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q55790297" start="6514" end="6543" title="Graham–Boyle–Troxell syndrome" label="Graham–Boyle–Troxell syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6546" end="6574" title="Grand–Kaine–Fulling syndrome" label="Grand–Kaine–Fulling syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6577" end="6591" title="Grant syndrome" label="Grant syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q223143" start="6594" end="6610" title="Granulocytopenia" label="Granulocytopenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q455085" start="6613" end="6631" title="Granuloma annulare" label="Granuloma annulare"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6634" end="6665" title="Granulomas, congenital cerebral" label="Granulomas, congenital cerebral"/>
<link wikidata="Q3775784" start="6668" end="6696" title="Granulomatosis, lymphomatoid" label="Granulomatosis, lymphomatoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q32811" start="6699" end="6730" title="Granulomatous allergic angiitis" label="Granulomatous allergic angiitis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6733" end="6759" title="Granulomatous hypophysitis" label="Granulomatous hypophysitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q831530" start="6762" end="6783" title="Granulomatous rosacea" label="Granulomatous rosacea"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6786" end="6809" title="Graphite pneumoconiosis" label="Graphite pneumoconiosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q16483" start="6812" end="6832" title="Graves&amp;#x27; disease" label="Graves&amp;#x27; disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q5598273" start="6835" end="6857" title="Gray platelet syndrome" label="Gray platelet syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758730" start="6860" end="6887" title="Great vessels transposition" label="Great vessels transposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q3335662" start="6890" end="6909" title="Greenberg dysplasia" label="Greenberg dysplasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3508649" start="6912" end="6953" title="Greig cephalopolysyndactyly syndrome GCPS" label="Greig cephalopolysyndactyly syndrome GCPS"/>
<link wikidata="Q934034" start="6956" end="6973" title="Griscelli disease" label="Griscelli disease"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6976" end="7010" title="Grix–Blankenship–Peterson syndrome" label="Grix–Blankenship–Peterson syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7028" end="7054" title="Groll–Hirschowitz syndrome" label="Groll–Hirschowitz syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7057" end="7072" title="Grosse syndrome" label="Grosse syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q3774229" start="7075" end="7096" title="Grover&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Grover&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7099" end="7145" title="Growth deficiency brachydactyly unusual facies" label="Growth deficiency brachydactyly unusual facies"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164324" start="7148" end="7176" title="Growth delay, constitutional" label="Growth delay, constitutional"/>
<link wikidata="Q369262" start="7179" end="7204" title="Growth hormone deficiency" label="Growth hormone deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q17042115" start="7207" end="7249" title="Growth mental deficiency syndrome of Myhre" label="Growth mental deficiency syndrome of Myhre"/>
<link wikidata="Q5512866" start="7252" end="7301" title="Growth retardation alopecia pseudoanodontia optic" label="Growth retardation alopecia pseudoanodontia optic"/>
<link wikidata="Q55781946" start="7304" end="7351" title="Growth retardation hydrocephaly lung hypoplasia" label="Growth retardation hydrocephaly lung hypoplasia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7354" end="7413" title="Growth retardation mental retardation phalangeal hypoplasia" label="Growth retardation mental retardation phalangeal hypoplasia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7416" end="7450" title="Grubben–Decock–Borghgraef syndrome" label="Grubben–Decock–Borghgraef syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q112628405" start="7464" end="7493" title="GTP cyclohydrolase deficiency" label="GTP cyclohydrolase deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q5613758" start="7496" end="7541" title="Guanidinoacetate methyltransferase deficiency" label="Guanidinoacetate methyltransferase deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7544" end="7565" title="Guérin–Stern syndrome" label="Guérin–Stern syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7568" end="7592" title="Guibaud–Vainsel syndrome" label="Guibaud–Vainsel syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q205214" start="7595" end="7618" title="Guillain–Barré syndrome" label="Guillain–Barré syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7621" end="7652" title="Guizar–Vasquez–Luengas syndrome" label="Guizar–Vasquez–Luengas syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q55786065" start="7655" end="7694" title="Guizar–Vasquez–Sanchez–Manzano syndrome" label="Guizar–Vasquez–Sanchez–Manzano syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7697" end="7725" title="Gunal–Seber–Basaran syndrome" label="Gunal–Seber–Basaran syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7728" end="7749" title="Gupta–Patton syndrome" label="Gupta–Patton syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7752" end="7786" title="Gurrieri–Sammito–Bellussi syndrome" label="Gurrieri–Sammito–Bellussi syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q9079046" start="7789" end="7804" title="Gusher syndrome" label="Gusher syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010522" start="7807" end="7818" title="Gymnophobia" label="Gymnophobia"/>
<link wikidata="Q339221" start="7821" end="7833" title="Gynecomastia" label="Gynecomastia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3629047" start="7836" end="7864" title="Gyrate atrophy of the retina" label="Gyrate atrophy of the retina"/>
<link wikidata="Q3629047" start="7867" end="7881" title="Gyrate atrophy" label="Gyrate atrophy"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="236342" wikidata="Q6616867" url="?curid=236342" title="List of diseases (H)">
<text>This is a list of diseases starting with the letter &quot;H&quot;.


==Ha==
===Hag–Ham===
* Hageman factor deficiency
* Hagemoser–Weinstein–Bresnick syndrome
* Hailey–Hailey disease
* Hair defect with photosensitivity and mental retardation
* Hairy cell leukemia
* Hairy ears, y-linked
* Hairy ears
* Hairy nose tip
* Hairy palms and soles
* Hairy tongue
* Hajdu–Cheney syndrome
* Halal–Setton–Wang syndrome
* Halal syndrome
* Hall–Riggs mental retardation syndrome
* Hallermann–Streiff syndrome
* Hallervorden–Spatz disease (renamed to Pantothenate kinase-associated neurodegeneration due to Hallervorden&#x27;s Nazi party associations)
* Hallucinogen persisting perception disorder
* Hallux valgus
* Hamanishi–Ueba–Tsuji syndrome
* Hamano–Tsukamoto syndrome
* Hamartoma sebaceus of Jadassohn

===Han–Hay===
* Hand and foot deformity flat facies
* Hand–foot–uterus syndrome
* Hand wringing Rett syndrome
* Hand, foot and mouth disease
* Hand–Schüller–Christian disease
* Hanhart syndrome
* Harding ataxia
* Harlequin type ichthyosis
* Harpaxophobia
* Harrod–Doman–Keele syndrome
* Hartnup disease
* Hartsfield–Bixler–Demyer syndrome
* Hashimoto struma
* Hashimoto–Pritzker syndrome
* Hashimoto&#x27;s thyroiditis
* Haspeslagh–Fryns–Muelenaere syndrome
* Hay–Wells syndrome recessive type
* Hay–Wells syndrome

==He==
===Hea–Hei===
* Headache, cluster
* Hearing disorder
* Hearing impairment
* Hearing loss
* Heart aneurysm
* Heart attack
* Heart block progressive, familial
* Heart block
* Heart defect round face congenital retarded development
* Heart defect tongue hamartoma polysyndactyly
* Heart defects limb shortening
* Heart hand syndrome Spanish type
* Heart hypertrophy, hereditary
* Heart situs anomaly
* Heart tumor of the adult
* Heart tumor of the child
* Heavy metal poisoning
* HEC syndrome
* Hecht–Scott syndrome
* Heckenlively syndrome
* Heide syndrome

===Hel===
* Heliophobia
* HELLP syndrome
* Helmerhorst–Heaton–Crossen syndrome
* Helminthiasis

===Hem===
* HEM dysplasia

====Hema–Hemi====
* Hemangioblastoma
* Hemangioendothelioma
* Hemangioma thrombocytopenia syndrome
* Hemangioma, capillary infantile
* Hemangioma
* Hemangiomatosis, familial pulmonary capillary
* Hemangiopericytoma
* Hematocolpos
* Hemeralopia, congenital essential
* Hemeralopia, familial
* Hemi 3 syndrome
* Hemifacial atrophy agenesis of the caudate nucleus
* Hemifacial atrophy progressive
* Hemifacial hyperplasia strabismus
* Hemifacial microsomia
* Hemihypertrophy in context of NF
* Hemihypertrophy intestinal web corneal opacity
* Hemimegalencephaly
* Hemiplegia
* Hemiplegic migraine, familial

====Hemo====
* Hemochromatosis
** Hemochromatosis type 1
** Hemochromatosis type 2
** Hemochromatosis type 3
** Hemochromatosis type 4
* Hemoglobin C disease
* Hemoglobin E disease
* Hemoglobin SC disease
* Hemoglobinopathy
* Hemoglobinuria
* Hemolytic anemia lethal genital anomalies
* Hemolytic-uremic syndrome
* Hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis
* Hemophagocytic reticulosis
* Hemophilia A
* Hemophilic arthropathy
* Hemophobia
* Hemorrhagic fever with renal syndrome
* Hemorrhoid
* Hemorrhagic proctocolitis
* Hemorrhagic thrombocythemia
* Hemorrhagiparous thrombocytic dystrophy
* Hemosiderosis
* Hemothorax

===Hen===
* Hennekam–Beemer syndrome
* Hennekam–Koss–de Geest syndrome
* Hennekam syndrome
* Hennekam–Van der Horst syndrome
* Henoch–Schönlein purpura

===Hep===
* Hepadnovirus D
* Heparane sulfamidase deficiency
* Heparin-induced thrombopenia
* Hepatic cystic hamartoma
* Hepatic ductular hypoplasia
* Hepatic encephalopathy
* Hepatic fibrosis renal cysts mental retardation
* Hepatic fibrosis
* Hepatic venoocclusive disease
* Hepatic veno-occlusive disease
* Hepatitis
* Hepatitis A
* Hepatitis B
* Hepatitis C
* Hepatitis D
* Hepatitis E
* Hepatoblastoma
* Hepatocellular carcinoma
* Hepatorenal syndrome
* Hepatorenal tyrosinemia

===Her===
* Herpes

====Here====

=====Hered=====

======Heredi======
Hereditary a – Hereditary m
* Hereditary amyloidosis
* Hereditary angioedema
* Hereditary ataxia
* Hereditary breast–ovarian cancer syndrome
* Hereditary carnitine deficiency myopathy
* Hereditary carnitine deficiency syndrome
* Hereditary carnitine deficiency
* Hereditary ceroid lipofuscinosis
* Hereditary coproporphyria
* Hereditary deafness
* Hereditary elliptocytosis
* Hereditary fibrinogen Aα-Chain amyloidosis
* Hereditary fructose intolerance
* Hereditary hearing disorder
* Hereditary hearing loss
* Hereditary hemochromatosis
* Hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia
* Hereditary hyperuricemia
* Hereditary macrothrombocytopenia
* Hereditary methemoglobinemia, recessive
* Hereditary myopathy with intranuclear filamentous
Hereditary n – Hereditary t
* Hereditary nodular heterotopia
* Hereditary non-spherocytic hemolytic anemia
* Hereditary pancreatitis
* Hereditary paroxysmal cerebral ataxia
* Hereditary peripheral nervous disorder
* Hereditary primary Fanconi disease
* Hereditary resistance to anti-vitamin K
* Hereditary sensory and autonomic neuropathy 3
* Hereditary sensory and autonomic neuropathy 4
* Hereditary sensory neuropathy type I
* Hereditary sensory neuropathy type II
* Hereditary spastic paraplegia
* Hereditary spherocytic hemolytic anemia
* Hereditary spherocytosis
* Hereditary type 1 neuropathy
* Hereditary type 2 neuropathy

====Herm–Hers====
* Hermansky–Pudlak syndrome
* Hermaphroditism
* Hernandez–Aguire–Negrete syndrome
* Herpangina
* Herpes encephalitis
* Herpes simplex disease
* Herpes simplex encephalitis
* Herpes viridae disease
* Herpes virus antenatal infection
* Herpes zoster oticus
* Herpes zoster
* Herpesvirus simiae B virus
* Herpetic embryopathy
* Herpetic keratitis
* Herpetophobia
* Herrmann–Opitz arthrogryposis syndrome
* Herrmann–Opitz craniosynostosis
* Hers&#x27; disease
* Hersh–Podruch–Weisskopk syndrome

===Het–Hex===
* Heterophobia
* Heterotaxia (generic term)
* Heterotaxia autosomal dominant type
* Heterotaxy with polysplenia or asplenia
* Heterotaxy, visceral, X-linked
* Hexosaminidases A and B deficiency

==Hh==
* HHH syndrome

==Hi==
===Hib–Hip===
* Hibernian fever, familial
* Hiccups
* Hidradenitis suppurativa familial
* Hidradenitis suppurativa
* Hidrotic ectodermal dysplasia type Christianson Fouris
* High scapula
* High-molecular-weight kininogen deficiency, congenital
* Hillig syndrome
* Hing–Torack–Dowston syndrome
* Hinson–Pepys disease
* Hip dislocation
* Hip dysplasia Beukes type
* Hip dysplasia (canine)
* Hip dysplasia (human)
* Hip luxation
* Hip subluxation
* Hipo syndrome

===Hir–Hiv===
* Hirschsprung disease
** Hirschsprung disease ganglioneuroblastoma
** Hirschsprung disease polydactyly heart disease
** Hirschsprung disease type 2
** Hirschsprung disease type 3
** Hirschsprung disease type d brachydactyly
** Hirschsprung microcephaly cleft palate
** Hirschsprung nail hypoplasia dysmorphism
* Hirsutism congenital gingival hyperplasia
* Hirsutism skeletal dysplasia mental retardation
* His bundle tachycardia
* Histadelia
* Histapenia
* Histidinemia
* Histidinuria renal tubular defect syndrome
* Histiocytosis X
* Histiocytosis, Non-Langerhans-Cell
* Histoplasmosis
* Histrionic personality disorder
* Hittner–Hirsch–Kreh syndrome
* HIV

==Hm==
* Hm syndrome
* HMG-CoA lyase deficiency
* HMG CoA synthetase deficiency

==Ho==
===Hod–Hol===
* Hodgkin lymphoma
* Hodgkin&#x27;s disease
* Hoepffner–Dreyer–Reimers syndrome
* Hollow visceral myopathy
* Holmes–Benacerraf syndrome
* Holmes–Borden syndrome
* Holmes–Collins syndrome
* Holmes–Gang syndrome
* Holoacardius amorphus
* Holocarboxylase synthetase deficiency
* Holoprosencephaly caudal dysgenesis
* Holoprosencephaly deletion 2p
* Holoprosencephaly ectrodactyly cleft lip palate
* Holoprosencephaly radial heart renal anomalies
* Holoprosencephaly
* Holt–Oram syndrome
* Holzgreve–Wagner–Rehder syndrome

===Hom–Hoy===
* Homocarnosinase deficiency
* Homocarnosinosis
* Homocystinuria due to cystathionine beta-synthase
* Homocystinuria due to defect in methylation (cbl g)
* Homocystinuria due to defect in methylation cbl e
* Homocystinuria due to defect in methylation, MTHFR deficiency
* Homocystinuria
* Homologous wasting disease
* Homozygous hypobetalipoproteinemia
* Hoon–Hall syndrome
* Hordnes–Engebretsen–Knudtson syndrome
* Horn–Kolb syndrome
* Horner&#x27;s syndrome
* Hornova–Dlurosova syndrome
* Horseshoe kidney
* Horton disease, juvenile
* Horton disease
* Hot tub folliculitis
* Houlston–Ironton–Temple syndrome
* Howard–Young syndrome
* Howel–Evans syndrome
* Hoyeraal–Hreidarsson syndrome
* Hoyeraal syndrome

==Hs==
* HSV-2 infection

==Hu==
* Human ewingii ehrlichiosis
* Human granulocytic ehrlichiosis
* Human monocytic ehrlichiosis
* Human parvovirus B19 infection
* Humero spinal dysostosis congenital heart disease
* Humeroradial synostosis
* Humeroradioulnar synostosis
* Humerus trochlea aplasia of
* Hunter–Carpenter–Mcdonald syndrome
* Hunter–Jurenka–Thompson syndrome
* Hunter–Macpherson syndrome
* Hunter–Mcalpine syndrome
* Hunter–Mcdonald syndrome
* Hunter–Rudd–Hoffmann syndrome
* Hunter syndrome
* Huntington&#x27;s disease
* Huriez scleroatrophic syndrome
* Hurler syndrome
* Hurst–Hallam–Hockey syndrome
* Hutchinson–Gilford–Progeria syndrome
* Hutchinson incisors
* Hutteroth–Spranger syndrome

==Hy==
===Hya===
* Hyalinosis systemic short stature
* Hyaloideoretinal degeneration of wagner

===Hyd===

====Hyda–Hyde====
* Hydantoin antenatal infection
* Hydatidiform mole
* Hydatidosis
* Hyde–Forster–Mccarthy–Berry syndrome

====Hydr====
* Hydranencephaly
* Hydrocephalus - Arnold Chiari - allied disorders
* Hydrocephalus autosomal recessive
* Hydrocephalus costovertebral dysplasia Sprengel anomaly
* Hydrocephalus craniosynostosis bifid nose
* Hydrocephalus endocardial fibroelastosis cataract
* Hydrocephalus growth retardation skeletal anomalies
* Hydrocephalus obesity hypogonadism
* Hydrocephalus skeletal anomalies
* Hydrocephalus
* Hydrocephaly corpus callosum agenesis diaphragmatic hernia
* Hydrocephaly low insertion umbilicus
* Hydrocephaly tall stature joint laxity
* Hydrolethalus syndrome
* Hydronephrosis
* Hydronephrosis peculiar facial expression
* Hydrophobia
* Hydrops ectrodactyly syndactyly
* Hydrops fetalis anemia immune disorder absent thumb
* Hydrops fetalis
* Hydroxycarboxylic aciduria
* Hydroxymethylglutaric aciduria

===Hyg-Hym===
* Hygroma cervical
* Hymenolepiasis

===Hyp===

====Hyper====

* Hyper IgE
* Hyper IgM syndrome

=====Hypera–Hyperb=====
* Hyperadrenalism
* Hyperaldosteronism familial type 2
* Hyperaldosteronism, familial type 1
* Hyperaldosteronism
* Hyperammonemia
* Hyperandrogenism
* Hyperbilirubinemia transient familial neonatal
* Hyperbilirubinemia type 1
* Hyperbilirubinemia type 2
* Hyperbilirubinemia

=====Hyperc–Hyperg=====
* Hypercalcemia, familial benign type 1
* Hypercalcemia, familial benign type 2
* Hypercalcemia, familial benign type 3
* Hypercalcemia, familial benign
* Hypercalcemia
* Hypercalcinuria idiopathic
* Hypercalcinuria macular coloboma
* Hypercalcinuria
* Hypercementosis
* Hypercholesterolemia due to arg3500 mutation of Apo B-100
* Hypercholesterolemia due to LDL receptor deficiency
* Hypercholesterolemia
* Hyperchylomicronemia
* Hyperekplexia
* Hypereosinophilic syndrome
* Hyperferritinemia, hereditary, with congenital cataracts
* Hypergeusia
* Hyperglycemia
* Hyperglycerolemia
* Hyperglycinemia, isolated nonketotic type 1
* Hyperglycinemia, isolated nonketotic type 2
* Hyperglycinemia, isolated nonketotic
* Hyperglycinemia, ketotic
* Hyperglycinemia, non-ketotic
* Hypergonadotropic ovarian failure, familial or sporadic

=====Hyperh–Hyperk=====
* Hyperhidrosis
* Hyperhomocysteinemia
* Hyper-IgD syndrome
* Hyperimidodipeptiduria
* Hyperimmunoglobinemia D with recurrent fever
* Hyperimmunoglobulin E - recurrent infection syndrome
* Hyperimmunoglobulinemia D with periodic fever
* Hyperimmunoglobulinemia E
* Hyperinsulinism due to focal adenomatous hyperplasia
* Hyperinsulinism due to glucokinase deficiency
* Hyperinsulinism due to glutamodehydrogenase deficiency
* Hyperinsulinism in children, congenital
* Hyperinsulinism, diffuse
* Hyperinsulinism, focal
* Hyperkalemia
* Hyperkalemic periodic paralysis
* Hyperkeratosis lenticularis perstans of Flegel
* Hyperkeratosis lenticularis perstans
* Hyperkeratosis palmoplantar localized acanthokeratolytic
* Hyperkeratosis palmoplantar localized epidermolytic
* Hyperkeratosis palmoplantar with palmar crease hyperkeratosis

=====Hyperl–Hypero=====
* Hyperlipoproteinemia type I
* Hyperlipoproteinemia type II
* Hyperlipoproteinemia type III
* Hyperlipoproteinemia type IV
* Hyperlipoproteinemia type V
* Hyperlipoproteinemia
* Hyperlysinemia
* Hyperopia
* Hyperornithinemia
* Hyperornithinemia, hyperammonemia, homocitrullinuria syndrome
* Hyperostosid corticalis deformans juvenilis
* Hyperostosis cortical infantile
* Hyperostosis corticalis generalisata
* Hyperostosis frontalis interna
* Hyperoxaluria type 1
* Hyperoxaluria type 2
* Hyperoxaluria

=====Hyperp–Hypers=====
* Hyperparathyroidism
* Hyperparathyroidism, familial, primary
* Hyperparathyroidism, neonatal severe primary
* Hyperphalangism dysmorphy bronchomalacia
* Hyperphenylalaninemia
* Hyperphenylalaninemia due to pterin-4-alpha-carbin
* Hyperphenylalaninemia due to dihydropteridine reductase deficiency
* Hyperphenylalaninemia due to 6-pyruvoyltetrahydrop
* Hyperphenylalaninemia due to dehydratase deficiency
* Hyperphenylalaninemia due to GTP cyclohydrolase deficiency
* Hyperphenylalaninemic embryopathy
* Hyperpipecolatemia
* Hyperprolactinemia
* Hyperprolinemia type II
* Hyperprolinemia
* Hyperreflexia
* Hyper-reninism
* Hypersensitivity
:* Hypersensitivity type I
:* Hypersensitivity type II
:* Hypersensitivity type III
:* Hypersensitivity type IV
* Hypersomnolence

=====Hypert–Hyperv=====
* Hypertelorism and tetralogy of Fallot
* Hypertelorism hypospadias syndrome
* Hypertension
* Hypertensive hyperkalemia, familial
* Hypertensive hypokalemia familial
* Hypertensive retinopathy
* Hyperthermia induced defects
* Hyperthermia
* Hyperthyroidism
* Hyperthyroidism due to mutations in TSH receptor
* Hypertrichosis atrophic skin ectropion macrostomia
* Hypertrichosis brachydactyly obesity and mental retardation
* Hypertrichosis congenital generalized X linked
* Hypertrichosis lanuginosa congenita
* Hypertrichosis lanuginosa, acquired
* Hypertrichosis retinopathy dysmorphism
* Hypertrichosis, anterior cervical
* Hypertrichotic osteochondrodysplasia
* Hypertriglycidemia
* Hypertrophic branchial myopathy
* Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
* Hypertrophic hemangiectasia
* Hypertrophic myocardiopathy
* Hypertrophic osteoarthropathy, primary or idiopathic
* Hypertropia
* Hypertropic neuropathy of Dejerine-Sottas
* Hypertryptophanemia
* Hypervitaminosis A
* Hypervitaminosis D
* Hypervitaminosis E

====Hypo====
=====Hypoa–Hypof=====
* Hypoactive sexual desire disorder
* Hypoadrenalism
* Hypoadrenocorticism hypoparathyroidism moniliasis
* Hypoaldosteronism
* Hypo-alphalipoproteinemia primary
* Hypobetalipoproteinaemia ataxia hearing loss
* Hypobetalipoprotéinemia, familial
* Hypocalcemia, autosomal dominant
* Hypocalcemia
* Hypocalciuric hypercalcemia, familial
* Hypochondriasis
* Hypochondrogenesis
* Hypochondroplasia
* Hypocomplementemic urticarial vasculitis
* Hypodermyasis
* Hypodontia dysplasia of nails
* Hypodontia of incisors and premolars
* Hypodysfibrinogenemia
* Hypofibrinogenemia, familial

=====Hypog–Hypol=====
* Hypoglycemia with deficiency of glycogen synthetase in the liver
* Hypoglycemia
* Hypogonadism cardiomyopathy
* Hypogonadism hypogonadotropic due to mutations in GR hormone
* Hypogonadism male mental retardation skeletal anomaly
* Hypogonadism mitral valve prolapse mental retardation
* Hypogonadism primary partial alopecia
* Hypogonadism retinitis pigmentosa
* Hypogonadism, isolated, hypogonadotropic
* Hypogonadism
* Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism syndactyly
* Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism without anosmia, X linked
* Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism-anosmia, X linked
* Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism-anosmia
* Hypohidrotic Ectodermal Dysplasia
* Hypokalemia
* Hypokalemic alkalosis with hypercalcinuria
* Hypokalemic periodic paralysis
* Hypokalemic periodic paralysis type 1
* Hypokalemic sensory overstimulation
* Hypoketonemic hypoglycemia
* Hypolipoproteinemia

=====Hypom=====
* Hypomagnesemia primary
* Hypomandibular faciocranial dysostosis
* Hypomelanotic disorder
* Hypomelia Müllerian duct anomalies
* Hypomentia

=====Hypop=====
* Hypoparathyroidism familial isolated
* Hypoparathyroidism nerve deafness nephrosis
* Hypoparathyroidism short stature mental retardation
* Hypoparathyroidism short stature
* Hypoparathyroidism X linked
* Hypoparathyroidism
* Hypophosphatasia, infantile
* Hypophosphatasia
* Hypophosphatemic rickets
* Hypopigmentation oculocerebral syndrome Cross type
* Hypopituitarism micropenis cleft lip palate
* Hypopituitarism postaxial polydactyly
* Hypopituitarism
* Hypopituitary dwarfism
* Hypoplasia hepatic ductular
* Hypoplasia of the tibia with polydactyly
* Hypoplastic left heart syndrome
* Hypoplastic right heart microcephaly
* Hypoplastic thumb Müllerian aplasia
* Hypoplastic thumbs hydranencephaly
* Hypoproconvertinemia
* Hypoprothrombinemia

=====Hypor–Hypox=====
* Hyporeninemic hypoaldosteronism
* Hyposmia nasal hypoplasia hypogonadism
* Hypospadias familial
* Hypospadias mental retardation Goldblatt type
* Hyposplenism
* Hypotelorism cleft palate hypospadias
* Hypothalamic dysfunction
* Hypothalamic hamartoblastoma syndrome
* Hypothalamic hamartomas
* Hypertonic gingivitus
* Hypothermia
* Hypothyroidism due to iodide transport defect
* Hypothyroidism postaxial polydactyly mental retardation
* Hypothyroidism
* Hypotonic sclerotic muscular dystrophy
* Hypotrichosis mental retardation Lopes type
* Hypotrichosis
* Hypotropia
* Hypoxanthine guanine phosphoribosyltransferase deficiency
* Hypoxia</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q12136" start="18" end="25" title="disease" label="disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q339499" start="92" end="117" title="Hageman factor deficiency" label="Hageman factor deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q5638589" start="120" end="157" title="Hagemoser–Weinstein–Bresnick syndrome" label="Hagemoser–Weinstein–Bresnick syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q863861" start="160" end="181" title="Hailey–Hailey disease" label="Hailey–Hailey disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q55781925" start="184" end="240" title="Hair defect with photosensitivity and mental retardation" label="Hair defect with photosensitivity and mental retardation"/>
<link wikidata="Q201299" start="243" end="262" title="Hairy cell leukemia" label="Hairy cell leukemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q9003892" start="265" end="285" title="Hairy ears, y-linked" label="Hairy ears, y-linked"/>
<link wikidata="Q9003892" start="288" end="298" title="Hairy ears" label="Hairy ears"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="301" end="315" title="Hairy nose tip" label="Hairy nose tip"/>
<link wikidata="Q5639639" start="318" end="339" title="Hairy palms and soles" label="Hairy palms and soles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084600" start="342" end="354" title="Black hairy tongue" label="Hairy tongue"/>
<link wikidata="Q632228" start="357" end="378" title="Hajdu–Cheney syndrome" label="Hajdu–Cheney syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="381" end="407" title="Halal–Setton–Wang syndrome" label="Halal–Setton–Wang syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q5641058" start="410" end="424" title="Halal syndrome" label="Halal syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="427" end="465" title="Hall–Riggs mental retardation syndrome" label="Hall–Riggs mental retardation syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1459851" start="468" end="495" title="Hallermann–Streiff syndrome" label="Hallermann–Streiff syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436162" start="537" end="585" title="Pantothenate kinase-associated neurodegeneration" label="Pantothenate kinase-associated neurodegeneration"/>
<link wikidata="Q7320" start="613" end="623" title="Nazi party" label="Nazi party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001920" start="640" end="683" title="Hallucinogen persisting perception disorder" label="Hallucinogen persisting perception disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q852574" start="686" end="699" title="Hallux valgus" label="Hallux valgus"/>
<link wikidata="Q55781661" start="702" end="731" title="Hamanishi–Ueba–Tsuji syndrome" label="Hamanishi–Ueba–Tsuji syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="734" end="759" title="Hamano–Tsukamoto syndrome" label="Hamano–Tsukamoto syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1574843" start="762" end="793" title="Hamartoma sebaceus of Jadassohn" label="Hamartoma sebaceus of Jadassohn"/>
<link wikidata="Q42793110" start="811" end="846" title="Hand and foot deformity flat facies" label="Hand and foot deformity flat facies"/>
<link wikidata="Q18027147" start="849" end="874" title="Hand–foot–uterus syndrome" label="Hand–foot–uterus syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q917357" start="877" end="904" title="Hand wringing Rett syndrome" label="Hand wringing Rett syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q652744" start="907" end="935" title="Hand, foot and mouth disease" label="Hand, foot and mouth disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q13026837" start="938" end="969" title="Hand–Schüller–Christian disease" label="Hand–Schüller–Christian disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q9390457" start="972" end="988" title="Hanhart syndrome" label="Hanhart syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q5656137" start="991" end="1005" title="Harding ataxia" label="Harding ataxia"/>
<link wikidata="Q266421" start="1008" end="1033" title="Harlequin type ichthyosis" label="Harlequin type ichthyosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q327658" start="1036" end="1049" title="Harpaxophobia" label="Harpaxophobia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1052" end="1079" title="Harrod–Doman–Keele syndrome" label="Harrod–Doman–Keele syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q200985" start="1082" end="1097" title="Hartnup disease" label="Hartnup disease"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1100" end="1133" title="Hartsfield–Bixler–Demyer syndrome" label="Hartsfield–Bixler–Demyer syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q11094" start="1136" end="1152" title="Hashimoto struma" label="Hashimoto struma"/>
<link wikidata="Q5160450" start="1155" end="1182" title="Hashimoto–Pritzker syndrome" label="Hashimoto–Pritzker syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q11094" start="1185" end="1213" title="Hashimoto&amp;#x27;s thyroiditis" label="Hashimoto&amp;#x27;s thyroiditis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1216" end="1252" title="Haspeslagh–Fryns–Muelenaere syndrome" label="Haspeslagh–Fryns–Muelenaere syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1255" end="1288" title="Hay–Wells syndrome recessive type" label="Hay–Wells syndrome recessive type"/>
<link wikidata="Q940210" start="1291" end="1309" title="Hay–Wells syndrome" label="Hay–Wells syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q166907" start="1334" end="1351" title="Headache, cluster" label="Headache, cluster"/>
<link wikidata="Q16035842" start="1354" end="1370" title="Hearing disorder" label="Hearing disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q16035842" start="1373" end="1391" title="Hearing impairment" label="Hearing impairment"/>
<link wikidata="Q16035842" start="1394" end="1406" title="Hearing loss" label="Hearing loss"/>
<link wikidata="Q7920313" start="1409" end="1423" title="Heart aneurysm" label="Heart aneurysm"/>
<link wikidata="Q12152" start="1426" end="1438" title="Heart attack" label="Heart attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q110785267" start="1441" end="1474" title="Heart block progressive, familial" label="Heart block progressive, familial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361515" start="1477" end="1488" title="Heart block" label="Heart block"/>
<link wikidata="Q19709948" start="1491" end="1546" title="Heart defect round face congenital retarded development" label="Heart defect round face congenital retarded development"/>
<link wikidata="Q55781762" start="1549" end="1593" title="Heart defect tongue hamartoma polysyndactyly" label="Heart defect tongue hamartoma polysyndactyly"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1596" end="1625" title="Heart defects limb shortening" label="Heart defects limb shortening"/>
<link wikidata="Q55780854" start="1628" end="1660" title="Heart hand syndrome Spanish type" label="Heart hand syndrome Spanish type"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364270" start="1663" end="1692" title="Heart hypertrophy, hereditary" label="Heart hypertrophy, hereditary"/>
<link wikidata="Q579665" start="1695" end="1714" title="Heart situs anomaly" label="Heart situs anomaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q17142406" start="1717" end="1741" title="Heart tumor of the adult" label="Heart tumor of the adult"/>
<link wikidata="Q17142406" start="1744" end="1768" title="Heart tumor of the child" label="Heart tumor of the child"/>
<link wikidata="Q19904193" start="1771" end="1792" title="Heavy metal poisoning" label="Heavy metal poisoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q5629424" start="1795" end="1807" title="HEC syndrome" label="HEC syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q17254905" start="1810" end="1830" title="Hecht–Scott syndrome" label="Hecht–Scott syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q7633601" start="1833" end="1854" title="Heckenlively syndrome" label="Heckenlively syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1857" end="1871" title="Heide syndrome" label="Heide syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q3499749" start="1885" end="1896" title="Heliophobia" label="Heliophobia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1563513" start="1899" end="1913" title="HELLP syndrome" label="HELLP syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1916" end="1951" title="Helmerhorst–Heaton–Crossen syndrome" label="Helmerhorst–Heaton–Crossen syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q578994" start="1954" end="1967" title="Helminthiasis" label="Helminthiasis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1981" end="1994" title="HEM dysplasia" label="HEM dysplasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q460937" start="2016" end="2032" title="Hemangioblastoma" label="Hemangioblastoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q5710984" start="2035" end="2055" title="Hemangioendothelioma" label="Hemangioendothelioma"/>
<link wikidata="Q764185" start="2058" end="2094" title="Hemangioma thrombocytopenia syndrome" label="Hemangioma thrombocytopenia syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q52771370" start="2097" end="2128" title="Hemangioma, capillary infantile" label="Hemangioma, capillary infantile"/>
<link wikidata="Q861028" start="2131" end="2141" title="Hemangioma" label="Hemangioma"/>
<link wikidata="Q7259524" start="2144" end="2189" title="Hemangiomatosis, familial pulmonary capillary" label="Hemangiomatosis, familial pulmonary capillary"/>
<link wikidata="Q3144913" start="2192" end="2210" title="Hemangiopericytoma" label="Hemangiopericytoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q5711155" start="2213" end="2225" title="Hematocolpos" label="Hematocolpos"/>
<link wikidata="Q7757581" start="2228" end="2261" title="Hemeralopia, congenital essential" label="Hemeralopia, congenital essential"/>
<link wikidata="Q7757581" start="2264" end="2285" title="Hemeralopia, familial" label="Hemeralopia, familial"/>
<link wikidata="Q2880638" start="2288" end="2303" title="Hemi 3 syndrome" label="Hemi 3 syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2306" end="2356" title="Hemifacial atrophy agenesis of the caudate nucleus" label="Hemifacial atrophy agenesis of the caudate nucleus"/>
<link wikidata="Q250365" start="2359" end="2389" title="Hemifacial atrophy progressive" label="Hemifacial atrophy progressive"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2392" end="2425" title="Hemifacial hyperplasia strabismus" label="Hemifacial hyperplasia strabismus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5711576" start="2428" end="2449" title="Hemifacial microsomia" label="Hemifacial microsomia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2880638" start="2452" end="2484" title="Hemihypertrophy in context of NF" label="Hemihypertrophy in context of NF"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2487" end="2533" title="Hemihypertrophy intestinal web corneal opacity" label="Hemihypertrophy intestinal web corneal opacity"/>
<link wikidata="Q40103033" start="2536" end="2554" title="Hemimegalencephaly" label="Hemimegalencephaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2291130" start="2557" end="2567" title="Hemiplegia" label="Hemiplegia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3312899" start="2570" end="2599" title="Hemiplegic migraine, familial" label="Hemiplegic migraine, familial"/>
<link wikidata="Q2025687" start="2616" end="2631" title="Hemochromatosis" label="Hemochromatosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3144934" start="2635" end="2657" title="Hemochromatosis type 1" label="Hemochromatosis type 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q6318953" start="2661" end="2683" title="Juvenile hemochromatosis" label="Hemochromatosis type 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q3144936" start="2687" end="2709" title="Haemochromatosis type 3" label="Hemochromatosis type 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q28448698" start="2713" end="2735" title="Hemochromatosis type 4" label="Hemochromatosis type 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q409030" start="2738" end="2758" title="Hemoglobin C disease" label="Hemoglobin C disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q17022356" start="2761" end="2781" title="Hemoglobin E disease" label="Hemoglobin E disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q409030" start="2784" end="2805" title="Hemoglobin SC disease" label="Hemoglobin SC disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642147" start="2808" end="2824" title="Hemoglobinopathy" label="Hemoglobinopathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553850" start="2827" end="2841" title="Hemoglobinuria" label="Hemoglobinuria"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2844" end="2885" title="Hemolytic anemia lethal genital anomalies" label="Hemolytic anemia lethal genital anomalies"/>
<link wikidata="Q162266" start="2888" end="2913" title="Hemolytic-uremic syndrome" label="Hemolytic-uremic syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642170" start="2916" end="2950" title="Hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis" label="Hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642170" start="2953" end="2979" title="Hemophagocytic reticulosis" label="Hemophagocytic reticulosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092064" start="2982" end="2994" title="Hemophilia A" label="Hemophilia A"/>
<link wikidata="Q134003" start="2997" end="3019" title="Hemophilic arthropathy" label="Hemophilic arthropathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q886731" start="3022" end="3032" title="Hemophobia" label="Hemophobia"/>
<link wikidata="Q9002005" start="3035" end="3072" title="Hemorrhagic fever with renal syndrome" label="Hemorrhagic fever with renal syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q41478" start="3075" end="3085" title="Hemorrhoid" label="Hemorrhoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2453464" start="3088" end="3113" title="Hemorrhagic proctocolitis" label="Hemorrhagic proctocolitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368780" start="3116" end="3143" title="Hemorrhagic thrombocythemia" label="Hemorrhagic thrombocythemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q822228" start="3146" end="3185" title="Hemorrhagiparous thrombocytic dystrophy" label="Hemorrhagiparous thrombocytic dystrophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2089854" start="3188" end="3201" title="Hemosiderosis" label="Hemosiderosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q369073" start="3204" end="3214" title="Hemothorax" label="Hemothorax"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3228" end="3252" title="Hennekam–Beemer syndrome" label="Hennekam–Beemer syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3255" end="3286" title="Hennekam–Koss–de Geest syndrome" label="Hennekam–Koss–de Geest syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q5714797" start="3289" end="3306" title="Hennekam syndrome" label="Hennekam syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3309" end="3340" title="Hennekam–Van der Horst syndrome" label="Hennekam–Van der Horst syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035319" start="3343" end="3367" title="Henoch–Schönlein purpura" label="Henoch–Schönlein purpura"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356878" start="3381" end="3395" title="Hepadnovirus D" label="Hepadnovirus D"/>
<link wikidata="Q2200359" start="3398" end="3429" title="Heparane sulfamidase deficiency" label="Heparane sulfamidase deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1598365" start="3432" end="3460" title="Heparin-induced thrombopenia" label="Heparin-induced thrombopenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502047" start="3463" end="3487" title="Hepatic cystic hamartoma" label="Hepatic cystic hamartoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544408" start="3490" end="3517" title="Hepatic ductular hypoplasia" label="Hepatic ductular hypoplasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q642548" start="3520" end="3542" title="Hepatic encephalopathy" label="Hepatic encephalopathy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3545" end="3592" title="Hepatic fibrosis renal cysts mental retardation" label="Hepatic fibrosis renal cysts mental retardation"/>
<link wikidata="Q147778" start="3595" end="3611" title="Hepatic fibrosis" label="Hepatic fibrosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5731687" start="3614" end="3643" title="Hepatic venoocclusive disease" label="Hepatic venoocclusive disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q5731687" start="3646" end="3676" title="Hepatic veno-occlusive disease" label="Hepatic veno-occlusive disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q131742" start="3679" end="3688" title="Hepatitis" label="Hepatitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q157661" start="3691" end="3702" title="Hepatitis A" label="Hepatitis A"/>
<link wikidata="Q6853" start="3705" end="3716" title="Hepatitis B" label="Hepatitis B"/>
<link wikidata="Q154869" start="3719" end="3730" title="Hepatitis C" label="Hepatitis C"/>
<link wikidata="Q327281" start="3733" end="3744" title="Hepatitis D" label="Hepatitis D"/>
<link wikidata="Q326643" start="3747" end="3758" title="Hepatitis E" label="Hepatitis E"/>
<link wikidata="Q1607658" start="3761" end="3775" title="Hepatoblastoma" label="Hepatoblastoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148337" start="3778" end="3802" title="Hepatocellular carcinoma" label="Hepatocellular carcinoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q247131" start="3805" end="3825" title="Hepatorenal syndrome" label="Hepatorenal syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747726" start="3828" end="3851" title="Hepatorenal tyrosinemia" label="Hepatorenal tyrosinemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6473911" start="3865" end="3871" title="Herpes" label="Herpes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6740853" start="3953" end="3975" title="Hereditary amyloidosis" label="Hereditary amyloidosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2096745" start="3978" end="3999" title="Hereditary angioedema" label="Hereditary angioedema"/>
<link wikidata="Q213373" start="4002" end="4019" title="Hereditary ataxia" label="Hereditary ataxia"/>
<link wikidata="Q19000660" start="4022" end="4063" title="Hereditary breast–ovarian cancer syndrome" label="Hereditary breast–ovarian cancer syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033861" start="4066" end="4106" title="Hereditary carnitine deficiency myopathy" label="Hereditary carnitine deficiency myopathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3358135" start="4109" end="4149" title="Hereditary carnitine deficiency syndrome" label="Hereditary carnitine deficiency syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q3358135" start="4152" end="4183" title="Hereditary carnitine deficiency" label="Hereditary carnitine deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q4358039" start="4186" end="4218" title="Hereditary ceroid lipofuscinosis" label="Hereditary ceroid lipofuscinosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q823140" start="4221" end="4246" title="Hereditary coproporphyria" label="Hereditary coproporphyria"/>
<link wikidata="Q16035842" start="4249" end="4268" title="Hereditary deafness" label="Hereditary deafness"/>
<link wikidata="Q2298020" start="4271" end="4296" title="Hereditary elliptocytosis" label="Hereditary elliptocytosis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4299" end="4341" title="Dysfibrinogenemia#Pathophysiology#Hereditary fibrinogen Aα-Chain amyloidosis" label="Hereditary fibrinogen Aα-Chain amyloidosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1609755" start="4344" end="4375" title="Hereditary fructose intolerance" label="Hereditary fructose intolerance"/>
<link wikidata="Q16035842" start="4378" end="4405" title="Hereditary hearing disorder" label="Hereditary hearing disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q16035842" start="4408" end="4431" title="Hereditary hearing loss" label="Hereditary hearing loss"/>
<link wikidata="Q3144934" start="4434" end="4460" title="Hereditary hemochromatosis" label="Hereditary hemochromatosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q776881" start="4463" end="4500" title="Hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia" label="Hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q49970" start="4503" end="4527" title="Hereditary hyperuricemia" label="Hereditary hyperuricemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5558486" start="4530" end="4562" title="Hereditary macrothrombocytopenia" label="Hereditary macrothrombocytopenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q748442" start="4565" end="4604" title="Hereditary methemoglobinemia, recessive" label="Hereditary methemoglobinemia, recessive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1848471" start="4607" end="4656" title="Hereditary myopathy with intranuclear filamentous" label="Hereditary myopathy with intranuclear filamentous"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4687" end="4717" title="Hereditary nodular heterotopia" label="Hereditary nodular heterotopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q848343" start="4720" end="4763" title="Hereditary non-spherocytic hemolytic anemia" label="Hereditary non-spherocytic hemolytic anemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3361967" start="4766" end="4789" title="Hereditary pancreatitis" label="Hereditary pancreatitis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4792" end="4829" title="Hereditary paroxysmal cerebral ataxia" label="Hereditary paroxysmal cerebral ataxia"/>
<link wikidata="Q945238" start="4832" end="4870" title="Hereditary peripheral nervous disorder" label="Hereditary peripheral nervous disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179460" start="4873" end="4907" title="Hereditary primary Fanconi disease" label="Hereditary primary Fanconi disease"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4910" end="4949" title="Hereditary resistance to anti-vitamin K" label="Hereditary resistance to anti-vitamin K"/>
<link wikidata="Q2325854" start="4952" end="4997" title="Hereditary sensory and autonomic neuropathy 3" label="Hereditary sensory and autonomic neuropathy 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q501694" start="5000" end="5045" title="Hereditary sensory and autonomic neuropathy 4" label="Hereditary sensory and autonomic neuropathy 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q3338681" start="5048" end="5084" title="Hereditary sensory neuropathy type I" label="Hereditary sensory neuropathy type I"/>
<link wikidata="Q3702898" start="5087" end="5124" title="Hereditary sensory neuropathy type II" label="Hereditary sensory neuropathy type II"/>
<link wikidata="Q657516" start="5127" end="5156" title="Hereditary spastic paraplegia" label="Hereditary spastic paraplegia"/>
<link wikidata="Q541244" start="5159" end="5198" title="Hereditary spherocytic hemolytic anemia" label="Hereditary spherocytic hemolytic anemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q541244" start="5201" end="5225" title="Hereditary spherocytosis" label="Hereditary spherocytosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3338681" start="5228" end="5256" title="Hereditary type 1 neuropathy" label="Hereditary type 1 neuropathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3702898" start="5259" end="5287" title="Hereditary type 2 neuropathy" label="Hereditary type 2 neuropathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506216" start="5309" end="5334" title="Hermansky–Pudlak syndrome" label="Hermansky–Pudlak syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q303479" start="5337" end="5352" title="Hermaphroditism" label="Hermaphroditism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5355" end="5388" title="Hernandez–Aguire–Negrete syndrome" label="Hernandez–Aguire–Negrete syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q665258" start="5391" end="5401" title="Herpangina" label="Herpangina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1613885" start="5404" end="5423" title="Herpes encephalitis" label="Herpes encephalitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q655331" start="5426" end="5448" title="Herpes simplex disease" label="Herpes simplex disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q1613885" start="5451" end="5478" title="Herpes simplex encephalitis" label="Herpes simplex encephalitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q149348" start="5481" end="5503" title="Herpes viridae disease" label="Herpes viridae disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q3134326" start="5506" end="5538" title="Herpes virus antenatal infection" label="Herpes virus antenatal infection"/>
<link wikidata="Q1648128" start="5541" end="5561" title="Herpes zoster oticus" label="Herpes zoster oticus"/>
<link wikidata="Q182155" start="5564" end="5577" title="Herpes zoster" label="Herpes zoster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330599" start="5580" end="5606" title="Herpesvirus simiae B virus" label="Herpesvirus simiae B virus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5609" end="5629" title="Herpetic embryopathy" label="Herpetic embryopathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258984" start="5632" end="5650" title="Herpetic keratitis" label="Herpetic keratitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2319444" start="5653" end="5666" title="Herpetophobia" label="Herpetophobia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5669" end="5707" title="Herrmann–Opitz arthrogryposis syndrome" label="Herrmann–Opitz arthrogryposis syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5710" end="5741" title="Herrmann–Opitz craniosynostosis" label="Herrmann–Opitz craniosynostosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1947298" start="5744" end="5762" title="Hers&amp;#x27; disease" label="Hers&amp;#x27; disease"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5765" end="5797" title="Hersh–Podruch–Weisskopk syndrome" label="Hersh–Podruch–Weisskopk syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q33487" start="5815" end="5827" title="Heterophobia" label="Heterophobia"/>
<link wikidata="Q83851589" start="5830" end="5856" title="Heterotaxia (generic term)" label="Heterotaxia (generic term)"/>
<link wikidata="Q83851589" start="5859" end="5894" title="Heterotaxia autosomal dominant type" label="Heterotaxia autosomal dominant type"/>
<link wikidata="Q83851589" start="5897" end="5936" title="Heterotaxy with polysplenia or asplenia" label="Heterotaxy with polysplenia or asplenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q83851589" start="5939" end="5969" title="Heterotaxy, visceral, X-linked" label="Heterotaxy, visceral, X-linked"/>
<link wikidata="Q917227" start="5972" end="6006" title="Hexosaminidases A and B deficiency" label="Hexosaminidases A and B deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q7103627" start="6017" end="6029" title="HHH syndrome" label="HHH syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q3512243" start="6054" end="6079" title="Hibernian fever, familial" label="Hibernian fever, familial"/>
<link wikidata="Q58952" start="6082" end="6089" title="Hiccups" label="Hiccups"/>
<link wikidata="Q341999" start="6092" end="6125" title="Hidradenitis suppurativa familial" label="Hidradenitis suppurativa familial"/>
<link wikidata="Q341999" start="6128" end="6152" title="Hidradenitis suppurativa" label="Hidradenitis suppurativa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6155" end="6209" title="Hidrotic ectodermal dysplasia type Christianson Fouris" label="Hidrotic ectodermal dysplasia type Christianson Fouris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1850576" start="6212" end="6224" title="High scapula" label="High scapula"/>
<link wikidata="Q24721273" start="6227" end="6281" title="High-molecular-weight kininogen deficiency, congenital" label="High-molecular-weight kininogen deficiency, congenital"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6284" end="6299" title="Hillig syndrome" label="Hillig syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6302" end="6330" title="Hing–Torack–Dowston syndrome" label="Hing–Torack–Dowston syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6333" end="6353" title="Hinson–Pepys disease" label="Hinson–Pepys disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q634638" start="6356" end="6371" title="Hip dislocation" label="Hip dislocation"/>
<link wikidata="Q625935" start="6374" end="6399" title="Hip dysplasia Beukes type" label="Hip dysplasia Beukes type"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434611" start="6402" end="6424" title="Hip dysplasia (canine)" label="Hip dysplasia (canine)"/>
<link wikidata="Q625935" start="6427" end="6448" title="Hip dysplasia (human)" label="Hip dysplasia (human)"/>
<link wikidata="Q634638" start="6451" end="6463" title="Hip luxation" label="Hip luxation"/>
<link wikidata="Q753108" start="6466" end="6481" title="Hip subluxation" label="Hip subluxation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6484" end="6497" title="Hipo syndrome" label="Hipo syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343645" start="6515" end="6535" title="Hirschsprung disease" label="Hirschsprung disease"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6539" end="6580" title="Hirschsprung disease ganglioneuroblastoma" label="Hirschsprung disease ganglioneuroblastoma"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6584" end="6630" title="Hirschsprung disease polydactyly heart disease" label="Hirschsprung disease polydactyly heart disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343645" start="6634" end="6661" title="Hirschsprung disease type 2" label="Hirschsprung disease type 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343645" start="6665" end="6692" title="Hirschsprung disease type 3" label="Hirschsprung disease type 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q55786119" start="6696" end="6737" title="Hirschsprung disease type d brachydactyly" label="Hirschsprung disease type d brachydactyly"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6741" end="6779" title="Hirschsprung microcephaly cleft palate" label="Hirschsprung microcephaly cleft palate"/>
<link wikidata="Q55781936" start="6783" end="6823" title="Hirschsprung nail hypoplasia dysmorphism" label="Hirschsprung nail hypoplasia dysmorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q10282075" start="6826" end="6867" title="Hirsutism congenital gingival hyperplasia" label="Hirsutism congenital gingival hyperplasia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6870" end="6917" title="Hirsutism skeletal dysplasia mental retardation" label="Hirsutism skeletal dysplasia mental retardation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3513620" start="6920" end="6942" title="His bundle tachycardia" label="His bundle tachycardia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031905" start="6945" end="6955" title="Histadelia" label="Histadelia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031905" start="6958" end="6968" title="Histapenia" label="Histapenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q725845" start="6971" end="6983" title="Histidinemia" label="Histidinemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q55781937" start="6986" end="7028" title="Histidinuria renal tubular defect syndrome" label="Histidinuria renal tubular defect syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q374036" start="7031" end="7046" title="Histiocytosis X" label="Histiocytosis X"/>
<link wikidata="Q7048772" start="7049" end="7083" title="Histiocytosis, Non-Langerhans-Cell" label="Histiocytosis, Non-Langerhans-Cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q627625" start="7086" end="7100" title="Histoplasmosis" label="Histoplasmosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q845787" start="7103" end="7134" title="Histrionic personality disorder" label="Histrionic personality disorder"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7137" end="7165" title="Hittner–Hirsch–Kreh syndrome" label="Hittner–Hirsch–Kreh syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q15787" start="7168" end="7171" title="HIV" label="HIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641042" start="7182" end="7193" title="Hm syndrome" label="Hm syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q4634217" start="7196" end="7220" title="HMG-CoA lyase deficiency" label="HMG-CoA lyase deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640432" start="7223" end="7252" title="HMG CoA synthetase deficiency" label="HMG CoA synthetase deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q209369" start="7277" end="7293" title="Hodgkin lymphoma" label="Hodgkin lymphoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q209369" start="7296" end="7318" title="Hodgkin&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Hodgkin&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7321" end="7354" title="Hoepffner–Dreyer–Reimers syndrome" label="Hoepffner–Dreyer–Reimers syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q15056772" start="7357" end="7381" title="Hollow visceral myopathy" label="Hollow visceral myopathy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7384" end="7410" title="Holmes–Benacerraf syndrome" label="Holmes–Benacerraf syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7413" end="7435" title="Holmes–Borden syndrome" label="Holmes–Borden syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q55782897" start="7438" end="7461" title="Holmes–Collins syndrome" label="Holmes–Collins syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q7545701" start="7464" end="7484" title="Holmes–Gang syndrome" label="Holmes–Gang syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7487" end="7508" title="Holoacardius amorphus" label="Holoacardius amorphus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5883885" start="7511" end="7548" title="Holocarboxylase synthetase deficiency" label="Holocarboxylase synthetase deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7551" end="7586" title="Holoprosencephaly caudal dysgenesis" label="Holoprosencephaly caudal dysgenesis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7589" end="7618" title="Holoprosencephaly deletion 2p" label="Holoprosencephaly deletion 2p"/>
<link wikidata="Q55784727" start="7621" end="7668" title="Holoprosencephaly ectrodactyly cleft lip palate" label="Holoprosencephaly ectrodactyly cleft lip palate"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7671" end="7717" title="Holoprosencephaly radial heart renal anomalies" label="Holoprosencephaly radial heart renal anomalies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1459821" start="7720" end="7737" title="Holoprosencephaly" label="Holoprosencephaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q182005" start="7740" end="7758" title="Holt–Oram syndrome" label="Holt–Oram syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7761" end="7793" title="Holzgreve–Wagner–Rehder syndrome" label="Holzgreve–Wagner–Rehder syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7811" end="7837" title="Homocarnosinase deficiency" label="Homocarnosinase deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7840" end="7856" title="Homocarnosinosis" label="Homocarnosinosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q994859" start="7859" end="7908" title="Homocystinuria due to cystathionine beta-synthase" label="Homocystinuria due to cystathionine beta-synthase"/>
<link wikidata="Q994859" start="7911" end="7962" title="Homocystinuria due to defect in methylation (cbl g)" label="Homocystinuria due to defect in methylation (cbl g)"/>
<link wikidata="Q994859" start="7965" end="8014" title="Homocystinuria due to defect in methylation cbl e" label="Homocystinuria due to defect in methylation cbl e"/>
<link wikidata="Q994859" start="8017" end="8078" title="Homocystinuria due to defect in methylation, MTHFR deficiency" label="Homocystinuria due to defect in methylation, MTHFR deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q994859" start="8081" end="8095" title="Homocystinuria" label="Homocystinuria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194520" start="8098" end="8124" title="Homologous wasting disease" label="Homologous wasting disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q3444851" start="8127" end="8161" title="Homozygous hypobetalipoproteinemia" label="Homozygous hypobetalipoproteinemia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8164" end="8182" title="Hoon–Hall syndrome" label="Hoon–Hall syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8185" end="8222" title="Hordnes–Engebretsen–Knudtson syndrome" label="Hordnes–Engebretsen–Knudtson syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q4673593" start="8225" end="8243" title="Horn–Kolb syndrome" label="Horn–Kolb syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126839" start="8246" end="8268" title="Horner&amp;#x27;s syndrome" label="Horner&amp;#x27;s syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8271" end="8297" title="Hornova–Dlurosova syndrome" label="Hornova–Dlurosova syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1634033" start="8300" end="8316" title="Horseshoe kidney" label="Horseshoe kidney"/>
<link wikidata="Q707816" start="8319" end="8343" title="Horton disease, juvenile" label="Horton disease, juvenile"/>
<link wikidata="Q707816" start="8346" end="8360" title="Horton disease" label="Horton disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q14870002" start="8363" end="8383" title="Hot tub folliculitis" label="Hot tub folliculitis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8386" end="8418" title="Houlston–Ironton–Temple syndrome" label="Houlston–Ironton–Temple syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8421" end="8442" title="Howard–Young syndrome" label="Howard–Young syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q5921848" start="8445" end="8465" title="Howel–Evans syndrome" label="Howel–Evans syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q9390252" start="8468" end="8497" title="Hoyeraal–Hreidarsson syndrome" label="Hoyeraal–Hreidarsson syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q9390252" start="8500" end="8517" title="Hoyeraal syndrome" label="Hoyeraal syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q655331" start="8528" end="8543" title="HSV-2 infection" label="HSV-2 infection"/>
<link wikidata="Q5348632" start="8554" end="8580" title="Ehrlichiosis ewingii infection" label="Human ewingii ehrlichiosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q992139" start="8583" end="8614" title="Human granulocytic ehrlichiosis" label="Human granulocytic ehrlichiosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3049302" start="8617" end="8645" title="Human monocytic ehrlichiosis" label="Human monocytic ehrlichiosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q933694" start="8648" end="8678" title="Human parvovirus B19 infection" label="Human parvovirus B19 infection"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8681" end="8730" title="Humero spinal dysostosis congenital heart disease" label="Humero spinal dysostosis congenital heart disease"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8733" end="8756" title="Humeroradial synostosis" label="Humeroradial synostosis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8759" end="8786" title="Humeroradioulnar synostosis" label="Humeroradioulnar synostosis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8789" end="8816" title="Humerus trochlea aplasia of" label="Humerus trochlea aplasia of"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8819" end="8853" title="Hunter–Carpenter–Mcdonald syndrome" label="Hunter–Carpenter–Mcdonald syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8856" end="8888" title="Hunter–Jurenka–Thompson syndrome" label="Hunter–Jurenka–Thompson syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8891" end="8917" title="Hunter–Macpherson syndrome" label="Hunter–Macpherson syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8920" end="8944" title="Hunter–Mcalpine syndrome" label="Hunter–Mcalpine syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8947" end="8971" title="Hunter–Mcdonald syndrome" label="Hunter–Mcdonald syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8974" end="9003" title="Hunter–Rudd–Hoffmann syndrome" label="Hunter–Rudd–Hoffmann syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1529983" start="9006" end="9021" title="Hunter syndrome" label="Hunter syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q190564" start="9024" end="9049" title="Huntington&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Huntington&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q7128426" start="9052" end="9082" title="Huriez scleroatrophic syndrome" label="Huriez scleroatrophic syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q25379699" start="9085" end="9100" title="Hurler syndrome" label="Hurler syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9103" end="9131" title="Hurst–Hallam–Hockey syndrome" label="Hurst–Hallam–Hockey syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q213098" start="9134" end="9170" title="Hutchinson–Gilford–Progeria syndrome" label="Hutchinson–Gilford–Progeria syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424702" start="9173" end="9192" title="Hutchinson incisors" label="Hutchinson incisors"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9195" end="9222" title="Hutteroth–Spranger syndrome" label="Hutteroth–Spranger syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q6029067" start="9243" end="9276" title="Hyalinosis systemic short stature" label="Hyalinosis systemic short stature"/>
<link wikidata="Q2470609" start="9279" end="9318" title="Hyaloideoretinal degeneration of wagner" label="Hyaloideoretinal degeneration of wagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q410400" start="9351" end="9380" title="Hydantoin antenatal infection" label="Hydantoin antenatal infection"/>
<link wikidata="Q881855" start="9383" end="9400" title="Hydatidiform mole" label="Hydatidiform mole"/>
<link wikidata="Q777087" start="9403" end="9414" title="Hydatidosis" label="Hydatidosis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9417" end="9453" title="Hyde–Forster–Mccarthy–Berry syndrome" label="Hyde–Forster–Mccarthy–Berry syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2565270" start="9470" end="9485" title="Hydranencephaly" label="Hydranencephaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071707" start="9488" end="9536" title="Hydrocephalus - Arnold Chiari - allied disorders" label="Hydrocephalus - Arnold Chiari - allied disorders"/>
<link wikidata="Q193003" start="9539" end="9572" title="Hydrocephalus autosomal recessive" label="Hydrocephalus autosomal recessive"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9575" end="9630" title="Hydrocephalus costovertebral dysplasia Sprengel anomaly" label="Hydrocephalus costovertebral dysplasia Sprengel anomaly"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9633" end="9674" title="Hydrocephalus craniosynostosis bifid nose" label="Hydrocephalus craniosynostosis bifid nose"/>
<link wikidata="Q5629424" start="9677" end="9726" title="Hydrocephalus endocardial fibroelastosis cataract" label="Hydrocephalus endocardial fibroelastosis cataract"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9729" end="9780" title="Hydrocephalus growth retardation skeletal anomalies" label="Hydrocephalus growth retardation skeletal anomalies"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9783" end="9817" title="Hydrocephalus obesity hypogonadism" label="Hydrocephalus obesity hypogonadism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9820" end="9852" title="Hydrocephalus skeletal anomalies" label="Hydrocephalus skeletal anomalies"/>
<link wikidata="Q193003" start="9855" end="9868" title="Hydrocephalus" label="Hydrocephalus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3508635" start="9871" end="9929" title="Hydrocephaly corpus callosum agenesis diaphragmatic hernia" label="Hydrocephaly corpus callosum agenesis diaphragmatic hernia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9932" end="9968" title="Hydrocephaly low insertion umbilicus" label="Hydrocephaly low insertion umbilicus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9971" end="10009" title="Hydrocephaly tall stature joint laxity" label="Hydrocephaly tall stature joint laxity"/>
<link wikidata="Q5955105" start="10012" end="10034" title="Hydrolethalus syndrome" label="Hydrolethalus syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q730877" start="10037" end="10051" title="Hydronephrosis" label="Hydronephrosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4352832" start="10054" end="10095" title="Hydronephrosis peculiar facial expression" label="Hydronephrosis peculiar facial expression"/>
<link wikidata="Q39222" start="10098" end="10109" title="rabies" label="Hydrophobia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10112" end="10143" title="Hydrops ectrodactyly syndactyly" label="Hydrops ectrodactyly syndactyly"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10146" end="10197" title="Hydrops fetalis anemia immune disorder absent thumb" label="Hydrops fetalis anemia immune disorder absent thumb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1679678" start="10200" end="10215" title="Hydrops fetalis" label="Hydrops fetalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7243137" start="10218" end="10244" title="Hydroxycarboxylic aciduria" label="Hydroxycarboxylic aciduria"/>
<link wikidata="Q4634217" start="10247" end="10277" title="Hydroxymethylglutaric aciduria" label="Hydroxymethylglutaric aciduria"/>
<link wikidata="Q459896" start="10295" end="10311" title="Hygroma cervical" label="Hygroma cervical"/>
<link wikidata="Q12656487" start="10314" end="10328" title="Hymenolepiasis" label="Hymenolepiasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2336873" start="10358" end="10367" title="Hyper IgE" label="Hyper IgE"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617658" start="10370" end="10388" title="Hyper IgM syndrome" label="Hyper IgM syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q219102" start="10416" end="10431" title="Hyperadrenalism" label="Hyperadrenalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640860" start="10434" end="10468" title="Hyperaldosteronism familial type 2" label="Hyperaldosteronism familial type 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640860" start="10471" end="10506" title="Hyperaldosteronism, familial type 1" label="Hyperaldosteronism, familial type 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640860" start="10509" end="10527" title="Hyperaldosteronism" label="Hyperaldosteronism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640868" start="10530" end="10544" title="Hyperammonemia" label="Hyperammonemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q10529545" start="10547" end="10563" title="Hyperandrogenism" label="Hyperandrogenism"/>
<link wikidata="Q390908" start="10566" end="10612" title="Hyperbilirubinemia transient familial neonatal" label="Hyperbilirubinemia transient familial neonatal"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10615" end="10640" title="Hyperbilirubinemia type 1" label="Hyperbilirubinemia type 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1263039" start="10643" end="10668" title="Hyperbilirubinemia type 2" label="Hyperbilirubinemia type 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q104219" start="10671" end="10689" title="Hyperbilirubinemia" label="Hyperbilirubinemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395332" start="10717" end="10754" title="Hypercalcemia, familial benign type 1" label="Hypercalcemia, familial benign type 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395332" start="10757" end="10794" title="Hypercalcemia, familial benign type 2" label="Hypercalcemia, familial benign type 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395332" start="10797" end="10834" title="Hypercalcemia, familial benign type 3" label="Hypercalcemia, familial benign type 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395332" start="10837" end="10867" title="Hypercalcemia, familial benign" label="Hypercalcemia, familial benign"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474877" start="10870" end="10883" title="Hypercalcemia" label="Hypercalcemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q112610466" start="10886" end="10912" title="Idiopathic hypercalcinuria" label="Hypercalcinuria idiopathic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10915" end="10947" title="Hypercalcinuria macular coloboma" label="Hypercalcinuria macular coloboma"/>
<link wikidata="Q2526358" start="10950" end="10965" title="Hypercalcinuria" label="Hypercalcinuria"/>
<link wikidata="Q17132235" start="10968" end="10983" title="Hypercementosis" label="Hypercementosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4780235" start="10986" end="11043" title="Hypercholesterolemia due to arg3500 mutation of Apo B-100" label="Hypercholesterolemia due to arg3500 mutation of Apo B-100"/>
<link wikidata="Q2711291" start="11046" end="11097" title="Hypercholesterolemia due to LDL receptor deficiency" label="Hypercholesterolemia due to LDL receptor deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q762713" start="11100" end="11120" title="Hypercholesterolemia" label="Hypercholesterolemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079120" start="11123" end="11143" title="Hyperchylomicronemia" label="Hyperchylomicronemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781802" start="11146" end="11159" title="Hyperekplexia" label="Hyperekplexia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2551272" start="11162" end="11188" title="Hypereosinophilic syndrome" label="Hypereosinophilic syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11191" end="11247" title="Hyperferritinemia, hereditary, with congenital cataracts" label="Hyperferritinemia, hereditary, with congenital cataracts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5958019" start="11250" end="11261" title="Hypergeusia" label="Hypergeusia"/>
<link wikidata="Q271993" start="11264" end="11277" title="Hyperglycemia" label="Hyperglycemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q17120992" start="11280" end="11297" title="Hyperglycerolemia" label="Hyperglycerolemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3053945" start="11300" end="11343" title="Hyperglycinemia, isolated nonketotic type 1" label="Hyperglycinemia, isolated nonketotic type 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q3053945" start="11346" end="11389" title="Hyperglycinemia, isolated nonketotic type 2" label="Hyperglycinemia, isolated nonketotic type 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q3053945" start="11392" end="11428" title="Hyperglycinemia, isolated nonketotic" label="Hyperglycinemia, isolated nonketotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7250337" start="11431" end="11455" title="Propionic acidemia" label="Hyperglycinemia, ketotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3053945" start="11458" end="11486" title="Glycine encephalopathy" label="Hyperglycinemia, non-ketotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8042656" start="11489" end="11544" title="Hypergonadotropic ovarian failure, familial or sporadic" label="Hypergonadotropic ovarian failure, familial or sporadic"/>
<link wikidata="Q935781" start="11572" end="11585" title="Hyperhidrosis" label="Hyperhidrosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093815" start="11588" end="11608" title="Hyperhomocysteinemia" label="Hyperhomocysteinemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3043158" start="11611" end="11629" title="Hyperimmunoglobinemia D with recurrent fever" label="Hyper-IgD syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q7249599" start="11632" end="11654" title="Hyperimidodipeptiduria" label="Hyperimidodipeptiduria"/>
<link wikidata="Q3043158" start="11657" end="11701" title="Hyperimmunoglobinemia D with recurrent fever" label="Hyperimmunoglobinemia D with recurrent fever"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11704" end="11756" title="Hyperimmunoglobulin E - recurrent infection syndrome" label="Hyperimmunoglobulin E - recurrent infection syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q3043158" start="11759" end="11804" title="Hyperimmunoglobulinemia D with periodic fever" label="Hyperimmunoglobulinemia D with periodic fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q2336873" start="11807" end="11832" title="Hyperimmunoglobulinemia E" label="Hyperimmunoglobulinemia E"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11835" end="11887" title="Hyperinsulinism due to focal adenomatous hyperplasia" label="Hyperinsulinism due to focal adenomatous hyperplasia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11890" end="11935" title="Hyperinsulinism due to glucokinase deficiency" label="Hyperinsulinism due to glucokinase deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11938" end="11992" title="Hyperinsulinism due to glutamodehydrogenase deficiency" label="Hyperinsulinism due to glutamodehydrogenase deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q5160437" start="11995" end="12034" title="Hyperinsulinism in children, congenital" label="Hyperinsulinism in children, congenital"/>
<link wikidata="Q5160437" start="12037" end="12061" title="Hyperinsulinism, diffuse" label="Hyperinsulinism, diffuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q5160437" start="12064" end="12086" title="Hyperinsulinism, focal" label="Hyperinsulinism, focal"/>
<link wikidata="Q605259" start="12089" end="12101" title="Hyperkalemia" label="Hyperkalemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3269843" start="12104" end="12135" title="Hyperkalemic periodic paralysis" label="Hyperkalemic periodic paralysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640998" start="12138" end="12184" title="Hyperkeratosis lenticularis perstans of Flegel" label="Hyperkeratosis lenticularis perstans of Flegel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640998" start="12187" end="12223" title="Hyperkeratosis lenticularis perstans" label="Hyperkeratosis lenticularis perstans"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12226" end="12282" title="Hyperkeratosis palmoplantar localized acanthokeratolytic" label="Hyperkeratosis palmoplantar localized acanthokeratolytic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12285" end="12336" title="Hyperkeratosis palmoplantar localized epidermolytic" label="Hyperkeratosis palmoplantar localized epidermolytic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7128426" start="12339" end="12400" title="Hyperkeratosis palmoplantar with palmar crease hyperkeratosis" label="Hyperkeratosis palmoplantar with palmar crease hyperkeratosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079120" start="12428" end="12455" title="Hyperlipoproteinemia type I" label="Hyperlipoproteinemia type I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079120" start="12458" end="12486" title="Hyperlipoproteinemia type II" label="Hyperlipoproteinemia type II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079120" start="12489" end="12518" title="Hyperlipoproteinemia type III" label="Hyperlipoproteinemia type III"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079120" start="12521" end="12549" title="Hyperlipoproteinemia type IV" label="Hyperlipoproteinemia type IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079120" start="12552" end="12579" title="Hyperlipoproteinemia type V" label="Hyperlipoproteinemia type V"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079120" start="12582" end="12602" title="Hyperlipoproteinemia" label="Hyperlipoproteinemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q10295763" start="12605" end="12619" title="Hyperlysinemia" label="Hyperlysinemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q177254" start="12622" end="12631" title="Hyperopia" label="Hyperopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7103627" start="12634" end="12651" title="Hyperornithinemia" label="Hyperornithinemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7103627" start="12654" end="12715" title="Hyperornithinemia, hyperammonemia, homocitrullinuria syndrome" label="Hyperornithinemia, hyperammonemia, homocitrullinuria syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q3357478" start="12718" end="12761" title="Hyperostosid corticalis deformans juvenilis" label="Hyperostosid corticalis deformans juvenilis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3801522" start="12764" end="12795" title="Hyperostosis cortical infantile" label="Hyperostosis cortical infantile"/>
<link wikidata="Q8037184" start="12798" end="12834" title="Hyperostosis Corticalis Generalisata" label="Hyperostosis corticalis generalisata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641052" start="12837" end="12867" title="Hyperostosis frontalis interna" label="Hyperostosis frontalis interna"/>
<link wikidata="Q7243137" start="12870" end="12890" title="Hyperoxaluria type 1" label="Hyperoxaluria type 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q7243137" start="12893" end="12913" title="Hyperoxaluria type 2" label="Hyperoxaluria type 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641060" start="12916" end="12929" title="Hyperoxaluria" label="Hyperoxaluria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344835" start="12957" end="12976" title="Hyperparathyroidism" label="Hyperparathyroidism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919083" start="12979" end="13017" title="Hyperparathyroidism, familial, primary" label="Hyperparathyroidism, familial, primary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919083" start="13020" end="13064" title="Hyperparathyroidism, neonatal severe primary" label="Hyperparathyroidism, neonatal severe primary"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13067" end="13107" title="Hyperphalangism dysmorphy bronchomalacia" label="Hyperphalangism dysmorphy bronchomalacia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5898279" start="13110" end="13131" title="Hyperphenylalaninemia" label="Hyperphenylalaninemia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13134" end="13184" title="Hyperphenylalaninemia due to pterin-4-alpha-carbin" label="Hyperphenylalaninemia due to pterin-4-alpha-carbin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13187" end="13253" title="Hyperphenylalaninemia due to dihydropteridine reductase deficiency" label="Hyperphenylalaninemia due to dihydropteridine reductase deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13256" end="13306" title="Hyperphenylalaninemia due to 6-pyruvoyltetrahydrop" label="Hyperphenylalaninemia due to 6-pyruvoyltetrahydrop"/>
<link wikidata="Q112506271" start="13309" end="13360" title="Hyperphenylalaninemia due to dehydratase deficiency" label="Hyperphenylalaninemia due to dehydratase deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q112623900" start="13363" end="13421" title="Hyperphenylalaninemia due to GTP cyclohydrolase deficiency" label="Hyperphenylalaninemia due to GTP cyclohydrolase deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q194041" start="13424" end="13457" title="Hyperphenylalaninemic embryopathy" label="Hyperphenylalaninemic embryopathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7197254" start="13460" end="13478" title="Hyperpipecolatemia" label="Hyperpipecolatemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433936" start="13481" end="13499" title="Hyperprolactinemia" label="Hyperprolactinemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q13637044" start="13502" end="13525" title="Hyperprolinemia type II" label="Hyperprolinemia type II"/>
<link wikidata="Q13637044" start="13528" end="13543" title="Hyperprolinemia" label="Hyperprolinemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429154" start="13546" end="13559" title="Hyperreflexia" label="Hyperreflexia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640860" start="13562" end="13576" title="Hyper-reninism" label="Hyper-reninism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5958765" start="13579" end="13595" title="Hypersensitivity" label="Hypersensitivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q5941165" start="13599" end="13622" title="Type I hypersensitivity" label="Hypersensitivity type I"/>
<link wikidata="Q5898312" start="13626" end="13650" title="Type II hypersensitivity" label="Hypersensitivity type II"/>
<link wikidata="Q5898315" start="13654" end="13679" title="Type III hypersensitivity" label="Hypersensitivity type III"/>
<link wikidata="Q7860879" start="13683" end="13707" title="Type IV hypersensitivity" label="Hypersensitivity type IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q751641" start="13710" end="13725" title="Hypersomnolence" label="Hypersomnolence"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13753" end="13790" title="Hypertelorism and tetralogy of Fallot" label="Hypertelorism and tetralogy of Fallot"/>
<link wikidata="Q3508750" start="13793" end="13827" title="Hypertelorism hypospadias syndrome" label="Hypertelorism hypospadias syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q41861" start="13830" end="13842" title="Hypertension" label="Hypertension"/>
<link wikidata="Q200745" start="13845" end="13880" title="Hypertensive hyperkalemia, familial" label="Hypertensive hyperkalemia, familial"/>
<link wikidata="Q200745" start="13883" end="13916" title="Hypertensive hypokalemia familial" label="Hypertensive hypokalemia familial"/>
<link wikidata="Q425811" start="13919" end="13943" title="Hypertensive retinopathy" label="Hypertensive retinopathy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13946" end="13974" title="Hyperthermia induced defects" label="Hyperthermia induced defects"/>
<link wikidata="Q242165" start="13977" end="13989" title="Hyperthermia" label="Hyperthermia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16499" start="13992" end="14007" title="Hyperthyroidism" label="Hyperthyroidism"/>
<link wikidata="Q16499" start="14010" end="14058" title="Hyperthyroidism due to mutations in TSH receptor" label="Hyperthyroidism due to mutations in TSH receptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q18616565" start="14061" end="14111" title="Hypertrichosis atrophic skin ectropion macrostomia" label="Hypertrichosis atrophic skin ectropion macrostomia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14114" end="14173" title="Hypertrichosis brachydactyly obesity and mental retardation" label="Hypertrichosis brachydactyly obesity and mental retardation"/>
<link wikidata="Q8041556" start="14176" end="14222" title="Hypertrichosis congenital generalized X linked" label="Hypertrichosis congenital generalized X linked"/>
<link wikidata="Q595010" start="14225" end="14260" title="Hypertrichosis lanuginosa congenita" label="Hypertrichosis lanuginosa congenita"/>
<link wikidata="Q595010" start="14263" end="14298" title="Hypertrichosis lanuginosa, acquired" label="Hypertrichosis lanuginosa, acquired"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14301" end="14339" title="Hypertrichosis retinopathy dysmorphism" label="Hypertrichosis retinopathy dysmorphism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14342" end="14375" title="Hypertrichosis, anterior cervical" label="Hypertrichosis, anterior cervical"/>
<link wikidata="Q5034093" start="14378" end="14414" title="Hypertrichotic osteochondrodysplasia" label="Hypertrichotic osteochondrodysplasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1467339" start="14417" end="14435" title="Hypertriglycidemia" label="Hypertriglycidemia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14438" end="14469" title="Hypertrophic branchial myopathy" label="Hypertrophic branchial myopathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364270" start="14472" end="14499" title="Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy" label="Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7138441" start="14502" end="14529" title="Hypertrophic hemangiectasia" label="Hypertrophic hemangiectasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364270" start="14532" end="14559" title="Hypertrophic myocardiopathy" label="Hypertrophic myocardiopathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641153" start="14562" end="14614" title="Hypertrophic osteoarthropathy, primary or idiopathic" label="Hypertrophic osteoarthropathy, primary or idiopathic"/>
<link wikidata="Q17145626" start="14617" end="14628" title="Hypertropia" label="Hypertropia"/>
<link wikidata="Q845618" start="14631" end="14672" title="Hypertropic neuropathy of Dejerine-Sottas" label="Hypertropic neuropathy of Dejerine-Sottas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5958803" start="14675" end="14694" title="Hypertryptophanemia" label="Hypertryptophanemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3100515" start="14697" end="14715" title="Hypervitaminosis A" label="Hypervitaminosis A"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641171" start="14718" end="14736" title="Hypervitaminosis D" label="Hypervitaminosis D"/>
<link wikidata="Q141180" start="14739" end="14757" title="Hypervitaminosis E" label="Hypervitaminosis E"/>
<link wikidata="Q303555" start="14796" end="14829" title="Hypoactive sexual desire disorder" label="Hypoactive sexual desire disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q2507454" start="14832" end="14846" title="Hypoadrenalism" label="Hypoadrenalism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14849" end="14898" title="Hypoadrenocorticism hypoparathyroidism moniliasis" label="Hypoadrenocorticism hypoparathyroidism moniliasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2378552" start="14901" end="14918" title="Hypoaldosteronism" label="Hypoaldosteronism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5959167" start="14921" end="14954" title="Hypo-alphalipoproteinemia primary" label="Hypo-alphalipoproteinemia primary"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14957" end="15001" title="Hypobetalipoproteinaemia ataxia hearing loss" label="Hypobetalipoproteinaemia ataxia hearing loss"/>
<link wikidata="Q3444851" start="15004" end="15037" title="Hypobetalipoprotéinemia, familial" label="Hypobetalipoprotéinemia, familial"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15040" end="15072" title="Hypocalcemia, autosomal dominant" label="Hypocalcemia, autosomal dominant"/>
<link wikidata="Q936382" start="15075" end="15087" title="Hypocalcemia" label="Hypocalcemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395332" start="15090" end="15127" title="Hypocalciuric hypercalcemia, familial" label="Hypocalciuric hypercalcemia, familial"/>
<link wikidata="Q105434" start="15130" end="15145" title="Hypochondriasis" label="Hypochondriasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5959327" start="15148" end="15166" title="Hypochondrogenesis" label="Hypochondrogenesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283054" start="15169" end="15186" title="Hypochondroplasia" label="Hypochondroplasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7901365" start="15189" end="15229" title="Hypocomplementemic urticarial vasculitis" label="Hypocomplementemic urticarial vasculitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641318" start="15232" end="15245" title="Hypodermyasis" label="Hypodermyasis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15248" end="15277" title="Hypodontia dysplasia of nails" label="Hypodontia dysplasia of nails"/>
<link wikidata="Q1549421" start="15280" end="15316" title="Hypodontia of incisors and premolars" label="Hypodontia of incisors and premolars"/>
<link wikidata="Q42417349" start="15319" end="15340" title="Hypodysfibrinogenemia" label="Hypodysfibrinogenemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q42417401" start="15343" end="15371" title="Hypofibrinogenemia, familial" label="Hypofibrinogenemia, familial"/>
<link wikidata="Q5572606" start="15397" end="15461" title="Hypoglycemia with deficiency of glycogen synthetase in the liver" label="Hypoglycemia with deficiency of glycogen synthetase in the liver"/>
<link wikidata="Q202758" start="15464" end="15476" title="Hypoglycemia" label="Hypoglycemia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15479" end="15506" title="Hypogonadism cardiomyopathy" label="Hypogonadism cardiomyopathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641332" start="15509" end="15569" title="Hypogonadism hypogonadotropic due to mutations in GR hormone" label="Hypogonadism hypogonadotropic due to mutations in GR hormone"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15572" end="15625" title="Hypogonadism male mental retardation skeletal anomaly" label="Hypogonadism male mental retardation skeletal anomaly"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15628" end="15681" title="Hypogonadism mitral valve prolapse mental retardation" label="Hypogonadism mitral valve prolapse mental retardation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15684" end="15721" title="Hypogonadism primary partial alopecia" label="Hypogonadism primary partial alopecia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15724" end="15757" title="Hypogonadism retinitis pigmentosa" label="Hypogonadism retinitis pigmentosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q938107" start="15760" end="15800" title="Hypogonadism, isolated, hypogonadotropic" label="Hypogonadism, isolated, hypogonadotropic"/>
<link wikidata="Q938107" start="15803" end="15815" title="Hypogonadism" label="Hypogonadism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641332" start="15818" end="15858" title="Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism syndactyly" label="Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism syndactyly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641332" start="15861" end="15916" title="Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism without anosmia, X linked" label="Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism without anosmia, X linked"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641332" start="15919" end="15966" title="Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism-anosmia, X linked" label="Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism-anosmia, X linked"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641332" start="15969" end="16006" title="Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism-anosmia" label="Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism-anosmia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077955" start="16009" end="16042" title="Hypohidrotic Ectodermal Dysplasia" label="Hypohidrotic Ectodermal Dysplasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q794086" start="16045" end="16056" title="Hypokalemia" label="Hypokalemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q790971" start="16059" end="16101" title="Hypokalemic alkalosis with hypercalcinuria" label="Hypokalemic alkalosis with hypercalcinuria"/>
<link wikidata="Q622828" start="16104" end="16134" title="Hypokalemic periodic paralysis" label="Hypokalemic periodic paralysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q622828" start="16137" end="16174" title="Hypokalemic periodic paralysis type 1" label="Hypokalemic periodic paralysis type 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q48837404" start="16177" end="16212" title="Hypokalemic sensory overstimulation" label="Hypokalemic sensory overstimulation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16215" end="16241" title="Hypoketonemic hypoglycemia" label="Hypoketonemic hypoglycemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5959735" start="16244" end="16263" title="Hypolipoproteinemia" label="Hypolipoproteinemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3771629" start="16283" end="16305" title="Hypomagnesemia primary" label="Hypomagnesemia primary"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16308" end="16346" title="Hypomandibular faciocranial dysostosis" label="Hypomandibular faciocranial dysostosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q81867" start="16349" end="16371" title="Hypomelanotic disorder" label="Hypomelanotic disorder"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16374" end="16408" title="Hypomelia Müllerian duct anomalies" label="Hypomelia Müllerian duct anomalies"/>
<link wikidata="Q594013" start="16411" end="16421" title="Hypomentia" label="Hypomentia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1586088" start="16441" end="16477" title="Hypoparathyroidism familial isolated" label="Hypoparathyroidism familial isolated"/>
<link wikidata="Q2027515" start="16480" end="16523" title="Hypoparathyroidism nerve deafness nephrosis" label="Hypoparathyroidism nerve deafness nephrosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q21124512" start="16526" end="16577" title="Hypoparathyroidism short stature mental retardation" label="Hypoparathyroidism short stature mental retardation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16580" end="16612" title="Hypoparathyroidism short stature" label="Hypoparathyroidism short stature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1586088" start="16615" end="16642" title="Hypoparathyroidism X linked" label="Hypoparathyroidism X linked"/>
<link wikidata="Q1586088" start="16645" end="16663" title="Hypoparathyroidism" label="Hypoparathyroidism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1313510" start="16666" end="16693" title="Hypophosphatasia, infantile" label="Hypophosphatasia, infantile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1313510" start="16696" end="16712" title="Hypophosphatasia" label="Hypophosphatasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779987" start="16715" end="16739" title="Hypophosphatemic rickets" label="Hypophosphatemic rickets"/>
<link wikidata="Q5188485" start="16742" end="16792" title="Hypopigmentation oculocerebral syndrome Cross type" label="Hypopigmentation oculocerebral syndrome Cross type"/>
<link wikidata="Q2756703" start="16795" end="16838" title="Hypopituitarism micropenis cleft lip palate" label="Hypopituitarism micropenis cleft lip palate"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16841" end="16878" title="Hypopituitarism postaxial polydactyly" label="Hypopituitarism postaxial polydactyly"/>
<link wikidata="Q922411" start="16881" end="16896" title="Hypopituitarism" label="Hypopituitarism"/>
<link wikidata="Q369262" start="16899" end="16921" title="Hypopituitary dwarfism" label="Hypopituitary dwarfism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544408" start="16924" end="16951" title="Hypoplasia hepatic ductular" label="Hypoplasia hepatic ductular"/>
<link wikidata="Q56014402" start="16954" end="16994" title="Hypoplasia of the tibia with polydactyly" label="Hypoplasia of the tibia with polydactyly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641399" start="16997" end="17028" title="Hypoplastic left heart syndrome" label="Hypoplastic left heart syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17031" end="17067" title="Hypoplastic right heart microcephaly" label="Hypoplastic right heart microcephaly"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17070" end="17105" title="Hypoplastic thumb Müllerian aplasia" label="Hypoplastic thumb Müllerian aplasia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17108" end="17142" title="Hypoplastic thumbs hydranencephaly" label="Hypoplastic thumbs hydranencephaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q18555032" start="17145" end="17165" title="Hypoproconvertinemia" label="Hypoproconvertinemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3801629" start="17168" end="17187" title="Hypoprothrombinemia" label="Hypoprothrombinemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2378552" start="17213" end="17244" title="Hyporeninemic hypoaldosteronism" label="Hyporeninemic hypoaldosteronism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17247" end="17285" title="Hyposmia nasal hypoplasia hypogonadism" label="Hyposmia nasal hypoplasia hypogonadism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132108" start="17288" end="17308" title="Hypospadias familial" label="Hypospadias familial"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17311" end="17356" title="Hypospadias mental retardation Goldblatt type" label="Hypospadias mental retardation Goldblatt type"/>
<link wikidata="Q737712" start="17359" end="17371" title="Hyposplenism" label="Hyposplenism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17374" end="17411" title="Hypotelorism cleft palate hypospadias" label="Hypotelorism cleft palate hypospadias"/>
<link wikidata="Q5961220" start="17414" end="17438" title="Hypothalamic dysfunction" label="Hypothalamic dysfunction"/>
<link wikidata="Q3085434" start="17441" end="17478" title="Hypothalamic hamartoblastoma syndrome" label="Hypothalamic hamartoblastoma syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q7850809" start="17481" end="17503" title="Hypothalamic hamartoma" label="Hypothalamic hamartoma"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17507" end="17528" title="Hypertonic gingivitus" label="Hypertonic gingivitus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036696" start="17531" end="17542" title="Hypothermia" label="Hypothermia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17545" end="17590" title="Hypothyroidism due to iodide transport defect" label="Hypothyroidism due to iodide transport defect"/>
<link wikidata="Q8058422" start="17593" end="17648" title="Hypothyroidism postaxial polydactyly mental retardation" label="Hypothyroidism postaxial polydactyly mental retardation"/>
<link wikidata="Q16501" start="17651" end="17665" title="Hypothyroidism" label="Hypothyroidism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17668" end="17706" title="Hypotonic sclerotic muscular dystrophy" label="Hypotonic sclerotic muscular dystrophy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17709" end="17752" title="Hypotrichosis mental retardation Lopes type" label="Hypotrichosis mental retardation Lopes type"/>
<link wikidata="Q181391" start="17755" end="17768" title="Hypotrichosis" label="Hypotrichosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q17145626" start="17771" end="17781" title="Hypotropia" label="Hypotropia"/>
<link wikidata="Q727436" start="17784" end="17841" title="Hypoxanthine guanine phosphoribosyltransferase deficiency" label="Hypoxanthine guanine phosphoribosyltransferase deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q105688" start="17844" end="17851" title="Hypoxia (medical)" label="Hypoxia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="236344" wikidata="Q6616869" url="?curid=236344" title="List of diseases (I)">
<text>This is a list of diseases starting with the letter &quot;I&quot;.

==I==
* I cell disease
* Inverted Gentile Disorder

==Ib==
* IBIDS syndrome

==Ic==
===Icf===
* ICF syndrome

===Ich===
* Ichthyoallyeinotoxism
* Ichthyophobia
* Ichthyosiform erythroderma corneal involvement deafness
* Ichthyosis alopecia eclabion ectropion mental retardation
* Ichthyosis and male hypogonadism
* Ichthyosis bullosa of Siemens
* Ichthyosis cheek eyebrow syndrome
* Ichthyosis congenita biliary atresia
* Ichthyosis deafness mental retardation skeletal anomaly
* Ichthyosis follicularis atrichia photophobia syndrome
* Ichthyosis hepatosplenomegaly cerebellar degeneration
* Ichthyosis hystrix, Curth Macklin type
* Ichthyosis linearis circumflexa
* Ichthyosis male hypogonadism
* Ichthyosis mental retardation Devriendt type
* Ichthyosis mental retardation dwarfism renal impairment
* Ichthyosis microphthalmos
* Ichthyosis tapered fingers midline groove up
* Ichthyosis vulgaris
* Ichthyosis, erythrokeratolysis hemalis
* Ichthyosis, keratosis follicularis spinulosa Decalvans
* Ichthyosis, lamellar recessive
* Ichthyosis, Netherton syndrome

==Id==
* Idaho syndrome
* Idiopathic acute eosinophilic pneumonia
* Idiopathic adolescent scoliosis
* Idiopathic adult neutropenia
* Idiopathic alveolar hypoventilation syndrome
* Idiopathic congenital nystagmus, dominant, X- linked
* Idiopathic diffuse interstitial fibrosis
* Idiopathic dilatation of the pulmonary artery
* Idiopathic dilation cardiomyopathy
* Idiopathic double athetosis
* Idiopathic edema
* Idiopathic eosinophilic chronic pneumopathy
* Idiopathic facial palsy
* Idiopathic hypereosinophilic syndrome
* Idiopathic infection caused by BCG or atypical mycobacteria
* Idiopathic juvenile osteoporosis
* Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis
* Idiopathic pulmonary haemosiderosis
* Idiopathic sclerosing mesenteritis
* Idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura
* Iduronate 2-sulfatase deficiency

==Ie–Im==
* IFAP syndrome
* IgA deficiency
* IgA nephropathy
* IgA vasculitis
* IGDA syndrome
* IgG4-related disease
* Illum syndrome
* Illyngophobia
* Ilyina–Amoashy–Grygory syndrome
* Imaizumi–Kuroki syndrome
* Iminoglycinuria
* Immotile cilia syndrome, due to defective radial spokes
* Immotile cilia syndrome, due to excessively long cilia
* Immotile cilia syndrome, Kartagener type
* Immune deficiency, familial variable
* Immune thrombocytopenia
* Immunodeficiency, primary
* Immunodeficiency, secondary
* Immunodeficiency with short limb dwarfism
* Immunodeficiency, microcephaly with normal intelligence
* Imperforate anus
* Imperforate oropharynx costo vertebral anomalies
* Impetigo

==In==
===In===
* Inactive colon

===In–Inz===
* Inborn amino acid metabolism disorder
* Inborn branched chain aminoaciduria
* Inborn error of metabolism
* Inborn metabolic disorder
* Inborn renal aminoaciduria
* Inborn urea cycle disorder
* Incisors fused
* Inclusion-cell disease
* Inclusion conjunctivitis
* Incontinentia pigmenti
* Incontinentia pigmenti achromians
* Indomethacin antenatal infection
* Induced delusional disorder

===Inf–Inh===
* Infant epilepsy with migrant focal crisis
* Infant respiratory distress syndrome
* Infantile apnea
* Infantile axonal neuropathy
* Infantile convulsions and paroxysmal choreoathetosis, familial
* Infantile digital fibromatosis
* Infantile dysphagia
* Infantile multisystem inflammatory disease
* Infantile myofibromatosis
* Infantile onset spinocerebellar ataxia
* Infantile recurrent chronic multifocal osteomyolitis
* Infantile sialic acid storage disorder
* Infantile spasms broad thumbs
* Infantile spasms
* Infantile striato thalamic degeneration
* Infectious arthritis
* Infectious myocarditis
* Infective endocarditis
* Inflammatory breast cancer
* Infundibulopelvic stenosis multicystic kidney
* Influenza
* Inguinal hernia
* Inhalant abuse
:* Inhalant abuse, aliphatic hydrocarbons
:* Inhalant abuse, aromatic hydrocarbons
:* Inhalant abuse, ketones
:* Inhalant abuse, haloalkanes
:* Inhalant abuse, nitrites

===Ins===
* Congenital insensitivity to pain
* Instability mitotic non disjunction syndrome
* Insulinoma
* Insulin-resistance type B
* Insulin-resistant acanthosis nigricans, type A

===Int===
* Intercellular cholesterol esterification disease
* Interferon gamma, receptor 1, deficiency
* Internal carotid agenesis
* Intraocular lymphoma
* Interstitial cystitis
* Interstitial lung disease
* Interstitial pneumonia
* Intestinal atresia multiple
* Intestinal lipodystrophy
* Intestinal lymphangiectasia
* Intestinal malrotation facial anomalies familial type
* Intestinal pseudoobstruction chronic idiopathic
* Intestinal pseudo-obstruction
* Intestinal spirochetosis
* Intoeing
* Intracranial aneurysms multiple congenital anomaly
* Intracranial arteriovenous malformations
* Intractable singultus
* Intrathoracic kidney vertebral fusion
* Intrauterine growth retardation mandibular malar hypoplasia
* Intrauterine infections
* Intrinsic factor, congenital deficiency of

==Io–Iv==
* Iodine antenatal infection
* Iodine deficiency
* Iophobia
* Iridocyclitis
* Iridogoniodysgenesis, dominant type
* Iris dysplasia hypertelorism deafness
* Iritis
* Iron deficiency
* Iron overload
* Irons–Bhan syndrome 
* Irritable bowel syndrome
* Isaacs–Mertens syndrome
* Isaacs syndrome
* Ischiadic hypoplasia renal dysfunction immunodeficiency
* Ischiopatellar dysplasia Isochromosome 18p syndrome
* Isochromosome i (5p)
* Isochromosome 18p syndrome
* Isosporosiasis
* Isotretinoin embryopathy
* Isthmian coarctation
* Ivemark syndrome
* Ivic syndrome</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q12136" start="18" end="25" title="disease" label="disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516888" start="76" end="90" title="I cell disease" label="I cell disease"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="93" end="118" title="Inverted Gentile Disorder" label="Inverted Gentile Disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q3539030" start="129" end="143" title="IBIDS syndrome" label="IBIDS syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1869923" start="164" end="176" title="ICF syndrome" label="ICF syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q5986402" start="190" end="211" title="Ichthyoallyeinotoxism" label="Ichthyoallyeinotoxism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3321265" start="214" end="227" title="Ichthyophobia" label="Ichthyophobia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345746" start="230" end="285" title="Ichthyosiform erythroderma corneal involvement deafness" label="Ichthyosiform erythroderma corneal involvement deafness"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="288" end="345" title="Ichthyosis alopecia eclabion ectropion mental retardation" label="Ichthyosis alopecia eclabion ectropion mental retardation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7376681" start="348" end="380" title="Ichthyosis and male hypogonadism" label="Ichthyosis and male hypogonadism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5986438" start="383" end="412" title="Ichthyosis bullosa of Siemens" label="Ichthyosis bullosa of Siemens"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="415" end="448" title="Ichthyosis cheek eyebrow syndrome" label="Ichthyosis cheek eyebrow syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="451" end="487" title="Ichthyosis congenita biliary atresia" label="Ichthyosis congenita biliary atresia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7383669" start="490" end="545" title="Ichthyosis deafness mental retardation skeletal anomaly" label="Ichthyosis deafness mental retardation skeletal anomaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q5986440" start="548" end="601" title="Ichthyosis follicularis atrichia photophobia syndrome" label="Ichthyosis follicularis atrichia photophobia syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="604" end="657" title="Ichthyosis hepatosplenomegaly cerebellar degeneration" label="Ichthyosis hepatosplenomegaly cerebellar degeneration"/>
<link wikidata="Q5986448" start="660" end="698" title="Ichthyosis hystrix, Curth Macklin type" label="Ichthyosis hystrix, Curth Macklin type"/>
<link wikidata="Q5986443" start="701" end="732" title="Ichthyosis linearis circumflexa" label="Ichthyosis linearis circumflexa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7376681" start="735" end="763" title="Ichthyosis male hypogonadism" label="Ichthyosis male hypogonadism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="766" end="810" title="Ichthyosis mental retardation Devriendt type" label="Ichthyosis mental retardation Devriendt type"/>
<link wikidata="Q55781987" start="813" end="868" title="Ichthyosis mental retardation dwarfism renal impairment" label="Ichthyosis mental retardation dwarfism renal impairment"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="871" end="896" title="Ichthyosis microphthalmos" label="Ichthyosis microphthalmos"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="899" end="943" title="Ichthyosis tapered fingers midline groove up" label="Ichthyosis tapered fingers midline groove up"/>
<link wikidata="Q3765145" start="946" end="965" title="Ichthyosis vulgaris" label="Ichthyosis vulgaris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1976193" start="968" end="1006" title="Ichthyosis, erythrokeratolysis hemalis" label="Ichthyosis, erythrokeratolysis hemalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6393653" start="1009" end="1063" title="Ichthyosis, keratosis follicularis spinulosa Decalvans" label="Ichthyosis, keratosis follicularis spinulosa Decalvans"/>
<link wikidata="Q3804556" start="1066" end="1096" title="Ichthyosis, lamellar recessive" label="Ichthyosis, lamellar recessive"/>
<link wikidata="Q9390284" start="1099" end="1129" title="Ichthyosis, Netherton syndrome" label="Ichthyosis, Netherton syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1140" end="1154" title="Idaho syndrome" label="Idaho syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q32540" start="1157" end="1196" title="Idiopathic acute eosinophilic pneumonia" label="Idiopathic acute eosinophilic pneumonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q55950311" start="1199" end="1230" title="Idiopathic adolescent scoliosis" label="Idiopathic adolescent scoliosis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1233" end="1261" title="Idiopathic adult neutropenia" label="Idiopathic adult neutropenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q979129" start="1264" end="1308" title="Idiopathic alveolar hypoventilation syndrome" label="Idiopathic alveolar hypoventilation syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q220989" start="1311" end="1363" title="Idiopathic congenital nystagmus, dominant, X- linked" label="Idiopathic congenital nystagmus, dominant, X- linked"/>
<link wikidata="Q424258" start="1366" end="1406" title="Idiopathic diffuse interstitial fibrosis" label="Idiopathic diffuse interstitial fibrosis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1409" end="1454" title="Idiopathic dilatation of the pulmonary artery" label="Idiopathic dilatation of the pulmonary artery"/>
<link wikidata="Q283656" start="1457" end="1491" title="Idiopathic dilation cardiomyopathy" label="Idiopathic dilation cardiomyopathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q755524" start="1494" end="1521" title="Idiopathic double athetosis" label="Idiopathic double athetosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q152234" start="1524" end="1540" title="Idiopathic edema" label="Idiopathic edema"/>
<link wikidata="Q32540" start="1543" end="1586" title="Idiopathic eosinophilic chronic pneumopathy" label="Idiopathic eosinophilic chronic pneumopathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7562539" start="1589" end="1612" title="Idiopathic facial palsy" label="Idiopathic facial palsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2551272" start="1615" end="1652" title="Idiopathic hypereosinophilic syndrome" label="Idiopathic hypereosinophilic syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q798309" start="1655" end="1714" title="Idiopathic infection caused by BCG or atypical mycobacteria" label="Idiopathic infection caused by BCG or atypical mycobacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q6318965" start="1717" end="1749" title="Idiopathic juvenile osteoporosis" label="Idiopathic juvenile osteoporosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2290446" start="1752" end="1781" title="Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis" label="Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052626" start="1784" end="1819" title="Idiopathic pulmonary haemosiderosis" label="Idiopathic pulmonary haemosiderosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q17048348" start="1822" end="1856" title="Idiopathic sclerosing mesenteritis" label="Idiopathic sclerosing mesenteritis"/>
<link wikidata="Q638729" start="1859" end="1894" title="Idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura" label="Idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura"/>
<link wikidata="Q1529983" start="1897" end="1929" title="Iduronate 2-sulfatase deficiency" label="Iduronate 2-sulfatase deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q5986440" start="1943" end="1956" title="IFAP syndrome" label="IFAP syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q942926" start="1959" end="1973" title="Selective immunoglobulin A deficiency" label="IgA deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146454" start="1976" end="1991" title="IgA nephropathy" label="IgA nephropathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035319" start="1994" end="2008" title="Henoch–Schönlein purpura" label="IgA vasculitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q16894392" start="2011" end="2024" title="IGDA syndrome" label="IGDA syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q11039483" start="2027" end="2047" title="IgG4-related disease" label="IgG4-related disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q708165" start="2050" end="2064" title="Illum syndrome" label="Illum syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2067" end="2080" title="Illyngophobia" label="Illyngophobia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2083" end="2114" title="Ilyina–Amoashy–Grygory syndrome" label="Ilyina–Amoashy–Grygory syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2117" end="2141" title="Imaizumi–Kuroki syndrome" label="Imaizumi–Kuroki syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q6004091" start="2144" end="2159" title="Iminoglycinuria" label="Iminoglycinuria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1690779" start="2162" end="2217" title="Immotile cilia syndrome, due to defective radial spokes" label="Immotile cilia syndrome, due to defective radial spokes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1690779" start="2220" end="2274" title="Immotile cilia syndrome, due to excessively long cilia" label="Immotile cilia syndrome, due to excessively long cilia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1690779" start="2277" end="2317" title="Immotile cilia syndrome, Kartagener type" label="Immotile cilia syndrome, Kartagener type"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472818" start="2320" end="2356" title="Immune deficiency, familial variable" label="Immune deficiency, familial variable"/>
<link wikidata="Q638729" start="2359" end="2382" title="Immune thrombocytopenia" label="Immune thrombocytopenia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2385" end="2410" title="Immunodeficiency, primary" label="Immunodeficiency, primary"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2413" end="2440" title="Immunodeficiency, secondary" label="Immunodeficiency, secondary"/>
<link wikidata="Q55781626" start="2443" end="2484" title="Immunodeficiency with short limb dwarfism" label="Immunodeficiency with short limb dwarfism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250362" start="2487" end="2542" title="Immunodeficiency, microcephaly with normal intelligence" label="Immunodeficiency, microcephaly with normal intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q484631" start="2545" end="2561" title="Imperforate anus" label="Imperforate anus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2564" end="2612" title="Imperforate oropharynx costo vertebral anomalies" label="Imperforate oropharynx costo vertebral anomalies"/>
<link wikidata="Q28971" start="2615" end="2623" title="Impetigo" label="Impetigo"/>
<link wikidata="Q178436" start="2643" end="2657" title="Inactive colon" label="Inactive colon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758393" start="2674" end="2711" title="Inborn amino acid metabolism disorder" label="Inborn amino acid metabolism disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547640" start="2714" end="2749" title="Inborn branched chain aminoaciduria" label="Inborn branched chain aminoaciduria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758393" start="2752" end="2778" title="Inborn error of metabolism" label="Inborn error of metabolism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758393" start="2781" end="2806" title="Inborn metabolic disorder" label="Inborn metabolic disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q6013986" start="2809" end="2835" title="Inborn renal aminoaciduria" label="Inborn renal aminoaciduria"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2838" end="2864" title="Inborn urea cycle disorder" label="Inborn urea cycle disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q3847191" start="2867" end="2881" title="Incisors fused" label="Incisors fused"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516888" start="2884" end="2906" title="Inclusion-cell disease" label="Inclusion-cell disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q167844" start="2909" end="2933" title="Inclusion conjunctivitis" label="Inclusion conjunctivitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q884590" start="2936" end="2958" title="Incontinentia pigmenti" label="Incontinentia pigmenti"/>
<link wikidata="Q907921" start="2961" end="2994" title="Incontinentia pigmenti achromians" label="Incontinentia pigmenti achromians"/>
<link wikidata="Q409231" start="2997" end="3029" title="Indomethacin antenatal infection" label="Indomethacin antenatal infection"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435409" start="3032" end="3059" title="Induced delusional disorder" label="Induced delusional disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q3589156" start="3077" end="3118" title="Infant epilepsy with migrant focal crisis" label="Infant epilepsy with migrant focal crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q754348" start="3121" end="3157" title="Infant respiratory distress syndrome" label="Infant respiratory distress syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q25324240" start="3160" end="3175" title="Infantile apnea" label="Infantile apnea"/>
<link wikidata="Q6029060" start="3178" end="3205" title="Infantile axonal neuropathy" label="Infantile axonal neuropathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6029036" start="3208" end="3270" title="Infantile convulsions and paroxysmal choreoathetosis, familial" label="Infantile convulsions and paroxysmal choreoathetosis, familial"/>
<link wikidata="Q16917828" start="3273" end="3303" title="Infantile digital fibromatosis" label="Infantile digital fibromatosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q623289" start="3306" end="3325" title="Infantile dysphagia" label="Infantile dysphagia"/>
<link wikidata="Q93629491" start="3328" end="3370" title="Infantile multisystem inflammatory disease" label="Infantile multisystem inflammatory disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q6029048" start="3373" end="3398" title="Infantile myofibromatosis" label="Infantile myofibromatosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q899726" start="3401" end="3439" title="Infantile onset spinocerebellar ataxia" label="Infantile onset spinocerebellar ataxia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2787011" start="3442" end="3494" title="Infantile recurrent chronic multifocal osteomyolitis" label="Infantile recurrent chronic multifocal osteomyolitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2280692" start="3497" end="3535" title="Infantile sialic acid storage disorder" label="Infantile sialic acid storage disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q55787460" start="3538" end="3567" title="Infantile spasms broad thumbs" label="Infantile spasms broad thumbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041258" start="3570" end="3586" title="Infantile spasms" label="Infantile spasms"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3589" end="3628" title="Infantile striato thalamic degeneration" label="Infantile striato thalamic degeneration"/>
<link wikidata="Q924421" start="3631" end="3651" title="Infectious arthritis" label="Infectious arthritis"/>
<link wikidata="Q186235" start="3654" end="3676" title="Infectious myocarditis" label="Infectious myocarditis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2450598" start="3679" end="3701" title="Infective endocarditis" label="Infective endocarditis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5922406" start="3704" end="3730" title="Inflammatory breast cancer" label="Inflammatory breast cancer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3733" end="3778" title="Infundibulopelvic stenosis multicystic kidney" label="Infundibulopelvic stenosis multicystic kidney"/>
<link wikidata="Q2840" start="3781" end="3790" title="Influenza" label="Influenza"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144039" start="3793" end="3808" title="Inguinal hernia" label="Inguinal hernia"/>
<link wikidata="Q900521" start="3811" end="3825" title="Inhalant abuse" label="Inhalant abuse"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3829" end="3867" title="Inhalant abuse#Classification" label="Inhalant abuse, aliphatic hydrocarbons"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3871" end="3908" title="Inhalant abuse#Classification" label="Inhalant abuse, aromatic hydrocarbons"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3912" end="3935" title="Inhalant abuse#Classification" label="Inhalant abuse, ketones"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3939" end="3966" title="Inhalant abuse#Classification" label="Inhalant abuse, haloalkanes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3970" end="3994" title="Inhalant abuse#Classification" label="Inhalant abuse, nitrites"/>
<link wikidata="Q501694" start="4008" end="4040" title="Insensitivity to pain with anhidrosis" label="Congenital insensitivity to pain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414557" start="4043" end="4087" title="Instability mitotic non disjunction syndrome" label="Instability mitotic non disjunction syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501239" start="4090" end="4100" title="Insulinoma" label="Insulinoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053470" start="4103" end="4128" title="Insulin-resistance type B" label="Insulin-resistance type B"/>
<link wikidata="Q415833" start="4131" end="4177" title="Insulin-resistant acanthosis nigricans, type A" label="Insulin-resistant acanthosis nigricans, type A"/>
<link wikidata="Q6710283" start="4191" end="4239" title="Intercellular cholesterol esterification disease" label="Intercellular cholesterol esterification disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q25324130" start="4242" end="4282" title="Interferon gamma, receptor 1, deficiency" label="Interferon gamma, receptor 1, deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q118948186" start="4285" end="4310" title="Internal carotid agenesis" label="Internal carotid agenesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6058506" start="4313" end="4333" title="Intraocular lymphoma" label="Intraocular lymphoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1671412" start="4336" end="4357" title="Interstitial cystitis" label="Interstitial cystitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153419" start="4360" end="4385" title="Interstitial lung disease" label="Interstitial lung disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153419" start="4388" end="4410" title="Interstitial pneumonia" label="Interstitial pneumonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q18554801" start="4413" end="4440" title="Intestinal atresia multiple" label="Intestinal atresia multiple"/>
<link wikidata="Q653078" start="4443" end="4467" title="Whipple&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Intestinal lipodystrophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7961531" start="4470" end="4497" title="Intestinal lymphangiectasia" label="Intestinal lymphangiectasia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4500" end="4553" title="Intestinal malrotation facial anomalies familial type" label="Intestinal malrotation facial anomalies familial type"/>
<link wikidata="Q56014002" start="4556" end="4603" title="Intestinal pseudoobstruction chronic idiopathic" label="Intestinal pseudoobstruction chronic idiopathic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3924862" start="4606" end="4635" title="Intestinal pseudo-obstruction" label="Intestinal pseudo-obstruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q12244913" start="4638" end="4662" title="Intestinal spirochetosis" label="Intestinal spirochetosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524166" start="4665" end="4673" title="Intoeing" label="Intoeing"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4676" end="4726" title="Intracranial aneurysms multiple congenital anomaly" label="Intracranial aneurysms multiple congenital anomaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q191570" start="4729" end="4769" title="Intracranial arteriovenous malformations" label="Intracranial arteriovenous malformations"/>
<link wikidata="Q58952" start="4772" end="4793" title="Intractable singultus" label="Intractable singultus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4796" end="4833" title="Intrathoracic kidney vertebral fusion" label="Intrathoracic kidney vertebral fusion"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4836" end="4895" title="Intrauterine growth retardation mandibular malar hypoplasia" label="Intrauterine growth retardation mandibular malar hypoplasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4113827" start="4898" end="4921" title="Intrauterine infections" label="Intrauterine infections"/>
<link wikidata="Q410153" start="4924" end="4966" title="Intrinsic factor, congenital deficiency of" label="Intrinsic factor, congenital deficiency of"/>
<link wikidata="Q1103" start="4980" end="5006" title="Iodine antenatal infection" label="Iodine antenatal infection"/>
<link wikidata="Q18377123" start="5009" end="5026" title="Iodine deficiency" label="Iodine deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q327658" start="5029" end="5037" title="Iophobia" label="Iophobia"/>
<link wikidata="Q280027" start="5040" end="5053" title="Iridocyclitis" label="Iridocyclitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q17125601" start="5056" end="5091" title="Iridogoniodysgenesis, dominant type" label="Iridogoniodysgenesis, dominant type"/>
<link wikidata="Q474994" start="5094" end="5131" title="Iris dysplasia hypertelorism deafness" label="Iris dysplasia hypertelorism deafness"/>
<link wikidata="Q280027" start="5134" end="5140" title="Iritis" label="Iritis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1313081" start="5143" end="5158" title="Iron deficiency" label="Iron deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q2025687" start="5161" end="5174" title="Iron overload" label="Iron overload"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5177" end="5196" title="Irons–Bhan syndrome" label="Irons–Bhan syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q838966" start="5200" end="5224" title="Irritable bowel syndrome" label="Irritable bowel syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5227" end="5250" title="Isaacs–Mertens syndrome" label="Isaacs–Mertens syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q520797" start="5253" end="5268" title="Isaacs syndrome" label="Isaacs syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5271" end="5326" title="Ischiadic hypoplasia renal dysfunction immunodeficiency" label="Ischiadic hypoplasia renal dysfunction immunodeficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q28456109" start="5329" end="5353" title="Ischiopatellar dysplasia" label="Ischiopatellar dysplasia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5383" end="5403" title="Small supernumerary marker chromosome#Isochromosome i (5p)" label="Isochromosome i (5p)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5406" end="5432" title="Small supernumerary marker chromosome#Isochromosome 18p syndrome" label="Isochromosome 18p syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q428447" start="5435" end="5449" title="Isosporosiasis" label="Isosporosiasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q287029" start="5452" end="5476" title="Isotretinoin embryopathy" label="Isotretinoin embryopathy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5479" end="5499" title="Isthmian coarctation" label="Isthmian coarctation"/>
<link wikidata="Q772022" start="5502" end="5518" title="Ivemark syndrome" label="Ivemark syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5521" end="5534" title="Ivic syndrome" label="Ivic syndrome"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="236345" wikidata="Q6616872" url="?curid=236345" title="List of diseases (J)">
<text>This is a list of diseases starting with the letter &quot;J&quot;.

==Ja–Je==
* Jackson–Weiss syndrome
* Jacobsen syndrome
* Jadassohn–Lewandowsky syndrome
* Jaffer–Beighton syndrome
* Jalili syndrome
* Jancar syndrome
* Jankovic–Rivera syndrome
* Jansen type metaphyseal chondrodysplasia
* Jansky–Bielschowsky disease
* Japanese encephalitis
* Jarcho–Levin syndrome
* Jejunal atresia
* Jensen syndrome
* Jequier–Kozlowski skeletal dysplasia
* Jervell and Lange-Nielsen syndrome
* Jeune syndrome situs inversus
* Jeune syndrome
* Jeune asphyxiating thoracic dystrophy

==Jo==
* Job syndrome
* Johanson–Blizzard syndrome
* Johnson–Hall–Krous syndrome
* Johnson–Munson syndrome
* Johnston–Aarons–Schelley syndrome
* Jones–Hersh–Yusk syndrome
* Jones syndrome
* Jorgenson–Lenz syndrome
* Joseph disease
* Joubert syndrome bilateral chorioretinal coloboma
* Joubert syndrome

==Ju==
* Juberg–Hayward syndrome
* Juberg–Marsidi syndrome
* Judge–Misch–Wright syndrome
* Jumping Frenchmen of Maine
* Jung–Wolff–Back–Stahl syndrome
* Juvenile cataract cerebellar atrophy myopathy mental retardation
* Juvenile dermatomyositis
* Juvenile gastrointestinal polyposis
* Juvenile gout
* Juvenile hyaline fibromatosis
* Juvenile macular degeneration hypotrichosis
* Juvenile muscular atrophy of the distal upper limb
* Juvenile myoclonic epilepsy
* Juvenile nephronophthisis
* Juvenile rheumatoid arthritis
* Juvenile temporal arteritis
* Juliannite nephronophthisis</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q12136" start="18" end="25" title="disease" label="disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q6616872" start="58" end="59" title="List of diseases (J)" label="J"/>
<link wikidata="Q6118062" start="80" end="102" title="Jackson–Weiss syndrome" label="Jackson–Weiss syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1677755" start="105" end="122" title="Jacobsen syndrome" label="Jacobsen syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q3360152" start="125" end="155" title="Jadassohn–Lewandowsky syndrome" label="Jadassohn–Lewandowsky syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="158" end="182" title="Jaffer–Beighton syndrome" label="Jaffer–Beighton syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q6126829" start="185" end="200" title="Jalili syndrome" label="Jalili syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q18412811" start="203" end="218" title="Jancar syndrome" label="Jancar syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q7577468" start="221" end="245" title="Jankovic–Rivera syndrome" label="Jankovic–Rivera syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2964433" start="248" end="288" title="Jansen type metaphyseal chondrodysplasia" label="Jansen type metaphyseal chondrodysplasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4354940" start="291" end="318" title="Jansky–Bielschowsky disease" label="Jansky–Bielschowsky disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q738292" start="321" end="342" title="Japanese encephalitis" label="Japanese encephalitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4821698" start="345" end="366" title="Jarcho–Levin syndrome" label="Jarcho–Levin syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q4597494" start="369" end="384" title="Jejunal atresia" label="Jejunal atresia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3508677" start="387" end="402" title="Jensen syndrome" label="Jensen syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="405" end="441" title="Jequier–Kozlowski skeletal dysplasia" label="Jequier–Kozlowski skeletal dysplasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3304152" start="444" end="478" title="Jervell and Lange-Nielsen syndrome" label="Jervell and Lange-Nielsen syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q4807981" start="481" end="510" title="Jeune syndrome situs inversus" label="Jeune syndrome situs inversus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4807981" start="513" end="527" title="Jeune syndrome" label="Jeune syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="530" end="567" title="Jeune asphyxiating thoracic dystrophy" label="Jeune asphyxiating thoracic dystrophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2336873" start="578" end="590" title="Job syndrome" label="Job syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1699007" start="593" end="619" title="Johanson–Blizzard syndrome" label="Johanson–Blizzard syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="622" end="649" title="Johnson–Hall–Krous syndrome" label="Johnson–Hall–Krous syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q6268578" start="652" end="675" title="Johnson–Munson syndrome" label="Johnson–Munson syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="678" end="711" title="Johnston–Aarons–Schelley syndrome" label="Johnston–Aarons–Schelley syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="714" end="739" title="Jones–Hersh–Yusk syndrome" label="Jones–Hersh–Yusk syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q22965474" start="742" end="756" title="Jones syndrome" label="Jones syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="759" end="782" title="Jorgenson–Lenz syndrome" label="Jorgenson–Lenz syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q3026441" start="785" end="799" title="Joseph disease" label="Joseph disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q1101694" start="802" end="851" title="Joubert syndrome bilateral chorioretinal coloboma" label="Joubert syndrome bilateral chorioretinal coloboma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1101694" start="854" end="870" title="Joubert syndrome" label="Joubert syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q18021495" start="881" end="904" title="Juberg–Hayward syndrome" label="Juberg–Hayward syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q7545701" start="907" end="930" title="Juberg–Marsidi syndrome" label="Juberg–Marsidi syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="933" end="960" title="Judge–Misch–Wright syndrome" label="Judge–Misch–Wright syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q6311294" start="963" end="989" title="Jumping Frenchmen of Maine" label="Jumping Frenchmen of Maine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="992" end="1022" title="Jung–Wolff–Back–Stahl syndrome" label="Jung–Wolff–Back–Stahl syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2628677" start="1025" end="1089" title="Juvenile cataract cerebellar atrophy myopathy mental retardation" label="Juvenile cataract cerebellar atrophy myopathy mental retardation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6318950" start="1092" end="1116" title="Juvenile dermatomyositis" label="Juvenile dermatomyositis"/>
<link wikidata="Q609165" start="1119" end="1154" title="Juvenile gastrointestinal polyposis" label="Juvenile gastrointestinal polyposis"/>
<link wikidata="Q727436" start="1157" end="1170" title="Juvenile gout" label="Juvenile gout"/>
<link wikidata="Q6318955" start="1173" end="1202" title="Juvenile hyaline fibromatosis" label="Juvenile hyaline fibromatosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q22132220" start="1205" end="1248" title="Juvenile macular degeneration hypotrichosis" label="Juvenile macular degeneration hypotrichosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6901736" start="1251" end="1301" title="Juvenile muscular atrophy of the distal upper limb" label="Juvenile muscular atrophy of the distal upper limb"/>
<link wikidata="Q543517" start="1304" end="1331" title="Juvenile myoclonic epilepsy" label="Juvenile myoclonic epilepsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q24975508" start="1334" end="1359" title="Juvenile nephronophthisis" label="Juvenile nephronophthisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q861224" start="1362" end="1391" title="Juvenile rheumatoid arthritis" label="Juvenile rheumatoid arthritis"/>
<link wikidata="Q707816" start="1394" end="1421" title="Juvenile temporal arteritis" label="Juvenile temporal arteritis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1424" end="1451" title="Juliannite nephronophthisis" label="Juliannite nephronophthisis"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="236346" wikidata="Q6616874" url="?curid=236346" title="List of diseases (K)">
<text>This is a list of diseases starting with the letter &quot;K&quot;.

==Ka==
===Kab–Kas===
* Kabuki syndrome
* Kalam–Hafeez syndrome
* Kaler–Garrity–Stern syndrome
* Kallikrein hypertension
* Kallmann syndrome with Spastic paraplegia
* Kallmann syndrome with heart disease
* Kallmann syndrome, type 1, X linked
* Kallmann syndrome, type 3, recessive
* Kalyanraman syndrome
* Kantaputra–Gorlin syndrome
* Kaolin pneumoconiosis
* Kaplan–Plauchu–Fitch syndrome
* Kaplowitz–Bodurtha syndrome
* Kaposi sarcoma
* Kaposiform hemangioendothelioma
* Kapur–Toriello syndrome
* Karandikar–Maria–Kamble syndrome
* Karsch–Neugebauer syndrome
* Kartagener syndrome
* Kashani–Strom–Utley syndrome
* Kasznica–Carlson–Coppedge syndrome

===Kat–Kaw===
* Kathisophobia
* Katsantoni–Papadakou–Lagoyanni syndrome
* Katz syndrome
* Kaufman oculocerebrofacial syndrome
* Kawasaki syndrome

==Ke==
===Kea–Ken===
* Kearns–Sayre syndrome
* Keloids
* Kennedy disease
* Kennerknecht–Sorgo–Oberhoffer syndrome
* Kennerknecht–Vogel syndrome
* Kenny–Caffey syndrome
* Kenny–Caffey syndrome, type 1

===Ker===

====Kera====
* Keratitis, hereditary
* Keratoacanthoma familial
* Keratoacanthoma
* Keratoconjunctivitis sicca
* Keratoconus posticus circumscriptus
* Keratoconus
* Keratoderma hypotrichosis leukonychia
* Keratoderma palmoplantar deafness
* Keratoderma palmoplantar spastic paralysis
* Keratoderma palmoplantaris transgrediens
* Keratolytic winter erythema
* Keratomalacia
* Keratosis focal palmoplantar gingival
* Keratosis follicularis dwarfism cerebral atrophy
* Keratosis follicularis spinulosa decalvans
* Keratosis palmoplantaris adenocarcinoma of the colon
* Keratosis palmoplantaris esophageal colon cancer
* Keratosis palmoplantaris papulosa
* Keratosis palmoplantaris with corneal dystrophy
* Keratosis palmoplantar-periodontopathy
* Keratosis pilaris
* Keratosis, seborrheic

====Keri–Kern====
* Kerion celsi
* Kernicterus

===Keu===
* Keutel syndrome

==Ki–Kn==
* Ki-1cell lymphoma
* KID syndrome
* Kifafa seizure disorder
* Kikuchi disease
* Kimura disease
* King–Denborough syndrome
* Kjer&#x27;s optic neuropathy
* Kleeblattschaedel syndrome
* Kleine–Levin syndrome
* Kleiner–Holmes syndrome
* Klinefelter&#x27;s Syndrome
* Klippel–Feil syndrome
** Klippel–Feil deformity conductive deafness absent vagina
** Klippel–Feil syndrome dominant type
** Klippel–Feil syndrome recessive type
* Klippel–Trénaunay–Weber syndrome
* Klumpke paralysis
* Klüver–Bucy syndrome
* Kniest dysplasia
* Kniest-like dysplasia lethal
* Knobloch–Layer syndrome
* Knuckle pads, leuconychia and sensorineural deafness

==Ko==
* Kobberling–Dunnigan syndrome
* Kocher–Debré–Semelaigne syndrome
* Kohler disease
* Kohlschütter-Tönz syndrome
* Koilonychia
* Konigsmark–Knox–Hussels syndrome
* Koone–Rizzo–Elias syndrome
* Korsakoff&#x27;s syndrome
* Korula–Wilson–Salomonson syndrome
* Kostmann syndrome
* Kosztolanyi syndrome
* Kotzot–Richter syndrome
* Kounis syndrome
* Kousseff–Nichols syndrome
* Kousseff syndrome
* Kowarski syndrome
* Kozlowski–Brown–Hardwick syndrome
* Kozlowski–Celermajer syndrome
* Kozlowski–Massen syndrome
* Kozlowski–Ouvrier syndrome
* Kozlowski–Rafinski–Klicharska syndrome
* Kozlowski–Tsuruta–Taki syndrome
* Kozlowski–Warren–Fisher syndrome
* Kozlowski–Krajewska syndrome

==Kr–Ky==
* Krabbe leukodystrophy
* Krasnow–Qazi syndrome
* Krause–Kivlin syndrome
* Krauss–Herman–Holmes syndrome
* Krieble–Bixler syndrome
* Kumar–Levick syndrome
* Kurczynski–Casperson syndrome
* Kuru
* Kuskokwim disease
* Kuster–Majewski–Hammerstein syndrome
* Kuster syndrome
* Kuzniecky syndrome
* Kwashiorkor
* Kyasanur forest disease
* Kyphosis
* Kyphosis brachyphalangy optic atrophy</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q12136" start="18" end="25" title="disease" label="disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538227" start="91" end="106" title="Kabuki syndrome" label="Kabuki syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="109" end="130" title="Kalam–Hafeez syndrome" label="Kalam–Hafeez syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="133" end="161" title="Kaler–Garrity–Stern syndrome" label="Kaler–Garrity–Stern syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2270510" start="164" end="187" title="Kallikrein hypertension" label="Kallikrein hypertension"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165179" start="190" end="231" title="Kallmann syndrome" label="Kallmann syndrome with Spastic paraplegia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165179" start="234" end="270" title="Kallmann syndrome" label="Kallmann syndrome with heart disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165179" start="273" end="308" title="Kallmann syndrome" label="Kallmann syndrome, type 1, X linked"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165179" start="311" end="347" title="Kallmann syndrome" label="Kallmann syndrome, type 3, recessive"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="350" end="370" title="Kalyanraman syndrome" label="Kalyanraman syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="373" end="399" title="Kantaputra–Gorlin syndrome" label="Kantaputra–Gorlin syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q651223" start="402" end="423" title="Kaolin pneumoconiosis" label="Kaolin pneumoconiosis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="426" end="455" title="Kaplan–Plauchu–Fitch syndrome" label="Kaplan–Plauchu–Fitch syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="458" end="485" title="Kaplowitz–Bodurtha syndrome" label="Kaplowitz–Bodurtha syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q725345" start="488" end="502" title="Kaposi sarcoma" label="Kaposi sarcoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q25422732" start="505" end="536" title="Kaposiform hemangioendothelioma" label="Kaposiform hemangioendothelioma"/>
<link wikidata="Q17128230" start="539" end="562" title="Kapur–Toriello syndrome" label="Kapur–Toriello syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="565" end="597" title="Karandikar–Maria–Kamble syndrome" label="Karandikar–Maria–Kamble syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q21050314" start="600" end="626" title="Karsch–Neugebauer syndrome" label="Karsch–Neugebauer syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1690779" start="629" end="648" title="Kartagener syndrome" label="Kartagener syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="651" end="679" title="Kashani–Strom–Utley syndrome" label="Kashani–Strom–Utley syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="682" end="716" title="Kasznica–Carlson–Coppedge syndrome" label="Kasznica–Carlson–Coppedge syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="734" end="747" title="Kathisophobia" label="Kathisophobia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="750" end="789" title="Katsantoni–Papadakou–Lagoyanni syndrome" label="Katsantoni–Papadakou–Lagoyanni syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q6378573" start="792" end="805" title="Katz syndrome" label="Katz syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q6378691" start="808" end="843" title="Kaufman oculocerebrofacial syndrome" label="Kaufman oculocerebrofacial syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q265936" start="846" end="863" title="Kawasaki syndrome" label="Kawasaki syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2605012" start="888" end="909" title="Kearns–Sayre syndrome" label="Kearns–Sayre syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131260" start="912" end="919" title="Keloids" label="Keloids"/>
<link wikidata="Q1995327" start="922" end="937" title="Kennedy disease" label="Kennedy disease"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="940" end="978" title="Kennerknecht–Sorgo–Oberhoffer syndrome" label="Kennerknecht–Sorgo–Oberhoffer syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="981" end="1008" title="Kennerknecht–Vogel syndrome" label="Kennerknecht–Vogel syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q48989142" start="1011" end="1032" title="Kenny–Caffey syndrome" label="Kenny–Caffey syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1035" end="1064" title="Kenny–Caffey syndrome, type 1" label="Kenny–Caffey syndrome, type 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q757838" start="1092" end="1113" title="Keratitis, hereditary" label="Keratitis, hereditary"/>
<link wikidata="Q785827" start="1116" end="1140" title="Keratoacanthoma familial" label="Keratoacanthoma familial"/>
<link wikidata="Q785827" start="1143" end="1158" title="Keratoacanthoma" label="Keratoacanthoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162694" start="1161" end="1187" title="Keratoconjunctivitis sicca" label="Keratoconjunctivitis sicca"/>
<link wikidata="Q611984" start="1190" end="1225" title="Keratoconus posticus circumscriptus" label="Keratoconus posticus circumscriptus"/>
<link wikidata="Q611984" start="1228" end="1239" title="Keratoconus" label="Keratoconus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7128426" start="1242" end="1279" title="Keratoderma hypotrichosis leukonychia" label="Keratoderma hypotrichosis leukonychia"/>
<link wikidata="Q55781160" start="1282" end="1315" title="Keratoderma palmoplantar deafness" label="Keratoderma palmoplantar deafness"/>
<link wikidata="Q7128426" start="1318" end="1360" title="Keratoderma palmoplantar spastic paralysis" label="Keratoderma palmoplantar spastic paralysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7128426" start="1363" end="1403" title="Keratoderma palmoplantaris transgrediens" label="Keratoderma palmoplantaris transgrediens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1976193" start="1406" end="1433" title="Keratolytic winter erythema" label="Keratolytic winter erythema"/>
<link wikidata="Q379418" start="1436" end="1449" title="Keratomalacia" label="Keratomalacia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5463857" start="1452" end="1489" title="Keratosis focal palmoplantar gingival" label="Keratosis focal palmoplantar gingival"/>
<link wikidata="Q55782575" start="1492" end="1540" title="Keratosis follicularis dwarfism cerebral atrophy" label="Keratosis follicularis dwarfism cerebral atrophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6393653" start="1543" end="1585" title="Keratosis follicularis spinulosa decalvans" label="Keratosis follicularis spinulosa decalvans"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1588" end="1640" title="Keratosis palmoplantaris adenocarcinoma of the colon" label="Keratosis palmoplantaris adenocarcinoma of the colon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5921848" start="1643" end="1691" title="Keratosis palmoplantaris esophageal colon cancer" label="Keratosis palmoplantaris esophageal colon cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7128426" start="1694" end="1727" title="Keratosis palmoplantaris papulosa" label="Keratosis palmoplantaris papulosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7484623" start="1730" end="1777" title="Keratosis palmoplantaris with corneal dystrophy" label="Keratosis palmoplantaris with corneal dystrophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2050791" start="1780" end="1818" title="Keratosis palmoplantar-periodontopathy" label="Keratosis palmoplantar-periodontopathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637035" start="1821" end="1838" title="Keratosis pilaris" label="Keratosis pilaris"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166371" start="1841" end="1862" title="Seborrheic keratosis" label="Keratosis, seborrheic"/>
<link wikidata="Q167967" start="1884" end="1896" title="Kerion celsi" label="Kerion celsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q861845" start="1899" end="1910" title="Kernicterus" label="Kernicterus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6395632" start="1924" end="1939" title="Keutel syndrome" label="Keutel syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q486090" start="1953" end="1970" title="Ki-1cell lymphoma" label="Ki-1cell lymphoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345746" start="1973" end="1985" title="KID syndrome" label="KID syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1988" end="2011" title="Kifafa seizure disorder" label="Kifafa seizure disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060827" start="2014" end="2029" title="Kikuchi disease" label="Kikuchi disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q2069545" start="2032" end="2046" title="Kimura disease" label="Kimura disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585081" start="2049" end="2073" title="King–Denborough syndrome" label="King–Denborough syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2869820" start="2076" end="2104" title="Kjer&amp;#x27;s optic neuropathy" label="Kjer&amp;#x27;s optic neuropathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q108899092" start="2107" end="2133" title="Kleeblattschaedel syndrome" label="Kleeblattschaedel syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q613809" start="2136" end="2157" title="Kleine–Levin syndrome" label="Kleine–Levin syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2160" end="2183" title="Kleiner–Holmes syndrome" label="Kleiner–Holmes syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q207133" start="2186" end="2213" title="Klinefelter&amp;#x27;s Syndrome" label="Klinefelter&amp;#x27;s Syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774751" start="2216" end="2237" title="Klippel–Feil syndrome" label="Klippel–Feil syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2241" end="2297" title="Klippel–Feil deformity conductive deafness absent vagina" label="Klippel–Feil deformity conductive deafness absent vagina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774751" start="2301" end="2336" title="Klippel–Feil syndrome dominant type" label="Klippel–Feil syndrome dominant type"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774751" start="2340" end="2376" title="Klippel–Feil syndrome recessive type" label="Klippel–Feil syndrome recessive type"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774750" start="2379" end="2411" title="Klippel–Trénaunay–Weber syndrome" label="Klippel–Trénaunay–Weber syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2336817" start="2414" end="2431" title="Klumpke paralysis" label="Klumpke paralysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q367929" start="2434" end="2454" title="Klüver–Bucy syndrome" label="Klüver–Bucy syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q6422092" start="2457" end="2473" title="Kniest dysplasia" label="Kniest dysplasia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2476" end="2504" title="Kniest-like dysplasia lethal" label="Kniest-like dysplasia lethal"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2507" end="2530" title="Knobloch–Layer syndrome" label="Knobloch–Layer syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q4865826" start="2533" end="2585" title="Knuckle pads, leuconychia and sensorineural deafness" label="Knuckle pads, leuconychia and sensorineural deafness"/>
<link wikidata="Q5432945" start="2596" end="2624" title="Kobberling–Dunnigan syndrome" label="Kobberling–Dunnigan syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q932899" start="2627" end="2659" title="Kocher–Debre–Semelaigne syndrome" label="Kocher–Debré–Semelaigne syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q578257" start="2662" end="2676" title="Kohler disease" label="Kohler disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q6426064" start="2679" end="2705" title="Kohlschütter-Tönz syndrome" label="Kohlschütter-Tönz syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q968206" start="2708" end="2719" title="Koilonychia" label="Koilonychia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2722" end="2754" title="Konigsmark–Knox–Hussels syndrome" label="Konigsmark–Knox–Hussels syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2757" end="2783" title="Koone–Rizzo–Elias syndrome" label="Koone–Rizzo–Elias syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q622901" start="2786" end="2811" title="Korsakoff&amp;#x27;s syndrome" label="Korsakoff&amp;#x27;s syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2814" end="2847" title="Korula–Wilson–Salomonson syndrome" label="Korula–Wilson–Salomonson syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337441" start="2850" end="2867" title="Kostmann syndrome" label="Kostmann syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2870" end="2890" title="Kosztolanyi syndrome" label="Kosztolanyi syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2893" end="2916" title="Kotzot–Richter syndrome" label="Kotzot–Richter syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q6434647" start="2919" end="2934" title="Kounis syndrome" label="Kounis syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2937" end="2962" title="Kousseff–Nichols syndrome" label="Kousseff–Nichols syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2965" end="2982" title="Kousseff syndrome" label="Kousseff syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q17082044" start="2985" end="3002" title="Kowarski syndrome" label="Kowarski syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3005" end="3038" title="Kozlowski–Brown–Hardwick syndrome" label="Kozlowski–Brown–Hardwick syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3041" end="3070" title="Kozlowski–Celermajer syndrome" label="Kozlowski–Celermajer syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3073" end="3098" title="Kozlowski–Massen syndrome" label="Kozlowski–Massen syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3101" end="3127" title="Kozlowski–Ouvrier syndrome" label="Kozlowski–Ouvrier syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3130" end="3168" title="Kozlowski–Rafinski–Klicharska syndrome" label="Kozlowski–Rafinski–Klicharska syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3171" end="3202" title="Kozlowski–Tsuruta–Taki syndrome" label="Kozlowski–Tsuruta–Taki syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3205" end="3237" title="Kozlowski–Warren–Fisher syndrome" label="Kozlowski–Warren–Fisher syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3240" end="3268" title="Kozlowski–Krajewska syndrome" label="Kozlowski–Krajewska syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q511372" start="3282" end="3303" title="Krabbe leukodystrophy" label="Krabbe leukodystrophy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3306" end="3327" title="Krasnow–Qazi syndrome" label="Krasnow–Qazi syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1559250" start="3330" end="3352" title="Krause–Kivlin syndrome" label="Krause–Kivlin syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3355" end="3384" title="Krauss–Herman–Holmes syndrome" label="Krauss–Herman–Holmes syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3387" end="3410" title="Krieble–Bixler syndrome" label="Krieble–Bixler syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3413" end="3434" title="Kumar–Levick syndrome" label="Kumar–Levick syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3437" end="3466" title="Kurczynski–Casperson syndrome" label="Kurczynski–Casperson syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q274615" start="3469" end="3473" title="Kuru (disease)" label="Kuru"/>
<link wikidata="Q708165" start="3476" end="3493" title="Kuskokwim disease" label="Kuskokwim disease"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3496" end="3532" title="Kuster–Majewski–Hammerstein syndrome" label="Kuster–Majewski–Hammerstein syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473749" start="3535" end="3550" title="Kuster syndrome" label="Kuster syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991265" start="3553" end="3571" title="Kuzniecky syndrome" label="Kuzniecky syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q213151" start="3574" end="3585" title="Kwashiorkor" label="Kwashiorkor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432397" start="3588" end="3611" title="Kyasanur forest disease" label="Kyasanur forest disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q478389" start="3614" end="3622" title="Kyphosis" label="Kyphosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4892313" start="3625" end="3662" title="Kyphosis brachyphalangy optic atrophy" label="Kyphosis brachyphalangy optic atrophy"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="236349" wikidata="Q6616876" url="?curid=236349" title="List of diseases (L)">
<text>This is a list of diseases starting with the letter &quot;L&quot;.

==La==
===Lab–Lam===
* Labrador lung
* Labyrinthitis
* Lachiewicz–Sibley syndrome
* Lacrimo-auriculo-dento-digital syndrome
* Lactate dehydrogenase deficiency type A
* Lactate dehydrogenase deficiency type B
* Lactate dehydrogenase deficiency type C
* Lactate dehydrogenase deficiency
* Lactic acidosis congenital infantile
* Ladda–Zonana–Ramer syndrome
* Lafora disease
* Lagophthalmia cleft lip palate
* Lambdoid synostosis familial
* Lambert syndrome
* Lambert–Eaton myasthenic syndrome (Lambert–Eaton paraneoplastic cerebellar degeneration)
* Lambert–Eaton syndrome
* Lamellar ichthyosis
* Lamellar recessive ichthyosis

===Lan–Lap===
* Landau–Kleffner syndrome
* Landouzy–Dejerine muscular dystrophy
* Landy–Donnai syndrome
* Langdon Down
* Langer–Nishino–Yamaguchi syndrome
* Langer–Giedion syndrome
* Langerhans cell granulomatosis
* Langerhans cell histiocytosis
* Laparoschisis
* Laplane–Fontaine–Lagardere syndrome

===Lar–Lat===
* Large B-cell diffuse lymphoma
* Laron-type dwarfism
* Larsen-like osseous dysplasia dwarfism
* Larsen-like syndrome lethal type
* Larsen syndrome craniosynostosis
* Larsen syndrome, dominant type
* Larsen syndrome, recessive type
* Larsen syndrome
* Laryngeal abductor paralysis mental retardation
* Laryngeal carcinoma
* Laryngeal cleft
* Laryngeal neoplasm
* Laryngeal papillomatosis
* Laryngeal web congenital heart disease short stature
* Laryngocele
* Laryngomalacia dominant congenital
* Laryngomalacia
* Larynx atresia
* Lassa fever
* Lassueur–Graham–Little syndrome
* Late onset dominant cone dystrophy
* Lateral body wall defect
* Laterality defects dominant
* Lattice corneal dystrophy type 2

===Lau–Lax===
* Launois–Bensaude adenolipomatosis
* Laurence–Prosser–Rocker syndrome
* Laurence–Moon–Bardet–Biedl syndrome
* Laurin–Sandrow syndrome
* Laxova–Brown–Hogan syndrome

==Lb–Lc==
* LBWC - amniotic bands
* LBWD syndrome
* LCHAD deficiency

==Le==
===Lea–Leh===
* Lead poisoning
* Leao Ribeiro Da Silva syndrome
* Learman syndrome
* Leber military aneurysm
* Leber optic atrophy
* Leber&#x27;s disease
* Lecithin cholesterol acyltransferase deficiency
* Ledderhose disease
* Lee–Root–Fenske syndrome
* Left ventricle-aorta tunnel
* Left ventricular hypertrophy
* Leg absence deformity cataract
* Legg–Calvé–Perthes syndrome
* Legionellosis
** syn: Legionnaires&#x27; disease
* Lehman syndrome

===Lei–Ler===
* Leichtman–Wood–Rohn syndrome
* Leifer–Lai–Buyse syndrome
* Leigh disease
* Leigh syndrome, French Canadian type
* Leiner disease
* Leiomyoma
* Leiomyomatosis familial
* Leiomyomatosis of oesophagus cataract hematuria
* Leiomyosarcoma
* Leipala–Kaitila syndrome
* Leishmaniasis
* Leisti–Hollister–Rimoin syndrome
* Lemierre&#x27;s syndrome
* Lennox–Gastaut syndrome
* Lentiginosis in context of NF
* Lenz–Majewski hyperostotic dwarfism
* Lenz microphthalmia syndrome
* Leprechaunism
* Leprosy
* Leptomeningeal capillary - venous angiomatosis
* Leptospirosis
* Leri pleonosteosis
* Léri–Weill dyschondrosteosis

===Les–Let===
* Lesch–Nyhan syndrome
* Lethal chondrodysplasia Moerman type
* Lethal chondrodysplasia Seller type
* Lethal congenital contracture syndrome
* Letterer–Siwe disease

===Leu–Lev===
* Leucinosis
* Leukemia subleukemic
* Leukemia, B-Cell, chronic
* Leukemia, Myeloid
* Leukemia, T-Cell, chronic
* Leukemia
* Leukocyte adhesion deficiency syndrome
* Leukocyte adhesion deficiency type 2
* Leukocytoclastic angiitis
* Leukodystrophy reunion type
* Leukodystrophy, globoid cell
* Leukodystrophy, metachromatic
* Leukodystrophy, pseudometachromatic
* Leukodystrophy, Sudanophilic
* Leukodystrophy
* Leukoencephalopathy palmoplantar keratoderma
* Leukomalacia
* Leukomelanoderma mental retardation hypotrichosis
* Leukoplakia
* Levator syndrome
* Levic–Stefanovic–Nikolic syndrome
* Levine–Crichley syndrome

===Lew–Ley===
* Lewandowski–Kikolich syndrome
* Lewis–Pashayan syndrome
* Leydig cells hypoplasia

==Lg–Lh==
* LGCR
* LGS
* Lhermitte–Duclos disease

==Li==
===Lic–Lin===
* Lichen myxedematosus
* Lichen planus follicularis
* Lichen planus
* Lichen sclerosus et atrophicus
* Lichen spinulosus
* Lichstenstein syndrome
* Lida–Kannari syndrome
* Liddle syndrome
* Li–Fraumeni syndrome
* Light chain disease
* Ligyrophobia
* Limb deficiencies distal micrognathia
* Limb dystonia
* Limb reduction defect
* Limb scalp and skull defects
* Limb transversal defect cardiac anomaly
* Limb-body wall complex
* Limb-girdle muscular dystrophy
* Lindsay–Burn syndrome
* Lindstrom syndrome
* Linear hamartoma syndrome
* Linear nevus syndrome

===Lip–Lis===
* Lip lit syndrome
* Lipid storage myopathy
* Lipidosis with triglyceride storage disease
* Lipoamide dehydrogenase deficiency
* Lipodystrophy Rieger anomaly diabetes
* Lipodystrophy
* Lipogranulomatosis
* Lipoid congenital adrenal hyperplasia
* Lipoid proteinosis of Urbach and Wiethe
* Lipomatosis central non-encapsulated
* Lipomatosis familial benign cervical
* Lipomucopolysaccharidosis
* Lipoprotein disorder
* Liposarcoma
* Lisker–Garcia–Ramos syndrome
* Lison–Kornbrut–Feinstein syndrome
* Lissencephaly immunodeficiency
* Lissencephaly syndrome type 1
* Lissencephaly syndrome type 2
* Lissencephaly, isolated
* Lissencephaly
* Listeria infection
* Listeriosis

===Lit–Liv===
* Livedoid dermatitis
* Liver cirrhosis
* Liver neoplasms

==Lo==
===Lob–Lou===
* Lobar atrophy of brain
* Lobster hand
* Lobstein disease
* Localized epiphyseal dysplasia
* Locked-in syndrome
* Lockwood–Feingold syndrome
* Loffredo–Cennamo–Cecio syndrome
* Logic syndrome
* Loiasis
* Loin pain hematuria syndrome
* Long QT Syndrome
** Long QT syndrome type 1
** Long QT syndrome type 2
** Long QT syndrome type 3
* Loose anagen hair syndrome
* Loose anagen syndrome
* Lopes–Gorlin syndrome
* Lopes–Marques de Faria syndrome
* Lopez–Hernandez syndrome
* Lou Gehrig&#x27;s disease
* Louis–Bar syndrome

===Low===
* Low birth weight dwarfism dysgammaglobulinemia
* Lowe–Kohn–Cohen syndrome
* Lowe oculocerebrorenal syndrome
* Lowe syndrome
* Lower limb anomaly ureteral obstruction
* Lower limb deficiency hypospadias
* Lower mesodermal defects
* Lowry–MacLean syndrome
* Lowry syndrome
* Lowry–Wood syndrome
* Lowry–Yong syndrome

==Ls–Lt==
* LSA
* L-transposition and ccTGA

==Lu==
* Lubani Al Saleh Teebi syndrome
* Lubinsky syndrome
* Lucey–Driscoll syndrome
* Lucky–Gelehrter syndrome
* Ludomania
* Lúes Congénita
* Lujan–Fryns syndrome
* Lumbar malsegmentation short stature
* Lumbar spinal stenosis
* Lundberg syndrome
* Lung agenesis heart defect thumb anomalies
* Lung cancer
* Lung herniation congenital defect of sternem
* Lung neoplasm
* Lupus anticoagulant, familial
* Lupus erythematosus
* Lurie–Kletsky syndrome
* Luteinizing hormone releasing hormone, deficiency of with ataxia
* Lutz–Richner–Landolt syndrome
* Lutz–Lewandowsky epidermodysplasia verruciformis

==Ly==
===Lye–Lyg===
* Lyell&#x27;s syndrome
* Lygophobia

===Lym===

====Lyme====
* Lyme disease

====Lymp====

=====Lymph=====
* Lymph node neoplasm

======Lympha–Lymphe======
* Lymphadenopathy, angioimmunoblastic with dysproteinemia
* Lymphangiectasies lymphoedema type Hennekam type
* Lymphangiectasis
* Lymphangioleiomyomatosis
* Lymphangiomatosis, pulmonary
* Lymphangiomyomatosis
* Lymphatic filariasis
* Lymphatic neoplasm
* Lymphedema distichiasis
* Lymphedema hereditary type 1
* Lymphedema hereditary type 2
* Lymphedema ptosis
* Lymphedema, congenital
* Lymphedema
* Lymphedema–distichiasis syndrome

======Lympho======
* Lymphoblastic lymphoma
* Lymphocytes reduced or absent
* Lymphocytic colitis
* Lymphocytic infiltrate of Jessner
* Lymphocytic vasculitis
* Lymphoid hamartoma
* Lymphoma, AIDS-related
* Lymphoma, gastric non-Hodgkin&#x27;s type
* Lymphoma, large-cell, immunoblastic
* Lymphoma, large-cell
* Lymphoma, small cleaved-cell, diffuse
* Lymphoma, small cleaved-cell, follicular
* Lymphoma
* Lymphomatoid granulomatosis
* Lymphomatoid Papulosis (LyP)
* Lymphomatous thyroiditis
* Lymphosarcoma

===Lyn–Lys===
* Lynch–Lee–Murday syndrome
* Lynch–Bushby syndrome
* Lyngstadaas syndrome
* LyP (lymphomatoid papulosis)
* Lysine alpha-ketoglutarate reductase deficiency
* Lysinuric protein intolerance
* Lysosomal alpha-D-mannosidase deficiency
* Lysosomal beta-mannosidase deficiency
* Lysosomal glycogen storage disease with normal acid maltase activity
* Lysosomal storage disease</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q12136" start="18" end="25" title="disease" label="disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q651223" start="91" end="104" title="Labrador lung" label="Labrador lung"/>
<link wikidata="Q2038371" start="107" end="120" title="Labyrinthitis" label="Labyrinthitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6468402" start="123" end="149" title="Lachiewicz–Sibley syndrome" label="Lachiewicz–Sibley syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="152" end="191" title="Lacrimo-auriculo-dento-digital syndrome" label="Lacrimo-auriculo-dento-digital syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q409464" start="194" end="233" title="Lactate dehydrogenase deficiency type A" label="Lactate dehydrogenase deficiency type A"/>
<link wikidata="Q409464" start="236" end="275" title="Lactate dehydrogenase deficiency type B" label="Lactate dehydrogenase deficiency type B"/>
<link wikidata="Q409464" start="278" end="317" title="Lactate dehydrogenase deficiency type C" label="Lactate dehydrogenase deficiency type C"/>
<link wikidata="Q409464" start="320" end="352" title="Lactate dehydrogenase deficiency" label="Lactate dehydrogenase deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q24975705" start="355" end="391" title="Lactic acidosis congenital infantile" label="Lactic acidosis congenital infantile"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="394" end="421" title="Ladda–Zonana–Ramer syndrome" label="Ladda–Zonana–Ramer syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q163905" start="424" end="438" title="Lafora disease" label="Lafora disease"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="441" end="471" title="Lagophthalmia cleft lip palate" label="Lagophthalmia cleft lip palate"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="474" end="502" title="Lambdoid synostosis familial" label="Lambdoid synostosis familial"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="505" end="521" title="Lambert syndrome" label="Lambert syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756898" start="524" end="557" title="Lambert–Eaton myasthenic syndrome" label="Lambert–Eaton myasthenic syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756898" start="615" end="637" title="Lambert–Eaton syndrome" label="Lambert–Eaton syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q3804556" start="640" end="659" title="Lamellar ichthyosis" label="Lamellar ichthyosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3804556" start="662" end="691" title="Lamellar recessive ichthyosis" label="Lamellar recessive ichthyosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636310" start="709" end="733" title="Landau–Kleffner syndrome" label="Landau–Kleffner syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399182" start="736" end="772" title="Landouzy–Dejerine muscular dystrophy" label="Landouzy–Dejerine muscular dystrophy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="775" end="796" title="Landy–Donnai syndrome" label="Landy–Donnai syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q315940" start="799" end="811" title="Langdon Down" label="Langdon Down"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="814" end="847" title="Langer–Nishino–Yamaguchi syndrome" label="Langer–Nishino–Yamaguchi syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q3508795" start="850" end="873" title="Langer–Giedion syndrome" label="Langer–Giedion syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q374036" start="876" end="906" title="Langerhans cell granulomatosis" label="Langerhans cell granulomatosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q374036" start="909" end="938" title="Langerhans cell histiocytosis" label="Langerhans cell histiocytosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1495674" start="941" end="954" title="Laparoschisis" label="Laparoschisis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="957" end="992" title="Laplane–Fontaine–Lagardere syndrome" label="Laplane–Fontaine–Lagardere syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2626074" start="1010" end="1039" title="Large B-cell diffuse lymphoma" label="Large B-cell diffuse lymphoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q669822" start="1042" end="1061" title="Laron-type dwarfism" label="Laron-type dwarfism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1064" end="1102" title="Larsen-like osseous dysplasia dwarfism" label="Larsen-like osseous dysplasia dwarfism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1105" end="1137" title="Larsen-like syndrome lethal type" label="Larsen-like syndrome lethal type"/>
<link wikidata="Q3501154" start="1140" end="1172" title="Larsen syndrome craniosynostosis" label="Larsen syndrome craniosynostosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3501154" start="1175" end="1205" title="Larsen syndrome, dominant type" label="Larsen syndrome, dominant type"/>
<link wikidata="Q3501154" start="1208" end="1239" title="Larsen syndrome, recessive type" label="Larsen syndrome, recessive type"/>
<link wikidata="Q3501154" start="1242" end="1257" title="Larsen syndrome" label="Larsen syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1260" end="1307" title="Laryngeal abductor paralysis mental retardation" label="Laryngeal abductor paralysis mental retardation"/>
<link wikidata="Q852423" start="1310" end="1329" title="Laryngeal carcinoma" label="Laryngeal carcinoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q6491956" start="1332" end="1347" title="Laryngeal cleft" label="Laryngeal cleft"/>
<link wikidata="Q852423" start="1350" end="1368" title="Laryngeal neoplasm" label="Laryngeal neoplasm"/>
<link wikidata="Q3497004" start="1371" end="1395" title="Laryngeal papillomatosis" label="Laryngeal papillomatosis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1398" end="1450" title="Laryngeal web congenital heart disease short stature" label="Laryngeal web congenital heart disease short stature"/>
<link wikidata="Q6491969" start="1453" end="1464" title="Laryngocele" label="Laryngocele"/>
<link wikidata="Q598035" start="1467" end="1501" title="Laryngomalacia dominant congenital" label="Laryngomalacia dominant congenital"/>
<link wikidata="Q598035" start="1504" end="1518" title="Laryngomalacia" label="Laryngomalacia"/>
<link wikidata="Q757722" start="1521" end="1535" title="Larynx atresia" label="Larynx atresia"/>
<link wikidata="Q706845" start="1538" end="1549" title="Lassa fever" label="Lassa fever"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1552" end="1583" title="Lassueur–Graham–Little syndrome" label="Lassueur–Graham–Little syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q147270" start="1586" end="1620" title="Late onset dominant cone dystrophy" label="Late onset dominant cone dystrophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9390465" start="1623" end="1647" title="Lateral body wall defect" label="Lateral body wall defect"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1650" end="1677" title="Laterality defects dominant" label="Laterality defects dominant"/>
<link wikidata="Q4394144" start="1680" end="1712" title="Lattice corneal dystrophy type 2" label="Lattice corneal dystrophy type 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q675402" start="1730" end="1763" title="Launois–Bensaude adenolipomatosis" label="Launois–Bensaude adenolipomatosis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1766" end="1798" title="Laurence–Prosser–Rocker syndrome" label="Laurence–Prosser–Rocker syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1678281" start="1801" end="1836" title="Bardet–Biedl syndrome" label="Laurence–Moon–Bardet–Biedl syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1839" end="1862" title="Laurin–Sandrow syndrome" label="Laurin–Sandrow syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1865" end="1892" title="Laxova–Brown–Hogan syndrome" label="Laxova–Brown–Hogan syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q9390465" start="1906" end="1927" title="LBWC - amniotic bands" label="LBWC - amniotic bands"/>
<link wikidata="Q473753" start="1930" end="1943" title="LBWD syndrome" label="LBWD syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q24963765" start="1946" end="1962" title="LCHAD deficiency" label="LCHAD deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q110315" start="1987" end="2001" title="Lead poisoning" label="Lead poisoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q3508786" start="2004" end="2034" title="Leao Ribeiro Da Silva syndrome" label="Leao Ribeiro Da Silva syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q635339" start="2037" end="2053" title="Learman syndrome" label="Learman syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2056" end="2079" title="Leber military aneurysm" label="Leber military aneurysm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262161" start="2082" end="2101" title="Leber optic atrophy" label="Leber optic atrophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262161" start="2104" end="2124" title="Leber&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Leber&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q3441028" start="2127" end="2174" title="Lecithin cholesterol acyltransferase deficiency" label="Lecithin cholesterol acyltransferase deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424509" start="2177" end="2195" title="Ledderhose disease" label="Ledderhose disease"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2198" end="2222" title="Lee–Root–Fenske syndrome" label="Lee–Root–Fenske syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2225" end="2252" title="Left ventricle-aorta tunnel" label="Left ventricle-aorta tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1628627" start="2255" end="2283" title="Left ventricular hypertrophy" label="Left ventricular hypertrophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q55782038" start="2286" end="2316" title="Leg absence deformity cataract" label="Leg absence deformity cataract"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456403" start="2319" end="2346" title="Legg–Calvé–Perthes syndrome" label="Legg–Calvé–Perthes syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q154882" start="2349" end="2362" title="Legionellosis" label="Legionellosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q154882" start="2371" end="2397" title="Legionnaires&amp;#x27; disease" label="Legionnaires&amp;#x27; disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q18589160" start="2400" end="2415" title="Lehman syndrome" label="Lehman syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2433" end="2461" title="Leichtman–Wood–Rohn syndrome" label="Leichtman–Wood–Rohn syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2464" end="2489" title="Leifer–Lai–Buyse syndrome" label="Leifer–Lai–Buyse syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815019" start="2492" end="2505" title="Leigh disease" label="Leigh disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q112221244" start="2508" end="2544" title="Leigh syndrome, French Canadian type" label="Leigh syndrome, French Canadian type"/>
<link wikidata="Q3591492" start="2547" end="2561" title="Leiner disease" label="Leiner disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q4667534" start="2564" end="2573" title="Leiomyoma" label="Leiomyoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q4667534" start="2576" end="2599" title="Leiomyomatosis familial" label="Leiomyomatosis familial"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2602" end="2649" title="Leiomyomatosis of oesophagus cataract hematuria" label="Leiomyomatosis of oesophagus cataract hematuria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1504713" start="2652" end="2666" title="Leiomyosarcoma" label="Leiomyosarcoma"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2669" end="2693" title="Leipala–Kaitila syndrome" label="Leipala–Kaitila syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q331283" start="2696" end="2709" title="Leishmaniasis" label="Leishmaniasis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2712" end="2744" title="Leisti–Hollister–Rimoin syndrome" label="Leisti–Hollister–Rimoin syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q72000" start="2747" end="2771" title="Lemierre&amp;#x27;s syndrome" label="Lemierre&amp;#x27;s syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544884" start="2774" end="2797" title="Lennox–Gastaut syndrome" label="Lennox–Gastaut syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2800" end="2829" title="Lentiginosis in context of NF" label="Lentiginosis in context of NF"/>
<link wikidata="Q6523462" start="2832" end="2867" title="Lenz–Majewski hyperostotic dwarfism" label="Lenz–Majewski hyperostotic dwarfism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6523439" start="2870" end="2898" title="Lenz microphthalmia syndrome" label="Lenz microphthalmia syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2467739" start="2901" end="2914" title="Leprechaunism" label="Leprechaunism"/>
<link wikidata="Q36956" start="2917" end="2924" title="Leprosy" label="Leprosy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1886238" start="2927" end="2973" title="Leptomeningeal capillary - venous angiomatosis" label="Leptomeningeal capillary - venous angiomatosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q155098" start="2976" end="2989" title="Leptospirosis" label="Leptospirosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q17115004" start="2992" end="3010" title="Leri pleonosteosis" label="Leri pleonosteosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3368713" start="3013" end="3041" title="Léri–Weill dyschondrosteosis" label="Léri–Weill dyschondrosteosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q727436" start="3059" end="3079" title="Lesch–Nyhan syndrome" label="Lesch–Nyhan syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3082" end="3118" title="Lethal chondrodysplasia Moerman type" label="Lethal chondrodysplasia Moerman type"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3121" end="3156" title="Lethal chondrodysplasia Seller type" label="Lethal chondrodysplasia Seller type"/>
<link wikidata="Q6533262" start="3159" end="3197" title="Lethal congenital contracture syndrome" label="Lethal congenital contracture syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q6533637" start="3200" end="3221" title="Letterer–Siwe disease" label="Letterer–Siwe disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q402575" start="3239" end="3249" title="Leucinosis" label="Leucinosis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3252" end="3272" title="Leukemia subleukemic" label="Leukemia subleukemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088156" start="3275" end="3300" title="Leukemia, B-Cell, chronic" label="Leukemia, B-Cell, chronic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11688946" start="3303" end="3320" title="Leukemia, Myeloid" label="Leukemia, Myeloid"/>
<link wikidata="Q17152512" start="3323" end="3348" title="Leukemia, T-Cell, chronic" label="Leukemia, T-Cell, chronic"/>
<link wikidata="Q29496" start="3351" end="3359" title="Leukemia" label="Leukemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154422" start="3362" end="3400" title="Leukocyte adhesion deficiency syndrome" label="Leukocyte adhesion deficiency syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154422" start="3403" end="3439" title="Leukocyte adhesion deficiency type 2" label="Leukocyte adhesion deficiency type 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1613670" start="3442" end="3467" title="Leukocytoclastic angiitis" label="Leukocytoclastic angiitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1821559" start="3470" end="3497" title="Leukodystrophy reunion type" label="Leukodystrophy reunion type"/>
<link wikidata="Q511372" start="3500" end="3528" title="Leukodystrophy, globoid cell" label="Leukodystrophy, globoid cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1120682" start="3531" end="3560" title="Leukodystrophy, metachromatic" label="Leukodystrophy, metachromatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1120682" start="3563" end="3598" title="Metachromatic leukodystrophy" label="Leukodystrophy, pseudometachromatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1876206" start="3601" end="3629" title="Leukodystrophy, Sudanophilic" label="Leukodystrophy, Sudanophilic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1821559" start="3632" end="3646" title="Leukodystrophy" label="Leukodystrophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3237081" start="3649" end="3693" title="Leukoencephalopathy palmoplantar keratoderma" label="Leukoencephalopathy palmoplantar keratoderma"/>
<link wikidata="Q469490" start="3696" end="3708" title="Leukomalacia" label="Leukomalacia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3711" end="3760" title="Leukomelanoderma mental retardation hypotrichosis" label="Leukomelanoderma mental retardation hypotrichosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q838145" start="3763" end="3774" title="Leukoplakia" label="Leukoplakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q537123" start="3777" end="3793" title="Levator syndrome" label="Levator syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3796" end="3829" title="Levic–Stefanovic–Nikolic syndrome" label="Levic–Stefanovic–Nikolic syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q746781" start="3832" end="3856" title="Levine–Crichley syndrome" label="Levine–Crichley syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3874" end="3903" title="Lewandowski–Kikolich syndrome" label="Lewandowski–Kikolich syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3906" end="3929" title="Lewis–Pashayan syndrome" label="Lewis–Pashayan syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q6538005" start="3932" end="3955" title="Leydig cells hypoplasia" label="Leydig cells hypoplasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3508795" start="3969" end="3973" title="LGCR" label="LGCR"/>
<link wikidata="Q17103190" start="3976" end="3979" title="Leaky gut syndrome" label="LGS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461101" start="3982" end="4006" title="Lhermitte–Duclos disease" label="Lhermitte–Duclos disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q6543199" start="4031" end="4051" title="Lichen myxedematosus" label="Lichen myxedematosus"/>
<link wikidata="Q848371" start="4054" end="4080" title="Lichen planus follicularis" label="Lichen planus follicularis"/>
<link wikidata="Q848371" start="4083" end="4096" title="Lichen planus" label="Lichen planus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641400" start="4099" end="4129" title="Lichen sclerosus et atrophicus" label="Lichen sclerosus et atrophicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6543215" start="4132" end="4149" title="Lichen spinulosus" label="Lichen spinulosus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4152" end="4174" title="Lichstenstein syndrome" label="Lichstenstein syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4177" end="4198" title="Lida–Kannari syndrome" label="Lida–Kannari syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1823656" start="4201" end="4216" title="Liddle syndrome" label="Liddle syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q187542" start="4219" end="4239" title="Li–Fraumeni syndrome" label="Li–Fraumeni syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q17142640" start="4242" end="4261" title="Light chain disease" label="Light chain disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q2434711" start="4264" end="4276" title="Ligyrophobia" label="Ligyrophobia"/>
<link wikidata="Q104023277" start="4279" end="4316" title="Limb deficiencies distal micrognathia" label="Limb deficiencies distal micrognathia"/>
<link wikidata="Q906492" start="4319" end="4332" title="Limb dystonia" label="Limb dystonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5160441" start="4335" end="4356" title="Limb reduction defect" label="Limb reduction defect"/>
<link wikidata="Q351708" start="4359" end="4387" title="Limb scalp and skull defects" label="Limb scalp and skull defects"/>
<link wikidata="Q351708" start="4390" end="4429" title="Limb transversal defect cardiac anomaly" label="Limb transversal defect cardiac anomaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q9390465" start="4432" end="4454" title="Limb-body wall complex" label="Limb-body wall complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1531322" start="4457" end="4487" title="Limb-girdle muscular dystrophy" label="Limb-girdle muscular dystrophy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4490" end="4511" title="Lindsay–Burn syndrome" label="Lindsay–Burn syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4514" end="4532" title="Lindstrom syndrome" label="Lindstrom syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4535" end="4560" title="Linear hamartoma syndrome" label="Linear hamartoma syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274018" start="4563" end="4584" title="Linear nevus syndrome" label="Linear nevus syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4602" end="4618" title="Lip lit syndrome" label="Lip lit syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q7003001" start="4621" end="4643" title="Lipid storage myopathy" label="Lipid storage myopathy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4646" end="4689" title="Lipidosis with triglyceride storage disease" label="Lipidosis with triglyceride storage disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q419337" start="4692" end="4726" title="Lipoamide dehydrogenase deficiency" label="Lipoamide dehydrogenase deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q7390227" start="4729" end="4766" title="Lipodystrophy Rieger anomaly diabetes" label="Lipodystrophy Rieger anomaly diabetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538213" start="4769" end="4782" title="Lipodystrophy" label="Lipodystrophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396345" start="4785" end="4803" title="Lipogranulomatosis" label="Lipogranulomatosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4262866" start="4806" end="4843" title="Lipoid congenital adrenal hyperplasia" label="Lipoid congenital adrenal hyperplasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2500124" start="4846" end="4885" title="Lipoid proteinosis of Urbach and Wiethe" label="Lipoid proteinosis of Urbach and Wiethe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4887975" start="4888" end="4924" title="Lipomatosis central non-encapsulated" label="Lipomatosis central non-encapsulated"/>
<link wikidata="Q4887975" start="4927" end="4963" title="Lipomatosis familial benign cervical" label="Lipomatosis familial benign cervical"/>
<link wikidata="Q7506658" start="4966" end="4991" title="Lipomucopolysaccharidosis" label="Lipomucopolysaccharidosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q28350" start="4994" end="5014" title="Lipoprotein disorder" label="Lipoprotein disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1827425" start="5017" end="5028" title="Liposarcoma" label="Liposarcoma"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5031" end="5059" title="Lisker–Garcia–Ramos syndrome" label="Lisker–Garcia–Ramos syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5062" end="5095" title="Lison–Kornbrut–Feinstein syndrome" label="Lison–Kornbrut–Feinstein syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5098" end="5128" title="Lissencephaly immunodeficiency" label="Lissencephaly immunodeficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544416" start="5131" end="5160" title="Lissencephaly syndrome type 1" label="Lissencephaly syndrome type 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q130555" start="5163" end="5192" title="Lissencephaly syndrome type 2" label="Lissencephaly syndrome type 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544416" start="5195" end="5218" title="Lissencephaly, isolated" label="Lissencephaly, isolated"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544416" start="5221" end="5234" title="Lissencephaly" label="Lissencephaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q160653" start="5237" end="5255" title="Listeria infection" label="Listeria infection"/>
<link wikidata="Q160653" start="5258" end="5269" title="Listeriosis" label="Listeriosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335036" start="5287" end="5306" title="Livedoid dermatitis" label="Livedoid dermatitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q147778" start="5309" end="5324" title="Liver cirrhosis" label="Liver cirrhosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148337" start="5327" end="5342" title="Liver neoplasms" label="Liver neoplasms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1620193" start="5367" end="5389" title="Lobar atrophy of brain" label="Lobar atrophy of brain"/>
<link wikidata="Q650026" start="5392" end="5404" title="Lobster hand" label="Lobster hand"/>
<link wikidata="Q749409" start="5407" end="5423" title="Lobstein disease" label="Lobstein disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q1452604" start="5426" end="5456" title="Localized epiphyseal dysplasia" label="Localized epiphyseal dysplasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q794457" start="5459" end="5477" title="Locked-in syndrome" label="Locked-in syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5480" end="5506" title="Lockwood–Feingold syndrome" label="Lockwood–Feingold syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5509" end="5540" title="Loffredo–Cennamo–Cecio syndrome" label="Loffredo–Cennamo–Cecio syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q6491971" start="5543" end="5557" title="Logic syndrome" label="Logic syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760607" start="5560" end="5567" title="Loiasis" label="Loiasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6668132" start="5570" end="5598" title="Loin pain hematuria syndrome" label="Loin pain hematuria syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q653924" start="5601" end="5617" title="Long QT Syndrome" label="Long QT Syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q653924" start="5621" end="5644" title="Long QT syndrome type 1" label="Long QT syndrome type 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q653924" start="5648" end="5671" title="Long QT syndrome type 2" label="Long QT syndrome type 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q653924" start="5675" end="5698" title="Long QT syndrome type 3" label="Long QT syndrome type 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q3961659" start="5701" end="5727" title="Loose anagen hair syndrome" label="Loose anagen hair syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q3961659" start="5730" end="5751" title="Loose anagen syndrome" label="Loose anagen syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5754" end="5775" title="Lopes–Gorlin syndrome" label="Lopes–Gorlin syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5778" end="5809" title="Lopes–Marques de Faria syndrome" label="Lopes–Marques de Faria syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5812" end="5836" title="Lopez–Hernandez syndrome" label="Lopez–Hernandez syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q206901" start="5839" end="5864" title="Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis" label="Lou Gehrig&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q387082" start="5867" end="5885" title="Louis–Bar syndrome" label="Louis–Bar syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5899" end="5945" title="Low birth weight dwarfism dysgammaglobulinemia" label="Low birth weight dwarfism dysgammaglobulinemia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5948" end="5972" title="Lowe–Kohn–Cohen syndrome" label="Lowe–Kohn–Cohen syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200839" start="5975" end="6006" title="Lowe oculocerebrorenal syndrome" label="Lowe oculocerebrorenal syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200839" start="6009" end="6022" title="Lowe syndrome" label="Lowe syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6025" end="6064" title="Lower limb anomaly ureteral obstruction" label="Lower limb anomaly ureteral obstruction"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6067" end="6100" title="Lower limb deficiency hypospadias" label="Lower limb deficiency hypospadias"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6103" end="6127" title="Lower mesodermal defects" label="Lower mesodermal defects"/>
<link wikidata="Q6694174" start="6130" end="6152" title="Lowry–MacLean syndrome" label="Lowry–MacLean syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1106881" start="6155" end="6169" title="Lowry syndrome" label="Lowry syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6172" end="6191" title="Lowry–Wood syndrome" label="Lowry–Wood syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6194" end="6213" title="Lowry–Yong syndrome" label="Lowry–Yong syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641400" start="6227" end="6230" title="Lichen sclerosus et atrophicus" label="LSA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1784755" start="6233" end="6258" title="L-transposition and ccTGA" label="L-transposition and ccTGA"/>
<link wikidata="Q29014927" start="6269" end="6299" title="Lubani Al Saleh Teebi syndrome" label="Lubani Al Saleh Teebi syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q3961676" start="6302" end="6319" title="Lubinsky syndrome" label="Lubinsky syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q390908" start="6322" end="6345" title="Lucey–Driscoll syndrome" label="Lucey–Driscoll syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6348" end="6372" title="Lucky–Gelehrter syndrome" label="Lucky–Gelehrter syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q748309" start="6375" end="6384" title="Ludomania" label="Ludomania"/>
<link wikidata="Q41083" start="6387" end="6401" title="Lúes Congénita" label="Lúes Congénita"/>
<link wikidata="Q640836" start="6404" end="6424" title="Lujan–Fryns syndrome" label="Lujan–Fryns syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6427" end="6463" title="Lumbar malsegmentation short stature" label="Lumbar malsegmentation short stature"/>
<link wikidata="Q17164695" start="6466" end="6488" title="Lumbar spinal stenosis" label="Lumbar spinal stenosis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6491" end="6508" title="Lundberg syndrome" label="Lundberg syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6511" end="6553" title="Lung agenesis heart defect thumb anomalies" label="Lung agenesis heart defect thumb anomalies"/>
<link wikidata="Q47912" start="6556" end="6567" title="Lung cancer" label="Lung cancer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6570" end="6614" title="Lung herniation congenital defect of sternem" label="Lung herniation congenital defect of sternem"/>
<link wikidata="Q47912" start="6617" end="6630" title="Lung neoplasm" label="Lung neoplasm"/>
<link wikidata="Q5786759" start="6633" end="6662" title="Lupus anticoagulant, familial" label="Lupus anticoagulant, familial"/>
<link wikidata="Q188297" start="6665" end="6684" title="Lupus erythematosus" label="Lupus erythematosus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6687" end="6709" title="Lurie–Kletsky syndrome" label="Lurie–Kletsky syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6712" end="6776" title="Luteinizing hormone releasing hormone, deficiency of with ataxia" label="Luteinizing hormone releasing hormone, deficiency of with ataxia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4797658" start="6779" end="6808" title="Lutz–Richner–Landolt syndrome" label="Lutz–Richner–Landolt syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q974691" start="6811" end="6859" title="Lutz–Lewandowsky epidermodysplasia verruciformis" label="Lutz–Lewandowsky epidermodysplasia verruciformis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1878682" start="6884" end="6905" title="Lyell&amp;#x27;s syndrome" label="Lyell&amp;#x27;s syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152594" start="6908" end="6918" title="Lygophobia" label="Lygophobia"/>
<link wikidata="Q201989" start="6946" end="6958" title="Lyme disease" label="Lyme disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q208414" start="6992" end="7011" title="Lymph node neoplasm" label="Lymph node neoplasm"/>
<link wikidata="Q4763257" start="7041" end="7096" title="Lymphadenopathy, angioimmunoblastic with dysproteinemia" label="Lymphadenopathy, angioimmunoblastic with dysproteinemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5714797" start="7099" end="7147" title="Lymphangiectasies lymphoedema type Hennekam type" label="Lymphangiectasies lymphoedema type Hennekam type"/>
<link wikidata="Q3832889" start="7150" end="7166" title="Lymphangiectasis" label="Lymphangiectasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1878759" start="7169" end="7193" title="Lymphangioleiomyomatosis" label="Lymphangioleiomyomatosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7852669" start="7196" end="7224" title="Lymphangiomatosis, pulmonary" label="Lymphangiomatosis, pulmonary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1878759" start="7227" end="7247" title="Lymphangiomyomatosis" label="Lymphangiomyomatosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q192100" start="7250" end="7270" title="Lymphatic filariasis" label="Lymphatic filariasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q208414" start="7273" end="7291" title="Lymphatic neoplasm" label="Lymphatic neoplasm"/>
<link wikidata="Q3508768" start="7294" end="7317" title="Lymphedema distichiasis" label="Lymphedema distichiasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1996246" start="7320" end="7348" title="Lymphedema hereditary type 1" label="Lymphedema hereditary type 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q6809999" start="7351" end="7379" title="Lymphedema hereditary type 2" label="Lymphedema hereditary type 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q3508768" start="7382" end="7399" title="Lymphedema ptosis" label="Lymphedema ptosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q916398" start="7402" end="7424" title="Congenital lymphedema" label="Lymphedema, congenital"/>
<link wikidata="Q916398" start="7427" end="7437" title="Lymphedema" label="Lymphedema"/>
<link wikidata="Q3508768" start="7440" end="7472" title="Lymphedema–distichiasis syndrome" label="Lymphedema–distichiasis syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q180664" start="7495" end="7517" title="Lymphoblastic lymphoma" label="Lymphoblastic lymphoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q485831" start="7520" end="7549" title="Lymphocytes reduced or absent" label="Lymphocytes reduced or absent"/>
<link wikidata="Q6708258" start="7552" end="7571" title="Lymphocytic colitis" label="Lymphocytic colitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3269477" start="7574" end="7607" title="Lymphocytic infiltrate of Jessner" label="Lymphocytic infiltrate of Jessner"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7610" end="7632" title="Lymphocytic vasculitis" label="Lymphocytic vasculitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q50349818" start="7635" end="7653" title="Lymphoid hamartoma" label="Lymphoid hamartoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q4651856" start="7656" end="7678" title="Lymphoma, AIDS-related" label="Lymphoma, AIDS-related"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7681" end="7722" title="Lymphoma, gastric non-Hodgkin&amp;#x27;s type" label="Lymphoma, gastric non-Hodgkin&amp;#x27;s type"/>
<link wikidata="Q208414" start="7725" end="7760" title="Lymphoma, large-cell, immunoblastic" label="Lymphoma, large-cell, immunoblastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q486090" start="7763" end="7783" title="Lymphoma, large-cell" label="Lymphoma, large-cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7543028" start="7786" end="7823" title="Lymphoma, small cleaved-cell, diffuse" label="Lymphoma, small cleaved-cell, diffuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q7543028" start="7826" end="7866" title="Lymphoma, small cleaved-cell, follicular" label="Lymphoma, small cleaved-cell, follicular"/>
<link wikidata="Q208414" start="7869" end="7877" title="Lymphoma" label="Lymphoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q3775784" start="7880" end="7907" title="Lymphomatoid granulomatosis" label="Lymphomatoid granulomatosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1878745" start="7910" end="7938" title="Lymphomatoid Papulosis (LyP)" label="Lymphomatoid Papulosis (LyP)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11094" start="7941" end="7965" title="Lymphomatous thyroiditis" label="Lymphomatous thyroiditis"/>
<link wikidata="Q208414" start="7968" end="7981" title="Lymphosarcoma" label="Lymphosarcoma"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7999" end="8024" title="Lynch–Lee–Murday syndrome" label="Lynch–Lee–Murday syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8027" end="8048" title="Lynch–Bushby syndrome" label="Lynch–Bushby syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q16978490" start="8051" end="8071" title="Lyngstadaas syndrome" label="Lyngstadaas syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1878745" start="8074" end="8102" title="LyP (lymphomatoid papulosis)" label="LyP (lymphomatoid papulosis)"/>
<link wikidata="Q10295763" start="8105" end="8152" title="Lysine alpha-ketoglutarate reductase deficiency" label="Lysine alpha-ketoglutarate reductase deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q3153671" start="8155" end="8184" title="Lysinuric protein intolerance" label="Lysinuric protein intolerance"/>
<link wikidata="Q250449" start="8187" end="8227" title="Lysosomal alpha-D-mannosidase deficiency" label="Lysosomal alpha-D-mannosidase deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q291617" start="8230" end="8267" title="Lysosomal beta-mannosidase deficiency" label="Lysosomal beta-mannosidase deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q5220984" start="8270" end="8338" title="Lysosomal glycogen storage disease with normal acid maltase activity" label="Lysosomal glycogen storage disease with normal acid maltase activity"/>
<link wikidata="Q675010" start="8341" end="8366" title="Lysosomal storage disease" label="Lysosomal storage disease"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="236351" wikidata="Q9839" url="?curid=236351" title="Grave, Netherlands">
<text>Grave (; formerly &quot;De Graaf&quot;) is a city and former municipality in the Dutch province of North Brabant. The former municipality had a population of in . Grave is a member of the Dutch Association of Fortified Cities.

The former municipality included the following towns: Grave (capital), Velp, Escharen and Gassel.

Grave, Boxmeer, Cuijk, Mill en Sint Hubert, and Sint Anthonis merged into the new municipality of Land van Cuijk on 1 January 2022.

== History ==
Grave received city rights in 1233.

The former municipality of Grave was formed in the Napoleonic era (1810) and coincided with the fortified Grave and immediate surroundings. The history of the town was thus linked to that of the place.

This changed in 1942. Then there was a reclassification place where the municipality Grave was expanded with the previously independent municipalities Velp and Escharen. Moreover, in 1994 the neighboring municipality of Beers was abolished and a part thereof, the parish Gassel, was also added to the municipality Grave.

== Popular attractions ==
Near to Grave lies a bridge, now called John S. Thompsonbrug, built in 1929. It is the northern connection to Gelderland, spanning the river Maas. The bridge was one of the key strategic points in Operation Market Garden; the city was liberated at 17 September 1944, suffering very little damage. The bridge was named in 2004 after Lieutenant John S. Thompson of the US Army&#x27;s 82nd Airborne Division, who commanded the platoon of the 82nd Airborne Division that captured the bridge.

The Hampoort is the old entrance to the city, and it is still largely intact and can be visited.

== Notable people ==
=== Nobility ===
* Mary of Guelders ( in Grave – 1463), the queen consort of Scotland as the wife of King James II of Scotland, served as regent of Scotland from 1460 to 1463
* Adolf, Duke of Guelders (1438 in Grave – 1477) Duke of Guelders &amp; Count of Zutphen 1465–1471
* Charles II, Duke of Guelders (1467 in Grave – 1538) member of the House of Egmond who ruled as Duke of Guelders and Count of Zutphen from 1492 to 1538
* Anna van Egmont (1533 in Grave – 1558) a wealthy Dutch heiress, the first wife of William the Silent, Prince of Orange
* Louise van der Nooth (1630s in Grave – 1654) a maid of honour and favorite of Queen Christina of Sweden

=== Others ===
* Johann Weyer (1515 in Grave – 1588) Dutch physician, occultist and demonologist, disciple and follower of Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa
* Charles de Thierry (1793 in Grave – 1864) an adventurer in New Zealand
* Jan Pieter van Suchtelen (1751 in Grave – 1836) general in the Russian army during the Russo-Swedish War (1808–1809) 
* Johan Stein (1871 in Grave – 1951) Dutch astronomer and a member of the Society of Jesus

== Images ==
== See also ==
* Apostolic Vicariate of Grave–Nijmegen, former Catholic pre-diocesan jurisdiction

== References ==
== External links ==
* Official website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q9839" start="0" end="5" title="Grave, Netherlands" label="Grave"/>
<link wikidata="Q1101" start="99" end="112" title="North Brabant" label="North Brabant"/>
<link wikidata="Q3555376" start="299" end="303" title="Velp, North Brabant" label="Velp"/>
<link wikidata="Q2804519" start="305" end="313" title="Escharen" label="Escharen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2771634" start="318" end="324" title="Gassel" label="Gassel"/>
<link wikidata="Q9819" start="334" end="341" title="Boxmeer" label="Boxmeer"/>
<link wikidata="Q9827" start="343" end="348" title="Cuijk (municipality)" label="Cuijk"/>
<link wikidata="Q9853" start="350" end="369" title="Mill en Sint Hubert" label="Mill en Sint Hubert"/>
<link wikidata="Q14346629" start="375" end="388" title="Sint Anthonis" label="Sint Anthonis"/>
<link wikidata="Q107242476" start="425" end="439" title="Land van Cuijk" label="Land van Cuijk"/>
<link wikidata="Q3626147" start="489" end="500" title="City rights in the Netherlands" label="city rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q3555376" start="865" end="869" title="Velp, North Brabant" label="Velp"/>
<link wikidata="Q2804519" start="874" end="882" title="Escharen" label="Escharen"/>
<link wikidata="Q954104" start="934" end="939" title="Beers (Netherlands)" label="Beers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2771634" start="985" end="991" title="Gassel" label="Gassel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2654136" start="1102" end="1122" title="John S. Thompsonbrug" label="John S. Thompsonbrug"/>
<link wikidata="Q775" start="1172" end="1182" title="Gelderland" label="Gelderland"/>
<link wikidata="Q41986" start="1203" end="1207" title="Meuse" label="Maas"/>
<link wikidata="Q189930" start="1259" end="1282" title="Operation Market Garden" label="Operation Market Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q6207596" start="1405" end="1421" title="Jocko Thompson" label="John S. Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q258758" start="1429" end="1436" title="Army of the United States" label="US Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2358" start="1444" end="1466" title="82nd Airborne Division" label="82nd Airborne Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q2358" start="1501" end="1523" title="82nd Airborne Division" label="82nd Airborne Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q60560" start="1689" end="1705" title="Mary of Guelders" label="Mary of Guelders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1850905" start="1730" end="1755" title="List of Scottish consorts" label="queen consort of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q272864" start="1776" end="1796" title="James II of Scotland" label="James II of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q153819" start="1847" end="1870" title="Adolf, Duke of Guelders" label="Adolf, Duke of Guelders"/>
<link wikidata="Q3248555" start="1894" end="1910" title="Duke of Guelders" label="Duke of Guelders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1787007" start="1917" end="1933" title="Count of Zutphen" label="Count of Zutphen"/>
<link wikidata="Q832225" start="1946" end="1974" title="Charles II, Duke of Guelders" label="Charles II, Duke of Guelders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1298216" start="2012" end="2027" title="House of Egmond" label="House of Egmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q3248555" start="2041" end="2057" title="Duke of Guelders" label="Duke of Guelders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1787007" start="2062" end="2078" title="Count of Zutphen" label="Count of Zutphen"/>
<link wikidata="Q266926" start="2099" end="2114" title="Anna van Egmont" label="Anna van Egmont"/>
<link wikidata="Q78454" start="2181" end="2199" title="William the Silent" label="William the Silent"/>
<link wikidata="Q549449" start="2201" end="2217" title="Prince of Orange" label="Prince of Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q16595937" start="2220" end="2240" title="Louise van der Nooth" label="Louise van der Nooth"/>
<link wikidata="Q52937" start="2298" end="2323" title="Queen Christina of Sweden" label="Queen Christina of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q719711" start="2342" end="2354" title="Johann Weyer" label="Johann Weyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q76568" start="2448" end="2474" title="Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa" label="Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065772" start="2477" end="2495" title="Charles de Thierry" label="Charles de Thierry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2106584" start="2550" end="2574" title="Jan Pieter van Suchtelen" label="Jan Pieter van Suchtelen"/>
<link wikidata="Q736268" start="2637" end="2666" title="Russo-Swedish War (1808–1809)" label="Russo-Swedish War (1808–1809)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2305995" start="2670" end="2681" title="Johan Stein" label="Johan Stein"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="2742" end="2758" title="Society of Jesus" label="Society of Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2605930" start="2790" end="2827" title="Apostolic Vicariate of Grave–Nijmegen" label="Apostolic Vicariate of Grave–Nijmegen"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="236352" wikidata="Q6616878" url="?curid=236352" title="List of diseases (M)">
<text>This is a list of diseases starting with the letter &quot;M&quot;.

==Ma==
===Mac===
* Mac Dermot Patton Williams syndrome
* Mac Dermot Winter syndrome

====Maci–Macr====
* Macias–Flores–Garcia–Cruz–Rivera syndrome
* Mackay–Shek–Carr syndrome
* Macleod–Fraser syndrome
* Macrocephaly cutis marmorata telangiectatica
* Macrocephaly dominant type
* Macrocephaly mental retardation facial dysmorphism
* Macrocephaly mesodermal hamartoma spectrum
* Macrocephaly mesomelic arms talipes
* Macrocephaly pigmentation large hands feet
* Macrocephaly short stature paraplegia
* Macrodactyly of the foot
* Macrodactyly of the hand
* Macroepiphyseal dysplasia Mcalister Coe type
* Macroglobulinemia
* Macroglossia dominant
* Macroglossia exomphalos gigantism
* Macrogyria pseudobulbar palsy
* Macrophagic myofasciitis
* Macrosomia developmental delay dysmorphism
* Macrosomia microphthalmia cleft palate
* Macrothrombocytopenia progressive deafness
* Macrothrombocytopenia with leukocyte inclusions

====Macu====
* Macular corneal dystrophy
* Macular degeneration
** Macular degeneration juvenile
** Macular degeneration, age-related
** Macular degeneration, polymorphic
* Macular dystrophy, vitelliform
* Macules hereditary congenital hypopigmented and hyperpigmented

===Mad–Mak===
* Mad cow disease
* Madelung&#x27;s disease
* Madokoro–Ohdo–Sonoda syndrome
* Maffucci syndrome
* Maghazaji syndrome
* Magnesium defect in renal tubular transport of
* Magnesium wasting renal
* Major depressive disorder

===Mal===
* Mal de debarquement

====Mala–Mall====
* Malakoplakia
* Malaria
* Male pseudohermaphroditism due to 17-beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase deficiency
* Male pseudohermaphroditism due to 5-alpha-reductase 2 deficiency
* Male pseudohermaphroditism due to defective LH molecule
* Malformations in neuronal migration
* Malignant astrocytoma
* Malignant fibrous histiocytoma
* Malignant germ cell tumor
* Malignant hyperthermia arthrogryposis torticollis
* Malignant hyperthermia
:* Malignant hyperthermia susceptibility type 1
:* Malignant hyperthermia susceptibility type 2
:* Malignant hyperthermia susceptibility type 3
:* Malignant hyperthermia susceptibility type 4
:* Malignant hyperthermia susceptibility type 5
:* Malignant hyperthermia susceptibility type 6
* Malignant mesenchymal tumor
* Malignant mixed Müllerian tumor
* Malignant paroxysmal ventricular tachycardia
* Mallory–Weiss syndrome

====Malo–Malp====
* Malonic aciduria
* Malonyl-CoA decarboxylase deficiency
* Malouf syndrome
* Malpuech facial clefting syndrome

===Man===
* Mandibuloacral dysplasia
* Mandibulofacial dysostosis deafness postaxial polydactyly
* Mandibulofacial dysostosis-microcephaly syndrome
* Manic Depression, Bipolar
* Manic-depressive psychosis, genetic types
* Mannosidosis
* Manouvrier syndrome
* Mansonelliasis
* Mantle cell lymphoma

===Mar===

====Mara–Marg====
* Marashi–Gorlin syndrome
* Marburg fever
* Marchiafava–Bignami disease
* Marchiafava–Micheli disease
* Marcus Gunn phenomenon
* Marden–Walker-like syndrome
* Marden–Walker syndrome
* Marek disease
* Marfan syndrome
** Marfan Syndrome type II
** Marfan Syndrome type III
** Marfan Syndrome type IV
** Marfan Syndrome type V
* Marfan-like syndrome, Boileau type
* Marfan-like syndrome
* Marfanoid craniosynostosis syndrome
* Marfanoid hypermobility
* Marfanoid mental retardation syndrome autosomal
* Marginal glioneuronal heterotopia

====Mari–Mart====
* Marie type ataxia
* Marie–Unna congenital hypotrichosis
* Marinesco–Sjögren like syndrome
* Marinesco–Sjögren syndrome
* Marion–Mayers syndrome
* Markel–Vikkula–Mulliken syndrome
* Marles–Greenberg–Persaud syndrome
* Marker chromosome 15 syndrome
* Maroteaux–Cohen–Solal–Bonaventure syndrome
* Maroteaux–Fonfria syndrome
* Maroteaux–Le Merrer–Bensahel syndrome
* Maroteaux–Stanescu–Cousin syndrome
* Maroteaux–Verloes–Stanescu syndrome
* Maroteaux–Lamy syndrome
* Marphanoid syndrome type De Silva
* Marsden–Nyhan–Sakati syndrome
* Marsden syndrome
* Marshall syndrome
* Marshall–Smith syndrome
* Martinez–Monasterio–Pinheiro syndrome
* Martsolf–Reed–Hunter syndrome
* Martsolf syndrome

===Mas–May===
* MASA syndrome
* Mass psychogenic illness
* MASS syndrome
* Massa–Casaer–Ceulemans syndrome
* Mast cell disease
* Mastocytosis, short stature, hearing loss
* Mastocytosis
* Mastoiditis
* Mastroiacovo–De Rosa–Satta syndrome
* Mastroiacovo–Gambi–Segni syndrome
* MAT deficiency
* Maternal hyperphenylalaninemia
* Maternally inherited diabetes and deafness
* Mathieu–De Broca–Bony syndrome
* Matsoukas–Liarikos–Giannika syndrome
* Matthew–Wood syndrome
* Maturity onset diabetes of the young
* Maumenee syndrome
* Maxillary double lip
* Maxillofacial dysostosis
* Maxillonasal dysplasia, Binder type
* Mayer–Rokitanski–Kuster syndrome
* May–Hegglin anomaly

==Mc==
* McAlister–Crane syndrome
* McArdle disease
* McCallum–Macadam–Johnston syndrome
* McCune–Albright syndrome
* McDonough syndrome
* McDowall syndrome
* McGillivray syndrome
* McKusick–Kaufman syndrome
* McKusick type metaphyseal chondrodysplasia
* McLain–Debakian syndrome
* McPherson–Clemens syndrome
* McPherson–Robertson–Cammarano syndrome

==Me==
===Mea–Med===
* Meacham–Winn–Culler syndrome
* Meadows syndrome, names for:
** Munchausen syndrome by proxy
** Peripartum cardiomyopathy
* Measles
* Meckel like syndrome
* Meckel syndrome
* Medeira Dennis Donnai syndrome
* Median cleft lip corpus callosum lipoma skin polyps
* Median nodule of the upper lip
* Mediastinal endodermal sinus tumors
* Mediastinal syndrome
* Mediterranean fever
* Medium-chain Acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency
* Medrano Roldan syndrome
* Medullary cystic disease
* Medullary thyroid carcinoma
* Medulloblastoma

===Meg–Mei===
* Megacystis microcolon intestinal hypoperistalsis syndrome
* Megaduodenum
* Mega-epiphyseal dwarfism
* Megalencephalic leukodystrophy
* Megalencephaly-cystic leukodystrophy
* Megaloblastic anemia
* Megalocornea mental retardation syndrome
* Megalocytic interstitial nephritis
* Mehes syndrome
* Mehta–Lewis–Patton syndrome
* Meier–Blumberg–Imahorn syndrome
* Meier–Rotschild syndrome
* Meige syndrome
* Meigel disease
* Meinecke–Pepper syndrome
* Meinecke syndrome

===Mel–Mem===
* Melanoma type 1
* Melanoma type 2
* Melanoma, familial
* Melanoma, malignant
* Melanoma-astrocytoma syndrome
* Melanosis neurocutaneous
* MELAS
* Meleda disease
* Melhem–Fahl syndrome
* Melioidosis
* Melkersson–Rosenthal syndrome
* Melnick–Needles osteodysplasty
* Melnick–Needles syndrome
* Membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis (type II)

===Men===

====Mend–Meno====
* Mendelian susceptibility to atypical mycobacteria
* Menetrier&#x27;s disease
* Mengel–Konigsmark syndrome
* Ménière&#x27;s disease
* Meningeal angiomatosis cleft hypoplastic left heart
* Meningioma 1
* Meningioma
* Meningitis, meningococcal
* Meningitis
* Meningocele
* Meningococcemia
* Meningoencephalocele
* Meningoencephalocele-arthrogryposis-hypoplastic thumb
* Meningomyelocele

====Ment====

=====Menta=====

======Mental======
Mental d – Mental m
* Mental deficiency-epilepsy-endocrine disorders
* Mental mixed retardation deafness clubbed digits
Mental r
* Mental retardation
Mental retardation a – Mental retardation m
* Mental retardation anophthalmia craniosynostosis
* Mental retardation arachnodactyly hypotonia telangiectasia
* Mental retardation athetosis microphthalmia
* Mental retardation blepharophimosis obesity web neck
* Mental retardation Buenos Aires type
* Mental retardation cataracts calcified pinnae myopathy
* Mental retardation coloboma slimness
* Mental retardation contractural arachnodactyly
* Mental retardation dysmorphism hypogonadism diabetes
* Mental retardation epilepsy bulbous nose
* Mental retardation epilepsy
* Mental retardation gynecomastia obesity X linked
* Mental retardation hip luxation G6PD variant
* Mental retardation hypocupremia hypobetalipoproteinemia
* Mental retardation hypotonia skin hyperpigmentation
* Mental retardation macrocephaly coarse facies hypotonia
* Mental retardation microcephaly phalangeal facial
* Mental retardation microcephaly unusual facies
* Mental retardation Mietens–Weber type
* Mental retardation multiple nevi
* Mental retardation myopathy short stature endocrine defect
* Mental retardation nasal hypoplasia obesity genital hypoplasia
Mental retardation n – Mental retardation s
* Mental retardation nasal papillomata
* Mental retardation osteosclerosis
* Mental retardation progressive spasticity
* Mental retardation psychosis macroorchidism
* Mental retardation short broad thumbs
* Mental retardation short stature absent phalanges
* Mental retardation short stature Bombay phenotype
* Mental retardation short stature cleft palate unusual facies
* Mental retardation short stature deafness genital
* Mental retardation short stature hand contractures genital anomalies
* Mental retardation short stature heart and skeletal anomalies
* Mental retardation short stature hypertelorism
* Mental retardation short stature microcephaly eye
* Mental retardation short stature ocular and articular anomalies
* Mental retardation short stature scoliosis
* Mental retardation short stature unusual facies
* Mental retardation short stature wedge shaped epiphyses
* Mental retardation skeletal dysplasia abducens palsy
* Mental retardation Smith–Fineman–Myers type
* Mental retardation spasticity ectrodactyly
Mental retardation u – Mental retardation x
* Mental retardation unusual facies Ampola type
* Mental retardation unusual facies Davis–Lafer type
* Mental retardation unusual facies talipes hand anomalies
* Mental retardation unusual facies
* Mental retardation Wolff type
* Mental retardation X linked Atkin type
* Mental retardation X linked borderline Maoa metabolism anomaly
* Mental retardation X linked Brunner type
* Mental retardation X linked dysmorphism
* Mental retardation X linked dystonia dysarthria
* Mental retardation X linked severe Gustavson type
* Mental retardation X linked short stature obesity
* Mental retardation X linked Tranebjaerg type seizures psoriasis
* Mental retardation, unexplained
* Mental retardation, X linked, Marfanoid habitus
* Mental retardation, X linked, nonspecific
* Mental retardation, X-linked 14
* Mental retardation-polydactyly-uncombable hair

===Mer–Mes===
* Mercury poisoning (Mercurialism)
* Meretoja syndrome
* Merkle tumors
* Merlob–Grunebaum–Reisner syndrome
* Merlob syndrome
* Mesangial sclerosis, diffuse
* Mesenteric ischemia
* Mesenteric panniculitis
* Mesodermal defects lower type
* Mesomelia synostoses
* Mesomelia
* Mesomelic dwarfism cleft palate camptodactyly
* Mesomelic dwarfism Langer type
* Mesomelic dwarfism Nievergelt type
* Mesomelic dwarfism Reinhardt–Pfeiffer type
* Mesomelic dysplasia skin dimples
* Mesomelic dysplasia Thai type
* Mesomelic syndrome Pfeiffer type
* Mesothelioma

===Met===

====Meta====
* Metabolic acidosis
* Metabolic disorder
* Metabolic syndrome X
* Metacarpals 4 and 5 fusion
* Metachondromatosis
* Metageria
* Metaphyseal anadysplasia
* Metaphyseal chondrodysplasia Schmid type
* Metaphyseal chondrodysplasia Spahr type
* Metaphyseal chondrodysplasia, others
* Metaphyseal dysostosis mental retardation conductive deafness
* Metaphyseal dysplasia maxillary hypoplasia brachydactyly
* Metaphyseal dysplasia Pyle type
* Metastatic Insulinoma
* Metatarsus adductus
* Metatropic dwarfism
* Metatropic dysplasia

====Meth====
* Methimazole antenatal infection
* Methionine adenosyltransferase deficiency
* Methyl mercury antenatal infection
* Methylcobalamin deficiency cbl G type
* Methylcobalamin deficiency, cbl E complementation type
* Methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase deficiency
* Methylmalonic acidemia with homocystinuria
* Methylmalonic acidemia
* Methylmalonic aciduria microcephaly cataract
* Methylmalonicacidemia with homocystinuria, cbl D
* Methylmalonicaciduria with homocystinuria, cbl F
* Methylmalonicaciduria, vitamin B12 unresponsive, mut-0
* Methylmalonyl-Coenzyme A mutase deficiency

===Mev–Mey===
* Mevalonate kinase deficiency
* Mevalonicaciduria
* Meyenburg–Altherr–Uehlinger syndrome

==Mi==
===Mib===
* Mibies syndrome

===Mic===

====Mich–Mick====
* Michelin tire baby syndrome
* Michels Caskey syndrome
* Michels syndrome
* Mickleson syndrome

====Micr====

=====Mircre=====
* Micrencephaly corpus callosum agenesis
* Micrencephaly olivopontocerebellar hypoplasia

=====Micro=====
* Micro syndrome

======Microb======
* Microbrachycephaly ptosis cleft lip

======Microc======
Microcephalic
* Microcephalic osteodysplastic primordial dwarfism
* Microcephalic primordial dwarfism Toriello type
* Microcephalic primordial dwarfism
Microcephaly
* Microcephaly
Microcephaly a – Microcephaly l
* Microcephaly albinism digital anomalies syndrome
* Microcephaly autosomal dominant
* Microcephaly brachydactyly kyphoscoliosis
* Microcephaly brain defect spasticity hypernatremia
* Microcephaly cardiac defect lung malsegmentation
* Microcephaly cardiomyopathy
* Microcephaly cervical spine fusion anomalies
* Microcephaly chorioretinopathy recessive form
* Microcephaly cleft palate autosomal dominant
* Microcephaly deafness syndrome
* Microcephaly developmental delay pancytopenia
* Microcephaly facial clefting preaxial polydactyly
* Microcephaly glomerulonephritis Marfanoid habitus
* Microcephaly hiatus hernia nephrotic syndrome
* Microcephaly hypergonadotropic hypogonadism short stature
* Microcephaly immunodeficiency lymphoreticuloma
* Microcephaly intracranial calcification
* Microcephaly lymphoedema chorioretinal dysplasia
* Microcephaly lymphoedema syndrome
Microcephaly m – Microcephaly w
* Microcephaly mental retardation retinopathy
* Microcephaly mental retardation spasticity epilepsy
* Microcephaly mesobrachyphalangy tracheoesophageal fistula syndrome
* Microcephaly microcornea syndrome Seemanova type
* Microcephaly micropenis convulsions
* Microcephaly microphthalmos blindness
* Microcephaly nonsyndromal
* Microcephaly pontocerebellar hypoplasia dyskinesia
* Microcephaly seizures mental retardation heart disorders
* Microcephaly sparse hair mental retardation seizures
* Microcephaly syndactyly brachymesophalangy
* Microcephaly with chorioretinopathy, autosomal dominant form
* Microcephaly with normal intelligence, immunodeficiency
* Microcephaly with spastic q­riplegia
* Microcephaly, holoprosencephaly, and intrauterine growth retardation
* Microcephaly, primary autosomal recessive
Microco
* Microcoria, congenital
* Microcornea correctopia macular hypoplasia
* Microcornea glaucoma absent frontal sinuses

======Microd – Microv======
* Microdontia hypodontia short stature
* Microencephaly
* Microgastria limb reduction defect
* Microgastria short stature diabetes
* Microinfarct
* Micromelic dwarfism Fryns type
* Micromelic dysplasia dislocation of radius
* Microphtalmos bilateral colobomatous orbital cyst
* Microphthalmia
* Microphthalmia, Lentz type
* Microphthalmia camptodactyly mental retardation
* Microphthalmia cataract
* Microphthalmia diaphragmatic hernia Fallot
* Microphthalmia mental deficiency
* Microphthalmia microtia fetal akinesia
* Microphthalmia with limb anomalies
* Microphthalmos, microcornea, and sclerocornea
* Microscopic polyangiitis
* Microsomia hemifacial radial defects
* Microspherophakia metaphyseal dysplasia
* Microsporidiosis
* Microtia, meatal atresia and conductive deafness
* Microvillus inclusion disease

====Micu====
* Miculicz syndrome

===Mid–Mir===
* MIDAS syndrome
* Midline cleft of lower lip
* Midline defects autosomal type
* Midline defects recessive type
* Midline developmental field defects
* Midline field defects
* Midline lethal granuloma
* Mietens syndrome
* Mievis–Verellen–Dumoulin syndrome
* Migraine
* Mikulicz syndrome
* Mild cognitive impairment
* Miller Fisher syndrome
* Miller–Dieker syndrome
* Milner–Khallouf–Gibson syndrome
* MILS syndrome
* Minamata disease
* Minkowski–Chauffard syndrome
* Minoxidil antenatal infection
* Miosis, congenital
* Mirhosseini–Holmes–Walton syndrome
* Mirror hands feet nasal defects
* Mirror polydactyly segmentation and limbs defects

===Mis–Mix===
* Mitochondrial cytopathy (generic term)
* Mitochondrial diseases of nuclear origin
* Mitochondrial diseases, clinically undefinite
* Mitochondrial disease
* Mitochondrial encephalomyopathy aminoacidopathy
* Mitochondrial genetic disorders
* Mitochondrial myopathy lactic acidosis
* Mitochondrial myopathy-encephalopathy-lactic acidosis
* Mitochondrial PEPCK deficiency
* Mitochondrial trifunctional protein deficiency
* Mitral atresia
* Mitral regurgitation deafness skeletal anomalies
* Mitral valve prolapse, familial, autosomal dominant
* Mitral valve prolapse, familial, X linked
* Mitral valve prolapse
* Miura syndrome
* Mixed connective tissue disease
* Mixed Müllerian tumor
* Mixed receptive-expressive language disorder
* Mixed sclerosing bone dystrophy

==Ml–Mn==
* MLS syndrome
* MMEP syndrome
* MMT syndrome
* MN1
* MNGIE syndrome

==Mo==
===Mob–Mom===
* Möbius syndrome
* MODY syndrome
* Möbius axonal neuropathy hypogonadism
* Moerman Van den berghe Fryns syndrome
* Moeschler–Clarren syndrome
* Mohr syndrome
* Mohr–Tranebjærg syndrome
* Mollica–Pavone–Antener syndrome
* Molluscum contagiosum
* Moloney syndrome
* Molybdenum cofactor deficiency
* MOMO syndrome

===Mon–Moo===
* Mondini dysplasia
* Mondor&#x27;s disease
* Monge&#x27;s disease
* Monilethrix
* Monoamine oxidase A deficiency
* Monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance
* Monodactyly tetramelic
* Mononen–Karnes–Senac syndrome
* Mononeuritis multiplex
* Monosomy 8q12 21
* Monosomy 8q21 q22
* Monosomy X
* Montefiore syndrome
* Moore–Federman syndrome
* Moore–Smith–Weaver syndrome

===Mor–Moy===
* Morel&#x27;s ear
* Moreno–Zachai–Kaufman syndrome
* Morgani–Turner–Albright syndrome
* Morillo–Cucci–Passarge syndrome
* Morphea scleroderma
* Morphea, generalized
* Morquio disease, type A
* Morquio disease, type B
* Morquio syndrome
* Morrison–Young syndrome
* Morse–Rawnsley–Sargent syndrome
* Motor neuron disease
* Motor neuro-ophthalmic disorders
* Motor neuropathy peripheral dysautonomia
* Motor neuropathy
* Motor sensory neuropathy type 1 aplasia cutis congenita
* Mounier-Kuhn syndrome
* Mount–Reback syndrome
* Mousa Al din Al Nassar syndrome
* Moyamoya disease

==Mp–Mt==
* MPO deficiency
* MPS III-A
* MPS III-B
* MPS III-C
* MPS III-D
* MPS VI
* MRKH Syndrome (Müllerian agenesis)
* MSBD syndrome
* MTHFR deficiency

==Mu==
===Muc–Mue===
* Mucha–Habermann disease
* Muckle–Wells syndrome
* Mucoepithelial dysplasia
* Mucolipidosis type 1
* Mucolipidosis type 3
* Mucolipidosis type 4
* Mucopolysaccharidosis type 3
* Mucopolysaccharidosis type 4
* Mucopolysaccharidosis type I Hurler syndrome
* Mucopolysaccharidosis type I Hurler/Scheie syndrome
* Mucopolysaccharidosis type I Scheie syndrome
* Mucopolysaccharidosis type II Hunter syndrome- mild form
* Mucopolysaccharidosis type II Hunter syndrome- severe form
* Mucopolysaccharidosis type IV-A Morquio syndrome
* Mucopolysaccharidosis type IV-B
* Mucopolysaccharidosis type V
* Mucopolysaccharidosis type VI Maroteaux-Lamy - severe, intermediate
* Mucopolysaccharidosis type VII Sly syndrome
* Mucopolysaccharidosis
* Mucormycosis
* Mucosulfatidosis
* Muenke syndrome

===Mul===

====Muli–Mull====
* Mulibrey nanism
* Müller–Barth–Menger syndrome
* Müllerian agenesis
* Müllerian aplasia
* Müllerian derivatives lymphangiectasia polydactyly
* Müllerian derivatives, persistent
* Müllerian duct abnormalities galactosemia
* Mulliez–Roux–Loterman syndrome

====Mult====

=====Multi=====

======Multic–Multin======
* Multicentric osteolysis nephropathy
* Multicentric reticulohistiocytosis
* Multifocal heterotopia
* Multifocal motor neuropathy
* Multifocal ventricular premature beats
* Multi-infarct dementia
* Multinodular goiter cystic kidney polydactyly

======Multip======
Multiple a – Multiple p
* Multiple acyl-CoA deficiency
* Multiple carboxylase deficiency, biotin responsive
* Multiple carboxylase deficiency, late onset
* Multiple carboxylase deficiency, propionic acidemia
* Multiple chemical sensitivity
* Multiple congenital anomalies mental retardation, growth failure and cleft lip palate
* Multiple congenital contractures
* Multiple contracture syndrome Finnish type
* Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1
* Multiple endocrine neoplasia, type 2
* Multiple fibrofolliculoma familial
* Multiple hereditary exostoses
* Multiple joint dislocations metaphyseal dysplasia
* Multiple myeloma
* Multiple organ failure
* Multiple pterygium syndrome lethal type
* Multiple pterygium syndrome
Multiple s – Multiple v
* Multiple sclerosis ichthyosis factor VIII deficiency
* Multiple sclerosis
* Multiple subcutaneous angiolipomas
* Multiple sulfatase deficiency
* Multiple synostoses syndrome 1
* Multiple system atrophy
* Multiple vertebral anomalies unusual facies

===Mum–Mut===
* Mumps
* Münchausen syndrome
* Münchausen syndrome by proxy
* Muscle-eye-brain syndrome
* Muscular atrophy ataxia retinitis pigmentosa diabetes mellitus
* Muscular dystrophy congenital infantile cataract hypogonadism
* Muscular dystrophy congenital, merosin negative
* Muscular dystrophy, facioscapulohumeral
* Muscular dystrophy Hutterite type
* Muscular dystrophy limb girdle type 2A, Erb type
* Muscular dystrophy limb-girdle autosomal dominant
* Muscular dystrophy limb-girdle type 2B, Myoshi type
* Muscular dystrophy limb-girdle with beta-sarcoglycan deficiency
* Muscular dystrophy limb-girdle with delta-sarcoglyan deficiency
* Muscular dystrophy white matter spongiosis
* Muscular dystrophy, congenital, merosin-positive
* Muscular dystrophy, Duchenne and Becker type
* Muscular dystrophy
* Muscular fibrosis multifocal obstructed vessels
* Muscular phosphorylase kinase deficiency
* Mutations in estradiol receptor

==My==
===Mya–Myc===
* Myalgia eosinophilia associated with tryptophan
* Myalgic encephalomyelitis
* Myasthenia gravis congenital
* Myasthenia gravis
* Myasthenia, familial
* Mycobacterium avium complex infection
* Mycoplasmal pneumonia
* Mycosis fungoides lymphoma
* Mycosis fungoides, familial
* Mycosis fungoides
* Mycositis fungoides

===Mye–Myi===
* Myelinopathy
* Myelitis
* Myelocerebellar disorder
* Myelodysplasia
* Myelodysplastic syndromes
* Myelofibrosis, idiopathic
* Myelofibrosis
* Myelofibrosis-osteosclerosis
* Myeloid splenomegaly
* Myeloperoxidase deficiency
* Myhre–Ruvalcaba–Graham syndrome
* Myhre–Ruvalcaba–Kelley syndrome
* Myhre–School syndrome
* Myhre syndrome
* Myiasis

===Myo===

====Myoa–Myon====
* Myoadenylate deaminase deficiency
* Myocarditis
* Myocardium disorder
* Myoclonic dystonia
* Myoclonic epilepsy
* Myoclonic epilepsy with ragged red fibres (MERRF syndrome)
* Myoclonic progressive familial epilepsy
* Myoclonus ataxia
* Myoclonus cerebellar ataxia deafness
* Myoclonus epilepsy partial seizure
* Myoclonus hereditary progressive distal muscular atrophy
* Myoclonus progressive epilepsy of Unverricht and Lundborg
* Myoclonus
* Myofibrillar lysis
* Myofibroblastic tumors
* Myoglobinuria dominant form
* Myoglobinuria recurrent
* Myoglobinuria
* Myokymia
* Myoneurogastrointestinal encephalopathy syndrome

====Myop====
* Myopathy and diabetes mellitus
* Myopathy cataract hypogonadism
* Myopathy congenital multicore with external ophthalmoplegia
* Myopathy growth and mental retardation hypospadias
* Myopathy Hutterite type
* Myopathy mitochondrial cataract
* Myopathy Moebius Robin syndrome
* Myopathy ophthalmoplegia hypoacousia areflexia
* Myopathy tubular aggregates
* Myopathy with lactic acidosis and sideroblastic anemia
* Myopathy with lysis of myofibrils
* Myopathy, centronuclear
* Myopathy, desmin storage
* Myopathy, McArdle type
* Myopathy, myotubular
* Myopathy, X-linked, with excessive autophagy
* Myopathy
* Myophosphorylase deficiency
* Myopia
* Myopia, infantile severe
* Myopia, severe

====Myor–Myot====
* Myorhythmia
* Myositis ossificans post-traumatic
* Myositis ossificans progressiva
* Myositis ossificans
* Myositis, inclusion body
* Myositis
* Myotonia atrophica
* Myotonia mental retardation skeletal anomalies
* Myotubular myopathy

===Myx===
* Myxedema
* Myxoid liposarcoma
* Myxoma-spotty pigmentation-endocrine overactivity
* Myxomatous peritonitis
* Myxozoa</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q12136" start="18" end="25" title="disease" label="disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q16908675" start="87" end="122" title="Mac Dermot Patton Williams syndrome" label="Mac Dermot Patton Williams syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q55782055" start="125" end="151" title="Macdermot-Winter syndrome" label="Mac Dermot Winter syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="173" end="214" title="Macias–Flores–Garcia–Cruz–Rivera syndrome" label="Macias–Flores–Garcia–Cruz–Rivera syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="217" end="242" title="Mackay–Shek–Carr syndrome" label="Mackay–Shek–Carr syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="245" end="268" title="Macleod–Fraser syndrome" label="Macleod–Fraser syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997180" start="271" end="315" title="Macrocephaly cutis marmorata telangiectatica" label="Macrocephaly cutis marmorata telangiectatica"/>
<link wikidata="Q635339" start="318" end="344" title="Macrocephaly dominant type" label="Macrocephaly dominant type"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="347" end="397" title="Macrocephaly mental retardation facial dysmorphism" label="Macrocephaly mental retardation facial dysmorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q281115" start="400" end="442" title="Macrocephaly mesodermal hamartoma spectrum" label="Macrocephaly mesodermal hamartoma spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="445" end="480" title="Macrocephaly mesomelic arms talipes" label="Macrocephaly mesomelic arms talipes"/>
<link wikidata="Q81923010" start="483" end="525" title="Macrocephaly pigmentation large hands feet" label="Macrocephaly pigmentation large hands feet"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="528" end="565" title="Macrocephaly short stature paraplegia" label="Macrocephaly short stature paraplegia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6664372" start="568" end="592" title="Macrodactyly of the foot" label="Macrodactyly of the foot"/>
<link wikidata="Q6664372" start="595" end="619" title="Macrodactyly of the hand" label="Macrodactyly of the hand"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="622" end="666" title="Macroepiphyseal dysplasia Mcalister Coe type" label="Macroepiphyseal dysplasia Mcalister Coe type"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118092" start="669" end="686" title="Macroglobulinemia" label="Macroglobulinemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q524095" start="689" end="710" title="Macroglossia dominant" label="Macroglossia dominant"/>
<link wikidata="Q521863" start="713" end="746" title="Macroglossia exomphalos gigantism" label="Macroglossia exomphalos gigantism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991265" start="749" end="778" title="Macrogyria pseudobulbar palsy" label="Macrogyria pseudobulbar palsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3331434" start="781" end="805" title="Macrophagic myofasciitis" label="Macrophagic myofasciitis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="808" end="850" title="Macrosomia developmental delay dysmorphism" label="Macrosomia developmental delay dysmorphism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="853" end="891" title="Macrosomia microphthalmia cleft palate" label="Macrosomia microphthalmia cleft palate"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="894" end="936" title="Macrothrombocytopenia progressive deafness" label="Macrothrombocytopenia progressive deafness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1914356" start="939" end="986" title="Macrothrombocytopenia with leukocyte inclusions" label="Macrothrombocytopenia with leukocyte inclusions"/>
<link wikidata="Q4385926" start="1003" end="1028" title="Macular corneal dystrophy" label="Macular corneal dystrophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q27429789" start="1031" end="1051" title="Macular degeneration" label="Macular degeneration"/>
<link wikidata="Q27429789" start="1055" end="1084" title="Macular degeneration juvenile" label="Macular degeneration juvenile"/>
<link wikidata="Q27429789" start="1088" end="1121" title="Macular degeneration, age-related" label="Macular degeneration, age-related"/>
<link wikidata="Q27429789" start="1125" end="1158" title="Macular degeneration, polymorphic" label="Macular degeneration, polymorphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q830265" start="1161" end="1191" title="Macular dystrophy, vitelliform" label="Macular dystrophy, vitelliform"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1194" end="1256" title="Macules hereditary congenital hypopigmented and hyperpigmented" label="Macules hereditary congenital hypopigmented and hyperpigmented"/>
<link wikidata="Q154666" start="1274" end="1289" title="Mad cow disease" label="Mad cow disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q4887975" start="1292" end="1315" title="Madelung&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Madelung&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1318" end="1347" title="Madokoro–Ohdo–Sonoda syndrome" label="Madokoro–Ohdo–Sonoda syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419261" start="1350" end="1367" title="Maffucci syndrome" label="Maffucci syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1370" end="1388" title="Maghazaji syndrome" label="Maghazaji syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q3771629" start="1391" end="1437" title="Magnesium defect in renal tubular transport of" label="Magnesium defect in renal tubular transport of"/>
<link wikidata="Q3771629" start="1440" end="1463" title="Magnesium wasting renal" label="Magnesium wasting renal"/>
<link wikidata="Q42844" start="1466" end="1491" title="Major depressive disorder" label="Major depressive disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q3480741" start="1505" end="1524" title="Mal de debarquement" label="Mal de debarquement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1789076" start="1546" end="1558" title="Malakoplakia" label="Malakoplakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12156" start="1561" end="1568" title="Malaria" label="Malaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q4552290" start="1571" end="1652" title="Male pseudohermaphroditism due to 17-beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase deficiency" label="Male pseudohermaphroditism due to 17-beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q858426" start="1655" end="1719" title="Male pseudohermaphroditism due to 5-alpha-reductase 2 deficiency" label="Male pseudohermaphroditism due to 5-alpha-reductase 2 deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q18028548" start="1722" end="1777" title="Male pseudohermaphroditism due to defective LH molecule" label="Male pseudohermaphroditism due to defective LH molecule"/>
<link wikidata="Q17146964" start="1780" end="1815" title="Malformations in neuronal migration" label="Malformations in neuronal migration"/>
<link wikidata="Q177755" start="1818" end="1839" title="Malignant astrocytoma" label="Malignant astrocytoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1887348" start="1842" end="1872" title="Malignant fibrous histiocytoma" label="Malignant fibrous histiocytoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1737977" start="1875" end="1900" title="Malignant germ cell tumor" label="Malignant germ cell tumor"/>
<link wikidata="Q708165" start="1903" end="1952" title="Malignant hyperthermia arthrogryposis torticollis" label="Malignant hyperthermia arthrogryposis torticollis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585081" start="1955" end="1977" title="Malignant hyperthermia" label="Malignant hyperthermia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585081" start="1981" end="2025" title="Malignant hyperthermia susceptibility type 1" label="Malignant hyperthermia susceptibility type 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585081" start="2029" end="2073" title="Malignant hyperthermia susceptibility type 2" label="Malignant hyperthermia susceptibility type 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585081" start="2077" end="2121" title="Malignant hyperthermia susceptibility type 3" label="Malignant hyperthermia susceptibility type 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585081" start="2125" end="2169" title="Malignant hyperthermia susceptibility type 4" label="Malignant hyperthermia susceptibility type 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585081" start="2173" end="2217" title="Malignant hyperthermia susceptibility type 5" label="Malignant hyperthermia susceptibility type 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585081" start="2221" end="2265" title="Malignant hyperthermia susceptibility type 6" label="Malignant hyperthermia susceptibility type 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q32838" start="2268" end="2295" title="Malignant mesenchymal tumor" label="Malignant mesenchymal tumor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1958786" start="2298" end="2329" title="Malignant mixed Müllerian tumor" label="Malignant mixed Müllerian tumor"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2332" end="2376" title="Malignant paroxysmal ventricular tachycardia" label="Malignant paroxysmal ventricular tachycardia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1632678" start="2379" end="2401" title="Mallory–Weiss syndrome" label="Mallory–Weiss syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q6744526" start="2423" end="2439" title="Malonic aciduria" label="Malonic aciduria"/>
<link wikidata="Q6744526" start="2442" end="2478" title="Malonyl-CoA decarboxylase deficiency" label="Malonyl-CoA decarboxylase deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q5547625" start="2481" end="2496" title="Malouf syndrome" label="Malouf syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q6744609" start="2499" end="2532" title="Malpuech facial clefting syndrome" label="Malpuech facial clefting syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q16968886" start="2546" end="2570" title="Mandibuloacral dysplasia" label="Mandibuloacral dysplasia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2573" end="2630" title="Mandibulofacial dysostosis deafness postaxial polydactyly" label="Mandibulofacial dysostosis deafness postaxial polydactyly"/>
<link wikidata="Q22965506" start="2633" end="2681" title="Mandibulofacial dysostosis-microcephaly syndrome" label="Mandibulofacial dysostosis-microcephaly syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q131755" start="2684" end="2709" title="Manic Depression, Bipolar" label="Manic Depression, Bipolar"/>
<link wikidata="Q131755" start="2712" end="2753" title="Manic-depressive psychosis, genetic types" label="Manic-depressive psychosis, genetic types"/>
<link wikidata="Q6750947" start="2756" end="2768" title="Mannosidosis" label="Mannosidosis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2771" end="2790" title="Manouvrier syndrome" label="Manouvrier syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q4280605" start="2793" end="2807" title="Mansonelliasis" label="Mansonelliasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q268713" start="2810" end="2830" title="Mantle cell lymphoma" label="Mantle cell lymphoma"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2863" end="2886" title="Marashi–Gorlin syndrome" label="Marashi–Gorlin syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q167264" start="2889" end="2902" title="Marburg fever" label="Marburg fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q94796" start="2905" end="2932" title="Marchiafava–Bignami disease" label="Marchiafava–Bignami disease"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2935" end="2962" title="Marchiafava–Micheli disease" label="Marchiafava–Micheli disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476789" start="2965" end="2987" title="Marcus Gunn phenomenon" label="Marcus Gunn phenomenon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2990" end="3017" title="Marden–Walker-like syndrome" label="Marden–Walker-like syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q6758640" start="3020" end="3042" title="Marden–Walker syndrome" label="Marden–Walker syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q53843869" start="3045" end="3058" title="Marek disease" label="Marek disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q208562" start="3061" end="3076" title="Marfan syndrome" label="Marfan syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q3508669" start="3080" end="3103" title="Marfan Syndrome type II" label="Marfan Syndrome type II"/>
<link wikidata="Q208562" start="3107" end="3131" title="Marfan Syndrome type III" label="Marfan Syndrome type III"/>
<link wikidata="Q208562" start="3135" end="3158" title="Marfan Syndrome type IV" label="Marfan Syndrome type IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q208562" start="3162" end="3184" title="Marfan Syndrome type V" label="Marfan Syndrome type V"/>
<link wikidata="Q6759035" start="3187" end="3221" title="Marfan-like syndrome, Boileau type" label="Marfan-like syndrome, Boileau type"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3224" end="3244" title="Marfan-like syndrome" label="Marfan-like syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q3508694" start="3247" end="3282" title="Marfanoid craniosynostosis syndrome" label="Marfanoid craniosynostosis syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q6759035" start="3285" end="3308" title="Marfanoid hypermobility" label="Marfanoid hypermobility"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3311" end="3358" title="Marfanoid mental retardation syndrome autosomal" label="Marfanoid mental retardation syndrome autosomal"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3361" end="3394" title="Marginal glioneuronal heterotopia" label="Marginal glioneuronal heterotopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q622925" start="3416" end="3433" title="Marie type ataxia" label="Marie type ataxia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3436" end="3471" title="Marie–Unna congenital hypotrichosis" label="Marie–Unna congenital hypotrichosis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3474" end="3505" title="Marinesco–Sjögren like syndrome" label="Marinesco–Sjögren like syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2628677" start="3508" end="3534" title="Marinesco–Sjögren syndrome" label="Marinesco–Sjögren syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3537" end="3559" title="Marion–Mayers syndrome" label="Marion–Mayers syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3562" end="3594" title="Markel–Vikkula–Mulliken syndrome" label="Markel–Vikkula–Mulliken syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3597" end="3630" title="Marles–Greenberg–Persaud syndrome" label="Marles–Greenberg–Persaud syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3633" end="3662" title="Small supernumerary marker chromosome#Marker chromosome 15 syndrome" label="Marker chromosome 15 syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3665" end="3707" title="Maroteaux–Cohen–Solal–Bonaventure syndrome" label="Maroteaux–Cohen–Solal–Bonaventure syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3710" end="3736" title="Maroteaux–Fonfria syndrome" label="Maroteaux–Fonfria syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3739" end="3776" title="Maroteaux–Le Merrer–Bensahel syndrome" label="Maroteaux–Le Merrer–Bensahel syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3779" end="3813" title="Maroteaux–Stanescu–Cousin syndrome" label="Maroteaux–Stanescu–Cousin syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3816" end="3851" title="Maroteaux–Verloes–Stanescu syndrome" label="Maroteaux–Verloes–Stanescu syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q576109" start="3854" end="3877" title="Maroteaux–Lamy syndrome" label="Maroteaux–Lamy syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q6759035" start="3880" end="3913" title="Marphanoid syndrome type De Silva" label="Marphanoid syndrome type De Silva"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3916" end="3945" title="Marsden–Nyhan–Sakati syndrome" label="Marsden–Nyhan–Sakati syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262161" start="3948" end="3964" title="Marsden syndrome" label="Marsden syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2195906" start="3967" end="3984" title="Marshall–Smith syndrome" label="Marshall syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2195906" start="3987" end="4010" title="Marshall–Smith syndrome" label="Marshall–Smith syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4013" end="4050" title="Martinez–Monasterio–Pinheiro syndrome" label="Martinez–Monasterio–Pinheiro syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4053" end="4082" title="Martsolf–Reed–Hunter syndrome" label="Martsolf–Reed–Hunter syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4085" end="4102" title="Martsolf syndrome" label="Martsolf syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q6714500" start="4120" end="4133" title="MASA syndrome" label="MASA syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q4532199" start="4136" end="4160" title="Mass psychogenic illness" label="Mass psychogenic illness"/>
<link wikidata="Q3508570" start="4163" end="4176" title="MASS syndrome" label="MASS syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4179" end="4210" title="Massa–Casaer–Ceulemans syndrome" label="Massa–Casaer–Ceulemans syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q191989" start="4213" end="4230" title="Mast cell disease" label="Mast cell disease"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4233" end="4274" title="Mastocytosis, short stature, hearing loss" label="Mastocytosis, short stature, hearing loss"/>
<link wikidata="Q112670" start="4277" end="4289" title="Mastocytosis" label="Mastocytosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q509389" start="4292" end="4303" title="Mastoiditis" label="Mastoiditis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4306" end="4341" title="Mastroiacovo–De Rosa–Satta syndrome" label="Mastroiacovo–De Rosa–Satta syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4344" end="4377" title="Mastroiacovo–Gambi–Segni syndrome" label="Mastroiacovo–Gambi–Segni syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q11668635" start="4380" end="4394" title="Hypermethioninemia" label="MAT deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q5898279" start="4397" end="4427" title="Maternal hyperphenylalaninemia" label="Maternal hyperphenylalaninemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4313947" start="4430" end="4472" title="Maternally inherited diabetes and deafness" label="Maternally inherited diabetes and deafness"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4475" end="4505" title="Mathieu–De Broca–Bony syndrome" label="Mathieu–De Broca–Bony syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4508" end="4544" title="Matsoukas–Liarikos–Giannika syndrome" label="Matsoukas–Liarikos–Giannika syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4547" end="4568" title="Matthew–Wood syndrome" label="Matthew–Wood syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q663041" start="4571" end="4607" title="Maturity onset diabetes of the young" label="Maturity onset diabetes of the young"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4610" end="4627" title="Maumenee syndrome" label="Maumenee syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4630" end="4650" title="Maxillary double lip" label="Maxillary double lip"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4653" end="4677" title="Maxillofacial dysostosis" label="Maxillofacial dysostosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4913982" start="4680" end="4715" title="Maxillonasal dysplasia, Binder type" label="Maxillonasal dysplasia, Binder type"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473749" start="4718" end="4750" title="Mayer–Rokitanski–Kuster syndrome" label="Mayer–Rokitanski–Kuster syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1914356" start="4753" end="4772" title="May–Hegglin anomaly" label="May–Hegglin anomaly"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4783" end="4807" title="McAlister–Crane syndrome" label="McAlister–Crane syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q787751" start="4810" end="4825" title="McArdle disease" label="McArdle disease"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4828" end="4862" title="McCallum–Macadam–Johnston syndrome" label="McCallum–Macadam–Johnston syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q727008" start="4865" end="4889" title="McCune–Albright syndrome" label="McCune–Albright syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q55782071" start="4892" end="4910" title="McDonough syndrome" label="McDonough syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q5196861" start="4913" end="4930" title="McDowall syndrome" label="McDowall syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q16947790" start="4933" end="4953" title="McGillivray syndrome" label="McGillivray syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q3508674" start="4956" end="4981" title="McKusick–Kaufman syndrome" label="McKusick–Kaufman syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2964438" start="4984" end="5026" title="McKusick type metaphyseal chondrodysplasia" label="McKusick type metaphyseal chondrodysplasia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5029" end="5053" title="McLain–Debakian syndrome" label="McLain–Debakian syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5056" end="5082" title="McPherson–Clemens syndrome" label="McPherson–Clemens syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5085" end="5123" title="McPherson–Robertson–Cammarano syndrome" label="McPherson–Robertson–Cammarano syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5148" end="5176" title="Meacham–Winn–Culler syndrome" label="Meacham–Winn–Culler syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414765" start="5211" end="5239" title="Munchausen syndrome by proxy" label="Munchausen syndrome by proxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2938089" start="5243" end="5268" title="Peripartum cardiomyopathy" label="Peripartum cardiomyopathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q79793" start="5271" end="5278" title="Measles" label="Measles"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5281" end="5301" title="Meckel like syndrome" label="Meckel like syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1915681" start="5304" end="5319" title="Meckel syndrome" label="Meckel syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5322" end="5352" title="Medeira Dennis Donnai syndrome" label="Medeira Dennis Donnai syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q47461585" start="5355" end="5406" title="Median cleft lip corpus callosum lipoma skin polyps" label="Median cleft lip corpus callosum lipoma skin polyps"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5409" end="5439" title="Median nodule of the upper lip" label="Median nodule of the upper lip"/>
<link wikidata="Q3542021" start="5442" end="5477" title="Mediastinal endodermal sinus tumors" label="Mediastinal endodermal sinus tumors"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5480" end="5500" title="Mediastinal syndrome" label="Mediastinal syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q156050" start="5503" end="5522" title="Brucellosis" label="Mediterranean fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q750826" start="5525" end="5571" title="Medium-chain Acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency" label="Medium-chain Acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5574" end="5597" title="Medrano Roldan syndrome" label="Medrano Roldan syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1916694" start="5600" end="5624" title="Medullary cystic disease" label="Medullary cystic disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q3493538" start="5627" end="5654" title="Medullary thyroid carcinoma" label="Medullary thyroid carcinoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333608" start="5657" end="5672" title="Medulloblastoma" label="Medulloblastoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q4891136" start="5690" end="5747" title="Megacystis microcolon intestinal hypoperistalsis syndrome" label="Megacystis microcolon intestinal hypoperistalsis syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q15056772" start="5750" end="5762" title="Megaduodenum" label="Megaduodenum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7109017" start="5765" end="5789" title="Mega-epiphyseal dwarfism" label="Mega-epiphyseal dwarfism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3237080" start="5792" end="5822" title="Megalencephalic leukodystrophy" label="Megalencephalic leukodystrophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3237080" start="5825" end="5861" title="Megalencephaly-cystic leukodystrophy" label="Megalencephaly-cystic leukodystrophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q10832211" start="5864" end="5884" title="Megaloblastic anemia" label="Megaloblastic anemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q18026348" start="5887" end="5927" title="Megalocornea mental retardation syndrome" label="Megalocornea mental retardation syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5930" end="5964" title="Megalocytic interstitial nephritis" label="Megalocytic interstitial nephritis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5967" end="5981" title="Mehes syndrome" label="Mehes syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5984" end="6011" title="Mehta–Lewis–Patton syndrome" label="Mehta–Lewis–Patton syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6014" end="6045" title="Meier–Blumberg–Imahorn syndrome" label="Meier–Blumberg–Imahorn syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6048" end="6072" title="Meier–Rotschild syndrome" label="Meier–Rotschild syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q693872" start="6075" end="6089" title="Meige syndrome" label="Meige syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q5013311" start="6092" end="6106" title="Meigel disease" label="Meigel disease"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6109" end="6133" title="Meinecke–Pepper syndrome" label="Meinecke–Pepper syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q55783063" start="6136" end="6153" title="Meinecke syndrome" label="Meinecke syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q180614" start="6171" end="6186" title="Melanoma type 1" label="Melanoma type 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q180614" start="6189" end="6204" title="Melanoma type 2" label="Melanoma type 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q5009957" start="6207" end="6225" title="Melanoma, familial" label="Melanoma, familial"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6228" end="6247" title="Melanoma, malignant" label="Melanoma, malignant"/>
<link wikidata="Q5009957" start="6250" end="6279" title="Melanoma-astrocytoma syndrome" label="Melanoma-astrocytoma syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q11777035" start="6282" end="6306" title="Melanosis neurocutaneous" label="Melanosis neurocutaneous"/>
<link wikidata="Q2666433" start="6309" end="6314" title="MELAS" label="MELAS"/>
<link wikidata="Q4352925" start="6317" end="6331" title="Meleda disease" label="Meleda disease"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6334" end="6354" title="Melhem–Fahl syndrome" label="Melhem–Fahl syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q963944" start="6357" end="6368" title="Melioidosis" label="Melioidosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1919487" start="6371" end="6400" title="Melkersson–Rosenthal syndrome" label="Melkersson–Rosenthal syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6403" end="6433" title="Melnick–Needles osteodysplasty" label="Melnick–Needles osteodysplasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q3508673" start="6436" end="6460" title="Melnick–Needles syndrome" label="Melnick–Needles syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2299379" start="6463" end="6513" title="Membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis (type II)" label="Membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis (type II)"/>
<link wikidata="Q25324130" start="6546" end="6595" title="Mendelian susceptibility to atypical mycobacteria" label="Mendelian susceptibility to atypical mycobacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q975705" start="6598" end="6622" title="Menetrier&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Menetrier&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6625" end="6651" title="Mengel–Konigsmark syndrome" label="Mengel–Konigsmark syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q460167" start="6654" end="6676" title="Ménière&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Ménière&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6679" end="6730" title="Meningeal angiomatosis cleft hypoplastic left heart" label="Meningeal angiomatosis cleft hypoplastic left heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q369157" start="6733" end="6745" title="Meningioma 1" label="Meningioma 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q369157" start="6748" end="6758" title="Meningioma" label="Meningioma"/>
<link wikidata="Q890785" start="6761" end="6786" title="Meningitis, meningococcal" label="Meningitis, meningococcal"/>
<link wikidata="Q48143" start="6789" end="6799" title="Meningitis" label="Meningitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q844717" start="6802" end="6813" title="Meningocele" label="Meningocele"/>
<link wikidata="Q890785" start="6816" end="6831" title="Meningococcemia" label="Meningococcemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346023" start="6834" end="6854" title="Meningoencephalocele" label="Meningoencephalocele"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6857" end="6910" title="Meningoencephalocele-arthrogryposis-hypoplastic thumb" label="Meningoencephalocele-arthrogryposis-hypoplastic thumb"/>
<link wikidata="Q844717" start="6913" end="6929" title="Meningomyelocele" label="Meningomyelocele"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019940" start="7003" end="7049" title="Mental deficiency-epilepsy-endocrine disorders" label="Mental deficiency-epilepsy-endocrine disorders"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7052" end="7100" title="Mental mixed retardation deafness clubbed digits" label="Mental mixed retardation deafness clubbed digits"/>
<link wikidata="Q183560" start="7112" end="7130" title="Intellectual disability" label="Mental retardation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7177" end="7225" title="Mental retardation anophthalmia craniosynostosis" label="Mental retardation anophthalmia craniosynostosis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7228" end="7286" title="Mental retardation arachnodactyly hypotonia telangiectasia" label="Mental retardation arachnodactyly hypotonia telangiectasia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7289" end="7332" title="Mental retardation athetosis microphthalmia" label="Mental retardation athetosis microphthalmia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7335" end="7387" title="Mental retardation blepharophimosis obesity web neck" label="Mental retardation blepharophimosis obesity web neck"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7390" end="7426" title="Mental retardation Buenos Aires type" label="Mental retardation Buenos Aires type"/>
<link wikidata="Q7243682" start="7429" end="7483" title="Mental retardation cataracts calcified pinnae myopathy" label="Mental retardation cataracts calcified pinnae myopathy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7486" end="7522" title="Mental retardation coloboma slimness" label="Mental retardation coloboma slimness"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7525" end="7571" title="Mental retardation contractural arachnodactyly" label="Mental retardation contractural arachnodactyly"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7574" end="7626" title="Mental retardation dysmorphism hypogonadism diabetes" label="Mental retardation dysmorphism hypogonadism diabetes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7629" end="7669" title="Mental retardation epilepsy bulbous nose" label="Mental retardation epilepsy bulbous nose"/>
<link wikidata="Q7059204" start="7672" end="7699" title="Mental retardation epilepsy" label="Mental retardation epilepsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8023321" start="7702" end="7750" title="Mental retardation gynecomastia obesity X linked" label="Mental retardation gynecomastia obesity X linked"/>
<link wikidata="Q55782445" start="7753" end="7797" title="Mental retardation hip luxation G6PD variant" label="Mental retardation hip luxation G6PD variant"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7800" end="7855" title="Mental retardation hypocupremia hypobetalipoproteinemia" label="Mental retardation hypocupremia hypobetalipoproteinemia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7858" end="7909" title="Mental retardation hypotonia skin hyperpigmentation" label="Mental retardation hypotonia skin hyperpigmentation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7912" end="7967" title="Mental retardation macrocephaly coarse facies hypotonia" label="Mental retardation macrocephaly coarse facies hypotonia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7970" end="8019" title="Mental retardation microcephaly phalangeal facial" label="Mental retardation microcephaly phalangeal facial"/>
<link wikidata="Q2757585" start="8022" end="8068" title="Mental retardation microcephaly unusual facies" label="Mental retardation microcephaly unusual facies"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8071" end="8108" title="Mental retardation Mietens–Weber type" label="Mental retardation Mietens–Weber type"/>
<link wikidata="Q5382842" start="8111" end="8143" title="Mental retardation multiple nevi" label="Mental retardation multiple nevi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8146" end="8204" title="Mental retardation myopathy short stature endocrine defect" label="Mental retardation myopathy short stature endocrine defect"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8207" end="8269" title="Mental retardation nasal hypoplasia obesity genital hypoplasia" label="Mental retardation nasal hypoplasia obesity genital hypoplasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136492" start="8316" end="8352" title="Mental retardation nasal papillomata" label="Mental retardation nasal papillomata"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8355" end="8388" title="Mental retardation osteosclerosis" label="Mental retardation osteosclerosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q50349623" start="8391" end="8432" title="Mental retardation progressive spasticity" label="Mental retardation progressive spasticity"/>
<link wikidata="Q8041560" start="8435" end="8478" title="Mental retardation psychosis macroorchidism" label="Mental retardation psychosis macroorchidism"/>
<link wikidata="Q666980" start="8481" end="8518" title="Mental retardation short broad thumbs" label="Mental retardation short broad thumbs"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8521" end="8570" title="Mental retardation short stature absent phalanges" label="Mental retardation short stature absent phalanges"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154422" start="8573" end="8622" title="Mental retardation short stature Bombay phenotype" label="Mental retardation short stature Bombay phenotype"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8625" end="8685" title="Mental retardation short stature cleft palate unusual facies" label="Mental retardation short stature cleft palate unusual facies"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8688" end="8737" title="Mental retardation short stature deafness genital" label="Mental retardation short stature deafness genital"/>
<link wikidata="Q7900262" start="8740" end="8808" title="Mental retardation short stature hand contractures genital anomalies" label="Mental retardation short stature hand contractures genital anomalies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543446" start="8811" end="8872" title="Mental retardation short stature heart and skeletal anomalies" label="Mental retardation short stature heart and skeletal anomalies"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8875" end="8921" title="Mental retardation short stature hypertelorism" label="Mental retardation short stature hypertelorism"/>
<link wikidata="Q29982037" start="8924" end="8973" title="Mental retardation short stature microcephaly eye" label="Mental retardation short stature microcephaly eye"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8976" end="9039" title="Mental retardation short stature ocular and articular anomalies" label="Mental retardation short stature ocular and articular anomalies"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9042" end="9084" title="Mental retardation short stature scoliosis" label="Mental retardation short stature scoliosis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9087" end="9134" title="Mental retardation short stature unusual facies" label="Mental retardation short stature unusual facies"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9137" end="9192" title="Mental retardation short stature wedge shaped epiphyses" label="Mental retardation short stature wedge shaped epiphyses"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9195" end="9247" title="Mental retardation skeletal dysplasia abducens palsy" label="Mental retardation skeletal dysplasia abducens palsy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9250" end="9293" title="Mental retardation Smith–Fineman–Myers type" label="Mental retardation Smith–Fineman–Myers type"/>
<link wikidata="Q18412811" start="9296" end="9338" title="Mental retardation spasticity ectrodactyly" label="Mental retardation spasticity ectrodactyly"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9385" end="9430" title="Mental retardation unusual facies Ampola type" label="Mental retardation unusual facies Ampola type"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9433" end="9483" title="Mental retardation unusual facies Davis–Lafer type" label="Mental retardation unusual facies Davis–Lafer type"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9486" end="9542" title="Mental retardation unusual facies talipes hand anomalies" label="Mental retardation unusual facies talipes hand anomalies"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9545" end="9578" title="Mental retardation unusual facies" label="Mental retardation unusual facies"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9581" end="9610" title="Mental retardation Wolff type" label="Mental retardation Wolff type"/>
<link wikidata="Q8041560" start="9613" end="9651" title="Mental retardation X linked Atkin type" label="Mental retardation X linked Atkin type"/>
<link wikidata="Q4979092" start="9654" end="9716" title="Mental retardation X linked borderline Maoa metabolism anomaly" label="Mental retardation X linked borderline Maoa metabolism anomaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q4979092" start="9719" end="9759" title="Mental retardation X linked Brunner type" label="Mental retardation X linked Brunner type"/>
<link wikidata="Q8041560" start="9762" end="9801" title="Mental retardation X linked dysmorphism" label="Mental retardation X linked dysmorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q8041560" start="9804" end="9851" title="Mental retardation X linked dystonia dysarthria" label="Mental retardation X linked dystonia dysarthria"/>
<link wikidata="Q19703046" start="9854" end="9903" title="Mental retardation X linked severe Gustavson type" label="Mental retardation X linked severe Gustavson type"/>
<link wikidata="Q8041560" start="9906" end="9955" title="Mental retardation X linked short stature obesity" label="Mental retardation X linked short stature obesity"/>
<link wikidata="Q55782580" start="9958" end="10021" title="Mental retardation X linked Tranebjaerg type seizures psoriasis" label="Mental retardation X linked Tranebjaerg type seizures psoriasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q183560" start="10024" end="10055" title="Mental retardation, unexplained" label="Mental retardation, unexplained"/>
<link wikidata="Q640836" start="10058" end="10105" title="Mental retardation, X linked, Marfanoid habitus" label="Mental retardation, X linked, Marfanoid habitus"/>
<link wikidata="Q8041560" start="10108" end="10149" title="Mental retardation, X linked, nonspecific" label="Mental retardation, X linked, nonspecific"/>
<link wikidata="Q8041560" start="10152" end="10183" title="Mental retardation, X-linked 14" label="Mental retardation, X-linked 14"/>
<link wikidata="Q55787278" start="10186" end="10232" title="Mental retardation-polydactyly-uncombable hair" label="Mental retardation-polydactyly-uncombable hair"/>
<link wikidata="Q408089" start="10250" end="10267" title="Mercury poisoning" label="Mercury poisoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q408089" start="10269" end="10281" title="Mercurialism" label="Mercurialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4064296" start="10285" end="10302" title="Meretoja syndrome" label="Meretoja syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10305" end="10318" title="Merkle tumors" label="Merkle tumors"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10321" end="10354" title="Merlob–Grunebaum–Reisner syndrome" label="Merlob–Grunebaum–Reisner syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q431643" start="10357" end="10372" title="Merlob syndrome" label="Merlob syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10375" end="10403" title="Mesangial sclerosis, diffuse" label="Mesangial sclerosis, diffuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q221463" start="10406" end="10425" title="Mesenteric ischemia" label="Mesenteric ischemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q17048348" start="10428" end="10451" title="Mesenteric panniculitis" label="Mesenteric panniculitis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10454" end="10483" title="Mesodermal defects lower type" label="Mesodermal defects lower type"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10486" end="10506" title="Mesomelia synostoses" label="Mesomelia synostoses"/>
<link wikidata="Q19597858" start="10509" end="10518" title="Mesomelia" label="Mesomelia"/>
<link wikidata="Q22965561" start="10521" end="10566" title="Mesomelic dwarfism cleft palate camptodactyly" label="Mesomelic dwarfism cleft palate camptodactyly"/>
<link wikidata="Q16550087" start="10569" end="10599" title="Mesomelic dwarfism Langer type" label="Mesomelic dwarfism Langer type"/>
<link wikidata="Q19597858" start="10602" end="10636" title="Mesomelic dwarfism Nievergelt type" label="Mesomelic dwarfism Nievergelt type"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10639" end="10681" title="Mesomelic dwarfism Reinhardt–Pfeiffer type" label="Mesomelic dwarfism Reinhardt–Pfeiffer type"/>
<link wikidata="Q19597858" start="10684" end="10716" title="Mesomelic dysplasia skin dimples" label="Mesomelic dysplasia skin dimples"/>
<link wikidata="Q19597858" start="10719" end="10748" title="Mesomelic dysplasia Thai type" label="Mesomelic dysplasia Thai type"/>
<link wikidata="Q19597858" start="10751" end="10783" title="Mesomelic syndrome Pfeiffer type" label="Mesomelic syndrome Pfeiffer type"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077603" start="10786" end="10798" title="Mesothelioma" label="Mesothelioma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1598200" start="10826" end="10844" title="Metabolic acidosis" label="Metabolic acidosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2351083" start="10847" end="10865" title="Metabolic disorder" label="Metabolic disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q657193" start="10868" end="10888" title="Metabolic syndrome X" label="Metabolic syndrome X"/>
<link wikidata="Q112683450" start="10891" end="10917" title="Metacarpals 4 and 5 fusion" label="Metacarpals 4 and 5 fusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q6822414" start="10920" end="10938" title="Metachondromatosis" label="Metachondromatosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6822520" start="10941" end="10950" title="Metageria" label="Metageria"/>
<link wikidata="Q13566985" start="10953" end="10977" title="Metaphyseal anadysplasia" label="Metaphyseal anadysplasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2964434" start="10980" end="11020" title="Metaphyseal chondrodysplasia Schmid type" label="Metaphyseal chondrodysplasia Schmid type"/>
<link wikidata="Q3251367" start="11023" end="11062" title="Metaphyseal chondrodysplasia Spahr type" label="Metaphyseal chondrodysplasia Spahr type"/>
<link wikidata="Q3251367" start="11065" end="11101" title="Metaphyseal chondrodysplasia, others" label="Metaphyseal chondrodysplasia, others"/>
<link wikidata="Q112739550" start="11104" end="11165" title="Metaphyseal dysostosis mental retardation conductive deafness" label="Metaphyseal dysostosis mental retardation conductive deafness"/>
<link wikidata="Q13566985" start="11168" end="11224" title="Metaphyseal dysplasia maxillary hypoplasia brachydactyly" label="Metaphyseal dysplasia maxillary hypoplasia brachydactyly"/>
<link wikidata="Q13566985" start="11227" end="11258" title="Metaphyseal dysplasia Pyle type" label="Metaphyseal dysplasia Pyle type"/>
<link wikidata="Q85785041" start="11261" end="11282" title="Metastatic Insulinoma" label="Metastatic Insulinoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524166" start="11285" end="11304" title="Metatarsus adductus" label="Metatarsus adductus"/>
<link wikidata="Q194101" start="11307" end="11326" title="Metatropic dwarfism" label="Metatropic dwarfism"/>
<link wikidata="Q194101" start="11329" end="11349" title="Metatropic dysplasia" label="Metatropic dysplasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q419663" start="11366" end="11397" title="Methimazole antenatal infection" label="Methimazole antenatal infection"/>
<link wikidata="Q11668635" start="11400" end="11441" title="Methionine adenosyltransferase deficiency" label="Methionine adenosyltransferase deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q414075" start="11444" end="11478" title="Methyl mercury antenatal infection" label="Methyl mercury antenatal infection"/>
<link wikidata="Q994859" start="11481" end="11518" title="Methylcobalamin deficiency cbl G type" label="Methylcobalamin deficiency cbl G type"/>
<link wikidata="Q994859" start="11521" end="11575" title="Methylcobalamin deficiency, cbl E complementation type" label="Methylcobalamin deficiency, cbl E complementation type"/>
<link wikidata="Q30643222" start="11578" end="11624" title="Methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase deficiency" label="Methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q742500" start="11627" end="11669" title="Methylmalonic acidemia with homocystinuria" label="Methylmalonic acidemia with homocystinuria"/>
<link wikidata="Q742500" start="11672" end="11694" title="Methylmalonic acidemia" label="Methylmalonic acidemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q742500" start="11697" end="11741" title="Methylmalonic aciduria microcephaly cataract" label="Methylmalonic aciduria microcephaly cataract"/>
<link wikidata="Q742500" start="11744" end="11792" title="Methylmalonicacidemia with homocystinuria, cbl D" label="Methylmalonicacidemia with homocystinuria, cbl D"/>
<link wikidata="Q742500" start="11795" end="11843" title="Methylmalonicaciduria with homocystinuria, cbl F" label="Methylmalonicaciduria with homocystinuria, cbl F"/>
<link wikidata="Q742500" start="11846" end="11900" title="Methylmalonicaciduria, vitamin B12 unresponsive, mut-0" label="Methylmalonicaciduria, vitamin B12 unresponsive, mut-0"/>
<link wikidata="Q6824028" start="11903" end="11945" title="Methylmalonyl-Coenzyme A mutase deficiency" label="Methylmalonyl-Coenzyme A mutase deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q3043158" start="11963" end="11991" title="Mevalonate kinase deficiency" label="Mevalonate kinase deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q3043158" start="11994" end="12011" title="Mevalonicaciduria" label="Mevalonicaciduria"/>
<link wikidata="Q187656" start="12014" end="12050" title="Meyenburg–Altherr–Uehlinger syndrome" label="Meyenburg–Altherr–Uehlinger syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12071" end="12086" title="Mibies syndrome" label="Mibies syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q6836884" start="12119" end="12146" title="Michelin tire baby syndrome" label="Michelin tire baby syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q6837318" start="12149" end="12172" title="Michels Caskey syndrome" label="Michels Caskey syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q6837320" start="12175" end="12191" title="Michels syndrome" label="Michels syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q6838869" start="12194" end="12212" title="Mickleson syndrome" label="Mickleson syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1698867" start="12247" end="12285" title="Micrencephaly corpus callosum agenesis" label="Micrencephaly corpus callosum agenesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1698867" start="12288" end="12333" title="Micrencephaly olivopontocerebellar hypoplasia" label="Micrencephaly olivopontocerebellar hypoplasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6839205" start="12353" end="12367" title="Micro syndrome" label="Micro syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12390" end="12425" title="Microbrachycephaly ptosis cleft lip" label="Microbrachycephaly ptosis cleft lip"/>
<link wikidata="Q6839323" start="12462" end="12511" title="Microcephalic osteodysplastic primordial dwarfism" label="Microcephalic osteodysplastic primordial dwarfism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2289761" start="12514" end="12561" title="Microcephalic primordial dwarfism Toriello type" label="Microcephalic primordial dwarfism Toriello type"/>
<link wikidata="Q2289761" start="12564" end="12597" title="Microcephalic primordial dwarfism" label="Microcephalic primordial dwarfism"/>
<link wikidata="Q431643" start="12613" end="12625" title="Microcephaly" label="Microcephaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q55781637" start="12660" end="12708" title="Microcephaly albinism digital anomalies syndrome" label="Microcephaly albinism digital anomalies syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q431643" start="12711" end="12742" title="Microcephaly autosomal dominant" label="Microcephaly autosomal dominant"/>
<link wikidata="Q55787736" start="12745" end="12786" title="Microcephaly brachydactyly kyphoscoliosis" label="Microcephaly brachydactyly kyphoscoliosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q431643" start="12789" end="12839" title="Microcephaly brain defect spasticity hypernatremia" label="Microcephaly brain defect spasticity hypernatremia"/>
<link wikidata="Q431643" start="12842" end="12890" title="Microcephaly cardiac defect lung malsegmentation" label="Microcephaly cardiac defect lung malsegmentation"/>
<link wikidata="Q431643" start="12893" end="12920" title="Microcephaly cardiomyopathy" label="Microcephaly cardiomyopathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q431643" start="12923" end="12967" title="Microcephaly cervical spine fusion anomalies" label="Microcephaly cervical spine fusion anomalies"/>
<link wikidata="Q431643" start="12970" end="13015" title="Microcephaly chorioretinopathy recessive form" label="Microcephaly chorioretinopathy recessive form"/>
<link wikidata="Q22965506" start="13018" end="13062" title="Microcephaly cleft palate autosomal dominant" label="Microcephaly cleft palate autosomal dominant"/>
<link wikidata="Q55781232" start="13065" end="13095" title="Microcephaly deafness syndrome" label="Microcephaly deafness syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757427" start="13098" end="13143" title="Microcephaly developmental delay pancytopenia" label="Microcephaly developmental delay pancytopenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q431643" start="13146" end="13195" title="Microcephaly facial clefting preaxial polydactyly" label="Microcephaly facial clefting preaxial polydactyly"/>
<link wikidata="Q431643" start="13198" end="13247" title="Microcephaly glomerulonephritis Marfanoid habitus" label="Microcephaly glomerulonephritis Marfanoid habitus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4357083" start="13250" end="13295" title="Microcephaly hiatus hernia nephrotic syndrome" label="Microcephaly hiatus hernia nephrotic syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13298" end="13355" title="Microcephaly hypergonadotropic hypogonadism short stature" label="Microcephaly hypergonadotropic hypogonadism short stature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250362" start="13358" end="13404" title="Microcephaly immunodeficiency lymphoreticuloma" label="Microcephaly immunodeficiency lymphoreticuloma"/>
<link wikidata="Q4113827" start="13407" end="13446" title="Microcephaly intracranial calcification" label="Microcephaly intracranial calcification"/>
<link wikidata="Q6839330" start="13449" end="13497" title="Microcephaly lymphoedema chorioretinal dysplasia" label="Microcephaly lymphoedema chorioretinal dysplasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6839330" start="13500" end="13533" title="Microcephaly lymphoedema syndrome" label="Microcephaly lymphoedema syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13568" end="13611" title="Microcephaly mental retardation retinopathy" label="Microcephaly mental retardation retinopathy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13614" end="13665" title="Microcephaly mental retardation spasticity epilepsy" label="Microcephaly mental retardation spasticity epilepsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5441566" start="13668" end="13734" title="Microcephaly mesobrachyphalangy tracheoesophageal fistula syndrome" label="Microcephaly mesobrachyphalangy tracheoesophageal fistula syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13737" end="13785" title="Microcephaly microcornea syndrome Seemanova type" label="Microcephaly microcornea syndrome Seemanova type"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13788" end="13823" title="Microcephaly micropenis convulsions" label="Microcephaly micropenis convulsions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1557239" start="13826" end="13863" title="Microcephaly microphthalmos blindness" label="Microcephaly microphthalmos blindness"/>
<link wikidata="Q431643" start="13866" end="13891" title="Microcephaly nonsyndromal" label="Microcephaly nonsyndromal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1698867" start="13894" end="13944" title="Microcephaly pontocerebellar hypoplasia dyskinesia" label="Microcephaly pontocerebellar hypoplasia dyskinesia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13947" end="14003" title="Microcephaly seizures mental retardation heart disorders" label="Microcephaly seizures mental retardation heart disorders"/>
<link wikidata="Q5558010" start="14006" end="14058" title="Microcephaly sparse hair mental retardation seizures" label="Microcephaly sparse hair mental retardation seizures"/>
<link wikidata="Q5441566" start="14061" end="14103" title="Microcephaly syndactyly brachymesophalangy" label="Microcephaly syndactyly brachymesophalangy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6839330" start="14106" end="14166" title="Microcephaly with chorioretinopathy, autosomal dominant form" label="Microcephaly with chorioretinopathy, autosomal dominant form"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250362" start="14169" end="14224" title="Microcephaly with normal intelligence, immunodeficiency" label="Microcephaly with normal intelligence, immunodeficiency"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14227" end="14263" title="Microcephaly with spastic q­riplegia" label="Microcephaly with spastic q­riplegia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14266" end="14334" title="Microcephaly, holoprosencephaly, and intrauterine growth retardation" label="Microcephaly, holoprosencephaly, and intrauterine growth retardation"/>
<link wikidata="Q431643" start="14337" end="14378" title="Microcephaly, primary autosomal recessive" label="Microcephaly, primary autosomal recessive"/>
<link wikidata="Q720101" start="14389" end="14411" title="Microcoria, congenital" label="Microcoria, congenital"/>
<link wikidata="Q6725784" start="14438" end="14456" title="macular hypoplasia" label="macular hypoplasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q55781233" start="14459" end="14502" title="Microcornea glaucoma absent frontal sinuses" label="Microcornea glaucoma absent frontal sinuses"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14534" end="14570" title="Microdontia hypodontia short stature" label="Microdontia hypodontia short stature"/>
<link wikidata="Q431643" start="14573" end="14587" title="Microencephaly" label="Microencephaly"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14590" end="14624" title="Microgastria limb reduction defect" label="Microgastria limb reduction defect"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14627" end="14662" title="Microgastria short stature diabetes" label="Microgastria short stature diabetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q18344610" start="14665" end="14677" title="Microinfarct" label="Microinfarct"/>
<link wikidata="Q18966185" start="14680" end="14710" title="Micromelic dwarfism Fryns type" label="Micromelic dwarfism Fryns type"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14713" end="14755" title="Micromelic dysplasia dislocation of radius" label="Micromelic dysplasia dislocation of radius"/>
<link wikidata="Q29982037" start="14758" end="14807" title="Microphtalmos bilateral colobomatous orbital cyst" label="Microphtalmos bilateral colobomatous orbital cyst"/>
<link wikidata="Q1557239" start="14810" end="14824" title="Microphthalmia" label="Microphthalmia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6523439" start="14827" end="14853" title="Microphthalmia, Lentz type" label="Microphthalmia, Lentz type"/>
<link wikidata="Q6523439" start="14856" end="14903" title="Microphthalmia camptodactyly mental retardation" label="Microphthalmia camptodactyly mental retardation"/>
<link wikidata="Q29982037" start="14906" end="14929" title="Microphthalmia cataract" label="Microphthalmia cataract"/>
<link wikidata="Q29982037" start="14932" end="14974" title="Microphthalmia diaphragmatic hernia Fallot" label="Microphthalmia diaphragmatic hernia Fallot"/>
<link wikidata="Q29982037" start="14977" end="15009" title="Microphthalmia mental deficiency" label="Microphthalmia mental deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q29982037" start="15012" end="15050" title="Microphthalmia microtia fetal akinesia" label="Microphthalmia microtia fetal akinesia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15053" end="15087" title="Microphthalmia with limb anomalies" label="Microphthalmia with limb anomalies"/>
<link wikidata="Q29982037" start="15090" end="15135" title="Microphthalmos, microcornea, and sclerocornea" label="Microphthalmos, microcornea, and sclerocornea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934069" start="15138" end="15162" title="Microscopic polyangiitis" label="Microscopic polyangiitis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15165" end="15201" title="Microsomia hemifacial radial defects" label="Microsomia hemifacial radial defects"/>
<link wikidata="Q55781237" start="15204" end="15243" title="Microspherophakia metaphyseal dysplasia" label="Microspherophakia metaphyseal dysplasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934052" start="15246" end="15262" title="Microsporidiosis" label="Microsporidiosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759560" start="15265" end="15313" title="Microtia, meatal atresia and conductive deafness" label="Microtia, meatal atresia and conductive deafness"/>
<link wikidata="Q4293116" start="15316" end="15345" title="Microvillus inclusion disease" label="Microvillus inclusion disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q335555" start="15362" end="15379" title="Miculicz syndrome" label="Miculicz syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q6839894" start="15397" end="15411" title="MIDAS syndrome" label="MIDAS syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q222634" start="15414" end="15440" title="Midline cleft of lower lip" label="Midline cleft of lower lip"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15443" end="15473" title="Midline defects autosomal type" label="Midline defects autosomal type"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15476" end="15506" title="Midline defects recessive type" label="Midline defects recessive type"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15509" end="15544" title="Midline developmental field defects" label="Midline developmental field defects"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15547" end="15568" title="Midline field defects" label="Midline field defects"/>
<link wikidata="Q6533263" start="15571" end="15595" title="Midline lethal granuloma" label="Midline lethal granuloma"/>
<link wikidata="Q55782075" start="15598" end="15614" title="Mietens syndrome" label="Mietens syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15617" end="15650" title="Mievis–Verellen–Dumoulin syndrome" label="Mievis–Verellen–Dumoulin syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q133823" start="15653" end="15661" title="Migraine" label="Migraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q516562" start="15664" end="15681" title="Mikulicz syndrome" label="Mikulicz syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472703" start="15684" end="15709" title="Mild cognitive impairment" label="Mild cognitive impairment"/>
<link wikidata="Q205214" start="15712" end="15734" title="Miller Fisher syndrome" label="Miller Fisher syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2200977" start="15737" end="15759" title="Miller–Dieker syndrome" label="Miller–Dieker syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15762" end="15793" title="Milner–Khallouf–Gibson syndrome" label="Milner–Khallouf–Gibson syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815019" start="15796" end="15809" title="MILS syndrome" label="MILS syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q338857" start="15812" end="15828" title="Minamata disease" label="Minamata disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q541244" start="15831" end="15859" title="Minkowski–Chauffard syndrome" label="Minkowski–Chauffard syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15862" end="15891" title="Minoxidil antenatal infection" label="Minoxidil antenatal infection"/>
<link wikidata="Q596899" start="15894" end="15912" title="Miosis, congenital" label="Miosis, congenital"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107087" start="15915" end="15949" title="Mirhosseini–Holmes–Walton syndrome" label="Mirhosseini–Holmes–Walton syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15952" end="15983" title="Mirror hands feet nasal defects" label="Mirror hands feet nasal defects"/>
<link wikidata="Q55787201" start="15986" end="16035" title="Mirror polydactyly segmentation and limbs defects" label="Mirror polydactyly segmentation and limbs defects"/>
<link wikidata="Q935710" start="16053" end="16091" title="Mitochondrial cytopathy (generic term)" label="Mitochondrial cytopathy (generic term)"/>
<link wikidata="Q935710" start="16094" end="16134" title="Mitochondrial diseases of nuclear origin" label="Mitochondrial diseases of nuclear origin"/>
<link wikidata="Q935710" start="16137" end="16182" title="Mitochondrial diseases, clinically undefinite" label="Mitochondrial diseases, clinically undefinite"/>
<link wikidata="Q935710" start="16185" end="16206" title="Mitochondrial disease" label="Mitochondrial disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q17144217" start="16209" end="16256" title="Mitochondrial encephalomyopathy aminoacidopathy" label="Mitochondrial encephalomyopathy aminoacidopathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q935710" start="16259" end="16290" title="Mitochondrial genetic disorders" label="Mitochondrial genetic disorders"/>
<link wikidata="Q2666433" start="16293" end="16331" title="Mitochondrial myopathy lactic acidosis" label="Mitochondrial myopathy lactic acidosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2666433" start="16334" end="16387" title="Mitochondrial myopathy-encephalopathy-lactic acidosis" label="Mitochondrial myopathy-encephalopathy-lactic acidosis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16390" end="16420" title="Mitochondrial PEPCK deficiency" label="Mitochondrial PEPCK deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q6881883" start="16423" end="16469" title="Mitochondrial trifunctional protein deficiency" label="Mitochondrial trifunctional protein deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140794" start="16472" end="16486" title="Mitral atresia" label="Mitral atresia"/>
<link wikidata="Q112740188" start="16489" end="16537" title="Mitral regurgitation deafness skeletal anomalies" label="Mitral regurgitation deafness skeletal anomalies"/>
<link wikidata="Q735652" start="16540" end="16591" title="Mitral valve prolapse, familial, autosomal dominant" label="Mitral valve prolapse, familial, autosomal dominant"/>
<link wikidata="Q735652" start="16594" end="16635" title="Mitral valve prolapse, familial, X linked" label="Mitral valve prolapse, familial, X linked"/>
<link wikidata="Q735652" start="16638" end="16659" title="Mitral valve prolapse" label="Mitral valve prolapse"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16662" end="16676" title="Miura syndrome" label="Miura syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1622407" start="16679" end="16710" title="Mixed connective tissue disease" label="Mixed connective tissue disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q1958786" start="16713" end="16734" title="Mixed Müllerian tumor" label="Mixed Müllerian tumor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6884011" start="16737" end="16781" title="Mixed receptive-expressive language disorder" label="Mixed receptive-expressive language disorder"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16784" end="16815" title="Mixed sclerosing bone dystrophy" label="Mixed sclerosing bone dystrophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6839894" start="16829" end="16841" title="MLS syndrome" label="MLS syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q29982037" start="16844" end="16857" title="MMEP syndrome" label="MMEP syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q5441566" start="16860" end="16872" title="MMT syndrome" label="MMT syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q15322457" start="16875" end="16878" title="MN1 (gene)" label="MN1"/>
<link wikidata="Q6881876" start="16881" end="16895" title="MNGIE syndrome" label="MNGIE syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418152" start="16920" end="16935" title="Möbius syndrome" label="Möbius syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q663041" start="16938" end="16951" title="MODY syndrome" label="MODY syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16954" end="16991" title="Möbius axonal neuropathy hypogonadism" label="Möbius axonal neuropathy hypogonadism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3508635" start="16994" end="17031" title="Moerman Van den berghe Fryns syndrome" label="Moerman Van den berghe Fryns syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q5711576" start="17034" end="17060" title="Moeschler–Clarren syndrome" label="Moeschler–Clarren syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q3508783" start="17063" end="17076" title="Mohr syndrome" label="Mohr syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q3508677" start="17079" end="17103" title="Mohr–Tranebjærg syndrome" label="Mohr–Tranebjærg syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17106" end="17137" title="Mollica–Pavone–Antener syndrome" label="Mollica–Pavone–Antener syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q659584" start="17140" end="17161" title="Molluscum contagiosum" label="Molluscum contagiosum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323713" start="17164" end="17180" title="Moloney syndrome" label="Moloney syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1621463" start="17183" end="17213" title="Molybdenum cofactor deficiency" label="Molybdenum cofactor deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q3079989" start="17216" end="17229" title="MOMO syndrome" label="MOMO syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1944248" start="17247" end="17264" title="Mondini dysplasia" label="Mondini dysplasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3525982" start="17267" end="17288" title="Mondor&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Mondor&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q582189" start="17291" end="17311" title="Monge&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Monge&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363508" start="17314" end="17325" title="Monilethrix" label="Monilethrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q4979092" start="17328" end="17358" title="Monoamine oxidase A deficiency" label="Monoamine oxidase A deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q458138" start="17361" end="17411" title="Monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance" label="Monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17414" end="17436" title="Monodactyly tetramelic" label="Monodactyly tetramelic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17439" end="17468" title="Mononen–Karnes–Senac syndrome" label="Mononen–Karnes–Senac syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q945238" start="17471" end="17493" title="Mononeuritis multiplex" label="Mononeuritis multiplex"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17496" end="17512" title="Monosomy 8q12 21" label="Monosomy 8q12 21"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17515" end="17532" title="Monosomy 8q21 q22" label="Monosomy 8q21 q22"/>
<link wikidata="Q202849" start="17535" end="17545" title="Monosomy X" label="Monosomy X"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17548" end="17567" title="Montefiore syndrome" label="Montefiore syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17570" end="17593" title="Moore–Federman syndrome" label="Moore–Federman syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17596" end="17623" title="Moore–Smith–Weaver syndrome" label="Moore–Smith–Weaver syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q6911278" start="17641" end="17657" title="Morel&amp;#x27;s ear" label="Morel&amp;#x27;s ear"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17660" end="17690" title="Moreno–Zachai–Kaufman syndrome" label="Moreno–Zachai–Kaufman syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17693" end="17725" title="Morgani–Turner–Albright syndrome" label="Morgani–Turner–Albright syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17728" end="17759" title="Morillo–Cucci–Passarge syndrome" label="Morillo–Cucci–Passarge syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17762" end="17781" title="Morphea scleroderma" label="Morphea scleroderma"/>
<link wikidata="Q3324389" start="17784" end="17804" title="Morphea, generalized" label="Morphea, generalized"/>
<link wikidata="Q580285" start="17807" end="17830" title="Morquio disease, type A" label="Morquio disease, type A"/>
<link wikidata="Q580285" start="17833" end="17856" title="Morquio disease, type B" label="Morquio disease, type B"/>
<link wikidata="Q580285" start="17859" end="17875" title="Morquio syndrome" label="Morquio syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17878" end="17901" title="Morrison–Young syndrome" label="Morrison–Young syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q55782559" start="17904" end="17935" title="Morse–Rawnsley–Sargent syndrome" label="Morse–Rawnsley–Sargent syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q206901" start="17938" end="17958" title="Motor neuron disease" label="Motor neuron disease"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17961" end="17993" title="Motor neuro-ophthalmic disorders" label="Motor neuro-ophthalmic disorders"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17996" end="18036" title="Motor neuropathy peripheral dysautonomia" label="Motor neuropathy peripheral dysautonomia"/>
<link wikidata="Q945238" start="18039" end="18055" title="Motor neuropathy" label="Motor neuropathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052687" start="18058" end="18113" title="Motor sensory neuropathy type 1 aplasia cutis congenita" label="Motor sensory neuropathy type 1 aplasia cutis congenita"/>
<link wikidata="Q7831318" start="18116" end="18137" title="Mounier-Kuhn syndrome" label="Mounier-Kuhn syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q3042114" start="18140" end="18161" title="Mount–Reback syndrome" label="Mount–Reback syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q24977247" start="18164" end="18195" title="Mousa Al din Al Nassar syndrome" label="Mousa Al din Al Nassar syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951267" start="18198" end="18214" title="Moyamoya disease" label="Moyamoya disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q6947340" start="18228" end="18242" title="MPO deficiency" label="MPO deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q2200359" start="18245" end="18254" title="MPS III-A" label="MPS III-A"/>
<link wikidata="Q2200359" start="18257" end="18266" title="MPS III-B" label="MPS III-B"/>
<link wikidata="Q2200359" start="18269" end="18278" title="MPS III-C" label="MPS III-C"/>
<link wikidata="Q2200359" start="18281" end="18290" title="MPS III-D" label="MPS III-D"/>
<link wikidata="Q576109" start="18293" end="18299" title="MPS VI" label="MPS VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473749" start="18302" end="18315" title="MRKH Syndrome" label="MRKH Syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473749" start="18317" end="18335" title="Müllerian agenesis" label="Müllerian agenesis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18339" end="18352" title="MSBD syndrome" label="MSBD syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q30643222" start="18355" end="18371" title="MTHFR deficiency" label="MTHFR deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118211" start="18396" end="18419" title="Mucha–Habermann disease" label="Mucha–Habermann disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538218" start="18422" end="18443" title="Muckle–Wells syndrome" label="Muckle–Wells syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q5737858" start="18446" end="18470" title="Mucoepithelial dysplasia" label="Mucoepithelial dysplasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7506658" start="18473" end="18493" title="Mucolipidosis type 1" label="Mucolipidosis type 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q7254411" start="18496" end="18516" title="Mucolipidosis type 3" label="Mucolipidosis type 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q931538" start="18519" end="18539" title="Mucolipidosis type 4" label="Mucolipidosis type 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479681" start="18542" end="18570" title="Mucopolysaccharidosis type 3" label="Mucopolysaccharidosis type 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479681" start="18573" end="18601" title="Mucopolysaccharidosis type 4" label="Mucopolysaccharidosis type 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479681" start="18604" end="18648" title="Mucopolysaccharidosis type I Hurler syndrome" label="Mucopolysaccharidosis type I Hurler syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479681" start="18651" end="18702" title="Mucopolysaccharidosis type I Hurler/Scheie syndrome" label="Mucopolysaccharidosis type I Hurler/Scheie syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479681" start="18705" end="18749" title="Mucopolysaccharidosis type I Scheie syndrome" label="Mucopolysaccharidosis type I Scheie syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479681" start="18752" end="18808" title="Mucopolysaccharidosis type II Hunter syndrome- mild form" label="Mucopolysaccharidosis type II Hunter syndrome- mild form"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479681" start="18811" end="18869" title="Mucopolysaccharidosis type II Hunter syndrome- severe form" label="Mucopolysaccharidosis type II Hunter syndrome- severe form"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479681" start="18872" end="18920" title="Mucopolysaccharidosis type IV-A Morquio syndrome" label="Mucopolysaccharidosis type IV-A Morquio syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479681" start="18923" end="18954" title="Mucopolysaccharidosis type IV-B" label="Mucopolysaccharidosis type IV-B"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479681" start="18957" end="18985" title="Mucopolysaccharidosis type V" label="Mucopolysaccharidosis type V"/>
<link wikidata="Q576109" start="18988" end="19055" title="Mucopolysaccharidosis type VI Maroteaux-Lamy - severe, intermediate" label="Mucopolysaccharidosis type VI Maroteaux-Lamy - severe, intermediate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750471" start="19058" end="19101" title="Mucopolysaccharidosis type VII Sly syndrome" label="Mucopolysaccharidosis type VII Sly syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479681" start="19104" end="19125" title="Mucopolysaccharidosis" label="Mucopolysaccharidosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6931254" start="19128" end="19140" title="Mucormycosis" label="Mucormycosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3281227" start="19143" end="19159" title="Mucosulfatidosis" label="Mucosulfatidosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3508679" start="19162" end="19177" title="Muenke syndrome" label="Muenke syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q3335671" start="19210" end="19225" title="Mulibrey nanism" label="Mulibrey nanism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19228" end="19256" title="Müller–Barth–Menger syndrome" label="Müller–Barth–Menger syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473749" start="19259" end="19277" title="Müllerian agenesis" label="Müllerian agenesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473749" start="19280" end="19297" title="Müllerian aplasia" label="Müllerian aplasia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19300" end="19350" title="Müllerian derivatives lymphangiectasia polydactyly" label="Müllerian derivatives lymphangiectasia polydactyly"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19353" end="19386" title="Müllerian derivatives, persistent" label="Müllerian derivatives, persistent"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19389" end="19430" title="Müllerian duct abnormalities galactosemia" label="Müllerian duct abnormalities galactosemia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19433" end="19463" title="Mulliez–Roux–Loterman syndrome" label="Mulliez–Roux–Loterman syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q56297474" start="19524" end="19559" title="Multicentric osteolysis nephropathy" label="Multicentric osteolysis nephropathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q15731494" start="19562" end="19596" title="Multicentric reticulohistiocytosis" label="Multicentric reticulohistiocytosis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19599" end="19621" title="Multifocal heterotopia" label="Multifocal heterotopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6934690" start="19624" end="19651" title="Multifocal motor neuropathy" label="Multifocal motor neuropathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q26781137" start="19654" end="19692" title="Multifocal ventricular premature beats" label="Multifocal ventricular premature beats"/>
<link wikidata="Q583908" start="19695" end="19717" title="Multi-infarct dementia" label="Multi-infarct dementia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19720" end="19765" title="Multinodular goiter cystic kidney polydactyly" label="Multinodular goiter cystic kidney polydactyly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1403045" start="19812" end="19840" title="Multiple acyl-CoA deficiency" label="Multiple acyl-CoA deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q6934914" start="19843" end="19893" title="Multiple carboxylase deficiency, biotin responsive" label="Multiple carboxylase deficiency, biotin responsive"/>
<link wikidata="Q6934914" start="19896" end="19939" title="Multiple carboxylase deficiency, late onset" label="Multiple carboxylase deficiency, late onset"/>
<link wikidata="Q6934914" start="19942" end="19993" title="Multiple carboxylase deficiency, propionic acidemia" label="Multiple carboxylase deficiency, propionic acidemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q674461" start="19996" end="20025" title="Multiple chemical sensitivity" label="Multiple chemical sensitivity"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20028" end="20113" title="Multiple congenital anomalies mental retardation, growth failure and cleft lip palate" label="Multiple congenital anomalies mental retardation, growth failure and cleft lip palate"/>
<link wikidata="Q708165" start="20116" end="20148" title="Multiple congenital contractures" label="Multiple congenital contractures"/>
<link wikidata="Q6533262" start="20151" end="20193" title="Multiple contracture syndrome Finnish type" label="Multiple contracture syndrome Finnish type"/>
<link wikidata="Q3347154" start="20196" end="20231" title="Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1" label="Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q604075" start="20234" end="20270" title="Multiple endocrine neoplasia, type 2" label="Multiple endocrine neoplasia, type 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q2532540" start="20273" end="20307" title="Multiple fibrofolliculoma familial" label="Multiple fibrofolliculoma familial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952467" start="20310" end="20339" title="Multiple hereditary exostoses" label="Multiple hereditary exostoses"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20342" end="20391" title="Multiple joint dislocations metaphyseal dysplasia" label="Multiple joint dislocations metaphyseal dysplasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q467635" start="20394" end="20410" title="Multiple myeloma" label="Multiple myeloma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193870" start="20413" end="20435" title="Multiple organ failure" label="Multiple organ failure"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20438" end="20477" title="Multiple pterygium syndrome lethal type" label="Multiple pterygium syndrome lethal type"/>
<link wikidata="Q16889762" start="20480" end="20507" title="Multiple pterygium syndrome" label="Multiple pterygium syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20534" end="20586" title="Multiple sclerosis ichthyosis factor VIII deficiency" label="Multiple sclerosis ichthyosis factor VIII deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q8277" start="20589" end="20607" title="Multiple sclerosis" label="Multiple sclerosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4763273" start="20610" end="20644" title="Multiple subcutaneous angiolipomas" label="Multiple subcutaneous angiolipomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3281227" start="20647" end="20676" title="Multiple sulfatase deficiency" label="Multiple sulfatase deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20679" end="20709" title="Multiple synostoses syndrome 1" label="Multiple synostoses syndrome 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541975" start="20712" end="20735" title="Multiple system atrophy" label="Multiple system atrophy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20738" end="20781" title="Multiple vertebral anomalies unusual facies" label="Multiple vertebral anomalies unusual facies"/>
<link wikidata="Q176741" start="20799" end="20804" title="Mumps" label="Mumps"/>
<link wikidata="Q642598" start="20807" end="20826" title="Münchausen syndrome" label="Münchausen syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414765" start="20829" end="20857" title="Münchausen syndrome by proxy" label="Münchausen syndrome by proxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3508572" start="20860" end="20885" title="Muscle-eye-brain syndrome" label="Muscle-eye-brain syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q55345664" start="20888" end="20950" title="Muscular atrophy ataxia retinitis pigmentosa diabetes mellitus" label="Muscular atrophy ataxia retinitis pigmentosa diabetes mellitus"/>
<link wikidata="Q55782123" start="20953" end="21014" title="Muscular dystrophy congenital infantile cataract hypogonadism" label="Muscular dystrophy congenital infantile cataract hypogonadism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321884" start="21017" end="21064" title="Muscular dystrophy congenital, merosin negative" label="Muscular dystrophy congenital, merosin negative"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399182" start="21067" end="21106" title="Muscular dystrophy, facioscapulohumeral" label="Muscular dystrophy, facioscapulohumeral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1531322" start="21109" end="21142" title="Muscular dystrophy Hutterite type" label="Muscular dystrophy Hutterite type"/>
<link wikidata="Q17177467" start="21145" end="21193" title="Muscular dystrophy limb girdle type 2A, Erb type" label="Muscular dystrophy limb girdle type 2A, Erb type"/>
<link wikidata="Q1531322" start="21196" end="21245" title="Muscular dystrophy limb-girdle autosomal dominant" label="Muscular dystrophy limb-girdle autosomal dominant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1531322" start="21248" end="21299" title="Muscular dystrophy limb-girdle type 2B, Myoshi type" label="Muscular dystrophy limb-girdle type 2B, Myoshi type"/>
<link wikidata="Q7423586" start="21302" end="21365" title="Muscular dystrophy limb-girdle with beta-sarcoglycan deficiency" label="Muscular dystrophy limb-girdle with beta-sarcoglycan deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q7423586" start="21368" end="21431" title="Muscular dystrophy limb-girdle with delta-sarcoglyan deficiency" label="Muscular dystrophy limb-girdle with delta-sarcoglyan deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321884" start="21434" end="21476" title="Muscular dystrophy white matter spongiosis" label="Muscular dystrophy white matter spongiosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321884" start="21479" end="21527" title="Muscular dystrophy, congenital, merosin-positive" label="Muscular dystrophy, congenital, merosin-positive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137767" start="21530" end="21574" title="Muscular dystrophy, Duchenne and Becker type" label="Muscular dystrophy, Duchenne and Becker type"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137767" start="21577" end="21595" title="Muscular dystrophy" label="Muscular dystrophy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21598" end="21645" title="Muscular fibrosis multifocal obstructed vessels" label="Muscular fibrosis multifocal obstructed vessels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421738" start="21648" end="21688" title="Muscular phosphorylase kinase deficiency" label="Muscular phosphorylase kinase deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q416496" start="21691" end="21722" title="Mutations in estradiol receptor" label="Mutations in estradiol receptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3508806" start="21747" end="21794" title="Myalgia eosinophilia associated with tryptophan" label="Myalgia eosinophilia associated with tryptophan"/>
<link wikidata="Q209733" start="21797" end="21822" title="Myalgic encephalomyelitis" label="Myalgic encephalomyelitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q8285" start="21825" end="21853" title="Myasthenia gravis congenital" label="Myasthenia gravis congenital"/>
<link wikidata="Q8285" start="21856" end="21873" title="Myasthenia gravis" label="Myasthenia gravis"/>
<link wikidata="Q8285" start="21876" end="21896" title="Myasthenia, familial" label="Myasthenia, familial"/>
<link wikidata="Q6946984" start="21899" end="21936" title="Mycobacterium avium complex infection" label="Mycobacterium avium complex infection"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633267" start="21939" end="21960" title="Mycoplasmal pneumonia" label="Mycoplasmal pneumonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891209" start="21963" end="21989" title="Mycosis fungoides lymphoma" label="Mycosis fungoides lymphoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891209" start="21992" end="22019" title="Mycosis fungoides, familial" label="Mycosis fungoides, familial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891209" start="22022" end="22039" title="Mycosis fungoides" label="Mycosis fungoides"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891209" start="22042" end="22061" title="Mycositis fungoides" label="Mycositis fungoides"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502312" start="22079" end="22091" title="Myelinopathy" label="Myelinopathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q551085" start="22094" end="22102" title="Myelitis" label="Myelitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q25324661" start="22105" end="22129" title="Myelocerebellar disorder" label="Myelocerebellar disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q954625" start="22132" end="22146" title="Myelodysplasia" label="Myelodysplasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q954625" start="22149" end="22174" title="Myelodysplastic syndromes" label="Myelodysplastic syndromes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752571" start="22177" end="22202" title="Myelofibrosis, idiopathic" label="Myelofibrosis, idiopathic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752571" start="22205" end="22218" title="Myelofibrosis" label="Myelofibrosis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22221" end="22249" title="Myelofibrosis-osteosclerosis" label="Myelofibrosis-osteosclerosis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22252" end="22272" title="Myeloid splenomegaly" label="Myeloid splenomegaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q6947340" start="22275" end="22301" title="Myeloperoxidase deficiency" label="Myeloperoxidase deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22304" end="22335" title="Myhre–Ruvalcaba–Graham syndrome" label="Myhre–Ruvalcaba–Graham syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22338" end="22369" title="Myhre–Ruvalcaba–Kelley syndrome" label="Myhre–Ruvalcaba–Kelley syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22372" end="22393" title="Myhre–School syndrome" label="Myhre–School syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q17042115" start="22396" end="22410" title="Myhre syndrome" label="Myhre syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q304601" start="22413" end="22420" title="Myiasis" label="Myiasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1956662" start="22453" end="22486" title="Myoadenylate deaminase deficiency" label="Myoadenylate deaminase deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q186235" start="22489" end="22500" title="Myocarditis" label="Myocarditis"/>
<link wikidata="Q847583" start="22503" end="22522" title="Myocardium disorder" label="Myocardium disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q3710440" start="22525" end="22543" title="Myoclonic dystonia" label="Myoclonic dystonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11883686" start="22546" end="22564" title="Myoclonic epilepsy" label="Myoclonic epilepsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1881388" start="22567" end="22608" title="Myoclonic epilepsy with ragged red fibres" label="Myoclonic epilepsy with ragged red fibres"/>
<link wikidata="Q7248853" start="22628" end="22667" title="Myoclonic progressive familial epilepsy" label="Myoclonic progressive familial epilepsy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22670" end="22686" title="Myoclonus ataxia" label="Myoclonus ataxia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22689" end="22725" title="Myoclonus cerebellar ataxia deafness" label="Myoclonus cerebellar ataxia deafness"/>
<link wikidata="Q11883686" start="22728" end="22762" title="Myoclonus epilepsy partial seizure" label="Myoclonus epilepsy partial seizure"/>
<link wikidata="Q7577468" start="22765" end="22821" title="Myoclonus hereditary progressive distal muscular atrophy" label="Myoclonus hereditary progressive distal muscular atrophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2356131" start="22824" end="22881" title="Unverricht–Lundborg disease" label="Myoclonus progressive epilepsy of Unverricht and Lundborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q116275" start="22884" end="22893" title="Myoclonus" label="Myoclonus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22896" end="22914" title="Myofibrillar lysis" label="Myofibrillar lysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q108392778" start="22917" end="22939" title="Myofibroblastic tumors" label="Myofibroblastic tumors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1956682" start="22942" end="22969" title="Myoglobinuria dominant form" label="Myoglobinuria dominant form"/>
<link wikidata="Q1956682" start="22972" end="22995" title="Myoglobinuria recurrent" label="Myoglobinuria recurrent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1956682" start="22998" end="23011" title="Myoglobinuria" label="Myoglobinuria"/>
<link wikidata="Q6593390" start="23014" end="23022" title="Myokymia" label="Myokymia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6881876" start="23025" end="23073" title="Myoneurogastrointestinal encephalopathy syndrome" label="Myoneurogastrointestinal encephalopathy syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q12206" start="23090" end="23120" title="Myopathy and diabetes mellitus" label="Myopathy and diabetes mellitus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23123" end="23153" title="Myopathy cataract hypogonadism" label="Myopathy cataract hypogonadism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1723331" start="23200" end="23215" title="ophthalmoparesis" label="ophthalmoplegia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23218" end="23268" title="Myopathy growth and mental retardation hypospadias" label="Myopathy growth and mental retardation hypospadias"/>
<link wikidata="Q1531322" start="23271" end="23294" title="Myopathy Hutterite type" label="Myopathy Hutterite type"/>
<link wikidata="Q26492825" start="23297" end="23328" title="Myopathy mitochondrial cataract" label="Myopathy mitochondrial cataract"/>
<link wikidata="Q3508625" start="23331" end="23362" title="Myopathy Moebius Robin syndrome" label="Myopathy Moebius Robin syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23365" end="23411" title="Myopathy ophthalmoplegia hypoacousia areflexia" label="Myopathy ophthalmoplegia hypoacousia areflexia"/>
<link wikidata="Q112412" start="23414" end="23441" title="Myopathy tubular aggregates" label="Myopathy tubular aggregates"/>
<link wikidata="Q6822345" start="23444" end="23498" title="Myopathy with lactic acidosis and sideroblastic anemia" label="Myopathy with lactic acidosis and sideroblastic anemia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23501" end="23534" title="Myopathy with lysis of myofibrils" label="Myopathy with lysis of myofibrils"/>
<link wikidata="Q782958" start="23537" end="23560" title="Centronuclear myopathy (including myotubular myopathy)" label="Myopathy, centronuclear"/>
<link wikidata="Q3331452" start="23563" end="23587" title="Myopathy, desmin storage" label="Myopathy, desmin storage"/>
<link wikidata="Q787751" start="23590" end="23612" title="Myopathy, McArdle type" label="Myopathy, McArdle type"/>
<link wikidata="Q782958" start="23615" end="23635" title="Centronuclear myopathy (including myotubular myopathy)" label="Myopathy, myotubular"/>
<link wikidata="Q3456637" start="23638" end="23682" title="Myopathy, X-linked, with excessive autophagy" label="Myopathy, X-linked, with excessive autophagy"/>
<link wikidata="Q692536" start="23685" end="23693" title="Myopathy" label="Myopathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q787751" start="23696" end="23723" title="Myophosphorylase deficiency" label="Myophosphorylase deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q168403" start="23726" end="23732" title="Myopia" label="Myopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q168403" start="23735" end="23759" title="Myopia, infantile severe" label="Myopia, infantile severe"/>
<link wikidata="Q168403" start="23762" end="23776" title="Myopia, severe" label="Myopia, severe"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23798" end="23809" title="Myorhythmia" label="Myorhythmia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3858675" start="23812" end="23846" title="Myositis ossificans post-traumatic" label="Myositis ossificans post-traumatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3858675" start="23849" end="23880" title="Myositis ossificans progressiva" label="Myositis ossificans progressiva"/>
<link wikidata="Q3858675" start="23883" end="23902" title="Myositis ossificans" label="Myositis ossificans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1848471" start="23905" end="23929" title="Myositis, inclusion body" label="Myositis, inclusion body"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433212" start="23932" end="23940" title="Myositis" label="Myositis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860507" start="23943" end="23961" title="Myotonia atrophica" label="Myotonia atrophica"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23964" end="24010" title="Myotonia mental retardation skeletal anomalies" label="Myotonia mental retardation skeletal anomalies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3331454" start="24013" end="24032" title="Myotubular myopathy" label="Myotubular myopathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q966229" start="24046" end="24054" title="Myxedema" label="Myxedema"/>
<link wikidata="Q6949365" start="24057" end="24075" title="Myxoid liposarcoma" label="Myxoid liposarcoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044007" start="24078" end="24127" title="Myxoma-spotty pigmentation-endocrine overactivity" label="Myxoma-spotty pigmentation-endocrine overactivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q574694" start="24130" end="24152" title="Myxomatous peritonitis" label="Myxomatous peritonitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q134882" start="24155" end="24162" title="Myxozoa" label="Myxozoa"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="236354" wikidata="Q917069" url="?curid=236354" title="Rhabdomyolysis">
<text>Rhabdomyolysis (shortened as rhabdo) is a condition in which damaged skeletal muscle breaks down rapidly, often due to high intensity exercise over a short period. Symptoms may include muscle pains, weakness, vomiting, and confusion. There may be tea-colored urine or an irregular heartbeat. Some of the muscle breakdown products, such as the protein myoglobin, are harmful to the kidneys and can cause acute kidney injury.
The muscle damage is most usually caused by a crush injury, strenuous exercise, medications, or a substance use disorder. Other causes include infections, electrical injury, heat stroke, prolonged immobilization, lack of blood flow to a limb, or snake bites as well as intense or prolonged exercise, particularly in hot conditions. Statins (prescription drugs to lower cholesterol) are considered a small risk. Some people have inherited muscle conditions that increase the risk of rhabdomyolysis. The diagnosis is supported by a urine test strip which is positive for &quot;blood&quot; but the urine contains no red blood cells when examined with a microscope. Blood tests show a creatine kinase activity greater than  U/L, with severe disease being above .
The mainstay of treatment is large quantities of intravenous fluids. Other treatments may include dialysis or hemofiltration in more severe cases. Once urine output is established, sodium bicarbonate and mannitol are commonly used but they are poorly supported by the evidence. Outcomes are generally good if treated early. Complications may include high blood potassium, low blood calcium, disseminated intravascular coagulation, and compartment syndrome.
Rhabdomyolysis is reported about 26,000 times a year in the United States. While the condition has been commented on throughout history, the first modern description was following an earthquake in 1908. Important discoveries as to its mechanism were made during the Blitz of London in 1941. It is a significant problem for those injured in earthquakes, and relief efforts for such disasters often include medical teams equipped to treat survivors with rhabdomyolysis.

== Signs and symptoms ==
The symptoms of rhabdomyolysis depend on its severity and whether kidney failure develops. Milder forms may not cause any muscle symptoms, and the diagnosis is based on abnormal blood tests in the context of other problems. More severe rhabdomyolysis is characterized by muscle pain, tenderness, weakness and swelling of the affected muscles. If the swelling is very rapid, as may happen with a crush injury after someone is released from under heavy collapsed debris, the movement of fluid from the bloodstream into damaged muscle may cause low blood pressure and shock. Other symptoms are nonspecific and result either from the consequences of muscle tissue breakdown or from the condition that originally led to the muscle breakdown. Release of the components of muscle tissue into the bloodstream causes electrolyte disturbances, which can lead to nausea, vomiting, confusion, coma or abnormal heart rate and rhythm. The urine may be dark, often described as &quot;tea-colored&quot;, due to the presence of myoglobin. Damage to the kidneys may give rise to decreased or absent urine production, usually 12 to 24 hours after the initial muscle damage.

Swelling of damaged muscle occasionally leads to compartment syndrome—compression of surrounding tissues, such as nerves and blood vessels, in the same fascial compartment—leading to the loss of blood supply and damage or loss of function in the part(s) of the body supplied by these structures. Symptoms of this complication include pain or reduced sensation in the affected limb. A second recognized complication is disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC), a severe disruption in blood clotting that may lead to uncontrollable bleeding.

==Causes==
Any form of muscle damage of sufficient severity can cause rhabdomyolysis. Multiple causes can be present simultaneously in one person. Some have an underlying muscle condition, usually hereditary in nature, that makes them more prone to rhabdomyolysis.

===Genetic predisposition===
Recurrent or episodic rhabdomyolysis is commonly due to intrinsic muscle enzyme deficiencies, which are usually inherited and often appear during childhood. Many structural muscle diseases feature episodes of rhabdomyolysis that are triggered by exercise, general anesthesia or any of the other causes of rhabdomyolysis listed above. Inherited muscle disorders and infections together cause the majority of rhabdomyolysis in children.

The following hereditary disorders of the muscle energy supply may cause recurrent and usually exertional rhabdomyolysis:
* Glycolysis and glycogenolysis defects: McArdle&#x27;s disease, phosphofructokinase deficiency, glycogen storage diseases VIII, IX, X and XI
* Lipid metabolism defects: carnitine palmitoyltransferase I and II deficiency, deficiency of subtypes of acyl CoA dehydrogenase (LCAD, SCAD, MCAD, VLCAD, 3-hydroxyacyl-coenzyme A dehydrogenase deficiency), thiolase deficiency
* Mitochondrial myopathies: deficiency of succinate dehydrogenase, cytochrome c oxidase and coenzyme Q10
* Others: glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency, myoadenylate deaminase deficiency and muscular dystrophies

==Mechanism==

Damage to skeletal muscle may take various forms. Crush and other physical injuries cause damage to muscle cells directly or interfere with blood supply, while non-physical causes interfere with muscle cell metabolism. When damaged, muscle tissue rapidly fills with fluid from the bloodstream, including sodium ions. The swelling itself may lead to destruction of muscle cells, but those cells that survive are subject to various disruptions that lead to rise in intracellular calcium ions; the accumulation of calcium outside the sarcoplasmic reticulum leads to continuous muscle contraction and depletion of ATP, the main carrier of energy in the cell. ATP depletion can itself lead to uncontrolled calcium influx. The persistent contraction of the muscle cell leads to breakdown of intracellular proteins and disintegration of the cell.

Neutrophil granulocytes—the most abundant type of white blood cell—enter the muscle tissue, producing an inflammatory reaction and releasing reactive oxygen species, particularly after crush injury. Crush syndrome may also cause reperfusion injury when blood flow to decompressed muscle is suddenly restored.

The swollen, inflamed muscle may directly compress structures in the same fascial compartment, causing compartment syndrome. The swelling may also further compromise blood supply into the area. Finally, destroyed muscle cells release potassium ions, phosphate ions, the heme-containing protein myoglobin, the enzyme creatine kinase and uric acid (a breakdown product of purines from DNA) into the blood. Activation of the coagulation system may precipitate disseminated intravascular coagulation. High potassium levels may lead to potentially fatal disruptions in heart rhythm. Phosphate binds to calcium from the circulation, leading to low calcium levels in the blood.

Rhabdomyolysis may cause kidney failure by several mechanisms. The most important is the accumulation of myoglobin in the kidney tubules. Normally, the blood protein haptoglobin binds circulating myoglobin and other heme-containing substances, but in rhabdomyolysis the quantity of myoglobin exceeds the binding capacity of haptoglobin. Myoglobinuria, the presence of myoglobin in the urine, occurs when the level in plasma exceeds ; once plasma levels reach , the concentration in the urine becomes sufficient for it to be visibly discolored and corresponds with the destruction of about 200 grams of muscle. As the kidneys reabsorb more water from the , myoglobin interacts with Tamm–Horsfall protein in the nephron to form casts (solid aggregates) that obstruct the normal flow of fluid; the condition is worsened further by high levels of uric acid and acidification of the filtrate, which increase cast formation. Iron released from the heme generates reactive oxygen species, damaging the kidney cells. In addition to the myoglobinuria, two other mechanisms contribute to kidney impairment: low blood pressure leads to constriction of the blood vessels and therefore a relative lack of blood flow to the kidney, and finally uric acid may form crystals in the tubules of the kidneys, causing obstruction. Together, these processes lead to acute tubular necrosis, the destruction of the cells of tubules. Glomerular filtration rate falls and the kidney is unable to perform its normal excretory functions. This causes disruption of electrolyte regulation, leading to a further rise in potassium levels, and interferes with vitamin D processing, further worsening the low calcium levels.

==Diagnosis==
A diagnosis of rhabdomyolysis may be suspected in anyone who has sustained trauma, crush injury or prolonged immobilization, but it may also be identified at a later stage due to deteriorating kidney function (abnormally raised or increasing creatinine and urea levels, falling urine output) or reddish-brown discoloration of the urine.

===General investigations===
The most reliable test in the diagnosis of rhabdomyolysis is the level of creatine kinase (CK) in the blood. This enzyme is released by damaged muscle, and levels above (5 times the upper limit of normal (ULN)) indicate rhabdomyolysis. More than indicates severe disease but depending on the extent of the rhabdomyolysis, concentrations up to  U/l are not unusual. CK concentrations rise steadily for 12 hours after the original muscle injury, remain elevated for and then fall gradually. Initial and peak CK levels have a linear relationship with the risk of acute kidney failure: the higher the CK, the more likely it is that kidney damage will occur. There is no specific concentration of CK above which kidney impairment definitely occurs; concentrations below are unlikely to be associated with a risk of kidney impairment, unless there are other contributing risk factors. Mild rises without kidney impairment are referred to as &quot;hyperCKemia&quot;. Myoglobin has a short half-life, and is therefore less useful as a diagnostic test in the later stages. Its detection in blood or urine is associated with a higher risk of kidney impairment. Despite this, use of urine myoglobin measurement is not supported by evidence as it lacks specificity and the research studying its utility is of poor quality.

Elevated concentrations of the enzyme lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) may be detected. Other markers of muscle damage, such as aldolase, troponin, carbonic anhydrase type 3 and fatty acid-binding protein (FABP), are mainly used in chronic muscle diseases. The transaminases, enzymes abundant in both liver and muscle tissue, are also usually increased; this can lead to the condition being confused with acute liver injury, at least in the early stages. The incidence of actual acute liver injury is 25% in people with non-traumatic rhabdomyolysis; the mechanism for this is uncertain.

High potassium levels tend to be a feature of severe rhabdomyolysis. Electrocardiography (ECG) may show whether the elevated potassium levels are affecting the conduction system of the heart, as suggested by the presence of T wave changes or broadening of the QRS complex. Low calcium levels may be present in the initial stage due to binding of free calcium to damaged muscle cells.

As detectable levels of myoglobinemia and myoglobinuria occur, blood tests and urine tests may show elevated levels of myoglobin. For example, a urine test strip may reveal a positive result for &quot;blood&quot;, even though no red blood cells can be identified on microscopy of the urine; this occurs because the reagent on the test strip reacts with myoglobin. The same phenomenon may happen in conditions that lead to hemolysis, the destruction of red blood cells; in hemolysis the blood serum is also visibly discolored, while in rhabdomyolysis it is normal. If kidney damage has occurred, microscopy of the urine also reveals urinary casts that appear pigmented and granular.

===Complications===
Compartment syndrome is a clinical diagnosis, i.e., no diagnostic test conclusively proves its presence or absence, but direct measurement of the pressure in a fascial compartment, and the difference between this pressure and the blood pressure, may be used to assess its severity. High pressures in the compartment and a small difference between compartment pressure and blood pressure indicate that the blood supply is likely to be insufficient, and that surgical intervention may be needed.

Disseminated intravascular coagulation, another complication of rhabdomyolysis and other forms of critical illness, may be suspected on the basis of unexpected bleeding or abnormalities in hematological tests, such as a decreasing platelet count or prolongation of the prothrombin time. The diagnosis can be confirmed with standard blood tests for DIC, such as D-dimer.

===Underlying disorders===
If an underlying muscle disease is suspected, for instance, if there is no obvious explanation or there have been multiple episodes, it may be necessary to perform further investigations. During an attack, low levels of carnitine in the blood and high levels of acylcarnitine in blood and urine may indicate a lipid metabolism defect, but these abnormalities revert to normal during convalescence. Other tests may be used at that stage to demonstrate these disorders. Disorders of glycolysis can be detected by various means, including the measurement of lactate after exercise; a failure of the lactate to rise may be indicative of a disorder in glycolysis, while an exaggerated response is typical of mitochondrial diseases. Electromyography (EMG) may show particular patterns in specific muscle diseases; for instance, McArdle&#x27;s disease and phosphofructokinase deficiency show a phenomenon called &quot;cramp-like contracture&quot;. There are genetic tests available for many of the hereditary muscle conditions that predispose to myoglobinuria and rhabdomyolysis.

Muscle biopsy can be useful if an episode of rhabdomyolysis is thought to be the result of an underlying muscle disorder. A biopsy sample taken during an episode is often uninformative, as it will show only evidence of cell death or may appear normal. Taking the sample is therefore delayed for several weeks or months. The histopathological appearance on the biopsy indicates the nature of the underlying disorder. For instance, mitochondrial diseases are characterized by &quot;ragged red fibers&quot;. Biopsy sites may be identified by medical imaging, such as magnetic resonance imaging, as the muscles may not be uniformly affected.

==Treatment==
The main goal of treatment is to treat shock and preserve kidney function. Initially this is done through the administration of generous amounts of intravenous fluids, usually isotonic saline (0.9% weight per volume sodium chloride solution). In victims of crush syndrome, it is recommended to administer intravenous fluids even before they are extracted from collapsed structures. This will ensure sufficient circulating volume to deal with the muscle cell swelling (which typically commences when blood supply is restored), and to prevent the deposition of myoglobin in the kidneys. Amounts of 6 to 12 liters over 24 hours are recommended. The rate of fluid administration may be altered to achieve a high urine output (200–300 mL/h in adults), unless there are other reasons why this might lead to complications, such as a history of heart failure.

While many sources recommend additional intravenous agents to reduce damage to the kidney, most of the evidence supporting this practice comes from animal studies, and is inconsistent and conflicting. Mannitol acts by osmosis to enhance urine production and is thought to prevent myoglobin deposition in the kidney, but its efficacy has not been shown in studies and there is a risk of worsening kidney function. The addition of bicarbonate to the intravenous fluids may alleviate acidosis (high acid level of the blood) and make the urine more alkaline to prevent cast formation in the kidneys; evidence suggesting that bicarbonate has benefits above saline alone is limited, and it can worsen hypocalcemia by enhancing calcium and phosphate deposition in the tissues. If urine alkalinization is used, the pH of the urine is kept at 6.5 or above. Furosemide, a loop diuretic, is often used to ensure sufficient urine production, but evidence that this prevents kidney failure is lacking.

===Electrolytes===
In the initial stages, electrolyte levels are often abnormal and require correction. High potassium levels can be life-threatening, and respond to increased urine production and renal replacement therapy (see below). Temporary measures include the administration of calcium to protect against cardiac complications, insulin or salbutamol to redistribute potassium into cells, and infusions of bicarbonate solution.

Calcium levels initially tend to be low, but as the situation improves calcium is released from where it has precipitated with phosphate, and vitamin D production resumes, leading to hypercalcemia (abnormally high calcium levels). This &quot;overshoot&quot; occurs in 20–30% of those people who have developed kidney failure.

===Acute kidney impairment===

Kidney dysfunction typically develops 1–2 days after the initial muscle damage. If supportive treatment is inadequate to manage this, renal replacement therapy (RRT) may be required. RRT removes excess potassium, acid and phosphate that accumulate when the kidneys are unable to function normally and is required until kidney function is regained.

Three main modalities of RRT are available: hemodialysis, continuous hemofiltration and peritoneal dialysis. The former two require access to the bloodstream (a dialysis catheter) and peritoneal dialysis is achieved by instilling fluid into the abdominal cavity and later draining it. Hemodialysis, which is normally done several times a week in chronic kidney disease, is often required on a daily basis in rhabdomyolysis. Its advantage over continuous hemofiltration is that one machine can be used multiple times a day, and that continuous administration of anticoagulant drugs is not necessary. Hemofiltration is more effective at removing large molecules from the bloodstream, such as myoglobin, but this does not seem to confer any particular benefit. Peritoneal dialysis may be difficult to administer in someone with severe abdominal injury, and it may be less effective than the other modalities.

===Other complications===
Compartment syndrome is treated with surgery to relieve the pressure inside the muscle compartment and reduce the risk of compression on blood vessels and nerves in that area. Fasciotomy is the incision of the affected compartment. Often, multiple incisions are made and left open until the swelling has reduced. At that point, the incisions are closed, often requiring debridement (removal of non-viable tissue) and skin grafting in the process. The need for fasciotomy may be decreased if mannitol is used, as it can relieve muscle swelling directly.

Disseminated intravascular coagulation generally resolves when the underlying causes are treated, but supportive measures are often required. For instance, if the platelet count drops significantly and there is resultant bleeding, platelets may be administered.

==Prognosis==
The prognosis depends on the underlying cause and whether any complications occur. Rhabdomyolysis complicated by acute kidney impairment in patients with traumatic injury may have a mortality rate of 20%. Admission to the intensive care unit is associated with a mortality of 22% in the absence of acute kidney injury, and 59% if kidney impairment occurs. Most people who have sustained kidney impairment due to rhabdomyolysis fully recover their kidney function.

==Epidemiology==
The exact number of cases of rhabdomyolysis is difficult to establish because different definitions have been used. In 1995, hospitals in the U.S. reported 26,000 cases of rhabdomyolysis. Up to 85% of people with major traumatic injuries will experience some degree of rhabdomyolysis. Of those with rhabdomyolysis, 10–50% develop acute kidney injury. The risk is higher in people with a history of illicit drug use, alcohol misuse or trauma when compared to muscle diseases, and it is particularly high if multiple contributing factors occur together. Rhabdomyolysis accounts for 7–10% of all cases of acute kidney injury in the U.S.

Crush injuries are common in major disasters, especially in earthquakes. The aftermath of the 1988 Spitak earthquake prompted the establishment, in 1995, of the Renal Disaster Relief Task Force, a working group of the International Society of Nephrology (a worldwide body of kidney experts). Its volunteer doctors and nurses assisted for the first time in the 1999 İzmit earthquake in Turkey, where 17,480 people died, 5392 were hospitalized and 477 received dialysis, with positive results. Treatment units are generally established outside the immediate disaster area, as aftershocks could potentially injure or kill staff and make equipment unusable.

Acute exertional rhabdomyolysis happens in 2% to 40% of people going through basic training for the United States military. In 2012, the United States military reported 402 cases. Another group at increased risk is firefighters.

==History==

The Bible may contain an early account of rhabdomyolysis. In , the Pentateuch says that the Jews demanded meat while traveling in the desert; God sent quail in response to the complaints, and people ate large quantities of quail meat. A plague then broke out, killing numerous people. Rhabdomyolysis after consuming quail was described in more recent times and called &quot;coturnism&quot; (after &quot;Coturnix&quot;, the main quail genus). Migrating quail consume large amounts of hemlock, a known cause of rhabdomyolysis.

In modern times, early reports from the 1908 Messina earthquake and World War I on kidney failure after injury were followed by studies by London physicians Eric Bywaters and Desmond Beall, working at the Royal Postgraduate Medical School and the National Institute for Medical Research, on four victims of the Blitz in 1941. Myoglobin was demonstrated in the urine of victims by spectroscopy, and it was noted that the kidneys of victims resembled those of patients who had hemoglobinuria (hemoglobin rather than myoglobin being the cause of the kidney damage). In 1944 Bywaters demonstrated experimentally that the kidney failure was mainly caused by myoglobin. Already during the war, teams of doctors traveled to bombed areas to provide medical support, chiefly with intravenous fluids, as dialysis was not yet available. The prognosis of acute kidney failure improved markedly when dialysis was added to supportive treatment, which first happened during the 1950–1953 Korean War.

==Etymology and pronunciation==
The word &quot;rhabdomyolysis&quot; () uses the combining forms &quot;&quot; + &quot;&quot; + &quot;&quot;, yielding &quot;striated muscle breakdown&quot;.

==Other animals==
Rhabdomyolysis is recognized in horses. Horses can develop a number of muscle disorders, many of which may progress to rhabdomyolysis. Of these, some cause isolated attacks of rhabdomyolysis (e.g., dietary deficiency in vitamin E and selenium, poisoning associated with pasture or agricultural poisons such as organophosphates), while others predispose to exertional rhabdomyolysis (e.g., the hereditary condition equine polysaccharide storage myopathy). 5–10% of thoroughbred horses and some standardbred horses have the condition equine exertional rhabdomyolysis; no specific cause has been identified, but an underlying muscle calcium regulation disorder is suspected.

Rhabdomyolysis affecting horses may also occur in outbreaks; these have been reported in many European countries, and later in Canada, Australia, and the United States. It has been referred to as &quot;atypical myopathy&quot; or &quot;myoglobinuria of unknown etiology&quot;. No single cause has yet been found, but various mechanisms have been proposed, and a seasonal pattern has been observed. Very high creatine kinase levels are detected, and mortality from this condition is 89%.

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q917069" start="0" end="14" title="Rhabdomyolysis" label="Rhabdomyolysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q917069" start="29" end="35" title="Rhabdomyolysis" label="rhabdo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048687" start="69" end="84" title="skeletal muscle" label="skeletal muscle"/>
<link wikidata="Q474959" start="185" end="197" title="myalgia" label="muscle pains"/>
<link wikidata="Q127076" start="209" end="217" title="vomiting" label="vomiting"/>
<link wikidata="Q557945" start="223" end="232" title="mental confusion" label="confusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q373597" start="247" end="264" title="Pigmenturia" label="tea-colored urine"/>
<link wikidata="Q189331" start="271" end="290" title="arrythmia" label="irregular heartbeat"/>
<link wikidata="Q192642" start="351" end="360" title="myoglobin" label="myoglobin"/>
<link wikidata="Q9377" start="381" end="387" title="kidney" label="kidney"/>
<link wikidata="Q424337" start="403" end="422" title="acute kidney injury" label="acute kidney injury"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130527" start="470" end="482" title="Crush syndrome" label="crush injury"/>
<link wikidata="Q17081080" start="484" end="502" title="Exertional rhabdomyolysis" label="strenuous exercise"/>
<link wikidata="Q12140" start="504" end="515" title="Pharmaceutical drug" label="medications"/>
<link wikidata="Q7632070" start="522" end="544" title="substance use disorder" label="substance use disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q166231" start="567" end="576" title="infection" label="infection"/>
<link wikidata="Q244404" start="579" end="596" title="electrical injury" label="electrical injury"/>
<link wikidata="Q337554" start="598" end="609" title="heat stroke" label="heat stroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q3155223" start="637" end="665" title="limb ischemia" label="lack of blood flow to a limb"/>
<link wikidata="Q68854" start="670" end="680" title="snake bite" label="snake bite"/>
<link wikidata="Q954845" start="756" end="762" title="Statin" label="Statin"/>
<link wikidata="Q178694" start="852" end="861" title="Heredity" label="inherited"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637044" start="954" end="970" title="urine test strip" label="urine test strip"/>
<link wikidata="Q37187" start="1037" end="1052" title="red blood cells" label="red blood cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q7168" start="1058" end="1084" title="Histology" label="examined with a microscope"/>
<link wikidata="Q886837" start="1086" end="1096" title="Blood test" label="Blood test"/>
<link wikidata="Q409458" start="1105" end="1120" title="creatine kinase" label="creatine kinase"/>
<link wikidata="Q835916" start="1144" end="1147" title="International unit" label="U/L"/>
<link wikidata="Q640448" start="1232" end="1243" title="intravenous" label="intravenous"/>
<link wikidata="Q202301" start="1281" end="1289" title="Kidney dialysis" label="dialysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2720606" start="1293" end="1307" title="hemofiltration" label="hemofiltration"/>
<link wikidata="Q179731" start="1364" end="1382" title="sodium bicarbonate" label="sodium bicarbonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q407646" start="1387" end="1395" title="mannitol" label="mannitol"/>
<link wikidata="Q605259" start="1533" end="1553" title="hyperkalemia" label="high blood potassium"/>
<link wikidata="Q936382" start="1555" end="1572" title="hypocalcemia" label="low blood calcium"/>
<link wikidata="Q823027" start="1574" end="1612" title="disseminated intravascular coagulation" label="disseminated intravascular coagulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778968" start="1618" end="1638" title="compartment syndrome" label="compartment syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q6900329" start="1902" end="1921" title="The Blitz" label="the Blitz of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q7944" start="1980" end="1990" title="earthquake" label="earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q886837" start="2312" end="2322" title="blood test" label="blood test"/>
<link wikidata="Q474959" start="2405" end="2416" title="Myalgia" label="muscle pain"/>
<link wikidata="Q270421" start="2430" end="2438" title="Muscle weakness" label="weakness"/>
<link wikidata="Q152234" start="2443" end="2451" title="edema" label="swelling"/>
<link wikidata="Q4388656" start="2529" end="2541" title="crush injury" label="crush injury"/>
<link wikidata="Q275419" start="2676" end="2694" title="hypotension" label="low blood pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q178061" start="2699" end="2704" title="shock (circulatory)" label="shock"/>
<link wikidata="Q112965645" start="2725" end="2736" title="nonspecific symptom" label="nonspecific"/>
<link wikidata="Q162908" start="2942" end="2953" title="electrolyte" label="electrolyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q186889" start="2986" end="2992" title="nausea" label="nausea"/>
<link wikidata="Q127076" start="2994" end="3002" title="vomiting" label="vomiting"/>
<link wikidata="Q557945" start="3004" end="3013" title="mental confusion" label="confusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q159557" start="3015" end="3019" title="coma" label="coma"/>
<link wikidata="Q189331" start="3023" end="3053" title="cardiac arrhythmia" label="abnormal heart rate and rhythm"/>
<link wikidata="Q192642" start="3145" end="3154" title="myoglobin" label="myoglobin"/>
<link wikidata="Q961326" start="3195" end="3204" title="oliguria" label="decreased"/>
<link wikidata="Q612681" start="3208" end="3231" title="anuria" label="absent urine production"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778968" start="3339" end="3359" title="compartment syndrome" label="compartment syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q988343" start="3415" end="3427" title="blood vessel" label="blood vessel"/>
<link wikidata="Q425964" start="3442" end="3461" title="fascial compartment" label="fascial compartment"/>
<link wikidata="Q823027" start="3708" end="3746" title="disseminated intravascular coagulation" label="disseminated intravascular coagulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q179217" start="3777" end="3791" title="coagulation" label="blood clotting"/>
<link wikidata="Q166543" start="4386" end="4404" title="General anaesthesia" label="general anesthesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q162643" start="4690" end="4700" title="Glycolysis" label="Glycolysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q680603" start="4705" end="4719" title="glycogenolysis" label="glycogenolysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q787751" start="4729" end="4751" title="Glycogen storage disease type V" label="McArdle&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251847" start="4753" end="4783" title="phosphofructokinase deficiency" label="phosphofructokinase deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1947298" start="4785" end="4822" title="glycogen storage disease type VI" label="glycogen storage diseases VIII, IX, X"/>
<link wikidata="Q409464" start="4827" end="4829" title="Glycogen storage disease type XI" label="XI"/>
<link wikidata="Q15051322" start="4832" end="4856" title="Inborn error of lipid metabolism" label="Lipid metabolism defects"/>
<link wikidata="Q3043143" start="4858" end="4890" title="Carnitine palmitoyltransferase I deficiency" label="carnitine palmitoyltransferase I"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033861" start="4895" end="4908" title="carnitine palmitoyltransferase II deficiency" label="II deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150892" start="4936" end="4958" title="acyl CoA dehydrogenase" label="acyl CoA dehydrogenase"/>
<link wikidata="Q24963765" start="4960" end="4964" title="long-chain 3-hydroxyacyl-coenzyme A dehydrogenase deficiency" label="LCAD"/>
<link wikidata="Q7501551" start="4966" end="4970" title="short-chain acyl-coenzyme A dehydrogenase deficiency" label="SCAD"/>
<link wikidata="Q750826" start="4972" end="4976" title="medium-chain acyl-coenzyme A dehydrogenase deficiency" label="MCAD"/>
<link wikidata="Q7923095" start="4978" end="4983" title="Very long-chain acyl-coenzyme A dehydrogenase deficiency" label="VLCAD"/>
<link wikidata="Q4634219" start="4985" end="5034" title="3-hydroxyacyl-coenzyme A dehydrogenase deficiency" label="3-hydroxyacyl-coenzyme A dehydrogenase deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q24782380" start="5037" end="5045" title="thiolase" label="thiolase"/>
<link wikidata="Q6881881" start="5059" end="5083" title="Mitochondrial myopathy" label="Mitochondrial myopathies"/>
<link wikidata="Q412837" start="5099" end="5122" title="succinate dehydrogenase" label="succinate dehydrogenase"/>
<link wikidata="Q306116" start="5124" end="5144" title="cytochrome c oxidase" label="cytochrome c oxidase"/>
<link wikidata="Q321285" start="5149" end="5161" title="coenzyme Q10" label="coenzyme Q10"/>
<link wikidata="Q848343" start="5172" end="5216" title="glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency" label="glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1956662" start="5218" end="5251" title="myoadenylate deaminase deficiency" label="myoadenylate deaminase deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137767" start="5256" end="5276" title="muscular dystrophy" label="muscular dystrophies"/>
<link wikidata="Q428914" start="5393" end="5405" title="myocyte" label="muscle cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057" start="5500" end="5510" title="metabolism" label="metabolism"/>
<link wikidata="Q658" start="5597" end="5608" title="sodium" label="sodium ions"/>
<link wikidata="Q14633936" start="5824" end="5846" title="sarcoplasmic reticulum" label="sarcoplasmic reticulum"/>
<link wikidata="Q127006" start="5867" end="5885" title="muscle contraction" label="muscle contraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q80863" start="5903" end="5906" title="Adenosine triphosphate" label="ATP"/>
<link wikidata="Q188417" start="6134" end="6156" title="Neutrophil granulocyte" label="Neutrophil granulocyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q42395" start="6184" end="6200" title="white blood cell" label="white blood cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q101991" start="6239" end="6251" title="inflammation" label="inflammatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q424361" start="6275" end="6298" title="reactive oxygen species" label="reactive oxygen species"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413991" start="6363" end="6381" title="reperfusion injury" label="reperfusion injury"/>
<link wikidata="Q425964" start="6518" end="6537" title="fascial compartment" label="fascial compartment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778968" start="6547" end="6567" title="compartment syndrome" label="compartment syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q46220103" start="6694" end="6703" title="phosphate" label="phosphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q189621" start="6714" end="6718" title="heme" label="heme"/>
<link wikidata="Q192642" start="6738" end="6747" title="myoglobin" label="myoglobin"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047" start="6753" end="6759" title="enzyme" label="enzyme"/>
<link wikidata="Q409458" start="6760" end="6775" title="creatine kinase" label="creatine kinase"/>
<link wikidata="Q105522" start="6780" end="6789" title="uric acid" label="uric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q188261" start="6814" end="6820" title="purine" label="purine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430" start="6827" end="6830" title="DNA" label="DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q823027" start="6901" end="6939" title="disseminated intravascular coagulation" label="disseminated intravascular coagulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q605259" start="6941" end="6962" title="Hyperkalemia" label="High potassium levels"/>
<link wikidata="Q189331" start="6993" end="7020" title="Cardiac dysrhythmia" label="disruptions in heart rhythm"/>
<link wikidata="Q936382" start="7082" end="7113" title="hypocalcemia" label="low calcium levels in the blood"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7238" end="7252" title="Nephron#Renal tubule" label="kidney tubules"/>
<link wikidata="Q422025" start="7282" end="7293" title="haptoglobin" label="haptoglobin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1956682" start="7453" end="7466" title="Myoglobinuria" label="Myoglobinuria"/>
<link wikidata="Q79749" start="7533" end="7539" title="blood plasma" label="plasma"/>
<link wikidata="Q420024" start="7797" end="7818" title="Tamm-Horsfall protein" label="Tamm–Horsfall protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q58184" start="7826" end="7833" title="nephron" label="nephron"/>
<link wikidata="Q245639" start="7842" end="7847" title="Urinary cast" label="casts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067506" start="8241" end="8274" title="vasoconstriction" label="constriction of the blood vessels"/>
<link wikidata="Q2425407" start="8460" end="8482" title="acute tubular necrosis" label="acute tubular necrosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542839" start="8525" end="8551" title="Glomerular filtration rate" label="Glomerular filtration rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q175621" start="8743" end="8752" title="vitamin D" label="vitamin D"/>
<link wikidata="Q426660" start="9064" end="9074" title="creatinine" label="creatinine"/>
<link wikidata="Q764079" start="9079" end="9083" title="Blood urea nitrogen" label="urea"/>
<link wikidata="Q409458" start="9263" end="9278" title="creatine kinase" label="creatine kinase"/>
<link wikidata="Q636200" start="9533" end="9534" title="enzyme unit" label="U"/>
<link wikidata="Q3808900" start="10430" end="10441" title="Sensitivity and specificity" label="specificity"/>
<link wikidata="Q409464" start="10539" end="10560" title="lactate dehydrogenase" label="lactate dehydrogenase"/>
<link wikidata="Q421968" start="10624" end="10632" title="aldolase" label="aldolase"/>
<link wikidata="Q7846262" start="10634" end="10642" title="troponin" label="troponin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5038047" start="10644" end="10669" title="Carbonic anhydrase III, muscle specific" label="carbonic anhydrase type 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q17927051" start="10674" end="10700" title="Heart-type fatty acid binding protein" label="fatty acid-binding protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q424288" start="10757" end="10769" title="transaminase" label="transaminase"/>
<link wikidata="Q605259" start="11084" end="11105" title="Hyperkalemia" label="High potassium levels"/>
<link wikidata="Q79785" start="11153" end="11172" title="Electrocardiography" label="Electrocardiography"/>
<link wikidata="Q7672706" start="11308" end="11314" title="T wave" label="T wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969239" start="11344" end="11355" title="QRS complex" label="QRS complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q60097" start="11361" end="11368" title="calcium in biology" label="calcium"/>
<link wikidata="Q917069" start="11493" end="11506" title="myoglobinemia" label="myoglobinemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1956682" start="11511" end="11524" title="myoglobinuria" label="myoglobinuria"/>
<link wikidata="Q886837" start="11532" end="11542" title="blood test" label="blood test"/>
<link wikidata="Q113213644" start="11548" end="11558" title="clinical urine tests" label="urine test"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637044" start="11614" end="11630" title="urine test strip" label="urine test strip"/>
<link wikidata="Q37187" start="11698" end="11712" title="red blood cell" label="red blood cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074953" start="11735" end="11745" title="microscopy" label="microscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q471706" start="11891" end="11900" title="hemolysis" label="hemolysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q110084" start="11955" end="11966" title="blood serum" label="blood serum"/>
<link wikidata="Q245639" start="12101" end="12113" title="urinary cast" label="urinary cast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778968" start="12172" end="12192" title="Compartment syndrome" label="Compartment syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2671652" start="12227" end="12242" title="diagnostic test" label="diagnostic test"/>
<link wikidata="Q823027" start="12667" end="12705" title="Disseminated intravascular coagulation" label="Disseminated intravascular coagulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q101026" start="12898" end="12906" title="platelet" label="platelet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144385" start="12936" end="12952" title="prothrombin time" label="prothrombin time"/>
<link wikidata="Q198526" start="13028" end="13035" title="D-dimer" label="D-dimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q243309" start="13285" end="13294" title="carnitine" label="carnitine"/>
<link wikidata="Q162643" start="13546" end="13556" title="glycolysis" label="glycolysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q161249" start="13620" end="13627" title="lactic acid" label="lactate"/>
<link wikidata="Q935710" start="13768" end="13789" title="mitochondrial disease" label="mitochondrial disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q507369" start="13792" end="13808" title="Electromyography" label="Electromyography"/>
<link wikidata="Q787751" start="13887" end="13909" title="Glycogen storage disease type V" label="McArdle&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251847" start="13914" end="13944" title="phosphofructokinase deficiency" label="phosphofructokinase deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094702" start="14139" end="14152" title="Muscle biopsy" label="Muscle biopsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q178069" start="14358" end="14368" title="necrosis" label="cell death"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070952" start="14463" end="14480" title="Histopathology" label="histopathological"/>
<link wikidata="Q931309" start="14678" end="14693" title="medical imaging" label="medical imaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q161238" start="14703" end="14729" title="magnetic resonance imaging" label="magnetic resonance imaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q640448" start="14940" end="14957" title="intravenous fluid" label="intravenous fluid"/>
<link wikidata="Q275792" start="14968" end="14983" title="Saline (medicine)" label="isotonic saline"/>
<link wikidata="Q589446" start="14990" end="15007" title="weight per volume" label="weight per volume"/>
<link wikidata="Q2314" start="15008" end="15023" title="sodium chloride" label="sodium chloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q181754" start="15629" end="15642" title="heart failure" label="heart failure"/>
<link wikidata="Q407646" start="15846" end="15854" title="Mannitol" label="Mannitol"/>
<link wikidata="Q54237" start="15863" end="15870" title="osmosis" label="osmosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q409202" start="16074" end="16085" title="bicarbonate" label="bicarbonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q185089" start="16126" end="16134" title="acidosis" label="acidosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q485742" start="16190" end="16198" title="alkaline" label="alkaline"/>
<link wikidata="Q388801" start="16493" end="16503" title="Furosemide" label="Furosemide"/>
<link wikidata="Q424280" start="16507" end="16520" title="loop diuretic" label="loop diuretic"/>
<link wikidata="Q185643" start="16832" end="16857" title="renal replacement therapy" label="renal replacement therapy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16871" end="16889" title="Hyperkalemia#Treatment" label="Temporary measures"/>
<link wikidata="Q50265665" start="16970" end="16977" title="insulin" label="insulin"/>
<link wikidata="Q410358" start="16981" end="16991" title="salbutamol" label="salbutamol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474877" start="17253" end="17266" title="hypercalcemia" label="hypercalcemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q185643" start="17562" end="17587" title="renal replacement therapy" label="renal replacement therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q391744" start="17821" end="17833" title="hemodialysis" label="hemodialysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2720606" start="17835" end="17860" title="hemofiltration" label="continuous hemofiltration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756474" start="17865" end="17884" title="peritoneal dialysis" label="peritoneal dialysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q656261" start="17938" end="17955" title="dialysis catheter" label="dialysis catheter"/>
<link wikidata="Q736715" start="18123" end="18145" title="chronic kidney disease" label="chronic kidney disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q215118" start="18338" end="18351" title="anticoagulant" label="anticoagulant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778968" start="18710" end="18730" title="Compartment syndrome" label="Compartment syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397866" start="18886" end="18896" title="Fasciotomy" label="Fasciotomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1270448" start="19080" end="19091" title="debridement" label="debridement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1591440" start="19127" end="19140" title="skin grafting" label="skin grafting"/>
<link wikidata="Q823027" start="19264" end="19302" title="Disseminated intravascular coagulation" label="Disseminated intravascular coagulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q621558" start="19366" end="19385" title="supportive treatment" label="supportive measures"/>
<link wikidata="Q585285" start="19427" end="19447" title="thrombocytopenia" label="platelet count drops"/>
<link wikidata="Q58702" start="19723" end="19737" title="mortality rate" label="mortality rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q815567" start="20752" end="20774" title="1988 Spitak earthquake" label="1988 Spitak earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q6053497" start="20876" end="20911" title="International Society of Nephrology" label="International Society of Nephrology"/>
<link wikidata="Q367449" start="21018" end="21039" title="1999 İzmit earthquake" label="1999 İzmit earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="21043" end="21049" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q308442" start="21232" end="21242" title="aftershock" label="aftershock"/>
<link wikidata="Q5175885" start="21930" end="21939" title="coturnism" label="coturnism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1869243" start="21959" end="21967" title="Coturnix" label="Coturnix"/>
<link wikidata="Q6491516" start="22039" end="22046" title="Conium" label="hemlock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348910" start="22122" end="22145" title="1908 Messina earthquake" label="1908 Messina earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q12751621" start="22239" end="22252" title="Eric Bywaters" label="Eric Bywaters"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22257" end="22270" title="Desmond Beall" label="Desmond Beall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374735" start="22287" end="22320" title="Royal Postgraduate Medical School" label="Royal Postgraduate Medical School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1732774" start="22329" end="22368" title="National Institute for Medical Research" label="National Institute for Medical Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q6900329" start="22389" end="22398" title="the Blitz" label="the Blitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q483666" start="22462" end="22474" title="spectroscopy" label="spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553850" start="22557" end="22571" title="hemoglobinuria" label="hemoglobinuria"/>
<link wikidata="Q8663" start="23055" end="23065" title="Korean War" label="Korean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3686701" start="23148" end="23163" title="classical compound" label="combining forms"/>
<link wikidata="Q141180" start="23495" end="23504" title="vitamin E" label="vitamin E"/>
<link wikidata="Q876" start="23509" end="23517" title="selenium" label="selenium"/>
<link wikidata="Q411097" start="23585" end="23600" title="organophosphate" label="organophosphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q16992706" start="23689" end="23727" title="equine polysaccharide storage myopathy" label="equine polysaccharide storage myopathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q210826" start="23739" end="23751" title="thoroughbred" label="thoroughbred"/>
<link wikidata="Q467024" start="23768" end="23780" title="standardbred" label="standardbred"/>
<link wikidata="Q595708" start="23807" end="23839" title="equine exertional rhabdomyolysis" label="equine exertional rhabdomyolysis"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="236355" wikidata="Q7585483" url="?curid=236355" title="Reed">
<text>Reed or Reeds may refer to:
== Science, technology, biology, and medicine ==
* Reed bird (disambiguation)
* Reed pen, writing implement in use since ancient times
* Reed (plant), one of several tall, grass-like wetland plants of the order Poales
* Reed reaction, in chemistry
* Reed receiver, an outdated form of multi-channel signal decoding
* Reed relay, one or more reed switches controlled by an electromagnet
* Reed switch, an electrical switch operated by an applied magnetic field
* Reed valve, restricts the flow of fluids to a single direction
* Reed (weaving), a comb like tool for beating the weft when weaving
* Reed&#x27;s law, describes the utility of large networks, particularly social networks
* Reed–Solomon error correction, a systematic way of building codes that can be used to detect and correct multiple random symbol errors
* Reed–Sternberg cell, related to Hodgkin&#x27;s disease

== Organizations ==
* Reed (company), offering employment-related services (UK)
* Reed and Stem, former architecture firm St. Paul, Minnesota
* Reed Arena, a sports arena in College Station, Texas
* Reed College, Portland, Oregon
** Reed Research Reactor, a research nuclear reactor at the college
** Reed, Portland, Oregon, the surrounding neighborhood
* Reed-Custer High School, in Braidwood, Illinois
* Reed Elsevier, a publishing company
** Reed Construction Data
** Reed Business Information
* Reed Exhibitions, trade fairs and convention organizing company
* Reed family, family of Mark E. Reed
* Reeds Jewelers, a U.S. retail jewelry company 
* Reed High School (disambiguation)
* Reed House (disambiguation), several
* Reed Middle School (disambiguation), several
* Reed Plantation, Maine, United States
* Reed Publishing, a New Zealand publishing house
* Reed&#x27;s, Inc., manufactures naturally brewed sodas, California, United States
* Records of Early English Drama (REED), a theatre research centre at the University of Toronto, Canada

== People ==
* Reed (name), a surname or given name
* Reed (surname), a list of people with the surname

== Places ==
=== Cities and towns ===
* Reed, Arkansas, United States
* Reed, Kentucky, United States
* Reeds, Virginia, United States
* Reed, Wisconsin, United States
* Reed City, Michigan, United States
* Reed-Cooke, a neighborhood in Washington DC, United States
* Reed Creek, Georgia, United States
* Reed, Hertfordshire, United Kingdom
* Reed, Norway
* Reeds Branch, a stream in Missouri
* Reed Point, Montana, of statistical meaning only
* Reed Plantation, Maine, United States
* Reed Township, Pennsylvania, United States

=== Historic interest ===
* Reed-Wood Place, a historic site Littleton, Massachusetts
* Reed&#x27;s Creek Farm, a historic home Maryland, United States
* Reed and Barton Complex, a historic industrial complex in Taunton, Massachusetts
* Reed Gold Mine, defunct, in Midland, North Carolina
* Reed Memorial Library, Carmel, New York, United States
* Lerners Building, also known as Reed&#x27;s, Los Angeles, California

== Other uses ==
* Reed Airport (disambiguation)
* &quot;Reed v. Reed&quot;, a United States Supreme Court case (Equal Protection case)
* Reed&#x27;s Regiment of Militia, a military unit in the U.S. war of independence
* Reeding, the process or effect of creating &quot;reeds&quot; around the edges of coins, furniture, and architectural columns
* Reed (mouthpiece), the vibrating piece in woodwind musical instrument
**Double reed
**Quadruple reed
* Reed pipe, a type of organ pipe, as distinct from a flue pipe

== See also ==
* Reid (disambiguation)
* Reed-Muller (disambiguation)
* Justice Reed (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7585483" start="0" end="4" title="Reed" label="Reed"/>
<link wikidata="Q7585483" start="8" end="13" title="Reed" label="Reeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q7306716" start="79" end="105" title="Reed bird (disambiguation)" label="Reed bird (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349162" start="108" end="116" title="Reed pen" label="Reed pen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2734060" start="165" end="177" title="Reed (plant)" label="Reed (plant)"/>
<link wikidata="Q900667" start="248" end="261" title="Reed reaction" label="Reed reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q7306722" start="278" end="291" title="Reed receiver" label="Reed receiver"/>
<link wikidata="Q376185" start="345" end="355" title="Reed relay" label="Reed relay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461745" start="416" end="427" title="Reed switch" label="Reed switch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427417" start="490" end="500" title="Reed valve" label="Reed valve"/>
<link wikidata="Q3500504" start="555" end="569" title="Reed (weaving)" label="Reed (weaving)"/>
<link wikidata="Q525787" start="624" end="639" title="Reed&amp;#x27;s law" label="Reed&amp;#x27;s law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061598" start="713" end="742" title="Reed–Solomon error correction" label="Reed–Solomon error correction"/>
<link wikidata="Q2167074" start="850" end="869" title="Reed–Sternberg cell" label="Reed–Sternberg cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7306618" start="928" end="942" title="Reed (company)" label="Reed (company)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7306714" start="988" end="1001" title="Reed and Stem" label="Reed and Stem"/>
<link wikidata="Q14711273" start="1050" end="1060" title="Reed Arena" label="Reed Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140775" start="1105" end="1117" title="Reed College" label="Reed College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7306688" start="1139" end="1160" title="Reed Research Reactor" label="Reed Research Reactor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7306608" start="1207" end="1229" title="Reed, Portland, Oregon" label="Reed, Portland, Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7306610" start="1262" end="1285" title="Reed-Custer High School" label="Reed-Custer High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q998470" start="1312" end="1325" title="Reed Elsevier" label="Reed Elsevier"/>
<link wikidata="Q7306639" start="1351" end="1373" title="Reed Construction Data" label="Reed Construction Data"/>
<link wikidata="Q998470" start="1377" end="1402" title="Reed Business Information" label="Reed Business Information"/>
<link wikidata="Q998470" start="1405" end="1421" title="Reed Exhibitions" label="Reed Exhibitions"/>
<link wikidata="Q60628311" start="1471" end="1482" title="Reed family" label="Reed family"/>
<link wikidata="Q17109990" start="1509" end="1523" title="Reeds Jewelers" label="Reeds Jewelers"/>
<link wikidata="Q15947757" start="1558" end="1591" title="Reed High School (disambiguation)" label="Reed High School (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2136476" start="1594" end="1621" title="Reed House (disambiguation)" label="Reed House (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7306675" start="1633" end="1668" title="Reed Middle School (disambiguation)" label="Reed Middle School (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7306687" start="1680" end="1702" title="Reed Plantation, Maine" label="Reed Plantation, Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7306689" start="1720" end="1735" title="Reed Publishing" label="Reed Publishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7306596" start="1770" end="1787" title="Reed&amp;#x27;s, Inc." label="Reed&amp;#x27;s, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q33153327" start="1854" end="1884" title="Records of Early English Drama" label="Records of Early English Drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q121409230" start="1972" end="1983" title="Reed (name)" label="Reed (name)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2136484" start="2011" end="2025" title="Reed (surname)" label="Reed (surname)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2660617" start="2102" end="2116" title="Reed, Arkansas" label="Reed, Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7306605" start="2134" end="2148" title="Reed, Kentucky" label="Reed, Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q7306742" start="2166" end="2181" title="Reeds, Virginia" label="Reeds, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1659007" start="2199" end="2214" title="Reed, Wisconsin" label="Reed, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2629803" start="2232" end="2251" title="Reed City, Michigan" label="Reed City, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7306609" start="2269" end="2279" title="Reed-Cooke" label="Reed-Cooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q2253203" start="2330" end="2349" title="Reed Creek, Georgia" label="Reed Creek, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1848766" start="2367" end="2386" title="Reed, Hertfordshire" label="Reed, Hertfordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q121409230" start="2405" end="2417" title="Reed, Norway" label="Reed, Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q20710229" start="2420" end="2432" title="Reeds Branch" label="Reeds Branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q964040" start="2457" end="2476" title="Reed Point, Montana" label="Reed Point, Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q7306687" start="2508" end="2530" title="Reed Plantation, Maine" label="Reed Plantation, Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7999406" start="2548" end="2575" title="Reed Township, Pennsylvania" label="Reed Township, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q7306614" start="2620" end="2635" title="Reed-Wood Place" label="Reed-Wood Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q7306597" start="2680" end="2702" title="Reed&amp;#x27;s Creek Farm" label="Reed&amp;#x27;s Creek Farm"/>
<link wikidata="Q7306713" start="2746" end="2769" title="Reed and Barton Complex" label="Reed and Barton Complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q7306649" start="2829" end="2843" title="Reed Gold Mine" label="Reed Gold Mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7306674" start="2883" end="2904" title="Reed Memorial Library" label="Reed Memorial Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q131378751" start="2940" end="2956" title="Lerners Building" label="Lerners Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q7306620" start="3029" end="3058" title="Reed Airport (disambiguation)" label="Reed Airport (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7306724" start="3067" end="3079" title="Reed v. Reed" label="Reed v. Reed"/>
<link wikidata="Q7306600" start="3148" end="3179" title="Reed&amp;#x27;s Regiment of Militia" label="Reed&amp;#x27;s Regiment of Militia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4152515" start="3231" end="3238" title="Reeding" label="Reeding"/>
<link wikidata="Q42890140" start="3358" end="3375" title="Reed (mouthpiece)" label="Reed (mouthpiece)"/>
<link wikidata="Q29811838" start="3430" end="3441" title="Double reed" label="Double reed"/>
<link wikidata="Q7268441" start="3444" end="3458" title="Quadruple reed" label="Quadruple reed"/>
<link wikidata="Q3178239" start="3461" end="3470" title="Reed pipe" label="Reed pipe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2139902" start="3541" end="3562" title="Reid (disambiguation)" label="Reid (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q28838134" start="3565" end="3593" title="Reed-Muller (disambiguation)" label="Reed-Muller (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q25194652" start="3596" end="3625" title="Justice Reed (disambiguation)" label="Justice Reed (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="236374" wikidata="Q295998" url="?curid=236374" title="AOLserver">
<text>AOLserver is AOL&#x27;s open source web server. AOLserver is
multithreaded, Tcl-enabled, and used for large scale, dynamic web sites.

AOLserver is distributed under the Mozilla Public License.

AOLserver was originally developed by NaviSoft under the name &quot;NaviServer&quot;, but changed names when AOL bought the company in 1995. Philip Greenspun convinced America Online to open-source the program in 1999.

AOLserver was the first HTTP server program to combine multithreading, a built-in scripting language, and the pooling of persistent database connections. For database-backed Web sites, this enabled performance improvements of 100× compared to the standard practices at the time of CGI scripts that opened fresh database connections on every page load. Eventually other HTTP server programs were able to achieve similar performance with a similar architecture.

AOLserver is a key component in the Open Architecture Community System (OpenACS) which is an advanced open-source toolkit for developing web applications.

In September 2007, a port of AOLserver for the iPhone was made available and later forked under the name &quot;Joggame Server&quot;. This fork is described on its SourceForge project page as being a spin-off of AOLserver for devices.

NaviServer (also hosted on SourceForge) is a fork of AOLserver.

==See also==

* Comparison of web server software
* OpenACS

==References==
==External links==
* SourceForge Project: AOLserver
* Python for AOLserver
* AOLserver Wiki
** PHP on AOLserver
* AOLserver Public License
* NaviServer Fork Project Homepage</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q295998" start="0" end="9" title="AOLserver" label="AOLserver"/>
<link wikidata="Q27585" start="13" end="16" title="AOL" label="AOL"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130645" start="24" end="35" title="Open-source software" label="open source"/>
<link wikidata="Q11288" start="36" end="46" title="web server" label="web server"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="61" end="72" title="Thread_(computing)#Single-threaded_vs_multithreaded_programs" label="multithread"/>
<link wikidata="Q5288" start="76" end="79" title="Tcl" label="Tcl"/>
<link wikidata="Q308915" start="170" end="192" title="Mozilla Public License" label="Mozilla Public License"/>
<link wikidata="Q6982292" start="233" end="241" title="NaviSoft" label="NaviSoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q27585" start="304" end="307" title="AOL" label="AOL"/>
<link wikidata="Q7183648" start="336" end="352" title="Philip Greenspun" label="Philip Greenspun"/>
<link wikidata="Q213092" start="470" end="484" title="Thread (computer science)" label="multithreading"/>
<link wikidata="Q80432" start="547" end="566" title="database connection" label="database connection"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318309" start="912" end="929" title="Open Architecture" label="Open Architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1718320" start="948" end="955" title="OpenACS" label="OpenACS"/>
<link wikidata="Q2766" start="1079" end="1085" title="iPhone" label="iPhone"/>
<link wikidata="Q332903" start="1115" end="1119" title="fork (software development)" label="fork"/>
<link wikidata="Q165400" start="1195" end="1206" title="SourceForge" label="SourceForge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330876" start="1267" end="1277" title="NaviServer" label="NaviServer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2508366" start="1348" end="1381" title="Comparison of web server software" label="Comparison of web server software"/>
<link wikidata="Q1718320" start="1384" end="1391" title="OpenACS" label="OpenACS"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="236375" wikidata="Q588571" url="?curid=236375" title="John Swinburne (Scottish politician)">
<text>John Swinburne (4 July 1930 – 1 October 2017) was an American-born Scottish politician who was the founder and leader of the Scottish Senior Citizens Unity Party (SSCUP). He was that party&#x27;s only ever representative in the Scottish Parliament, serving as a Member of the Scottish Parliament (MSP) for the Central Scotland list from 2003 until 2007.

==Early life==
Swinburne was born in Pennsylvania, United States. He was educated at Dalziel High School, Motherwell.

==Political career==
In 2003 Swinburne stood for election as the SSCUP candidate and gained a list seat in Central Scotland.

Swinburne called for reintroduction of the &#x27;Belt&#x27; or &#x27;Tawse&#x27; into Scottish schools, expressing the opinion that corporal punishment would solve what he believed were endemic discipline problems. In 2006 his statement was condemned by other MSPs and by the teaching union, the EIS.

Swinburne stood for re-election in the 2007 Scottish Parliament election but lost his list seat, polling only 2% of the vote.

In May 2009, at age 78, Swinburne announced he was planning to stand for the UK Parliament in the 2009 Glasgow North East by-election. He later withdrew from this election, due to &quot;unforeseen circumstances&quot;.

==Outside politics==
He became a director of Motherwell Football Club in 2000 and held this position until 2015.

He died on 1 October 2017.

==References==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q588571" start="0" end="14" title="John Swinburne (Scottish politician)" label="John Swinburne"/>
<link wikidata="Q7437975" start="125" end="161" title="Scottish Senior Citizens Unity Party" label="Scottish Senior Citizens Unity Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q206171" start="228" end="247" title="Scottish Parliament" label="Scottish Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1711695" start="262" end="295" title="Member of the Scottish Parliament" label="Member of the Scottish Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053991" start="310" end="326" title="Central Scotland (Scottish Parliament electoral region)" label="Central Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q683800" start="337" end="341" title="2003 Scottish Parliament election" label="2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q953141" start="348" end="352" title="2007 Scottish Parliament election" label="2007"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400" start="392" end="404" title="Pennsylvania" label="Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q5211808" start="440" end="471" title="Dalziel High School" label="Dalziel High School, Motherwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053991" start="581" end="597" title="Central Scotland (Scottish Parliament electoral region)" label="Central Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1643904" start="669" end="674" title="Tawse" label="Tawse"/>
<link wikidata="Q16947037" start="686" end="702" title="Scottish schools" label="Scottish schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q305" start="732" end="751" title="corporal punishment" label="corporal punishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q5341240" start="896" end="899" title="Educational Institute of Scotland" label="EIS"/>
<link wikidata="Q953141" start="941" end="974" title="2007 Scottish Parliament election" label="2007 Scottish Parliament election"/>
<link wikidata="Q11010" start="1106" end="1119" title="UK Parliament" label="UK Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q5566876" start="1127" end="1162" title="2009 Glasgow North East by-election" label="2009 Glasgow North East by-election"/>
<link wikidata="Q216523" start="1293" end="1317" title="Motherwell Football Club" label="Motherwell Football Club"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="236376" wikidata="Q937429" url="?curid=236376" title="William Edmond Logan">
<text>Sir William Edmond Logan, FRSE FRS FGS (20 April 1798 – 22 June 1875), was a Canadian-born geologist and the founder and first director of the Geological Survey of Canada.

==Life==

William Edmond Logan was born into a well-to-do Montreal family in 1798, the third son of William Logan, a baker and owner of real estate, and Janet Edmond, both originally from Scotland.

Logan was sent to Edinburgh to receive an education. As was common at the time for young men of means, he learned several languages (French, Spanish, some Gaelic and German), music (flute), and became an accomplished artist. In the 1830s, Logan became fascinated with geology while managing a copper-smelting works near Swansea, Wales, on behalf of his uncle, Hart Logan. His self-taught talent for the subject soon brought his geological maps and interpretations to the attention of the most eminent geologists of Great Britain, and it was their later recommendations that clinched Logan&#x27;s appointment as the founding director of the Geological Survey of Canada (GSC).

The need for an organization that could chart the mineral resources of the newly established Province of Canada (following the merger of Upper and Lower Canada) had been under discussion for over a decade. Government funds were allocated in 1841 and Logan took up his duties in 1842.

By the spring of 1843, Logan had established the Survey&#x27;s headquarters in what he described as a &quot;small and dark room&quot; in Montreal. He had also hired Scottish-born Alexander Murray, a former naval officer, as his assistant. The rapid industrial advances in England since the late 18th century had shown how essential coal was to economic expansion. With the accepted belief that North America&#x27;s destiny lay in applying industrial technology to rich natural resources, the search for coal became the Survey&#x27;s first priority.

The 1843 field season saw Logan working between Pictou, Nova Scotia, and the Gaspé, as well as Murray between Lake Erie and Lake Huron. The following year, Logan mapped the north shore of the Gaspé Peninsula and then explored inland to the mountains along the Cap Chat River. Logan&#x27;s assistants named the highest peak in his honour (this Mount Logan is not to be confused with Canada&#x27;s highest mountain, which is located in Yukon and also named for him).

Based on information gathered during the first two field seasons, Logan was able to report that no coal deposits were to be found in the Province of Canada. Logan&#x27;s conclusion undoubtedly made the idea of amalgamating with the coal-rich Maritime Provinces attractive, and was one of the factors leading to Confederation in 1867.

Logan also made many important discoveries in the early days of the Survey. For example, he identified several broad geological divisions: folded rocks covering Quebec&#x27;s Gaspé Peninsula and Eastern Townships; the nearly flat-lying limestones that extend west from Montreal to Lake Huron; and much older crystalline rocks extending north an unknown distance from Kingston, Ottawa, and Montreal. The latter soon proved to be the southernmost exposed section of Canada&#x27;s mineral-rich Precambrian Shield. 

After failing to find any extensive coal deposits in the Province of Canada, Logan became interested in the bitumen deposits in Enniskillen Township as a potential substitute. In the Report of the Geological Survey for 1849–1850, Thomas Sterry Hunt analyzed a one hundred pound sample of bitumen that was sent to Logan, noting that the material could be used to create asphalt, caulking material for ships or lamp fuel. The Survey&#x27;s reports caught the attention of Charles and Henry Tripp, who established the International Mining and Manufacturing Company in 1854, the world&#x27;s first petroleum company.

In addition to Logan&#x27;s skills at geological observation and surviving in the wilds, he was an adept manager; during the 1850s he built up the staff of the GSC, adding a paleontologist, a chemist, more geologists, and a museum technician, amongst others. He also lobbied the government successfully for continued funding for the GSC, although he would use his own funds when necessary; he was an independently wealthy man, and to the despair of many parents hoping to snag him as a son-in-law, his response was always that he was &quot;married to the rocks.&quot; By the late 1850s, Logan had built the GSC into a well-rounded organization capable of conducting rigorous exploration, making maps, analyzing and identifying mineral and fossil specimens, producing reports, and maintaining a public museum.

The 1850s saw the beginning of the great international expositions, and Logan was a talented promoter of Canada&#x27;s mineral resources abroad, starting with the Exhibition of the Industry of All Nations, the 1851 world fair at the Crystal Palace in London, England. A second similar opportunity came in 1855 with the Universal Exposition in Paris. Canada&#x27;s participation in these high-profile events stimulated international interest in Canadian minerals and brought personal honours to Logan. Logan exhibited Charles and Henry&#x27;s asphalt, where it won an honorable mention. He received the French Cross of the Legion of Honour from Napoleon III in 1855, and his greatest honour, his knighthood bestowed by Queen Victoria at Windsor Castle in 1856. That same year he was awarded the Wollaston Medal, the highest award of the Geological Society of London. Throughout his career, Logan was to receive dozens of prestigious awards.

Logan was also an influential museum builder. In 1856, he was authorized by the government to establish a Geological Museum open to the public – which he did at the GSC headquarters in Montreal. This museum was to grow through the years, and both the Canadian Museum of Nature and the Canadian Museum of History trace their roots to it.

One of the most important accomplishments of the GSC under Logan was the publication in 1863 of the &quot;Geology of Canada&quot;. Representing all the work of the organization up to that date, this 983-page book recorded everything known about Canadian geology. It received national and international acclaim for its content, style, and precision.

In 1864 Logan founded the Geological Survey of Newfoundland, on request of the colonial government and appointed Alexander Murray as the first director.

In 1869, Logan&#x27;s geological map of Canada was published (the map is actually dated 1866). On a scale of 1 inch to 25 miles, it showed the geology and geography of southeastern Canada as far west as Manitoba and as far north as lakes St. John, Timiskaming, Nipigon, and St. Joseph. In 1864, a smaller scale version of this same map (1 inch to 125 miles) had been printed in atlas form, making it the first comprehensive illustration of the geology of what is now the southern part of Ontario and Quebec.

Logan retired in 1869 at the age of 71. He died at Castle Malgwyn in Wales, the home of his sister, Elizabeth Gower, on 22 June 1875, and is buried in the churchyard of St Llawddog at Cilgerran, Pembrokeshire, Wales.

==Posthumous honours==
* Mount Logan, Canada&#x27;s highest mountain, was named in Logan&#x27;s honour in 1890 by I.C. Russell of the U.S. Geological Survey.
* The rare mineral weloganite, discovered by GSC scientist Ann Sabina at the Francon Quarry in Montreal in 1966 was named in his honour.
* The Geological Association of Canada awards the Logan Medal, established in 1964, annually as its highest honour. 
* &quot;Maclean&#x27;s&quot; magazine, in July 1998, named Logan &#x27;Canada&#x27;s Greatest Scientist&#x27; in their feature &quot;The 100 Most Important Canadians in History.&quot;
* In 2005, the Literary Review of Canada chose Logan&#x27;s landmark publication &quot;Geological Survey of Canada: Report of Progress from its Commencement to 1863&quot; as one of the 100 most important Canadian books. The list was intended to identify the books that had &quot;changed our country&#x27;s psychic landscape.&quot;

==Bibliography==
* Winder, C. Gordon, LOGAN, Sir WILLIAM EDMOND, Dictionary of Canadian Biography, Vol. X, http://www.biographi.ca/en/bio/logan_william_edmond_10E.html. 
* Vodden, Christy, No Stone Unturned: The First 150 Years of the Geological Survey of Canada, Minister of Supply and Services, Ottawa, 1992
* Harrington, Bernard, J., Life of Sir William E. Logan, Dawson Brothers, Montreal, 1883
* Smith, Charles and Dyck, Ian (editors), William E. Logan&#x27;s 1845 Survey of the Upper Ottawa Valley, Canadian Museum of Civilization, Gatineau, 2007
* Winder, C. Gordon, William Edmond Logan (1798–1875): Knighted Canadian Geologist, Trafford on Demand Publishing, 2004

==References==
== External links ==
* Written in Stone: William E. Logan and the Geological Survey of Canada (English and French)
* Sir William Logan 1798 - 1875
* Biography at the &quot;Dictionary of Canadian Biography Online&quot;
* William Edmond Logan (1798–1875): Canada&#x27;s Super-Rocker!!
* Sir William Logan Online 
* Sir William Logan, 200th birthday essay
* &quot;The History of the Geological Survey of Canada in 175 Objects&quot;
* L’histoire de la Commission géologique du Canada illustrée par 175 objets</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q937429" start="0" end="24" title="William Edmond Logan" label="Sir William Edmond Logan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5438598" start="26" end="30" title="Fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh" label="FRSE"/>
<link wikidata="Q15631401" start="31" end="34" title="Fellow of the Royal Society of London" label="FRS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230936" start="35" end="38" title="Geological Society of London" label="FGS"/>
<link wikidata="Q7437641" start="77" end="85" title="Scottish-Canadian" label="Canadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986634" start="1012" end="1039" title="Geological Survey of Canada" label="Geological Survey of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q4719723" start="1512" end="1528" title="Alexander Murray (geologist)" label="Alexander Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q167510" start="3305" end="3312" title="bitumen" label="bitumen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5379202" start="3325" end="3345" title="Enniskillen, Ontario" label="Enniskillen Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q904300" start="3427" end="3445" title="Thomas Sterry Hunt" label="Thomas Sterry Hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q167510" start="3485" end="3492" title="bitumen" label="bitumen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5081222" start="3667" end="3690" title="Charles Nelson Tripp" label="Charles and Henry Tripp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142248" start="4784" end="4825" title="Exhibition of the Industry of All Nations" label="Exhibition of the Industry of All Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q832424" start="5415" end="5430" title="Wollaston Medal" label="Wollaston Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230936" start="5457" end="5485" title="Geological Society of London" label="Geological Society of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032232" start="5813" end="5838" title="Canadian Museum of Nature" label="Canadian Museum of Nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032269" start="5847" end="5873" title="Canadian Museum of History" label="Canadian Museum of History"/>
<link wikidata="Q5535317" start="6276" end="6309" title="Geological Survey of Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Geological Survey of Newfoundland"/>
<link wikidata="Q18349327" start="6329" end="6348" title="8th General Assembly of Newfoundland" label="colonial government"/>
<link wikidata="Q4719723" start="6363" end="6379" title="Alexander Murray (geologist)" label="Alexander Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q15978929" start="6964" end="6978" title="Castell Malgwyn" label="Castle Malgwyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="6982" end="6987" title="Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q120306" start="7156" end="7167" title="Mount Logan" label="Mount Logan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063207" start="7308" end="7318" title="weloganite" label="weloganite"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="7384" end="7392" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5535301" start="7432" end="7464" title="Geological Association of Canada" label="Geological Association of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2760808" start="7476" end="7487" title="Logan Medal" label="Logan Medal"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="236381" wikidata="Q8014670" url="?curid=236381" title="William Logan">
<text>Bill, Willie or William Logan may refer to:

== Politicians and activists ==
*William Logan (politician) (1776–1822), U.S. Senator from Kentucky
*William Logan (temperance campaigner) (1813–1879), Scottish missionary and temperance activist
*William F. Logan (fl. 1860s), U.S. mayor, see List of mayors of Williamsport, Pennsylvania
*William Turner Logan (1874–1941), U.S. Representative from South Carolina
*William Logan Martin (1883–1959), U.S. Judge in Alabama and Attorney General
*Bill Logan (spartacist) (fl. 1970s), New Zealand Spartacist and member of the International Communist League
*William J. Logan (Orangeman) (fl. 1990s), Northern Irish Sovereign Grand Master of the Royal Black Preceptory
*Willie Logan (born 1957), American politician from Florida
*William Logan (Indian agent), U.S. Indian agent in Oregon and appointed superintendent of The Dalles Mint for the United States

== Artists and writers ==
*William Logan (author) (1841–1914), Scottish author of &quot;Malabar Manual&quot;
*William Logan (poet) (born 1950), U.S. poet and critic

== Sportspersons ==
*William Logan (cricketer) (fl. 1880s), Australian cricketer
*William Logan (footballer), Scottish footballer
*William Francis Logan (Bill Logan, born 1905), American soccer, basketball and Lacrosse coach of Princeton Tigers men&#x27;s basketball 
*William Logan (speed skater) (1907–1955), Canadian Olympic speed skater
*William Logan (cyclist) (1914–2002), American cyclist
*Bill Logan (basketball), 1950s American basketball player, member of Iowa Hawkeyes&#x27; Fabulous Five

== Other ==
*Willie Logan (Loganair) (1913–1966), Scottish construction contractor, founder of Loganair
*William Edmond Logan (1798–1875), Canadian geologist</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q8014670" start="0" end="4" title="William Logan" label="Bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q8014670" start="6" end="12" title="William Logan" label="Willie"/>
<link wikidata="Q8014670" start="16" end="29" title="William Logan" label="William Logan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2579764" start="78" end="104" title="William Logan (politician)" label="William Logan (politician)"/>
<link wikidata="Q8014672" start="146" end="183" title="William Logan (temperance campaigner)" label="William Logan (temperance campaigner)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6627779" start="288" end="332" title="List of mayors of Williamsport, Pennsylvania" label="List of mayors of Williamsport, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1707040" start="334" end="354" title="William Turner Logan" label="William Turner Logan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818624" start="469" end="485" title="Attorney General of Alabama" label="Attorney General"/>
<link wikidata="Q3240310" start="565" end="595" title="International Communist League (Fourth Internationalist)" label="International Communist League"/>
<link wikidata="Q7373816" start="684" end="706" title="Royal Black Preceptory" label="Royal Black Preceptory"/>
<link wikidata="Q8021636" start="708" end="720" title="Willie Logan" label="Willie Logan"/>
<link wikidata="Q85815707" start="768" end="796" title="William Logan (Indian agent)" label="William Logan (Indian agent)"/>
<link wikidata="Q8014671" start="924" end="946" title="William Logan (author)" label="William Logan (author)"/>
<link wikidata="Q8014673" start="1007" end="1027" title="William Logan (poet)" label="William Logan (poet)"/>
<link wikidata="Q20811191" start="1084" end="1109" title="William Logan (cricketer)" label="William Logan (cricketer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q27958383" start="1145" end="1171" title="William Logan (footballer)" label="William Logan (footballer)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1194" end="1215" title="William Francis Logan" label="William Francis Logan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7245013" start="1291" end="1329" title="Princeton Tigers men&amp;#x27;s basketball" label="Princeton Tigers men&amp;#x27;s basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783621" start="1332" end="1360" title="William Logan (speed skater)" label="William Logan (speed skater)"/>
<link wikidata="Q17388550" start="1405" end="1428" title="William Logan (cyclist)" label="William Logan (cyclist)"/>
<link wikidata="Q47690874" start="1460" end="1483" title="Bill Logan (basketball)" label="Bill Logan (basketball)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1529" end="1562" title="Iowa Hawkeyes men&amp;#x27;s basketball#The Fabulous Five" label="Iowa Hawkeyes&amp;#x27; Fabulous Five"/>
<link wikidata="Q8021635" start="1577" end="1600" title="Willie Logan (Loganair)" label="Willie Logan (Loganair)"/>
<link wikidata="Q937429" start="1669" end="1689" title="William Edmond Logan" label="William Edmond Logan"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="236382" wikidata="Q837101" url="?curid=236382" title="FishBase">
<text>FishBase is a global species database of fish species (specifically finfish). It is the largest and most extensively accessed online database on adult finfish on the web. Over time it has &quot;evolved into a dynamic and versatile ecological tool&quot; that is widely cited in scholarly publications.

FishBase provides comprehensive species data, including information on taxonomy, geographical distribution, biometrics and morphology, behaviour and habitats, ecology and population dynamics as well as reproductive, metabolic and genetic data. There is access to tools such as trophic pyramids, identification keys, biogeographical modelling and fishery statistics and there are direct species level links to information in other databases such as LarvalBase, GenBank, the IUCN Red List and the Catalog of Fishes.

, FishBase included descriptions of 35,600 species and subspecies, with 329,500 common names, 64,000 pictures, and references to 61,700 works in the scientific literature. The site has about 700,000 visits per month.

==History==
The origins of FishBase go back to the 1970s, when the fisheries scientist Daniel Pauly found himself struggling to test a hypothesis on how the growing ability of fish was affected by the size of their gills. Hypotheses, such as this one, could be tested only if large amounts of empirical data were available. At the time, fisheries management used analytical models which required estimates for fish growth and mortality. It can be difficult for fishery scientists and managers to get the information they need on the species that concern them, because the relevant facts can be scattered across and buried in numerous journal articles, reports, newsletters and other sources. It can be particularly difficult for people in developing countries who need such information. Pauly believed that the only practical way fisheries managers could access the volume of data they needed was to assemble and consolidate all the data available in the published literature into some central and easily accessed repository. Such a database would be particularly useful if the data has also been standardised and validated. This would mean that when scientists or managers need to test a new hypothesis, the available data will already be there in a validated and accessible form, and there will be no need to create a new dataset and then have to validate it.

Pauly recruited Rainer Froese, and the beginnings of a software database along these lines was encoded in 1988. This database, initially confined to tropical fish, became the prototype for FishBase. FishBase was subsequently extended to cover all finfish, and was launched on the Web in August 1996. It is now the largest and most accessed online database for fish in the world. In 1995 the first CD-ROM was released as &quot;FishBase 100&quot;. Subsequent CDs have been released annually. The software runs on Microsoft Access which operates only on Microsoft Windows.

FishBase covers adult finfish, but does not detail the early and juvenile stages of fish. In 1999 a complementary database, called LarvalBase, went online under the supervision of Bernd Ueberschär. It covers ichthyoplankton and the juvenile stage of fishes, with detailed data on fish eggs and larvae, fish identification, as well as data relevant to the rearing of young fish in aquaculture. Given FishBase&#x27;s success, there was a demand for a database covering forms of aquatic life other than finfish. This resulted, in 2006, in the birth of SeaLifeBase. The long-term goal of SeaLifeBase is to develop an information system modelled on FishBase, but including all forms of aquatic life, both marine and freshwater, apart from the finfish which FishBase specialises in. Altogether, there are about 300,000 known species in this category.

==Organization==
As awareness of FishBase has grown among fish specialists, it has attracted over 2,480 contributors and collaborators. Since 2000 FishBase has been supervised by a consortium of nine international institutions. The FishBase consortium has grown to twelve members. The GEOMAR – Helmholtz Centre for Ocean Research for Ocean Research Kiel (GEOMAR) in Germany, functions as the coordinating body and, since February 2017, Quantitative Aquatics, Inc. functions as the administrative body. 

==See also==
*Catalog of Fishes
*List of online encyclopedias

==References==
==Further reading==
* Bailly N (2010) Why there may be discrepancies in the assessment of scientific names between the Catalog of Fishes and FishBase Version 2, 6 May 2010.
* Bailly N, Reyes Jr R, Atanacio R and Froese R (2010) &quot;Simple Identification Tools in FishBase&quot; In: Nimis PL and Vignes Lebbe R. (eds) &quot;Tools for Identifying Biodiversity: Progress and Problems&quot;, pages 31–36. .
* Christensen V, CJ Walters, R Ahrens, J Alder, J Buszowski, LB Christensen, WWL Cheung, J Dunne, R Froese, V Karpouzi, K Kaschner, K Kearney, S Lai, V Lam, MLD Palomares, A Peters-Mason, C Piroddia, JL Sarmiento, J Steenbeek, R Sumaila, R Watson, D Zeller and D Pauly (2009) Database-driven models of the world&#x27;s Large Marine Ecosystems &quot;Ecological Modelling&quot;, 220(17): 1984–1996.
* Froese R (2011) &quot;The science in Fishbase&quot; In: Villy Christensen and Jay Maclean (eds) &quot;Ecosystem Approaches to Fisheries: A Global Perspective&quot;, Cambridge University Press, pages 47–54. .
* Froese R and Pauly D (eds) (2000) &quot;FishBase 2000: concepts, design and data sources&quot; ICLARM, Philippines.
* Froese R and Pauly D (1994) &quot;Fishbase as a tool for comparing the life history patterns of flatfish&quot; &quot;Netherlands Journal of Sea Research&quot;, 32(3/4): 235–239.
* Nauen CE (2004) A public electronic archive on the world’s fishes in support of sustainable fisheries CTA/Commonwealth Secretariat Seminar, Expert Meeting on ACP-EU Fisheries Relations, Brussels.
* Palomares, M.L.D., N. Bailly and D. Pauly (2009) FishBase, SeaLifeBase and database-driven ecosystem modeling p. 156–158. In: M.L.D. Palomares, L. Morissette, A. Cisnero-Montemayor, D. Varkey, M. Coll and C. Piroddi (eds.) Ecopath 25 Years Conference Proceedings: Extended Abstracts. UBC Fisheries Centre Research Reports 17(3).
* Pauly D (1997) &quot;The Science in FishBase&quot; &quot;EC Fisheries Cooperation Bulletin,&quot; 10(2): 4–6.
* Robertson R (2008) &quot;Global biogeographical data bases on marine fishes: caveat emptor&quot; &quot;Diversity and Distributions,&quot; 14(6): 891–892.
* Ueberschär B and Teltow M (1999) &quot;FishBase goes fishing&quot; &quot;Bulletin&quot;, 12(2–3): 38–39.

==External links==

* FishBase online
* The Fish Database of Taiwan
* FishBase for Africa
* FishBase FishBlog (FishBase Sverige informerar)
* FishBase Celebrates 20 Year Anniversary in Kiel &quot;Science newsline&quot;, 3 September 2010.
* Rainer Froese on FishBase &quot;Blue Zoo&quot;.
* Fish Morphology and Identification in FishBase &quot;Royal Museum for Central Africa (RMCA Tervuren)&quot;, Presentation at FishBase and Fish Taxonomy Training Session 2007.
* The 6th FishBase Consortium meeting and 3rd Mini FishBase Symposium &quot;FishBytes&quot;, 2005.
* 2008 FishBase Symposium &quot;Chinese Academy of Fishery Sciences&quot;, 2 September 2008.
* Fish on line Daniel Pauly, Rainer Froese and Maria Lourdes Palomares. A draft guide to learning and teaching ichthyology using the FishBase information system. Updated 17 January 2005.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q837101" start="0" end="8" title="FishBase" label="FishBase"/>
<link wikidata="Q5570651" start="14" end="37" title="Global Species Database" label="global species database"/>
<link wikidata="Q152" start="41" end="45" title="fish" label="fish"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="68" end="75" title="Fish#&amp;quot;True fish&amp;quot; or &amp;quot;finfish&amp;quot;" label="finfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q8513" start="126" end="141" title="Database" label="online database"/>
<link wikidata="Q8269924" start="373" end="381" title="taxonomy (biology)" label="taxonomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q177765" start="410" end="420" title="biometrics" label="biometrics"/>
<link wikidata="Q183252" start="425" end="435" title="Morphology (biology)" label="morphology"/>
<link wikidata="Q904564" start="473" end="492" title="population dynamics" label="population dynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q948022" start="579" end="594" title="Ecological pyramid" label="trophic pyramid"/>
<link wikidata="Q218682" start="597" end="615" title="identification key" label="identification key"/>
<link wikidata="Q52106" start="618" end="633" title="Biogeography" label="biogeographical"/>
<link wikidata="Q6491913" start="750" end="760" title="LarvalBase" label="LarvalBase"/>
<link wikidata="Q901755" start="762" end="769" title="GenBank" label="GenBank"/>
<link wikidata="Q32059" start="775" end="788" title="IUCN Red List" label="IUCN Red List"/>
<link wikidata="Q9185167" start="797" end="814" title="Catalog of Fishes" label="Catalog of Fishes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="860" end="867" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q502895" start="897" end="908" title="common name" label="common name"/>
<link wikidata="Q12042160" start="966" end="987" title="scientific literature" label="scientific literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420050" start="1102" end="1121" title="Fisheries science" label="fisheries scientist"/>
<link wikidata="Q581515" start="1122" end="1134" title="Daniel Pauly" label="Daniel Pauly"/>
<link wikidata="Q5454893" start="1372" end="1392" title="fisheries management" label="fisheries management"/>
<link wikidata="Q5454650" start="1461" end="1470" title="Fish mortality" label="mortality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420050" start="1496" end="1513" title="fishery scientist" label="fishery scientist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7284814" start="2414" end="2427" title="Rainer Froese" label="Rainer Froese"/>
<link wikidata="Q180538" start="2645" end="2652" title="finfish" label="finfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q466" start="2678" end="2681" title="World Wide Web" label="Web"/>
<link wikidata="Q7982" start="2795" end="2801" title="CD-ROM" label="CD-ROM"/>
<link wikidata="Q80689" start="2909" end="2925" title="Microsoft Access" label="Microsoft Access"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="2949" end="2966" title="Microsoft Windows" label="Microsoft Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q6491913" start="3100" end="3110" title="LarvalBase" label="LarvalBase"/>
<link wikidata="Q5986436" start="3177" end="3192" title="ichthyoplankton" label="ichthyoplankton"/>
<link wikidata="Q17147" start="3254" end="3258" title="Fish egg" label="eggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q129270" start="3263" end="3268" title="larva" label="larva"/>
<link wikidata="Q2039217" start="3276" end="3290" title="Identification (biology)" label="identification"/>
<link wikidata="Q188989" start="3349" end="3360" title="aquaculture" label="aquaculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q7439813" start="3518" end="3529" title="SeaLifeBase" label="SeaLifeBase"/>
<link wikidata="Q323945" start="4100" end="4168" title="GEOMAR Helmholtz Centre for Ocean Research Kiel" label="GEOMAR – Helmholtz Centre for Ocean Research for Ocean Research Kiel"/>
<link wikidata="Q9185167" start="4333" end="4350" title="Catalog of Fishes" label="Catalog of Fishes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477046" start="4352" end="4380" title="List of online encyclopedias" label="List of online encyclopedias"/>
<link wikidata="Q7931136" start="5257" end="5274" title="Villy Christensen" label="Villy Christensen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5100369" start="7207" end="7242" title="Chinese Academy of Fishery Sciences" label="Chinese Academy of Fishery Sciences"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="236385" wikidata="Q1486149" url="?curid=236385" title="WorldFish">
<text>The International Center for Living Aquatic Resources Management (ICLARM), also known as WorldFish, is an international organization working to transform aquatic food systems to reduce hunger, malnutrition, and poverty.

Based in Penang, Malaysia, WorldFish is a member of CGIAR, which unites international organizations engaged in research about food security and has a presence in 20 countries throughout Africa, Asia and the Pacific Region.

WorldFish has introduced technologies to ramp up local aquatic food production through a network of partners. Such innovations include the development of &quot;genetically improved farmed tilapia&quot; (GIFT) and an enhanced strain of Nile tilapia, in support of smallhold aquaculture farmers in the Global South.

==WorldFish research==
In 2020, WorldFish began to transition from fisheries and aquaculture to a more holistic aquatic foods system approach. The institution shifted towards food systems management to focus on aquatic food value chains from production through consumption, with focuses on climate resilience and environmental sustainability.

== Recognition ==
WorldFish has been recognized for its work in Nile tilapia. WorldFish fisheries scientist Modadugu Vijay Gupta was awarded the World Food Prize for his research on genetically improved farmed tilapia (GIFT) in support of food and nutrition security in food-insecure regions.

Shakuntala Haraksingh Thilsted, a food nutritionist with WorldFish, received the 2021 World Food Prize for her groundbreaking research, critical insights, and landmark innovations in developing holistic, nutrition-sensitive approaches to aquaculture and food systems.

==Impact==
WorldFish has worked to breed genetically enhanced fast-growing tilapia (GIFT) varieties to raise the productivity and incomes of low-income smallholder farmers. It also works to improve the production of key inputs for aquaculture, specifically fish feed and fingerlings, and links small-scale aquatic food producers with input and output markets.

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1486149" start="4" end="64" title="WorldFish" label="International Center for Living Aquatic Resources Management"/>
<link wikidata="Q1486149" start="66" end="72" title="WorldFish" label="ICLARM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1486149" start="89" end="98" title="WorldFish" label="WorldFish"/>
<link wikidata="Q188096" start="230" end="246" title="Penang" label="Penang, Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128401" start="273" end="278" title="CGIAR" label="CGIAR"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="407" end="413" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q48" start="415" end="419" title="Asia" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="428" end="442" title="Pacific Ocean" label="Pacific Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q311170" start="680" end="692" title="Nile tilapia" label="Nile tilapia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2827199" start="708" end="717" title="smallholding" label="smallhold"/>
<link wikidata="Q188989" start="718" end="729" title="aquaculture" label="aquaculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203182" start="745" end="757" title="Global North and Global South" label="Global South"/>
<link wikidata="Q17072637" start="1050" end="1068" title="climate resilience" label="climate resilience"/>
<link wikidata="Q219416" start="1073" end="1101" title="environmental sustainability" label="environmental sustainability"/>
<link wikidata="Q6887988" start="1212" end="1232" title="Modadugu Vijay Gupta" label="Modadugu Vijay Gupta"/>
<link wikidata="Q772112" start="1249" end="1265" title="World Food Prize" label="World Food Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q91687223" start="1398" end="1428" title="Shakuntala Haraksingh Thilsted" label="Shakuntala Haraksingh Thilsted"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="236387" wikidata="Q380429" url="?curid=236387" title="Tony Robbins">
<text>Anthony Jay Robbins ( Mahavoric, born February 29, 1960) is an American author, coach and motivational speaker. He is known for his seminars, and self-help books including the books &quot;Unlimited Power&quot; and &quot;Awaken the Giant Within&quot;.

==Early life==
Robbins was born Anthony J. Mahavoric in North Hollywood, California, on February 29, 1960. The eldest of three children, his parents divorced when he was seven. He is of Croatian descent from both sides of his family. His mother remarried several times, including a marriage with Jim Robbins, a former semi-professional baseball player who legally adopted Anthony when he was 12.

Robbins attended Glendora High School. During high school, he grew in one year, a growth spurt later attributed to a pituitary tumor. He has said his home life was &quot;chaotic&quot; and &quot;abusive&quot;. When he was 17, he left home and never returned. He later worked as a janitor, and did not attend college. One day, he asked his landlord, a family friend, how he became so successful, and the landlord told him that he started to turn his life around after attending a Jim Rohn seminar.

==Career==
Robbins began promoting seminars for motivational speaker and author Jim Rohn when he was 17 years old. He subsequently learned to firewalk and incorporated it into his seminars.

In May 1995, Robbins Research International (RRI) settled with the Federal Trade Commission over alleged violations of the agency&#x27;s Franchise Rule. Under the settlement, RRI did not admit to having violated any law, but agreed to pay $221,260 in consumer redress. In 2000, Wade Cook sued Robbins for allegedly using copyrighted terms from Cook&#x27;s book &quot;Wall Street Money Machine&quot; in his seminars. A jury awarded Cook a $655,900 judgment, which was appealed. Cook and Robbins settled for an undisclosed amount.

In July 2010, NBC debuted &quot;Breakthrough with Tony Robbins&quot;, a reality show that followed Robbins as he helped the show&#x27;s participants face their personal challenges. NBC canceled the show after airing two of the planned six episodes due to low viewership of 2.8 million. In March 2012, the OWN Network picked up the show for another season beginning with the original first season set to re-run and thereafter leading directly into the new 2012 season. In April 2012, Robbins began cohosting &quot;Oprah&#x27;s Lifeclass&quot; on the OWN Network.

In July 2012, the &quot;San Jose Mercury News&quot; published a story reporting that several people had been burned and hospitalized during one of Robbins&#x27;s fire-walking events on July 19, 2012. This story was picked up by other media outlets, including Fox News, &quot;The New York Times&quot;, and CNN. Aspects of these reports were later challenged by Robbins himself along with some of the on-site medical professionals. On June 24, 2016, it was reported that &quot;dozens were burned and required medical attention after attempting to walk on hot coals during a fire-walking event at a Tony Robbins seminar in Dallas, Texas&quot;. A spokeswoman for the Robbins organization stated, &quot;Someone unfamiliar with the process of the fire-walk called 911 reporting the need for emergency service vehicles […] there was no need for emergency personnel […] only 5 of 7,000 participants requested an examination beyond what was readily available on site.&quot;

In 2014, Robbins joined a group of investors to acquire rights to launch a Major League Soccer franchise in Los Angeles referred to as the Los Angeles Football Club. The team entered competition in 2018.

In 2015, filmmaker Joe Berlinger directed and produced the documentary &quot;Tony Robbins: I Am Not Your Guru&quot;, about the Tony Robbins event &quot;Date with Destiny&quot; after filming it in Boca Raton, Florida, in December 2014. It premiered at the South by Southwest film festival in March 2016 and was released by Netflix on July 15, 2016.

In 2016, Robbins partnered with Golden State Warriors co-owner Peter Guber and Washington Wizards co-owner Ted Leonsis to purchase Team Liquid, an eSports professional gaming organization. 

Robbins has worked on an individual basis with Bill Clinton, Justin Tuck, Hugh Jackman, and Pitbull. He has counseled businessmen Peter Guber, Steve Wynn, and Marc Benioff.

=== Philanthropy ===
In 1991, Robbins founded the Anthony Robbins Foundation, to help young people, homeless people, hungry people, elderly people, and imprisoned people.

In 2014, he donated the profits of his book, &quot;Money: Master the Game&quot;, along with an additional personal donation, through Feeding America to provide meals to people in need. Robbins works with a water company called Spring Health, which provides fresh water to parts of rural eastern India to prevent waterborne diseases.

Robbins helped raise money for Operation Underground Railroad, a nonprofit organization that works with governments to fight against child trafficking and slavery with the assistance of former CIA, Navy SEALs, and special operations operatives.

=== Books ===

* &quot;Unlimited Power: The New Science of Personal Achievement&quot; (1986) - This book explores techniques and strategies for achieving personal excellence through neurolinguistic programming (NLP) and other psychological tools.
* &quot;Awaken the Giant Within: How to Take Immediate Control of Your Mental, Emotional, Physical and Financial Destiny!&quot; (1991) - Robbins emphasizes taking charge of one&#x27;s life by understanding and leveraging the power of personal beliefs and behaviors.
* &quot;Giant Steps: Small Changes to Make a Big Difference&quot; (1994) - Offers practical advice on how small, consistent changes in behavior can lead to significant improvements in life.
* &quot;Money: Master the Game: 7 Simple Steps to Financial Freedom&quot; (2014) - Robbins interviews financial experts to provide insights and strategies for achieving financial independence and security.
* &quot;Unshakeable: Your Financial Freedom Playbook&quot; (2017) - A follow-up to &quot;Money: Master the Game,&quot; this book distills the principles of investing and financial success into actionable steps.
* &quot;The Path: Accelerating Your Journey to Financial Freedom&quot; (2022) - Robbins focuses on financial freedom and achieving personal goals through a comprehensive guide to life planning.

==Personal life==
In 1984, Robbins married Rebecca Jenkins after meeting her at a seminar. Jenkins had three children, from two former marriages, whom Robbins adopted. Robbins and Jenkins filed for divorce in 1998.

In 1984, Robbins fathered a child with former girlfriend Liz Acosta. Their son, Jairek Robbins, is also a personal empowerment coach and trainer.

In October 2001, Robbins married Bonnie Sage Humphrey Robbins. They live in Manalapan, Florida.

Robbins was a vegan for 12 years; he then reportedly added fish to his diet. While eating a fish-heavy diet, he developed mercury poisoning and nearly died. His diet now consists of mostly vegetables with a small amount of animal protein.

In a 2013 interview with Playboy magazine, Robbins disclosed that he had been diagnosed with acromegaly at age 31, but refused his doctor&#x27;s recommendation to undergo brain surgery.

===2019 allegations by &quot;BuzzFeed&quot;===
In May 2019, an investigation by &quot;BuzzFeed News&quot; detailed accusations against Robbins of the sexual harassment of fans and staff members, such as groping fans at events and exposing his genitals to his assistants. Robbins denied the allegations and said, &quot;I have been the target of a year-long investigation by BuzzFeed. Unfortunately, your organization has made it clear to my team that you intend to move forward with publishing an inaccurate, agenda-driven version of the past, pierced with falsehoods.&quot; In November 2019, &quot;BuzzFeed News&quot; published a six-part article accusing Robbins of molesting a teenage girl during his time as a &quot;star speaker&quot; at SuperCamp, an elite summer camp in southern California. The article states that the events took place in 1985 when Robbins was 25, and that there were at least two eyewitnesses.

Robbins denied wrongdoing and sued &quot;BuzzFeed News&quot; in Ireland. In response, &quot;BuzzFeed News&quot; said that it stood by its reporting and suggested that Robbins&#x27;s decision to file the summons in Ireland was an &quot;abuse&quot; of the Irish court.

==Select bibliography==
* &quot;Unlimited Power&quot; (1986). Free Press. .
* &quot;Awaken the Giant Within&quot; (1991). Free Press. .
* &quot;Giant Steps&quot; (1994). Touchstone. .
* &quot;Money: Master the Game&quot; (2014). Simon &amp; Schuster. .
* Co-authored with Peter Mallouk (2017). &quot;Unshakeable: Your Financial Freedom Playbook&quot;. Simon &amp; Schuster. .
* Co-authored with Peter Diamandis and Robert Hariri (2022). &quot;Life Force: How New Breakthroughs in Precision Medicine Can Transform the Quality of Your Life &amp; Those You Love&quot;. Simon &amp; Schuster. .

==References==
==External links==
* 
* &quot;Tony Robbins&quot;, Encyclopædia Britannica</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q380429" start="0" end="19" title="Tony Robbins" label="Anthony Jay Robbins"/>
<link wikidata="Q380429" start="22" end="31" title="Tony Robbins" label="Mahavoric"/>
<link wikidata="Q15982858" start="90" end="110" title="motivational speaker" label="motivational speaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q504703" start="132" end="139" title="seminar" label="seminar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3739522" start="146" end="160" title="self-help book" label="self-help book"/>
<link wikidata="Q7897055" start="188" end="203" title="Unlimited Power" label="Unlimited Power"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319697" start="308" end="335" title="North Hollywood, California" label="North Hollywood, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q167420" start="438" end="446" title="Croats" label="Croatian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5568433" start="666" end="686" title="Glendora High School" label="Glendora High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q864296" start="766" end="781" title="pituitary tumor" label="pituitary tumor"/>
<link wikidata="Q640514" start="1127" end="1135" title="Jim Rohn" label="Jim Rohn"/>
<link wikidata="Q15982858" start="1194" end="1214" title="motivational speaker" label="motivational speaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q640514" start="1226" end="1234" title="Jim Rohn" label="Jim Rohn"/>
<link wikidata="Q929202" start="1288" end="1296" title="Firewalking" label="firewalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q786713" start="1404" end="1428" title="Federal Trade Commission" label="Federal Trade Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q5479757" start="1474" end="1488" title="Franchise Rule" label="Franchise Rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q7959032" start="1615" end="1624" title="Wade Cook" label="Wade Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="1881" end="1884" title="National Broadcasting Company" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2573619" start="2172" end="2183" title="Oprah Winfrey Network (U.S. TV channel)" label="OWN Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q7098671" start="2380" end="2402" title="Oprah&amp;#x27;s Lifeclass" label="Oprah&amp;#x27;s Lifeclass"/>
<link wikidata="Q575741" start="2454" end="2475" title="San Jose Mercury News" label="San Jose Mercury News"/>
<link wikidata="Q18543" start="3471" end="3490" title="Major League Soccer" label="Major League Soccer"/>
<link wikidata="Q18380286" start="3535" end="3560" title="Los Angeles Football Club" label="Los Angeles Football Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q5637614" start="3620" end="3633" title="Joe Berlinger" label="Joe Berlinger"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3678" end="3710" title="Tony Robbins: I Am Not Your Guru" label="Tony Robbins: I Am Not Your Guru"/>
<link wikidata="Q959755" start="3856" end="3874" title="South by Southwest" label="South by Southwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q907311" start="3923" end="3930" title="Netflix" label="Netflix"/>
<link wikidata="Q157376" start="3982" end="4003" title="Golden State Warriors" label="Golden State Warriors"/>
<link wikidata="Q169165" start="4029" end="4047" title="Washington Wizards" label="Washington Wizards"/>
<link wikidata="Q6381629" start="4057" end="4068" title="Ted Leonsis" label="Ted Leonsis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054000" start="4081" end="4092" title="Team Liquid" label="Team Liquid"/>
<link wikidata="Q300920" start="4097" end="4104" title="eSports" label="eSports"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124" start="4188" end="4200" title="Bill Clinton" label="Bill Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277152" start="4202" end="4213" title="Justin Tuck" label="Justin Tuck"/>
<link wikidata="Q129591" start="4215" end="4227" title="Hugh Jackman" label="Hugh Jackman"/>
<link wikidata="Q187844" start="4233" end="4240" title="Pitbull (rapper)" label="Pitbull"/>
<link wikidata="Q970867" start="4271" end="4282" title="Peter Guber" label="Peter Guber"/>
<link wikidata="Q524369" start="4284" end="4294" title="Steve Wynn" label="Steve Wynn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1521908" start="4300" end="4312" title="Marc Benioff" label="Marc Benioff"/>
<link wikidata="Q4773363" start="4365" end="4391" title="Anthony Robbins Foundation" label="Anthony Robbins Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006911" start="4620" end="4635" title="Feeding America" label="Feeding America"/>
<link wikidata="Q22080495" start="4852" end="4882" title="Operation Underground Railroad" label="Operation Underground Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q163740" start="4886" end="4908" title="nonprofit organization" label="nonprofit organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="5014" end="5017" title="CIA" label="CIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q178033" start="5019" end="5029" title="Navy SEALS" label="Navy SEALs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060062" start="5035" end="5053" title="special operations" label="special operations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1825409" start="6821" end="6839" title="Manalapan, Florida" label="Manalapan, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q181138" start="6856" end="6861" title="vegan" label="vegan"/>
<link wikidata="Q408089" start="6964" end="6981" title="mercury poisoning" label="mercury poisoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q150820" start="7107" end="7114" title="Playboy" label="Playboy"/>
<link wikidata="Q189580" start="7175" end="7185" title="acromegaly" label="acromegaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q55715275" start="7355" end="7368" title="BuzzFeed News" label="BuzzFeed News"/>
<link wikidata="Q30590551" start="8729" end="8742" title="Creative Planning" label="Peter Mallouk"/>
<link wikidata="Q562799" start="8852" end="8867" title="Peter Diamandis" label="Peter Diamandis"/>
<link wikidata="Q455" start="9113" end="9136" title="Encyclopædia Britannica" label="Encyclopædia Britannica"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="236388" wikidata="Q2647209" url="?curid=236388" title="Stylus">
<text>A stylus is a writing utensil or tool for scribing or marking into softer materials. Different styluses were used to write in cuneiform by pressing into wet clay, and to scribe or carve into a wax tablet. Very hard styluses are also used to engrave metal, and the slate and stylus system is used to punch out dots to write in Braille.

Styluses are held in the hand and thus are usually a narrow elongated shape, similar to a modern ballpoint pen. Many styluses are heavily curved to be held more easily. 

The word &quot;stylus&quot; is also used to describe computer styluses used to assist in navigating or providing more precision when using touchscreens.

==Etymology==

&quot;Stylus&quot; comes from the Latin —the spelling &quot;stylus&quot; arose from an erroneous connection with Greek (), &#x27;pillar&#x27;.

The Latin word had several meanings, including &quot;a long, sharply pointed piece of metal; the stem of a plant; a pointed instrument for incising letters; the stylus (as used in literary composition), &#x27;pen. The last meaning is the origin of &quot;style&quot; in the literary sense. The Latin word is probably derived from the Indo-European root &#x27;to prick&#x27;, also found in the words &#x27;a goad, stimulus&#x27; and &#x27;to incite, instigate&#x27;.

== Cuneiform ==

Styluses were first used by the ancient Mesopotamians in order to write in cuneiform. They were mostly made of reeds and had a slightly curved trapezoidal section. Egyptians (Middle Kingdom) and the Minoans of Crete (Linear A and Cretan Hieroglyphic) made styluses in various materials: reeds that grew on the sides of the Tigris and Euphrates rivers and in marshes and down to Egypt where the Egyptians used styluses from sliced reeds with sharp points; bone and metal styluses were also used. Cuneiform was entirely based on the &quot;wedge-shaped&quot; mark that the end of a cut reed made when pushed into a clay tablet; from Latin &#x27;wedge&#x27;. The linear writings of Crete in the first half of the second millennium BC which were made on clay tablets that were left to dry in the sun until they became &quot;leather-hard&quot; before being incised by the stylus. The linear nature of the writing was also dictated by the use of the stylus.

In Western Europe styluses were widely used until the late Middle Ages. For learning purposes, the stylus was gradually replaced by a writing slate. From the mid-14th century improved water-powered paper mills produced large and cheap quantities of paper and the wax tablet and stylus disappeared completely from daily life.

==Use in arts==
Styluses are still used in various arts and crafts, for example in: rubbing off dry transfer letters, tracing designs onto a new surface with carbon paper, and hand embossing. Styluses are also used to engrave into materials like metal or clay.

Styluses are used to make dots as found in folk art and Mexican pottery artifacts. Oaxaca dot art is created using styluses.

==Smartphones and computing==
Modern day devices, such as phones, can often be used with a stylus to accurately navigate through menus, send messages etc. 
Today, the term &quot;stylus&quot; often refers to an input tool usually used with touchscreen-enabled devices, such as Tablet PCs, to accurately navigate interface elements, send messages, etc. This also prevents smearing the screen with oils from one&#x27;s fingers. Styluses may also be used for handwriting, or for drawing using graphics tablets.

Many new phones have a built-in stylus which tucks in behind the back cover. Some styluses may extend and contract into small, pen-like cylinders, which are easy to put away.

Styluses come in both passive and active versions.

A passive or capacitive stylus is a stylus that acts just like a finger when touching a device screen. There is no electronic communication between a passive stylus and a device, and the device treats the stylus the same as a finger. Passive styluses are considered less accurate than active styluses.

An active stylus includes electronic components that communicate with a device&#x27;s touchscreen controller, or digitizer. Active pens are typically used for note taking, on-screen drawing/painting, and electronic document annotation. They help prevent the problem of one&#x27;s fingers or hands accidentally contacting the screen.

As in ancient styluses, the stylus is pointed or rounded at one end and is made to fit in the grip of a hand comfortably. These styluses can be found in many different styles.

Since many modern tablets make use of multi-touch recognition, some stylus and app manufactures have created palm rejection technologies into their products. This works to turn off the multi-touch feature allowing the palm to rest on the tablet while still recognizing the stylus.

Other than the types above, a haptic stylus is a stylus that simulates, through haptic technology, realistic physical sensations which can be felt while writing on paper. The sensation is sometimes enhanced by the combination of auditory and tactile illusions, such as with RealPen.

==Scientific instruments==
A stylus is also an instrument used to scribe a recording into smoked foil or glass. In various scientific instruments this method may be employed instead of a pen for recording as it has the advantage of being able to operate over a wide temperature range, does not clog or dry prematurely, and has nearly negligible friction in comparison to other methods. These characteristics were useful in certain types of early seismographs and in recording barographs that were once used to verify sailplane records. The styluses used in scanning tunneling microscopes have only a single atom at the tip; these are effectively the sharpest styluses possible.

==See also==
* Active pen
* Digital ink
* List of pen types, brands and companies
* Phonograph stylus
* Slate and stylus

== Notes ==
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2647209" start="2" end="8" title="Stylus" label="stylus"/>
<link wikidata="Q121916" start="14" end="29" title="writing utensil" label="writing utensil"/>
<link wikidata="Q401" start="126" end="135" title="cuneiform" label="cuneiform"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428312" start="193" end="203" title="wax tablet" label="wax tablet"/>
<link wikidata="Q139106" start="241" end="248" title="Engraving" label="engrave"/>
<link wikidata="Q7538861" start="264" end="280" title="slate and stylus" label="slate and stylus"/>
<link wikidata="Q79894" start="326" end="333" title="Braille" label="Braille"/>
<link wikidata="Q160137" start="433" end="446" title="ballpoint pen" label="ballpoint pen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227035" start="560" end="577" title="Stylus (computing)" label="computer styluses"/>
<link wikidata="Q165970" start="646" end="657" title="touchscreen" label="touchscreen"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="710" end="715" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2243831" start="1074" end="1079" title="Writing style" label="style"/>
<link wikidata="Q37178" start="1153" end="1166" title="Proto-Indo-European language" label="Indo-European"/>
<link wikidata="Q2481441" start="1335" end="1356" title="ancient Mesopotamians" label="ancient Mesopotamians"/>
<link wikidata="Q401" start="1378" end="1387" title="cuneiform" label="cuneiform"/>
<link wikidata="Q1976487" start="1414" end="1419" title="Phragmites" label="reeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q134178" start="1502" end="1509" title="Minoan civilization" label="Minoans"/>
<link wikidata="Q34374" start="1513" end="1518" title="Crete" label="Crete"/>
<link wikidata="Q35591" start="1626" end="1632" title="Tigris" label="Tigris"/>
<link wikidata="Q34589" start="1637" end="1646" title="Euphrates" label="Euphrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q30198" start="1661" end="1666" title="marsh" label="marsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2755127" start="1840" end="1845" title="Wedge (geometry)" label="wedge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570005" start="1915" end="1926" title="clay tablet" label="clay tablet"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="1933" end="1938" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6510429" start="2122" end="2134" title="leather-hard" label="leather-hard"/>
<link wikidata="Q212976" start="2309" end="2325" title="late Middle Ages" label="late Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371902" start="2389" end="2402" title="Slate (writing)" label="writing slate"/>
<link wikidata="Q918088" start="2453" end="2463" title="paper mill" label="paper mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428312" start="2518" end="2528" title="wax tablet" label="wax tablet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2937830" start="2677" end="2689" title="dry transfer" label="dry transfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748670" start="2739" end="2751" title="carbon paper" label="carbon paper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1624092" start="2762" end="2771" title="Embossing (paper)" label="embossing"/>
<link wikidata="Q139106" start="2799" end="2806" title="engraving" label="engrave"/>
<link wikidata="Q11426" start="2827" end="2832" title="metal" label="metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q42302" start="2836" end="2840" title="clay" label="clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q34110" start="2926" end="2932" title="Oaxaca" label="Oaxaca"/>
<link wikidata="Q165970" start="3208" end="3219" title="touchscreen" label="touchscreen"/>
<link wikidata="Q155972" start="3245" end="3254" title="Tablet computer" label="Tablet PC"/>
<link wikidata="Q189414" start="3458" end="3473" title="graphics tablet" label="graphics tablet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3030571" start="4881" end="4898" title="haptic technology" label="haptic technology"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5075" end="5082" title="RealPen" label="RealPen"/>
<link wikidata="Q160567" start="5531" end="5542" title="seismograph" label="seismograph"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146365" start="5561" end="5570" title="barograph" label="barograph"/>
<link wikidata="Q180173" start="5602" end="5611" title="sailplane" label="sailplane"/>
<link wikidata="Q175646" start="5642" end="5671" title="scanning tunneling microscope" label="scanning tunneling microscope"/>
<link wikidata="Q9121" start="5692" end="5696" title="atom" label="atom"/>
<link wikidata="Q16825194" start="5779" end="5789" title="Active pen" label="Active pen"/>
<link wikidata="Q42356144" start="5792" end="5803" title="Digital ink (disambiguation)" label="Digital ink"/>
<link wikidata="Q6632119" start="5806" end="5845" title="List of pen types, brands and companies" label="List of pen types, brands and companies"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5848" end="5865" title="Phonograph#Stylus" label="Phonograph stylus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7538861" start="5868" end="5884" title="Slate and stylus" label="Slate and stylus"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="236392" wikidata="Q671246" url="?curid=236392" title="John Maclean (Scottish socialist)">
<text>John Maclean (24 August 1879 – 30 November 1923) was a Scottish schoolteacher and revolutionary socialist of the Red Clydeside era. He was notable for his outspoken opposition to World War I, which caused his arrest under the Defence of the Realm Act and loss of his teaching post, after which he became a full-time Marxist lecturer and organiser. In April 1918 he was arrested for sedition, and his 75-minute speech from the dock became a celebrated text for Scottish left-wingers. He was sentenced to five years&#x27; penal servitude, but was released after the November armistice.

Maclean believed that Scottish workers were especially fitted to lead the revolution, and talked of &quot;Celtic communism&quot;, inspired by clan spirit. But his launch of a Scottish Workers Republican Party and a Scottish Communist Party were largely unsuccessful. Although he had been appointed Bolshevik representative in Scotland, he was not in harmony with the Communist Party of Great Britain, even though it had absorbed the British Socialist Party, to which he had belonged. In captivity, Maclean had been on hunger strike, and prolonged force-feeding had permanently affected his health. He collapsed during a speech and died of pneumonia, aged forty-four.

==Biography==
===Early life===
Maclean was born in Pollokshaws, then on the outskirts of Glasgow, Scotland. His father Daniel (; 1843–1888) was a potter who hailed from Bo&#x27;ness and his mother Ann (1846–1914) came from Corpach. His parents spoke Gaelic and he was raised in a Calvinist household, Maclean trained as a schoolteacher under the auspices of the Free Church and then attended part-time classes at the University of Glasgow, graduating with a Master of Arts degree in 1904. (Maclean often used the letters M.A. after his name when being published).

===Political development===
Maclean first came to politics through the Pollokshaws Progressive Union and Robert Blatchford&#x27;s &quot;Merrie England&quot;. He became convinced that the living standards of the working-classes could only be improved by social revolution and it was as a Marxist that he joined the Social Democratic Federation (SDF), and remained in the organisation as it formed the British Socialist Party.

In 1906, Maclean gave a series of speeches in Pollokshaws which led to the formation of an SDF branch there, and through these, he met James D. MacDougall, who became his strongest supporter for the remainder of his life.

Maclean was also an active member of the Co-operative movement and it was his prominent role that led the Renfrewshire Co-operative Societies to pressurise local school boards to provide facilities for adult classes in economics.

As a revolutionary enemy of what he saw as an imperialist war, Maclean was fiercely opposed to the stance adopted by the leadership of the BSP around H. M. Hyndman. However he was not to be a part of the new leadership which replaced Hyndman in 1916.

===Marxist educator===
By the time of World War I, his socialism was of a revolutionary nature, although he worked with others on the Clyde Workers&#x27; Committee who were more reformist in outlook, such as his friend James Maxton. He heavily opposed the war, as he felt it was a war of imperialism which divided workers from one another, as he explained in his letter to &quot;Forward&quot; ().

His politics made him well known to the authorities of the day, and on 27 October 1915 he was arrested under the Defence of the Realm Act and Govan School Board sacked him from his teaching post at Lorne Street Primary School. As a consequence, he became a full-time Marxist lecturer and organiser, educating workers in Marxist theory. He would later found the Scottish Labour College.

During World War I, he was active in anti-war circles and was imprisoned in 1916 for breaching the Defense of the Realm Act, but was released in 1917 after demonstrations following the February Revolution in Russia.

===Relationship with Russia===
In January 1918 Maclean was elected to the chair of the Third All-Russian Congress of Soviets and a month later appointed Bolshevik consul in Scotland. He established a Consulate at 12 South Portland Street in Glasgow but was refused recognition by the British Government.

===Trial and imprisonment for sedition (1918)===
On 15 April 1918, Maclean was arrested for sedition. He was refused bail and his trial fixed for 9 May in Edinburgh. He conducted his own defence in a defiant manner, refusing to plead and when asked if he objected to any of the jurors replying, &quot;I object to the whole lot of them.&quot; The prosecution case was based on the testimony of witnesses who had attended his meetings, who quoted extracts from his speeches using notes they had written up from memory after the meeting. Maclean objected to his words being taken out of context, saying. &quot;The main parts of my speech, in which my themes are developed are omitted. I want to expose the trickery of the British government and their police and their lawyers.&quot;

This speech from the dock has passed into folklore for the Scottish left. Lasting for some 75 minutes, Maclean&#x27;s speech began :
It has been said that they cannot fathom my motive. For the full period of my active life I have been a teacher of economics to the working classes, and my contention has always been that capitalism is rotten to its foundations, and must give place to a new society. I had a lecture, the principal heading of which was &quot;Thou shalt not steal; thou shalt not kill&quot;, and I pointed out that as a consequence of the robbery that goes on in all civilised countries today, our respective countries have had to keep armies, and that inevitably our armies must clash together. On that and on other grounds, I consider capitalism the most infamous, bloody and evil system that mankind has ever witnessed. My language is regarded as extravagant language, but the events of the past four years have proved my contention.

He went on to say:

I wish no harm to any human being, but I, as one man, am going to exercise my freedom of speech. No human being on the face of the earth, no government is going to take from me my right to speak, my right to protest against wrong, my right to do everything that is for the benefit of mankind. I am not here, then, as the accused; I am here as the accuser of capitalism dripping with blood from head to foot.

His speech concluded:

I have taken up unconstitutional action at this time because of the abnormal circumstances and because precedent has been given by the British government. I am a socialist, and have been fighting and will fight for an absolute reconstruction of society for the benefit of all. I am proud of my conduct. I have squared my conduct with my intellect, and if everyone had done so this war would not have taken place. I act square and clean for my principles. ... No matter what your accusations against me may be, no matter what reservations you keep at the back of your head, my appeal is to the working class. I appeal exclusively to them because they and they only can bring about the time when the whole world will be in one brotherhood, on a sound economic foundation. That, and that alone, can be the means of bringing about a re-organisation of society. That can only be obtained when the people of the world get the world, and retain the world.

He was sentenced to five years&#x27; penal servitude, and imprisoned in Peterhead prison near Aberdeen. However, a militant campaign was launched for his release:

The call &#x27;Release John Maclean was never silent. Every week the socialist papers kept up the barrage and reminded their readers that in Germany Karl Liebknecht was already free, while in &#x27;democratic&#x27; Britain John Maclean was lying in a prison cell being forcibly fed twice a day by an India rubber tube forced down his gullet or up his nose. &#x27;Is the Scottish Office&#x27; asked Forward. &#x27;to be stained with a crime in some respects even more horrible and revolting, more callous and cruel, than that which the Governors of Ireland perpetrated on the shattered body of James Connolly?&#x27; 

Following the armistice on 11 November, he was released on 3 December 1918, returning to Glasgow to a tumultuous welcome.

Eleven days later, Maclean was the official Labour Party candidate at the general election for the constituency of Glasgow Gorbals, where he failed to unseat the sitting MP, George Barnes, a former Labour MP who had defected to support Lloyd George&#x27;s coalition government.

===Ireland===

Maclean was a supporter of Home Rule for Ireland but originally opposed an independent Ireland because he was afraid that an independent Catholic Ireland would be disastrous. He later became committed to Irish independence as part of a worldwide anti-imperialist struggle. He wrote a pamphlet called &#x27;The Irish Tragedy: Scotland&#x27;s Disgrace&#x27; which sold 20,000 copies. Following the Easter Rising he had contacts with members of the Scottish Divisional Board of the Irish Republican Brotherhood In the summer of 1907 he went on a speaking tour of Ireland, here he made friends with Jim Larkin. When the Easter Rising happened he distanced himself from it because he viewed it to be a bourgeois-democratic revolution and in contradiction with his pacifist principles.

In July 1919 he visited Dublin for the first time and gave speeches. By the end of his life his attitude to Ireland had been radicalised and he gave up his opposition to physical force Irish republicanism. He described the Irish War of Independence as &quot;The Irish fight for freedom&quot;, defended killings of &quot;scabs and traitors to their race&quot;, and condoned the assassination of a magistrate, Alan Bell, saying &quot;What self-respecting man or woman can blame the Irish for ridding the earth of such a foul skunk?&quot;. He saw the war in Ireland as strengthening the Bolshevik revolution in Russia, arguing that &quot;Irish Sinn Féiners, who make no profession of socialism or communism, ... are doing more to help Russia and the revolution than all we professed Marxian Bolsheviks in Britain&quot;. He saw Irish independence as being a positive thing for Scotland; in a speech Maclean gave at Motherwell in 1920, he claimed that the British government&#x27;s foreign policy towards Ireland was intended to &quot;starve [Irish] youths out of their native land&quot; and Ireland&#x27;s independence would decrease Irish emigration from to Scotland, thus allowing for more opportunities for Scottish workers. When the Government of the Irish Free State started executing its opponents during the Irish Civil War Maclean wrote a letter of protest to W. T. Cosgrave expressing his &quot;dismay&quot;.

===Formation of the Communist Party===
As the BSP was the main constituent organisation which merged into the newly formed Communist Party of Great Britain, Maclean was alienated from the new party despite his support for the Communist International. While declaring that he wanted to make Glasgow a Petrograd, he was adamant that Moscow should not dictate to Glasgow and declare himself in favour of a Scottish Workers&#x27; Republic, arguing that Lenin&#x27;s acceptance of a &#x27;British&#x27; Communist Party was a mistake based on inadequate information. He believed that workers in Scotland could develop in a revolutionary direction more swiftly than their comrades in England and Wales, and in 1920 he attempted to found a Scottish Communist Party. This group renamed itself the Communist Labour Party and dropped Maclean&#x27;s distinctive positions, so he left in disgust. He attempted to found a new Scottish Communist Party, without success. It seems that he may have become a member of the Socialist Labour Party at this time.

In November 1922, he wrote in &quot;The Vanguard&quot; that &quot;the British empire is the greatest menace to the human race... The best interest of humanity can therefore be served by the break-up of the British empire. The Irish, the Indians and others are playing their part. Why ought not the Scottish? The corruption of the English communists and the position of the English governing class, then, amply justify the establishment of a Scottish Communist Republic. In 1923, Maclean founded the Scottish Workers Republican Party, which combined communist ideologies with Scottish nationalism. Maclean&#x27;s call for a Communist Republic of Scotland was based on the belief that traditional Scottish Gaelic society was structured along the lines of &quot;community&quot;. He argued that &quot;the communism of the clans must be re-established on a modern basis&quot; and raised the slogan &quot;back to community and forward to communism&quot;.
===Death, legacy, reputation and in popular culture===
====Death====
His stay in Peterhead Prison in 1918 caused a considerable deterioration in his health, being force fed through hunger strikes. Milton quotes a letter that Agnes, his wife, wrote to Edwin C. Fairchild (a leading member of the British Socialist Party):

Well, John has been on hunger strike since July. He resisted the forcible feeding for a good while, but submitted to the inevitable. Now he is being fed by a stomach tube twice daily. He has aged very much and has the look of a man who is going through torture... Seemingly anything is law in regard to John. I hope you will make the atrocity public. We must get him out of their clutches. It is nothing but slow murder...

Maclean died at home in Pollokshaws, Glasgow on 30 November 1923, aged 44. His reputation was such that many thousands of people lined the streets of Glasgow to see his funeral procession pass. In the intervening time Maclean&#x27;s funeral has become known as the largest Glasgow ever saw. He left a legacy that has subsequently been claimed by both the Scottish Nationalist and Labour movements, making him rare in this respect amongst Scotland&#x27;s historical figures. The modern Scottish Socialist Party lay claim to Maclean&#x27;s political legacy, particularly the Scottish Republican Socialist Movement previously a faction (or &quot;platform&quot;) within the SSP.

According to a BBC television documentary aired in January 2015, Maclean collapsed while giving an outdoor speech and died of pneumonia. Several days before he had given his only overcoat to a destitute man from Barbados, Neill Johnstone.

====Reputation====

Vladimir Lenin described him as one of the &quot;best-known names of the isolated heroes who have taken upon themselves the arduous role of forerunners of the world revolution.&quot; He has been described by his daughter Nan Milton and by the publication CounterFire as the &quot;Scottish Lenin&quot;. The magazine &quot;Socialist Appeal&quot; has labeled him a &quot;Marxist who played an outstanding role in promoting the ideas and cause of Marxism...[and] worked like a Trojan to promote the principles of Marxism amongst the working class of Scotland&quot; The National describes him as &quot;a man who most knowledgeable Scots would consider a legend, indeed an almost mythical Celtic giant of socialism&quot;. David Sherry, author of the book &#x27;John Maclean: Red Clydesider&#x27; considers him an &quot;outstanding revolutionary leader&quot;.

====Popular culture====

In his poem &quot;John Maclean (1879–1923)&quot;, written in 1934 but only published later in the 1956 edition of &quot;Stony Limits and Other Poems&quot;, Hugh MacDiarmid railed that &quot;of all Maclean&#x27;s foes not one was his peer&quot; and described Maclean as &quot;both beautiful and red&quot; in his 1943 poem &quot;Krassivy, Krassivy&quot; This was the inspiration for the title of &quot;Krassivy&quot;, a 1979 play by Glasgow writer Freddie Anderson. Maclean was eulogised as &quot;the eagle o&#x27; the age&quot; and placed in the Scottish pantheon alongside Thomas Muir and William Wallace by Sydney Goodsir Smith in his &quot;Ballant O John Maclean&quot;. In 1948, MacDiarmid and Smith (among others) gave readings at a &quot;huge mass meeting&quot; at St. Andrew&#x27;s Hall in Glasgow, organised by the Scottish-USSR Society to mark the 25th Anniversary of his death. The Scottish Esperanto poet and novelist John Islay Francis (1924–2012) in his novel &quot;La Granda Kaldrono&quot; (&quot;The Big Cauldron&quot;) published in 1978, describes different attitudes toward the first and the second world wars. Among the characters, John Maclean is the only actual one, and has an important role.

Maclean is the subject of a number of songs. Hamish Henderson makes reference to Maclean in the final verse of his &quot;Freedom Come-All-Ye&quot; and his &quot;John Maclean March&quot; was specifically written for the 25th anniversary memorial meeting. John Maclean was known as &quot;The Fighting Dominie&quot; and this forms the chorus of Matt McGinn&#x27;s song &quot;The Ballad of John Maclean&quot;. He is referenced in several of the tracks on the album &quot;Red Clydeside&quot; by folk musicians Alistair Hulett and Dave Swarbrick, and also in the song &quot;Rent Strike&quot; by Thee Faction.

Maclean&#x27;s life is celebrated in the play &quot;The Wrong Side of the Law&quot; by Ayrshire writer Norman Deeley, dealing with the political and personal struggles that Maclean faced in his fight to establish socialism in Scotland.

The Soviet Union (USSR) honoured Maclean with an avenue in central Leningrad – Maklin Prospekt, which ran north from the Fontanka towards the Moika. It has now, like Leningrad/St Petersburg itself, reverted to its original name, Angliisky Prospekt (English Avenue).

To mark the 50th anniversary of MacLean&#x27;s death in 1973 a 6 ft high cairn of Scottish granite was unveiled at Pollokshaws, not far from Maclean&#x27;s birthplace. Nan and her sister Jean attended the unveiling ceremony. The cairn was inscribed: &quot;In memory of John Maclean, born in Pollokshaws on 24th August 1879, died 30th November 1923. Famous pioneer of working-class education. He forged the Scottish link in the golden chain of world socialism&quot;. At the ceremony, Hugh MacDiarmid described Maclean as &quot;Next to Burns, the greatest-ever Scot&quot;.

In 1979, on the centenary of his birth, the USSR issued a 4 kopeck commemorative postage stamp depicting Maclean in a portrait by Peter Emilevich Bendel.

====Nan Milton====
Maclean&#x27;s daughter was Nan Milton, who helped found the John MacLean Society and served as its secretary. She copied all of her father&#x27;s writings from his own and other publications in the National Library and typed them up, these were read by Hugh MacDiarmid who then championed his ideas. Her first husband wrote a biography of Maclean.

==See also==
*James Connolly
*Scottish Workers&#x27; Republican Party
*Red Clydeside
*Guy Aldred

==References==
==Bibliography==

* Anderson, Tom, &quot;John Maclean MA&quot;, Proletarian Press, Glasgow, 1930
* Aldred, Guy A., &quot;John Maclean: Martyr of the Class Struggle&quot;, Bakunin Press, Glasgow, 1932.
*Bell, Henry, &quot;John Maclean, Hero of Red Clydeside&quot;, Pluto Press, 2018.
* Bell, Tom, &quot;John Maclean, Fighter for Freedom&quot;, Communist Party Scottish Committee, 1944.
* Broom, John, &quot;John Maclean&quot;, Loanhead, 1973
* Clunie, James, &quot;The Voice of Labour, Autobiography of a House Painter&quot;, Dunfermline, 1958
* Knox, William, &quot;Scottish Labour Leaders 1918–1939: A Biographical Dictionary&quot; (Ed. Dr. William Knox), Edinburgh, 1984, p. 179. 
* Maclean, John, &quot;In the Rapids of Revolution: Essays, Articles, and Letters, 1902–23&quot; Ed. Milton, Nan, Allison and Busby, London, 1978. 
* McGuigan, Kenny. &quot;John Maclean: A Working Class Hero&quot;. Wellred Books, London, 2005.
* McShane, Harry and Smith, Joan, &quot;No Mean Fighter&quot;, London, 1978. 
* McShane, Harry, &quot;Remembering John Maclean: Portrait of a Scottish Revolutionary&quot;, &quot;New Edinburgh Review 19&quot;, 1972, p4-10
* Milton, Nan, &quot;John Maclean&quot;, Pluto Press Ltd., 1973. .
* Raszkowski, Josef, &quot;Battlepost of the Poor: The Legend of John Maclean&quot;, in &quot;Cencrastus&quot; No. 1, Autumn 1979, pp. 9 – 12 .
* Ripley, Brian J.; John McHugh. &quot;John Maclean&quot;. Lives of the Left Series. Manchester Univ Press. 1 December 1989. 
* Ross, Raymond J., &quot;Hugh MacDiarmid and John MacLean&quot;, in Hearn, Sheila G. (ed.), &quot;Cencrastus&quot; No. 11, New Year 1983, pp. 33–36, 
* Sherry, Dave. &quot;John Maclean&quot;. Bookmarks, London, 1998
* Thatcher, Ian D., &quot;John Maclean: Soviet Versions&quot;, in &quot;History&quot;, Vol. 77, Issue 251, pp. 421–429, October 1992
* Young, James D. &quot;John Maclean: Clydeside Socialist&quot;, Clydeside Press, Glasgow, 1992. 
==External links==
*John Maclean Internet Archive, Marxists Internet Archive. Retrieved 30 Aug. 2009.
* 
* image scan and 
*John Maclean: Socialist (1958) by Harry McShane 
*&#x27;Scotsmen, stand by Ireland&#x27;: John Maclean and the Irish Revolution at History Ireland
*Nan Milton, 1913–1996; The Herald; 25 April 1996</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q671246" start="0" end="12" title="John Maclean (Scottish socialist)" label="John Maclean"/>
<link wikidata="Q4239467" start="113" end="126" title="Red Clydeside" label="Red Clydeside"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="179" end="190" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q2896674" start="226" end="250" title="Defence of the Realm Act" label="Defence of the Realm Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q544394" start="382" end="390" title="sedition" label="sedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q253224" start="564" end="582" title="Armistice of 11 November 1918" label="November armistice"/>
<link wikidata="Q125727598" start="691" end="707" title="Celtic Communism" label="Celtic communism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7438044" start="760" end="793" title="Scottish Workers Republican Party" label="Scottish Workers Republican Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q4991390" start="800" end="824" title="Scottish Communist Party" label="Scottish Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q83372" start="883" end="892" title="Bolshevik" label="Bolshevik"/>
<link wikidata="Q592068" start="952" end="984" title="Communist Party of Great Britain" label="Communist Party of Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q920153" start="1018" end="1041" title="British Socialist Party" label="British Socialist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7225723" start="1304" end="1315" title="Pollokshaws" label="Pollokshaws"/>
<link wikidata="Q4093" start="1342" end="1349" title="Glasgow" label="Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="1351" end="1359" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q896424" start="1422" end="1434" title="Bo&amp;#x27;ness" label="Bo&amp;#x27;ness"/>
<link wikidata="Q2409970" start="1476" end="1483" title="Corpach" label="Corpach"/>
<link wikidata="Q9314" start="1503" end="1509" title="Scottish Gaelic" label="Gaelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q101849" start="1533" end="1542" title="Calvinist" label="Calvinist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3046878" start="1615" end="1626" title="Free Church of Scotland (1843-1900)" label="Free Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q192775" start="1670" end="1691" title="University of Glasgow" label="University of Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q6785149" start="1711" end="1725" title="Master of Arts (Scotland)" label="Master of Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q4088446" start="1923" end="1940" title="Robert Blatchford" label="Robert Blatchford"/>
<link wikidata="Q6820104" start="1954" end="1968" title="Merrie England (book)" label="Merrie England"/>
<link wikidata="Q191159" start="2029" end="2044" title="working-classes" label="working-classes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7264" start="2105" end="2112" title="Marxist" label="Marxist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1304246" start="2132" end="2160" title="Social Democratic Federation" label="Social Democratic Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q920153" start="2218" end="2241" title="British Socialist Party" label="British Socialist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q20983393" start="2379" end="2398" title="James D. MacDougall" label="James D. MacDougall"/>
<link wikidata="Q23444992" start="2508" end="2529" title="Co-operative movement" label="Co-operative movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q548271" start="2848" end="2861" title="H. M. Hyndman" label="H. M. Hyndman"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="2988" end="2999" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="3005" end="3014" title="socialism" label="socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5137056" start="3084" end="3113" title="Clyde Workers&amp;#x27; Committee" label="Clyde Workers&amp;#x27; Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q6139120" start="3169" end="3181" title="James Maxton" label="James Maxton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7260" start="3238" end="3249" title="imperialism" label="imperialism"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3313" end="3342" title=":Image:Redcly182.jpg" label="letter to &amp;quot;Forward&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2896674" start="3461" end="3485" title="Defence of the Realm Act" label="Defence of the Realm Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q6681514" start="3546" end="3573" title="Lorne Street Primary School" label="Lorne Street Primary School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569495" start="3623" end="3631" title="lecturer" label="lecturer"/>
<link wikidata="Q16885455" start="3709" end="3732" title="Scottish Labour College" label="Scottish Labour College"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="3742" end="3753" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q2896674" start="3834" end="3858" title="Defense of the Realm Act" label="Defense of the Realm Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q101534" start="3920" end="3939" title="February Revolution" label="February Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q207978" start="4115" end="4121" title="consul (representative)" label="consul"/>
<link wikidata="Q23436" start="4412" end="4421" title="Edinburgh" label="Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q164597" start="5106" end="5110" title="Left-wing politics" label="left"/>
<link wikidata="Q8134" start="5286" end="5295" title="economics" label="economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q6206" start="5359" end="5369" title="capitalism" label="capitalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q22692" start="6089" end="6106" title="freedom of speech" label="freedom of speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="6605" end="6614" title="socialist" label="socialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q191159" start="7036" end="7049" title="working class" label="working class"/>
<link wikidata="Q5635245" start="7465" end="7481" title="Peterhead prison" label="Peterhead prison"/>
<link wikidata="Q36405" start="7487" end="7495" title="Aberdeen" label="Aberdeen"/>
<link wikidata="Q75886" start="7706" end="7721" title="Karl Liebknecht" label="Karl Liebknecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q213374" start="8150" end="8164" title="James Connolly" label="James Connolly"/>
<link wikidata="Q4093" start="8263" end="8270" title="Glasgow" label="Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="8341" end="8353" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3042701" start="8371" end="8387" title="1918 United Kingdom general election" label="general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q5566822" start="8412" end="8427" title="Glasgow Gorbals" label="Glasgow Gorbals"/>
<link wikidata="Q746232" start="8471" end="8484" title="George Barnes (British politician)" label="George Barnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q193689" start="8987" end="9000" title="Easter Rising" label="Easter Rising"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062580" start="9070" end="9098" title="Irish Republican Brotherhood" label="Irish Republican Brotherhood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1583571" start="9186" end="9196" title="Jim Larkin" label="Jim Larkin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9288" end="9319" title="Trotskyism#Capitalist or bourgeois-democratic revolution" label="bourgeois-democratic revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q58848" start="9350" end="9358" title="pacifist" label="pacifist"/>
<link wikidata="Q517372" start="9542" end="9576" title="physical force Irish republicanism" label="physical force Irish republicanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q208297" start="9595" end="9620" title="Irish War of Independence" label="Irish War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340502" start="9692" end="9697" title="Scab labour" label="scabs"/>
<link wikidata="Q4594605" start="9768" end="9778" title="magistrate" label="magistrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q737547" start="10283" end="10293" title="Motherwell" label="Motherwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419833" start="10605" end="10639" title="Government of the Irish Free State" label="Government of the Irish Free State"/>
<link wikidata="Q748042" start="10683" end="10698" title="Irish Civil War" label="Irish Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q465770" start="10736" end="10750" title="W. T. Cosgrave" label="W. T. Cosgrave"/>
<link wikidata="Q592068" start="10910" end="10942" title="Communist Party of Great Britain" label="Communist Party of Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q163931" start="11013" end="11036" title="Communist International" label="Communist International"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="11087" end="11096" title="Petrograd" label="Petrograd"/>
<link wikidata="Q649" start="11118" end="11124" title="Moscow" label="Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394" start="11236" end="11241" title="Lenin" label="Lenin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4991390" start="11519" end="11543" title="Scottish Communist Party" label="Scottish Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q4991390" start="11575" end="11597" title="Communist Labour Party (UK)" label="Communist Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395162" start="11791" end="11813" title="Socialist Labour Party (1903-1980)" label="Socialist Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="11899" end="11913" title="British Empire" label="British empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7438044" start="12328" end="12361" title="Scottish Workers Republican Party" label="Scottish Workers Republican Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q499247" start="12643" end="12652" title="Scottish clan" label="the clans"/>
<link wikidata="Q26251087" start="13029" end="13047" title="Edwin C. Fairchild" label="Edwin C. Fairchild"/>
<link wikidata="Q920153" start="13073" end="13096" title="British Socialist Party" label="British Socialist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q891900" start="14009" end="14033" title="Scottish Socialist Party" label="Scottish Socialist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7437939" start="14097" end="14135" title="Scottish Republican Socialist Movement" label="Scottish Republican Socialist Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394" start="14460" end="14474" title="Vladimir Lenin" label="Vladimir Lenin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3365196" start="14781" end="14797" title="Socialist Appeal (UK, 1992)" label="Socialist Appeal"/>
<link wikidata="Q18573802" start="15021" end="15033" title="The National (Scotland)" label="The National"/>
<link wikidata="Q35966" start="15143" end="15149" title="Celts" label="Celtic"/>
<link wikidata="Q981981" start="15495" end="15510" title="Hugh MacDiarmid" label="Hugh MacDiarmid"/>
<link wikidata="Q5496683" start="15785" end="15801" title="Freddie Anderson (writer)" label="Freddie Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3376141" start="15893" end="15901" title="Pantheon (gods)" label="pantheon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7792602" start="15912" end="15923" title="Thomas Muir (radical)" label="Thomas Muir"/>
<link wikidata="Q82457" start="15928" end="15943" title="William Wallace" label="William Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q7659945" start="15947" end="15967" title="Sydney Goodsir Smith" label="Sydney Goodsir Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q143" start="16238" end="16247" title="Esperanto" label="Esperanto"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="16432" end="16437" title="World War I" label="first"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="16446" end="16452" title="World War II" label="second"/>
<link wikidata="Q103495" start="16453" end="16462" title="world war" label="world war"/>
<link wikidata="Q2349386" start="16597" end="16613" title="Hamish Henderson" label="Hamish Henderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5500511" start="16673" end="16692" title="Freedom Come-All-Ye" label="Freedom Come-All-Ye"/>
<link wikidata="Q91923371" start="16713" end="16731" title="John Maclean March" label="John Maclean March"/>
<link wikidata="Q5290955" start="16851" end="16858" title="Dominie" label="Dominie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1909241" start="16894" end="16905" title="Matt McGinn (Scottish songwriter)" label="Matt McGinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2602811" start="17057" end="17072" title="Alistair Hulett" label="Alistair Hulett"/>
<link wikidata="Q763897" start="17077" end="17091" title="Dave Swarbrick" label="Dave Swarbrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q16191346" start="17141" end="17153" title="Thee Faction" label="Thee Faction"/>
<link wikidata="Q793283" start="17243" end="17251" title="Ayrshire" label="Ayrshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="17397" end="17409" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="17411" end="17415" title="USSR" label="USSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="17460" end="17469" title="Leningrad" label="Leningrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q590237" start="17514" end="17522" title="Fontanka" label="Fontanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q590269" start="17535" end="17540" title="Moika" label="Moika"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="17569" end="17582" title="St Petersburg" label="St Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415602" start="18292" end="18298" title="kopeck" label="kopeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1670994" start="18605" end="18621" title="National Library of Scotland" label="National Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q981981" start="18660" end="18675" title="Hugh MacDiarmid" label="Hugh MacDiarmid"/>
<link wikidata="Q213374" start="18770" end="18784" title="James Connolly" label="James Connolly"/>
<link wikidata="Q7438044" start="18786" end="18825" title="Scottish Workers&amp;#x27; Republican Party" label="Scottish Workers&amp;#x27; Republican Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q4239467" start="18827" end="18840" title="Red Clydeside" label="Red Clydeside"/>
<link wikidata="Q5622050" start="18842" end="18852" title="Guy Aldred" label="Guy Aldred"/>
<link wikidata="Q5622050" start="18968" end="18982" title="Guy Aldred" label="Aldred, Guy A."/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19071" end="19082" title="Henry Bell (writer)" label="Bell, Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1994268" start="19154" end="19163" title="Tom Bell (politician)" label="Bell, Tom"/>
<link wikidata="Q981981" start="20380" end="20395" title="Hugh MacDiarmid" label="Hugh MacDiarmid"/>
<link wikidata="Q5058809" start="20453" end="20463" title="Cencrastus" label="Cencrastus"/>
<link wikidata="" start="20909" end="20919" title=":Image:Redcly182.jpg" label="image scan"/>
<link wikidata="Q11974373" start="20960" end="20973" title="Harry McShane" label="Harry McShane"/>
<link wikidata="Q3138559" start="21057" end="21072" title="History Ireland" label="History Ireland"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="236396" wikidata="Q327737" url="?curid=236396" title="Nong Khai province">
<text>Nong Khai province (, ; , ) was formerly the northernmost of the northeastern (Isan) provinces (&quot;changwat&quot;) of Thailand until its eight eastern districts were split off to form Thailand&#x27;s newest province, Bueng Kan province, in 2011. Nong Khai province lies in upper northeastern Thailand. Nearby provinces are (clockwise, from the east): Bueng Kan, Sakon Nakhon, Udon Thani, and Loei. To the north it borders Vientiane province, Vientiane Prefecture, and Bolikhamsai province of Laos.

==Geography==
The province is in the valley of the Mae Nam Kong (Mekong River), which also forms the border with Laos. There are highlands to the south. The total forest area is or 7.1 percent of provincial area. The Laotian capital, Vientiane, is only from the provincial capital of Nong Khai. The First Thai–Lao Friendship Bridge, which connects the two countries, was built jointly by the governments of Thailand, Laos, and Australia, and was opened in 1994.

Nong Khai is the smallest province in the northeastern after Bueng Kan and other seven districts became Bueng Kan province in 2011.

==History==

Over the centuries, control of the province swung between the Thai Kingdom Ayutthaya, and the Laotian kingdom Lan Xang, as their respective powers ebbed and flowed in the region.

The Prap Ho Monument in front of the historic city hall (now a museum and cultural center) memorializes the war dead of the Haw wars.

In more recent years, Nong Khai has become a popular destination during the Buddhist Lent festival when mysterious balls of light, or Naga fireballs, rise from the Mekong River. The balls resemble an orange sun. They rise out of the river approximately 6–9 meters (20 to 30 feet) and disappear after three to five seconds. Although the fireballs can be seen at other times, most Thais travel to see them during the full moon in October when the incidence of them is considered to be much higher.

Nong Khai&#x27;s main sight is Sala Keoku (alternatively spelled as Sala Kaew Ku, also known as Wat Khaek), a park of colossal sculptures, some over 20 m tall. The park is the handiwork of the mystic Luang Pu Bunleua Sulilat, who bought the land in 1978 when he was exiled from his native Laos, where he had built a similar park in Vientiane in the 1950s. Synthesizing Buddhist and Hinduist ideologies, Buddhas, many-armed goddesses, a seven-headed Naga snake, and various human-animal hybrids dominate the site.

Notable figures from twentieth century Buddhist history have lived in Nong Khai—the world renowned Buddhist scholar and leading meditation teacher Ajahn Sumedho ordained in Wat Sisaket in Nong Khai.

==Symbols==
The provincial seal shows a pond with a bamboo clump close to it. The bamboo symbolizes stability, glory, and continuity for the peaceful and fertile land.

The provincial tree is the tamalan or Burma pallisander (&quot;Dalbergia oliveri)&quot;.

The provincial aquatic life is the seven-striped barb or Jullien&#x27;s golden carp (&quot;Probarbus jullieni&quot;).

==Administrative divisions==
===Provincial government===
As of 23 March 2011, the province is divided into nine districts (&quot;amphoes&quot;). The districts are further divided into 62 subdistricts (&quot;tambons&quot;) and 705 villages (&quot;mubans&quot;). The eight districts of Bueng Kan were districts of Nong Khai before they were split off to form Bueng Kan province.

===Local government===
As of 26 November 2019 there are: one Nong Khai Provincial Administration Organisation (&quot;&quot;) and 19 municipal (&quot;thesaban&quot;) areas in the province. Nong Khai and Tha Bo have town (&quot;thesaban mueang&quot;) status. Further 17 subdistrict municipalities (&quot;thesaban tambon&quot;). The non-municipal areas are administered by 48 Subdistrict Administrative Organisations - SAO (&quot;ongkan borihan suan tambon&quot;).

==Transport==
===Air===
The nearest airport is Udon Thani International Airport, 56 km from Nong Khai.

===Rail===

The main railway station in Nong Khai is Nong Khai railway station. This station can be considered the destination of the Upper Northeastern Railway Line (only in Thailand&#x27;s area).

===Road===
The Thai–Lao Friendship Bridge was largely funded by a gift to the Lao government from the Australian government. It is the road and railway gateway to Laos&#x27;s capital, Vientiane ( upriver), on the north bank opposite the Thai town of Si Chiang Mai District. Construction of a rail spur to Thanaleng outside of Vientiane was begun early-2007 and officially opened 5 March 2009.

Nong Khai is 626 km north of Bangkok and 60 km north of Udon Thani.

==Human achievement index 2022==

Since 2003, United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) in Thailand has tracked progress on human development at sub-national level using the Human achievement index (HAI), a composite index covering all the eight key areas of human development. National Economic and Social Development Board (NESDB) has taken over this task since 2017.


==References==
==External links==
*Provincial website 
*Nong Khai Travel Guide</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q327737" start="0" end="18" title="Nong Khai province" label="Nong Khai province"/>
<link wikidata="Q381897" start="65" end="77" title="Isan" label="northeastern"/>
<link wikidata="Q50198" start="85" end="94" title="Provinces of Thailand" label="provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="121" end="129" title="Thailand" label="Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001862" start="220" end="238" title="Bueng Kan province" label="Bueng Kan province"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="276" end="303" title="Isan#Administrative divisions" label="upper northeastern Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q382125" start="365" end="377" title="Sakon Nakhon province" label="Sakon Nakhon"/>
<link wikidata="Q380752" start="379" end="389" title="Udon Thani province" label="Udon Thani"/>
<link wikidata="Q275388" start="395" end="399" title="Loei province" label="Loei"/>
<link wikidata="Q720066" start="425" end="443" title="Vientiane province" label="Vientiane province"/>
<link wikidata="Q9326" start="445" end="465" title="Vientiane (prefecture)" label="Vientiane Prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2403514" start="471" end="491" title="Bolikhamsai province" label="Bolikhamsai province"/>
<link wikidata="Q819" start="495" end="499" title="Laos" label="Laos"/>
<link wikidata="Q41179" start="567" end="573" title="Mekong" label="Mekong"/>
<link wikidata="Q9326" start="736" end="745" title="Vientiane" label="Vientiane"/>
<link wikidata="Q917862" start="801" end="833" title="First Thai–Lao Friendship Bridge" label="First Thai–Lao Friendship Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q841364" start="1186" end="1195" title="Ayutthaya Kingdom" label="Ayutthaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q853477" start="1221" end="1229" title="Lan Xang" label="Lan Xang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164157" start="1415" end="1423" title="Haw wars" label="Haw wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151493" start="1502" end="1515" title="Vassa" label="Buddhist Lent"/>
<link wikidata="Q2138833" start="1560" end="1573" title="Naga fireball" label="Naga fireball"/>
<link wikidata="Q41179" start="1590" end="1596" title="Mekong" label="Mekong"/>
<link wikidata="Q353944" start="1954" end="1964" title="Sala Keoku" label="Sala Keoku"/>
<link wikidata="Q353944" start="1991" end="2003" title="Sala Keoku" label="Sala Kaew Ku"/>
<link wikidata="Q353944" start="2019" end="2028" title="Sala Keoku" label="Wat Khaek"/>
<link wikidata="Q4267701" start="2123" end="2147" title="Luang Pu Bunleua Sulilat" label="Luang Pu Bunleua Sulilat"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="2292" end="2300" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhist"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="2305" end="2313" title="Hinduism" label="Hinduist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2569885" start="2372" end="2376" title="Mucalinda" label="Naga"/>
<link wikidata="Q2005455" start="2584" end="2597" title="Ajahn Sumedho" label="Ajahn Sumedho"/>
<link wikidata="Q1819245" start="2653" end="2668" title="Seals of the provinces of Thailand" label="provincial seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q670887" start="2689" end="2695" title="bamboo" label="bamboo"/>
<link wikidata="Q13019783" start="2810" end="2825" title="list of Thai provincial trees" label="provincial tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930212" start="2869" end="2886" title="Dalbergia oliveri" label="Dalbergia oliveri"/>
<link wikidata="Q135514" start="2987" end="3005" title="Probarbus jullieni" label="Probarbus jullieni"/>
<link wikidata="Q475061" start="3144" end="3150" title="Districts of Thailand" label="amphoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077097" start="3222" end="3228" title="tambon" label="tambon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368879" start="3261" end="3266" title="muban" label="muban"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001862" start="3299" end="3308" title="Bueng Kan province" label="Bueng Kan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155688" start="3619" end="3634" title="thesaban mueang" label="thesaban mueang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155688" start="3695" end="3710" title="thesaban tambon" label="thesaban tambon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299161" start="3903" end="3935" title="Udon Thani International Airport" label="Udon Thani International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q6633413" start="4013" end="4038" title="Nong Khai railway station" label="Nong Khai railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q6585979" start="4100" end="4125" title="Northeastern Line (Thailand)" label="Northeastern Railway Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q917862" start="4174" end="4200" title="Thai–Lao Friendship Bridge" label="Thai–Lao Friendship Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q9326" start="4343" end="4352" title="Vientiane" label="Vientiane"/>
<link wikidata="Q476689" start="4409" end="4431" title="Si Chiang Mai District" label="Si Chiang Mai District"/>
<link wikidata="Q801515" start="4464" end="4473" title="Thanaleng Railway Station" label="Thanaleng"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4798" end="4821" title="Human achievement index" label="Human achievement index"/>
</links>
</doc>
