<doc id="230578" wikidata="Q200464" url="?curid=230578" title="Portuguese Empire">
<text>The Portuguese Empire was a colonial empire that existed between 1415 and 1999. In conjunction with the Spanish Empire, it ushered in the European Age of Discovery. It achieved a global scale, controlling vast portions of the Americas, Africa and various islands in Asia and Oceania. It was one of the most powerful empires of the early modern period, while at its greatest extent in 1820, covering 5.5 million square km ( million square miles), making it among the largest empires in history. Composed of the overseas colonies, factories, and later overseas territories, governed by the Kingdom of Portugal, and later the Republic of Portugal, it was the longest-lived colonial empire in European history, lasting 584 years from the conquest of Ceuta in North Africa in 1415 to the transfer of sovereignty over Macau to China in 1999.

The power and influence of the Kingdom of Portugal would eventually expand across the globe. In the wake of the Reconquista, Portuguese sailors began exploring the coast of Africa and the Atlantic archipelagos in 1418–1419, using recent developments in navigation, cartography, and maritime technology such as the caravel, with the aim of finding a sea route to the source of the lucrative spice trade. In 1488, Bartolomeu Dias rounded the Cape of Good Hope, and in 1498 Vasco da Gama reached India. In 1500, either by an accidental landfall or by the crown&#x27;s secret design, Pedro Álvares Cabral reached what would be Brazil.

Over the following decades, Portuguese sailors continued to explore the coasts and islands of East Asia, establishing forts and factories as they went. By 1571, a string of naval outposts connected Lisbon to Nagasaki along the coasts of Africa, the Middle East, and South Asia. This commercial network and the colonial trade had a substantial positive impact on Portuguese economic growth (1500–1800) when it accounted for about a fifth of Portugal&#x27;s per-capita income.

When King Philip II of Spain (Philip I of Portugal) seized the Portuguese crown in 1580, there began a 60-year union between Spain and Portugal known to subsequent historiography as the Iberian Union, although the realms continued to have separate administrations. As the King of Spain was also King of Portugal, Portuguese colonies became the subject of attacks by three rival European powers hostile to Spain: the Dutch Republic, England, and France. With its smaller population, Portugal found itself unable to effectively defend its overstretched network of trading posts, and the empire began a long and gradual decline. Eventually, Brazil became the most valuable colony of the second era of empire (1663–1825), until, as part of the wave of independence movements that swept the Americas during the early 19th century, it broke away in 1822.

The third era of empire covers the final stage of Portuguese colonialism after the independence of Brazil in the 1820s. By then, the colonial possessions had been reduced to forts and plantations along the African coastline (expanded inland during the Scramble for Africa in the late 19th century), Portuguese Timor, and enclaves in India (Portuguese India) and China (Portuguese Macau). The 1890 British Ultimatum led to the contraction of Portuguese ambitions in Africa.

Under António Salazar (in office 1932–1968), the &quot;Estado Novo&quot; dictatorship made some ill-fated attempts to cling on to its last remaining colonies. Under the ideology of pluricontinentalism, the regime renamed its colonies &quot;overseas provinces&quot; while retaining the system of forced labour, from which only a small indigenous élite was normally exempt. In August 1961, the Dahomey annexed the Fort of São João Baptista de Ajudá, and in December that year India annexed Goa, Daman, and Diu. The Portuguese Colonial War in Africa lasted from 1961 until the final overthrow of the &quot;Estado Novo&quot; regime in 1974. The Carnation Revolution of April 1974 in Lisbon led to the hasty decolonisation of Portuguese Africa and to the 1975 annexation of Portuguese Timor by Indonesia. Decolonisation prompted the exodus of nearly all the Portuguese colonial settlers and of many mixed-race people from the colonies. Portugal returned Macau to China in 1999. The only overseas possessions to remain under Portuguese rule, the Azores and Madeira, both had overwhelmingly Portuguese populations, and Lisbon subsequently changed their constitutional status from &quot;overseas provinces&quot; to &quot;autonomous regions&quot;. 
The Community of Portuguese Speaking Countries (CPLP) is the cultural successor of the Empire, analogous to the Commonwealth of Nations for countries formerly part of the British Empire.

== Origins (1139–1415) ==

The origin of the Kingdom of Portugal lay in the &quot;reconquista&quot;, the gradual reconquest of the Iberian Peninsula from the Moors. After establishing itself as a separate kingdom in 1139, Portugal completed its reconquest of Moorish territory by reaching Algarve in 1249, but its independence continued to be threatened by neighbouring Castile until the signing of the Treaty of Ayllón in 1411.

Free from threats to its existence and unchallenged by the wars fought by other European states, Portuguese attention turned overseas and towards a military expedition to the Muslim lands of North Africa. There were several probable motives for their first attack, on the Marinid Sultanate (in present-day Morocco). It offered the opportunity to continue the Christian crusade against Islam; to the military class, it promised glory on the battlefield and the spoils of war; and finally, it was also a chance to expand Portuguese trade and to address Portugal&#x27;s economic decline.

In 1415 an attack was made on Ceuta, a strategically located North African Muslim enclave along the Mediterranean Sea, and one of the terminal ports of the trans-Saharan gold and slave trades. The conquest was a military success, and marked one of the first steps in Portuguese expansion beyond the Iberian Peninsula, but it proved costly to defend against the Muslim forces that soon besieged it. The Portuguese were unable to use it as a base for further expansion into the hinterland, and the trans-Saharan caravans merely shifted their routes to bypass Ceuta and/or used alternative Muslim ports.

== Portuguese Empire (1415–1663) ==
Although Ceuta proved to be a disappointment for the Portuguese, the decision was taken to hold it while exploring along the Atlantic African coast. A key supporter of this policy was Infante Dom Henry the Navigator, who had been involved in the capture of Ceuta, and who took the lead role in promoting and financing Portuguese maritime exploration until his death in 1460. At the time, Europeans did not know what lay beyond Cape Bojador on the African coast. Henry wished to know how far the Muslim territories in Africa extended, and whether it was possible to reach Asia by sea, both to reach the source of the lucrative spice trade and perhaps to join forces with the fabled Christian kingdom of Prester John that was rumoured to exist somewhere in the &quot;Indies&quot;. Under his sponsorship, soon the Atlantic islands of Madeira (1419) and Azores (1427) were reached and started to be settled, producing wheat for export to Portugal.

Soon its ships were bringing into the European market highly valued gold, ivory, pepper, cotton, sugar, and slaves. The slave trade, for example, was conducted by a few dozen merchants in Lisbon. In the process of expanding the trade routes, Portuguese navigators mapped unknown parts of Africa, and began exploring the Indian Ocean. In 1487, an overland expedition by Pêro da Covilhã made its way to India, exploring trade opportunities with the Indians and Arabs, and winding up finally in Ethiopia. His detailed report was eagerly read in Lisbon, which became the best-informed centre for global geography and trade routes.

=== Initial African coastline excursions ===
Fears of what lay beyond Cape Bojador, and whether it was possible to return once it was passed, were assuaged in 1434 when it was rounded by one of Infante Henry&#x27;s captains, Gil Eanes. Once this psychological barrier had been crossed, it became easier to probe further along the coast. In 1443, Infante Dom Pedro, Henry&#x27;s brother and by then regent of the Kingdom, granted him the monopoly of navigation, war and trade in the lands south of Cape Bojador. Later this monopoly would be enforced by the papal bulls &quot;Dum Diversas&quot; (1452) and &quot;Romanus Pontifex&quot; (1455), granting Portugal the trade monopoly for the newly discovered lands. A major advance that accelerated this project was the introduction of the caravel in the mid-15th century, a ship that could be sailed closer to the wind than any other in operation in Europe at the time. Using this new maritime technology, Portuguese navigators reached ever more southerly latitudes, advancing at an average rate of one degree a year. Senegal and Cape Verde Peninsula were reached in 1445.

The first feitoria trade post overseas was established in 1445 on the island of Arguin, off the coast of Mauritania, to attract Muslim traders and monopolise the business in the routes travelled in North Africa. In 1446, Álvaro Fernandes pushed on almost as far as present-day Sierra Leone, and the Gulf of Guinea was reached in the 1460s. The Cape Verde Islands were discovered in 1456 and settled in 1462.

Expansion of sugarcane in Madeira started in 1455, using advisers from Sicily and (largely) Genoese capital to produce the &quot;sweet salt&quot; that was rare in Europe. Already cultivated in Algarve, the accessibility of Madeira attracted Genoese and Flemish traders keen to bypass Venetian monopolies. Slaves were used, and the proportion of imported slaves in Madeira reached 10% of the total population by the 16th century. By 1480 Antwerp had some seventy ships engaged in the Madeira sugar trade, with the refining and distribution concentrated in Antwerp. By the 1490s Madeira had overtaken Cyprus as a producer of sugar. The success of sugar merchants such as Bartolomeo Marchionni would propel the investment in future travels.

In 1469, after prince Henry&#x27;s death and as a result of meagre returns of the African explorations, King Afonso V granted the monopoly of trade in part of the Gulf of Guinea to merchant Fernão Gomes. Gomes, who had to explore of the coast each year for five years, discovered the islands of the Gulf of Guinea, including São Tomé and Príncipe, and found a thriving alluvial gold trade among the natives and visiting Arab and Berber traders at the port then named Mina (the mine), where he established a trading post. Trade between Elmina and Portugal grew throughout a decade. During the War of the Castilian Succession, a large Castilian fleet attempted to wrest control of this lucrative trade, but were decisively defeated in the 1478 Battle of Guinea, which firmly established an exclusive Portuguese control. In 1481, the recently crowned João II decided to build São Jorge da Mina in order to ensure the protection of this trade, which was held again as a royal monopoly. The equator was crossed by navigators sponsored by Fernão Gomes in 1473 and the Congo River by Diogo Cão in 1482. It was during this expedition that the Portuguese first encountered the Kingdom of Kongo, with which it soon developed a rapport. During his 1485–86 expedition, Cão continued to Cape Cross, in present-day Namibia, near the Tropic of Capricorn.
In 1488, Bartolomeu Dias rounded the southern tip of Africa and reached Great Fish River on the coast of Africa, proving false the view that had existed since Ptolemy that the Indian Ocean was land-locked. Simultaneously Pêro da Covilhã, travelling secretly overland, had reached Ethiopia, suggesting that a sea route to the Indies would soon be forthcoming.

As the Portuguese explored the coastlines of Africa, they left behind a series of padrões, stone crosses engraved with the Portuguese coat of arms marking their claims, and built forts and trading posts. From these bases, they engaged profitably in the slave and gold trades. Portugal enjoyed a virtual monopoly on the African seaborne slave trade for over a century, importing around 800 slaves annually. Most were brought to the Portuguese capital Lisbon, where it is estimated black Africans came to constitute 10 percent of the population.

=== Treaty of Tordesillas (1494) ===

Christopher Columbus&#x27;s 1492 discovery for Spain of the New World, which he believed to be Asia, led to disputes between the Spanish and the Portuguese. These were eventually settled by the Treaty of Tordesillas in 1494, which divided the world outside of Europe in an exclusive duopoly between the Portuguese and the Spanish along a north–south meridian 370 leagues, or , west of the Cape Verde islands. However, as it was not possible at the time to correctly measure longitude, the exact boundary was disputed by the two countries until 1777.

The completion of these negotiations with Spain is one of several reasons proposed by historians for why it took nine years for the Portuguese to follow up on Dias&#x27;s voyage to the Cape of Good Hope, though it has also been speculated that other voyages were in fact taking place in secret during this time. Whether or not this was the case, the long-standing Portuguese goal of finding a sea route to Asia was finally achieved in a ground-breaking voyage commanded by Vasco da Gama.

=== The Portuguese enter the Indian Ocean ===

The squadron of Vasco da Gama left Portugal in 1497, rounded the Cape and continued along the coast of East Africa, where a local pilot was brought on board who guided them across the Indian Ocean, reaching Calicut, the capital of the kingdom ruled by Zamorins, also known as Kozhikode) in south-western India in May 1498. The second voyage to India was dispatched in 1500 under Pedro Álvares Cabral. While following the same south-westerly route as Gama across the Atlantic Ocean, Cabral made landfall on the Brazilian coast. This was probably an accidental discovery, but it has been speculated that the Portuguese secretly knew of Brazil&#x27;s existence and that it lay on their side of the Tordesillas line. Cabral recommended to the Portuguese King that the land be settled, and two follow up voyages were sent in 1501 and 1503. The land was found to be abundant in &quot;pau-brasil&quot;, or brazilwood, from which it later inherited its name, but the failure to find gold or silver meant that for the time being Portuguese efforts were concentrated on India. In 1502, to enforce its trade monopoly over a wide area of the Indian Ocean, the Portuguese Empire created the cartaz licensing system, granting merchant ships protection against pirates and rival states.

Profiting from the rivalry between the ruler of Kochi and the Zamorin of Calicut, the Portuguese were well-received and seen as allies, as they obtained a permit to build the fort &quot;Immanuel&quot; (Fort Kochi) and a trading post that was the first European settlement in India. They established a trading hub at Tangasseri, Quilon (&quot;Coulão&quot;, Kollam) city in (1503) in 1502, which became the centre of trade in pepper, and after founding manufactories at Cochin (&quot;Cochim&quot;, Kochi) and Cannanore (&quot;Canonor&quot;, Kannur), built a factory at Quilon in 1503. In 1505 King Manuel I of Portugal appointed Francisco de Almeida first Viceroy of Portuguese India, establishing the Portuguese government in the east. That year the Portuguese also conquered Kannur, where they founded St. Angelo Fort, and Lourenço de Almeida arrived in Ceylon (modern Sri Lanka), where he discovered the source of cinnamon. Although Cankili I of Jaffna initially resisted contact with them, the Jaffna kingdom came to the attention of Portuguese officials soon after for their resistance to missionary activities as well as logistical reasons due to its proximity with Trincomalee harbour among other reasons. In the same year, Manuel I ordered Almeida to fortify the Portuguese fortresses in Kerala and within eastern Africa, as well as probe into the prospects of building forts in Sri Lanka and Malacca in response to growing hostilities with Muslims within those regions and threats from the Mamluk sultan.

A Portuguese fleet under the command of Tristão da Cunha and Afonso de Albuquerque conquered Socotra at the entrance of the Red Sea in 1506 and Muscat in 1507. Having failed to conquer Ormuz, they instead followed a strategy intended to close off commerce to and from the Indian Ocean. Madagascar was partly explored by Cunha, and Mauritius was discovered by Cunha whilst possibly being accompanied by Albuquerque. After the capture of Socotra, Cunha and Albuquerque operated separately. While Cunha travelled India and Portugal for trading purposes, Albuquerque went to India to take over as governor after Almeida&#x27;s three-year term ended. Almeida refused to turn over power and soon placed Albuquerque under house arrest, where he remained until 1509.

Although requested by Manuel I to further explore interests in Malacca and Sri Lanka, Almeida instead focused on western India, in particular the Sultanate of Gujarat due to his suspicions of traders from the region possessing more power. The Mamlûk Sultanate sultan Al-Ashraf Qansuh al-Ghawri along with the Gujarati sultanate attacked Portuguese forces in the harbor of Chaul, resulting in the death of Almeida&#x27;s son. In retaliation, the Portuguese fought and destroyed the Mamluks and Gujarati fleets in the sea Battle of Diu in 1509.

Along with Almeida&#x27;s initial attempts, Manuel I and his council in Lisbon had tried to distribute power in the Indian Ocean, creating three areas of jurisdiction: Albuquerque was sent to the Red Sea, Diogo Lopes de Sequeira to South-east Asia, seeking an agreement with the Sultan of Malacca, and Jorge de Aguiar followed by Duarte de Lemos were sent to the area between the Cape of Good Hope and Gujarat. However, such posts were centralised by Afonso de Albuquerque after his succession and remained so in subsequent ruling.

=== Trade with Maritime Asia, Africa and the Indian Ocean ===
==== Goa, Malacca and Southeast Asia ====

By the end of 1509, Albuquerque became viceroy of the East Indies with the capital at Velha Goa, after the Cape route was discovered by Vasco da Gama. In contrast to Almeida, Albuquerque was more concerned with strengthening the navy, as well as being more compliant with the interests of the kingdom. His first objective was to conquer Goa, due to its strategic location as a defensive fort positioned between Kerala and Gujarat, as well as its prominence for Arabian horse imports.

The initial capture of Goa from the Bijapur sultanate in 1510 was soon countered by the Bijapuris, but with the help of Hindu privateer Timoji, on 25 November of the same year it was recaptured. In Goa, Albuquerque began the first Portuguese mint in India in 1510. He encouraged Portuguese settlers to marry local women, built a church in honor of St. Catherine (as it was recaptured on her feast day), and attempted to build rapport with the Hindus by protecting their temples and reducing their tax requirements. The Portuguese maintained friendly relations with the south Indian Emperors of the Vijayanagara Empire.

In April 1511, Albuquerque sailed to Malacca on the Malay Peninsula, the largest spice market of the period. Though the trade was largely dominated by the Gujarati, other groups such as the Turks, Persians, Armenians, Tamils and Abyssinians traded there. Albuquerque targeted Malacca to impede the Muslim and Venetian influence in the spice trade and increase that of Lisbon. By July 1511, Albuquerque had captured Malacca and sent Antonio de Abreu and Francisco Serrão (along with Ferdinand Magellan) to explore the Indonesian archipelago.

The Malacca peninsula became the strategic base for Portuguese trade expansion with China and Southeast Asia. A strong gate, called the A Famosa, was erected to defend the city and remains. Learning of Siamese ambitions over Malacca, Albuquerque immediately sent Duarte Fernandes on a diplomatic mission to the Kingdom of Siam (modern Thailand), where he was the first European to arrive, establishing amicable relations and trade between both kingdoms.

The Portuguese empire pushed further south and proceeded to discover Timor in 1512. Jorge de Meneses discovered New Guinea in 1526, naming it the &quot;Island of the Papua&quot;. In 1517, João da Silveira commanded a fleet to Chittagong, and by 1528, the Portuguese had established a settlement in Chittagong. The Portuguese eventually based their centre of operations along the Hugli River, where they encountered Muslims, Hindus, and Portuguese deserters known as &quot;Chatins&quot;.

==== China and Japan ====
Jorge Álvares was the first European to reach China by sea, while the Romans were the first overland via Asia Minor. He was also the first European to discover Hong Kong. In 1514, Afonso de Albuquerque, the viceroy of the Estado da India, dispatched Rafael Perestrello to sail to China in order to pioneer European trade relations with the nation.

In their first attempts at obtaining trading posts by force, the Portuguese were defeated by the Ming Chinese at the Battle of Tunmen in Tamão or Tuen Mun. In 1521, the Portuguese lost two ships at the Battle of Sincouwaan in Lantau Island. The Portuguese also lost two ships at Shuangyu in 1548 where several Portuguese were captured and near the Dongshan Peninsula. In 1549 two Portuguese junks and Galeote Pereira were captured. During these battles the Ming Chinese captured weapons from the defeated Portuguese which they then reverse engineered and mass-produced in China such as matchlock musket arquebuses which they named bird guns and breech-loading swivel guns which they named as Folangji (Frankish) cannon because the Portuguese were known to the Chinese under the name of Franks at this time. The Portuguese later returned to China peacefully and presented themselves under the name Portuguese instead of Franks in the Luso-Chinese agreement (1554) and rented Macau as a trading post from China by paying annual lease of hundreds of silver taels to Ming China.

Despite initial harmony and excitement between the two cultures, difficulties began to arise shortly afterwards, including misunderstanding, bigotry, and even hostility. The Portuguese explorer Simão de Andrade incited poor relations with China due to his pirate activities, raiding Chinese shipping, attacking a Chinese official, and kidnappings of Chinese. He based himself at Tamao island in a fort. The Chinese claimed that Simão kidnapped Chinese boys and girls to be molested and cannibalised. The Chinese sent a squadron of junks against Portuguese caravels that succeeded in driving the Portuguese away and reclaiming Tamao. As a result, the Chinese posted an edict banning men with Caucasian features from entering Canton, killing multiple Portuguese there, and driving the Portuguese back to sea.

After the Sultan of Bintan detained several Portuguese under Tomás Pires, the Chinese then executed 23 Portuguese and threw the rest into prison where they resided in squalid, sometimes fatal conditions. The Chinese then massacred Portuguese who resided at Ningbo and Fujian trading posts in 1545 and 1549, due to extensive and damaging raids by the Portuguese along the coast, which irritated the Chinese. Portuguese pirating was second to Japanese pirating by this period. However, they soon began to shield Chinese junks and a cautious trade began. In 1557 the Chinese authorities allowed the Portuguese to settle in Macau, creating a warehouse in the trade of goods between China, Japan, Goa and Europe.

==== Spice Islands (Moluccas) and Treaty of Zaragoza ====

Portuguese operations in Asia did not go unnoticed, and in 1521 Magellan arrived in the region and claimed the Philippines for Spain. In 1525, Spain under Charles V sent an expedition to colonise the Moluccas islands, claiming they were in his zone of the Treaty of Tordesillas, since there was no set limit to the east. The expedition of García Jofre de Loaísa reached the Moluccas, docking at Tidore. With the Portuguese already established in nearby Ternate, conflict was inevitable, leading to nearly a decade of skirmishes. A resolution was reached with the Treaty of Zaragoza in 1529, attributing the Moluccas to Portugal and the Philippines to Spain. The Portuguese traded regularly with the Bruneian Empire from 1530 and described the capital of Brunei as surrounded by a stone wall.

==== South Asia, Persian Gulf and Red Sea ====
The Portuguese empire expanded into the Persian Gulf, contesting control of the spice trade with the Ajuran Empire and the Ottoman Empire. Albuquerque conquered the Huwala state of Hormuz at the head of the Persian Gulf in 1515, establishing it as a vassal state. Aden, however, resisted Albuquerque&#x27;s expedition in that same year and another attempt by Albuquerque&#x27;s successor Lopo Soares de Albergaria in 1516. In 1521 a force led by António Correia captured Bahrain, defeating the Jabrid King, Muqrin ibn Zamil. In a shifting series of alliances, the Portuguese dominated much of the southern Persian Gulf for the next hundred years. With the regular maritime route linking Lisbon to Goa since 1497, the island of Mozambique became a strategic port, and there was built Fort São Sebastião and a hospital. In the Azores, the Islands Armada protected the ships en route to Lisbon.

In 1534, Gujarat faced attack from the Mughals and the Rajput states of Chitor and Mandu. The Sultan Bahadur Shah of Gujarat was forced to sign the Treaty of Bassein with the Portuguese, establishing an alliance to regain the country, giving in exchange Daman, Diu, Mumbai and Bassein. It also regulated the trade of Gujarati ships departing to the Red Sea and passing through Bassein to pay duties and allow the horse trade. After Mughal ruler Humayun had success against Bahadur, the latter signed another treaty with the Portuguese to confirm the provisions and allowed the fort to be built in Diu. Shortly afterward, Humayun turned his attention elsewhere, and the Gujarats allied with the Ottomans to regain control of Diu and lay siege to the fort. The two failed sieges of 1538 and 1546 put an end to Ottoman ambitions, confirming the Portuguese hegemony in the region, as well as gaining superiority over the Mughals. However, the Ottomans fought off attacks from the Portuguese in the Red Sea and in the Sinai Peninsula in 1541, and in the northern region of the Persian Gulf in 1546 and 1552. Each entity ultimately had to respect the sphere of influence of the other, albeit unofficially.

==== Sub-Saharan Africa ====
After a series of prolonged contacts with Ethiopia, the Portuguese embassy made contact with the Ethiopian (Abyssinian) Kingdom led by Rodrigo de Lima in 1520. This coincided with the Portuguese search for Prester John, as they soon associated the kingdom as his land. The fear of Turkish advances within the Portuguese and Ethiopian sectors also played a role in their alliance. The Adal Sultanate defeated the Ethiopians in the battle of Shimbra Kure in 1529, and Islam spread further in the region. Portugal responded by aiding king Gelawdewos with Portuguese soldiers and muskets. Though the Ottomans responded with support of soldiers and muskets to the Adal Sultanate, after the death of the Adali sultan Ahmad ibn Ibrahim al-Ghazi in the battle of Wayna Daga in 1543, the joint Adal-Ottoman force retreated.

The Portuguese also made direct contact with the Kongolose vassal state Ndongo and its ruler Ngola Kiljuane in 1520, after the latter requested missionaries. Kongolese king Afonso I interfered with the process with denunciations, and later sent a Kongo mission to Ndongo after the latter had arrested the Portuguese mission that came. The growing official and unofficial slave trading with Ndongo strained relations between Kongo and the Portuguese, and even had Portuguese ambassadors from São Tomé support Ndongo against the Kingdom of Kongo. However, when the Jaga attacked and conquered regions of Kongo in 1568, Portuguese assisted Kongo in their defeat. In response, the Kongo allowed the colonisation of Luanda Island; Luanda was established by Paulo Dias de Novais in 1576 and soon became a slave port. De Novais&#x27; subsequent alliance with Ndongo angered Luso-Africans who resented the influence from the Crown. In 1579, Ndongo ruler Ngola Kiluanje kia Ndamdi massacred Portuguese and Kongolese residents in the Ndongo capital Kabasa under the influence of Portuguese renegades. Both the Portuguese and Kongo fought against Ndongo, and off-and-on warfare between the Ndongo and Portugal would persist for decades.

In east-Africa, the main agents acting on behalf of the Portuguese Crown, exploring and settling the territory of what would become Mozambique were the &quot;&quot;, to whom vast estates around the Zambezi River were leased by the King as a reward for their services. Commanding vast armies of chikunda warrior-slaves, these men acted as feudal-like lords, either levying tax from local chieftains, defending them and their estates from marauding tribes, participating in the ivory or slave trade, and becoming involved in the politics of the Kingdom of Mutapa, to the point of installing client kings upon its throne.

==== Missionary expeditions ====
In 1542, Jesuit missionary Francis Xavier arrived in Goa at the service of João III of Portugal, in charge of an Apostolic Nunciature. At the same time Francisco Zeimoto, António Mota, and other traders arrived in Japan for the first time. According to Fernão Mendes Pinto, who claimed to be in this journey, they arrived at Tanegashima, where the locals were impressed by firearms, that would be immediately made by the Japanese on a large scale. By 1570 the Portuguese bought part of a Japanese port where they founded a small part of the city of Nagasaki, and it became the major trading port in Japan in the triangular trade with China and Europe.

Guarding its trade from both European and Asian competitors, Portugal dominated not only the trade between Asia and Europe, but also much of the trade between different regions of Asia and Africa, such as India, Indonesia, China, and Japan. Jesuit missionaries, followed the Portuguese to spread Catholicism to Asia and Africa with mixed success.

=== Colonisation efforts in the Americas ===
==== Canada ====

Based on the Treaty of Tordesillas, the Portuguese Crown, under the kings Manuel I, João III and Sebastão, also claimed territorial rights in North America (reached by John Cabot in 1497 and 1498). To that end, in 1499 and 1500, João Fernandes Lavrador explored Greenland and the north Atlantic coast of Canada, which accounts for the appearance of &quot;Labrador&quot; on topographical maps of the period. Subsequently, in 1500–1501 and 1502, the brothers Gaspar and Miguel Corte-Real explored what is today the Canadian province of Newfoundland and Labrador, and Greenland, claiming these lands for Portugal. In 1506, King Manuel I created taxes for the cod fisheries in Newfoundland waters. Around 1521, João Álvares Fagundes was granted donatary rights to the inner islands of the Gulf of St. Lawrence and also created a settlement on Cape Breton Island to serve as a base for cod fishing. Pressure from natives and competing European fisheries prevented a permanent establishment and it was abandoned five years later. Several attempts to establish settlements in Newfoundland over the next half-century also failed.

==== Brazil ====
Within a few years after Cabral arrived from Brazil, competition came along from France. In 1503, an expedition under the command of Gonçalo Coelho reported French raids on the Brazilian coasts, and explorer Binot Paulmier de Gonneville traded for brazilwood after making contact in southern Brazil a year later. Expeditions sponsored by Francis I along the North American coast directly violated of the Treaty of Tordesilhas. By 1531, the French had stationed a trading post off of an island on the Brazilian coast.

The increase in brazilwood smuggling from the French led João III to press an effort to establish effective occupation of the territory. In 1531, a royal expedition led by Martim Afonso de Sousa and his brother Pero Lopes went to patrol the whole Brazilian coast, banish the French, and create some of the first colonial towns – among them São Vicente, in 1532. Sousa returned to Lisbon a year later to become governor of India and never returned to Brazil. The French attacks did cease to an extent after retaliation led to the Portuguese paying the French to stop attacking Portuguese ships throughout the Atlantic, but the attacks would continue to be a problem well into the 1560s.

Upon de Sousa&#x27;s arrival and success, fifteen latitudinal tracts, theoretically to span from the coast to the Tordesillas limit, were decreed by João III on 28 September 1532. The plot of the lands formed as a hereditary captaincies (Capitanias Hereditárias) to grantees rich enough to support settlement, as had been done successfully in Madeira and Cape Verde islands. Each captain-major was to build settlements, grant allotments and administer justice, being responsible for developing and taking the costs of colonisation, although not being the owner: he could transmit it to offspring, but not sell it. Twelve recipients came from Portuguese gentry who become prominent in Africa and India and senior officials of the court, such as João de Barros.

Of the fifteen original captaincies, only two, Pernambuco and São Vicente, prospered. Both were dedicated to the crop of sugar cane, and the settlers managed to maintain alliances with Native Americans. The rise of the sugar industry came about because the Crown took the easiest sources of profit (brazilwood, spices, etc.), leaving settlers to come up with new revenue sources. The establishment of the sugar cane industry demanded intensive labour that would be met with Native American and, later, African slaves. Deeming the &quot;capitanias&quot; system ineffective, João III decided to centralise the government of the colony in order to &quot;give help and assistance&quot; to grantees. In 1548 he created the first General Government, sending in Tomé de Sousa as first governor and selecting a capital at the Bay of All Saints, making it at the Captaincy of Bahia.

Tomé de Sousa built the capital of Brazil, Salvador, at the Bay of All Saints in 1549. Among de Sousa&#x27;s 1000 man expedition were soldiers, workers, and six Jesuits led by Manuel da Nóbrega. The Jesuits would have an essential role in the settlement of Brazil, including the cities of São Vicente, and São Paulo, the latter co-founded by Nóbrega. Along with the Jesuit missions later came disease among the natives, among them plague and smallpox. Subsequently, the French would resettle in Portuguese territory at Guanabara Bay, which would be called France Antarctique. While a Portuguese ambassador was sent to Paris to report the French intrusion, João III appointed Mem de Sá as new Brazilian governor general, and Sá left for Brazil in 1557. Sá and his forces had by 1560 expelled the combined Huguenot, Scottish Calvinist, and slave forces from France Antarctique, but left survivors after burning their fortifications and villages. These survivors would settle Gloria Bay, Flamengo Beach, and Parapapuã with the assistance of the Tamoio natives.

The Tamoio had been allied with the French since the settlement of France Antarctique, and despite the French loss in 1560, the Tamoio were still a threat. They launched two attacks in 1561 and 1564 (the latter event was assisting the French), and were nearly successful with each. By this time period, Manuel de Nóbrega, along with fellow Jesuit José de Anchieta, took part as members of attacks on the Tamoios and as spies for their resources. From 1565 through 1567 Mem de Sá and his forces eventually destroyed France Antarctique at Guanabara Bay. He and his nephew, Estácio de Sá, then established the city of Rio de Janeiro in 1567, after Mem de Sá proclaimed the area &quot;São Sebastião do Rio de Janeiro&quot; in 1565. By 1575, the Tamoios had been subdued and essentially were extinct, and by 1580 the government became more of an &quot;ouvidor general&quot; rather than the &quot;ouvidores&quot;.

=== Iberian Union, Protestant rivalry, and colonial stasis (1580–1663) ===


In 1580, King Philip II of Spain invaded Portugal after a crisis of succession brought about by king Sebastião of Portugal&#x27;s death during a disastrous Portuguese attack on Alcácer Quibir in Morocco in 1578. At the Cortes of Tomar in 1581, Philip was crowned Philip I of Portugal, uniting the two crowns and overseas empires under Spanish Habsburg rule in a dynastic Iberian Union. At Tomar, Philip promised to keep the empires legally distinct, leaving the administration of the Portuguese Empire to Portuguese nationals, with a Viceroy of Portugal in Lisbon seeing to his interests. Philip even had the capital moved to Lisbon for a two-year period (1581–83) due to it being the most important city in the Iberian peninsula. All the Portuguese colonies accepted the new state of affairs except for the Azores, which held out for António, a Portuguese rival claimant to the throne who had garnered the support of Catherine de Medici of France in exchange for the promise to cede Brazil. Spanish forces eventually captured the islands in 1583.

The Tordesillas boundary between Spanish and Portuguese control in South America was then increasingly ignored by the Portuguese, who pressed beyond it into the heart of Brazil, allowing them to expand the territory to the west. Exploratory missions were carried out both ordered by the government, the &quot;entradas&quot; (entries), and by private initiative, the &quot;bandeiras&quot; (flags), by the &quot;bandeirantes&quot;. These expeditions lasted for years venturing into unmapped regions, initially to capture natives and force them into slavery, and later focusing on finding gold, silver and diamond mines.

However, the union meant that Spain dragged Portugal into its conflicts with England, France and the Dutch Republic, countries which were beginning to establish their own overseas empires. The primary threat came from the Dutch, who had been engaged in a struggle for independence against Spain since 1568. In 1581, the Seven Provinces gained independence from the Habsburg rule, leading Philip II to prohibit commerce with Dutch ships, including in Brazil where Dutch had invested large sums in financing sugar production.

Spanish imperial trade networks now were opened to Portuguese merchants, which was particularly lucrative for Portuguese slave traders who could now sell slaves in Spanish America at a higher price than could be fetched in Brazil. In addition to this newly acquired access to the Spanish &quot;asientos&quot;, the Portuguese were able to solve their bullion shortage issues with access to the production of the silver mining in Peru and Mexico. Manila was also incorporated into the Macau-Nagasaki trading network, allowing Macanese of Portuguese descent to act as trading agents for Philippine Spaniards and use Spanish silver from the Americas in trade with China, and they later drew competition with the Dutch East India Company.

In 1592, during the war with Spain, an English fleet captured a large Portuguese carrack off the Azores, the Madre de Deus, which was loaded with 900 tons of merchandise from India and China estimated at half a million pounds (nearly half the size of English Treasury at the time). This foretaste of the riches of the East galvanised English interest in the region. That same year, Cornelis de Houtman was sent by Dutch merchants to Lisbon, to gather as much information as he could about the Spice Islands.

The Dutch eventually came to acknowledge the importance of Goa in breaking up the Portuguese empire in Asia. In 1583, merchant and explorer Jan Huyghen van Linschoten (1563– 8 February 1611), formerly the Dutch secretary of the Archbishop of Goa, had acquired information while serving in that position that contained the location of secret Portuguese trade routes throughout Asia, including those to the East Indies and Japan. It was published in 1595 and then greatly expanded the next year as his &quot;Itinerario&quot;. Dutch and English interests used this new information, leading to their commercial expansion, including the foundation of the English East India Company in 1600, and the Dutch East India Company in 1602. These developments allowed the entry of chartered companies into the East Indies.

The Dutch took their fight overseas, attacking Spanish and Portuguese colonies and beginning the Dutch–Portuguese War, which would last for over sixty years (1602–1663). Other European nations, such as Protestant England, assisted the Dutch Empire in the war. The Dutch attained victories in Asia and Africa with assistance of various indigenous allies, eventually wrenching control of Malacca (1641), Portuguese Gold Coast (1642), Ceylon (1658), and Kochi (1663). The Dutch also had regional control of the lucrative sugar-producing region of northeast Brazil as well as Luanda, but the Portuguese regained these territories after considerable struggle.

Meanwhile, in the Persian Gulf region, the Portuguese also lost control of Bahrain in 1602, Ormuz was captured by a joint alliance of the Safavids and the English in 1622, and Muscat was captured by Oman under the Al-Ya&#x27;arubs in 1650. The 1625 Battle off Hormuz, one of the most important of the Portuguese–Safavid wars, would result in a draw. They would continue to use Muscat as a base for repetitive incursions within the Indian Ocean, including capturing Fort Jesus in 1698, which resulted in a loss of Zanzibar in 1698. In Ethiopia and Japan in the 1630s, the ousting of missionaries by local leaders severed influence in the respective regions.

== Portuguese Empire (1663–1822) ==
The loss of colonies was one of the reasons that contributed to the end of the personal union with Spain. João IV was proclaimed king of Portugal in 1640 and the Portuguese Restoration War began. Even before the war&#x27;s final resolution, the crown established the Overseas Council, conceived in 1642 on the short-lived model of the Council of India (1604–1614), and established in 1643, it was the governing body for most of the Portuguese overseas empire. The exceptions were North Africa, Madeira, and the Azores. All correspondence concerning overseas possessions were funneled through the council. When the Portuguese court fled to Brazil in 1807, following the Napoleonic invasion of Iberia, Brazil was removed from the jurisdiction of the council. It made recommendations concerning personnel for the administrative, fiscal, and military, as well as bishops of overseas dioceses. A distinguished seventeenth-century member was Salvador de Sá.
In 1661 the Portuguese offered Bombay and Tangier to England as part of a dowry, and over the next hundred years the English gradually became the dominant trader in India, gradually excluding the trade of other powers. Spain recognised the end of the Iberian Union in 1668, with Portugal in exchange ceding Ceuta to the Spanish crown.

After the Portuguese were defeated by the Indian rulers Chimnaji Appa of the Maratha Empire and by Shivappa Nayaka of the Keladi Nayaka Kingdom and at the end of confrontations with the Dutch, Portugal was only able to cling onto Goa and several minor bases in India, and managed to regain territories in Brazil and Africa, but lost forever to prominence in Asia as trade was diverted through increasing numbers of English, Dutch and French trading posts. In 1787, in Goa the Conspiracy of the Pintos, also known as the Pinto Revolt, known in Portuguese as &quot;A Conjuração dos Pintos&quot; occurred, this was a rebellion against Portuguese rule.

The leaders of the plot were three prominent priests from the village of Candolim in the &quot;&quot; of Bardez, Goa. They belonged to the noble Pinto clan, hence the name of the rebellion.

This was fought due to the Portuguese refusing to create bishops and other officials from the colonies and demanded equality. The family was one of the first Indian families to be considered as a Fidalgo by the Portuguese crown and two brothers were granted a coat of arms in 1770, and included in the Portuguese nobility

This was the first anti-colonial revolt in India and one of the first by Catholic subjects in all European colonies. 

Thus, throughout the century, Brazil gained increasing importance to the empire, which exported brazilwood and sugar.

=== Minas Gerais and the gold industry ===
In 1693, gold was discovered at Minas Gerais in Brazil. Major discoveries of gold and, later, diamonds in Minas Gerais, Mato Grosso and Goiás led to a &quot;gold rush&quot;, with a large influx of migrants. The village became the new economic focal point of the empire, with rapid settlement and some conflicts. This gold cycle led to the creation of an internal market and attracted a large number of immigrants. By 1739, at the apex of the mining boom, the population of Minas Gerais was somewhere between 200,000 and 250,000.

The gold rush considerably increased the revenue of the Portuguese crown, who charged a fifth of all the ore mined, or the &quot;fifth&quot;. Diversion and smuggling were frequent, along with altercations between &quot;Paulistas&quot; (residents of São Paulo) and &quot;Emboabas&quot; (immigrants from Portugal and other regions in Brazil), so a whole set of bureaucratic controls began in 1710 with the captaincy of São Paulo and Minas Gerais. By 1718, São Paulo and Minas Gerais became two captaincies, with eight &quot;vilas&quot; created in the latter. The crown also restricted the diamond mining within its jurisdiction and to private contractors. In spite of gold increasing global commerce, the plantation industry became the leading export for Brazil during this period; sugar constituted at 50% of the exports (with gold at 46%) in 1760.

Africans became the largest group of people in Minas Gerais. Slaves labeled as &#x27;Minas&#x27; and &#x27;Angolas&#x27; rose in high demand during the boom. The Akan within the &#x27;Minas&#x27; group had a reputation to have been experts in extrapolating gold in their native regions, and became the preferred group. In spite of the high death rate associated with the slaves involved in the mining industry, the owners that allowed slaves that extracted above the minimum amount of gold to keep the excesses, which in turn led to the possibility of manumission. Those that became free partook in artisan jobs such as cobblers, tailors, and blacksmiths. In spite of free blacks and mulattoes playing a large role in Minas Gerais, the number of them that received marginalisation was greater there than in any other region in Brazil.

Gold discovered in Mato Grosso and Goiás sparked an interest to solidify the western borders of the colony. In the 1730s contact with Spanish outposts occurred more frequently, and the Spanish threatened to launch a military expedition in order to remove them. This failed to happen and by the 1750s the Portuguese were able to implant a political stronghold in the region.

In 1755 Lisbon suffered a catastrophic earthquake, which together with a subsequent tsunami killed between 40,000 and 60,000 people out of a population of 275,000. This sharply checked Portuguese colonial ambitions in the late 18th century.

According to economic historians, Portugal&#x27;s colonial trade had a substantial positive impact on Portuguese economic growth, 1500–1800. Leonor Costa et al. conclude:

intercontinental trade had a substantial and increasingly positive impact on economic growth. In the heyday of colonial expansion, eliminating the economic links to empire would have reduced Portugal&#x27;s per capita income by roughly a fifth. While the empire helped the domestic economy it was not sufficient to annul the tendency towards decline in relation to Europe&#x27;s advanced core which set in from the 17th century onwards.

=== Pombaline and post-Pombaline Brazil ===
Unlike Spain, Portugal did not divide its colonial territory in America. The captaincies created there functioned under a centralised administration in Salvador, which reported directly to the Crown in Lisbon. The 18th century was marked by increasing centralisation of royal power throughout the Portuguese empire. The Jesuits, who protected the natives against slavery, were brutally suppressed by the Marquis of Pombal, which led to the dissolution of the order in the region by 1759. Pombal wished to improve the status of the natives by declaring them free and increasing the mestizo population by encouraging intermarriage between them and the white population. Indigenous freedom decreased in contrast to its period under the Jesuits, and the response to intermarriage was lukewarm at best. The crown&#x27;s revenue from gold declined and plantation revenue increased by the time of Pombal, and he made provisions to improve each. Although he failed to spike the gold revenue, two short-term companies he established for the plantation economy drove a significant increase in production of cotton, rice, cacao, tobacco, and sugar. Slavery increased as well as involvement from the textile economy. The economic development as a whole was inspired by elements of the Enlightenment in mainland Europe. However, the diminished influence from states such as the United Kingdom increased the Kingdom&#x27;s dependence upon Brazil.

Encouraged by the example of the United States of America, which had won its independence from Britain, the colonial province of Minas Gerais attempted to achieve the same objective in 1789. However, the Inconfidência Mineira failed, its leaders were arrested, and of the participants in the insurrections, the one of lowest social position, Tiradentes, was hanged. Among the conspiracies led by the African population was the Bahian revolt in 1798, led primarily by João de Deus do Nascimento. Inspired by the French Revolution, leaders proposed a society without slavery, food prices would be lowered, and trade restriction abolished. Impoverished social conditions and a high cost of living were among reasons of the revolt. Authorities diffused the plot before major action began; they executed four of the conspirators and exiled several others to the Atlantic Coast of Africa. Several more smaller-scale slave rebellions and revolts would occur from 1801 and 1816 and fears within Brazil were that these events would lead to a &quot;second Haiti&quot;.

In spite of the conspiracies, the rule of Portugal in Brazil was not under serious threat. Historian A. R. Disney states that the colonists did not until the transferring of the Kingdom in 1808 assert influence of policy changing due to direct contact, and historian Gabriel Paquette mentions that the threats in Brazil were largely unrealised in Portugal until 1808 because of effective policing and espionage. More revolts would occur after the arrival of the court.

=== Brazilian Independence ===
In 1808, Napoleon Bonaparte invaded Portugal, and Dom João, prince regent in place of his mother, Queen Maria I, ordered the transfer of the royal court to Brazil. In 1815 Brazil was elevated to the status of Kingdom, the Portuguese state officially becoming the United Kingdom of Portugal, Brazil and the Algarves (&quot;Reino Unido de Portugal, Brasil e Algarves&quot;), and the capital was transferred from Lisbon to Rio de Janeiro, the only instance of a European country being ruled from one of its colonies. There was also the election of Brazilian representatives to the Cortes Constitucionais Portuguesas (Portuguese Constitutional Courts), the Parliament that assembled in Lisbon in the wake of the Liberal Revolution of 1820.

Although the royal family returned to Portugal in 1821, the interlude led to a growing desire for independence amongst Brazilians. In 1822, the son of Dom João VI, then prince-regent Dom Pedro I, proclaimed the independence of Brazil on 7 September 1822, and was crowned Emperor of the new Empire of Brazil. Unlike the Spanish colonies of South America, Brazil&#x27;s independence was achieved without significant bloodshed.

===Third empire (1822–1999)===


At the height of European colonialism in the 19th century, Portugal had lost its territory in South America and all but a few bases in Asia. During this phase, Portuguese colonialism focused on expanding its outposts in Africa into nation-sized territories to compete with other European powers there. Portugal pressed into the hinterland of Angola and Mozambique, and explorers Serpa Pinto, Hermenegildo Capelo and Roberto Ivens were among the first Europeans to cross Africa west to east.

=== British Ultimatum and end of Portuguese monarchy (1890–1910) ===
The project to connect the two colonies, the Pink Map, was the main objective of Portuguese policy in the 1880s. However, the idea was unacceptable to the British, who had their own aspirations of contiguous British territory running from Cairo to Cape Town. The 1890 British Ultimatum was reluctantly accepted by Carlos I of Portugal and the Pink Map came to an end.

The King&#x27;s reaction to the ultimatum was exploited by republicans. On 1 February 1908, King Carlos and Prince Luís Filipe were assassinated in Lisbon by two Portuguese republican activist revolutionaries, Alfredo Luís da Costa and Manuel Buíça. Luís Filipe&#x27;s brother, Manuel, became King Manuel II of Portugal. Two years later, on 5 October 1910, he was overthrown and fled into exile in England in Fulwell Park, Twickenham near London and Portugal became a republic.

=== World War I ===
In 1914, the German Empire formulated plans to usurp Angola from Portuguese control. Skirmishes between Portuguese and German soldiers ensued, resulting in reinforcements being sent from the mainland. The main objective of these soldiers was to recapture the Kionga Triangle, in northern Mozambique, the territory having been subjugated by Germany.
In 1916, after Portugal interned German ships in Lisbon, Germany declared war on Portugal. Portugal followed suit, thus entering World War I.
Early in the war, Portugal was involved mainly in supplying the Allies positioned in France. In 1916, there was only one attack on the Portuguese territory, in Madeira. In 1917, one of the actions taken by Portugal was to assist Britain in its timber industry, imperative to the war effort. Along with the Canadian Forestry Corps, Portuguese personnel established logging infrastructure in an area now referred to as the &quot;Portuguese Fireplace&quot;.

Throughout 1917 Portugal dispatched contingents of troops to the Allied front in France. Midway in the year, Portugal suffered its first World War I casualty. In Portuguese Africa, Portugal and the British fought numerous battles against the Germans in both Mozambique and Angola. Later in the year, U-boats entered Portuguese waters again and once more attacked Madeira, sinking multiple Portuguese ships. Through the beginning of 1918, Portugal continued to fight along the Allied front against Germany, including participation in the infamous Battle of La Lys. As autumn approached, Germany found success in both Portuguese Africa and against Portuguese vessels, sinking multiple ships. After nearly three years of fighting (from a Portuguese perspective), World War I ended, with an armistice being signed by Germany. At the Versailles Conference, Portugal regained control of all its lost territory, but did not retain possession (by the principle of uti possidetis) of territories gained during the war, except for Kionga, a port city in modern-day Tanzania.

Portuguese territories in Africa eventually included the modern nations of Cape Verde, São Tomé and Príncipe, Guinea-Bissau, Angola, and Mozambique.

== Decolonisation and decline (1954–1999) ==

In the wake of World War II, decolonisation movements began to gain momentum in the empires of the European powers. The ensuing Cold War also created instabilities among Portuguese overseas populations, as the United States and Soviet Union vied to increase their spheres of influence. Following the granting of independence to India by Britain in 1947, and the decision by France to allow its enclaves in India to be incorporated into the newly independent nation, pressure was placed on Portugal to do the same. This was resisted by António de Oliveira Salazar, who had taken power in 1933. Salazar rebuffed a request in 1950 by Indian Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru to return the enclaves, viewing them as integral parts of Portugal. The following year, the Portuguese constitution was amended to change the status of the colonies to overseas provinces. In 1954, a local uprising resulted in the overthrow of the Portuguese authorities in the Indian enclave of Dadra and Nagar Haveli. The existence of the remaining Portuguese colonies in India became increasingly untenable and Nehru enjoyed the support of almost all the Indian domestic political parties as well as the Soviet Union and its allies. In 1961, shortly after an uprising against the Portuguese in Angola, Nehru ordered the Indian Army into Goa, Daman and Diu, which were quickly captured and formally annexed the following year. Salazar refused to recognise the transfer of sovereignty, considering the territories merely occupied. The Province of Goa continued to be represented in the Portuguese National Assembly until 1974.

The outbreak of violence in February 1961 in Angola was the beginning of the end of Portugal&#x27;s empire in Africa. Portuguese army officers in Angola held the view that it would be incapable of dealing militarily with an outbreak of guerilla warfare and therefore that negotiations should begin with the independence movements. However, Salazar publicly stated his determination to keep the empire intact, and by the end of the year, 50,000 troops had been stationed there. The same year, the tiny Portuguese fort of São João Baptista de Ajudá in Ouidah, a remnant of the West African slave trade, was annexed by the new government of Dahomey (now Benin) that had gained its independence from France. Unrest spread from Angola to Guinea, which rebelled in 1963, and Mozambique in 1964.

According to one historian, Portuguese rulers were unwilling to meet the demands of their colonial subjects (unlike other European powers) in part because Portuguese elites believed that &quot;Portugal lacked the means to conduct a successful &quot;exit strategy&quot; (akin to the &quot;neocolonial&quot; approach followed by the British, the French, or the Belgians)&quot; and in part due to the lack of &quot;a free and open debate [in Salazar&#x27;s dictatorial state] on the costs of upholding an empire against the anti-colonial consensus that had prevailed in the United Nations since the early 1960s&quot;.
The rise of Soviet influence among the Movimento das Forças Armadas&#x27;s military (MFA) and working class, and the cost and unpopularity of the Portuguese Colonial War (1961–1974), in which Portugal resisted to the emerging nationalist guerrilla movements in some of its African territories, eventually led to the collapse of the Estado Novo regime in 1974. Known as the &quot;Carnation Revolution&quot;, one of the first acts of the MFA-led government which then came into power – the National Salvation Junta (&quot;Junta de Salvação Nacional&quot;) – was to end the wars and negotiate Portuguese withdrawal from its African colonies. These events prompted a mass exodus of Portuguese citizens from Portugal&#x27;s African territories (mostly from Angola and Mozambique), creating over a million Portuguese refugees – the &quot;retornados&quot;. Portugal&#x27;s new ruling authorities also recognised Goa and other Portuguese India&#x27;s territories invaded by India&#x27;s military forces, as Indian territories. Benin&#x27;s claims over São João Baptista de Ajudá were accepted by Portugal in 1974.

Civil wars in Angola and Mozambique promptly broke out, with incoming communist governments formed by the former rebels (and backed by the Soviet Union, Cuba, and other communist countries) fighting against insurgent groups supported by nations like Zaire, South Africa, and the United States. East Timor also declared independence in 1975 by making an exodus of many Portuguese refugees to Portugal, which was also known as &quot;retornados&quot;. However, East Timor was almost immediately invaded by Indonesia, which later occupied it until 1999. A United Nations-sponsored referendum resulted in a majority of East Timorese choosing independence, which was finally achieved in 2002.

In 1987, Portugal signed the Sino-Portuguese Joint Declaration with the People&#x27;s Republic of China to establish the process and conditions for the transfer of sovereignty of Macau, its last remaining overseas possession. While this process was similar to the agreement between the United Kingdom and China two years earlier regarding Hong Kong, the Portuguese transfer to China was met with less resistance than that of Britain regarding Hong Kong, as Portugal had already recognised Macau as Chinese territory under Portuguese administration in 1979. Under the transfer agreement, Macau is to be governed under a one country, two systems policy, in which it will retain a high degree of autonomy and maintain its capitalist way of life for at least 50 years after the handover, until 2049. The handover of Macau on 20 December 1999, officially marked the end of the Portuguese Empire and the end of colonialism in Asia.

==Legacy==

Presently, the Community of Portuguese Language Countries (CPLP) serves as the cultural and intergovernmental successor of the Empire.

Macau was returned to China on 20 December 1999, under the terms of an agreement negotiated between People&#x27;s Republic of China and Portugal twelve years earlier. Nevertheless, the Portuguese language remains co-official with Cantonese Chinese in Macau.

Currently, the Azores and Madeira (the latter administering the uninhabited Savage Islands) are the only overseas territories that remain politically linked to Portugal. Although Portugal began the process of decolonising East Timor in 1975, during 1999–2002 was sometimes considered Portugal&#x27;s last remaining colony, as the Indonesian invasion of East Timor was not justified by Portugal.

Eight of the former colonies of Portugal have Portuguese as their official language. Together with Portugal, they are now members of the Community of Portuguese Language Countries, which when combined total 10,742,000 km2, or 7.2% of the Earth&#x27;s landmass (148 939 063 km2). As at 2023, there are 32 associate observers of the CPLP, reflecting the global reach and influence of Portugal&#x27;s former empire. Moreover, twelve candidate countries or regions have applied for membership to the CPLP and are awaiting approval.

Today, Portuguese is one of the world&#x27;s major languages, ranked sixth overall with approximately 240 million speakers around the globe. It is the third most spoken language in the Americas, mainly due to Brazil, although there are also significant communities of Lusophones in nations such as Canada, the US and Venezuela. In addition, there are numerous Portuguese-based creole languages, including the one spoken by the Kristang people in Malacca.

For instance, as Portuguese merchants were presumably the first to introduce the sweet orange in Europe, in several modern Indo-European languages the fruit has been named after them. Some examples are Albanian , Bulgarian (&quot;portokal&quot;), Greek (&quot;portokali&quot;), Macedonian (&quot;portokal&quot;), Persian (&quot;porteghal&quot;), and Romanian . Related names can be found in other languages, such as Arabic (&quot;bourtouqal&quot;), Georgian (&quot;p&#x27;ort&#x27;oxali&quot;), Turkish and Amharic &quot;birtukan&quot;. Also, in southern Italian dialects (e.g., Neapolitan), an orange is &quot;portogallo&quot; or &quot;purtuallo&quot;, literally &quot;(the) Portuguese (one)&quot;, in contrast to standard Italian &quot;arancia&quot;.

In light of its international importance, Portugal and Brazil are leading a movement to include Portuguese as one of the official languages of the United Nations.

==See also==

* Portuguese colonial architecture
* Edict of Expulsion
* Evolution of the Portuguese Empire
* Goan Inquisition
* Lusotropicalism
* Persecution of Jews and Muslims by Manuel I of Portugal
* Portuguese Armadas
* Portuguese in Africa
* Portuguese Inquisition
* Portuguese inventions
* Portuguese Surinamese
* Strait of Magellan

== References ==

=== Notes ===

=== Citations ===
=== General and cited sources ===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


==External links==

*Portuguese Empire Timeline
*Dutch Portuguese Colonial History: history of the Portuguese and the Dutch in Ceylon, India, Malacca, Bengal, Formosa, Africa, Brazil. Language Heritage, lists of remains, maps.
*&quot;The Present State of the West-Indies: Containing an Accurate Description of What Parts Are Possessed by the Several Powers in Europe&quot; by Thomas Kitchin
*Forts of the Spice Islands of Indonesia
* Senaka Weeraratna, 2005, &quot;Repression of Buddhism in Sri Lanka by the Portuguese (1505–1658)&quot;, Australian Centre for Sri Lankan Unity</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q200464" start="4" end="21" title="Portuguese Empire" label="Portuguese Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790360" start="28" end="43" title="colonial empire" label="colonial empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q80702" start="104" end="118" title="Spanish Empire" label="Spanish Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q133641" start="147" end="163" title="Age of Discovery" label="Age of Discovery"/>
<link wikidata="Q828" start="226" end="234" title="Americas" label="Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="236" end="242" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q48" start="266" end="270" title="Asia" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q55643" start="275" end="282" title="Oceania" label="Oceania"/>
<link wikidata="Q5308718" start="331" end="350" title="early modern period" label="early modern period"/>
<link wikidata="Q478024" start="466" end="481" title="List of largest empires" label="largest empires"/>
<link wikidata="Q7167" start="519" end="527" title="colonialism" label="colonies"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="529" end="538" title="Factory (trading post)#Portuguese feitorias (c. 1445)" label="factories"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="550" end="570" title="Territory#Overseas territory" label="overseas territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q45670" start="588" end="607" title="Kingdom of Portugal" label="Kingdom of Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q824489" start="623" end="643" title="Estado Novo (Portugal)" label="Republic of Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790360" start="670" end="685" title="colonial empire" label="colonial empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2888296" start="734" end="751" title="conquest of Ceuta" label="conquest of Ceuta"/>
<link wikidata="Q847839" start="783" end="817" title="transfer of sovereignty over Macau" label="transfer of sovereignty over Macau"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="821" end="826" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q45670" start="868" end="887" title="Kingdom of Portugal" label="Kingdom of Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q79791" start="949" end="960" title="Reconquista" label="Reconquista"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570124" start="962" end="996" title="Portuguese maritime exploration" label="Portuguese sailors began exploring"/>
<link wikidata="Q169560" start="1151" end="1158" title="caravel" label="caravel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778604" start="1227" end="1238" title="spice trade" label="spice trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q130377" start="1249" end="1264" title="Bartolomeu Dias" label="Bartolomeu Dias"/>
<link wikidata="Q4092" start="1277" end="1294" title="Cape of Good Hope" label="Cape of Good Hope"/>
<link wikidata="Q7328" start="1308" end="1321" title="Vasco da Gama" label="Vasco da Gama"/>
<link wikidata="Q174432" start="1417" end="1437" title="Pedro Álvares Cabral" label="Pedro Álvares Cabral"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="1460" end="1466" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q7232715" start="1587" end="1592" title="list of Portuguese colonial forts" label="forts"/>
<link wikidata="Q38234" start="1677" end="1685" title="Nagasaki" label="Nagasaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q34417" start="1955" end="1973" title="Philip II of Spain" label="Philip II of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3298746" start="1997" end="2024" title="War of the Portuguese Succession" label="seized the Portuguese crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q50675" start="2109" end="2123" title="historiography" label="historiography"/>
<link wikidata="Q377350" start="2131" end="2144" title="Iberian Union" label="Iberian Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q130654" start="2361" end="2375" title="Dutch colonial empire" label="Dutch Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q617219" start="2377" end="2384" title="English overseas possessions" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q179023" start="2390" end="2396" title="French colonial empire" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183679" start="2693" end="2715" title="Decolonization of the Americas" label="independence movements"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548600" start="2878" end="2900" title="independence of Brazil" label="independence of Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q16879646" start="2969" end="3018" title="Portuguese Africa (disambiguation)" label="forts and plantations along the African coastline"/>
<link wikidata="Q179848" start="3047" end="3066" title="Scramble for Africa" label="Scramble for Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q142965" start="3094" end="3110" title="Portuguese Timor" label="Portuguese Timor"/>
<link wikidata="Q15621274" start="3116" end="3124" title="Enclave and exclave" label="enclaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q323904" start="3135" end="3151" title="Portuguese India" label="Portuguese India"/>
<link wikidata="Q3916279" start="3164" end="3180" title="Portuguese Macau" label="Portuguese Macau"/>
<link wikidata="Q3320778" start="3187" end="3209" title="1890 British Ultimatum" label="1890 British Ultimatum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2593269" start="3236" end="3266" title="Pink Map" label="Portuguese ambitions in Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q151394" start="3275" end="3290" title="António de Oliveira Salazar" label="António Salazar"/>
<link wikidata="Q824489" start="3318" end="3354" title="Estado Novo (Portugal)" label="&amp;quot;Estado Novo&amp;quot; dictatorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205549" start="3450" end="3469" title="pluricontinentalism" label="pluricontinentalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q333542" start="3509" end="3526" title="overseas province" label="overseas province"/>
<link wikidata="Q5095321" start="3554" end="3577" title="Chibalo" label="system of forced labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q16243178" start="3603" end="3619" title="Assimilado" label="indigenous élite"/>
<link wikidata="Q798431" start="3661" end="3668" title="Republic of Dahomey" label="Dahomey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969968" start="3681" end="3715" title="Fort of São João Baptista de Ajudá" label="Fort of São João Baptista de Ajudá"/>
<link wikidata="Q626191" start="3743" end="3776" title="Annexation of Goa" label="India annexed Goa, Daman, and Diu"/>
<link wikidata="Q609836" start="3782" end="3805" title="Portuguese Colonial War" label="Portuguese Colonial War"/>
<link wikidata="Q193245" start="3910" end="3930" title="Carnation Revolution" label="Carnation Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146918" start="3972" end="4007" title="Decolonisation of Africa" label="decolonisation of Portuguese Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665403" start="4019" end="4054" title="Indonesian occupation of East Timor" label="1975 annexation of Portuguese Timor"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4122" end="4150" title="Processo Revolucionário Em Curso#The retornados" label="Portuguese colonial settlers"/>
<link wikidata="Q25103965" start="4163" end="4180" title="Luso-Africans" label="mixed-race people"/>
<link wikidata="Q847839" start="4209" end="4217" title="Transfer of sovereignty over Macau" label="returned"/>
<link wikidata="Q3916279" start="4218" end="4223" title="Portuguese Macau" label="Macau"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914565" start="4309" end="4327" title="Autonomous Regions of Portugal" label="Azores and Madeira"/>
<link wikidata="Q7225119" start="4415" end="4436" title="Political status of the Azores" label="constitutional status"/>
<link wikidata="Q333542" start="4448" end="4465" title="overseas province" label="overseas province"/>
<link wikidata="Q788176" start="4482" end="4500" title="autonomous regions" label="autonomous regions"/>
<link wikidata="Q182500" start="4513" end="4555" title="Community of Portuguese Speaking Countries" label="Community of Portuguese Speaking Countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="4621" end="4644" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="4680" end="4694" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q45670" start="4742" end="4761" title="Kingdom of Portugal" label="Kingdom of Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q79791" start="4779" end="4790" title="reconquista" label="reconquista"/>
<link wikidata="Q12837" start="4828" end="4845" title="Iberian Peninsula" label="Iberian Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q123559" start="4855" end="4860" title="Al-Andalus" label="Moors"/>
<link wikidata="Q26831" start="4986" end="4993" title="Algarve" label="Algarve"/>
<link wikidata="Q217196" start="5067" end="5074" title="Crown of Castile" label="Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q2844102" start="5100" end="5116" title="Treaty of Ayllón" label="Treaty of Ayllón"/>
<link wikidata="Q582861" start="5399" end="5416" title="Marinid Dynasty" label="Marinid Sultanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q12546" start="5496" end="5503" title="crusade" label="crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q5823" start="5743" end="5748" title="Ceuta" label="Ceuta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2888296" start="5910" end="5918" title="Conquest of Ceuta" label="conquest"/>
<link wikidata="Q213594" start="6535" end="6542" title="Infante" label="Infante"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138610" start="6543" end="6546" title="Dom (title)" label="Dom"/>
<link wikidata="Q182897" start="6547" end="6566" title="Henry the Navigator" label="Henry the Navigator"/>
<link wikidata="Q2888296" start="6597" end="6613" title="Conquest of Ceuta" label="capture of Ceuta"/>
<link wikidata="Q185222" start="6778" end="6790" title="Cape Bojador" label="Cape Bojador"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778604" start="6977" end="6988" title="spice trade" label="spice trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q118192" start="7053" end="7065" title="Prester John" label="Prester John"/>
<link wikidata="Q26253" start="7182" end="7189" title="Madeira" label="Madeira"/>
<link wikidata="Q25263" start="7201" end="7207" title="Azores" label="Azores"/>
<link wikidata="Q360804" start="7665" end="7680" title="Pêro da Covilhã" label="Pêro da Covilhã"/>
<link wikidata="Q185222" start="7994" end="8006" title="Cape Bojador" label="Cape Bojador"/>
<link wikidata="Q360391" start="8149" end="8158" title="Gil Eanes" label="Gil Eanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q552417" start="8270" end="8287" title="Infante Pedro, Duke of Coimbra" label="Infante Dom Pedro"/>
<link wikidata="Q189867" start="8480" end="8490" title="papal bull" label="papal bull"/>
<link wikidata="Q950731" start="8498" end="8510" title="Dum Diversas" label="Dum Diversas"/>
<link wikidata="Q542429" start="8534" end="8550" title="Romanus Pontifex" label="Romanus Pontifex"/>
<link wikidata="Q169560" start="8708" end="8715" title="caravel" label="caravel"/>
<link wikidata="Q34027" start="8925" end="8933" title="latitude" label="latitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041" start="8987" end="8994" title="Senegal" label="Senegal"/>
<link wikidata="Q216889" start="8999" end="9019" title="Cape Verde Peninsula" label="Cape Verde Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393765" start="9053" end="9061" title="feitoria" label="feitoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q651207" start="9123" end="9129" title="Arguin" label="Arguin"/>
<link wikidata="Q610871" start="9264" end="9280" title="Álvaro Fernandes" label="Álvaro Fernandes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044" start="9320" end="9332" title="Sierra Leone" label="Sierra Leone"/>
<link wikidata="Q41430" start="9342" end="9356" title="Gulf of Guinea" label="Gulf of Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011" start="9387" end="9397" title="Cape Verde" label="Cape Verde"/>
<link wikidata="Q36940" start="9465" end="9474" title="sugarcane" label="sugarcane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="9523" end="9529" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q174306" start="9544" end="9551" title="Republic of Genoa" label="Genoese"/>
<link wikidata="Q26831" start="9645" end="9652" title="Algarve" label="Algarve"/>
<link wikidata="Q12892" start="9889" end="9896" title="Antwerp" label="Antwerp"/>
<link wikidata="Q4865514" start="10121" end="10142" title="Bartolomeo Marchionni" label="Bartolomeo Marchionni"/>
<link wikidata="Q299119" start="10300" end="10308" title="Afonso V of Portugal" label="Afonso V"/>
<link wikidata="Q41430" start="10354" end="10368" title="Gulf of Guinea" label="Gulf of Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2575693" start="10381" end="10393" title="Fernão Gomes" label="Fernão Gomes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1039" start="10516" end="10537" title="São Tomé and Príncipe" label="São Tomé and Príncipe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6185405" start="10560" end="10568" title="alluvial" label="alluvial"/>
<link wikidata="Q968662" start="10658" end="10662" title="Elmina" label="Mina"/>
<link wikidata="Q282135" start="10783" end="10814" title="War of the Castilian Succession" label="War of the Castilian Succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q217196" start="10824" end="10832" title="Crown of Castile" label="Castilia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3772937" start="10933" end="10949" title="Battle of Guinea" label="Battle of Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q217637" start="11039" end="11046" title="John II of Portugal" label="João II"/>
<link wikidata="Q55264655" start="11064" end="11081" title="São Jorge da Mina" label="São Jorge da Mina"/>
<link wikidata="Q3503" start="11253" end="11264" title="Congo River" label="Congo River"/>
<link wikidata="Q313060" start="11268" end="11277" title="Diogo Cão" label="Diogo Cão"/>
<link wikidata="Q796583" start="11359" end="11375" title="Kingdom of Kongo" label="Kingdom of Kongo"/>
<link wikidata="Q858128" start="11465" end="11475" title="Cape Cross" label="Cape Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030" start="11492" end="11499" title="Namibia" label="Namibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q177440" start="11510" end="11529" title="Tropic of Capricorn" label="Tropic of Capricorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q130377" start="11540" end="11555" title="Bartolomeu Dias" label="Bartolomeu Dias"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130009" start="11603" end="11619" title="Great Fish River" label="Great Fish River"/>
<link wikidata="Q34943" start="11690" end="11697" title="Ptolemy" label="Ptolemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q123480" start="11724" end="11735" title="land-locked" label="land-locked"/>
<link wikidata="Q360804" start="11752" end="11767" title="Pêro da Covilhã" label="Pêro da Covilhã"/>
<link wikidata="Q115" start="11811" end="11819" title="Ethiopia" label="Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1463776" start="11973" end="11980" title="Padrão" label="padrões"/>
<link wikidata="Q7322" start="12474" end="12494" title="Christopher Columbus" label="Christopher Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q127834" start="12534" end="12543" title="New World" label="New World"/>
<link wikidata="Q180897" start="12668" end="12689" title="Treaty of Tordesillas" label="Treaty of Tordesillas"/>
<link wikidata="Q750207" start="12757" end="12764" title="duopoly" label="duopoly"/>
<link wikidata="Q660818" start="12837" end="12844" title="League (unit)" label="leagues"/>
<link wikidata="Q36477" start="12948" end="12957" title="longitude" label="longitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q951383" start="13462" end="13484" title="Discovery of the sea route to India" label="ground-breaking voyage"/>
<link wikidata="Q7328" start="13498" end="13511" title="Vasco da Gama" label="Vasco da Gama"/>
<link wikidata="Q7328" start="13577" end="13590" title="Vasco da Gama" label="Vasco da Gama"/>
<link wikidata="Q28729" start="13768" end="13775" title="Kozhikode" label="Calicut"/>
<link wikidata="Q2122988" start="13813" end="13820" title="Zamorin" label="Zamorin"/>
<link wikidata="Q28729" start="13837" end="13846" title="Kozhikode" label="Kozhikode"/>
<link wikidata="Q174432" start="13940" end="13960" title="Pedro Álvares Cabral" label="Pedro Álvares Cabral"/>
<link wikidata="Q42675898" start="14439" end="14449" title="Paubrasilia" label="pau-brasil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239" start="14691" end="14703" title="Indian Ocean" label="Indian Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q4216134" start="14739" end="14745" title="cartaz" label="cartaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q150056" start="14873" end="14887" title="Cochin kingdom" label="ruler of Kochi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2122988" start="14896" end="14903" title="Zamorin" label="Zamorin"/>
<link wikidata="Q130261957" start="14907" end="14914" title="History of Kozhikode" label="Calicut"/>
<link wikidata="Q18355920" start="15009" end="15034" title="Fort Emmanuel" label="fort &amp;quot;Immanuel&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595166" start="15036" end="15046" title="Fort Kochi" label="Fort Kochi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7682823" start="15150" end="15160" title="Tangasseri" label="Tangasseri"/>
<link wikidata="Q321475" start="15162" end="15168" title="Quilon" label="Quilon"/>
<link wikidata="Q321475" start="15190" end="15196" title="Kollam" label="Kollam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1800" start="15302" end="15308" title="Cochin" label="Cochin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4789666" start="15341" end="15350" title="Kannur" label="Cannanore"/>
<link wikidata="Q321475" start="15401" end="15407" title="Quilon" label="Quilon"/>
<link wikidata="Q191231" start="15430" end="15450" title="Manuel I of Portugal" label="Manuel I of Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q337066" start="15461" end="15481" title="Francisco de Almeida" label="Francisco de Almeida"/>
<link wikidata="Q244741" start="15488" end="15495" title="Viceroy" label="Viceroy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4789666" start="15609" end="15615" title="Kannur" label="Kannur"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663176" start="15636" end="15651" title="St. Angelo Fort" label="St. Angelo Fort"/>
<link wikidata="Q2657862" start="15657" end="15676" title="Lourenço de Almeida" label="Lourenço de Almeida"/>
<link wikidata="Q854" start="15688" end="15694" title="Ceylon" label="Ceylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q28165" start="15749" end="15757" title="cinnamon" label="cinnamon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5032506" start="15768" end="15777" title="Cankili I" label="Cankili I"/>
<link wikidata="Q215277" start="15781" end="15787" title="Jaffna" label="Jaffna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1311219" start="15830" end="15844" title="Jaffna kingdom" label="Jaffna kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q323873" start="16004" end="16015" title="Trincomalee" label="Trincomalee"/>
<link wikidata="Q81116" start="16387" end="16403" title="Tristão da Cunha" label="Tristão da Cunha"/>
<link wikidata="Q204397" start="16408" end="16429" title="Afonso de Albuquerque" label="Afonso de Albuquerque"/>
<link wikidata="Q82859" start="16440" end="16447" title="Socotra" label="Socotra"/>
<link wikidata="Q23406" start="16471" end="16478" title="Red Sea" label="Red Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q3826" start="16491" end="16497" title="Muscat, Oman" label="Muscat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478280" start="16532" end="16537" title="Ormus" label="Ormuz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019" start="16633" end="16643" title="Madagascar" label="Madagascar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027" start="16678" end="16687" title="Mauritius" label="Mauritius"/>
<link wikidata="Q507796" start="17253" end="17273" title="Sultanate of Gujarat" label="Sultanate of Gujarat"/>
<link wikidata="Q947784" start="17350" end="17366" title="Mamluk" label="Mamlûk Sultanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q286337" start="17374" end="17400" title="Al-Ashraf Qansuh al-Ghawri" label="Al-Ashraf Qansuh al-Ghawri"/>
<link wikidata="Q4087480" start="17479" end="17484" title="Battle of Chaul" label="Chaul"/>
<link wikidata="Q2657862" start="17512" end="17530" title="Lourenço de Almeida" label="Almeida&amp;#x27;s son"/>
<link wikidata="Q1628477" start="17627" end="17640" title="Battle of Diu (1509)" label="Battle of Diu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1226851" start="17856" end="17879" title="Diogo Lopes de Sequeira" label="Diogo Lopes de Sequeira"/>
<link wikidata="Q213137" start="18343" end="18354" title="East Indies" label="East Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q553907" start="18375" end="18384" title="Velha Goa" label="Velha Goa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2903677" start="18396" end="18406" title="Cape route" label="Cape route"/>
<link wikidata="Q184138" start="18750" end="18763" title="Arabian horse" label="Arabian horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2357384" start="18774" end="18800" title="Portuguese Conquest of Goa (1510)" label="The initial capture of Goa"/>
<link wikidata="Q83821" start="18810" end="18827" title="Adil Shahi dynasty" label="Bijapur sultanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q201559" start="18900" end="18909" title="privateer" label="privateer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7806913" start="18910" end="18916" title="Timoji" label="Timoji"/>
<link wikidata="Q464780" start="19016" end="19020" title="Mint (coin)" label="mint"/>
<link wikidata="Q179718" start="19122" end="19135" title="St. Catherine of Alexandria" label="St. Catherine"/>
<link wikidata="Q167639" start="19372" end="19391" title="Vijayanagara Empire" label="Vijayanagara Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q185221" start="19431" end="19438" title="Malacca" label="Malacca"/>
<link wikidata="Q18758" start="19446" end="19461" title="Malay Peninsula" label="Malay Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918061" start="19623" end="19634" title="People of Ethiopia" label="Abyssinians"/>
<link wikidata="Q611584" start="19826" end="19842" title="Antonio de Abreu" label="Antonio de Abreu"/>
<link wikidata="Q554452" start="19847" end="19863" title="Francisco Serrão" label="Francisco Serrão"/>
<link wikidata="Q1955098" start="20072" end="20080" title="A Famosa" label="A Famosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981637" start="20199" end="20215" title="Duarte Fernandes" label="Duarte Fernandes"/>
<link wikidata="Q841364" start="20247" end="20262" title="Ayutthaya Kingdom" label="Kingdom of Siam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029176" start="20475" end="20491" title="Jorge de Menezes" label="Jorge de Meneses"/>
<link wikidata="Q40285" start="20503" end="20513" title="New Guinea" label="New Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q115164587" start="20579" end="20595" title="João da Silveira" label="João da Silveira"/>
<link wikidata="Q376749" start="20617" end="20627" title="Chittagong" label="Chittagong"/>
<link wikidata="Q16933320" start="20675" end="20699" title="Portuguese settlement in Chittagong" label="settlement in Chittagong"/>
<link wikidata="Q739687" start="20770" end="20781" title="Hugli River" label="Hugli River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2600890" start="21155" end="21173" title="Rafael Perestrello" label="Rafael Perestrello"/>
<link wikidata="Q5452540" start="21371" end="21387" title="Battle of Tunmen" label="Battle of Tunmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q20640449" start="21391" end="21396" title="Tamão" label="Tamão"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758751" start="21400" end="21408" title="Tuen Mun" label="Tuen Mun"/>
<link wikidata="Q7443119" start="21456" end="21476" title="Battle of Sincouwaan" label="Battle of Sincouwaan"/>
<link wikidata="Q502379" start="21480" end="21493" title="Lantau Island" label="Lantau Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q10911959" start="21533" end="21541" title="Shuangyu" label="Shuangyu"/>
<link wikidata="Q970541" start="21602" end="21620" title="Dongshan County" label="Dongshan Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q5518426" start="21655" end="21670" title="Galeote Pereira" label="Galeote Pereira"/>
<link wikidata="Q2243678" start="21840" end="21849" title="matchlock" label="matchlock"/>
<link wikidata="Q178243" start="21850" end="21856" title="musket" label="musket"/>
<link wikidata="Q168289" start="21857" end="21865" title="arquebus" label="arquebus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21885" end="21894" title="Gun control in China#History" label="bird guns"/>
<link wikidata="Q11246676" start="21899" end="21924" title="breech-loading swivel gun" label="breech-loading swivel gun"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21956" end="21964" title="Franks#Crusaders and other Western Europeans as &amp;quot;Franks&amp;quot;" label="Frankish"/>
<link wikidata="Q13581279" start="22187" end="22216" title="Luso-Chinese agreement (1554)" label="Luso-Chinese agreement (1554)"/>
<link wikidata="Q876244" start="22308" end="22313" title="taels" label="taels"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22524" end="22540" title="Fernão Pires de Andrade#Andrade&amp;#x27;s brother and spoiled relations" label="Simão de Andrade"/>
<link wikidata="Q42780" start="23395" end="23401" title="Ningbo" label="Ningbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q41705" start="23406" end="23412" title="Fujian" label="Fujian"/>
<link wikidata="Q697605" start="23579" end="23596" title="Japanese pirates" label="Japanese pirating"/>
<link wikidata="Q1496" start="23970" end="23978" title="Ferdinand Magellan" label="Magellan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3827" start="24106" end="24122" title="Moluccas islands" label="Moluccas islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q180897" start="24162" end="24183" title="Treaty of Tordesillas" label="Treaty of Tordesillas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3751621" start="24245" end="24267" title="García Jofre de Loaísa" label="García Jofre de Loaísa"/>
<link wikidata="Q12506955" start="24301" end="24307" title="Tidore" label="Tidore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147471" start="24469" end="24487" title="Treaty of Zaragoza" label="Treaty of Zaragoza"/>
<link wikidata="Q887803" start="24605" end="24620" title="Bruneian Empire" label="Bruneian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q862532" start="24847" end="24860" title="Ajuran Sultanate" label="Ajuran Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="24869" end="24883" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1106847" start="24897" end="24906" title="Capture of Ormuz (1507)" label="conquered"/>
<link wikidata="Q3244694" start="24911" end="24917" title="Huwala" label="Huwala"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478280" start="24927" end="24933" title="Ormus" label="Hormuz"/>
<link wikidata="Q131694" start="25010" end="25014" title="Aden" label="Aden"/>
<link wikidata="Q55885827" start="25025" end="25033" title="Siege of Aden" label="resisted"/>
<link wikidata="Q2587384" start="25134" end="25159" title="Lopo Soares de Albergaria" label="Lopo Soares de Albergaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q4777544" start="25192" end="25207" title="António Correia (admiral)" label="António Correia"/>
<link wikidata="Q398" start="25217" end="25224" title="Bahrain" label="Bahrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q4116181" start="25240" end="25246" title="Jabrid" label="Jabrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q4117450" start="25253" end="25269" title="Muqrin ibn Zamil" label="Muqrin ibn Zamil"/>
<link wikidata="Q331099" start="25463" end="25483" title="island of Mozambique" label="island of Mozambique"/>
<link wikidata="Q1814572" start="25529" end="25547" title="Fort São Sebastião" label="Fort São Sebastião"/>
<link wikidata="Q33296" start="25678" end="25685" title="Mughals" label="Mughals"/>
<link wikidata="Q41827" start="25711" end="25717" title="Chitor" label="Chitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q147886" start="25722" end="25727" title="Mandu, Madhya Pradesh" label="Mandu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2879342" start="25740" end="25763" title="Bahadur Shah of Gujarat" label="Bahadur Shah of Gujarat"/>
<link wikidata="Q4887044" start="25787" end="25804" title="Treaty of Bassein (1534)" label="Treaty of Bassein"/>
<link wikidata="Q463252" start="25893" end="25898" title="Daman, Daman and Diu" label="Daman"/>
<link wikidata="Q631849" start="25900" end="25903" title="Diu, India" label="Diu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156" start="25905" end="25911" title="Mumbai" label="Mumbai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1949022" start="25916" end="25923" title="Vasai" label="Bassein"/>
<link wikidata="Q23406" start="25988" end="25995" title="Red Sea" label="Red Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q486188" start="26084" end="26091" title="Humayun" label="Humayun"/>
<link wikidata="Q3394749" start="26419" end="26423" title="Siege of Diu (1538)" label="1538"/>
<link wikidata="Q7443525" start="26428" end="26432" title="Siege of Diu (1546)" label="1546"/>
<link wikidata="Q36755" start="26652" end="26667" title="Sinai Peninsula" label="Sinai Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q207521" start="26966" end="26996" title="Ethiopian Empire" label="Ethiopian (Abyssinian) Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2365048" start="27253" end="27267" title="Adal Sultanate" label="Adal Sultanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2889965" start="27299" end="27321" title="battle of Shimbra Kure" label="battle of Shimbra Kure"/>
<link wikidata="Q319288" start="27363" end="27369" title="Ethiopian Highlands" label="region"/>
<link wikidata="Q887847" start="27405" end="27415" title="Gelawdewos of Ethiopia" label="Gelawdewos"/>
<link wikidata="Q335728" start="27580" end="27606" title="Ahmad ibn Ibrahim al-Ghazi" label="Ahmad ibn Ibrahim al-Ghazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q957263" start="27614" end="27634" title="battle of Wayna Daga" label="battle of Wayna Daga"/>
<link wikidata="Q796583" start="27734" end="27743" title="Kingdom of Kongo" label="Kongolose"/>
<link wikidata="Q1796232" start="27757" end="27763" title="Kingdom of Ndongo" label="Ndongo"/>
<link wikidata="Q383455" start="27858" end="27866" title="Afonso I of Kongo" label="Afonso I"/>
<link wikidata="Q6122041" start="28248" end="28252" title="Jaga (Kongo)" label="Jaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243549" start="28437" end="28457" title="Paulo Dias de Novais" label="Paulo Dias de Novais"/>
<link wikidata="Q1796232" start="28724" end="28730" title="Kingdom of Ndongo" label="Kabasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q48808942" start="29206" end="29214" title="chikunda" label="chikunda"/>
<link wikidata="Q854468" start="29455" end="29472" title="Kingdom of Mutapa" label="Kingdom of Mutapa"/>
<link wikidata="Q163900" start="29592" end="29606" title="Francis Xavier" label="Francis Xavier"/>
<link wikidata="Q620045" start="29678" end="29698" title="Apostolic Nunciature" label="Apostolic Nunciature"/>
<link wikidata="Q10285260" start="29717" end="29734" title="Francisco Zeimoto" label="Francisco Zeimoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q48700357" start="29736" end="29748" title="António Mota" label="António Mota"/>
<link wikidata="Q363923" start="29818" end="29837" title="Fernão Mendes Pinto" label="Fernão Mendes Pinto"/>
<link wikidata="Q696228" start="29890" end="29901" title="Tanegashima" label="Tanegashima"/>
<link wikidata="Q358057" start="29938" end="29946" title="Tanegashima (Japanese matchlock)" label="firearms"/>
<link wikidata="Q38234" start="30114" end="30122" title="Nagasaki" label="Nagasaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="30459" end="30465" title="Society of Jesus" label="Jesuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="30514" end="30525" title="Catholicism" label="Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q180897" start="30642" end="30663" title="Treaty of Tordesillas" label="Treaty of Tordesillas"/>
<link wikidata="Q85642" start="30797" end="30807" title="John Cabot" label="John Cabot"/>
<link wikidata="Q3052766" start="30858" end="30881" title="João Fernandes Lavrador" label="João Fernandes Lavrador"/>
<link wikidata="Q223" start="30891" end="30900" title="Greenland" label="Greenland"/>
<link wikidata="Q374424" start="31086" end="31092" title="Gaspar Corte-Real" label="Gaspar"/>
<link wikidata="Q748766" start="31097" end="31114" title="Miguel Corte-Real" label="Miguel Corte-Real"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003" start="31163" end="31188" title="Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Newfoundland and Labrador"/>
<link wikidata="Q3115062" start="31336" end="31357" title="João Álvares Fagundes" label="João Álvares Fagundes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3036201" start="31370" end="31378" title="Donatário" label="donatary"/>
<link wikidata="Q169523" start="31414" end="31434" title="Gulf of St. Lawrence" label="Gulf of St. Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q188489" start="31468" end="31486" title="Cape Breton Island" label="Cape Breton Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q715344" start="31902" end="31916" title="Gonçalo Coelho" label="Gonçalo Coelho"/>
<link wikidata="Q864038" start="31977" end="32005" title="Binot Paulmier de Gonneville" label="Binot Paulmier de Gonneville"/>
<link wikidata="Q129857" start="32107" end="32116" title="Francis I of France" label="Francis I"/>
<link wikidata="Q180897" start="32173" end="32194" title="Treaty of Tordesilhas" label="Treaty of Tordesilhas"/>
<link wikidata="Q216789" start="32344" end="32352" title="João III" label="João III"/>
<link wikidata="Q704141" start="32459" end="32481" title="Martim Afonso de Sousa" label="Martim Afonso de Sousa"/>
<link wikidata="Q272254" start="32627" end="32638" title="São Vicente, Brazil" label="São Vicente"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785759" start="32697" end="32714" title="List of governors of Portuguese India" label="governor of India"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="33199" end="33210" title="Colonial Brazil#Captaincies" label="captaincies"/>
<link wikidata="Q26253" start="33317" end="33324" title="Madeira" label="Madeira"/>
<link wikidata="Q3023340" start="33329" end="33339" title="Colonial Cape Verde" label="Cape Verde"/>
<link wikidata="Q2937346" start="33354" end="33367" title="captain-major" label="captain-major"/>
<link wikidata="Q703704" start="33718" end="33732" title="João de Barros" label="João de Barros"/>
<link wikidata="Q40942" start="33782" end="33792" title="Pernambuco" label="Pernambuco"/>
<link wikidata="Q36940" start="33856" end="33866" title="sugar cane" label="sugar cane"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="33920" end="33936" title="Indigenous peoples of the Americas" label="Native Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q36940" start="34140" end="34150" title="sugar cane" label="sugar cane"/>
<link wikidata="Q2554759" start="34490" end="34503" title="Tomé de Sousa" label="Tomé de Sousa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1310944" start="34553" end="34570" title="Bay of All Saints" label="Bay of All Saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q2843805" start="34589" end="34607" title="Captaincy of Bahia" label="Captaincy of Bahia"/>
<link wikidata="Q36947" start="34653" end="34661" title="Salvador, Brazil" label="Salvador"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="34771" end="34778" title="Society of Jesus" label="Jesuits"/>
<link wikidata="Q734274" start="34786" end="34803" title="Manuel da Nóbrega" label="Manuel da Nóbrega"/>
<link wikidata="Q174" start="34916" end="34925" title="São Paulo" label="São Paulo"/>
<link wikidata="Q133780" start="35041" end="35047" title="plague (disease)" label="plague"/>
<link wikidata="Q12214" start="35052" end="35060" title="smallpox" label="smallpox"/>
<link wikidata="Q224101" start="35129" end="35142" title="Guanabara Bay" label="Guanabara Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353951" start="35166" end="35184" title="France Antarctique" label="France Antarctique"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="35228" end="35233" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q2734857" start="35285" end="35294" title="Mem de Sá" label="Mem de Sá"/>
<link wikidata="Q101935" start="35414" end="35422" title="Huguenot" label="Huguenot"/>
<link wikidata="Q101849" start="35433" end="35442" title="Calvinist" label="Calvinist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1532671" start="35583" end="35593" title="Glória, Rio de Janeiro" label="Gloria Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q995561" start="35595" end="35609" title="Flamengo, Rio de Janeiro" label="Flamengo Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1658442" start="35615" end="35624" title="Governador Island" label="Parapapuã"/>
<link wikidata="Q120684" start="35652" end="35658" title="Tupí people" label="Tamoio"/>
<link wikidata="Q317126" start="36016" end="36032" title="José de Anchieta" label="José de Anchieta"/>
<link wikidata="Q640101" start="36240" end="36253" title="Estácio de Sá" label="Estácio de Sá"/>
<link wikidata="Q8678" start="36284" end="36298" title="Rio de Janeiro" label="Rio de Janeiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q34417" start="36669" end="36687" title="Philip II of Spain" label="Philip II of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2332476" start="36713" end="36733" title="1580 Portuguese succession crisis" label="crisis of succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q272899" start="36756" end="36777" title="Sebastian, King of Portugal" label="Sebastião of Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121532" start="36811" end="36846" title="Battle of Alcácer Quibir" label="Portuguese attack on Alcácer Quibir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028" start="36850" end="36857" title="Morocco" label="Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q600093" start="36990" end="37006" title="Spanish Habsburgs" label="Spanish Habsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1102202" start="37017" end="37025" title="Dynastic union" label="dynastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q377350" start="37026" end="37039" title="Iberian Union" label="Iberian Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q887282" start="37189" end="37208" title="List of Viceroys of Portugal during the Iberian Union" label="Viceroy of Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q12837" start="37367" end="37384" title="Iberian peninsula" label="Iberian peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q25263" start="37463" end="37469" title="Azores" label="Azores"/>
<link wikidata="Q321325" start="37490" end="37497" title="António, Prior of Crato" label="António"/>
<link wikidata="Q131552" start="37573" end="37592" title="Catherine de Medici" label="Catherine de Medici"/>
<link wikidata="Q806283" start="38114" end="38126" title="bandeirantes" label="bandeirantes"/>
<link wikidata="Q170072" start="38424" end="38438" title="Dutch Republic" label="Dutch Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q164432" start="38578" end="38603" title="Eighty Years War" label="struggle for independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q170072" start="38643" end="38658" title="Dutch Republic" label="Seven Provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q65968" start="38688" end="38701" title="House of Habsburg" label="Habsburg rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q21099469" start="39142" end="39149" title="asiento" label="asiento"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461" start="39293" end="39299" title="Manila" label="Manila"/>
<link wikidata="Q430726" start="39603" end="39617" title="Anglo-Spanish War (1585–1604)" label="war with Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q15197201" start="39636" end="39644" title="Battle of Flores (1592)" label="captured"/>
<link wikidata="Q3281901" start="39692" end="39705" title="Madre de Deus" label="Madre de Deus"/>
<link wikidata="Q25224" start="39802" end="39808" title="Pound sterling" label="pounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q558994" start="39965" end="39984" title="Cornelis de Houtman" label="Cornelis de Houtman"/>
<link wikidata="Q941383" start="40232" end="40258" title="Jan Huyghen van Linschoten" label="Jan Huyghen van Linschoten"/>
<link wikidata="Q83164" start="40750" end="40768" title="East India Company" label="East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q162157" start="40860" end="40879" title="chartered companies" label="chartered companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q377269" start="41000" end="41020" title="Dutch–Portuguese War" label="Dutch–Portuguese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q130654" start="41138" end="41150" title="Dutch Empire" label="Dutch Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2988343" start="41289" end="41296" title="Portuguese Malacca" label="Malacca"/>
<link wikidata="Q770048" start="41305" end="41326" title="Portuguese Gold Coast" label="Portuguese Gold Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1709007" start="41335" end="41341" title="Portuguese Ceylon" label="Ceylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1800" start="41354" end="41359" title="Kochi" label="Kochi"/>
<link wikidata="Q221357" start="41447" end="41463" title="Dutch Brazil" label="northeast Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q2826232" start="41475" end="41481" title="Portuguese Angola" label="Luanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q398" start="41634" end="41641" title="Bahrain" label="Bahrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031465" start="41651" end="41656" title="Capture of Ormuz (1622)" label="Ormuz"/>
<link wikidata="Q18234383" start="41697" end="41705" title="Safavid Empire" label="Safavids"/>
<link wikidata="Q3826" start="41735" end="41741" title="Muscat, Oman" label="Muscat"/>
<link wikidata="Q842" start="41758" end="41762" title="Oman" label="Oman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752110" start="41773" end="41789" title="Yaruba dynasty" label="Al-Ya&amp;#x27;arubs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2567256" start="41803" end="41825" title="Battle off Hormuz (1625)" label="1625 Battle off Hormuz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107697" start="41860" end="41883" title="Portuguese–Safavid wars" label="Portuguese–Safavid wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q17070460" start="42004" end="42042" title="Siege of Fort Jesus" label="including capturing Fort Jesus in 1698"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774" start="42072" end="42080" title="Zanzibar" label="Zanzibar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501724" start="42415" end="42441" title="Portuguese Restoration War" label="Portuguese Restoration War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3470325" start="43189" end="43203" title="Salvador de Sá" label="Salvador de Sá"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156" start="43236" end="43242" title="Bombay" label="Bombay"/>
<link wikidata="Q106200447" start="43247" end="43254" title="Portuguese Tangier" label="Tangier"/>
<link wikidata="Q377350" start="43456" end="43469" title="Iberian Union" label="Iberian Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q5823" start="43512" end="43517" title="Ceuta" label="Ceuta"/>
<link wikidata="Q5099387" start="43597" end="43610" title="Chimnaji Appa" label="Chimnaji Appa"/>
<link wikidata="Q83618" start="43618" end="43632" title="Maratha Confederacy" label="Maratha Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7499346" start="43640" end="43655" title="Shivappa Nayaka" label="Shivappa Nayaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587991" start="43663" end="43684" title="Keladi Nayaka Kingdom" label="Keladi Nayaka Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1171" start="43771" end="43774" title="Goa" label="Goa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1171" start="44009" end="44012" title="Goa" label="Goa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4183482" start="44017" end="44041" title="Conspiracy of the Pintos" label="Conspiracy of the Pintos"/>
<link wikidata="Q45" start="44173" end="44183" title="Portugal" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q858424" start="44264" end="44272" title="Candolim" label="Candolim"/>
<link wikidata="Q3632943" start="44296" end="44302" title="Bardez" label="Bardez"/>
<link wikidata="Q862086" start="44540" end="44546" title="People from India" label="Indian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774205" start="44578" end="44585" title="Fidalgo" label="Fidalgo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2077463" start="44684" end="44703" title="Portuguese nobility" label="Portuguese nobility"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="44748" end="44753" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="44778" end="44786" title="Catholic" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q42675898" start="44920" end="44930" title="brazilwood" label="brazilwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q39109" start="45018" end="45030" title="Minas Gerais" label="Minas Gerais"/>
<link wikidata="Q42824" start="45106" end="45117" title="Mato Grosso" label="Mato Grosso"/>
<link wikidata="Q4958632" start="45143" end="45152" title="Brazil Gold Rush" label="gold rush"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="46527" end="46531" title="Akan peoples" label="Akan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454489" start="46917" end="46928" title="manumission" label="manumission"/>
<link wikidata="Q191923" start="47049" end="47058" title="mulattoes" label="mulattoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q191055" start="47615" end="47625" title="1755 Lisbon earthquake" label="earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q8070" start="47660" end="47667" title="tsunami" label="tsunami"/>
<link wikidata="Q2088324" start="48514" end="48543" title="Colonial Brazil" label="colonial territory in America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200068" start="48549" end="48560" title="capitania" label="captaincies"/>
<link wikidata="Q36947" start="48624" end="48632" title="Salvador da Bahia" label="Salvador"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="48792" end="48799" title="Jesuits" label="Jesuits"/>
<link wikidata="Q3776440" start="48876" end="48893" title="Marquis of Pombal" label="Marquis of Pombal"/>
<link wikidata="Q106713" start="49053" end="49060" title="mestizo" label="mestizo"/>
<link wikidata="Q12539" start="49745" end="49758" title="Age of Enlightenment" label="Enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="Q39109" start="50035" end="50047" title="Minas Gerais" label="Minas Gerais"/>
<link wikidata="Q2558843" start="50110" end="50131" title="Inconfidência Mineira" label="Inconfidência Mineira"/>
<link wikidata="Q527112" start="50248" end="50258" title="Tiradentes" label="Tiradentes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="50417" end="50434" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q689128" start="50939" end="50963" title="Haitian Revolution" label="&amp;quot;second Haiti&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="51476" end="51494" title="Napoleon Bonaparte" label="Napoleon Bonaparte"/>
<link wikidata="Q676301" start="51517" end="51525" title="John VI of Portugal" label="Dom João"/>
<link wikidata="Q729924" start="51527" end="51540" title="prince regent" label="prince regent"/>
<link wikidata="Q773874" start="51565" end="51578" title="Maria I of Portugal" label="Queen Maria I"/>
<link wikidata="Q903779" start="51730" end="51781" title="United Kingdom of Portugal, Brazil and the Algarves" label="United Kingdom of Portugal, Brazil and the Algarves"/>
<link wikidata="Q5244869" start="52045" end="52079" title="Portuguese Cortes" label="Cortes Constitucionais Portuguesas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1822923" start="52175" end="52201" title="Liberal Revolution of 1820" label="Liberal Revolution of 1820"/>
<link wikidata="Q939" start="52387" end="52398" title="Dom Pedro I" label="Dom Pedro I"/>
<link wikidata="Q217230" start="52494" end="52510" title="Empire of Brazil" label="Empire of Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q3245246" start="52680" end="52700" title="European colonialism" label="European colonialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q18" start="52757" end="52770" title="South America" label="South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q921705" start="53042" end="53053" title="Alexandre de Serpa Pinto" label="Serpa Pinto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250265" start="53055" end="53074" title="Hermenegildo Capelo" label="Hermenegildo Capelo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1744490" start="53079" end="53092" title="Roberto Ivens" label="Roberto Ivens"/>
<link wikidata="Q2593269" start="53269" end="53277" title="Pink Map" label="Pink Map"/>
<link wikidata="Q85" start="53463" end="53468" title="Cairo" label="Cairo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465" start="53472" end="53481" title="Cape Town" label="Cape Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q3320778" start="53487" end="53509" title="1890 British Ultimatum" label="1890 British Ultimatum"/>
<link wikidata="Q158874" start="53538" end="53558" title="Carlos I of Portugal" label="Carlos I of Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q372740" start="53708" end="53719" title="Luís Filipe, Prince Royal of Portugal" label="Luís Filipe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665185" start="53725" end="53737" title="Lisbon Regicide" label="assassinated"/>
<link wikidata="Q4723816" start="53803" end="53824" title="Alfredo Luís da Costa" label="Alfredo Luís da Costa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6752466" start="53829" end="53841" title="Manuel Buíça" label="Manuel Buíça"/>
<link wikidata="Q154308" start="53891" end="53912" title="Manuel II of Portugal" label="Manuel II of Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270" start="54061" end="54069" title="republic" label="republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1742340" start="54351" end="54366" title="Kionga Triangle" label="Kionga Triangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q26253" start="54743" end="54750" title="Madeira" label="Madeira"/>
<link wikidata="Q2935787" start="54889" end="54912" title="Canadian Forestry Corps" label="Canadian Forestry Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q7232635" start="55010" end="55030" title="Portuguese Fireplace" label="Portuguese Fireplace"/>
<link wikidata="Q428661" start="55339" end="55346" title="U-boats" label="U-boats"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088364" start="55585" end="55601" title="Battle of La Lys" label="Battle of La Lys"/>
<link wikidata="Q199820" start="55868" end="55889" title="Paris Peace Conference, 1919" label="Versailles Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q678176" start="55995" end="56009" title="uti possidetis" label="uti possidetis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1742340" start="56060" end="56066" title="Kionga" label="Kionga"/>
<link wikidata="Q924" start="56094" end="56102" title="Tanzania" label="Tanzania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011" start="56180" end="56190" title="Cape Verde" label="Cape Verde"/>
<link wikidata="Q1039" start="56192" end="56213" title="São Tomé and Príncipe" label="São Tomé and Príncipe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1007" start="56215" end="56228" title="Guinea-Bissau" label="Guinea-Bissau"/>
<link wikidata="Q916" start="56230" end="56236" title="Angola" label="Angola"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029" start="56242" end="56252" title="Mozambique" label="Mozambique"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="56316" end="56328" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="56429" end="56437" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q646374" start="56695" end="56712" title="French India" label="enclaves in India"/>
<link wikidata="Q151394" start="56836" end="56863" title="António de Oliveira Salazar" label="António de Oliveira Salazar"/>
<link wikidata="Q192711" start="56932" end="56953" title="Prime Minister of India" label="Indian Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047" start="56954" end="56970" title="Jawaharlal Nehru" label="Jawaharlal Nehru"/>
<link wikidata="Q46107" start="57266" end="57288" title="Dadra and Nagar Haveli" label="Dadra and Nagar Haveli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1171" start="57610" end="57613" title="Goa" label="Goa"/>
<link wikidata="Q66710" start="57615" end="57628" title="Daman and Diu" label="Daman and Diu"/>
<link wikidata="Q626191" start="57649" end="57657" title="1961 Indian Annexation of Goa" label="captured"/>
<link wikidata="Q850031" start="58449" end="58455" title="Ouidah" label="Ouidah"/>
<link wikidata="Q962" start="58550" end="58555" title="Benin" label="Benin"/>
<link wikidata="Q586948" start="59343" end="59371" title="Movimento das Forças Armadas" label="Movimento das Forças Armadas"/>
<link wikidata="Q609836" start="59450" end="59473" title="Portuguese Colonial War" label="Portuguese Colonial War"/>
<link wikidata="Q824489" start="59636" end="59647" title="Estado Novo (Portugal)" label="Estado Novo"/>
<link wikidata="Q193245" start="59683" end="59703" title="Carnation Revolution" label="Carnation Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1701778" start="59792" end="59816" title="National Salvation Junta" label="National Salvation Junta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2826232" start="60056" end="60062" title="Overseas Province of Angola" label="Angola"/>
<link wikidata="Q889394" start="60067" end="60077" title="Overseas Province of Mozambique" label="Mozambique"/>
<link wikidata="Q626191" start="60259" end="60298" title="Invasion of Goa" label="invaded by India&amp;#x27;s military forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969968" start="60348" end="60374" title="São João Baptista de Ajudá" label="São João Baptista de Ajudá"/>
<link wikidata="Q12055176" start="60425" end="60431" title="Angolan Civil War" label="Angola"/>
<link wikidata="Q657661" start="60436" end="60446" title="Mozambican Civil War" label="Mozambique"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500954" start="60661" end="60666" title="Zaire" label="Zaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q574" start="60705" end="60715" title="East Timor" label="East Timor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2583734" start="60903" end="60923" title="Indonesian invasion of East Timor" label="invaded by Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665403" start="60937" end="60945" title="Indonesian occupation of East Timor" label="occupied"/>
<link wikidata="Q2492380" start="60963" end="60998" title="East Timor Special Autonomy Referendum" label="United Nations-sponsored referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q16241869" start="61128" end="61161" title="Joint Declaration on the Question of Macau" label="Sino-Portuguese Joint Declaration"/>
<link wikidata="Q3916279" start="61278" end="61283" title="Portuguese Macau" label="Macau"/>
<link wikidata="Q671479" start="61359" end="61409" title="Sino-British Joint Declaration" label="the agreement between the United Kingdom and China"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054923" start="61438" end="61447" title="British Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q723713" start="61718" end="61742" title="one country, two systems" label="one country, two systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q847839" start="61899" end="61916" title="Transfer of sovereignty over Macau" label="handover of Macau"/>
<link wikidata="Q182500" start="62053" end="62095" title="Community of Portuguese Language Countries" label="Community of Portuguese Language Countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q484652" start="62130" end="62147" title="intergovernmental organization" label="intergovernmental"/>
<link wikidata="Q9186" start="62404" end="62421" title="Cantonese Chinese" label="Cantonese Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q25263" start="62448" end="62454" title="Azores" label="Azores"/>
<link wikidata="Q26253" start="62459" end="62466" title="Madeira" label="Madeira"/>
<link wikidata="Q27088" start="62509" end="62523" title="Savage Islands" label="Savage Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914565" start="62538" end="62558" title="Autonomous Regions of Portugal" label="overseas territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q142965" start="62655" end="62665" title="Portuguese Timor" label="East Timor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2583734" start="62763" end="62796" title="Indonesian invasion of East Timor" label="Indonesian invasion of East Timor"/>
<link wikidata="Q124528082" start="62875" end="62912" title="Geographic distribution of Portuguese" label="Portuguese as their official language"/>
<link wikidata="Q182500" start="62966" end="63008" title="Community of Portuguese Language Countries" label="Community of Portuguese Language Countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q14507109" start="63718" end="63751" title="Portuguese-based creole languages" label="Portuguese-based creole languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q3502583" start="63785" end="63793" title="Kristang people" label="Kristang"/>
<link wikidata="Q185221" start="63804" end="63811" title="Malacca" label="Malacca"/>
<link wikidata="Q13191" start="63895" end="63907" title="sweet orange" label="sweet orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q19860" start="63937" end="63960" title="Indo-European languages" label="Indo-European languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q8108" start="64263" end="64271" title="Georgian language" label="Georgian"/>
<link wikidata="Q28244" start="64321" end="64328" title="Amharic" label="Amharic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1098467" start="64360" end="64385" title="Regional Italian" label="southern Italian dialects"/>
<link wikidata="Q33845" start="64393" end="64403" title="Neapolitan language" label="Neapolitan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="64425" end="64435" title=":wikt:portogallo" label="portogallo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="64451" end="64460" title=":wikt:it:purtuallo" label="purtuallo"/>
<link wikidata="Q652" start="64529" end="64545" title="standard Italian" label="standard Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2511187" start="64689" end="64729" title="official languages of the United Nations" label="official languages of the United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7232704" start="64748" end="64780" title="Portuguese colonial architecture" label="Portuguese colonial architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q29662" start="64783" end="64801" title="Edict of Expulsion" label="Edict of Expulsion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5418662" start="64804" end="64838" title="Evolution of the Portuguese Empire" label="Evolution of the Portuguese Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2903110" start="64841" end="64857" title="Goan Inquisition" label="Goan Inquisition"/>
<link wikidata="Q826018" start="64860" end="64875" title="Lusotropicalism" label="Lusotropicalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q15138579" start="64878" end="64933" title="Persecution of Jews and Muslims by Manuel I of Portugal" label="Persecution of Jews and Muslims by Manuel I of Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3286250" start="64936" end="64954" title="Portuguese Armadas" label="Portuguese Armadas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1797021" start="64957" end="64977" title="Portuguese in Africa" label="Portuguese in Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q965842" start="64980" end="65002" title="Portuguese Inquisition" label="Portuguese Inquisition"/>
<link wikidata="Q7232730" start="65005" end="65026" title="Portuguese inventions" label="Portuguese inventions"/>
<link wikidata="Q7232690" start="65029" end="65050" title="Portuguese Surinamese" label="Portuguese Surinamese"/>
<link wikidata="Q48365" start="65053" end="65071" title="Strait of Magellan" label="Strait of Magellan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3688020" start="65674" end="65688" title="Thomas Kitchin" label="Thomas Kitchin"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="230580" wikidata="Q2744006" url="?curid=230580" title="Malayalam cinema">
<text>Malayalam cinema is the segment of Indian cinema dedicated to the production of motion pictures in the Malayalam language, which is widely spoken in the state of Kerala and Lakshadweep islands of India. Malayalam cinema includes the commercial film industry, sometimes known as Mollywood, as well as independent cinema made in Malayalam. According to recent trends and critical acclaim, the Malayalam film industry (Mollywood) is known for its high quality storytelling, strong performances, and focus on social issues, and is often considered to be ‘one of the best&#x27; film industries of India, even though the largest film industry in terms of viewership remains Bollywood (Hindi cinema).

The first Malayalam feature film was &quot;Vigathakumaran,&quot; a silent film directed and produced by J. C. Daniel. Production started in 1928, and it was released at the Capitol Theatre in Thiruvananthapuram on 23 October 1930. The first talkie in Malayalam was &quot;Balan&quot; (1938) directed by S. Nottani. During the 1920s, the Malayalam film industry was based in Thiruvananthapuram, although the film industry started to develop and flourish by the late 1940s. Later the industry shifted to Madras (now Chennai). By the late 1980s, the industry returned to Kerala, establishing Kochi as its hub with most production and post-production facilities located there and most of the film stars including Mammootty and Mohanlal living in the city.

As of 2024, Malayalam cinema has earned numerous accolades at the National Film Awards, including 14 for Best Actor, 6 for Best Actress, 13 for Best Film, and 13 for Best Director. Malayalam cinema garnered international recognition, with &quot;Elippathayam&quot; (1982) winning the Sutherland Trophy at the London Film Festival, and being named the Most Original Imaginative Film of 1982 by the British Film Institute. Additionally, &quot;Marana Simhasanam&quot; won the prestigious Caméra d&#x27;Or at the 1999 Cannes Film Festival.

Several Malayalam films have been India&#x27;s official entries for the Best Foreign Language Film category at the Academy Awards, including Rajiv Anchal&#x27;s &quot;Guru&quot; (1997), Salim Ahamed&#x27;s &quot;Adaminte Makan Abu&quot; (2011), Lijo Jose Pellissery&#x27;s &quot;Jallikkattu&quot; (2019) and Jude Anthany Joseph&#x27;s &quot;2018&quot; (2023). Other globally acclaimed films include &quot;Chemmeen&quot; (1965), which received a Certificate of Merit at the Chicago International Film Festival, and a gold medal at the Cannes Film Festival for Best Cinematography. &quot;Swaham&quot; (1994) won the &quot;Bronze Rosa Camuna&quot; at the Bergamo Film Meeting in Italy. Malayalam cinema has also produced India&#x27;s first 3D film, &quot;My Dear Kuttichathan&quot; (1984). The first CinemaScope film produced in Malayalam was &quot;Thacholi Ambu&quot; (1978).

== History ==
Active Malayalam film production did not take place until the second half of the 20th century: there were only two silent films, and three Malayalam-language films before 1947. With support from the Kerala state government production climbed from around 6 a year in the 1950s, to 30 a year in the 1960s, 40 a year in the 1970s, to 127 films in 1980.

=== Origins 1928 ===
The first cinema hall in Kerala, with a manually operated film projector, was opened in Thrissur by Jose Kattookkaran in 1907. In 1913, the first permanent theatre in Kerala was established in Thrissur town by Kattookkaran and was called the &quot;Jose Electrical Bioscope&quot;, now Jos Theatre.

The first film made in Malayalam was &quot;Vigathakumaran&quot;. Production started in 1928, and it was released at the Capitol Theatre in Thiruvananthapuram on 23 October 1930. It was produced and directed by J. C. Daniel, a businessman with no prior film experience, who is credited as the father of Malayalam cinema. Daniel founded the first film studio, The Travancore National Pictures Limited, in Kerala. A second film, &quot;Marthanda Varma&quot;, based on the novel by C. V. Raman Pillai, was produced by R. Sundar Raj Nadar in 1933. However, after only being shown for four days, the film prints were confiscated due to a legal battle over copyright.

The first talkie in Malayalam was &quot;Balan&quot;, released in 1938. It was directed by S. Nottani with a screenplay and songs written by Muthukulam Raghavan Pillai. It was produced by Modern Theatres at Salem in the neighbouring state of Tamil Nadu. &quot;Balan&quot; was followed by &quot;Gnanambika&quot; in 1940, which was directed by S. Nottani. Then came &quot;Prahlada&quot; in 1941, directed by K. Subramoniam of Madras and featuring Guru Gopinath and Thankamani Gopinath.

Until 1947 most Malayalam films were made by Tamil producers, P. J. Cherian was the first Malayali producer to venture into this field after JC Daniel Nadar. PJ Cherian produced &quot;Nirmala&quot; in 1948 with Joseph Cherian and Baby Joseph his son and daughter-in-law as hero and heroine. He also cast many other family members in other roles, trying to break the taboo that noble family people do not take up acting. &quot;Nirmala&quot; is the first movie which introduced play-back singing in the Malayalm filim industry . P.J. Cherian introduced play-back singing in Malayalam cinema. The lyrics of the film written by G. Sankara Kurup became popular.

Udaya Studios&#x27; &quot;Vellinakshatram&quot; (1949) was the first movie with audio to be made completely in Kerala.

=== 1950s ===
Malayalam cinema has always taken its themes from relevant social issues and has been interwoven with material from literature, drama, and politics since its inception. One such film, &quot;Jeevitha Nouka&quot; (1951), was a musical drama that spoke about the problems in a joint family.

In 1954, the film &quot;Neelakuyil&quot; captured national interest by winning the President&#x27;s silver medal. It was scripted by the well-known Malayalam novelist Uroob, and directed by P. Bhaskaran and Ramu Kariat.

&quot;Newspaper Boy&quot; (1955) contained elements of Italian neorealism. This film is notable as the product of a group of amateur college filmmakers. It told the story of a printing press employee and his family being stricken with extreme poverty.

The music took a turn away from the trend of copying Tamil and Hindi songs. The poets Tirunainaarkurichy Madhavan Nair – Thirunaiyarkurichy, P. Bhaskaran, O. N. V. Kurup, and Vayalar Ramavarma rose up in this period as film lyricists. Brother Lakshmanan, Dakshinamurthy, K. Raghavan, G. Devarajan, M. S. Baburaj, and Pukhenthey Velappan Nair started a distinct style of Malayalam music. Kamukara Purushotaman, Mehboob, Kozhikode Abdul Kader, AM Raja, P. B. Sreenivas, K. P. Udayabhanu, Santha P. Nair, P. Leela, S. Janaki, P. Susheela, B. Vasantha, Renuka, and Jikki were the most prominent singers of the 1950s. The drama artist and school teacher Muthukulam Raghavan Pillai lent many of his skills to the cinema in this period.

=== 1960s ===
Ramu Kariat, one of the directors of &quot;Neelakuyil&quot; (along with P. Bhaskaran), went on to become a successful director in the 1960s and 1970s. P. Bhaskaran directed many acclaimed and hit films in the 1960s and 70s. The cameraman of &quot;Neelakkuyil&quot;, A. Vincent, also became a noted director of the 1960s and 1970s. Notable films of this decade include &quot;Odayil Ninnu&quot;, &quot;Bhargavi Nilayam&quot; (1964), &quot;Chemmeen&quot; (1965), &quot;Murappennu&quot; (1965) and &quot;Iruttinte Athmavu&quot; (1966).

Malayalam cinema&#x27;s first colour film was &quot;Kandam Bacha Coat&quot; (1961).

&quot;Chemmeen&quot; (1965), directed by Ramu Kariat and based on a novel of the same name by Thakazhi Sivasankara Pillai, went on to become very popular and became the first South Indian film to win the National Film Award for Best Feature Film.

Most of the films of the 1960s were animated by the nationalist and socialist projects and centered on issues relating to caste and class exploitation, the fight against obscurantist beliefs, the degeneration of the feudal class, and the break-up of the joint-family system.

In the 1960s, M. Krishnan Nair, Kunchacko and P. Subramaniam were the leading Malayali producers. Thikkurusi Sukumaran Nair, Prem Nazir, Sathyan, Madhu, Adoor Bhasi, Bahadur, S.P. Pillai, K.P. Ummer, Kottarakara Sreedharan Nair, Raghavan, G.K. Pillai, Muthukulam, Joseprakash, Paravur Bharatan, Muthayya, Shankaradi, Govindankutty, K.R. Vijaya, Padmini, Ragini, Sharada, Sheela, Ambika, Jayabharathi, Arumula Ponnamma and Sadahna were among the more popular actors active in this period.

During the 1950s, 1960s and 1970s, Kunchacko made significant contributions to Malayalam cinema, both as a producer and as director of some notable movies. He started Udaya Studios in Alappuzha in 1947, reducing the travel to Madras (Chennai) for film crew and actors. This boosted Malayalam film production in Kerala.

Many directors sprang up in this period. P.N. Menon made &quot;Rosy&quot; and later &quot;Chemparanthi&quot;. G. Aravindan and Adoor Gopalakrishnan also started work in the 1960s and became famous later.

=== 1970s ===
The 70s saw the emergence of a new wave of cinema in Malayalam. The growth of the film society movement in Kerala introduced the works of the French and Italian New Wave directors to the discerning Malayali film enthusiasts. Adoor Gopalakrishnan&#x27;s first film, &quot;Swayamvaram&quot; (1972), brought Malayalam cinema to the international film arena. In 1973 M. T. Vasudevan Nair, who was by then recognised as an important author in Malayalam, directed his first film, &quot;Nirmalyam&quot;, which won the National Film Award for Best Feature Film. G. Aravindan followed Adoor&#x27;s lead with his &quot;Uttarayanam&quot; in 1974. K. P. Kumaran&#x27;s &quot;Adhithi&quot; (1974) was another film that was acclaimed by the critics. Cinematographers who won the National Award for their work on Malayalam films in the 1970s were Mankada Ravi Varma for &quot;Swayamvaram&quot; (1972), P. S. Nivas for &quot;Mohiniyattam&quot; (1977), and Shaji N. Karun for &quot;Thampu&quot; (1979). John Abraham, K. R. Mohanan, K. G. George, and G. S. Panikkar were products of the Pune Film Institute who made significant contributions.

During the late 1970s, some young artists started seeing Malayalam cinema as a medium of expression and thought of it as a tool to revitalise society. A noted director, Aravindan, was famous in Kerala as a cartoonist before he started making films. His important movies include &quot;Kanchana Sita&quot; (1977), &quot;Thampu&quot; (1978), &quot;Kummatty&quot; (1979), &quot;Chidambaram&quot; (1985), &quot;Oridathu&quot; (1986), and &quot;Vasthuhara&quot; (1990).

The 1970s also saw the emergence of the notable director P. G. Viswambharan with his debut film &quot;Ozhukinethire&quot; and the mythical film &quot;Satyavan Savithri&quot;, which were well accepted.

Also, commercial cinema in this period saw several worker-class themed films which mostly had M. G. Soman, Sukumaran and Sudheer in the lead followed by the emergence of a new genre of pure action-themed films, in a movement led by Jayan. However, this was short-lived, and almost ended when Jayan died while performing a stunt in &quot;Kolilakkam&quot; (1980).

=== 1980s ===
The Malayalam cinema of this period was characterised by detailed screenplays dealing with everyday life with a lucid narration of plot intermingling with humour and melancholy. This was aided by the cinematography and lighting. The films had warm background music.

In 1981 Fazil directed Manjil Virinja Pookal the film also introduced then romantic star Shankar and later actor Mohanlal to the world. Adoor Gopalakrishnan made &quot;Elippathayam&quot; in 1981. This movie won the British Film Institute award. The year 1981 also saw the rise of actor &quot;Mammootty&quot; through the movie &quot;Sphodanam&quot; directed by P. G. Viswambharan.

In the 1980s Padmarajan made some of the landmark motion pictures in Malayalam cinema, including masterpieces like &quot;Oridathoru Phayalvaan&quot; (1981), &quot;Koodevide&quot; (1983), &quot;Thinkalaazhcha Nalla Divasam&quot; (1985), &quot;Arappatta Kettiya Gramathil&quot; (1986), &quot;Namukku Parkkan Munthirithoppukal&quot; (1986), &quot;Thoovanathumbikal&quot; (1987), &quot;Moonnam Pakkam&quot; (1988), &quot;Innale&quot; (1989) and &quot;Season&quot; (1989). He wrote several short stories that were unique in content and presentation. His novels handled the darkest emotions and considered as classics. Most plots were nascent for that age literature. All works were so cinematic and can be easily visualised to the celluloid version.

K. G. George released films including &quot;Yavanika&quot; and &quot;Adaminte Vaariyellu&quot;. This was the period during which script writer M. T. Vasudevan Nair started teaming up with director Hariharan to produce works like &quot;Panchagni&quot;, &quot;Nakhakshathangal&quot;, &quot;Aranyakam&quot; and &quot;Oru Vadakkan Veeragatha&quot;. John Abraham&#x27;s films such as &quot;Amma Ariyaan&quot; addressed people&#x27;s issues and raised the finance directly from people. The period had movies with humour from directors like Priyadarshan, Sathyan Anthikad, Kamal and Siddique-Lal. &quot;Piravi&quot; (1989) by Shaji N. Karun was the first Malayalam film to win the Caméra d&#x27;Or-Mention at the Cannes Film Festival.

Ratheesh and Sukumaran also were leading stars in the industry in the early eighties. By the end of the 1980s, Mammooty and Mohanlal also established themselves as the leading actors in Malayalam.

The mid 1980s saw the emergence of low-quality Malayalam softcore films made with fairly low budgets. They were remarked as B-grade films, and were certified as fit for adults only (A rated). These films emerged parallel with the mainstream Malayalam cinema. In 1986, roughly 14 of the 32-odd films released were classified as B-grade films.

=== 1990s ===

Some examples are &quot;Mathilukal&quot; (1990) directed by Adoor Gopalakrishnan, &quot;Kattukuthira&quot; (1990) directed by P. G. Viswambharan, &quot;Amaram&quot; (1991) directed by Bharathan, &quot;Ulladakkam&quot; (1992) directed by Kamal, &quot;Kilukkam&quot; (1991) directed by Priyadarshan, &quot;Kamaladalam&quot; (1992) by Sibi Malayil, &quot;Vidheyan&quot; (1993) by Adoor Gopalakrishnan, &quot;Devaasuram&quot; (1993) by I. V. Sasi, &quot;Manichitrathazhu&quot; (1993) by Fazil, &quot;Ponthan Mada&quot; (1993) by T. V. Chandran, &quot;Spadikam&quot; (1995) by Bhadran, &quot;Commissioner&quot;(1994) &quot;The King&quot; (1995) by Shaji Kailas, &quot;Hitler&quot; (1996) by Siddique and &quot;Desadanam&quot; (1997) by Jayaraj. Due to a series of comedy films produced between the late 1980s and late 1990s made actors like Jagadish, Siddique, Mukesh, Sreenivasan and Jayaram became very popular for their comedy roles. This series of comedy films begun in the late 1980s and early 1990s, with comedy films by Sathyan Anthikad and Siddique-Lal, like &quot;Ponmuttayidunna Tharavu&quot;, &quot;Mazhavilkavadi&quot;, &quot;Ramji Rao Speaking&quot;, &quot;Thalayana Manthram&quot;, &quot;In Harihar Nagar&quot;, and &quot;Godfather&quot;, and some of them went on to be remade by other directors in Tamil, Hindi, Telugu, and other languages. The success of &quot;In Harihar Nagar&quot; led to the production of a series of comedy films in the early and mid-1990s.

&quot;Swaham&quot; (1994), directed by Shaji N. Karun, was the first Malayalam film entry for the competition in the Cannes International Film Festival, where it was a nominee for the Palme d&#x27;Or. Murali Nair&#x27;s &quot;Marana Simhasanam&quot; later won the Caméra d&#x27;Or at the 1999 Cannes Film Festival. &quot;Guru&quot; (1997), directed by Rajiv Anchal, was chosen as India&#x27;s official entry to the Oscars to be considered for nomination in the Best Foreign Film category for that year, making it the first film in Malayalam to be chosen for Oscar nomination. Noted script writer A.K. Lohithadas made his directorial debut with &quot;Bhoothakkannadi&quot;, for which he won the Indira Gandhi Award for Best Debut Film of a Director. 

=== 2000s ===
The millennium started with a blockbuster hit &quot;Narasimham&quot; starring Mohanlal
. In 2001 came the world&#x27;s first film with only one actor in the cast, The Guard. Slapstick comedy was the predominant theme of the films of this era. &quot;C.I.D. Moosa&quot; (2003) by Johny Antony, &quot;Meesa Madhavan&quot; (2002) by Lal Jose and &quot;Kunjikoonan&quot; (2002) directed by Sasi Shanker are examples. Sequels to a number of successful films were made. Some movies were examples of exemplary film making, such as &quot;Meghamalhar&quot;, &quot;Madhuranombarakattu&quot;, &quot;Nandanam&quot;, &quot;Perumazhakkalam&quot;, and &quot;Kaazhcha&quot;. In 2008, Malayalam movie artists came together in the multistar film &quot;&quot; to raise funds for the AMMA.

The 2000-2003 period also saw witnessed the Shakeela tharangam that resulted in the series of production of low budget softporn films in Malayalam cinema. The continued failure of comedy films and the theater strikes in Kerala, that started in the early 2000s, were the major reasons behind the comeback of B-grade films in Malayalam. Around 57 of the total 89 films released in 2001 belonged to the soft-porn category and Shakeela featured in many of them&quot;.&quot;

=== 2010s ===

After several years of quality deterioration, Malayalam films saw the signs of massive resurgence after 2010 with the release of several experimental films (known as New Wave or New Generation films), mostly from new directors. New Wave is characterised by fresh and unusual themes and new narrative techniques. These films differ from conventional themes of the 1990s and 2000s and have introduced several new trends to the Malayalam industry. While the new generation&#x27;s formats and styles are deeply influenced by global and Indian trends, their themes are firmly rooted in Malayali life and mindscapes. The new generation also helped the Malayalam film industry regain its past glory.

Salim Ahamed&#x27;s &quot;Adaminte Makan Abu&quot; was chosen as India&#x27;s official entry to the Academy Awards to be considered for nomination in the Best Foreign Film category in 2011.

&quot;Christian Brothers&quot; (2011) was released worldwide with a total of 310 prints on 18 March; it went to 154 centres in Kerala, 90 centres outside Kerala and 80 centres overseas, making it the widest release for a Malayalam film at that time. This record was later broken by &quot;Peruchazhi&quot; (2014), which released in 500 screens worldwide on 29 August. &quot;Drishyam&quot; (2013) became the first Malayalam film to cross the 500 million mark at the box office. The film was critically acclaimed and was remade in four languages. Later, in 2016, &quot;Pulimurugan&quot; directed by Vyshak became the first Malayalam film to cross the 1 billion mark at the box office.

In recent years, Malayalam films have gained popularity in Sri Lanka, with fans citing cultural similarities between Sinhalese people and Malayalis as a reason. In 2019, &quot;Lucifer&quot; became the highest grossing Malayalam film of all time. Lucifer became the highest grossing Indian film in Dubai. The film collected a final gross of 2000 million at the box office.

=== 2020s ===
In November 2020, Lijo Jose Pellissery&#x27;s film &quot;Jallikattu&quot; was selected as India&#x27;s submission for Oscar for best foreign language film making as third Malayalam film as entry. In 2020 a mid the COVID-19 lockdown, Sufiyum Sujatayum, starring Jayasurya and Aditi Rao Hydari, has become the first Malayalam film to be released on the Amazon Prime Video (OTT) platform as theatres remain shut in Kerala due to the pandemic. In 2021, &quot;Drishyam 2&quot;, &quot;Nayattu&quot;, &quot;Kala&quot;, &quot;Joji&quot;, &quot;The Great Indian Kitchen&quot; and &quot;Malik&quot; made their list in the highest rated 2021 movies in Imdb.

Malayalam cinema&#x27;s first ever original superhero Minnal Murali was released through Netflix on 24 December 2021. Tovino Thomas as Minnal Murali which was directed by Basil Joseph under Weekend Blockbusters gained great reviews by critics and became top watched Non-English movie on Netflix. It broke all records of Malayalam cinema trailers on YouTube crossing 6 Million Views and 500K+ likes in 24 hours. in 2023, disaster film &quot;2018&quot; was selected as India&#x27;s submission for Oscar for best international film

Malayalam cinema enjoyed unprecedented box office success in early months of 2024, with worldwide box office collection of Malayalam films touching ₹900 crores in the first quarter. Malayalam cinema achieved its first calendar year ₹1000 crore worldwide gross by May. As of 24 May, total worldwide box office gross stood at ₹1030 crores, including ₹660 crores from India and ₹370 from overseas. The films that led the success story were &quot;Manjummel Boys&quot;, &quot;Aadujeevitham&quot;, &quot;Premalu&quot;, &quot;Aavesham&quot; and &quot;ARM&quot;, all of which earned over ₹100 crores at worldwide box office. The success is attributed to wide critical acclaim, themes that resonated with the audience and tapping into other state markets. In 2025, &quot;Marco&quot; is the first Malayalam film set to be released in South Korea.

== Pioneering film-making techniques ==
&quot;Newspaper Boy&quot; (1955), a neorealistic film, drew inspiration from Italian neorealism. &quot;Padayottam&quot; (1982) is India&#x27;s first indigenously produced 70 mm film, while &quot;My Dear Kuttichathan&quot; (1984) is India&#x27;s first 3D film. &quot;O&#x27; Faby&quot; (1993) is India&#x27;s first Live action/animation hybrid film.

&quot;Amma Ariyan&quot; (1986) is the first film made in India with money collected from the public. It was produced by Odessa Collective, founded by the director John Abraham and friends. The money was raised by collecting donations and screening Charlie Chaplin&#x27;s film &quot;The Kid&quot;.

&quot;Moonnamathoral&quot; (2006) is the first Indian film to be shot and distributed in digital format.

&quot;Jalachhayam&quot; (2010) is the first Indian feature film shot entirely on a Camera phone and it was also an experimental film directed by Sathish Kalathil who is the director of Veena Vaadanam, the first documentary film in India shot with the same movie capture medium.

&quot;Villain&quot; (2017) is the first Indian film to be shot entirely in 8K resolution.

&quot;Vazhiye&quot; (2022) is the first found footage film of Malayalam cinema.

== Notable personalities ==
=== Directors ===
Malayalam cinema&#x27;s directors have included J. C. Daniel, the director and producer of the first Malayalam film, &quot;Vigathakumaran&quot; (1928). Unlike other Indian films at that time, most of them were based on the Puranas, he chose to base his film on a social theme. Though it failed commercially, he paved the way for the Malayalam film industry and is widely considered the &quot;father of Malayalam cinema&quot;. Until the 1950s, Malayalam film didn&#x27;t see many talented film directors. The milestone film &quot;Neelakuyil&quot; (1954), directed by Ramu Kariat and P. Bhaskaran, shed a lot of limelight over its directors. Ramu Kariat went on to become a celebrated director in the 1960s and 1970s. P. Bhaskaran directed a few acclaimed films in the 1960s. The cameraman of &quot;Neelakuyil&quot;, A. Vincent, also became a noted director of the 1960s and 1970s. Another noted director of the 1950s was P. Ramadas, the director of the neorealistic film &quot;Newspaper Boy&quot; (1955).

In the 1970s, the Malayalam film industry saw the rise of film societies. It triggered a new genre of films known as &quot;parallel cinema&quot;. The main driving forces of the movement, who gave priority to serious cinema, were Adoor Gopalakrishnan and G. Aravindan. People like John Abraham and P. A. Backer gave a new dimension to Malayalam cinema through their political themes. The late 1970s witnessed the emergence of another stream of Malayalam films, known as &quot;middle-stream cinema&quot;, which seamlessly integrated the seriousness of the parallel cinema and the popularity of the mainstream cinema. Most of the films belonging to this stream were directed by PN Menon, I. V. Sasi, P. G. Viswambharan, K. G. George, Bharathan and Padmarajan.

Out of the 40 National Film Award for Best Direction given away till 2007, Malayalam directors have received 12. The directors who have won include Adoor Gopalakrishnan (1973, 1985, 1988, 1990, 2007), G. Aravindan (1978, 1979, 1987), Shaji N. Karun (1989), T. V. Chandran (1994), Jayaraj (1998, 2017) and Rajivnath (1999). There are several recipients of the Special Jury Award as well: Mankada Ravi Varma (1984), John Abraham (1987), Shaji N. Karun (1995) and Pradeep Nair (2005).

== Film music ==
Film score, which refers to Playback singer in the context of Indian music, forms the most important canon of popular music in India. The film music of Kerala in particular is the most popular form of music in the state. Before Malayalam cinema and Malayalam film music developed, the Malayali eagerly followed Tamil and Hindi film songs, and that habit has stayed with them until now. The history of Malayalam film songs begins with the 1948 film &quot;Nirmala&quot; which was produced by artist P. J. Cherian who introduced play-back singing for the first time in the film. The film&#x27;s music composer was P. S. Divakar, and the songs were sung by P. Leela, T. K. Govindarao, Vasudeva Kurup, C. K. Raghavan, Sarojini Menon and Vimala B. Varma, who is credited as the first playback singer of Malayalam cinema.

The main trend in the early years was to use the tune of hit Hindi or Tamil songs in Malayalam songs. This trend changed in the early 1950s with the arrival of a number of poets and musicians to the Malayalam music scene. By the middle of the 1950s, the Malayalam film music industry started finding its own identity. This reformation was led by the music directors Brother Laxmanan, G. Devarajan, V. Dakshinamoorthy, M. S. Baburaj and K. Raghavan along with the lyricists Vayalar Ramavarma, P. Bhaskaran, O. N. V. Kurup and Sreekumaran Thampi. Major playback singers of that time were Kamukara Purushothaman, K. P. Udayabhanu, A. M. Rajah, P. Leela, Santha P. Nair, Ayiroor Sadasivan, Lalitha Thampi, C. S. Radhadevi, A. K. Sukumaran, B. Vasantha, P. Susheela, P. Madhuri and S. Janaki. Despite that, these singers got high popularity throughout Kerala and were part of the Golden age of Malayalam music (1960 to 1970).

In the later years many non-Malayalis like Manna Dey, Talat Mahmood, Lata Mangeshkar, Asha Bhosle, Hemlata, Kishore Kumar, Mahendra Kapoor and S. P. Balasubrahmanyam sang for Malayalam films. This trend was also found among composers to an extent, with film composers from other languages including Naushad, Usha Khanna, M. B. Sreenivasan, Ravi, Shyam, Bappi Lahiri, Laxmikant–Pyarelal, Salil Chowdhury, Ilaiyaraaja, Vishal Bhardwaj and A. R. Rahman scoring music for Malayalam films. This can be attributed to the fact that film music in South India had a parallel growth pattern with many instances of cross-industry contributions. The late 1950s through the mid-1970s can be considered as the golden period of Malayalam film music in its own identity. Along with the leading music directors, the likes of M. B. Sreenivasan, M. K. Arjunan, Pukezhenty Vellappan Nair, M. S. Viswanathan, A. T. Ummer, R. K. Shekhar, Salil Chowdhury and lyricists like Thirunainar Kurichi Madhavan Nair, Mankombu Gopalakrishnan and Bharanikkavu Sivakumar, numerous everlasting and hit songs were delivered to the music lovers. The soft melodious music and high quality lyrics were the highlights of these songs.

K. J. Yesudas, who debuted in 1961, virtually revolutionised the Malayalam film music industry and became the most popular Malayalam singer ever along with K. S. Chithra. The trio of Vayalar, G. Devarajan and Yesudas also made unforgettable songs like the earlier trio of Kamukara, Tirunainaarkurichy and Brother Laxmanan. Yesudas became equally popular with classical music audience and people who patronised film music. He along with P. Jayachandran gave a major face-lift to Malayalam playback singing in the 1960s and 1970s. K. S. Chithra debuted in 1979, and by the mid-eighties, she became the most sought after female singer in South India.

By the late 1970s, the trends in music started changing and more rhythm oriented songs with a western touch came with the dominance of music directors like Shyam, K. J. Joy, and Jerry Amaldev. The lyricists were forced to write lyrics according to the tune in these days and were often criticised for quality issues. However, from 1979 to 1980, the revolutionary music director Raveendran along with Johnson and M. G. Radhakrishnan led the second reformation of Malayalam film music by creating melodious and classical oriented music with the soul of the culture of Kerala. Lyricists like Poovachal Khader, Kavalam Narayana Panicker and Bichu Thirumala in the 1980s and Kaithapram Damodaran Namboothiri, V. Madhusoodanan Nair and Girish Puthenchery in the 1990s were part of this musical success. Contributions from Kannur Rajan, Ravi, S. P. Venkatesh, Mohan Sithara, Ouseppachan, Sharath, Vidyadharan, Raghukumar and Vidyasagar were also notable in this period. K. J. Yesudas and K. S. Chithra and singers like M. G. Sreekumar, G. Venugopal, Radhika Thilak, Unni Menon and Sujatha Mohan were also active then. A notable aspect in the later years was the extensive of classical carnatic music in many film songs of the 1980s and 1990s. Classical Carnatic music was heavily used in films like &quot;Chithram&quot; (1988), &quot;His Highness Abdullah&quot; (1990), &quot;Bharatham&quot; (1991), &quot;Sargam&quot; (1992), &quot;Kudumbasametham&quot; (1992), &quot;Sopanam&quot; (1993) etc.

At present, the major players in the scene are composers like A. R. Rahman, M. Jayachandran, Bijibal, Deepak Dev, Rex Vijayan, Jakes Bejoy, Rahul Raj, Prashant Pillai, Shaan Rahman, Sushin Shyam, Gopi Sundar, Alphons Joseph, Rajesh Murugesan, Jassie Gift, Shahabaz Aman, Vishnu Vijay, lyricists Rafeeq Ahamed, Anwar Ali, B. K. Harinarayanan, Vinayak Sasikumar, Sarath and Anil Panachooran, and singers Vineeth Sreenivasan, Shreya Ghoshal, Shankar Mahadevan, Vijay Yesudas, Shweta Mohan, Karthik, Naresh Iyer, Manjari, Haricharan, Shahabaz Aman, Sithara Krishnakumar, Vaikom Vijayalakshmi, K. S. Harisankar, Sayanora Philip, Benny Dayal and Jyotsna Radhakrishnan, along with stalwarts in the field.

Young composers like Deepak Dev, Rex Vijayan, Rahul Raj, Jakes Bejoy, Sushin Shyam, and Prashant Pillai are not only known for their catchy tunes, but also for bringing in a lot of electronics, digital sound and a variety of genres in Malayalam film scores and songs.

The National Award-winning music composers of Malayalam cinema are Johnson (1994, 1995), Ravi (1995), Ouseppachan (2008), Ilaiyaraaja (2010), Isaac Thomas Kottukapally (2011), Bijibal (2012) and M. Jayachandran (2016). Until 2009, the 1995 National Award that Johnson received for the film score of &quot;Sukrutham&quot; (1994) was the only instance in the history of the award in which the awardee composed the Soundtrack rather than its Playback singer. He shared that award with Bombay Ravi, who received the award for composing songs for the same film. In 2010 and 2011, the awards given to film scores were won by Malayalam films: &quot;Kerala Varma Pazhassi Raja&quot; (Ilaiyaraaja) and &quot;Adaminte Makan Abu&quot; (Isaac Thomas Kottukapally). Raveendran also received a Special Mention in 1991 for composing songs for the film &quot;Bharatham&quot;.

The lyricists who have won the National Award are Vayalar Ramavarma (1973), O. N. V. Kurup (1989) and Yusufali Kechery (2001). The male singers who have received the National Award are K. J. Yesudas (1973, 1974, 1988, 1992, 1994, 2017), P. Jayachandran (1986) and M. G. Sreekumar (1991, 2000). Yesudas has won two more National Awards for singing in Hindi (1977) and Telugu (1983) films, which makes him the person who has won the most National Film Award for Best Male Playback Singer, with eight. The female singers who have won the award are S. Janaki (1981) and K. S. Chithra (1987, 1989). Chitra had also won the award for Tamil (1986, 1997, 2005) and Hindi (1998) film songs, which makes her the person with the most National Film Award for Best Female Playback Singer awards, six times.

== Landmark films ==
== Kerala State Film Awards ==

The Kerala State Film Awards are given to motion pictures made in the Malayalam language. The awards have been bestowed by Kerala State Chalachitra Academy since 1998 on behalf of the Department of Cultural Affairs of the government of Kerala. The awards were started in 1969. The awardees are decided by an independent jury formed by the academy and the Department of Cultural Affairs. The jury usually consists of personalities from the film field. For the awards for literature on cinema, a separate jury is formed. The academy annually invites films for the award and the jury analyses the films before deciding the winners. The awards intend to promote films with artistic values and encourage artists and technicians.

== International Film Festival of Kerala ==

The International Film Festival of Kerala (IFFK) is held annually in Thiruvananthapuram, the capital city of Kerala. It was started in 1996 and is organised by Kerala State Chalachitra Academy on behalf of the Department of Cultural Affairs of the State Government. It is held in November/December every year and is acknowledged as one of the leading film festivals in India.

== Film studios ==
Today most of the film studios are located in Kochi where majority of the pre and post film production works are conducted. All the major film production companies in the Malayalam film industry including Aashirvad Cinemas, Friday Film House, Kokers Media Entertainments,Maxlab Cinemas and Entertainments, Prithviraj Productions are located in Kochi.The Travancore National Pictures was the first film studio in Kerala. It was established by J. C. Daniel in 1926 in Thiruvananthapuram, which was then a part of Travancore. Producer-director Kunchacko and film distributor K. V. Koshy established Udaya Studios in Alappuzha in 1947. The studio influenced the gradual shift of Malayalam film industry from its original base of Chennai, Tamil Nadu to Kerala. In 1951, P. Subramaniam established Merryland Studio in Nemom, Thiruvananthapuram. The other major studios are Sreekrishna (1952, Thiruvananthapuram), Ajantha (1958, Keezhmadu – now extinct), Chithralekha (1965, Aakkulam, Thiruvananthapuram), Uma Studio (1975, Thiruvananthapuram), Navodaya, Kochi (1978, Thrikkakkara, Kochi) and Chitranjali Studio (1980, Thiruvananthapuram).

== Organisations ==
The Association of Malayalam Movie Artists (A.M.M.A) is an association of Malayalam film actors and artists based in Kochi is an organisation formed by artists of Malayalam cinema. It aims to act against piracy, to safeguard the interests of member actors and actresses, and to serve as a common forum to raise concerns and address issues. The activities of AMMA include endowments, insurance schemes, and committees on wages and benefits on revision, funds for research, pensions, and education loans for the children of the members. The organisation ventured into film production in 2008 with &quot;&quot; to raise funds for its activities. 

Organisations such as Kerala Film Producers Association, Kerala Film Distributors Association, Kerala Cine Exhibitors Federation, Hyperlink Film Club and Kerala Film Exhibitors Association have coordinated work stoppages.

== See also ==

* List of highest-grossing Malayalam films
* List of Malayalam film actors
* New generation (Malayalam film movement)
* Malayalam softcore pornography
* Cinema of South India
* List of cinema of the world
* Lists of Malayalam films
* Film Distribution companies in Kerala
* K. R. Narayanan National Institute of Visual Science and Arts

== References ==
== Sources ==

List of Malayalam Modern Screenwriters

== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2744006" start="0" end="16" title="Malayalam cinema" label="Malayalam cinema"/>
<link wikidata="Q328799" start="35" end="48" title="Cinema of India" label="Indian cinema"/>
<link wikidata="Q11424" start="80" end="94" title="motion picture" label="motion picture"/>
<link wikidata="Q36236" start="103" end="121" title="Malayalam" label="Malayalam language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186" start="162" end="168" title="Kerala" label="Kerala"/>
<link wikidata="Q26927" start="173" end="184" title="Lakshadweep" label="Lakshadweep"/>
<link wikidata="Q93196" start="668" end="677" title="Bollywood" label="Bollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q24869" start="715" end="727" title="feature film" label="feature film"/>
<link wikidata="Q7928860" start="738" end="752" title="Vigathakumaran" label="Vigathakumaran"/>
<link wikidata="Q226730" start="762" end="768" title="Silent film" label="silent"/>
<link wikidata="Q3522904" start="799" end="811" title="J. C. Daniel" label="J. C. Daniel"/>
<link wikidata="Q167715" start="887" end="905" title="Thiruvananthapuram" label="Thiruvananthapuram"/>
<link wikidata="Q848512" start="936" end="942" title="talkie" label="talkie"/>
<link wikidata="Q4849929" start="966" end="971" title="Balan (film)" label="Balan"/>
<link wikidata="Q20564763" start="997" end="1007" title="S. Nottani" label="S. Nottani"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352" start="1196" end="1202" title="Chennai" label="Madras"/>
<link wikidata="Q1800" start="1283" end="1288" title="Kochi" label="Kochi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2721855" start="1403" end="1412" title="Mammootty" label="Mammootty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2050534" start="1417" end="1425" title="Mohanlal" label="Mohanlal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350697" start="1513" end="1533" title="National Film Awards" label="National Film Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q11038927" start="1552" end="1562" title="National Film Award for Best Actor" label="Best Actor"/>
<link wikidata="Q489713" start="1570" end="1582" title="National Film Award for Best Actress" label="Best Actress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435633" start="1591" end="1600" title="National Film Award for Best Feature Film" label="Best Film"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435635" start="1613" end="1626" title="National Film Award for Best Direction" label="Best Director"/>
<link wikidata="Q2614341" start="1692" end="1704" title="Elippathayam" label="Elippathayam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7650000" start="1730" end="1747" title="Sutherland Trophy" label="Sutherland Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323689" start="1755" end="1775" title="London Film Festival" label="London Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q260528" start="1843" end="1865" title="British Film Institute" label="British Film Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q3427776" start="1887" end="1904" title="Marana Simhasanam" label="Marana Simhasanam"/>
<link wikidata="Q775091" start="1931" end="1947" title="Caméra d&amp;#x27;Or" label="Caméra d&amp;#x27;Or"/>
<link wikidata="Q238892" start="1955" end="1980" title="1999 Cannes Film Festival" label="1999 Cannes Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q105304" start="2055" end="2081" title="Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film" label="Best Foreign Language Film"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="2098" end="2112" title="Academy Awards" label="Academy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q7286179" start="2124" end="2136" title="Rajiv Anchal" label="Rajiv Anchal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5620328" start="2150" end="2154" title="Guru (1997 film)" label="Guru"/>
<link wikidata="Q7404548" start="2169" end="2181" title="Salim Ahamed" label="Salim Ahamed"/>
<link wikidata="Q3525225" start="2195" end="2213" title="Adaminte Makan Abu" label="Adaminte Makan Abu"/>
<link wikidata="Q6547017" start="2228" end="2248" title="Lijo Jose Pellissery" label="Lijo Jose Pellissery"/>
<link wikidata="Q67202673" start="2262" end="2273" title="Jallikkattu" label="Jallikkattu"/>
<link wikidata="Q16222231" start="2291" end="2310" title="Jude Anthany Joseph" label="Jude Anthany Joseph"/>
<link wikidata="Q115878911" start="2324" end="2328" title="2018 (film)" label="2018"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595616" start="2388" end="2396" title="Chemmeen" label="Chemmeen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071936" start="2456" end="2491" title="Chicago International Film Festival" label="Chicago International Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q42369" start="2517" end="2537" title="Cannes Film Festival" label="Cannes Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q7652963" start="2569" end="2575" title="Swaham" label="Swaham"/>
<link wikidata="Q3638530" start="2635" end="2655" title="Bergamo Film Meeting" label="Bergamo Film Meeting"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="2659" end="2664" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q229390" start="2720" end="2727" title="3D film" label="3D film"/>
<link wikidata="Q13114252" start="2735" end="2755" title="My Dear Kuttichathan" label="My Dear Kuttichathan"/>
<link wikidata="Q485544" start="2780" end="2791" title="CinemaScope" label="CinemaScope"/>
<link wikidata="Q7708897" start="2829" end="2842" title="Thacholi Ambu" label="Thacholi Ambu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186" start="3269" end="3275" title="Kerala" label="Kerala"/>
<link wikidata="Q163798" start="3332" end="3340" title="Thrissur" label="Thrissur"/>
<link wikidata="Q16031062" start="3344" end="3361" title="Jose Kattookkaran" label="Jose Kattookkaran"/>
<link wikidata="Q163798" start="3437" end="3445" title="Thrissur" label="Thrissur"/>
<link wikidata="Q17067441" start="3528" end="3539" title="Jose Theatre" label="Jos Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7928860" start="3585" end="3599" title="Vigathakumaran" label="Vigathakumaran"/>
<link wikidata="Q167715" start="3681" end="3699" title="Thiruvananthapuram" label="Thiruvananthapuram"/>
<link wikidata="Q3522904" start="3752" end="3764" title="J. C. Daniel" label="J. C. Daniel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3532843" start="3974" end="3989" title="Marthanda Varma (film)" label="Marthanda Varma"/>
<link wikidata="Q5006916" start="4019" end="4037" title="C. V. Raman Pillai" label="C. V. Raman Pillai"/>
<link wikidata="Q848512" start="4213" end="4219" title="talkie" label="talkie"/>
<link wikidata="Q4849929" start="4243" end="4248" title="Balan (film)" label="Balan"/>
<link wikidata="Q20564763" start="4293" end="4303" title="S. Nottani" label="S. Nottani"/>
<link wikidata="Q6943881" start="4343" end="4369" title="Muthukulam Raghavan Pillai" label="Muthukulam Raghavan Pillai"/>
<link wikidata="Q3531832" start="4390" end="4405" title="Modern Theatres" label="Modern Theatres"/>
<link wikidata="Q9863" start="4409" end="4414" title="Salem, Tamil Nadu" label="Salem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1445" start="4444" end="4454" title="Tamil Nadu" label="Tamil Nadu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7040027" start="4871" end="4878" title="Nirmala (1948 film)" label="Nirmala"/>
<link wikidata="Q2979882" start="5311" end="5327" title="G. Sankara Kurup" label="G. Sankara Kurup"/>
<link wikidata="Q7876989" start="5345" end="5358" title="Udaya Studios" label="Udaya Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q7340838" start="5371" end="5386" title="Vellinakshatram (1949 film)" label="Vellinakshatram"/>
<link wikidata="Q8242" start="5595" end="5605" title="literature" label="literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q25372" start="5607" end="5612" title="drama" label="drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q7163" start="5618" end="5626" title="politics" label="politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595091" start="5669" end="5683" title="Jeevitha Nouka" label="Jeevitha Nouka"/>
<link wikidata="Q6986759" start="5792" end="5802" title="Neelakuyil" label="Neelakuyil"/>
<link wikidata="Q7900912" start="5935" end="5940" title="Uroob" label="Uroob"/>
<link wikidata="Q2043560" start="5958" end="5970" title="P. Bhaskaran" label="P. Bhaskaran"/>
<link wikidata="Q7290339" start="5975" end="5986" title="Ramu Kariat" label="Ramu Kariat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7019719" start="5995" end="6008" title="Newspaper Boy (1955 film)" label="Newspaper Boy"/>
<link wikidata="Q167776" start="6044" end="6062" title="Italian neorealism" label="Italian neorealism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2043560" start="6383" end="6395" title="P. Bhaskaran" label="P. Bhaskaran"/>
<link wikidata="Q3521624" start="6397" end="6411" title="O. N. V. Kurup" label="O. N. V. Kurup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2605000" start="6497" end="6511" title="Dakshinamurthy" label="Dakshinamurthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6323873" start="6513" end="6524" title="K. Raghavan" label="K. Raghavan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5512207" start="6526" end="6538" title="G. Devarajan" label="G. Devarajan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4838100" start="6540" end="6553" title="M. S. Baburaj" label="M. S. Baburaj"/>
<link wikidata="Q2051388" start="6661" end="6682" title="Kozhikode Abdul Kader" label="Kozhikode Abdul Kader"/>
<link wikidata="Q3536974" start="6693" end="6708" title="P. B. Sreenivas" label="P. B. Sreenivas"/>
<link wikidata="Q13111490" start="6710" end="6726" title="K. P. Udayabhanu" label="K. P. Udayabhanu"/>
<link wikidata="Q16134431" start="6728" end="6742" title="Santha P. Nair" label="Santha P. Nair"/>
<link wikidata="Q465063" start="6744" end="6752" title="P. Leela" label="P. Leela"/>
<link wikidata="Q2051296" start="6754" end="6763" title="S. Janaki" label="S. Janaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q2050197" start="6765" end="6776" title="P. Susheela" label="P. Susheela"/>
<link wikidata="Q3533136" start="6803" end="6808" title="Jikki" label="Jikki"/>
<link wikidata="Q6943881" start="6891" end="6917" title="Muthukulam Raghavan Pillai" label="Muthukulam Raghavan Pillai"/>
<link wikidata="Q7290339" start="6987" end="6998" title="Ramu Kariat" label="Ramu Kariat"/>
<link wikidata="Q6986759" start="7030" end="7040" title="Neelakuyil" label="Neelakuyil"/>
<link wikidata="Q2043560" start="7138" end="7150" title="P. Bhaskaran" label="P. Bhaskaran"/>
<link wikidata="Q4648494" start="7253" end="7263" title="A. Vincent" label="A. Vincent"/>
<link wikidata="Q15052574" start="7361" end="7373" title="Odayil Ninnu" label="Odayil Ninnu"/>
<link wikidata="Q4901280" start="7387" end="7403" title="Bhargavi Nilayam" label="Bhargavi Nilayam"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595616" start="7424" end="7432" title="Chemmeen" label="Chemmeen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6937340" start="7453" end="7463" title="Murappennu" label="Murappennu"/>
<link wikidata="Q6074086" start="7487" end="7504" title="Iruttinte Athmavu" label="Iruttinte Athmavu"/>
<link wikidata="Q6361272" start="7572" end="7589" title="Kandam Bacha Coat" label="Kandam Bacha Coat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7290339" start="7646" end="7657" title="Ramu Kariat" label="Ramu Kariat"/>
<link wikidata="Q546044" start="7699" end="7726" title="Thakazhi Sivasankara Pillai" label="Thakazhi Sivasankara Pillai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435633" start="7809" end="7850" title="National Film Award for Best Feature Film" label="National Film Award for Best Feature Film"/>
<link wikidata="Q6712813" start="8143" end="8159" title="M. Krishnan Nair (director)" label="M. Krishnan Nair"/>
<link wikidata="Q6444212" start="8161" end="8170" title="Kunchacko" label="Kunchacko"/>
<link wikidata="Q7117552" start="8175" end="8189" title="P. Subramaniam" label="P. Subramaniam"/>
<link wikidata="Q6444212" start="8653" end="8662" title="Kunchacko" label="Kunchacko"/>
<link wikidata="Q7876989" start="8785" end="8798" title="Udaya Studios" label="Udaya Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q2043601" start="8979" end="8989" title="P. N. Menon (director)" label="P.N. Menon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5512132" start="9048" end="9060" title="G. Aravindan" label="G. Aravindan"/>
<link wikidata="Q366242" start="9065" end="9085" title="Adoor Gopalakrishnan" label="Adoor Gopalakrishnan"/>
<link wikidata="Q366242" start="9382" end="9402" title="Adoor Gopalakrishnan" label="Adoor Gopalakrishnan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7654086" start="9428" end="9439" title="Swayamvaram (1972 film)" label="Swayamvaram"/>
<link wikidata="Q3532812" start="9520" end="9540" title="M. T. Vasudevan Nair" label="M. T. Vasudevan Nair"/>
<link wikidata="Q7040062" start="9637" end="9646" title="Nirmalyam" label="Nirmalyam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435633" start="9668" end="9709" title="National Film Award for Best Feature Film" label="National Film Award for Best Feature Film"/>
<link wikidata="Q5512132" start="9711" end="9723" title="G. Aravindan" label="G. Aravindan"/>
<link wikidata="Q366242" start="9733" end="9738" title="Adoor Gopalakrishnan" label="Adoor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7903407" start="9766" end="9777" title="Uttarayanam" label="Uttarayanam"/>
<link wikidata="Q6323722" start="9793" end="9806" title="K. P. Kumaran" label="K. P. Kumaran"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967148" start="9893" end="9936" title="National Film Award for Best Cinematography" label="Cinematographers who won the National Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q6750483" start="9989" end="10007" title="Mankada Ravi Varma" label="Mankada Ravi Varma"/>
<link wikidata="Q7654086" start="10018" end="10029" title="Swayamvaram (1972 film)" label="Swayamvaram"/>
<link wikidata="Q7117509" start="10044" end="10055" title="P. S. Nivas" label="P. S. Nivas"/>
<link wikidata="Q940868" start="10066" end="10078" title="Mohiniyattam" label="Mohiniyattam"/>
<link wikidata="Q3521546" start="10097" end="10111" title="Shaji N. Karun" label="Shaji N. Karun"/>
<link wikidata="Q7710057" start="10122" end="10128" title="Thampu" label="Thampu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595237" start="10143" end="10155" title="John Abraham (director)" label="John Abraham"/>
<link wikidata="Q6323828" start="10157" end="10170" title="K. R. Mohanan" label="K. R. Mohanan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6323344" start="10172" end="10184" title="K. G. George" label="K. G. George"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414326" start="10226" end="10245" title="Pune Film Institute" label="Pune Film Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q6360999" start="10567" end="10580" title="Kanchana Sita" label="Kanchana Sita"/>
<link wikidata="Q7710057" start="10601" end="10607" title="Thampu" label="Thampu"/>
<link wikidata="Q13553733" start="10628" end="10636" title="Kummatty" label="Kummatty"/>
<link wikidata="Q5096587" start="10657" end="10668" title="Chidambaram (film)" label="Chidambaram"/>
<link wikidata="Q13110819" start="10689" end="10697" title="Oridathu" label="Oridathu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7916999" start="10722" end="10732" title="Vasthuhara" label="Vasthuhara"/>
<link wikidata="Q7117248" start="10805" end="10823" title="P. G. Viswambharan" label="P. G. Viswambharan"/>
<link wikidata="Q18355564" start="10898" end="10915" title="Satyavan Savithri" label="Satyavan Savithri"/>
<link wikidata="Q6712604" start="11044" end="11055" title="M. G. Soman" label="M. G. Soman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7635921" start="11057" end="11066" title="Sukumaran" label="Sukumaran"/>
<link wikidata="Q16016289" start="11071" end="11078" title="Sudheer (Malayalam actor)" label="Sudheer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6167522" start="11182" end="11187" title="Jayan" label="Jayan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758095" start="11272" end="11277" title="stunt" label="stunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q6427260" start="11287" end="11297" title="Kolilakkam" label="Kolilakkam"/>
<link wikidata="Q103076" start="11393" end="11403" title="screenplay" label="screenplay"/>
<link wikidata="Q590870" start="11527" end="11541" title="cinematography" label="cinematography"/>
<link wikidata="Q277729" start="11683" end="11690" title="Shankar (actor)" label="Shankar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2050534" start="11707" end="11715" title="Mohanlal" label="Mohanlal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2614341" start="11762" end="11774" title="Elippathayam" label="Elippathayam"/>
<link wikidata="Q260528" start="11809" end="11831" title="British Film Institute" label="British Film Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q2721855" start="11886" end="11895" title="Mammootty" label="Mammootty"/>
<link wikidata="Q14918227" start="11926" end="11935" title="Sphodanam" label="Sphodanam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7117248" start="11954" end="11972" title="P. G. Viswambharan" label="P. G. Viswambharan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595146" start="11988" end="11998" title="Padmarajan" label="Padmarajan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7102237" start="12096" end="12117" title="Oridathoru Phayalvaan" label="Oridathoru Phayalvaan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3530100" start="12138" end="12147" title="Koodevide" label="Koodevide"/>
<link wikidata="Q7784561" start="12168" end="12196" title="Thinkalaazhcha Nalla Divasam" label="Thinkalaazhcha Nalla Divasam"/>
<link wikidata="Q4784236" start="12217" end="12244" title="Arappatta Kettiya Gramathil" label="Arappatta Kettiya Gramathil"/>
<link wikidata="Q6962117" start="12265" end="12298" title="Namukku Parkkan Munthirithoppukal" label="Namukku Parkkan Munthirithoppukal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7796009" start="12319" end="12336" title="Thoovanathumbikal" label="Thoovanathumbikal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6907912" start="12357" end="12371" title="Moonnam Pakkam" label="Moonnam Pakkam"/>
<link wikidata="Q6035237" start="12392" end="12398" title="Innale" label="Innale"/>
<link wikidata="Q264943" start="12422" end="12428" title="Season (film)" label="Season"/>
<link wikidata="Q6323344" start="12721" end="12733" title="K. G. George" label="K. G. George"/>
<link wikidata="Q8050364" start="12765" end="12773" title="Yavanika" label="Yavanika"/>
<link wikidata="Q4680150" start="12790" end="12809" title="Adaminte Vaariyellu" label="Adaminte Vaariyellu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3532812" start="12864" end="12884" title="M. T. Vasudevan Nair" label="M. T. Vasudevan Nair"/>
<link wikidata="Q5657405" start="12918" end="12927" title="Hariharan (director)" label="Hariharan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3987072" start="12956" end="12965" title="Panchagni" label="Panchagni"/>
<link wikidata="Q6960554" start="12979" end="12995" title="Nakhakshathangal" label="Nakhakshathangal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4784167" start="13009" end="13018" title="Aranyakam" label="Aranyakam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7105147" start="13035" end="13058" title="Oru Vadakkan Veeragatha" label="Oru Vadakkan Veeragatha"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595237" start="13066" end="13078" title="John Abraham (director)" label="John Abraham"/>
<link wikidata="Q3115713" start="13255" end="13267" title="Priyadarshan" label="Priyadarshan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595185" start="13269" end="13285" title="Sathyan Anthikad" label="Sathyan Anthikad"/>
<link wikidata="Q6355357" start="13287" end="13292" title="Kamal (director)" label="Kamal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7508206" start="13297" end="13309" title="Siddique-Lal" label="Siddique-Lal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343846" start="13317" end="13323" title="Piravi" label="Piravi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3521546" start="13340" end="13354" title="Shaji N. Karun" label="Shaji N. Karun"/>
<link wikidata="Q775091" start="13395" end="13411" title="Caméra d&amp;#x27;Or" label="Caméra d&amp;#x27;Or"/>
<link wikidata="Q7295627" start="13450" end="13458" title="Ratheesh" label="Ratheesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q7635921" start="13463" end="13472" title="Sukumaran" label="Sukumaran"/>
<link wikidata="Q123011518" start="13695" end="13719" title="Malayalam softcore pornography" label="Malayalam softcore films"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320115" start="13737" end="13748" title="Low-budget film" label="low budgets"/>
<link wikidata="Q6787275" start="14030" end="14040" title="Mathilukal" label="Mathilukal"/>
<link wikidata="Q366242" start="14066" end="14086" title="Adoor Gopalakrishnan" label="Adoor Gopalakrishnan"/>
<link wikidata="Q13111137" start="14094" end="14106" title="Kattukuthira" label="Kattukuthira"/>
<link wikidata="Q7117248" start="14132" end="14150" title="P. G. Viswambharan" label="P. G. Viswambharan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4740138" start="14158" end="14164" title="Amaram" label="Amaram"/>
<link wikidata="Q2900655" start="14190" end="14199" title="Bharathan" label="Bharathan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7879118" start="14207" end="14217" title="Ulladakkam" label="Ulladakkam"/>
<link wikidata="Q6355357" start="14243" end="14248" title="Kamaluddin Mohammed" label="Kamal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6408256" start="14256" end="14264" title="Kilukkam" label="Kilukkam"/>
<link wikidata="Q3115713" start="14290" end="14302" title="Priyadarshan" label="Priyadarshan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6355644" start="14310" end="14321" title="Kamaladalam" label="Kamaladalam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2280863" start="14338" end="14350" title="Sibi Malayil" label="Sibi Malayil"/>
<link wikidata="Q7928073" start="14358" end="14366" title="Vidheyan" label="Vidheyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q366242" start="14383" end="14403" title="Adoor Gopalakrishnan" label="Adoor Gopalakrishnan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5266597" start="14411" end="14421" title="Devaasuram" label="Devaasuram"/>
<link wikidata="Q5968095" start="14438" end="14448" title="I. V. Sasi" label="I. V. Sasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3530081" start="14456" end="14472" title="Manichitrathazhu" label="Manichitrathazhu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7228194" start="14502" end="14514" title="Ponthan Mada" label="Ponthan Mada"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595285" start="14531" end="14545" title="T. V. Chandran" label="T. V. Chandran"/>
<link wikidata="Q7572787" start="14553" end="14561" title="Spadikam" label="Spadikam"/>
<link wikidata="Q4900560" start="14578" end="14585" title="Bhadran (director)" label="Bhadran"/>
<link wikidata="Q524778" start="14593" end="14605" title="Commissioner" label="Commissioner"/>
<link wikidata="Q7744492" start="14624" end="14632" title="The King (1995 film)" label="The King"/>
<link wikidata="Q7462513" start="14649" end="14661" title="Shaji Kailas" label="Shaji Kailas"/>
<link wikidata="Q16248944" start="14669" end="14675" title="Hitler (1996 film)" label="Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q7508209" start="14692" end="14700" title="Siddique (director)" label="Siddique"/>
<link wikidata="Q5263592" start="14711" end="14720" title="Desadanam" label="Desadanam"/>
<link wikidata="Q6167643" start="14737" end="14744" title="Jayaraj" label="Jayaraj"/>
<link wikidata="Q6122089" start="14842" end="14850" title="Jagadish" label="Jagadish"/>
<link wikidata="Q283512" start="14852" end="14860" title="Siddique (actor)" label="Siddique"/>
<link wikidata="Q277422" start="14862" end="14868" title="Mukesh (actor)" label="Mukesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q7585727" start="14870" end="14881" title="Sreenivasan" label="Sreenivasan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3522919" start="14886" end="14893" title="Jayaram" label="Jayaram"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595185" start="15028" end="15044" title="Sathyan Anthikad" label="Sathyan Anthikad"/>
<link wikidata="Q7508206" start="15049" end="15061" title="Siddique-Lal" label="Siddique-Lal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7227885" start="15074" end="15097" title="Ponmuttayidunna Tharavu" label="Ponmuttayidunna Tharavu"/>
<link wikidata="Q6798508" start="15111" end="15125" title="Mazhavilkavadi" label="Mazhavilkavadi"/>
<link wikidata="Q13114403" start="15139" end="15157" title="Ramji Rao Speaking" label="Ramji Rao Speaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q7709592" start="15171" end="15189" title="Thalayana Manthram" label="Thalayana Manthram"/>
<link wikidata="Q6009593" start="15203" end="15219" title="In Harihar Nagar" label="In Harihar Nagar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5576354" start="15237" end="15246" title="Godfather (1991 film)" label="Godfather"/>
<link wikidata="Q6009593" start="15378" end="15394" title="In Harihar Nagar" label="In Harihar Nagar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7652963" start="15486" end="15492" title="Swaham" label="Swaham"/>
<link wikidata="Q3521546" start="15519" end="15533" title="Shaji N. Karun" label="Shaji N. Karun"/>
<link wikidata="Q42369" start="15597" end="15631" title="Cannes Film Festival" label="Cannes International Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q179808" start="15664" end="15679" title="Palme d&amp;#x27;Or" label="Palme d&amp;#x27;Or"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595556" start="15681" end="15692" title="Murali Nair" label="Murali Nair"/>
<link wikidata="Q3427776" start="15706" end="15723" title="Marana Simhasanam" label="Marana Simhasanam"/>
<link wikidata="Q775091" start="15744" end="15760" title="Caméra d&amp;#x27;Or" label="Caméra d&amp;#x27;Or"/>
<link wikidata="Q238892" start="15768" end="15793" title="1999 Cannes Film Festival" label="1999 Cannes Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q5620328" start="15801" end="15805" title="Guru (1997 film)" label="Guru"/>
<link wikidata="Q7286179" start="15832" end="15844" title="Rajiv Anchal" label="Rajiv Anchal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3116900" start="15860" end="15901" title="India&amp;#x27;s official entry to the Oscars" label="India&amp;#x27;s official entry to the Oscars"/>
<link wikidata="Q2582445" start="16076" end="16091" title="A. K. Lohithadas" label="A.K. Lohithadas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4901987" start="16130" end="16145" title="Bhoothakkannadi" label="Bhoothakkannadi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661436" start="16174" end="16227" title="Indira Gandhi Award for Best Debut Film of a Director" label="Indira Gandhi Award for Best Debut Film of a Director"/>
<link wikidata="Q6965425" start="16297" end="16307" title="Narasimham (film)" label="Narasimham"/>
<link wikidata="Q2050534" start="16323" end="16331" title="Mohanlal" label="Mohanlal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7738423" start="16408" end="16417" title="The Guard (2001 film)" label="The Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q5006132" start="16494" end="16506" title="C.I.D. Moosa" label="C.I.D. Moosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6268834" start="16523" end="16535" title="Johny Antony" label="Johny Antony"/>
<link wikidata="Q6807719" start="16543" end="16557" title="Meesa Madhavan" label="Meesa Madhavan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6480060" start="16574" end="16582" title="Lal Jose" label="Lal Jose"/>
<link wikidata="Q6444825" start="16593" end="16604" title="Kunjikoonan (2002 film)" label="Kunjikoonan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7425144" start="16630" end="16642" title="Sasi Shanker" label="Sasi Shanker"/>
<link wikidata="Q6809027" start="16774" end="16785" title="Meghamalhar" label="Meghamalhar"/>
<link wikidata="Q13113849" start="16799" end="16818" title="Madhuranombarakattu" label="Madhuranombarakattu"/>
<link wikidata="Q13112801" start="16832" end="16840" title="Nandanam (film)" label="Nandanam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7171049" start="16854" end="16869" title="Perumazhakkalam" label="Perumazhakkalam"/>
<link wikidata="Q6343683" start="16887" end="16895" title="Kaazhcha" label="Kaazhcha"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17059" end="17077" title="Malayalam softcore pornography#The wave of Shakeela" label="Shakeela tharangam"/>
<link wikidata="Q123011518" start="17134" end="17148" title="Malayalam softcore pornography" label="softporn films"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519840" start="17438" end="17446" title="Shakeela" label="Shakeela"/>
<link wikidata="Q16252362" start="17667" end="17675" title="New Wave (Malayalam film genre)" label="New Wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q7404548" start="18195" end="18207" title="Salim Ahamed" label="Salim Ahamed"/>
<link wikidata="Q3525225" start="18221" end="18239" title="Adaminte Makan Abu" label="Adaminte Makan Abu"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="18295" end="18308" title="Academy Award" label="Academy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q5109360" start="18392" end="18410" title="Christian Brothers (film)" label="Christian Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q17078716" start="18674" end="18684" title="Peruchazhi" label="Peruchazhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q15401703" start="18759" end="18767" title="Drishyam" label="Drishyam"/>
<link wikidata="Q20814704" start="18952" end="18963" title="Pulimurugan" label="Pulimurugan"/>
<link wikidata="Q932244" start="19186" end="19202" title="Sinhalese people" label="Sinhalese people"/>
<link wikidata="Q55621418" start="19239" end="19258" title="Lucifer (2019 Indian film)" label="&amp;quot;Lucifer&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q6547017" start="19474" end="19494" title="Lijo Jose Pellissery" label="Lijo Jose Pellissery"/>
<link wikidata="Q67202673" start="19513" end="19523" title="Jallikattu (2019 film)" label="Jallikattu"/>
<link wikidata="Q84263196" start="19670" end="19678" title="COVID-19" label="COVID-19"/>
<link wikidata="Q96406662" start="19689" end="19706" title="Sufiyum Sujatayum" label="Sufiyum Sujatayum"/>
<link wikidata="Q6167686" start="19717" end="19726" title="Jayasurya" label="Jayasurya"/>
<link wikidata="Q4683039" start="19731" end="19747" title="Aditi Rao Hydari" label="Aditi Rao Hydari"/>
<link wikidata="Q4740856" start="19807" end="19825" title="Amazon Prime Video" label="Amazon Prime Video"/>
<link wikidata="Q829548" start="19827" end="19830" title="Over-the-top media service" label="OTT"/>
<link wikidata="Q102036246" start="19911" end="19921" title="Drishyam 2" label="Drishyam 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q106201385" start="19935" end="19942" title="Nayattu (2021 film)" label="Nayattu"/>
<link wikidata="Q106349600" start="19956" end="19960" title="Kala (2021 film)" label="Kala"/>
<link wikidata="Q106363196" start="19974" end="19978" title="Joji (film)" label="Joji"/>
<link wikidata="Q104884250" start="19992" end="20016" title="The Great Indian Kitchen" label="The Great Indian Kitchen"/>
<link wikidata="Q85846734" start="20033" end="20038" title="Malik (film)" label="Malik"/>
<link wikidata="Q37312" start="20097" end="20101" title="IMDb" label="Imdb"/>
<link wikidata="Q95432716" start="20158" end="20171" title="Minnal Murali" label="Minnal Murali"/>
<link wikidata="Q907311" start="20193" end="20200" title="Netflix" label="Netflix"/>
<link wikidata="Q16202781" start="20222" end="20235" title="Tovino Thomas" label="Tovino Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q19968643" start="20275" end="20287" title="Basil Joseph" label="Basil Joseph"/>
<link wikidata="Q27958088" start="20294" end="20314" title="Weekend Blockbusters" label="Weekend Blockbusters"/>
<link wikidata="Q866" start="20453" end="20460" title="YouTube" label="YouTube"/>
<link wikidata="Q115878911" start="20544" end="20548" title="2018 (film)" label="2018"/>
<link wikidata="Q124636001" start="21077" end="21091" title="Manjummel Boys" label="Manjummel Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q21152182" start="21105" end="21118" title="The Goat Life" label="Aadujeevitham"/>
<link wikidata="Q124467044" start="21132" end="21139" title="Premalu" label="Premalu"/>
<link wikidata="Q125372922" start="21153" end="21161" title="Aavesham (2024 film)" label="Aavesham"/>
<link wikidata="Q115516527" start="21178" end="21181" title="ARM (film)" label="ARM"/>
<link wikidata="Q7019719" start="21518" end="21531" title="Newspaper Boy (1955 film)" label="Newspaper Boy"/>
<link wikidata="Q858436" start="21548" end="21560" title="Neorealism (art)" label="neorealistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q167776" start="21589" end="21607" title="Italian neorealism" label="Italian neorealism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7123303" start="21615" end="21625" title="Padayottam (1982 film)" label="Padayottam"/>
<link wikidata="Q261242" start="21683" end="21693" title="70 mm film" label="70 mm film"/>
<link wikidata="Q13114252" start="21707" end="21727" title="My Dear Kuttichathan" label="My Dear Kuttichathan"/>
<link wikidata="Q13110840" start="21778" end="21790" title="O&amp;#x27; Faby" label="O&amp;#x27; Faby"/>
<link wikidata="Q517386" start="21826" end="21837" title="Live action" label="Live action"/>
<link wikidata="Q11425" start="21838" end="21847" title="animation" label="animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4747090" start="21868" end="21879" title="Amma Ariyan" label="Amma Ariyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595237" start="22025" end="22037" title="John Abraham (director)" label="John Abraham"/>
<link wikidata="Q882" start="22110" end="22125" title="Charlie Chaplin" label="Charlie Chaplin"/>
<link wikidata="Q374172" start="22144" end="22151" title="The Kid (1921 film)" label="The Kid"/>
<link wikidata="Q6907909" start="22166" end="22180" title="Moonnamathoral" label="Moonnamathoral"/>
<link wikidata="Q761706" start="22249" end="22263" title="digital cinema" label="digital format"/>
<link wikidata="Q13112142" start="22272" end="22283" title="Jalachhayam" label="Jalachhayam"/>
<link wikidata="Q210820" start="22349" end="22361" title="Camera phone" label="Camera phone"/>
<link wikidata="Q790192" start="22381" end="22398" title="experimental film" label="experimental film"/>
<link wikidata="Q29534122" start="22411" end="22427" title="Sathish Kalathil" label="Sathish Kalathil"/>
<link wikidata="Q29467370" start="22451" end="22465" title="Veenavaadanam" label="Veena Vaadanam"/>
<link wikidata="Q29018078" start="22551" end="22558" title="Villain (2017 film)" label="Villain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3456907" start="22620" end="22633" title="8K resolution" label="8K resolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q106671200" start="22642" end="22649" title="Vazhiye" label="Vazhiye"/>
<link wikidata="Q3272147" start="22676" end="22689" title="found footage (film genre)" label="found footage"/>
<link wikidata="Q3522904" start="22811" end="22823" title="J. C. Daniel" label="J. C. Daniel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3282637" start="22842" end="22850" title="film producer" label="producer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7928860" start="22886" end="22900" title="Vigathakumaran" label="Vigathakumaran"/>
<link wikidata="Q188602" start="22986" end="22993" title="Puranas" label="Puranas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6986759" start="23292" end="23302" title="Neelakuyil" label="Neelakuyil"/>
<link wikidata="Q7290339" start="23329" end="23340" title="Ramu Kariat" label="Ramu Kariat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2043560" start="23345" end="23357" title="P. Bhaskaran" label="P. Bhaskaran"/>
<link wikidata="Q4648494" start="23578" end="23588" title="A. Vincent" label="A. Vincent"/>
<link wikidata="Q7019719" start="23739" end="23752" title="Newspaper Boy (1955 film)" label="Newspaper Boy"/>
<link wikidata="Q201658" start="23861" end="23875" title="film genre" label="genre of films"/>
<link wikidata="Q366242" start="23997" end="24017" title="Adoor Gopalakrishnan" label="Adoor Gopalakrishnan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5512132" start="24022" end="24034" title="G. Aravindan" label="G. Aravindan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595237" start="24048" end="24060" title="John Abraham (director)" label="John Abraham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1762332" start="24065" end="24077" title="P. A. Backer" label="P. A. Backer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5968095" start="24453" end="24463" title="I. V. Sasi" label="I. V. Sasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7117248" start="24465" end="24483" title="P. G. Viswambharan" label="P. G. Viswambharan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6323344" start="24485" end="24497" title="K. G. George" label="K. G. George"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595146" start="24513" end="24523" title="Padmarajan" label="Padmarajan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435635" start="24540" end="24578" title="National Film Award for Best Direction" label="National Film Award for Best Direction"/>
<link wikidata="Q366242" start="24674" end="24694" title="Adoor Gopalakrishnan" label="Adoor Gopalakrishnan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5512132" start="24727" end="24739" title="G. Aravindan" label="G. Aravindan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3521546" start="24760" end="24774" title="Shaji N. Karun" label="Shaji N. Karun"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595285" start="24783" end="24797" title="T. V. Chandran" label="T. V. Chandran"/>
<link wikidata="Q6167643" start="24806" end="24813" title="Jayaraj" label="Jayaraj"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398170" start="24885" end="24903" title="National Film Award – Special Jury Award (feature film)" label="Special Jury Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q6750483" start="24913" end="24931" title="Mankada Ravi Varma" label="Mankada Ravi Varma"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595237" start="24940" end="24952" title="John Abraham (director)" label="John Abraham"/>
<link wikidata="Q3521546" start="24961" end="24975" title="Shaji N. Karun" label="Shaji N. Karun"/>
<link wikidata="Q492264" start="25026" end="25036" title="Film score" label="Film score"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755412" start="25054" end="25069" title="Playback singer" label="Playback singer"/>
<link wikidata="Q531426" start="25088" end="25100" title="Music of India" label="Indian music"/>
<link wikidata="Q373342" start="25136" end="25149" title="popular music" label="popular music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1267987" start="25311" end="25319" title="Malayali" label="Malayali"/>
<link wikidata="Q926324" start="25337" end="25342" title="Tamil cinema" label="Tamil"/>
<link wikidata="Q93196" start="25347" end="25352" title="Hindi cinema" label="Hindi"/>
<link wikidata="Q465063" start="25679" end="25687" title="P. Leela" label="P. Leela"/>
<link wikidata="Q15685372" start="25689" end="25705" title="T. K. Govindarao" label="T. K. Govindarao"/>
<link wikidata="Q5512207" start="26226" end="26238" title="G. Devarajan" label="G. Devarajan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7906028" start="26240" end="26258" title="V. Dakshinamoorthy" label="V. Dakshinamoorthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4838100" start="26260" end="26273" title="M. S. Baburaj" label="M. S. Baburaj"/>
<link wikidata="Q6323873" start="26278" end="26289" title="K. Raghavan" label="K. Raghavan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7917551" start="26315" end="26332" title="Vayalar Ramavarma" label="Vayalar Ramavarma"/>
<link wikidata="Q2043560" start="26334" end="26346" title="P. Bhaskaran" label="P. Bhaskaran"/>
<link wikidata="Q3521624" start="26348" end="26362" title="O. N. V. Kurup" label="O. N. V. Kurup"/>
<link wikidata="Q7585712" start="26367" end="26385" title="Sreekumaran Thampi" label="Sreekumaran Thampi"/>
<link wikidata="Q16091592" start="26428" end="26450" title="Kamukara Purushothaman" label="Kamukara Purushothaman"/>
<link wikidata="Q13111490" start="26452" end="26468" title="K. P. Udayabhanu" label="K. P. Udayabhanu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2048851" start="26470" end="26481" title="A. M. Rajah" label="A. M. Rajah"/>
<link wikidata="Q465063" start="26483" end="26491" title="P. Leela" label="P. Leela"/>
<link wikidata="Q16134431" start="26493" end="26507" title="Santha P. Nair" label="Santha P. Nair"/>
<link wikidata="Q16134971" start="26509" end="26526" title="Ayiroor Sadasivan" label="Ayiroor Sadasivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q85952715" start="26544" end="26559" title="C. S. Radhadevi" label="C. S. Radhadevi"/>
<link wikidata="Q72855395" start="26561" end="26576" title="A. K. Sukumaran" label="A. K. Sukumaran"/>
<link wikidata="Q8289045" start="26578" end="26589" title="B. Vasantha" label="B. Vasantha"/>
<link wikidata="Q2050197" start="26591" end="26602" title="P. Susheela" label="P. Susheela"/>
<link wikidata="Q2049451" start="26604" end="26614" title="P. Madhuri" label="P. Madhuri"/>
<link wikidata="Q2051296" start="26619" end="26628" title="S. Janaki" label="S. Janaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q156310" start="26807" end="26816" title="Manna Dey" label="Manna Dey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595869" start="26818" end="26831" title="Talat Mahmood" label="Talat Mahmood"/>
<link wikidata="Q156347" start="26833" end="26848" title="Lata Mangeshkar" label="Lata Mangeshkar"/>
<link wikidata="Q38393" start="26850" end="26861" title="Asha Bhosle" label="Asha Bhosle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5712227" start="26863" end="26870" title="Hemlata (singer)" label="Hemlata"/>
<link wikidata="Q471542" start="26872" end="26885" title="Kishore Kumar" label="Kishore Kumar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2737017" start="26887" end="26902" title="Mahendra Kapoor" label="Mahendra Kapoor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2049688" start="26907" end="26929" title="S. P. Balasubrahmanyam" label="S. P. Balasubrahmanyam"/>
<link wikidata="Q36834" start="26988" end="26996" title="composer" label="composer"/>
<link wikidata="Q674337" start="27063" end="27070" title="Naushad" label="Naushad"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282932" start="27072" end="27083" title="Usha Khanna" label="Usha Khanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q6712428" start="27085" end="27102" title="M. B. Sreenivasan" label="M. B. Sreenivasan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595650" start="27104" end="27108" title="Ravi (composer)" label="Ravi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7505912" start="27110" end="27115" title="Shyam (composer)" label="Shyam"/>
<link wikidata="Q3345399" start="27117" end="27129" title="Bappi Lahiri" label="Bappi Lahiri"/>
<link wikidata="Q3032420" start="27131" end="27149" title="Laxmikant–Pyarelal" label="Laxmikant–Pyarelal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3349404" start="27151" end="27166" title="Salil Chowdhury" label="Salil Chowdhury"/>
<link wikidata="Q2720141" start="27168" end="27179" title="Ilaiyaraaja" label="Ilaiyaraaja"/>
<link wikidata="Q2742292" start="27181" end="27196" title="Vishal Bhardwaj" label="Vishal Bhardwaj"/>
<link wikidata="Q108560" start="27201" end="27213" title="A. R. Rahman" label="A. R. Rahman"/>
<link wikidata="Q542146" start="27303" end="27314" title="South India" label="South India"/>
<link wikidata="Q6712428" start="27572" end="27589" title="M. B. Sreenivasan" label="M. B. Sreenivasan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2053416" start="27591" end="27604" title="M. K. Arjunan" label="M. K. Arjunan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3115598" start="27633" end="27650" title="M. S. Viswanathan" label="M. S. Viswanathan"/>
<link wikidata="Q13110599" start="27652" end="27663" title="A. T. Ummer" label="A. T. Ummer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7273773" start="27665" end="27678" title="R. K. Shekhar" label="R. K. Shekhar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3349404" start="27680" end="27695" title="Salil Chowdhury" label="Salil Chowdhury"/>
<link wikidata="Q16873153" start="27715" end="27748" title="Thirunainar Kurichi Madhavan Nair" label="Thirunainar Kurichi Madhavan Nair"/>
<link wikidata="Q18125195" start="27750" end="27773" title="Mankombu Gopalakrishnan" label="Mankombu Gopalakrishnan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2051849" start="27959" end="27972" title="K. J. Yesudas" label="K. J. Yesudas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2049950" start="28115" end="28128" title="K. S. Chithra" label="K. S. Chithra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3529962" start="28142" end="28149" title="Vayalar" label="Vayalar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5512207" start="28151" end="28163" title="G. Devarajan" label="G. Devarajan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2051309" start="28395" end="28410" title="P. Jayachandran" label="P. Jayachandran"/>
<link wikidata="Q2049950" start="28488" end="28501" title="K. S. Chithra" label="K. S. Chithra"/>
<link wikidata="Q542146" start="28594" end="28605" title="South India" label="South India"/>
<link wikidata="Q7505912" start="28764" end="28769" title="Shyam (composer)" label="Shyam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2052070" start="28786" end="28799" title="Jerry Amaldev" label="Jerry Amaldev"/>
<link wikidata="Q7296357" start="28986" end="28996" title="Raveendran" label="Raveendran"/>
<link wikidata="Q3523016" start="29008" end="29015" title="Johnson (composer)" label="Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6712592" start="29020" end="29039" title="M. G. Radhakrishnan" label="M. G. Radhakrishnan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7228895" start="29197" end="29213" title="Poovachal Khader" label="Poovachal Khader"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595318" start="29215" end="29240" title="Kavalam Narayana Panicker" label="Kavalam Narayana Panicker"/>
<link wikidata="Q4903622" start="29245" end="29260" title="Bichu Thirumala" label="Bichu Thirumala"/>
<link wikidata="Q12055902" start="29278" end="29310" title="Kaithapram Damodaran Namboothiri" label="Kaithapram Damodaran Namboothiri"/>
<link wikidata="Q7906123" start="29312" end="29333" title="V. Madhusoodanan Nair" label="V. Madhusoodanan Nair"/>
<link wikidata="Q3530876" start="29338" end="29356" title="Girish Puthenchery" label="Girish Puthenchery"/>
<link wikidata="Q6364156" start="29424" end="29436" title="Kannur Rajan" label="Kannur Rajan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595650" start="29438" end="29442" title="Ravi (composer)" label="Ravi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7387760" start="29444" end="29459" title="S. P. Venkatesh" label="S. P. Venkatesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q6893606" start="29461" end="29474" title="Mohan Sithara" label="Mohan Sithara"/>
<link wikidata="Q7111340" start="29476" end="29487" title="Ouseppachan" label="Ouseppachan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7490467" start="29489" end="29496" title="Sharreth" label="Sharath"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595530" start="29526" end="29536" title="Vidyasagar (composer)" label="Vidyasagar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2051849" start="29571" end="29584" title="K. J. Yesudas" label="K. J. Yesudas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2049950" start="29589" end="29602" title="K. S. Chithra" label="K. S. Chithra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2050135" start="29620" end="29635" title="M. G. Sreekumar" label="M. G. Sreekumar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2051737" start="29637" end="29649" title="G. Venugopal" label="G. Venugopal"/>
<link wikidata="Q20988132" start="29651" end="29665" title="Radhika Thilak" label="Radhika Thilak"/>
<link wikidata="Q2049982" start="29667" end="29677" title="Unni Menon" label="Unni Menon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2048352" start="29682" end="29695" title="Sujatha Mohan" label="Sujatha Mohan"/>
<link wikidata="Q956883" start="29786" end="29800" title="carnatic music" label="carnatic music"/>
<link wikidata="Q5102231" start="29906" end="29914" title="Chithram" label="Chithram"/>
<link wikidata="Q5772035" start="29935" end="29956" title="His Highness Abdullah" label="His Highness Abdullah"/>
<link wikidata="Q4901186" start="29977" end="29986" title="Bharatham" label="Bharatham"/>
<link wikidata="Q7423891" start="30007" end="30013" title="Sargam (1992 film)" label="Sargam"/>
<link wikidata="Q18393090" start="30034" end="30049" title="Kudumbasametham" label="Kudumbasametham"/>
<link wikidata="Q16254401" start="30070" end="30077" title="Sopanam (film)" label="Sopanam"/>
<link wikidata="Q108560" start="30159" end="30171" title="A. R. Rahman" label="A. R. Rahman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6712722" start="30173" end="30188" title="M. Jayachandran" label="M. Jayachandran"/>
<link wikidata="Q4907221" start="30190" end="30197" title="Bijibal" label="Bijibal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5250502" start="30199" end="30209" title="Deepak Dev" label="Deepak Dev"/>
<link wikidata="Q7319335" start="30211" end="30222" title="Rex Vijayan" label="Rex Vijayan"/>
<link wikidata="Q28449839" start="30224" end="30235" title="Jakes Bejoy" label="Jakes Bejoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7283614" start="30237" end="30246" title="Rahul Raj" label="Rahul Raj"/>
<link wikidata="Q7238506" start="30248" end="30263" title="Prashant Pillai" label="Prashant Pillai"/>
<link wikidata="Q7459925" start="30265" end="30277" title="Shaan Rahman" label="Shaan Rahman"/>
<link wikidata="Q29453931" start="30279" end="30291" title="Sushin Shyam" label="Sushin Shyam"/>
<link wikidata="Q5584286" start="30293" end="30304" title="Gopi Sundar" label="Gopi Sundar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2051370" start="30306" end="30320" title="Alphons Joseph" label="Alphons Joseph"/>
<link wikidata="Q20649813" start="30322" end="30338" title="Rajesh Murugesan" label="Rajesh Murugesan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2050869" start="30340" end="30351" title="Jassie Gift" label="Jassie Gift"/>
<link wikidata="Q16885590" start="30353" end="30366" title="Shahabaz Aman" label="Shahabaz Aman"/>
<link wikidata="Q28967821" start="30368" end="30380" title="Vishnu Vijay" label="Vishnu Vijay"/>
<link wikidata="Q7282492" start="30392" end="30405" title="Rafeeq Ahamed" label="Rafeeq Ahamed"/>
<link wikidata="Q4777971" start="30407" end="30416" title="Anwar Ali (poet)" label="Anwar Ali"/>
<link wikidata="Q18210091" start="30439" end="30456" title="Vinayak Sasikumar" label="Vinayak Sasikumar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7917553" start="30458" end="30464" title="Vayalar Sarath Chandra Varma" label="Sarath"/>
<link wikidata="Q4764670" start="30469" end="30485" title="Anil Panachooran" label="Anil Panachooran"/>
<link wikidata="Q2051781" start="30499" end="30518" title="Vineeth Sreenivasan" label="Vineeth Sreenivasan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2050788" start="30520" end="30534" title="Shreya Ghoshal" label="Shreya Ghoshal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2049494" start="30536" end="30553" title="Shankar Mahadevan" label="Shankar Mahadevan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2051905" start="30555" end="30568" title="Vijay Yesudas" label="Vijay Yesudas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2050280" start="30570" end="30582" title="Shweta Mohan" label="Shweta Mohan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3521487" start="30584" end="30591" title="Karthik (singer)" label="Karthik"/>
<link wikidata="Q3635484" start="30593" end="30604" title="Naresh Iyer" label="Naresh Iyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2049562" start="30606" end="30613" title="Manjari (Indian singer)" label="Manjari"/>
<link wikidata="Q5892320" start="30615" end="30625" title="Haricharan" label="Haricharan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16885590" start="30627" end="30640" title="Shahabaz Aman" label="Shahabaz Aman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5247086" start="30640" end="30662" title="Sithara (singer)" label=", Sithara Krishnakumar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7908739" start="30664" end="30684" title="Vaikom Vijayalakshmi" label="Vaikom Vijayalakshmi"/>
<link wikidata="Q21063964" start="30704" end="30719" title="Sayanora Philip" label="Sayanora Philip"/>
<link wikidata="Q4889964" start="30721" end="30732" title="Benny Dayal" label="Benny Dayal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2051801" start="30737" end="30758" title="Jyotsna Radhakrishnan" label="Jyotsna Radhakrishnan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5250502" start="30817" end="30827" title="Deepak Dev" label="Deepak Dev"/>
<link wikidata="Q7319335" start="30829" end="30840" title="Rex Vijayan" label="Rex Vijayan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7283614" start="30842" end="30851" title="Rahul Raj" label="Rahul Raj"/>
<link wikidata="Q28449839" start="30853" end="30864" title="Jakes Bejoy" label="Jakes Bejoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q29453931" start="30866" end="30878" title="Sushin Shyam" label="Sushin Shyam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7238506" start="30884" end="30899" title="Prashant Pillai" label="Prashant Pillai"/>
<link wikidata="Q933084" start="31069" end="31107" title="National Film Award for Best Music Direction" label="National Award-winning music composers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3523016" start="31132" end="31139" title="Johnson (composer)" label="Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595650" start="31154" end="31158" title="Ravi (composer)" label="Ravi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7111340" start="31167" end="31178" title="Ouseppachan" label="Ouseppachan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2720141" start="31187" end="31198" title="Ilaiyaraaja" label="Ilaiyaraaja"/>
<link wikidata="Q13110797" start="31207" end="31232" title="Isaac Thomas Kottukapally" label="Isaac Thomas Kottukapally"/>
<link wikidata="Q4907221" start="31241" end="31248" title="Bijibal" label="Bijibal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6712722" start="31260" end="31275" title="M. Jayachandran" label="M. Jayachandran"/>
<link wikidata="Q492264" start="31350" end="31360" title="film score" label="film score"/>
<link wikidata="Q217199" start="31477" end="31487" title="Soundtrack" label="Soundtrack"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755412" start="31504" end="31519" title="Playback singer" label="Playback singer"/>
<link wikidata="Q13111537" start="31707" end="31733" title="Kerala Varma Pazhassi Raja (film)" label="Kerala Varma Pazhassi Raja"/>
<link wikidata="Q2720141" start="31741" end="31752" title="Ilaiyaraaja" label="Ilaiyaraaja"/>
<link wikidata="Q3525225" start="31764" end="31782" title="Adaminte Makan Abu" label="Adaminte Makan Abu"/>
<link wikidata="Q13110797" start="31790" end="31815" title="Isaac Thomas Kottukapally" label="Isaac Thomas Kottukapally"/>
<link wikidata="Q7296357" start="31818" end="31828" title="Raveendran" label="Raveendran"/>
<link wikidata="Q48730647" start="31845" end="31860" title="National Film Award – Special Mention (feature film)" label="Special Mention"/>
<link wikidata="Q4901186" start="31908" end="31917" title="Bharatham" label="Bharatham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967200" start="31930" end="31971" title="National Film Award for Best Lyrics" label="lyricists who have won the National Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q7917551" start="31976" end="31993" title="Vayalar Ramavarma" label="Vayalar Ramavarma"/>
<link wikidata="Q3521624" start="32002" end="32016" title="O. N. V. Kurup" label="O. N. V. Kurup"/>
<link wikidata="Q8062006" start="32028" end="32044" title="Yusufali Kechery" label="Yusufali Kechery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748337" start="32057" end="32106" title="National Film Award for Best Male Playback Singer" label="male singers who have received the National Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q2051849" start="32111" end="32124" title="K. J. Yesudas" label="K. J. Yesudas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2051309" start="32163" end="32178" title="P. Jayachandran" label="P. Jayachandran"/>
<link wikidata="Q2050135" start="32190" end="32205" title="M. G. Sreekumar" label="M. G. Sreekumar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568" start="32276" end="32281" title="Hindi" label="Hindi"/>
<link wikidata="Q8097" start="32293" end="32299" title="Telugu language" label="Telugu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748337" start="32362" end="32411" title="National Film Award for Best Male Playback Singer" label="National Film Award for Best Male Playback Singer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1314838" start="32461" end="32466" title="National Film Award for Best Female Playback Singer" label="award"/>
<link wikidata="Q2051296" start="32471" end="32480" title="S. Janaki" label="S. Janaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q2049950" start="32492" end="32505" title="K. S. Chithra" label="K. S. Chithra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1314838" start="32649" end="32700" title="National Film Award for Best Female Playback Singer" label="National Film Award for Best Female Playback Singer"/>
<link wikidata="Q36236" start="32844" end="32853" title="Malayalam" label="Malayalam"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595487" start="32897" end="32929" title="Kerala State Chalachitra Academy" label="Kerala State Chalachitra Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3522885" start="32996" end="33016" title="government of Kerala" label="government of Kerala"/>
<link wikidata="Q167715" start="33613" end="33631" title="Thiruvananthapuram" label="Thiruvananthapuram"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595487" start="33704" end="33736" title="Kerala State Chalachitra Academy" label="Kerala State Chalachitra Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1800" start="33986" end="33991" title="Kochi" label="Kochi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4662716" start="34145" end="34162" title="Aashirvad Cinemas" label="Aashirvad Cinemas"/>
<link wikidata="Q22080360" start="34164" end="34181" title="Friday Film House" label="Friday Film House"/>
<link wikidata="Q6426591" start="34183" end="34210" title="Kokers Media Entertainments" label="Kokers Media Entertainments"/>
<link wikidata="Q17072554" start="34211" end="34244" title="Maxlab Cinemas and Entertainments" label="Maxlab Cinemas and Entertainments"/>
<link wikidata="Q106282857" start="34246" end="34268" title="Prithviraj Productions" label="Prithviraj Productions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1800" start="34284" end="34289" title="Kochi" label="Kochi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3522904" start="34382" end="34394" title="J. C. Daniel" label="J. C. Daniel"/>
<link wikidata="Q167715" start="34406" end="34424" title="Thiruvananthapuram" label="Thiruvananthapuram"/>
<link wikidata="Q150058" start="34451" end="34461" title="Travancore" label="Travancore"/>
<link wikidata="Q6444212" start="34481" end="34490" title="Kunchacko" label="Kunchacko"/>
<link wikidata="Q7876989" start="34536" end="34549" title="Udaya Studios" label="Udaya Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q585026" start="34553" end="34562" title="Alappuzha" label="Alappuzha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352" start="34665" end="34672" title="Chennai" label="Chennai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1445" start="34674" end="34684" title="Tamil Nadu" label="Tamil Nadu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7117552" start="34705" end="34719" title="P. Subramaniam" label="P. Subramaniam"/>
<link wikidata="Q6820497" start="34732" end="34748" title="Merryland Studio" label="Merryland Studio"/>
<link wikidata="Q6991223" start="34752" end="34757" title="Nemom" label="Nemom"/>
<link wikidata="Q167715" start="34759" end="34777" title="Thiruvananthapuram" label="Thiruvananthapuram"/>
<link wikidata="Q167715" start="34826" end="34844" title="Thiruvananthapuram" label="Thiruvananthapuram"/>
<link wikidata="Q4701405" start="34908" end="34916" title="Aakkulam" label="Aakkulam"/>
<link wikidata="Q167715" start="34918" end="34936" title="Thiruvananthapuram" label="Thiruvananthapuram"/>
<link wikidata="Q167715" start="34957" end="34975" title="Thiruvananthapuram" label="Thiruvananthapuram"/>
<link wikidata="Q6982536" start="34978" end="34986" title="Navodaya Studio" label="Navodaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q7798151" start="35001" end="35013" title="Thrikkakkara" label="Thrikkakkara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1800" start="35015" end="35020" title="Kochi" label="Kochi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5102234" start="35026" end="35044" title="Chitranjali Studio" label="Chitranjali Studio"/>
<link wikidata="Q167715" start="35052" end="35070" title="Thiruvananthapuram" label="Thiruvananthapuram"/>
<link wikidata="Q4809909" start="35098" end="35136" title="Association of Malayalam Movie Artists" label="Association of Malayalam Movie Artists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1800" start="35211" end="35216" title="Kochi" label="Kochi"/>
<link wikidata="Q113622930" start="35980" end="36020" title="List of highest-grossing Malayalam films" label="List of highest-grossing Malayalam films"/>
<link wikidata="Q118904887" start="36023" end="36052" title="List of Malayalam film actors" label="List of Malayalam film actors"/>
<link wikidata="Q16252362" start="36055" end="36095" title="New generation (Malayalam film movement)" label="New generation (Malayalam film movement)"/>
<link wikidata="Q123011518" start="36098" end="36128" title="Malayalam softcore pornography" label="Malayalam softcore pornography"/>
<link wikidata="Q7567541" start="36131" end="36152" title="Cinema of South India" label="Cinema of South India"/>
<link wikidata="Q2973175" start="36155" end="36182" title="List of cinema of the world" label="List of cinema of the world"/>
<link wikidata="Q6589101" start="36185" end="36209" title="Lists of Malayalam films" label="Lists of Malayalam films"/>
<link wikidata="" start="36212" end="36249" title=":Category:Film production companies of Kerala" label="Film Distribution companies in Kerala"/>
<link wikidata="Q24907252" start="36252" end="36313" title="K. R. Narayanan National Institute of Visual Science and Arts" label="K. R. Narayanan National Institute of Visual Science and Arts"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36347" end="36385" title="List of Malayalam Modern Screenwriters" label="List of Malayalam Modern Screenwriters"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="230581" wikidata="Q1464168" url="?curid=230581" title="Index of a subgroup">
<text>In mathematics, specifically group theory, the index of a subgroup &quot;H&quot; in a group &quot;G&quot; is the 
number of left cosets of &quot;H&quot; in &quot;G&quot;, or equivalently, the number of right cosets of &quot;H&quot; in &quot;G&quot;.
The index is denoted formula_1 or formula_2 or formula_3.
Because &quot;G&quot; is the disjoint union of the left cosets and because each left coset has the same size as &quot;H&quot;, the index is related to the orders of the two groups by the formula
:formula_4
(interpret the quantities as cardinal numbers if some of them are infinite).
Thus the index formula_1 measures the &quot;relative sizes&quot; of &quot;G&quot; and &quot;H&quot;.

For example, let formula_6 be the group of integers under addition, and let formula_7 be the subgroup consisting of the even integers. Then formula_8 has two cosets in formula_9, namely the set of even integers and the set of odd integers, so the index formula_10 is 2. More generally, formula_11 for any positive integer &quot;n&quot;.

When &quot;G&quot; is finite, the formula may be written as formula_12, and it implies
Lagrange&#x27;s theorem that formula_13 divides formula_14.

When &quot;G&quot; is infinite, formula_1 is a nonzero cardinal number that may be finite or infinite.
For example, formula_16, but formula_17 is infinite.

If &quot;N&quot; is a normal subgroup of &quot;G&quot;, then formula_18 is equal to the order of the quotient group formula_19, since the underlying set of formula_19 is the set of cosets of &quot;N&quot; in &quot;G&quot;.

==Properties==
* If &quot;H&quot; is a subgroup of &quot;G&quot; and &quot;K&quot; is a subgroup of &quot;H&quot;, then
::formula_21
* If &quot;H&quot; and &quot;K&quot; are subgroups of &quot;G&quot;, then
::formula_22
:with equality if formula_23. (If formula_24 is finite, then equality holds if and only if formula_23.)
* Equivalently, if &quot;H&quot; and &quot;K&quot; are subgroups of &quot;G&quot;, then
::formula_26
:with equality if formula_23. (If formula_28 is finite, then equality holds if and only if formula_23.)
* If &quot;G&quot; and &quot;H&quot; are groups and formula_30 is a homomorphism, then the index of the kernel of formula_31 in &quot;G&quot; is equal to the order of the image:
::formula_32
* Let &quot;G&quot; be a group acting on a set &quot;X&quot;, and let &quot;x&quot; ∈ &quot;X&quot;. Then the cardinality of the orbit of &quot;x&quot; under &quot;G&quot; is equal to the index of the stabilizer of &quot;x&quot;:
::formula_33
:This is known as the orbit-stabilizer theorem.
* As a special case of the orbit-stabilizer theorem, the number of conjugates formula_34 of an element formula_35 is equal to the index of the centralizer of &quot;x&quot; in &quot;G&quot;.
* Similarly, the number of conjugates formula_36 of a subgroup &quot;H&quot; in &quot;G&quot; is equal to the index of the normalizer of &quot;H&quot; in &quot;G&quot;.
* If &quot;H&quot; is a subgroup of &quot;G&quot;, the index of the normal core of &quot;H&quot; satisfies the following inequality:
::formula_37
:where ! denotes the factorial function; this is discussed further below.
:* As a corollary, if the index of &quot;H&quot; in &quot;G&quot; is 2, or for a finite group the lowest prime &quot;p&quot; that divides the order of &quot;G,&quot; then &quot;H&quot; is normal, as the index of its core must also be &quot;p,&quot; and thus &quot;H&quot; equals its core, i.e., it is normal.
:* Note that a subgroup of lowest prime index may not exist, such as in any simple group of non-prime order, or more generally any perfect group.

==Examples==
* The alternating group formula_38 has index 2 in the symmetric group formula_39 and thus is normal.
* The special orthogonal group formula_40 has index 2 in the orthogonal group formula_41, and thus is normal.
* The free abelian group formula_42 has three subgroups of index 2, namely
::formula_43.
* More generally, if &quot;p&quot; is prime then formula_44 has formula_45 subgroups of index &quot;p&quot;, corresponding to the formula_46 nontrivial homomorphisms formula_47.
* Similarly, the free group formula_48 has formula_49 subgroups of index &quot;p&quot;.
* The infinite dihedral group has a cyclic subgroup of index 2, which is necessarily normal.

==Infinite index==
If &quot;H&quot; has an infinite number of cosets in &quot;G&quot;, then the index of &quot;H&quot; in &quot;G&quot; is said to be infinite. In this case, the index formula_1 is actually a cardinal number. For example, the index of &quot;H&quot; in &quot;G&quot; may be countable or uncountable, depending on whether &quot;H&quot; has a countable number of cosets in &quot;G&quot;. Note that the index of &quot;H&quot; is at most the order of &quot;G,&quot; which is realized for the trivial subgroup, or in fact any subgroup &quot;H&quot; of infinite cardinality less than that of &quot;G.&quot;

==Finite index==
A subgroup &quot;H&quot; of finite index in a group &quot;G&quot; (finite or infinite) always contains a normal subgroup &quot;N&quot; (of &quot;G&quot;), also of finite index. In fact, if &quot;H&quot; has index &quot;n&quot;, then the index of &quot;N&quot; will be some divisor of &quot;n&quot;! and a multiple of &quot;n&quot;; indeed, &quot;N&quot; can be taken to be the kernel of the natural homomorphism from &quot;G&quot; to the permutation group of the left (or right) cosets of &quot;H&quot;.
Let us explain this in more detail, using right cosets:

The elements of &quot;G&quot; that leave all cosets the same form a group.

If &quot;Hca&quot; ⊂ &quot;Hc&quot; ∀ &quot;c&quot; ∈ &quot;G&quot; and likewise &quot;Hcb&quot; ⊂ &quot;Hc&quot; ∀ &quot;c&quot; ∈ &quot;G&quot;, then &quot;Hcab&quot; ⊂ &quot;Hc&quot; ∀ &quot;c&quot; ∈ &quot;G&quot;. If &quot;h&quot;1&quot;ca&quot; = &quot;h&quot;2&quot;c&quot; for all &quot;c&quot; ∈ &quot;G&quot; (with &quot;h&quot;1, &quot;h&quot;2 ∈ H) then &quot;h&quot;2&quot;ca&quot;−1 = &quot;h&quot;1&quot;c&quot;, so &quot;Hca&quot;−1 ⊂ &quot;Hc&quot;.
Let us call this group &quot;A&quot;. Note that &quot;A&quot; is a subgroup of &quot;H&quot;, since &quot;Ha&quot; ⊂ &quot;H&quot; by the definition of &quot;A&quot;. Let &quot;B&quot; be the set of elements of &quot;G&quot; which perform a given permutation on the cosets of &quot;H&quot;. Then &quot;B&quot; is a right coset of &quot;A&quot;.
First let us show that if &quot;b&quot;∈&quot;B&quot;, then any other element &quot;b&quot; of &quot;B&quot; equals &quot;ab&quot; for some &quot;a&quot;∈&quot;A&quot;. Assume that multiplying the coset &quot;Hc&quot; on the right by elements of &quot;B&quot; gives elements of the coset &quot;Hd&quot;. If &quot;cb&quot;1 = &quot;d&quot; and &quot;cb&quot;2 = &quot;hd&quot;, then &quot;cb&quot;2&quot;b&quot;1−1 = &quot;hc&quot; ∈ &quot;Hc&quot;, or in other words &quot;b&quot;=&quot;ab&quot; for some &quot;a&quot;∈&quot;A&quot;, as desired. Now we show that for any &quot;b&quot;∈&quot;B&quot; and &quot;a&quot;∈&quot;A&quot;, &quot;ab&quot; will be an element of &quot;B&quot;. This is because the coset &quot;Hc&quot; is the same as &quot;Hca&quot;, so &quot;Hcb&quot; = &quot;Hcab&quot;. Since this is true for any &quot;c&quot; (that is, for any coset), it shows that multiplying on the right by &quot;ab&quot; makes the same permutation of cosets as multiplying by &quot;b&quot;, and therefore &quot;ab&quot;∈&quot;B&quot;.
What we have said so far applies whether the index of &quot;H&quot; is finite or infinte. Now assume that it is the finite number &quot;n&quot;. Since the number of possible permutations of cosets is finite, namely &quot;n&quot;!, then there can only be a finite number of sets like &quot;B&quot;. (If &quot;G&quot; is infinite, then all such sets are therefore infinite.) The set of these sets forms a group isomorphic to a subset of the group of permutations, so the number of these sets must divide &quot;n&quot;!. Furthermore, it must be a multiple of &quot;n&quot; because each coset of &quot;H&quot; contains the same number of cosets of &quot;A&quot;. Finally, if for some &quot;c&quot; ∈ &quot;G&quot; and &quot;a&quot; ∈ &quot;A&quot; we have &quot;ca = xc&quot;, then for any &quot;d&quot; ∈ &quot;G dca = dxc&quot;, but also &quot;dca = hdc&quot; for some &quot;h&quot; ∈ &quot;H&quot; (by the definition of &quot;A&quot;), so &quot;hd = dx&quot;. Since this is true for any &quot;d&quot;, &quot;x&quot; must be a member of A, so &quot;ca = xc&quot; implies that &quot;cac&quot; ∈ &quot;A&quot; and therefore &quot;A&quot; is a normal subgroup.

The index of the normal subgroup not only has to be a divisor of &quot;n&quot;!, but must satisfy other criteria as well. Since the normal subgroup is a subgroup of &quot;H&quot;, its index in &quot;G&quot; must be &quot;n&quot; times its index inside &quot;H&quot;. Its index in &quot;G&quot; must also correspond to a subgroup of the symmetric group S, the group of permutations of &quot;n&quot; objects. So for example if &quot;n&quot; is 5, the index cannot be 15 even though this divides 5!, because there is no subgroup of order 15 in S.

In the case of &quot;n&quot; = 2 this gives the rather obvious result that a subgroup &quot;H&quot; of index 2 is a normal subgroup, because the normal subgroup of &quot;H&quot; must have index 2 in &quot;G&quot; and therefore be identical to &quot;H&quot;. (We can arrive at this fact also by noting that all the elements of &quot;G&quot; that are not in &quot;H&quot; constitute the right coset of &quot;H&quot; and also the left coset, so the two are identical.) More generally, a subgroup of index &quot;p&quot; where &quot;p&quot; is the smallest prime factor of the order of &quot;G&quot; (if &quot;G&quot; is finite) is necessarily normal, as the index of &quot;N&quot; divides &quot;p&quot;! and thus must equal &quot;p,&quot; having no other prime factors. For example, the subgroup &quot;Z&quot; of the non-abelian group of order 21 is normal (see List of small non-abelian groups and Frobenius group#Examples).

An alternative proof of the result that a subgroup of index lowest prime &quot;p&quot; is normal, and other properties of subgroups of prime index are given in .

=== Examples ===
The group O of chiral octahedral symmetry has 24 elements. It has a dihedral D4 subgroup (in fact it has three such) of order 8, and thus of index 3 in O, which we shall call &quot;H&quot;. This dihedral group has a 4-member D2 subgroup, which we may call &quot;A&quot;. Multiplying on the right any element of a right coset of &quot;H&quot; by an element of &quot;A&quot; gives a member of the same coset of &quot;H&quot; (&quot;Hca = Hc&quot;). &quot;A&quot; is normal in O. There are six cosets of &quot;A&quot;, corresponding to the six elements of the symmetric group S3. All elements from any particular coset of &quot;A&quot; perform the same permutation of the cosets of &quot;H&quot;.

On the other hand, the group Th of pyritohedral symmetry also has 24 members and a subgroup of index 3 (this time it is a D2h prismatic symmetry group, see point groups in three dimensions), but in this case the whole subgroup is a normal subgroup. All members of a particular coset carry out the same permutation of these cosets, but in this case they represent only the 3-element alternating group in the 6-member S3 symmetric group.

==Normal subgroups of prime power index==
Normal subgroups of prime power index are kernels of surjective maps to &quot;p&quot;-groups and have interesting structure, as described at Focal subgroup theorem: Subgroups and elaborated at focal subgroup theorem.

There are three important normal subgroups of prime power index, each being the smallest normal subgroup in a certain class:
* E&quot;p&quot;(&quot;G&quot;) is the intersection of all index &quot;p&quot; normal subgroups; &quot;G&quot;/E&quot;p&quot;(&quot;G&quot;) is an elementary abelian group, and is the largest elementary abelian &quot;p&quot;-group onto which &quot;G&quot; surjects.
* A&quot;p&quot;(&quot;G&quot;) is the intersection of all normal subgroups &quot;K&quot; such that &quot;G&quot;/&quot;K&quot; is an abelian &quot;p&quot;-group (i.e., &quot;K&quot; is an index formula_51 normal subgroup that contains the derived group formula_52): &quot;G&quot;/A&quot;p&quot;(&quot;G&quot;) is the largest abelian &quot;p&quot;-group (not necessarily elementary) onto which &quot;G&quot; surjects.
* O&quot;p&quot;(&quot;G&quot;) is the intersection of all normal subgroups &quot;K&quot; of &quot;G&quot; such that &quot;G&quot;/&quot;K&quot; is a (possibly non-abelian) &quot;p&quot;-group (i.e., &quot;K&quot; is an index formula_51 normal subgroup): &quot;G&quot;/O&quot;p&quot;(&quot;G&quot;) is the largest &quot;p&quot;-group (not necessarily abelian) onto which &quot;G&quot; surjects. O&quot;p&quot;(&quot;G&quot;) is also known as the &quot;p&quot;-residual subgroup.
As these are weaker conditions on the groups &quot;K,&quot; one obtains the containments 
:formula_54

These groups have important connections to the Sylow subgroups and the transfer homomorphism, as discussed there.

=== Geometric structure ===
An elementary observation is that one cannot have exactly 2 subgroups of index 2, as the complement of their symmetric difference yields a third. This is a simple corollary of the above discussion (namely the projectivization of the vector space structure of the elementary abelian group 
:formula_55,

and further, &quot;G&quot; does not act on this geometry, nor does it reflect any of the non-abelian structure (in both cases because the quotient is abelian).

However, it is an elementary result, which can be seen concretely as follows: the set of normal subgroups of a given index &quot;p&quot; form a projective space, namely the projective space 
:formula_56

In detail, the space of homomorphisms from &quot;G&quot; to the (cyclic) group of order &quot;p,&quot; formula_57 is a vector space over the finite field formula_58 A non-trivial such map has as kernel a normal subgroup of index &quot;p,&quot; and multiplying the map by an element of formula_59 (a non-zero number mod &quot;p&quot;) does not change the kernel; thus one obtains a map from 
:formula_60

to normal index &quot;p&quot; subgroups. Conversely, a normal subgroup of index &quot;p&quot; determines a non-trivial map to formula_61 up to a choice of &quot;which coset maps to formula_62 which shows that this map is a bijection.

As a consequence, the number of normal subgroups of index &quot;p&quot; is 
:formula_63

for some &quot;k;&quot; formula_64 corresponds to no normal subgroups of index &quot;p&quot;. Further, given two distinct normal subgroups of index &quot;p,&quot; one obtains a projective line consisting of formula_65 such subgroups.

For formula_66 the symmetric difference of two distinct index 2 subgroups (which are necessarily normal) gives the third point on the projective line containing these subgroups, and a group must contain formula_67 index 2 subgroups – it cannot contain exactly 2 or 4 index 2 subgroups, for instance.

==See also==
* Virtually
* Codimension

==References==



== External links ==
* &quot;Subgroup of least prime index is normal&quot; at Groupprops, The Group Properties Wiki</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="3" end="14" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q874429" start="29" end="41" title="group theory" label="group theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464168" start="47" end="52" title="Index of a subgroup" label="index"/>
<link wikidata="Q466109" start="58" end="66" title="subgroup" label="subgroup"/>
<link wikidata="Q751969" start="129" end="135" title="Coset" label="cosets"/>
<link wikidata="Q4049983" start="412" end="416" title="cardinality" label="size"/>
<link wikidata="Q589491" start="463" end="469" title="order (group theory)" label="orders"/>
<link wikidata="Q163875" start="543" end="559" title="cardinal numbers" label="cardinal numbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q32043" start="751" end="759" title="addition" label="addition"/>
<link wikidata="Q230967" start="813" end="826" title="Parity (mathematics)" label="even integers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057968" start="1053" end="1059" title="finite group" label="finite"/>
<link wikidata="Q505798" start="1118" end="1141" title="Lagrange&amp;#x27;s theorem (group theory)" label="Lagrange&amp;#x27;s theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q163875" start="1234" end="1249" title="cardinal number" label="cardinal number"/>
<link wikidata="Q743179" start="1358" end="1373" title="normal subgroup" label="normal subgroup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138961" start="1437" end="1451" title="quotient group" label="quotient group"/>
<link wikidata="Q215111" start="2157" end="2169" title="homomorphism" label="homomorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q574844" start="2193" end="2199" title="kernel (algebra)" label="kernel"/>
<link wikidata="Q288465" start="2311" end="2317" title="Group action (mathematics)" label="acting"/>
<link wikidata="Q36161" start="2323" end="2326" title="set (mathematics)" label="set"/>
<link wikidata="Q4049983" start="2390" end="2401" title="cardinality" label="cardinality"/>
<link wikidata="Q288465" start="2409" end="2414" title="orbit (group theory)" label="orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q288465" start="2481" end="2491" title="stabilizer subgroup" label="stabilizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q288465" start="2545" end="2569" title="orbit-stabilizer theorem" label="orbit-stabilizer theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353233" start="2638" end="2648" title="conjugacy class" label="conjugates"/>
<link wikidata="Q190629" start="2714" end="2725" title="centralizer" label="centralizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q190629" start="2884" end="2894" title="normalizer" label="normalizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3010804" start="2998" end="3009" title="core (group)" label="normal core"/>
<link wikidata="Q120976" start="3097" end="3106" title="factorial" label="factorial"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3143" end="3148" title="#Finite index" label="below"/>
<link wikidata="Q571124" start="3535" end="3547" title="simple group" label="simple group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571290" start="3590" end="3603" title="perfect group" label="perfect group"/>
<link wikidata="Q438814" start="3625" end="3642" title="alternating group" label="alternating group"/>
<link wikidata="Q849512" start="3673" end="3688" title="symmetric group" label="symmetric group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783179" start="3726" end="3750" title="special orthogonal group" label="special orthogonal group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783179" start="3781" end="3797" title="orthogonal group" label="orthogonal group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454111" start="3836" end="3854" title="free abelian group" label="free abelian group"/>
<link wikidata="Q49008" start="3957" end="3962" title="prime number" label="prime"/>
<link wikidata="Q215111" start="4071" end="4083" title="homomorphism" label="homomorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q431078" start="4114" end="4124" title="free group" label="free group"/>
<link wikidata="Q6029845" start="4191" end="4214" title="infinite dihedral group" label="infinite dihedral group"/>
<link wikidata="Q245462" start="4221" end="4236" title="cyclic group" label="cyclic subgroup"/>
<link wikidata="Q163875" start="4487" end="4502" title="cardinal number" label="cardinal number"/>
<link wikidata="Q66707394" start="4568" end="4577" title="countable set" label="countable"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128796" start="4581" end="4592" title="Uncountable set" label="uncountable"/>
<link wikidata="Q743179" start="5018" end="5033" title="normal subgroup" label="normal subgroup"/>
<link wikidata="Q849512" start="8889" end="8904" title="symmetric group" label="symmetric group"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9956" end="9988" title="List of small groups#List of small non-abelian groups" label="List of small non-abelian groups"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9993" end="10017" title="Frobenius group#Examples" label="Frobenius group#Examples"/>
<link wikidata="Q2017567" start="10223" end="10242" title="octahedral symmetry" label="octahedral symmetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q558339" start="10269" end="10277" title="dihedral symmetry" label="dihedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q849512" start="10758" end="10773" title="symmetric group" label="symmetric group"/>
<link wikidata="Q280222" start="10931" end="10952" title="pyritohedral symmetry" label="pyritohedral symmetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5276399" start="11022" end="11040" title="prismatic symmetry" label="prismatic symmetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7208207" start="11052" end="11084" title="point groups in three dimensions" label="point groups in three dimensions"/>
<link wikidata="Q438814" start="11278" end="11295" title="alternating group" label="alternating group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1667469" start="11395" end="11406" title="prime power" label="prime power"/>
<link wikidata="Q286972" start="11447" end="11467" title="p-group" label="&amp;quot;p&amp;quot;-groups"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11516" end="11549" title="Focal subgroup theorem#Subgroups" label="Focal subgroup theorem: Subgroups"/>
<link wikidata="Q5463860" start="11568" end="11590" title="focal subgroup theorem" label="focal subgroup theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017231" start="11865" end="11889" title="elementary abelian group" label="elementary abelian group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057919" start="13031" end="13045" title="Sylow subgroup" label="Sylow subgroup"/>
<link wikidata="Q242767" start="13216" end="13226" title="Complement (set theory)" label="complement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147242" start="13236" end="13256" title="symmetric difference" label="symmetric difference"/>
<link wikidata="Q877775" start="13735" end="13751" title="projective space" label="projective space"/>
<link wikidata="Q603880" start="13936" end="13948" title="finite field" label="finite field"/>
<link wikidata="Q764115" start="14700" end="14715" title="projective line" label="projective line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147242" start="14777" end="14797" title="symmetric difference" label="symmetric difference"/>
<link wikidata="Q7935201" start="15074" end="15083" title="Virtually" label="Virtually"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778247" start="15086" end="15097" title="Codimension" label="Codimension"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="230587" wikidata="Q265293" url="?curid=230587" title="James W. McCord Jr.">
<text>James Walter McCord Jr. (January 26, 1924 – June 15, 2017) was an American CIA officer, later head of security for President Richard Nixon&#x27;s 1972 reelection campaign. He was involved as an electronics expert in the burglaries which precipitated the Watergate scandal.

==Career==
McCord was born in Waurika, Oklahoma. He served as a bombardier with the rank of second lieutenant in the Army Air Forces during World War II. He briefly attended Baylor University before receiving a B.B.A. from the University of Texas at Austin in 1949. In 1965, he received an M.S. in international affairs from George Washington University. After beginning his career at the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), McCord worked for the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), ultimately ascending to the GS-15 directorship of the Agency&#x27;s Office of Security.

For a period of time, he was in charge of physical security at the Agency&#x27;s Langley headquarters. L. Fletcher Prouty, a former colonel in the United States Air Force, claimed then-Director of Central Intelligence Allen Dulles introduced McCord to him as &quot;my top man.&quot;.

In 1961, under his direction, a counter-intelligence program was launched against the Fair Play for Cuba Committee. He also held the rank of lieutenant colonel in the United States Air Force Reserve.

John M. Newman says in his 2022 book, &quot;Uncovering Popov&#x27;s Mole&quot;, that Bruce Solie and McCord were probably KGB &quot;moles&quot; in the CIA&#x27;s Office of Security, and that McCord very likely protected Solie and another &quot;mole,&quot; Pyotr Semyonovich Popov&#x27;s honey-trapped and recruited-by-KGB dead drop arranger, Edward Ellis Smith, from being uncovered by U.S. Intelligence.

==Watergate scandal==
Shortly after resigning from the CIA, McCord was interviewed and then hired by Jack Caulfield in January 1972 &quot;for strict, solely defensive security work at the Republican National Committee (RNC) and the Committee to Re-Elect the President (CRP).&quot; Some of the money from this contract came from the RNC, which was led by Bob Dole who was called &quot;Nixon&#x27;s Doberman pinscher&quot; and a Republican Party fixer, and was used during the Watergate scandal. McCord and four other accomplices were arrested during the second break-in to the Democratic National Committee&#x27;s headquarters at the Watergate complex on June 17, 1972. The arrests led to the Watergate scandal and Nixon&#x27;s resignation.

McCord asserted that the White House knew of and approved the break ins, and proceeded to cover up the incident. Because of McCord&#x27;s statements, the Watergate investigators pursued many more leads.

McCord was one of the first men convicted in the Watergate criminal trial; on eight counts of conspiracy, burglary and wiretapping. On March 21, 1973, three days before sentencing, McCord, after speaking to a probation officer and thus surmising that he might be facing a lengthy prison sentence, submitted a letter to the judge in the case, John Sirica, in which he claimed that he and the other defendants had committed perjury in their trial and that there was pressure from higher up for them to have done so. On March 23, the day of the sentencing, Sirica sentenced the other defendants provisionally, citing a statute that allowed for maximum sentences of several decades as a means to &quot;research&quot; more information needed for the final sentencing. This was a means to pressure the defendants into revealing more information about the burglary. McCord&#x27;s sentencing was postponed until June and then postponed again. Finally, in November 1973, McCord was sentenced to one to five years and began serving his sentence in March 1975, but was released after only four months because of his cooperation in the Watergate investigation.

==Post-Watergate==
After serving four months in prison, McCord continued with McCord Associates, which was his own security firm located in Rockville, retiring later to Pennsylvania.

McCord died at the age of 93 from pancreatic cancer on June 15, 2017, at his home in Douglassville, Pennsylvania. His death was not reported in local and national news outlets until 2019.

==In popular culture==

McCord was portrayed in &quot;All the President&#x27;s Men&quot;, the 1976 film retelling the events of the Watergate scandal, by Richard Herd.

McCord was portrayed in &quot;Gaslit&quot;, the 2022 television adaptation of the podcast &quot;Slow Burn&quot; by Chris Bauer, and in the TV-series &quot;White House Plumbers&quot; he was portrayed by Toby Huss.

== See also ==
* G. Gordon Liddy
* E. Howard Hunt
* &quot;All the President&#x27;s Men&quot; by Carl Bernstein and Bob Woodward
* Tennent H. Bagley

==References==
===Bibliography===


== Further reading ==
McCord wrote a book about his connection with the Watergate burglary:

==External links==
*James McCord testifying at the Watergate Hearings WETA-TV Public Television, 1973 Watergate Hearings
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q265293" start="0" end="23" title="James W. McCord Jr." label="James Walter McCord Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="75" end="78" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="CIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="125" end="138" title="Richard Nixon" label="Richard Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q42761" start="254" end="271" title="Watergate scandal" label="Watergate scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3240380" start="304" end="321" title="Waurika, Oklahoma" label="Waurika, Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q4305267" start="338" end="348" title="Bombardier (aircrew)" label="bombardier"/>
<link wikidata="Q56826567" start="366" end="383" title="second lieutenant" label="second lieutenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q741723" start="391" end="406" title="Army Air Forces" label="Army Air Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="414" end="426" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q812573" start="448" end="465" title="Baylor University" label="Baylor University"/>
<link wikidata="Q798129" start="485" end="491" title="Bachelor of Business Administration" label="B.B.A."/>
<link wikidata="Q49213" start="501" end="530" title="University of Texas at Austin" label="University of Texas at Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q950900" start="564" end="568" title="Master of Science" label="M.S."/>
<link wikidata="Q432637" start="599" end="627" title="George Washington University" label="George Washington University"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="663" end="694" title="Federal Bureau of Investigation" label="Federal Bureau of Investigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="724" end="751" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="Central Intelligence Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532170" start="787" end="792" title="General Schedule (US civil service pay scale)" label="GS-15"/>
<link wikidata="Q523606" start="929" end="949" title="Langley, Virginia" label="Langley headquarters"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918736" start="951" end="969" title="L. Fletcher Prouty" label="L. Fletcher Prouty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984198" start="980" end="987" title="Colonel (United States)" label="colonel"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223" start="995" end="1018" title="United States Air Force" label="United States Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227524" start="1033" end="1065" title="Director of Central Intelligence" label="Director of Central Intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q317243" start="1066" end="1078" title="Allen Dulles" label="Allen Dulles"/>
<link wikidata="Q5429907" start="1219" end="1247" title="Fair Play for Cuba Committee" label="Fair Play for Cuba Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q493898" start="1274" end="1292" title="lieutenant colonel" label="lieutenant colonel"/>
<link wikidata="Q407191" start="1300" end="1331" title="Air Force Reserve Command" label="United States Air Force Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q6245895" start="1334" end="1348" title="John M. Newman" label="John M. Newman"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1419" end="1430" title="Bruce Solie" label="Bruce Solie"/>
<link wikidata="Q4372607" start="1590" end="1613" title="Pyotr Semyonovich Popov" label="Pyotr Semyonovich Popov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638770" start="1656" end="1665" title="dead drop" label="dead drop"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1676" end="1694" title="Edward Ellis Smith" label="Edward Ellis Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q20858003" start="1841" end="1855" title="Jack Caulfield" label="Jack Caulfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q2145369" start="1928" end="1957" title="Republican National Committee" label="Republican National Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755212" start="1972" end="2007" title="Committee to Re-Elect the President" label="Committee to Re-Elect the President"/>
<link wikidata="Q319079" start="2094" end="2102" title="Bob Dole" label="Bob Dole"/>
<link wikidata="Q38358" start="2137" end="2154" title="Doberman pinscher" label="Doberman pinscher"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="2167" end="2183" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3073127" start="2184" end="2189" title="Fixer (person)" label="fixer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185863" start="2316" end="2345" title="Democratic National Committee" label="Democratic National Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419538" start="2373" end="2390" title="Watergate complex" label="Watergate complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q42761" start="2432" end="2449" title="Watergate scandal" label="Watergate scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q705980" start="3027" end="3038" title="John Sirica" label="John Sirica"/>
<link wikidata="Q310229" start="3107" end="3114" title="perjury" label="perjury"/>
<link wikidata="Q212961" start="4053" end="4070" title="pancreatic cancer" label="pancreatic cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5302196" start="4104" end="4131" title="Douglassville, Pennsylvania" label="Douglassville, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q466781" start="4262" end="4290" title="All the President&amp;#x27;s Men (film)" label="All the President&amp;#x27;s Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390515" start="4362" end="4374" title="Richard Herd" label="Richard Herd"/>
<link wikidata="Q106678966" start="4401" end="4419" title="Gaslit (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Gaslit&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q50718684" start="4473" end="4482" title="Slow Burn (podcast)" label="Slow Burn"/>
<link wikidata="Q39979" start="4492" end="4503" title="Chris Bauer" label="Chris Bauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q107008231" start="4526" end="4558" title="White House Plumbers (miniseries)" label="&amp;quot;White House Plumbers&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q946117" start="4579" end="4588" title="Toby Huss" label="Toby Huss"/>
<link wikidata="Q952688" start="4608" end="4623" title="G. Gordon Liddy" label="G. Gordon Liddy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4626" end="4640" title="E. Howard Hunt#Watergate scandal" label="E. Howard Hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2264555" start="4649" end="4677" title="All the President&amp;#x27;s Men" label="All the President&amp;#x27;s Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q319967" start="4687" end="4701" title="Carl Bernstein" label="Carl Bernstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q312782" start="4706" end="4718" title="Bob Woodward" label="Bob Woodward"/>
<link wikidata="Q9356716" start="4721" end="4738" title="Tennent H. Bagley" label="Tennent H. Bagley"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="230591" wikidata="Q273192" url="?curid=230591" title="Tanya Streeter">
<text>Tanya Streeter (born Tanya Dailey, 10 January 1973, Grand Cayman) is a British-Caymanian-American world champion freediver, inducted into the Women Divers Hall of Fame in March 2000. 

For more than two months, from 17 August 2002, she held the overall &quot;No Limit&quot; freediving record (greater than the men&#x27;s record) with a depth of 525 feet (160 m), which is still the women&#x27;s world record for &quot;NLT (No Limit) Apnea&quot;.

== Personal life ==
Streeter was born to Jim and Sandra Dailey in the Cayman Islands. She has two sisters and a brother. She was educated in England at the independent girls&#x27; school Roedean and at Brighton University. She met and married her husband Paul Streeter in England. They moved to the Cayman Islands in 1995. They have a daughter, Tilly Annina Andrus Streeter (b. 19 August 2008) and a son, Charlie Streeter (b. 2015). After giving birth Tanya Streeter officially retired from freediving. She currently resides in Austin, Texas. Tanya also has four step children residing in the UK. James and Christopher Streeter (b. 10 December 1983), Sophie Streeter (b. 6 September 1985) and Katie Streeter (b. 20 August 1988), and 10 grandchildren.

== Competitive career ==
Streeter took up freediving at age 25 and almost immediately began to break records. She made her first important breakthrough in 1998 when she bettered Deborah Andollo&#x27;s Women&#x27;s AIDA NLT (No Limit) diving record by 10 feet, achieving a total depth of 370 feet (113 m). She was inducted into the Women Divers Hall of Fame in March 2000. In 2002, she broke the men&#x27;s AIDA International&#x27;s &quot;NLT (No Limit)&quot; world diving record by diving to a depth of 525 feet (160 m) near the Turks and Caicos Islands, a record which was surpassed later that year by French diver Loïc Leferme (162 m). 

On 19 July 2003 she broke the men&#x27;s &quot;Variable Weight (VWT)&quot; world record by diving to a depth of 400 feet (122 m) and held it over a year until the record was broken by Carlos Coste (135 m) in Puerto la Cruz, Venezuela on 27 October 2004. However, as a women&#x27;s record, it lasted almost seven years, until Natalia Molchanova reached 125 m in June 2010 in Kalamata, Greece.

==Outside freediving==
Streeter was featured in an Animal Planet documentary, &quot;Freediver&quot; (aired March 2006), and presented &quot;Dive Galapagos&quot; (aired March 2007). She presented a documentary shown on BBC Two called &quot;Shark Therapy&quot; in which she attempted to overcome her fear of sharks. She is a public speaker, presenting &quot;The Deepest Dive Ever&quot; at TEDx in Austin, Texas in 2012, and also at the Divers Alert Network &quot;UHMS DAN 2006 Breath-hold Proceedings&quot;. She appeared on a set of five commemorative postage stamps distributed by the Turks and Caicos Islands in 2003. In 2014, she appeared as a coach on the television show &quot;Calzedonia Ocean Girls&quot;. She also features in the documentary &quot;A Plastic Ocean&quot; (aired 2016), and today focuses on her work as an environmentalist. 

==See also==
* David Apperley

==References==
==External links==
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q273192" start="0" end="14" title="Tanya Streeter" label="Tanya Streeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q273192" start="21" end="33" title="Tanya Streeter" label="Tanya Dailey"/>
<link wikidata="Q737765" start="52" end="64" title="Grand Cayman" label="Grand Cayman"/>
<link wikidata="Q392409" start="113" end="122" title="free-diving" label="freediver"/>
<link wikidata="Q112182575" start="142" end="167" title="Women Divers Hall of Fame" label="Women Divers Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q5785" start="517" end="531" title="Cayman Islands" label="Cayman Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q7357563" start="634" end="641" title="Roedean School" label="Roedean"/>
<link wikidata="Q3056813" start="649" end="668" title="University of Brighton" label="Brighton University"/>
<link wikidata="Q431853" start="1377" end="1392" title="Deborah Andollo" label="Deborah Andollo"/>
<link wikidata="Q112182575" start="1530" end="1555" title="Women Divers Hall of Fame" label="Women Divers Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q2657602" start="1605" end="1623" title="AIDA International" label="AIDA International"/>
<link wikidata="Q18221" start="1728" end="1752" title="Turks and Caicos Islands" label="Turks and Caicos Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="1802" end="1808" title="France" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q785008" start="1815" end="1827" title="Loïc Leferme" label="Loïc Leferme"/>
<link wikidata="Q2939321" start="2023" end="2035" title="Carlos Coste" label="Carlos Coste"/>
<link wikidata="Q379509" start="2047" end="2061" title="Puerto la Cruz" label="Puerto la Cruz"/>
<link wikidata="Q59920" start="2164" end="2182" title="Natalia Molchanova" label="Natalia Molchanova"/>
<link wikidata="Q167895" start="2213" end="2221" title="Kalamata" label="Kalamata"/>
<link wikidata="Q43429" start="2283" end="2296" title="Animal Planet" label="Animal Planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q216108" start="2450" end="2457" title="BBC Two" label="BBC Two"/>
<link wikidata="Q189021" start="2619" end="2623" title="TEDx" label="TEDx"/>
<link wikidata="Q16559" start="2627" end="2640" title="Austin, Texas" label="Austin, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230553" start="2666" end="2686" title="Divers Alert Network" label="Divers Alert Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q59287130" start="2912" end="2934" title="Calzedonia Ocean Girls" label="Calzedonia Ocean Girls"/>
<link wikidata="Q5230811" start="3092" end="3106" title="David Apperley" label="David Apperley"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="230592" wikidata="Q4873075" url="?curid=230592" title="Battle record">
<text>A battle record, also often called a battle tool or battle breaks, is a vinyl record made up of brief samples from songs, film dialogue, sound effects, and drum loops for use by a DJ. The samples and drum loops are used for scratching and performances by turntablists. The most famous example of this format is &quot;Super Duck Breaks&quot;, a 1996 release by &quot;The Turntablist,&quot; a pseudonym of DJ Babu.

Battle records that get released to the general public are often made by DJs banking on their celebrity or looking to capitalize on rare items in their collections. Creative, novel, or bizarre inclusions are especially prized. Often, the samples featured on these records do not have the blessing of the original copyright holders. Because of this, the use of pseudonyms and anonymous releases are common. Often, even the original sources of the samples are renamed or obscured, leading to some newcomers becoming disconnected from the history of the work.

==See also==
* Electronic Battle Weapon
* Turntablism
* Remix culture

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4873075" start="2" end="15" title="Battle record" label="battle record"/>
<link wikidata="Q4873075" start="37" end="48" title="Battle record" label="battle tool"/>
<link wikidata="Q4873075" start="52" end="65" title="Battle record" label="battle breaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q16629185" start="72" end="77" title="gramophone record" label="vinyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q596446" start="102" end="109" title="sampling (music)" label="samples"/>
<link wikidata="Q130857" start="180" end="182" title="DJ" label="DJ"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413166" start="224" end="234" title="scratching" label="scratching"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046801" start="255" end="266" title="turntablist" label="turntablist"/>
<link wikidata="Q325684" start="404" end="411" title="DJ Babu" label="DJ Babu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297822" start="727" end="736" title="copyright" label="copyright"/>
<link wikidata="Q5358215" start="987" end="1011" title="Electronic Battle Weapon" label="Electronic Battle Weapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046801" start="1014" end="1025" title="Turntablism" label="Turntablism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3298098" start="1028" end="1041" title="Remix culture" label="Remix culture"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="230594" wikidata="Q844684" url="?curid=230594" title="Bratz">
<text>Bratz is an American fashion doll and media franchise created by former Mattel employee Carter Bryant for MGA Entertainment, which debuted in 2001.

The four original 10-inch (25 cm) dolls were released on May 21, 2001 — Yasmin (Mulatta/Latina), Cloe (Caucasian), Jade (East Asian), and Sasha (African American). They featured almond-shaped eyes adorned with eyeshadow adding lush and big glossy lips. Bratz reached great success with the expansion to spin-offs, including Bratz Kidz, Bratz Boyz, Bratz Babyz and Bratzillaz&#x27; and a media franchise consisting of discography and adaptations into a TV series, a web series, a live-action film and video games. Global sales of the entire franchise grossed $2 billion in 2005 and by the following year, the brand had about 40 percent of the fashion-doll market.

The Bratz doll lines have provoked controversy in several areas from their stylized proportions to fashion-forward clothing, capitalizing closely on pop trends. Since the brand&#x27;s launch in 2001, franchise distributor MGA Entertainment got embroiled in a lengthy legal dispute with its rival Mattel over the rights to its design, which ended in 2011 with MGA as the victors. Related litigation is ongoing in a lawsuit by MGA alleging Mattel&#x27;s theft of trade secrets.

MGA has paused the Bratz brand since the onset of the litigation and rebranded it several times throughout its lifespan, with the first of those coming in 2010 after Mattel&#x27;s first lawsuit, only to return later that year to commemorate the brand&#x27;s 10th anniversary. In 2013, Bratz changed to have taller bodies, an all-new logo, and branding, and continued through 2014, in an effort to return the brand to its roots. As a result, none of the 2014 product line was made available in North America.

In July 2015, Bratz relaunched a second time for 14 years with new doll lines and introducing a new main character, Raya, to the debut lineup from its 2001 launch as well as a new slogan and website design. The bodies were changed to be 10&quot; (25 cm) tall again, but with new bodies and head molds. These dolls were met with negative reactions from fans, as the brand was more oriented towards younger kids rather than tweens and teens like the previous dolls. Due to the poor reception and sales, the dolls were once again discontinued in 2016.

==Products and history==

Though Bratz dolls fared poorly at their May 21, 2001 debut — mostly due to the long-held monopoly by the Mattel-staple Barbie — their popularity increased the following Christmas. In the first half-decade since debut, 125 million products were sold worldwide, and, in 2005, global sales of Bratz and Bratz products grossed over $2 billion. In 2006, a toy-industry analyst indicated Bratz had captured about 40% of the fashion-doll market, compared with Barbie&#x27;s 60%. The competition was high with Barbies, but became more and more popular with time.

In August 2010, MGA released its first Bratz dolls in a year to celebrate the 10th anniversary/first decadal anniversary of the franchise. In addition to two &quot;comeback&quot; collections, MGA also released 10 new female Bratz characters on October 10, 2010. Bratz Party and Talking Bratz were in Target, Toys &quot;R&quot; Us and Walmart stores.

In 2013, Bratz got a new logo and slogan, and the dolls all got new bodies with articulated arms, with a height to match its competitor Monster High while keeping their unique faces, and sporting brand new fashions. Only the four principal Bratz characters, alongside minors: Meygan, Fianna, Shira, Roxxi and Phoebe, have been made in the new bodies.

In January 2014, MGA revealed that Bratz would go on a country-based hiatus (only for/in the United States) for a year in an attempt to rebuild the brand after an admittedly first relaunch in September 2010 to celebrate the brand&#x27;s first decadal anniversary, resulting from the lawsuit against Mattel, which was met with decreased popularity. MGA Entertainment felt that it wanted to give the brand &quot;the comeback it truly deserved&quot;.

In July 2015, Bratz relaunched a second time for 14 years with new doll lines and introducing a new main character, Raya (despite sharing the same name with a previous character) to the debut lineup from its 2001 launch as well as a new slogan and website design. The bodies were changed to be 10&quot; (25 cm) tall again, but with new bodies and head molds. These dolls were met with negative reactions from fans, as the brand was more oriented towards younger kids rather than tweens and teens like the previous dolls. Due to the poor reception and sales, the dolls were once again discontinued in 2016.

On May 20, 2017, MGA Entertainment CEO, Isaac Larian, announced a third relaunch of the brand in Autumn/Fall 2018, in addition to announcing a collaboration with fashion designer Hayden Williams. Since Black Friday of 2018, the new set of Bratz Collector dolls designed by Hayden Williams were officially released and sold exclusively through Amazon online.

In September 2018, a new line of dolls titled &quot;Bratz Collector&quot; were designed by fashion illustrator Hayden Williams and released exclusively on Amazon online. The brand featured closely resemblance to the original 2001 doll line. In June 2021, for its 20th anniversary, Bratz released near-replicas of the debut dolls from its 2001 launch.

Bratz turned 20 in 2021.

In July 2023, Bratz announced a new partnership with celebrity Kylie Jenner. On August 1, 2023, Bratz released a limited-time Mini Bratz x Kylie Jenner collection. The collection features a range of Kylie&#x27;s famous looks with the promise of a &quot;full line&quot; of Kylie dolls released on October 1 as reported by MGA Entertainment manufacturer.

To celebrate the Mean Girls film&#x27;s 20th anniversary, Paramount collaborated with MGA Entertainment to feature Cady and the Plastics as limited-edition Bratz dolls. The collaboration collection will release each character on separate dates throughout October 2024, with Cady on the 3rd, Regina on the 17th and Karen and Gretchen on the 31st (Halloween)

===Controversies===
The parental group Dads and Daughters were upset at the marketing of the Bratz Secret Date collection. The dolls were packaged with a Bratz girl in the right half of the box — either Cloe, Yasmin, Jade, Meygan, or Nevra — and matched with a mystery Boyz doll behind the door on the left. A window showing the doll&#x27;s feet would provide a clue to which Boyz doll it was, especially important in the quest for a rare Bryce doll, available in only one of every 24 boxes. The group complained that the dolls&#x27; marketing was encouraging young girls to sneak out of the house and go on blind dates with strangers. It also took issue with accessory champagne bottles and glasses, but these were later confirmed to be smoothie bottles. MGA later renamed the collection to Bratz Blind Date. 

On December 21, 2006, the National Labor Committee (now The Institute for Global Labour and Human Rights) announced that the factory workers behind Bratz dolls in China have labored for 94½ hours a week, while the factory paid only $0.515 an hour. The cost of labor per doll was $0.17. The retail price for a single doll ranges between $9.99 to $22.99, depending on the included items and specific retailer.

The allegations in the report describe practices found at many Chinese factories producing name-brand products for export. They include required overtime exceeding the legal maximum of 36 hours a month, forcing workers to stay on the job to meet stringent production quotas and the denial of paid sick leave and other benefits. The report shows copies of what it says are &quot;cheat sheets&quot; distributed to workers before auditors from Walmart or other customers arrive to make sure the factory passes inspections intended to ensure the supplier meets labor standards. It said workers at the factory intended to go on strike in January 2007 to protest plans by factory managers to put all employees on temporary contracts, denying them legal protection required for long-term employees.

After the announcement, MGA Entertainment CEO, Isaac Larian sent a statement on December 24, 2006, via email to a dedicated franchise fansite, Bratz World, and another two days later to &quot;Playthings&quot; magazine stating that the information is false and the company is not familiar with the company named in the report and MGA uses &quot;first-rate factories in the Orient&quot; to make its goods, besides Mattel and Hasbro. Larian said that he never heard about the news or of &quot;the organization who is behind this negative and false campaign immediately prior to the last holiday shopping weekend.&quot;

In 2007, concerns over the body image and lifestyle the Bratz dolls allegedly promoted were raised by the American Psychological Association after it established its Task Force on the Sexualization of Girls. In its published report, it cited concern over the adult-like sexuality the Bratz dolls allegedly portray. Another study found that for young African-American girls, the dolls&#x27; racial diversity was a more salient variable during play than their sexualized outfits. The controversy over alleged oversexualization of Bratz dolls for young girls was alluded to in a 2007 episode of &quot;Boston Legal&quot; titled &quot;Guise n&#x27; Dolls.&quot; 

Bratz were not the only dolls to be criticized in this report, which highlighted not only toys but also other products and the wider media. In the UK, a Bratz spokesman defended the toy line, saying that &quot;it is consumed by 8+-year-olds&quot; and &quot;are aimed at the preteen and teen market&quot;, adding that the dolls were considered for &quot;female consumers at ages 10 to 18&quot;, with the focus on the dolls while on looks was not on &quot;sexualization&quot; and that &quot;friendship was also a key focus&quot; of Bratz dolls.

The spokesman quoted Dr. Brian Young of the University of Exeter, saying &quot;parents may feel awkward but I don&#x27;t think children see the dolls as sexy. They just think they&#x27;re pretty.&quot; Isaac Larian, in comments given to the BBC, said that the report was a &quot;bunch of garbage&quot; and that the people who wrote it were &quot;acting irresponsibly&quot;.

In line with the launch of the new line of Kylie dolls, Bratz fans questioned the choice of Kylie as their first celebrity collaborator. Others did not like the skin tones on the Kylie dolls, implying they were too dark as compared to Kylie&#x27;s skin tone.

In 2024, to commemorate the 65th anniversary of International Women&#x27;s Day, a number of celebrities had their likeness turned into Bratz dolls, including Chappell Roan, Normani, Miley Cyrus and Sinéad O&#x27;Connor. 

===Legal issues===
Since the 2001 launch of Bratz, sales of the Mattel, Inc.-staple Barbie fashion dolls began to decline. In 2004, sales figures showed that Bratz dolls outsold Barbie dolls in the UK and Australia, although Mattel maintained that in terms of the number of dolls, clothes, and accessories sold, Barbie remained the leading brand. In 2005, figures showed that sales of Barbie dolls had fallen by 30% in the United States, and by 18% worldwide, with much of the drop being attributed to the popularity of Bratz.

In April 2005, MGA Entertainment filed a lawsuit against Mattel, claiming that the &quot;My Scene&quot; line of Barbie dolls had copied the doe-eyed look of Bratz dolls. It added the word &quot;only&quot; to the toy line&#x27;s slogan &quot;The only girls with a passion for fashion&quot; by attempting to isolate their dolls from Mattel&#x27;s as many casual consumers confused the difference of two brands.

On December 10, 2006, Mattel sued MGA Entertainment for $500 million, alleging that the brand&#x27;s creator, Carter Bryant, was working for Mattel when he developed its original idea/concept. On July 17, 2008, a federal jury ruled that Bryant had created the Bratz concept while he was working for Mattel, despite MGA&#x27;s claim that Bryant had never been employed by Mattel at the time and Bryant&#x27;s assertion that he had designed the Bratz concepts between two separate periods of employment at Mattel. The jury also ruled that MGA and its CEO Isaac Larian were liable for converting Mattel property for its own use and intentionally interfering with the contractual duties owed by Bryant to Mattel. On August 26, the jury decided that Mattel was to be paid just $100 million in damages, citing that only the first generation of Bratz had infringed on Mattel property and that MGA had innovated and evolved the product significantly enough that subsequent generations of Bratz could not be conclusively found to be infringing.

On December 3, 2008, U.S. District Judge Stephen G. Larson granted a permanent injunction requested by Mattel against MGA. Subsequently, on December 10, 2009, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit granted MGA an immediate stay of the injunction, thereby halting the impending recall of all Bratz products, ensuring that retailers would be allowed to continue to sell the Bratz products through at least the Court&#x27;s final ruling on the matter. In its initial statement, the Court suggested Larson&#x27;s previous ruling was &quot;draconian&quot; and had gone too far in awarding ownership of the entire Bratz franchise to Mattel. The Court of Appeals also ordered MGA and Mattel to resolve their dispute out of court. Isaac Larian and MGA Entertainment issued a statement that &quot;the Court&#x27;s stay is good news for all Bratz fans and for anyone who cares about fair competition.&quot;

On July 22, 2010, the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals declared that ownership of the Bratz franchise belonged to MGA Entertainment. The Court Of Appeals rejected the District Court&#x27;s original ruling for Mattel, where MGA Entertainment was ordered to forfeit the entire Bratz brand — including all registered copyrights and trademarks of the Bratz name — to Mattel. The panel from the Court of Appeals said Judge Larson had abused his discretion with his ruling for Mattel, concluding that Bryant&#x27;s employment agreement could have, but did not necessarily, cover ideas as it did designs, processes, computer programs, and formulae, which are all more concrete.

In addition to the litigation for ownership and control of Bratz&#x27; on October 20, 2009, artist Bernard &quot;Butch&quot; Belair filed a new design infringement lawsuit against both Mattel and MGA in Manhattan federal court, seeking unspecified damages. Belair claimed that his copyright designs of young women with &quot;large heads, oval eyes, small bodies and large feet,&quot; which he had created for shoe designer house Steve Madden, were &quot;pilfered&quot; when Carter Bryant, during his 2008 court testimony, testified that he had been inspired by Steve Madden shoe ads which he saw in &quot;Seventeen&quot; magazine. Belair says neither MGA nor Mattel &quot;sought or obtained permission ... to copy, reproduce, create derivative works from or distribute&quot; his &quot;copyrighted&quot; work. In 2011, MGA prevailed over Belair, with the summary judgment stating that, &quot;Belair cannot monopolize the abstract concept of an absurdly large-headed, long limbed, attractive, fashionable woman.&quot;

Mattel and MGA returned to court in January 2011 to renew its battle over who owns Bratz, which this time includes accusations from both companies that the other side stole trade secrets. In April 2011, a federal jury returned a verdict supporting MGA, with Mattel in August that year ordered by the same court to pay MGA $310 million for attorney fees, stealing trade secrets and false claims rather than the $88.5 million issued in April.

In July 2012, MGA Entertainment sued pop singer Lady Gaga for $10 million for causing, according to the BBC, &quot;deliberate delays to the release of a doll based on her image.&quot;

The Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals vacated without prejudice the $170 million judgment from 2008 against Mattel on procedural grounds in January 2013. In 2014, MGA filed a complaint in a California state court, seeking in excess of $1 billion.

==Media franchising==

===Films===
There have been a number of animated Bratz direct-to-video films, all of which initially were distributed by 20th Century Fox Home Entertainment and were later re-released through Lionsgate. Some of the films, including &quot;Bratz Go to Paris: The Movie&quot; is a re-released compilation of three &quot;Bratz&quot; episodes from the first season, consisting of &quot;&quot;Go to Paris I / Bratz in Playland&quot;, &quot;Go to Paris II / Bratz in Franceland&quot;, and &quot;Go to Paris III / Bratz in Ragland&quot;&quot;. &quot;Bratz Babyz Save Christmas&quot;, initially released in 2008, was re-released by Lionsgate in 2013 as &quot;Bratz Babyz Save Christmas: The Movie&quot;. The live-action adaption of the franchise involving the four main characters exploring high school troubles and cliques was met with overwhelmingly negative reviews from critics including at Rotten Tomatoes with emphasis &quot;full of mixed messages and dubious role-models&quot;, adding that &quot;&quot;Bratz&quot; is too shallow even for its intended audience.&quot;

;Traditional animation
* &quot;&quot; (August 3, 2004)
* &quot;Bratz Babyz: The Movie&quot; (September 12, 2006)

;Computer animation
* &quot;Bratz: Rock Angelz&quot; (October 4, 2005)
* &quot;Bratz: Genie Magic&quot; (April 11, 2006)
* &quot;Bratz: Passion 4 Fashion – Diamondz&quot;/&quot;Bratz Forever Diamondz&quot; (September 26, 2006)
* &quot;Bratz: Fashion Pixiez&quot; (February 27, 2007)
* &quot;Bratz Kidz: Sleep-Over Adventure&quot; (July 31, 2007)
* &quot;Bratz: Super Babyz&quot; (October 9, 2007)
* &quot;Bratz Kidz: Fairy Tales&quot; (February 26, 2008)
* &quot;Bratz: Girlz Really Rock&quot; (September 22, 2008)
* &quot;Bratz Babyz Save Christmas&quot; (November 5, 2008)
* &quot;Bratz: Pampered Petz&quot; (October 5, 2010)
* &quot;Bratz: Desert Jewelz &quot;(January 10, 2012)
* &quot;Bratz: Go to Paris the Movie&quot; (October 8, 2013)
;Live-action
* &quot;Bratz&quot; (August 3, 2007)

===Television and web series===

====Bratz TV series====

A computer-animated TV series adaptation was produced by Mike Young Productions (now Splash Entertainment) and premiered in the United States on 4Kids TV. Voices included Tia Mowry.

====Bratz: BFF (Best Friends Forever)====
In August 2007, an 88-minute, computer-animated, audiovisual production titled &quot;Bratz: BFF (Best Friends Forever)&quot; was released on the DVD rental website portal of Netflix.

====Bratz Design Academy====
From October 2008, Nickelodeon aired a reality show titled &quot;Bratz Design Academy&quot;, in which young girls aged 9 to 14 compete in fashion challenges similar to &quot;Project Runway&quot;, with the winner designing clothing for a British line of Bratz dolls.

====Bratz Rock====
On October 10, 2010, MGA premiered the first episode of an 11-episode web series, titled &quot;Bratz Rock&quot;, revolving around the main characters as they enter a music competition held by fictional music star Whisper, and as they get closer to finishing their song for the contest, they also uncover Whisper&#x27;s true identity. On October 14, 2010, the series was announced as postponed, but the remaining episodes were not released.

====Bratz (web series)====

In August 2015, a stop-motion web series premiered on YouTube. MGA confirmed there would be 10 episodes for the first season, which would turn out to be the only season. All 10 episodes were compiled into a 25-minute video titled &quot;Bratz: Friends Forever&quot; on Netflix. The web series was seen on American TV on Kabillion.

====Talking Bratz (web series)====

In May 2021, Bratz announced via Twitter that a web series titled &quot;Talking Bratz&quot; would air exclusively on its TikTok. In a similar CGI-style animation to the original TV series which aired between 2005 and 2008, the series consisted of several Bratz characters being interviewed in a talk-show like studio. The series saw the return of two of the TV series&#x27; cast in Olivia Hack (Cloe) and Ogie Banks (Dylan).

==== Alwayz Bratz (web series) ====
On August 31, 2023, Bratz announced on its TikTok that it is going to weekly air a two-minute miniseries on there titled &quot;Alwayz Bratz&quot;. It started on September 15 and ended on December 9 with 13 episodes. In a CGI-style animation different from Talking Bratz, the series focuses on the main characters, who are young adults in their 20s, pursuing a TV pitch to get their show Talking Bratz on streaming services. Meanwhile, Cloe is persuading her friends to start dating and set two of them up on a dating app without their consent. In an Instagram post on January 30, 2025, Bratz announced a second season of their continuous Alwayz Bratz miniseries since 2023, and the season premiered on February 7, 2025.

=== Digital Dolls ===
In January 2024, MGA Entertainment partnered with Flickplay in a five-year deal to create digital Bratz dolls. The digital dolls will be used on Flickplay, on other platforms, and in internet games.

==Discography==

* &quot;&quot; (2005)
* &quot;Bratz: Genie Magic Soundtrack&quot; (2006)
* &quot;Bratz: Forever Diamondz Soundtrack&quot; (2006)
* &quot;Bratz: The Motion Picture Soundtrack&quot; (2007)
* &quot;Bratz: Fashion Pixiez Soundtrack&quot; (2007)
* &quot;Bratz: Girlz Really Rock Soundtrack&quot; (2008)

== Games ==

===Interactive DVDs===
* &quot;Livin&#x27; It Up with the Bratz&quot; (2006)
* &quot;Bratz: Glitz &#x27;n&#x27; Glamour&quot; (2007)
* &quot;Lil&#x27; Bratz: Party Time!&quot; (2008)

=== Video games ===

*&quot;Bratz&quot; (2002)
* &quot;&quot; (2005)
* &quot;Bratz: Forever Diamondz&quot; (2006)
* &quot;Bratz Babyz&quot; (2006)
* &quot;Lil&#x27; Bratz: Friends, Fashion and Fun&quot; (2006)
* &quot;Bratz: Fashion Pixiez&quot; (2007)
* &quot;Bratz: The Movie&quot; (2007) 
* &quot;Bratz: 4 Real&quot; (2007)
* &quot;Bratz Kidz Slumber Party!&quot; (2008)
* &quot;&quot; (2008)
* &quot;Bratz: Ponyz&quot; (2007) 
* &quot;Bratz: Ponyz 2&quot; (2008)
* &quot;Bratz: Girlz Really Rock&quot; (2008)
* &quot;Bratz: Fashion Boutique&quot; (2012)
* &quot;Bratz: Action Heroez&quot; (2013)
* &quot;Bratz: Total Fashion Makeover&quot; (2021)
* &quot;Bratz: Flaunt Your Fashion&quot; (2022)

== Notes ==
==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q844684" start="0" end="5" title="Bratz" label="Bratz"/>
<link wikidata="Q673218" start="21" end="33" title="fashion doll" label="fashion doll"/>
<link wikidata="Q196600" start="38" end="53" title="media franchise" label="media franchise"/>
<link wikidata="Q596139" start="72" end="78" title="Mattel" label="Mattel"/>
<link wikidata="Q122346589" start="88" end="101" title="Carter Bryant" label="Carter Bryant"/>
<link wikidata="Q539548" start="106" end="123" title="MGA Entertainment" label="MGA Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q4958204" start="473" end="483" title="Bratz Kidz" label="Bratz Kidz"/>
<link wikidata="Q844684" start="485" end="495" title="Bratz Boyz" label="Bratz Boyz"/>
<link wikidata="Q4958192" start="497" end="508" title="Bratz Babyz" label="Bratz Babyz"/>
<link wikidata="Q4958209" start="513" end="523" title="Bratzillaz" label="Bratzillaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q4958206" start="566" end="577" title="Bratz discography" label="discography"/>
<link wikidata="Q7803245" start="599" end="610" title="Bratz (TV series)" label="a TV series"/>
<link wikidata="Q25222382" start="612" end="624" title="Bratz (web series)" label="a web series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753966" start="626" end="644" title="Bratz (film)" label="a live-action film"/>
<link wikidata="Q596139" start="1109" end="1115" title="Mattel" label="Mattel"/>
<link wikidata="Q167447" start="2495" end="2501" title="Barbie" label="Barbie"/>
<link wikidata="Q36120" start="3419" end="3431" title="Monster High" label="Monster High"/>
<link wikidata="Q2061829" start="4731" end="4743" title="Isaac Larian" label="Isaac Larian"/>
<link wikidata="Q86483" start="4893" end="4905" title="Black Friday (shopping)" label="Black Friday"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770624" start="5491" end="5503" title="Kylie Jenner" label="Kylie Jenner"/>
<link wikidata="Q6039389" start="6978" end="7002" title="Institute for Global Labour and Human Rights" label="National Labor Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2061829" start="8201" end="8213" title="Isaac Larian" label="Isaac Larian"/>
<link wikidata="Q19880984" start="8346" end="8356" title="Playthings (magazine)" label="Playthings"/>
<link wikidata="Q501476" start="8577" end="8583" title="Hasbro" label="Hasbro"/>
<link wikidata="Q15733239" start="8798" end="8808" title="body image" label="body image"/>
<link wikidata="Q466587" start="8877" end="8911" title="American Psychological Association" label="American Psychological Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q308984" start="9369" end="9381" title="Boston Legal" label="Boston Legal"/>
<link wikidata="Q38964" start="10657" end="10687" title="International Women&amp;#x27;s Day" label="International Women&amp;#x27;s Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q110281146" start="10767" end="10780" title="Chappell Roan" label="Chappell Roan"/>
<link wikidata="Q28148022" start="10782" end="10789" title="Normani" label="Normani"/>
<link wikidata="Q4235" start="10791" end="10802" title="Miley Cyrus" label="Miley Cyrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q193982" start="10807" end="10827" title="Sinéad O&amp;#x27;Connor" label="Sinéad O&amp;#x27;Connor"/>
<link wikidata="Q167447" start="10915" end="10921" title="Barbie" label="Barbie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929993" start="11448" end="11456" title="My Scene" label="My Scene"/>
<link wikidata="Q7609272" start="12847" end="12864" title="Stephen G. Larson" label="Stephen G. Larson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5971274" start="14812" end="14824" title="Steve Madden" label="Steve Madden"/>
<link wikidata="Q19848" start="15890" end="15899" title="Lady Gaga" label="Lady Gaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q2084961" start="16416" end="16451" title="20th Century Fox Home Entertainment" label="20th Century Fox Home Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q515869" start="16487" end="16496" title="Lionsgate" label="Lionsgate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753966" start="16990" end="17014" title="Bratz (film)" label="The live-action adaption"/>
<link wikidata="" start="17424" end="17446" title="Bratz Babyz: The Movie" label="Bratz Babyz: The Movie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753966" start="18239" end="18244" title="Bratz (film)" label="Bratz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7803245" start="18347" end="18367" title="bratz (TV series)" label="TV series adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3857481" start="18384" end="18406" title="Splash Entertainment" label="Mike Young Productions"/>
<link wikidata="Q2814176" start="18472" end="18480" title="4Kids TV" label="4Kids TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q956479" start="18498" end="18507" title="Tia Mowry" label="Tia Mowry"/>
<link wikidata="Q154958" start="18784" end="18795" title="Nickelodeon" label="Nickelodeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122661" start="18939" end="18953" title="Project Runway" label="Project Runway"/>
<link wikidata="Q6344171" start="19839" end="19848" title="Kabillion" label="Kabillion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7803245" start="20052" end="20074" title="Bratz (TV series)" label="the original TV series"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576401" start="20269" end="20280" title="Olivia Hack" label="Olivia Hack"/>
<link wikidata="Q7080030" start="20292" end="20302" title="Ogie Banks" label="Ogie Banks"/>
<link wikidata="Q4958188" start="21833" end="21838" title="Bratz (video game)" label="Bratz"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22105" end="22118" title="Bratz (film)#Video game" label="Bratz: 4 Real"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="230595" wikidata="Q437771" url="?curid=230595" title="Willem Frederik Hermans">
<text>Willem Frederik Hermans (; 1 September 192127 April 1995) was a Dutch author of poetry, novels, short stories, plays, as well as book-length studies, essays, and literary criticism. His most famous works are &quot;The House of Refuge&quot; (novella, 1952), &quot;The Darkroom of Damocles&quot; (novel, 1958), and &quot;Beyond Sleep&quot; (novel, 1966).

After World War II, Hermans tried to live off his writing exclusively, but as his country was recovering from the Occupation, he had no opportunity to sustain himself. He published three collections of short stories from 1948 to 1957, chief among them the novella &quot;The House of Refuge&quot; (1952), and in 1958 became lecturer in physical geography at Groningen University, a position he retained until his move to Paris, France, in 1973. The same year 1958 he broke to a wide audience with &quot;The Darkroom of Damocles&quot;. 

In the 1970s, Hermans played an important role in the unmasking of Friedrich Weinreb as a cheater of Jews in the war. Hermans refused to accept the P. C. Hooft Award for 1971. In 1977, he received the Prijs der Nederlandse Letteren, the most prestigious literary award available for writers in the language, handed out every three years alternately by the reigning Dutch and Belgian monarchs to a writer of the other country, the Belgian king Boudewijn handing the prize to Hermans. Hermans is considered one of &quot;De Grote Drie&quot;, the three most important authors in the Netherlands in the postwar period, along with Harry Mulisch and Gerard Reve.

==Biography==

===Early life===
Willem Frederik Hermans was born on 1 September 1921 in Amsterdam to Johannes (&#x27;Johan&#x27;) Hermans (1879–1967) and Hendrika (&#x27;Rika&#x27;) Hillegonda Hermans-Eggelte (1884–-1967), who already had a daughter, Cornelia (&#x27;Corry&#x27;) Geertruida (1918–1940). His paternal great-grandfather and grandfather were breadbakers in the town of Brielle, members of the Dutch Reformed Church, and from the ranks of the &quot;lower bourgeoisie.&quot; Johan Hermans, the only one of the eight children (two sons and six daughters) allowed to pursue an education, became a grammar-school teacher. Hermans&#x27; predominantly Lutheran maternal family was slightly more middle-class. All three sons of the great-grandfather, a goldsmith, became schoolteachers.
Johan Hermans graduated as a teacher in 1898 and began his career as a teacher the same year in the Amsterdam area, where he met his future wife who was a teacher at the same school he worked. After their marriage in 1913, Rika Hermans quit working and devoted herself to the household. The couple&#x27;s first child was born five years later. From 1913 to 1929, they lived on the second floor of an apartment in the &quot;Old West&quot; part of Amsterdam, near the center of the city, in a neighbourhood with blocks built in 1910 specially to accommodate schoolteachers. In 1929, the family moved to another apartment in the same block, where they occupied the fourth floor, Corry having a large room for herself in the attic. Johan Hermans continued to improve his teaching qualifications, eventually rising to teach beyond grammar school. Though his own career was unremarkable, he had great ambitions for his two children, both of whom he sent to the prestigious Barlaeus Gymnasium, evidently to have them prepared for a college education. To save money to pay for such education, the parents were forced to be as tight with money as they could, especially since the salaries of teachers would be decreased thirteen times in the years from 1925 to 1940, with a 10% decrease in the period 1930-1933 alone. These were precisely the years when their children were growing up.

Hermans&#x27;s intelligence first emerged at grammar school, where he was included in the selection of four boys who were taught a more challenging Arithmetic course than was demanded of the other classmates. Apart from that, he followed the standard curriculum: Reading, Writing, Geography (with attention to the Dutch Indies), Native History, Gymnastics, and Singing. The grades of his admittance to the Gymnasium in 1940 were generally good, though not outstanding.

Hermans&#x27;s reading, remarkably well-documented from early age onward, included some favorites he could read again and again without exhausting them. Most important were children&#x27;s versions of classic works: he cited the legend of King Arthur, which never ceased to give him the chills even as an elderly man, as &quot;the most significative work&quot; of his youth. &quot;Gulliver&#x27;s Travels&quot;, &quot;Robinson Crusoe&quot;, which he could read over and over without ever getting enough of it. Alice in Wonderland both charmed and scared him, especially the poem on Father William. Besides these international classics, he also read Dutch children&#x27;s book, most notably &quot;Woutertje Pieterse&quot; by Multatuli.

Hermans&#x27;s parents were unreligious and did not have a &quot;Bible&quot; at home. Yet on a visit with his parents to an acquaintance of theirs who was religious, he discovered a &quot;Bible&quot; for children by Siebold Ulfers, one of the century&#x27;s most popular children&#x27;s Bibles for its beautiful illustrations. He was allowed to take it home, though his father had some misgivings. Hermans was fascinated especially by the cruel Old Testament stories of Ahab and Jezebel, and of Jehu and Jehoram.

Hermans&#x27;s interest in science, technology and especially inventors also emerged during these years. Angel&#x27;s 1927 biography of Thomas Alva Edison was a favorite, and Bernard Jaffe&#x27;s &quot;Crucibles. The Story of Chemistry&quot;, read in a Dutch translation, also made an enormous impression on the young Hermans.

In 1933, Hermans enrolled in the prestigious Barlaeus Gymnasium in Amsterdam, where most teachers held an academic degree, often a doctorate. The curriculum in the first class was Latin, Dutch, French, History, Geography, Arithmetic, and Biology. In the second year this was augmented with Greek and German. In the first two classes, Hermans&#x27;s results were mediocre at best, and when he had to double the third class for lack of applying himself, he vowed such thing would never happen to him again. During this time, Hermans had fallen under the spell of literature. When the school staged a performance of Sophocles&#x27;s &quot;Antigone&quot;, Hermans was given a minor role, but the play left a lasting impression upon him: &quot;It was my first introduction to the kind of literature that could swipe away the everyday world like a dull nightmare.&quot; In that period, during the lessons in German, Hermans delivered oral reports (in German) on Franz Kafka and Thomas Mann.

=== 1950–1995 ===
Hermans married Emmy Meurs (1923–2008), a Surinam woman, in 1950.

In 1957, Hermans worked as volunteer assistant to photographer Nico Jesse while writing his &quot;The Darkroom of Damocles&quot; (&quot;De donkere kamer van Damocles&quot;) which features a mysteriously blank photograph. In 1958, he was appointed reader in physical geography at Groningen University. In 1972, after accusations by among others the Calvinist Member of Parliament and later minister Jan de Koning that Hermans was using his time writing instead of lecturing, a parliamentary committee was set up to investigate the matter. The committee found that Hermans&#x27;s chief crime was his use of university stationery for writing his notes.

In 1973, he resigned and settled as a full-time writer in Paris. In &quot;&quot; (&quot;Among Professors&quot;) (1975) he described university life in Groningen in a bitter and satirical way. It can be read as a roman à clef and was entirely written on the empty sides of university letters, according to Hermans&#x27;s alter ego Zomerplaag &quot;to do something useful with this expensive paper that would normally disappear unread in the garbage bin, polluting the environment&quot;.

Hermans received honorary doctorates from the University of Liège (Luik) in 1990 and the University of Pretoria in 1993.

== Themes ==
Underlying all of Hermans&#x27;s works, says Hermans scholar Frans A. Janssen, is the theme of epistemological nihilism. Only the means employed by logic and the sciences are capable of producing reliable knowledge. All other fields of study, including philosophy, ethics, psychology, the humanities and societal studies, are unable to produce knowledge that can be called reliable or certain. Literature and the arts can &quot;show truths&quot; by employing irrational devices. For the greatest part the world is unknowable, and even language is no reliable tool of communication. Hermans&#x27;s characters are personifications of this state of affairs, loners who continuously misinterpret the reality surrounding them, unable to do something meaningful with other interpretive views when confronted with them, victims to the mercy of chance, misunderstanding. They fail, going under to the discrepancy between the world and their representation of it. Eventually in this world eternal powers as aggressiveness and the strife for power win. There is no place for such concepts as freedom, responsibility, idealism: in the jungle of human existence a sacrifice for a good cause is meaningless. Specific elements of this pessimistic worldview are kindred to Marquis de Sade, Heinrich von Kleist, Arthur Schopenhauer, Sigmund Freud, Louis-Ferdinand Céline and Ludwig Wittgenstein.

There does not exist any benefit of hindsight, and the past is just as unknowable as is the present, if only because the past is never fully accessible. Osewoudt, the protagonist of &quot;The Darkroom of Damocles&quot;, is unable to convince others of his past achievements, and geologist Alfred, the protagonist of &quot;Beyond Sleep&quot;, is not sure if he would recognize a meteorite crater if he saw one.

A recurrent theme in many of the author&#x27;s novels and stories is the discrepancy between the protagonists&#x27; own view of themselves and the images that others have of them. Essentially, this the problem of Osewoudt of the war novel &quot;The Darkroom of Damocles&quot; (1958), who driven to despair to find acceptance for his view of himself. Unable to achieve such acceptance, he loses his identity as well as his life.

==Style==
His style is existentialist and generally bleak, and his writing style is unique in Dutch literature with its short and pointed sentences. There is no doubt that he was influenced by World War II and the German occupation of the Netherlands between 1940 and 1945, and his longer novels (&quot;De tranen der acacia&#x27;s&quot; and &quot;De donkere kamer van Damokles&quot;) are set during the war. Even his more upbeat writings (&quot;Onder professoren&quot; and &quot;Au pair&quot;) can have a strange, existentialist twist to them.

==Controversies==

Hermans was notorious for his polemics, as was demonstrated in particular in the &#x27;Weinreb affair&#x27;, when he played a key role in the unmasking of a Jewish imposter who claimed to have been a resistance fighter helping other Jews during the Nazi occupation of the Netherlands.

In 1986, the Mayor and City Council of Amsterdam, Ed van Thijn, officially declared Hermans persona non grata in Amsterdam as he visited South Africa in 1983 in defiance of a cultural boycott that was declared on that country because of its apartheid policy. Being married to a non-white woman, Hermans remained totally unrepentant and did not visit his birthplace again until 1993 for a book presentation, after the City Council had ended that status on his insistence.

The best example of Hermans&#x27;s notoriety was the minor issue of the first volume of the memoirs of the (perceivedly) &quot;minor&quot; writer C. Buddingh&#x27;, which Hermans savagely and condescendingly criticised in a review in 1979. The next volume was published only in 1995, ten years after the death of Buddingh&#x27; but only months after Hermans&#x27; death.

== Translations in English ==
The earliest translation into English of a Hermans work was the novella &quot;The House of Refuge&quot; (translated by Estelle Debrot), which Steven Marcus included in his collection &quot;The World of Modern Fiction&quot; (New York, 1966). The original is called &quot;Het behouden huis&quot; and runs to just under 80 pages. &quot;Het behouden huis&quot; was translated into English again in 2017 by David Colmer and published by Archipelago Books as &quot;An Untouched House&quot; (2018).

In 2006, the novel &quot;Beyond Sleep&quot; (translated by Ina Rilke) was published. The story is about a geological expedition in the north of Norway, where the sun never sets. The original is from 1966 and is called &quot;Nooit meer slapen&quot; and ranks as one of Hermans&#x27;s two most important works. The other work, &quot;The Darkroom of Damocles&quot;, also translated by Ina Rilke, was published in 2007. The novel is set during the occupation in World War II, and the protagonist, a member of the Dutch resistance against the Germans, is unable to come up with evidence for his resistance activities when the war is over. The original is from 1958. Le Carré&#x27;s spy novel &quot;The Spy Who Came in from the Cold&quot; was in part inspired by Herman&#x27;s &quot;The Darkroom of Damocles&quot;, who suspected plagiarism.

In 2021, Archipelago Books published Hermans&#x27; novel &quot;Herinneringen van een engelbewaarder&quot; (again translated by David Colmer) as &quot;A Guardian Angel Recalls.&quot; This bleakly humorous work, set on the eve of Nazi Germany&#x27;s invasion of the Netherlands in 1940, follows the travails of Alberegt, a lovelorn public prosecutor who has just seen off his mistress, a German-Jewish refugee steaming to the safety of America. Accompanied by his guardian angel as well as the devil, Alberegt races his Renault recklessly through the Hook of Holland. Despite the determined efforts of his guardian angel, a moment&#x27;s inattention leads to a catastrophe that Alberget is ill-equipped to handle, just as the German war machine begins its onslaught on the poorly prepared Dutch.&#x27;

== Bibliography (selection) ==
* &quot;Moedwil en misverstand/Intention and misunderstanding&quot; (short stories, 1948)
* &quot;De tranen der acacia&#x27;s/The tears of the acacias&quot; (novel, 1949)
* &quot;Ik heb altijd gelijk/I am always right&quot; (novel, 1951)
* &quot;Het behouden huis/An Untouched House&quot; (novella, 1951)
* &quot;Paranoia&quot; (short stories, 1953)
* &quot;Description et genèse des dépôts meubles de surface et du relief de l&#x27;Oesling&quot; (dissertation, 1955)
* &quot;De God Denkbaar Denkbaar De God/The God Thinkable Thinkable the God&quot; (novel, 1956)
* &quot;Drie melodrama&#x27;s/Three pieces of melodrama&quot; (novel/short stories, 1957)
* &quot;Een landingspoging op Newfoundland/An attemptive landing on Newfoundland&quot; (short stories, 1957)
* &quot;The Darkroom of Damocles&quot; (&quot;De donkere kamer van Damokles&quot;, novel, 1958)
* &quot;Beyond Sleep&quot; (&quot;Nooit meer slapen&quot;, novel, 1966)
* &quot;Een wonderkind of een total loss/A child prodigy or a total loss&quot; (stories, 1967)
* &quot;Herinneringen van een engelbewaarder/Memories of a guardian angel&quot; (novel, 1971)
* &quot;Het evangelie van O. Dapper Dapper/The gospel of O. Dapper Dapper&quot; (novel, 1973)
* &quot;Onder professoren/Amongst professors&quot; (novel, 1975)
* &quot;Filip&#x27;s sonatine&quot; (short story, 1980)
* &quot;Uit talloos veel miljoenen/From innumerable millions&quot; (novel, 1981)
* &quot;Geijerstein&#x27;s dynamiek/Geijerstein&#x27;s dynamic&quot; (short story, 1982)
* &quot;De zegelring/The signet ring&quot; (short story, 1984)
* &quot;Een heilige van de horlogerie/The saint of the clockmakers&quot; (novel, 1987)
* &quot;Au pair&quot; (novel, 1989)
* &quot;De laatste roker/The last smoker&quot; (short stories, 1991)
* &quot;In de mist van het schimmenrijk/In the mist of the shadow empire&quot; (short story, 1993; &quot;boekenweekgeschenk&quot; (Dutch Book Week Gift), later published as &quot;Madelon in de mist van het schimmenrijk/Madelon in the mist of the shadow empire&quot;)
* &quot;Ruisend gruis/Rustling grit&quot; (novel, published after his death in 1995)

==See also==
*&quot;NRC&quot;&#x27;s Best Dutch novels

==Notes==
==References==
==Sources==
* Janssen, F.A. (in Dutch). (1985). &quot;Hermans, Willem Frederik.&quot; G.J. van Bork and P.J. Verkruijsse, &quot;The Dutch and Flemish Authors from Medieval Times to the Present, Including the Frisian Authors&quot;. Weesp: De Haan.
* Otterspeer, Willem (in Dutch) (2013). &quot;De mislukkingskunstenaar: Willem Frederik Hermans&quot;. Biografie, deel 1 (1921-1952), De Bezige Bij, Amsterdam. [&quot;The Artist of Failure: Willem Frederik Hermans&quot;. A Biography, Vol. 1, (1921-1952)]
* Raat, G.F.H. (in Dutch). (1989). , &quot;Alfred and His Mirror Image. Narrative Voice in &quot;Beyond Sleep&quot;.&quot;. In: Wilbert Smulders (red.), &quot;Verboden toegang. Essays over het werk van Willem Frederik Hermans gevolgd door een vraaggesprek met de schrijver&quot;. De Bezige Bij, Amsterdam 1989, p. 204-228. Retrieved 1 September 2014.

==External links==

* Website of Hermans&#x27;s &quot;Complete Works&quot;
*Willem Frederik Hermans instituut 
*Willem Frederik Hermans </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q437771" start="0" end="23" title="Willem Frederik Hermans" label="Willem Frederik Hermans"/>
<link wikidata="Q2561149" start="263" end="287" title="The Darkroom of Damocles" label="The Darkroom of Damocles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2685656" start="319" end="331" title="Beyond Sleep" label="Beyond Sleep"/>
<link wikidata="Q52107" start="689" end="707" title="physical geography" label="physical geography"/>
<link wikidata="Q850730" start="711" end="731" title="Groningen University" label="Groningen University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462771" start="957" end="974" title="Friedrich Weinreb" label="Friedrich Weinreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379623" start="1038" end="1055" title="P. C. Hooft Award" label="P. C. Hooft Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q2063896" start="1091" end="1121" title="Prijs der Nederlandse Letteren" label="Prijs der Nederlandse Letteren"/>
<link wikidata="Q927" start="1515" end="1528" title="Harry Mulisch" label="Harry Mulisch"/>
<link wikidata="Q364153" start="1533" end="1544" title="Gerard Reve" label="Gerard Reve"/>
<link wikidata="Q727" start="1635" end="1644" title="Amsterdam" label="Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q515880" start="1954" end="1975" title="Dutch Reformed Church" label="Dutch Reformed Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q188161" start="4032" end="4044" title="Dutch East Indies" label="Dutch Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q45792" start="4427" end="4438" title="King Arthur" label="King Arthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q181488" start="4569" end="4592" title="Gulliver&amp;#x27;s Travels" label="Gulliver&amp;#x27;s Travels"/>
<link wikidata="Q483034" start="4606" end="4621" title="Robinson Crusoe" label="Robinson Crusoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q92640" start="4698" end="4717" title="Alice in Wonderland" label="Alice in Wonderland"/>
<link wikidata="Q154211" start="4912" end="4921" title="Multatuli" label="Multatuli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845" start="4989" end="4994" title="Bible" label="Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q19786" start="5369" end="5382" title="Old Testament" label="Old Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q235901" start="5394" end="5398" title="Ahab" label="Ahab"/>
<link wikidata="Q721295" start="5403" end="5410" title="Jezebel" label="Jezebel"/>
<link wikidata="Q313225" start="5419" end="5423" title="Jehu" label="Jehu"/>
<link wikidata="Q334739" start="5428" end="5435" title="Jehoram of Israel" label="Jehoram"/>
<link wikidata="Q8743" start="5574" end="5592" title="Thomas Alva Edison" label="Thomas Alva Edison"/>
<link wikidata="Q808313" start="5811" end="5829" title="Barlaeus Gymnasium" label="Barlaeus Gymnasium"/>
<link wikidata="Q241077" start="6402" end="6410" title="Antigone (Sophocles play)" label="Antigone"/>
<link wikidata="Q905" start="6722" end="6733" title="Franz Kafka" label="Franz Kafka"/>
<link wikidata="Q37030" start="6738" end="6749" title="Thomas Mann" label="Thomas Mann"/>
<link wikidata="Q7646305" start="6812" end="6819" title="Surinam (Dutch colony)" label="Surinam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1871355" start="6900" end="6910" title="Nico Jesse" label="Nico Jesse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2561149" start="6935" end="6959" title="The Darkroom of Damocles" label="The Darkroom of Damocles"/>
<link wikidata="Q3445082" start="7084" end="7090" title="Reader (academic rank)" label="reader"/>
<link wikidata="Q52107" start="7094" end="7112" title="physical geography" label="physical geography"/>
<link wikidata="Q850730" start="7116" end="7136" title="Groningen University" label="Groningen University"/>
<link wikidata="Q101849" start="7185" end="7194" title="Calvinist" label="Calvinist"/>
<link wikidata="Q35749" start="7205" end="7215" title="Parliament" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q2336286" start="7235" end="7248" title="Jan de Koning (politician)" label="Jan de Koning"/>
<link wikidata="Q512207" start="7700" end="7712" title="roman à clef" label="roman à clef"/>
<link wikidata="Q201662" start="7808" end="7817" title="alter ego" label="alter ego"/>
<link wikidata="Q209896" start="7992" end="8010" title="honorary doctorate" label="honorary doctorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334582" start="8021" end="8040" title="University of Liège" label="University of Liège"/>
<link wikidata="Q604444" start="8064" end="8086" title="University of Pretoria" label="University of Pretoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q80968" start="8221" end="8229" title="nihilism" label="nihilism"/>
<link wikidata="Q123867" start="9368" end="9383" title="Marquis de Sade" label="Marquis de Sade"/>
<link wikidata="Q28494" start="9385" end="9404" title="Heinrich von Kleist" label="Heinrich von Kleist"/>
<link wikidata="Q38193" start="9406" end="9425" title="Arthur Schopenhauer" label="Arthur Schopenhauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q9215" start="9427" end="9440" title="Sigmund Freud" label="Sigmund Freud"/>
<link wikidata="Q151820" start="9442" end="9464" title="Louis-Ferdinand Céline" label="Louis-Ferdinand Céline"/>
<link wikidata="Q9391" start="9469" end="9488" title="Ludwig Wittgenstein" label="Ludwig Wittgenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q2561149" start="10147" end="10171" title="The Darkroom of Damocles" label="The Darkroom of Damocles"/>
<link wikidata="Q38066" start="10354" end="10368" title="existentialist" label="existentialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1853321" start="10425" end="10441" title="Dutch literature" label="Dutch literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="10524" end="10536" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462771" start="10982" end="10996" title="Friedrich Weinreb" label="Weinreb affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q727" start="11220" end="11229" title="Amsterdam" label="Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q607189" start="11231" end="11243" title="Ed van Thijn" label="Ed van Thijn"/>
<link wikidata="Q183424" start="11273" end="11290" title="persona non grata" label="persona non grata"/>
<link wikidata="Q11409" start="11422" end="11431" title="apartheid" label="apartheid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2232349" start="11799" end="11816" title="C. Buddingh&amp;#x27;" label="C. Buddingh&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q15874232" start="12457" end="12469" title="David Colmer" label="David Colmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4786918" start="12487" end="12504" title="Archipelago Books" label="Archipelago Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q2685656" start="12573" end="12585" title="Beyond Sleep" label="Beyond Sleep"/>
<link wikidata="Q2685656" start="12772" end="12789" title="Beyond Sleep" label="Nooit meer slapen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2561149" start="12879" end="12903" title="The Darkroom of Damocles" label="The Darkroom of Damocles"/>
<link wikidata="Q468071" start="13241" end="13274" title="The Spy Who Came in from the Cold" label="The Spy Who Came in from the Cold"/>
<link wikidata="Q4786918" start="13393" end="13410" title="Archipelago Books" label="Archipelago Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q15874232" start="13511" end="13523" title="David Colmer" label="David Colmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7135517" start="14529" end="14537" title="Paranoia (Hermans book)" label="Paranoia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2561149" start="14987" end="15011" title="The Darkroom of Damocles" label="The Darkroom of Damocles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2685656" start="15083" end="15095" title="Beyond Sleep" label="Beyond Sleep"/>
<link wikidata="Q2744530" start="16081" end="16091" title="boekenweek" label="boekenweek"/>
<link wikidata="Q6955113" start="16343" end="16383" title="NRC&amp;#x27;s Best Dutch novels" label="&amp;quot;NRC&amp;quot;&amp;#x27;s Best Dutch novels"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="230598" wikidata="Q785008" url="?curid=230598" title="Loïc Leferme">
<text>Loïc Leferme (28 August 1970 – 11 April 2007) was a French diver who was the world free diving record holder until 2 October 2005, when he was surpassed by Herbert Nitsch. Loic was also a founder of AIDA in 1990 with Roland Specker and Claude Chapuis in Nice. In 2002 he set the world free diving record without any breathing apparatus at . His first world record was , set in 1999. On 30 October 2004, he extended his own world record to in the no-limits free-diving category. The premier advocate of this type of freediving which has come to be known as Chapuis Style Freediving. 

He died during a private training session in Villefranche-sur-Mer when his equipment failed and he did not reach the surface in time. He was in training for a planned record attempt in July 2007.

==See also==
==References==
==External links==

*Official website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q785008" start="0" end="12" title="Loïc Leferme" label="Loïc Leferme"/>
<link wikidata="Q392409" start="83" end="94" title="free diving" label="free diving"/>
<link wikidata="Q78736" start="156" end="170" title="Herbert Nitsch" label="Herbert Nitsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2657602" start="199" end="203" title="AIDA International" label="AIDA"/>
<link wikidata="Q392409" start="456" end="467" title="free-diving" label="free-diving"/>
<link wikidata="Q207080" start="629" end="649" title="Villefranche-sur-Mer" label="Villefranche-sur-Mer"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="230600" wikidata="Q312843" url="?curid=230600" title="Robert K. Merton">
<text>Robert King Merton (born Meyer Robert Schkolnick; July 4, 1910 – February 23, 2003) was an American sociologist who is considered a founding father of modern sociology, and a major contributor to the subfield of criminology. He served as the 47th president of the American Sociological Association. He spent most of his career teaching at Columbia University, where he attained the rank of University Professor. In 1994 he was awarded the National Medal of Science for his contributions to the field and for having founded the sociology of science.

Merton&#x27;s contribution to sociology falls into three areas: (1) sociology of science; (2) sociology of crime and deviance; (3) sociological theory. He developed notable concepts, such as &quot;unintended consequences&quot;, the &quot;reference group&quot;, and &quot;role strain&quot;, but is perhaps best known for the terms &quot;role model&quot; and &quot;self-fulfilling prophecy&quot;. The concept of &quot;self-fulfilling prophecy&quot;, which is a central element in modern sociological, political, and economic theory, is one type of process through which a belief or expectation affects the outcome of a situation or the way a person or group will behave. More specifically, as Merton defined, &quot;the self-fulfilling prophecy is, in the beginning, a false definition of the situation evoking a new behavior, which makes the originally false conception come true&quot;.

Merton&#x27;s concept of the &quot;role model&quot; first appeared in a study on the socialization of medical students at Columbia University. The term grew from his theory of the &quot;reference group&quot;, the group to which individuals compare themselves but to which they do not necessarily belong. Social roles were central to Merton&#x27;s theory of &quot;social groups&quot;. Merton emphasized that, rather than a person assuming just one role and one status, they have a status set in the social structure that has, attached to it, a whole set of expected behaviors.

==Biography==
===Early life===
Robert King Merton was born on July 4, 1910, in Philadelphia as Meyer Robert Schkolnick into a family of Yiddish-speaking Russian Jews who had immigrated to the United States in 1904. His mother was Ida Rasovskaya, an &quot;unsynagogued&quot; socialist who had freethinking radical sympathies. His father was Aaron Schkolnickoff, a tailor who had officially been registered at port of entry to the United States as &quot;Harrie Skolnick&quot;. Merton&#x27;s family lived in strained financial circumstances after his father&#x27;s uninsured dairy-product shop in South Philadelphia burned down. His father later became a carpenter&#x27;s assistant to support the family.

Even though Merton grew up fairly poor, he believed that he had been afforded many opportunities. As a student at South Philadelphia High School, he was a frequent visitor to nearby cultural and educational venues, including the Andrew Carnegie Library, the Academy of Music, the Central Library, and the Museum of Arts. In 1994, Merton stated that growing up in South Philadelphia provided young people with &quot;every sort of capital—social capital, cultural capital, human capital, and, above all, what we may call public capital—that is, with every sort of capital except the personally financial.&quot;

He adopted the name Robert K. Merton initially as a stage name for his magic performances. Young Merton developed a strong interest in magic, heavily influenced by his sister&#x27;s boyfriend. For his magic acts he initially chose the stage name &quot;Merlin&quot;, but eventually settled on the surname &quot;Merton&quot; to further &quot;Americanize&quot; his immigrant-family name. He picked the given name &quot;Robert&quot; in honor of the 19th-century French magician Jean-Eugène Robert-Houdin, widely considered the father of modern-style conjuring. Thus his stage name became &quot;Robert Merton&quot;, and he kept it as his personal name upon receiving a scholarship to Temple University.

===Education===
Merton began his sociological career under the guidance of George E. Simpson at Philadelphia&#x27;s Temple University (1927–1931). Merton&#x27;s work as Simpson&#x27;s research assistant on a project dealing with race and media introduced Merton to sociology. Under Simpson&#x27;s leadership, Merton attended an American Sociological Association annual meeting where he met Pitrim A. Sorokin, the founding chair of the Harvard University sociology department. Merton applied to Harvard and worked from 1931 to 1936 as a research assistant to Sorokin.

By his second year at Harvard he had begun publishing with Sorokin. In 1934 he began publishing articles of his own, including &quot;Recent French Sociology&quot;, &quot;The Course of Arabian Intellectual Development, 700–1300 A.D.&quot;, &quot;Fluctuations in the Rate of Industrial Invention&quot;, and &quot;Science and Military Technique&quot;. In 1936 he graduated from Harvard, having obtained an MA and PhD in sociology.

By the end of his student career in 1938 he embarked on works that brought him renown, publishing his first major study, &quot;Science, Technology, and Society in Seventeenth-Century England&quot;, which helped create the sociology of science. Merton&#x27;s dissertation committee comprised Sorokin, Talcott Parsons, the historian George Sarton, and the biochemist Lawrence Joseph Henderson. Merton&#x27;s thesis—similar to Max Weber&#x27;s famous claim about a link between the Protestant work ethic and the capitalist economy—proposed a positive correlation between the rise of Protestant pietism, Puritanism, and early experimental science.

===Personal life===
In 1934 Merton married Suzanne Carhart, with whom he had a son, Robert C. Merton, winner of the 1997 Nobel Prize in economics, and two daughters, Stephanie Merton Tombrello and Vanessa Merton, professor of law at Pace University School of Law. In 1968 Merton and Carhart separated; she died in 1992.

In 1993 Merton married his fellow sociologist and collaborator, Harriet Zuckerman. After years of failing health, and battling six forms of cancer, Merton died in Manhattan on 23 February 2003, aged 92. He was survived by his wife, three children, nine grandchildren, and nine great-grandchildren.

== Career ==

===Teaching career===
Merton taught at Harvard until 1938, when he became professor and chairman of the Department of Sociology at Tulane University. In 1941, he joined the Columbia University faculty, where he spent the vast majority of his teaching career. Over his five decades at Columbia University he held numerous prestigious titles. He was associate director of the university&#x27;s Bureau of Applied Social Research from 1942 to 1971, and named Giddings Professor of Sociology in 1963. He was also named to the university&#x27;s highest academic rank, University Professor, in 1974 and became a Special Service Professor, a title reserved by the trustees for emeritus faculty who &quot;render special services to the University&quot;, upon his retirement in 1979. He was an adjunct faculty member at Rockefeller University, and was also the first Foundation Scholar at the Russell Sage Foundation. He withdrew from teaching in 1984. In recognition of his lasting contributions to scholarship and the university, Columbia established the Robert K. Merton Professorship in the Social Sciences in 1990.

==Theory==
Upon moving to Columbia in 1941, Merton joined Paul Lazarsfeld, who was introducing quantitative methods into empirical research in sociology. Lazarsfeld and Merton emphasized the importance of &quot;systematic data&quot;, collected in a systematic way through representative sampling. Merton sought to develop a theoretical approach &quot;that would turn the results from this research into sociology.&quot;

===Middle-range theory===
Merton&#x27;s work is often compared to that of Talcott Parsons. Merton enrolled in Parsons&#x27; theory course while at Harvard, admiring Parsons&#x27; work because it introduced him to European methods of theory, while also broadening his own ideas about sociology. However, unlike Parsons, who emphasized the necessity for social science to establish a general foundation, Merton preferred more limited, &quot;middle-range&quot; theories. Merton later explained in his writings that &quot;although much impressed by Parsons as a master-builder of sociological theory, I found myself departing from his mode of theorizing (as well as his mode of exposition).&quot; Merton himself fashioned his theory very similarly to that of Emile Durkheim&#x27;s &quot;Suicide&quot; (1897) or Max Weber&#x27;s &quot;Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism&quot; (1905). Weber had suggested a strong relationship between Protestant beliefs and the Economic activity that gave rise to capitalism. Merton&#x27;s extensive research highlighted a complementarity between puritanical Protestant beliefs and science, which developed rapidly in the seventeenth century. Merton believed that middle range theories bypassed the failures of larger theories, which are too distant from observing social behavior in a particular social setting.

According to Merton, &quot;middle-range theory&quot; starts its theorizing with clearly defined aspects of social phenomena, rather than with broad, abstract entities such as society as a whole. Theories of the middle range should be firmly supported by empirical data. These theories must be constructed with observed data to create theoretical problems and to be incorporated in proposals that allow empirical testing. Middle-range theories, applicable to limited ranges of data, transcend sheer description of social phenomena and fill in the blanks between raw empiricism and grand or all-inclusive theory.

The identification of middle-range theories or &quot;intermediate provisions&quot;, as defined by Rinzivillo (2019), is typical of the specification that passes through functional analysis, developed by Merton in the course of his research on the relationship between theory and empirical research. Unlike the functionalist theorisation proposed by Parsons, Merton proposes a choice that puts in particular evidence the relationship that the researcher should assume in the direction of a pragmatic choice of the instruments and methodology it uses. In this way, the theory can be addressed for heuristic purposes and the empirical research results in the operative aspect of the analysis, where the sociologist is obliged to choose to represent always, not the universe of the variables in play, but a reduction of the field of scientific interest. A strategy, in short, in favor of the &quot;survey&quot;.

=== Anomie and Strain ===
Merton argued that deviance may result as a consequence of a blockage in an individual&#x27;s life which does not allow them to achieve their goal, essentially leading to deviant behavior. According to Merton&#x27;s strain theory, criminality is determined by acceptance or rejection of cultural ideals and/or institutionalized mechanisms of accomplishing those goals. The term &quot;strain&quot; refers to the gap between culturally determined goals and the institutionalized tools available to fulfill these goals. Merton uses the progress of achieving the &#x27;American Dream&#x27; as an example. If an individual can not achieve the culturally dominant goal (of success), it can prove frustrating for the individual and may lead to breaking free into illegal escape routes or delinquency. The theory has been criticized for not or insufficiently factoring in an individuals aspirations and expectations of achieving those goals. For this reason and others, adherents of strain theory have developed revisions, such as Edwin Sutherland who defined white-collar crime as &quot;a crime committed by a person of respectability and high social status in the course of his occupation&quot;

===Clarifying functional analysis===
Merton argues that the central orientation of functionalism is in interpreting data by their consequences for larger structures in which they are implicated. Like Durkheim and Parsons, he analyzes society with reference to whether cultural and social structures are well or badly integrated. Merton is also interested in the persistence of societies and defines functions that make for the adaptation of a given social system. He believed that the way these early functionalists put emphasis on functions of one social structure or institution for another, created bias when focusing only on adaptation or adjustment because they would always have a positive consequence. Finally, Merton thinks that shared values are central in explaining how societies and institutions work; however, he disagrees with Parsons on some issues.

His belief in empirical testing led to the development of his &quot;paradigm&quot; of functional analysis. According to Merton, &quot;paradigm&quot; refers to: exemplars of codified basic and often tacit assumptions, problem sets, key concepts, logic of procedure, and selectively accumulated knowledge that guide [theoretical and empirical] inquiry in all scientific fields.

====Dysfunctions====
In Merton&#x27;s writing on &quot;dysfunctions&quot;, he highlights problems that tend to keep social systems from meeting all of their functional requirements. In doing this, he was able to point out the details as well as the contradictions of the overall concept. One group&#x27;s function could serve as another group&#x27;s dysfunction, and a general incident could turn out to be both functional and dysfunctional for the same group. Merton clarified the concept by stating that a certain degree of social cohesion eases the productivity of a group and is therefore functional, but it can become dysfunctional when it surpasses a certain threshold, because then the members of the group may become equally indulgent and fail to hold each other to high performance standards.

Merton elaborates on his three main issues or flaws with functionalism, which he labels &quot;postulates&quot;:

* the postulate of the &quot;functional unity&quot; of society; 
* the postulate of &quot;universal functionalism&quot;; and
* the postulate of &quot;indispensability&quot;.

The postulate of the functional unity of society refers to the misunderstanding that societies are functional and harmonious unions. According to Merton&#x27;s perception of &quot;functionalism&quot;, all standardized social and cultural beliefs and practices are functional for both society as a whole as well as individuals in society. This outlook maintains that various parts of social systems must show a high level of integration, but Merton argues that a generalization like this cannot be extended to larger, more complex societies. Merton points out that not all societies are happy and well-integrated, where the people function well together and all involved prosper. Merton cites examples, such as civil wars, African-Americans in the 1950s, and South African blacks during the apartheid regime as instances where societies were not necessarily functional for all people.

The postulate of universal functionalism refers to the idea that all ideals work for everyone in a society. The claim of &quot;universal functionalism&quot; argues that all standardized social and cultural structures and forms have a positive function. Merton argues that this is a contradiction to what is seen in the real world; not every structure, idea, belief, etc., has positive functions. Merton believes that some things may have consequences that are generally dysfunctional or which are dysfunctional for some and functional for others. For example, poverty may benefit the rich because they are allowed to maintain more of their wealth, but it certainly does not benefit the poor who struggle. On this point he approaches conflict theory, although he does believe that institutions and values can be functional for society as a whole. Merton states that only by recognizing the dysfunctional aspects of institutions, can we explain the development and persistence of alternatives. Merton&#x27;s concept of dysfunctions is also central to his argument that functionalism is not essentially conservative.

Lastly, the postulate of indispensability refers to the social function for customs, ideals, or institutions as a whole. This postulate states that the standardized parts of society have positive functions, and also represent indispensable parts of the working whole, which implies that structures and functions are functionally necessary for society. Here, Merton argues, people must be willing to admit that there exist various structural and functional alternatives within society. In terms of structural functionalism, Merton felt that the focus should be on social functions rather than on individual motives. He raises the question and doubt of whether every social institution performs a specific function, believing that several institutions can provide the same function or none at all, so it is impossible to decipher what functions are vital or not to a society.

==== Net balance ====
To help people determine whether positive functions outweigh dysfunctions, and vice versa, Merton developed the concept of &quot;net balance&quot;. Because the issues are complex and based on a lot of subjective judgement, they cannot be calculated and weighed easily. Therefore, positive functions and dysfunctions cannot be simply added up and objectively determine which outweighs the other. To deal with these issues, Merton believed that there must be levels of functional analysis. Rather than solely focusing on the analysis of society as a whole, Merton argued that analysis could and should also be done on an organization, institution or group.

===Unanticipated consequences and manifest vs latent functions===

Some of the crucial innovations that Merton made to sociology include the description of the unanticipated consequences of social action, of latent functions vs. manifest functions, and, as previously mentioned, of dysfunctions.

According to Merton, &quot;unanticipated consequences&quot; are actions that have both intended and unintended consequences. Everyone is aware of the intended consequences, but the unintended are more difficult to recognize, and therefore, sociological analysis is required to uncover what they may be. In his 1936 essay, &quot;The Unanticipated Consequences of Purposive Social Action&quot;, Merton uncovered the wide field of human activity where things do not go as planned, and paradoxes and strange outcomes are seen. One of these outcomes is the &quot;self-defeating prophecy&quot;, which through the very fact of its being publicized, is actually wrong. Merton was able to illustrate this by referencing Karl Marx&#x27;s prediction that as societies become more modern, the wealth will be concentrated amongst fewer people, and the majority of society would suffer from poverty and misery. This prediction helped to stimulate the socialist movement, which in some countries slowed the development that Marx had predicted. Struggles for economic equality tend to spread economic benefit rather than concentrating it. The opposite of the &quot;self-defeating prophecy&quot; then, is the &quot;self-fulfilling prophecy&quot;, when an originally unfounded prophecy turns out to be correct because it is believed and acted upon.

The distinction implied between manifest and latent functions was devised to preclude the unintentional confusion between conscious motivations for our social behavior and its objective consequences. Manifest functions are the consequences that people observe or expect, or what is intended; latent functions are those that are neither recognized nor intended. In distinguishing between manifest and latent functions, Merton argued that one must dig to discover latent functions. His example from his 1949 piece, &quot;Manifest and Latent Functions&quot;, was an analysis of political machines. Manifest and latent functions were devised to prelude the inadvertent confusion between conscious motivations for social behavior and its objective consequences.  Merton began by describing the negative consequences of political machines, and then changed the angle and demonstrated how the people in charge of the machines, acting in their own interest, were meeting the social needs not met by government institutions. Merton made it very clear however, that unanticipated consequences and latent functions are not the same. &quot;Latent functions&quot; are one type of unanticipated consequences; functional for the designated system.

According to Merton, there are also two other types of unanticipated consequences:

# &quot;Those that are dysfunctional for a designated system,&quot; which comprise the latent dysfunctions; and 
# &quot;Those which are irrelevant to the system which they affect neither functionally or dysfunctionally…non-functional consequences.&quot;

Merton sees attention to latent functions as increasing the understanding of society: the distinction between manifest and latent forces the sociologist to go beyond the reasons individuals give for their actions or for the existence of customs and institutions; it makes them look for other social consequences that allow these practices&#x27; survival and illuminate the way society works.

===Functional alternatives===
Functionalists believe societies must have certain characteristics to survive. Merton shares this view but stresses that at the same time particular institutions are not the only ones able to fulfill these functions; a wide range of functional alternatives may be able to perform the same task. This notion of functional alternative is important because it alerts sociologists to the similar functions different institutions may perform and it further reduces the tendency of functionalism to imply approval of the status quo.

===Theory of deviance===
Merton&#x27;s theory on deviance stems from his 1938 analysis of the relationship between culture, structure and anomie. Merton argued that deviance is most likely to occur when there is a discrepancy between culturally prescribed goals and the legitimate means of obtaining them. Merton defines culture as an &quot;organized set of normative values governing behavior which is common to members of a designated society or group&quot;. Social structures are the &quot;organized set of social relationships in which members of the society or group are variously implicated.&quot; Anomie, the state of normlessness, arises when there is &quot;an acute disjunction between the cultural norms and goals and the socially structured capacities of members of the group to act in accord with them.&quot; In his theory, Merton links anomie with deviance and argues that the discontinuity between culture and structure have the dysfunctional consequence of leading to deviance within society. The goal of material success was accepted, but the legitimate means were abandoned in preference for illegitimate ones. So, theft might replace hard work as the means for achieving goals. Merton argued deviance results not from pathological personalities but from the culture and structure of society itself. Value consensus is when all members of society share the same values; however, since members of society are placed in different positions in the social structure, they do not have the same opportunity of realizing the shared values. This can create deviance.

The term &quot;anomie&quot;, derived from Émile Durkheim, for Merton means a discord between cultural goals and the legitimate means available to reach them. Applied to the United States, he sees the American dream as an emphasis on the goal of monetary success, but without a corresponding emphasis on the legitimate avenues to attaining the Dream. In other words, Merton believes that the American Dream is a cultural ideal, but the ways in which people go about obtaining it are not the same. This can lead to a considerable amount of deviance (in the Parsonian sense). This theory is commonly used in the study of criminology (specifically the strain theory).

In 1938, Merton&#x27;s &quot;Social Structure and Anomie&quot;, one of the most important works of structural theory in American sociology, Merton&#x27;s basic assumption was that the individual is not just in a structured system of action but that his or her actions may be forced by the demands of the system. Merton argued that when the economic system fails to provide legitimate means to earn an income, and status, the cultural logic of the social system may force the individual to act in ways that are culturally logical, even if illegal.

In this rubric, conformity refers to the attaining of societal goals by socially accepted means, while innovation refers to the attaining of those goals in unaccepted ways (such as crime and deviance). Innovators find and create their own ways to obtain what they want, and a majority of the time, these new means are considered to be socially unaccepted and deviant. Merton considers &quot;ritualism&quot; the acceptance of the means but the forfeit of the goals. Ritualists continue to subscribe to the means, but they have rejected the overall goal; they are not viewed as deviant. Retreatism is the rejection of both the means and the goals. Retreaters want to find a way to escape from everything and therefore reject both the goals and the means and are seen as deviant. Rebellion differs from the other four approaches in a number of ways. Temporally, rebellion is a short-term response (unlike the other four). Like retreaters, rebels reject both existing societal goals and means, but unlike retreaters, rebels work at the macro level to replace those existing societal goals and means with new goals and means embodying other values. Innovation and ritualism are the pure cases of anomie as Merton defined it because in both cases there is a contradiction or discontinuity between goals and means.

===Sociology of science and CUDOS===
The sociology of science was a field that Merton was very interested in and remained very passionate about throughout his career. Merton was interested in the interactions and importance between social and cultural structures and science. For example, he did pioneering historical research in his PhD dissertation on the role of military institutions in stimulating scientific research during the era of the Scientific Revolution.

Merton carried out extensive research into the sociology of science, developing the Merton Thesis explaining some of the religious causes of the Scientific Revolution, and the Mertonian norms of science, often referred to by the acronym &quot;CUDOS&quot;. This is a set of ideals that are dictated by what Merton takes to be the goals and methods of science and to be binding on scientists. They include:

*Communism: the common ownership of scientific discoveries, according to which scientists give up intellectual property in exchange for recognition and esteem.
*Universalism: according to which claims to truth are evaluated in terms of universal or impersonal criteria, and not on the basis of race, class, gender, religion, or nationality;
*Disinterestedness: according to which scientists are rewarded for acting in ways that outwardly appear to be selfless; and
*Organized skepticism: all ideas must be tested and are subject to rigorous, structured community scrutiny.

The &quot;OS&quot; in &quot;CUDOS&quot; is sometimes identified as &quot;Originality&quot; (i.e. novelty in research contributions) and &quot;Skepticism&quot;. This is a subsequent modification of Merton&#x27;s norm set, as he did not refer to Originality in the 1942 essay that introduced the norms, &quot;The Normative Structure of Science&quot;.

Merton introduced many concepts to the sociology of science, including: &quot;obliteration by incorporation&quot;, referring to when a concept becomes so popularized that its inventor is forgotten; and &quot;multiples&quot;, referring to independent similar discoveries.

Merton and his colleagues spent much time studying &quot;how the social system of science works in accordance with, and often also in contradiction to, the ethos of science.&quot; This newer focus on the social organization of science led Merton to study the reward system in science, priority disputes between scientists, and the way in which famous scientists often receive disproportionate credit for their contributions, while less-known scientists receive less credit than their contributions merit. Merton called this phenomenon the &quot;Matthew effect&quot;. (See also Stigler&#x27;s law of eponymy.) As a result of the Matilda effect, Harriet Zuckerman is credited by Merton as co-author of the Matthew effect.

With his study of the &quot;Matthew effect&quot;, Merton showed how the social system of science sometimes deviated structurally from the ethos of science, in this case by violating the norm of universalism: a few top scientists enjoying large chunks of awards, grants and jobs, and the spread and distribution of resources and recognition among scientists being highly skewed.

===&quot;On the Shoulders of Giants&quot;===
Merton referred to his book &quot;On the Shoulders of Giants: A Shandean Postscript&quot; as &quot;OTSOG&quot;—&quot;part parody and part history of ideas&quot;, according to the publisher. In &quot;OTSOG&quot;, he traces the history of Newton&#x27;s famous comment &quot;If I have seen farther, it is by standing on the shoulders of giants&quot; back to centuries earlier, in the rambling style of Laurence Sterne&#x27;s &quot;The Life and Opinions of Tristram Shandy, Gentleman&quot;.

==Influences==
Merton was heavily influenced by Talcott Parsons and to a much lesser degree by Pitirim Sorokin. Indeed, Merton&#x27;s choice of dissertation topic reflect profoundly the interest from Parsons and was not of Sorokin&#x27;s liking. Hence, Sorokin was strongly opposed to the emphasis of the creativity of Puritanism, which was a central element in Merton&#x27;s discussion. Merton, however, managed to have both men on his dissertation committee. Merton worked with Sorokin as a graduate student at Harvard University. However, intellectuals like Paul Lazarsfeld influenced Merton to occupy himself with middle-range theories. Yet Merton&#x27;s general theoretical perspectives were much closer to Parsons than Sorokin. He was also influenced by Lawrence Joseph (L.J.) Henderson, who taught him something about the disciplined investigation of what is first entertained as an interesting idea. E.F. Gay also played a role in Merton&#x27;s thought, as did the famous historian of science George Sarton, who allowed Merton to work with him at Harvard and is believed to have inspired Merton to have interest in science. Émile Durkheim and Georg Simmel also greatly contributed to Merton&#x27;s understanding of sociology and to his own ideas.

==Legacy==
Today, Merton is viewed as one of the founding fathers of modern-day sociology. His works are seen as the driving force of many of today&#x27;s sociologists&#x27; studies. Merton&#x27;s friends and colleagues credit his guidance to the positive direction of modern sociology as well. In particular, Columbia provost Jonathan R. Cole who studied under Merton praised him shortly after his death, saying:

Bob Merton became the leader of structural-functional analysis in sociology, and the leader of those sociologists who attempted to create social theories that could be empirically tested. He was an inspirational teacher and editor, and with his students, such as James S. Coleman and Seymour Martin Lipset, among many others who would become leading figures in the field, he helped to build and legitimate the field of sociology in America. For me, he was a model teacher and mentor, a trusted colleague, and a close friend. His death, in many ways, puts a period at the end of 20th-century sociology. 

Through his theory and research during his many decades as a sociologist, Merton essentially created and sustained what is the modern sociology of science.

== Accolades ==
Over his career, Merton published some 50 papers in the sociology of science. Among many other fields and topics to which he contributed his ideas and theories were deviance theory, Organization theory, and middle-range theory.

Merton received many national and international honors for his research. He was one of the first sociologists elected to the National Academy of Sciences, and the first American sociologist to be elected a foreign member of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences, foreign member of the Polish Academy of Sciences, and a Corresponding Fellow of the British Academy. He was also a member of the American Philosophical Society, the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, which awarded him its Parsons Prize, the National Academy of Education, and Academica Europaea. Merton is also credited as the creator of the &quot;focus group&quot; research method.

He received a Guggenheim Fellowship in 1962 and was the first sociologist to be named a MacArthur Fellow (1983–1988). More than twenty universities awarded him honorary degrees, including: Harvard, Yale, Columbia, and Chicago University in the US; and, abroad, the Universities of Leiden, Wales, Oslo, Kraków, Oxford, and the Hebrew University of Jerusalem.

In 1994 Merton became the first sociologist to be awarded the US National Medal of Science, for &quot;founding the sociology of science and for his pioneering contributions to the study of social life, especially the self-fulfilling prophecy and the unintended consequences of social action.&quot;

The Robert K. Merton Award for the best paper in analytical sociology, has been awarded annually by the International Network of Analytical Sociology since 2013.

==Publications==
*1938. &quot;Science, Technology and Society in Seventeenth Century England.&quot; &quot;Osiris&quot; 4(2):360–632.
**This publication made Merton well known among historians of science. It was strongly influenced by Boris Hessen&#x27;s famous 1931 Marxist account, &quot;The Socio-economic Roots of Newton&#x27;s Principia&quot;, which he defended in a paper &quot;Science and the Economy of Seventeenth Century England&quot;. However, Merton also supplemented Hessen&#x27;s analysis of the technological determinants of the fields of inquiry of seventeenth-century science with a study of the influence of religion (especially Protestantism) on the social legitimacy of science as a profession: the so-called &quot;Merton Thesis&quot;. He also supported Hessen&#x27;s arguments by revealing how military problems influenced the research agendas of the Royal Society.
*1938. &quot;Social Structure and Anomie.&quot; &quot;American Sociological Review&quot; 3:672–82.
*1942. &quot;The Normative Structure of Science&quot;
* 1949. &quot;Social Theory and Social Structure&quot; (revised and expanded in 1957 and 1968)
* 1965. &quot;On the Shoulders of Giants: A Shandean Postscript&quot;
* 1973. &quot;The Sociology of Science&quot;
* 1976. &quot;Sociological Ambivalence&quot;
* 1979. &quot;The Sociology of Science: An Episodic Memoir&quot;
*1985. &quot;George Sarton: Episodic Recollections by an Unruly Apprentice.&quot; &quot;Isis&quot; 76(4):470–86.
* 1996. &quot;On Social Structure and Science&quot;, edited by Piotr Sztompka
* 2004. &quot;The Travels and Adventures of Serendipity: A Study in Sociological Semantics and the Sociology of Science&quot;

==See also==
* Historic recurrence
* Logology (science of science)
* Narcotizing dysfunction
* Role set
* Sociology of scientific knowledge

==References==

=== Notes ===
=== Citations ===
== Further reading ==

* Deflem, Mathieu. 2018. &quot;Anomie, Strain, and Opportunity Structure: Robert K. Merton&#x27;s Paradigm of Deviant Behavior.&quot; Pp. 140–55 in &quot;The Handbook of the History and Philosophy of Criminology&quot;, edited by R. A. Triplett. Malden, MA: Wiley-Blackwell.
* — 2018. &quot;Merton, Robert K.&quot; &quot;The Wiley Blackwell Encyclopedia of Social Theory&quot;, edited by B. S. Turner. Malden, MA: Wiley-Blackwell.
* Poros, Maritsa V., and Elizabeth Needham. 2004. &quot;Writings of Robert K. Merton.&quot; &quot;Social Studies of Science&quot; 34(6):863–78. 
* Sztompka, P. (1998). Robert K. Merton: Recipient of the 1997 Cooley-Mead Award. Social Psychology Quarterly, 61(2), 97–100.
* Hymes, D., &amp; Merton, R. K. (1980). The Award of the Talcott Parsons Prize. Bulletin of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, 33(6), 5–8

==External links==
*Robert K. Merton Selected Publications — posted by E. Garfield, University of Pennsylvania.
*Robert K. Merton papers, 1928–2003, bulk 1943–2001 — &quot;Rare Book &amp; Manuscript Library&quot;. Columbia University Archival Collections.
*Robert K. Merton (1910–2003) — by F. W. Elwell, Rogers State University.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q312843" start="0" end="18" title="Robert K. Merton" label="Robert King Merton"/>
<link wikidata="Q312843" start="25" end="48" title="Robert K. Merton" label="Meyer Robert Schkolnick"/>
<link wikidata="Q161733" start="212" end="223" title="criminology" label="criminology"/>
<link wikidata="Q466928" start="264" end="297" title="American Sociological Association" label="American Sociological Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q49088" start="339" end="358" title="Columbia University" label="Columbia University"/>
<link wikidata="Q737051" start="439" end="464" title="National Medal of Science" label="National Medal of Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q981008" start="527" end="547" title="Sociology of scientific knowledge" label="sociology of science"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135789" start="747" end="770" title="unintended consequences" label="unintended consequences"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="788" end="803" title="Types of social groups#Reference groups" label="reference group"/>
<link wikidata="Q16000316" start="821" end="832" title="role strain" label="role strain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136974" start="886" end="896" title="role model" label="role model"/>
<link wikidata="Q528458" start="913" end="937" title="self-fulfilling prophecy" label="self-fulfilling prophecy"/>
<link wikidata="Q528458" start="966" end="990" title="self-fulfilling prophecy" label="self-fulfilling prophecy"/>
<link wikidata="Q214339" start="1740" end="1751" title="Social role" label="Social role"/>
<link wikidata="Q16909496" start="1916" end="1926" title="status set" label="status set"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="2092" end="2104" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8641" start="2149" end="2156" title="Yiddish" label="Yiddish"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031644" start="2166" end="2178" title="Russian Jews" label="Russian Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="2287" end="2296" title="Socialism" label="socialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7568214" start="2607" end="2625" title="South Philadelphia" label="South Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4022424" start="2830" end="2860" title="South Philadelphia High School" label="South Philadelphia High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043939" start="2945" end="2968" title="Carnegie library" label="Andrew Carnegie Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q337337" start="2974" end="2990" title="Academy of Music (Philadelphia)" label="Academy of Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q7568214" start="3079" end="3097" title="South Philadelphia" label="South Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q148442" start="3397" end="3402" title="Magic (illusion)" label="magic"/>
<link wikidata="Q379773" start="3800" end="3825" title="Jean-Eugène Robert-Houdin" label="Jean-Eugène Robert-Houdin"/>
<link wikidata="Q829697" start="3872" end="3881" title="Evocation" label="conjuring"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420239" start="4005" end="4022" title="Temple University" label="Temple University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420239" start="4141" end="4158" title="Temple University" label="Temple University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5405633" start="4209" end="4227" title="research assistant" label="research assistant"/>
<link wikidata="Q466928" start="4353" end="4386" title="American Sociological Association" label="American Sociological Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q319816" start="4415" end="4432" title="Pitrim A. Sorokin" label="Pitrim A. Sorokin"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="4460" end="4478" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091008" start="4996" end="4998" title="Master of Arts" label="MA"/>
<link wikidata="Q981008" start="5244" end="5264" title="sociology of science" label="sociology of science"/>
<link wikidata="Q203913" start="5322" end="5337" title="Talcott Parsons" label="Talcott Parsons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316061" start="5353" end="5366" title="George Sarton" label="George Sarton"/>
<link wikidata="Q705550" start="5387" end="5412" title="Lawrence Joseph Henderson" label="Lawrence Joseph Henderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3365905" start="5414" end="5434" title="Merton thesis" label="Merton&amp;#x27;s thesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q9387" start="5446" end="5455" title="Max Weber" label="Max Weber"/>
<link wikidata="Q392937" start="5463" end="5475" title="The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism" label="famous claim"/>
<link wikidata="Q16024056" start="5501" end="5522" title="Protestant work ethic" label="Protestant work ethic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6206" start="5531" end="5549" title="capitalist economy" label="capitalist economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q186290" start="5570" end="5581" title="correlation" label="correlation"/>
<link wikidata="Q193664" start="5602" end="5620" title="Pietism" label="Protestant pietism"/>
<link wikidata="Q137073" start="5622" end="5632" title="Puritans" label="Puritanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q287542" start="5751" end="5767" title="Robert C. Merton" label="Robert C. Merton"/>
<link wikidata="Q47170" start="5788" end="5812" title="Nobel Prize in economics" label="Nobel Prize in economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7121909" start="5900" end="5929" title="Pace University School of Law" label="Pace University School of Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q517539" start="6052" end="6069" title="Harriet Zuckerman" label="Harriet Zuckerman"/>
<link wikidata="Q11299" start="6151" end="6160" title="Manhattan" label="Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193547" start="6432" end="6449" title="Tulane University" label="Tulane University"/>
<link wikidata="Q49088" start="6474" end="6493" title="Columbia University" label="Columbia University"/>
<link wikidata="Q4998351" start="6693" end="6726" title="Bureau of Applied Social Research" label="Bureau of Applied Social Research"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6970" end="6978" title=":wikt:emeritus" label="emeritus"/>
<link wikidata="Q270272" start="7111" end="7133" title="Rockefeller University" label="Rockefeller University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7381762" start="7184" end="7207" title="Russell Sage Foundation" label="Russell Sage Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q94037" start="7470" end="7485" title="Paul Lazarsfeld" label="Paul Lazarsfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q203913" start="7907" end="7922" title="Talcott Parsons" label="Talcott Parsons"/>
<link wikidata="Q15948" start="8588" end="8602" title="Emile Durkheim" label="Emile Durkheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q384404" start="8616" end="8623" title="Suicide (Durkheim book)" label="Suicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q9387" start="8640" end="8649" title="Max Weber" label="Max Weber"/>
<link wikidata="Q392937" start="8663" end="8708" title="The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism" label="Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1865167" start="9607" end="9628" title="Middle range theory (sociology)" label="Middle-range theories"/>
<link wikidata="Q602884" start="9699" end="9715" title="social phenomena" label="social phenomena"/>
<link wikidata="Q83368" start="9751" end="9761" title="empiricism" label="empiricism"/>
<link wikidata="Q831725" start="10108" end="10121" title="Structural functionalism" label="functionalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q126692" start="10287" end="10296" title="Pragmatism" label="pragmatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q201413" start="10393" end="10402" title="heuristic" label="heuristic"/>
<link wikidata="Q623184" start="10904" end="10911" title="Deviance (sociology)" label="deviant"/>
<link wikidata="Q214100" start="11298" end="11312" title="American Dream" label="American Dream"/>
<link wikidata="Q599329" start="11756" end="11772" title="Edwin Sutherland" label="Edwin Sutherland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137778" start="11785" end="11803" title="white-collar crime" label="white-collar crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q831725" start="12006" end="12019" title="Functionalism (sociology)" label="functionalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q211606" start="12204" end="12220" title="social structure" label="social structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q831725" start="12322" end="12331" title="social function" label="functions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639378" start="12372" end="12385" title="social system" label="social system"/>
<link wikidata="Q178706" start="12718" end="12730" title="social institution" label="institutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q2724302" start="13215" end="13239" title="Abnormality (behavior)" label="&amp;quot;dysfunctions&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412640" start="15875" end="15890" title="conflict theory" label="conflict theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q9061" start="18818" end="18827" title="Karl Marx" label="Karl Marx"/>
<link wikidata="Q6749522" start="19639" end="19657" title="Manifest function" label="Manifest functions"/>
<link wikidata="Q6749522" start="19731" end="19747" title="latent function" label="latent functions"/>
<link wikidata="Q831725" start="21436" end="21450" title="Functionalism (sociology)" label="Functionalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q17930" start="23556" end="23562" title="anomie" label="anomie"/>
<link wikidata="Q15948" start="23583" end="23597" title="Émile Durkheim" label="Émile Durkheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q214100" start="23741" end="23755" title="American dream" label="American dream"/>
<link wikidata="Q203913" start="24096" end="24105" title="Talcott Parsons" label="Parsonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q161733" start="24159" end="24170" title="criminology" label="criminology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2703123" start="24189" end="24202" title="strain theory (sociology)" label="strain theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q981008" start="26104" end="26124" title="sociology of science" label="sociology of science"/>
<link wikidata="Q214078" start="26508" end="26529" title="Scientific Revolution" label="Scientific Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q3365905" start="26616" end="26629" title="Merton Thesis" label="Merton Thesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q214078" start="26677" end="26698" title="Scientific Revolution" label="Scientific Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q3031352" start="26708" end="26723" title="Mertonian norms" label="Mertonian norms"/>
<link wikidata="Q3031352" start="26775" end="26780" title="Mertonian norms" label="CUDOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q7075189" start="27940" end="27969" title="obliteration by incorporation" label="obliteration by incorporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6629550" start="28070" end="28079" title="Multiple (sociology)" label="multiples"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337985" start="28679" end="28693" title="Matthew effect (sociology)" label="Matthew effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376201" start="28711" end="28740" title="Stigler&amp;#x27;s law of eponymy" label="Stigler&amp;#x27;s law of eponymy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509181" start="28762" end="28776" title="Matilda effect" label="Matilda effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q517539" start="28778" end="28795" title="Harriet Zuckerman" label="Harriet Zuckerman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337985" start="28838" end="28852" title="Matthew effect" label="Matthew effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q218960" start="29678" end="29693" title="Laurence Sterne" label="Laurence Sterne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164083" start="29707" end="29758" title="The Life and Opinions of Tristram Shandy, Gentleman" label="The Life and Opinions of Tristram Shandy, Gentleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q203913" start="29815" end="29830" title="Talcott Parsons" label="Talcott Parsons"/>
<link wikidata="Q319816" start="29862" end="29877" title="Pitirim Sorokin" label="Pitirim Sorokin"/>
<link wikidata="Q94037" start="30328" end="30343" title="Paul Lazarsfeld" label="Paul Lazarsfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q1865167" start="30385" end="30406" title="Middle range theory (sociology)" label="middle-range theories"/>
<link wikidata="Q705550" start="30527" end="30559" title="Lawrence Joseph Henderson" label="Lawrence Joseph (L.J.) Henderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294576" start="30675" end="30683" title="Edwin Francis Gay" label="E.F. Gay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316061" start="30768" end="30781" title="George Sarton" label="George Sarton"/>
<link wikidata="Q15948" start="30899" end="30913" title="Émile Durkheim" label="Émile Durkheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q76849" start="30918" end="30930" title="Georg Simmel" label="Georg Simmel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6274198" start="31350" end="31366" title="Jonathan R. Cole" label="Jonathan R. Cole"/>
<link wikidata="Q1681079" start="31701" end="31717" title="James Samuel Coleman" label="James S. Coleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q352959" start="31722" end="31743" title="Seymour Martin Lipset" label="Seymour Martin Lipset"/>
<link wikidata="Q623184" start="32380" end="32395" title="Deviance (sociology)" label="deviance theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1865167" start="32422" end="32441" title="Middle-range theory (sociology)" label="middle-range theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q270794" start="32569" end="32597" title="United States National Academy of Sciences" label="National Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q191583" start="32672" end="32705" title="Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences" label="Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q651690" start="32729" end="32755" title="Polish Academy of Sciences" label="Polish Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q723551" start="32791" end="32806" title="British Academy" label="British Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q466089" start="32836" end="32866" title="American Philosophical Society" label="American Philosophical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q463303" start="32872" end="32909" title="American Academy of Arts and Sciences" label="American Academy of Arts and Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q337234" start="32987" end="33005" title="Academia Europaea" label="Academica Europaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126687" start="33059" end="33070" title="focus group" label="focus group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316544" start="33109" end="33130" title="Guggenheim Fellowship" label="Guggenheim Fellowship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543268" start="33183" end="33199" title="MacArthur Fellow" label="MacArthur Fellow"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="33284" end="33291" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard"/>
<link wikidata="Q49112" start="33293" end="33297" title="Yale" label="Yale"/>
<link wikidata="Q49088" start="33299" end="33307" title="Columbia University" label="Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q131252" start="33313" end="33320" title="University of Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q156598" start="33376" end="33382" title="Leiden University" label="Leiden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072029" start="33384" end="33389" title="University of Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q486156" start="33391" end="33395" title="University of Oslo" label="Oslo"/>
<link wikidata="Q189441" start="33397" end="33403" title="University of Kraków" label="Kraków"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="33405" end="33411" title="University of Oxford" label="Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q174158" start="33421" end="33451" title="Hebrew University of Jerusalem" label="Hebrew University of Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q737051" start="33519" end="33544" title="National Medal of Science" label="National Medal of Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q528458" start="33671" end="33695" title="self-fulfilling prophecy" label="self-fulfilling prophecy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135789" start="33704" end="33727" title="unintended consequences" label="unintended consequences"/>
<link wikidata="Q251308" start="33802" end="33822" title="analytical sociology" label="analytical sociology"/>
<link wikidata="Q251308" start="33857" end="33902" title="International Network of Analytical Sociology" label="International Network of Analytical Sociology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385493" start="34022" end="34028" title="Osiris (journal)" label="Osiris"/>
<link wikidata="Q201486" start="34097" end="34118" title="History of science" label="historians of science"/>
<link wikidata="Q893722" start="34150" end="34162" title="Boris Hessen" label="Boris Hessen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7016" start="34480" end="34507" title="seventeenth-century science" label="seventeenth-century science"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="34562" end="34575" title="Protestantism" label="Protestantism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3365905" start="34650" end="34663" title="Merton Thesis" label="Merton Thesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q123885" start="34787" end="34800" title="Royal Society" label="Royal Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q3359818" start="34856" end="34884" title="American Sociological Review" label="American Sociological Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q3487396" start="34969" end="35003" title="Social Theory and Social Structure" label="Social Theory and Social Structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164083" start="35094" end="35102" title="Tristram Shandy" label="Shandean"/>
<link wikidata="Q689414" start="35363" end="35367" title="Isis (journal)" label="Isis"/>
<link wikidata="Q444495" start="35451" end="35465" title="Piotr Sztompka" label="Piotr Sztompka"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35608" end="35627" title="Historic recurrence#Striking similarity" label="Historic recurrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q17113456" start="35630" end="35659" title="Logology (science)" label="Logology (science of science)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6965697" start="35662" end="35685" title="Narcotizing dysfunction" label="Narcotizing dysfunction"/>
<link wikidata="Q7360652" start="35688" end="35696" title="Role set" label="Role set"/>
<link wikidata="Q981008" start="35699" end="35732" title="Sociology of scientific knowledge" label="Sociology of scientific knowledge"/>
<link wikidata="Q767319" start="36062" end="36077" title="Wiley-Blackwell" label="Wiley-Blackwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q49117" start="36738" end="36764" title="University of Pennsylvania" label="University of Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q13582663" start="36959" end="36982" title="Rogers State University" label="Rogers State University"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="230601" wikidata="Q846341" url="?curid=230601" title="Valdemārpils">
<text>Valdemārpils (; , ) (called Sasmaka until 1926) is a town in the Courland region of Latvia, in Talsi Municipality. The town is named after Krišjānis Valdemārs, born in nearby Valdgale parish (then part of Ārlava parish), who was one of the leaders of the First Latvian National Awakening. He is celebrated in the town with a memorial stone. Famous Jewish bibliographer and book collector Ephraim Deinard was born here in 1846.
==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q846341" start="0" end="12" title="Valdemārpils" label="Valdemārpils"/>
<link wikidata="Q846341" start="28" end="35" title="Valdemārpils" label="Sasmaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q3957" start="53" end="57" title="town" label="town"/>
<link wikidata="Q185072" start="65" end="73" title="Courland" label="Courland"/>
<link wikidata="Q211" start="84" end="90" title="Latvia" label="Latvia"/>
<link wikidata="Q97232890" start="95" end="113" title="Talsi Municipality" label="Talsi Municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984207" start="139" end="158" title="Krišjānis Valdemārs" label="Krišjānis Valdemārs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7909413" start="175" end="190" title="Valdgale parish" label="Valdgale parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q16349343" start="251" end="287" title="the First Latvian National Awakening" label="the First Latvian National Awakening"/>
<link wikidata="Q5382261" start="388" end="403" title="Ephraim Deinard" label="Ephraim Deinard"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="230602" wikidata="Q1090062" url="?curid=230602" title="Chuuk">
<text>Chuuk or Truk may refer to:
* Chuuk State, one of the four states of the Federated States of Micronesia
* Chuuk Lagoon, or Chuuk Atoll, a sheltered body of water and island group in the central Pacific
* Chuuk International Airport, an airport located on Weno, in Chuuk State, Micronesia
* Chuukese language, a language of the Austronesian language family 
* Chuukese people, an ethnic group in Oceania
* Battle of Truk, a massive United States Navy air and surface attack on Truk Lagoon on 17–18 February 1944</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q221684" start="30" end="41" title="Chuuk State" label="Chuuk State"/>
<link wikidata="Q3593555" start="106" end="118" title="Chuuk Lagoon" label="Chuuk Lagoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q166512" start="204" end="231" title="Chuuk International Airport" label="Chuuk International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q33161" start="290" end="307" title="Chuukese language" label="Chuukese language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568155" start="359" end="374" title="Chuukese people" label="Chuukese people"/>
<link wikidata="Q2026138" start="405" end="419" title="Battle of Truk" label="Battle of Truk"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="230613" wikidata="Q130912" url="?curid=230613" title="Scythe">
<text>A scythe (, rhyming with &quot;writhe&quot;) is an agricultural hand tool for mowing grass or harvesting crops. It is historically used to cut down or reap edible grains, before the process of threshing. The scythe has been largely replaced by horse-drawn and then tractor machinery, but is still used in some areas of Europe and Asia. Reapers are bladed machines that automate the cutting of the scythe, and sometimes subsequent steps in preparing the grain or the straw or hay.

The word &quot;scythe&quot; derives from Old English &quot;siðe&quot;. In Middle English and later, it was usually spelled &quot;sithe&quot; or &quot;sythe&quot;. However, in the 15th century some writers began to use the &quot;sc-&quot; spelling as they thought (wrongly) the word was related to the Latin &quot;scindere&quot; (meaning &quot;to cut&quot;). Nevertheless, the &quot;sithe&quot; spelling lingered and notably appears in Noah Webster&#x27;s dictionaries.

A scythe consists of a shaft about long called a &quot;snaith&quot;, &quot;snath&quot;, &quot;snathe&quot; or &quot;sned&quot;, traditionally made of wood but now sometimes metal. Simple snaiths are straight with offset handles, others have an &quot;S&quot; curve or are steam bent in three dimensions to place the handles in an ergonomic configuration but close to the shaft. The snaith has either one or two short handles at right angles to it, usually one near the upper end and always another roughly in the middle. The handles are usually adjustable to suit the user. A curved, steel blade between long is mounted at the lower end at 90°, or less, to the snaith. Scythes almost always have the blade projecting from the left side of the snaith when in use, with the edge towards the mower; left-handed scythes are made but cannot be used together with right-handed scythes as the left-handed mower would be mowing in the opposite direction and could not mow in a team. Although left-handed scythes exist, their primary purpose is not to suit left-handed mowers but to mow back out from an obstruction on the left, such as when mowing back from the end of a ditch; ditch mowers may have both left and right-handed ditch scythes with them to do this.

==Use==

The use of a scythe was historically called &quot;mowing&quot;, now often &quot;scything&quot; to distinguish it from machine mowing. The mower holds the top handle in the left hand and the central one in the right, with the arms straight, the blade parallel and very close to the ground. The mower cuts along the mowing edge of the meadow, keeping the uncut grass to the right. The blade hooks the grass on the right and is swung to the left in a long arc ending to the left of the mower to form a windrow of cut grass on the previously mown ground. The mower takes a small step forward and repeats the motion, proceeding with a steady rhythm, stopping at frequent intervals to hone the blade. The correct technique has a slicing action on the grass, leaving a &quot;swathe&quot; of uniformly cut stubble, and forming a regular windrow on the left. 
When mown in a team, the team starts at the edge of the meadow in a staggered line, then proceeds clockwise, finishing in the middle. Mowing with a scythe is a skilled task that takes time to learn fully. Long-bladed scythes, typically around (such as in the example below) and suitable for mowing grass or wheat, are harder to use at first; consequently, beginners usually start on shorter blades, generally or less. Common beginner errors include setting up the snaith with the handles in the wrong locations to suit the body, setting the blade at the wrong turn-in and turn-up angles to suit the conditions, choosing a blade that is too long for the skill level, failing to start with a sharp edge and persevering with a dull one during use, chopping or hacking at the grass, trying to cut too wide a strip of grass at once and striking the ground with the blade. Historically, beginners relied on mentors to help them set up and maintain their scythe and to teach them to mow comfortably and efficiently.

Mowing grass is easier when it is damp, and so hay-making historically began at dawn and often stopped early, the heat of the day being spent raking and carting the hay cut on previous days or peening the blades.

Scythes are designed for different tasks. A long, thin blade is most efficient for mowing grass or wheat, while a shorter, more robust scythe is more appropriate for clearing weeds, cutting reed or sedge and can be used with the blade under water for clearing ditches and waterways. Skilled mowers using long-bladed scythes honed very sharp were used to maintain short lawn grass until the invention of the lawnmower. Many cultures have used a variety of &#x27;cradles&#x27; to catch cut different kinds of grain stems, keeping the seed heads aligned and laying them down in an orderly fashion to make them easier to sheaf and winnow.

===The mowing action===
===Sharpening===
The cutting edge of a scythe blade is maintained by occasional peening followed by frequent honing. Peening reforms the malleable edge by hammering; creating the desired edge profile, locally work-hardening the metal, and removing minor nicks and dents. For mowing fine grass, the bevel angle may be peened extremely fine, while for coarser work a larger angle is created to give a more robust edge. Peening requires some skill and is done using a peening hammer and special anvils or by using a peening jig. Historically, when mowing in teams, a peening station was set up on the edge of the field during harvest, but now more likely back in the workshop.

In the example below, a short scythe blade, being used to clear brambles, is being sharpened. Before being taken to the forest, the blade is peened in the workshop: this reforms the malleable steel to create an edge profile that can then be honed. Peening is done only occasionally; how often depends on the hardness of the steel and the nature of the work. The Austrian blade shown is being used to cut tough-stemmed brambles and it is being peened about every thirty hours of work. Nicks and cuts to the blade edge can usually be worked out of the blade by peening and a new edge profile formed for honing.

A peening jig is being used here, but blades can be free-peened using various designs of peening anvils. The peening jig shown has two interchangeable caps that set different angles: a coarse angle is set first about 3 mm back from the edge, and the fine angle is then set on the edge, leaving an edge that lends itself to being easily honed. The blade is then honed using progressively finer honing stones and then taken to the field. In the field, the blade is honed using a fine, ovoid whetstone (or &quot;rubber&quot;), fine-grained for grass, coarser for cereal crops. Honing is performed the moment the mower senses that the edge has gone off; this may be every half hour or more depending on the conditions. The laminated honing stone shown here has two grades of stone and is carried into the field soaking in a water-filled holster on the belt. A burr is set up on the outside of the blade by stroking the blade on the inside; the burr is then taken off by gently stroking it on the outside. There are many opinions, regional traditions and variations on exactly how to do this; some eastern European countries even set up the burr on the inside.

Unlike European blades, which are made from malleable steel, typical American blades are made of harder, more brittle, steel and risk cracking if peened. While the harder blade holds an edge longer and requires less frequent honing in the field, the edge can only be reshaped by grinding after heavy use or damage. This usually only needs to be done only 1–3 times a season because of the greater wear resistance of the harder steel. Some examples have a laminated construction with a hard, wear-resistant core providing the edge, and softer sides providing strength. In American blades, the edge steel is typically clad on either side with the tough iron, while some Nordic laminated blades have a layer of iron on the top only, with the edge steel comprising the bottom layer.

==History==

Scythes may date back as far as ; they seem to have been used since Cucuteni–Trypillia settlements, becoming widespread with agricultural developments. Initially used mostly for mowing hay, it had replaced the sickle for reaping crops by the 16th century, as the scythe was better ergonomically and consequently more efficient. In about 1800, the &quot;grain cradle&quot; was sometimes added to the standard scythe when mowing grain; the cradle was an addition of light wooden fingers above the scythe blade which kept the grain stems aligned and the heads together to make the collection and threshing easier. In the developed world, the scythe has been largely replaced by the motorised lawn mower and combine harvester. However, the scythe remained in common use for many years after the introduction of machines because a side-mounted finger-bar mowerwhether horse- or tractor-drawncould not mow in front of itself, and scythes were still needed to &quot;open up&quot; a meadow by clearing the first swathe to give the mechanical mower room to start.


The &quot;Dictionary of Greek and Roman Antiquities&quot; of Sir William Smith argues that the scythe, known in Latin as the &quot;falx foenaria&quot; as opposed to the sickle, the &quot;falx messoria&quot;, was used by the ancient Romans. According to ancient Greek mythology, Gaiathe Greek goddess and mother of the Titansgave a sickle made of the strongest metal to her youngest son Kronos, who is also the youngest of the Titans and god of the harvest, to seek vengeance against her husband Ouranos for torturing their eldest sons. The Grim Reaper is often depicted carrying or wielding a scythe. According to Jack Herer and &quot;Flesh of The Gods&quot; (Emboden, W. A. Jr., Praeger Press, New York, 1974), the ancient Scythians grew hemp and harvested it with a hand reaper that would be considered a scythe.

The Abbeydale Industrial Hamlet in Sheffield, England, is a museum of a scythe-making works that was in operation from the end of the 18th century until the 1930s. This was part of the former scythe-making district of north Derbyshire, which extended into Eckington. Other English scythe-making districts include that around Belbroughton.

The German Renaissance scythe sword, the Greek and Roman harpe and the Egyptian khopesh were scythes or sickles modified as weapons or symbols of authority. An improvised conversion of the agricultural scythe to a war scythe by re-attaching the blade parallel to the snaith, similar to a bill, has also been used throughout history as a weapon. See below for an example.

==In national cultures==
Although the scythe is still an indispensable tool for farmers in developing countries and in mountainous terrain, the tool has become associated with the Grim Reaper. 

In Romania, for example, in the highland landscape of the Transylvanian Apuseni Mountains, scything is a very important annual activity, taking about 2–3 weeks to complete for a regular house. As scything is a tiring physical activity and is relatively difficult to learn, farmers help each other by forming teams. After each day&#x27;s harvest, the farmers often celebrate by having a small feast where they dance, drink and eat, while being careful to keep in shape for the next day&#x27;s hard work. In other parts of the Balkans, such as in Serbian towns, scything competitions are held where the winner takes away a small silver scythe. In small Serbian towns, scything is treasured as part of the local folklore, and the winners of friendly competitions are rewarded richly with food and drink, which they share with their competitors.

Among Basques scythe-mowing competitions are still a popular traditional sport, called &quot;segalaritza&quot; (from Spanish verb &quot;segar&quot;: to mow). Each contender competes to cut a defined section of grown grass before his rival does the same.

There is an international scything competition held at Goričko where people from Austria, Hungary, Serbia, and Romania, or as far away as Asia enter to showcase their culturally unique method of reaping crops. In 2009, a Japanese man showcased a wooden reaping tool with a metal edge, which he used to show how rice was cut. He was impressed with the speed of the local reapers, but said such a large scythe would never work in Japan. 

The Norwegian municipality of Hornindal has three scythe blades in its coat-of-arms.

 Their motto was &quot;They Feed and Defend&quot; (Polish: &quot;Żywią i Bronią&quot;, archaic spelling: &quot;Żywią y Bronią&quot;).

The emblem of Bnei Akiva, a Jewish religious-Zionist youth movement, contains wheat, scythe and pitchfork, representing agriculture and the combination of land labor with the Torah.

In 2012, &quot;The Wall Street Journal&quot; reported some American homeowners were eschewing motorized lawn mowers in favor of scythes, citing the lack of noise as well as the health benefits of scythe reaping as exercise.

==In art==
==See also==

* Billhook, a version of the sickle used for cutting shrubs and branches
* Death, a cultural personification depicted in some mythologies as wielding a scythe
* Grain cradle, for aligning grain stems
* Harpe, a Greek or Roman long sickle or scythe which doubled as a weapon
* Kama (tool), a Japanese hand scythe used in farming, and martial arts
* Khopesh, an Egyptian long sickle or scythe as a weapon
* Scythe sword, scythe blade converted to use as a weapon
* Sickle, the archetypal forerunner of the scythe
* String trimmer, a garden tool for cutting grass and groundcover which uses a flexible monofilament line instead of a blade
* War scythe, a polearm resembling a modified scythe

==References==
==External links==

* Scythe Network , a site dedicated to modern usage, with links to numerous equipment suppliers in North America.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q130912" start="2" end="8" title="Scythe" label="scythe"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="51" end="63" title="agriculture" label="agricultural"/>
<link wikidata="Q2578402" start="64" end="73" title="hand tool" label="hand tool"/>
<link wikidata="Q3930361" start="78" end="84" title="mowing" label="mowing"/>
<link wikidata="Q43238" start="85" end="90" title="grass" label="grass"/>
<link wikidata="Q213753" start="94" end="104" title="Harvest" label="harvesting"/>
<link wikidata="Q235352" start="105" end="110" title="Crop" label="crops"/>
<link wikidata="Q213753" start="151" end="155" title="reaping" label="reap"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995529" start="163" end="169" title="grain" label="grains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369140" start="193" end="202" title="threshing" label="threshing"/>
<link wikidata="Q726" start="244" end="249" title="horse" label="horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q39495" start="265" end="272" title="tractor" label="tractor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367947" start="336" end="343" title="reaper" label="Reapers"/>
<link wikidata="Q160066" start="466" end="471" title="straw" label="straw"/>
<link wikidata="Q336989" start="475" end="478" title="hay" label="hay"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="522" end="533" title="Old English" label="Old English"/>
<link wikidata="Q36395" start="555" end="569" title="Middle English" label="Middle English"/>
<link wikidata="Q241676" start="916" end="928" title="Noah Webster" label="Noah Webster"/>
<link wikidata="Q11426" start="1124" end="1129" title="metal" label="metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7605351" start="1222" end="1232" title="steam bending" label="steam bent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1610560" start="2714" end="2721" title="windrow" label="windrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1557150" start="2983" end="2989" title="swathe" label="swathe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5187955" start="3013" end="3020" title="crop residue" label="stubble"/>
<link wikidata="Q1610560" start="3044" end="3051" title="windrow" label="windrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q7777019" start="3122" end="3128" title="meadow" label="meadow"/>
<link wikidata="Q484884" start="4269" end="4276" title="peening" label="peening"/>
<link wikidata="Q620424" start="4480" end="4484" title="Reed bed" label="reed"/>
<link wikidata="Q155843" start="4488" end="4493" title="Cyperaceae" label="sedge"/>
<link wikidata="Q207766" start="4659" end="4663" title="lawn" label="lawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q260521" start="4697" end="4706" title="lawnmower" label="lawnmower"/>
<link wikidata="Q942040" start="4907" end="4912" title="Sheaf (agriculture)" label="sheaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q961751" start="4917" end="4923" title="Winnowing" label="winnow"/>
<link wikidata="Q484884" start="5030" end="5037" title="peening" label="peening"/>
<link wikidata="Q944016" start="5059" end="5065" title="honing (metalworking)" label="honing"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5137" end="5149" title="Blade#Geometry" label="edge profile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501203" start="5159" end="5173" title="work hardening" label="work-hardening"/>
<link wikidata="Q602740" start="5689" end="5696" title="bramble" label="bramble"/>
<link wikidata="Q507559" start="6724" end="6733" title="Sharpening stone" label="whetstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162419" start="8253" end="8271" title="Cucuteni–Trypillia culture" label="Cucuteni–Trypillia"/>
<link wikidata="Q42233" start="8395" end="8401" title="sickle" label="sickle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750812" start="8466" end="8479" title="Ergonomics" label="ergonomically"/>
<link wikidata="Q5180468" start="8538" end="8550" title="grain cradle" label="grain cradle"/>
<link wikidata="Q132453" start="8803" end="8818" title="developed world" label="developed world"/>
<link wikidata="Q260521" start="8874" end="8884" title="lawn mower" label="lawn mower"/>
<link wikidata="Q26886" start="8889" end="8906" title="combine harvester" label="combine harvester"/>
<link wikidata="Q783118" start="9252" end="9293" title="Dictionary of Greek and Roman Antiquities" label="Dictionary of Greek and Roman Antiquities"/>
<link wikidata="Q559411" start="9303" end="9320" title="Sir William Smith" label="Sir William Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q34726" start="9503" end="9518" title="Greek mythology" label="Greek mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q93172" start="9520" end="9524" title="Gaia" label="Gaia"/>
<link wikidata="Q45713" start="9560" end="9566" title="Titans" label="Titans"/>
<link wikidata="Q44204" start="9628" end="9634" title="Cronus" label="Kronos"/>
<link wikidata="Q79999" start="9737" end="9744" title="Uranus (mythology)" label="Ouranos"/>
<link wikidata="Q131803011" start="9782" end="9793" title="Grim Reaper" label="Grim Reaper"/>
<link wikidata="Q131802" start="9966" end="9975" title="Scythians" label="Scythians"/>
<link wikidata="Q4664097" start="10062" end="10089" title="Abbeydale Industrial Hamlet" label="Abbeydale Industrial Hamlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q42448" start="10093" end="10102" title="Sheffield" label="Sheffield"/>
<link wikidata="Q33506" start="10118" end="10124" title="museum" label="museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q23098" start="10282" end="10292" title="Derbyshire" label="Derbyshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1612862" start="10314" end="10323" title="Eckington, Derbyshire" label="Eckington"/>
<link wikidata="Q2268622" start="10383" end="10395" title="Belbroughton" label="Belbroughton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3965827" start="10421" end="10433" title="scythe sword" label="scythe sword"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137898" start="10455" end="10460" title="harpe" label="harpe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070186" start="10478" end="10485" title="khopesh" label="khopesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1724691" start="10612" end="10622" title="war scythe" label="war scythe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1619960" start="10686" end="10690" title="Bill (weapon)" label="bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q131803011" start="10950" end="10962" title="Grim reaper" label="Grim Reaper."/>
<link wikidata="Q39473" start="11023" end="11035" title="Transylvania" label="Transylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q285425" start="11037" end="11054" title="Apuseni Mountains" label="Apuseni Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q127885" start="11510" end="11517" title="Serbians" label="Serbian"/>
<link wikidata="Q126756" start="11814" end="11821" title="Basque people" label="Basques"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11901" end="11912" title="Basque rural sports#Sega jokoa (scything)" label="segalaritza"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12118" end="12125" title="Goričko" label="Goričko"/>
<link wikidata="Q494049" start="12530" end="12539" title="Hornindal" label="Hornindal"/>
<link wikidata="Q809" start="12637" end="12643" title="Polish language" label="Polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q887288" start="12735" end="12745" title="Bnei Akiva" label="Bnei Akiva"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="12749" end="12755" title="Judaism" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1577041" start="12756" end="12773" title="Religious Zionism" label="religious-Zionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q66809493" start="12774" end="12788" title="youth movement" label="youth movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q107293" start="12817" end="12826" title="pitchfork" label="pitchfork"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="12841" end="12852" title="agriculture" label="agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q164746" start="12919" end="12942" title="The Wall Street Journal" label="The Wall Street Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q219067" start="13118" end="13126" title="exercise" label="exercise"/>
<link wikidata="Q708852" start="13156" end="13164" title="Billhook" label="Billhook"/>
<link wikidata="Q161936" start="13229" end="13234" title="Personifications of death" label="Death"/>
<link wikidata="Q5180468" start="13315" end="13327" title="Grain cradle" label="Grain cradle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137898" start="13356" end="13361" title="Harpe" label="Harpe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189687" start="13430" end="13441" title="Kama (tool)" label="Kama (tool)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070186" start="13502" end="13509" title="Khopesh" label="Khopesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q3965827" start="13559" end="13571" title="Scythe sword" label="Scythe sword"/>
<link wikidata="Q42233" start="13617" end="13623" title="Sickle" label="Sickle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340233" start="13667" end="13681" title="String trimmer" label="String trimmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1724691" start="13792" end="13802" title="War scythe" label="War scythe"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="230615" wikidata="Q1310344" url="?curid=230615" title="Talpiot">
<text>Talpiot (, literally &#x27;turrets&#x27; or &#x27;magnificently built&#x27;) is an Israeli neighborhood in southeastern Jerusalem, established in 1922 by Zionist pioneers. It was built as a garden suburb on land purchased by the Tel Aviv-based Palestine Land Development Company and other Jewish building societies.

Talpiot has become a major commercial center and a hub of nonprofit organizations. The Talpiot industrial zone is one of the largest in the country, with plans for expansion as a center of shopping, entertainment and industry.

==Etymology==

The name &quot;Talpiot&quot; derives from a verse in Song of Songs 4:4: &quot;Thy neck is like the tower of David, built with turrets&quot;. According to rabbinic sources, Talpiot refers to the Temple. It was said to be a compound of the Hebrew words (hill) and (mouths), as in &quot;the hill to which all mouths turn in prayer&quot;.

==History==
In the 1920s, the Bauhaus architect Richard Kauffmann presented the British Mandate authorities with a plan for Talpiot, which he designed as a garden suburb. The plan included a large building that he envisioned as a future parliament, redesignated as an art gallery to appease the doubters. The first residents were clerical and office personnel. Living in the neighbourhood required membership in a mutual society to which dues were paid. Despite a British Mandate regulation stating that all buildings in Jerusalem must be made of Jerusalem stone, developers in Talpiot were permitted to use stucco-covered concrete because of the high demand for housing.
The early settlers were evacuated from Talpiot in the wake of the 1929 Hebron massacre, but they later returned. When the British left Jerusalem in May 1948, a Haganah military brigade launched Operation Kilshon to seize security zones that had been occupied by the British and defend Jerusalem against attacks by the Arab Legion. The British army camp in Talpiot, known as Mahane Allenby, was one of the strategic sites captured in the operation.

After the 1947–1949 Palestine war, Talpiot became the frontier, surrounded by Jordanian-ruled East Jerusalem, but Israelis continued to live there. The neighbourhood expanded significantly after the 1967 Six-Day War. New residential districts were established in the enclave formerly controlled by the United Nations, which had been a no man&#x27;s land. A tent camp established on the western outskirts of Talpiot for immigrants after Israel&#x27;s independence was replaced by a large industrial zone to house the businesses evicted from Mamilla.

On May 24, 2001, the third floor of the Versailles wedding hall in Talpiot collapsed during a wedding party, killing 23 and injuring more than 200. The collapse was blamed on poor construction, using a system called Pal-Kal which was deemed unfit for public buildings. The incident is considered one of Israel&#x27;s worst civil disasters.

Talpiot today consists of several districts. &quot;Old Talpiot&quot; is the historic residential neighborhood founded in 1922. Adjacent and south of this is Arnona, founded in 1931 but largely undeveloped until the 1980s. North Talpiot, built after 1967, offers panoramic views of the Hinnom and Kidron Valleys, and the Old City. Across Derech Hevron to the west is the Talpiot industrial zone, now one of Jerusalem&#x27;s main shopping districts. To the east is the neighborhood of East Talpiot, also known as Armon HaNetziv. Mahane Allenby was torn down and eight-story residential towers were built on the land. A parcel remains undeveloped, awaiting the relocation of the US Embassy from Tel Aviv.

The main offices of the US Consulate General in Jerusalem were relocated to the eastern ridge of Talpiot in 2010.

==Economy==

The Talpiot Industrial Zone is one of the largest in the country, with an annual turnover of NIS600 million. Indoor shopping malls in Talpiot include Kanyon Yisrael on Yad Haharutzim St., Kanyon Hadar on Pierre Koenig St., Kanyon Lev Talpiot on HaUman St. and Kanyon Rav Mecher on HaParsa St. In addition the area is home to numerous strip malls, light manufacturing workshops, warehouses, car dealerships and the largest concentration of auto repair shops in Jerusalem.

==Urban development==
In 2013, the Jerusalem District Planning and Building Committee approved a new master plan for the Talpiot industrial zone, adding 600,000 square meters of construction including 3,500 new residential units on the edge of the industrial zone and more space for offices, industry and commerce. The idea is to separate the residential, business and industrial sections of the neighborhood while boosting the presence of high-tech companies, academic institutions, offices, banquet halls, movie theaters, health clinics and art galleries.

==Arts and culture==
&#x27;Yellow Submarine&#x27;, established in 1991 by the Jerusalem Foundation in the Talpiot industrial zone, is a performance space for musicians with rehearsal-rooms, a recording studio and a nightclub.

&quot;Studio One Jerusalem&quot;, a recording studio, opened in Talpiot in 1999. Israel Hershberg, an American figurative painter established the Jerusalem Studio School on the top floor of an industrial building in 1996.

Talpiot has become a hub of Jerusalem nightlife, with a multiplex cinema, a bowling alley, a pool hall, and dozens of bars, nightclubs and discos, including one of Israel&#x27;s oldest and most popular nightclubs, Haoman 17.

Non-profit organizations located in Talpiot include the Association of Americans and Canadians in Israel, El HaLev, a center for women&#x27;s empowerment, the Pardes Institute of Jewish Studies, Melabev, a center for English-speaking senior citizens, and the Israel Free Loan Society.

==Landmarks==
In 1980, the Talpiot Tomb aka Jesus Family Tomb was discovered. This very controversial archaeological site contained nine ossuaries inscribed with &quot;Y&#x27;shua bar Yosef&quot;/Jesus son of Joseph and other family members.

===Tayelet===

Connecting East Talpiot and Talpiot is the Haas Promenade ( – &quot;ha-Tayelet&quot;). Together with the Sherover and Goldman Promenades, the three form a continuous public park from Jabl Mukabar to the east to Abu Tor to the north. From this vantage point atop a ridge overlooking Jerusalem&#x27;s Old City and the Dead Sea, tradition holds that Abraham was shown Mount Moriah as the site for the binding of Isaac as recorded in the Bible. Hidden under this ridge are the remains of an aqueduct built by Herod the Great to bring water from the south, by way of his summer palace Herodium, to the Second Temple.

This area was a no man&#x27;s land in the period between the establishment of the State of Israel in 1948 and the reunification of Jerusalem in 1967. At one end of the promenade, on the Hill of Evil Counsel, is the United Nations Middle East Headquarters, located in the former Palace of the British High Commissioner (&quot;Armon HaNetziv&quot;).

The Jerusalem Peace Forest descends along the slope below the Promenade. The Jerusalem municipality plants a tree in this forest for every child born in Jerusalem, representing the eternal hope of peace bridging the Arab and Jewish populations.

Every year, on the 29th day of Heshvan, the Ethiopian Jewish community gathers at the Promenade to mark the Sigd holiday.

===World War I cemetery===
A cemetery for Indian soldiers who died fighting for the British Army in World War I is located in Talpiot. Hindus, Sikhs and Muslims are buried there in common graves, with monuments inscribed in English, Hebrew, Sanskrit and Urdu.

==Notable residents==

Shmuel Yosef Agnon, winner of the Nobel Prize in Literature, settled in Talpiot in 1924 and wrote most of his important works there. After his death, his home was turned into a museum, Beit Agnon, where his study has been preserved intact.

One of Agnon&#x27;s neighbors was the eminent scholar Joseph Klausner, uncle of Israeli author Amos Oz. In his autobiographical novel &quot;A Tale of Love and Darkness&quot;, Oz writes that Agnon and Klausner were not fond of one another and kept their distance.

The founder of Modern Hebrew, Eliezer Ben-Yehuda, built a home on Ein Gedi Street in Talpiot, Beit Ben-Yehuda, but died before moving in. Today it serves as a guesthouse and meeting center.

==See also==
* Talpiot Tomb
* Ramat Rachel

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1310344" start="0" end="7" title="Talpiot" label="Talpiot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218" start="120" end="129" title="Jerusalem" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q42388" start="154" end="161" title="Zionist" label="Zionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q660088" start="190" end="203" title="garden suburb" label="garden suburb"/>
<link wikidata="Q33935" start="229" end="237" title="Tel Aviv" label="Tel Aviv"/>
<link wikidata="Q2909852" start="244" end="278" title="Palestine Land Development Company" label="Palestine Land Development Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q51670" start="613" end="626" title="Song of Songs" label="Song of Songs"/>
<link wikidata="Q124354" start="926" end="933" title="Bauhaus" label="Bauhaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q72604" start="944" end="961" title="Richard Kauffmann" label="Richard Kauffmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q193714" start="976" end="991" title="Mandatory Palestine" label="British Mandate"/>
<link wikidata="Q660088" start="1052" end="1065" title="garden suburb" label="garden suburb"/>
<link wikidata="Q846348" start="1443" end="1458" title="Jerusalem stone" label="Jerusalem stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417490" start="1634" end="1654" title="1929 Hebron massacre" label="1929 Hebron massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q252054" start="1728" end="1735" title="Haganah" label="Haganah"/>
<link wikidata="Q2907027" start="1762" end="1779" title="Operation Kilshon" label="Operation Kilshon"/>
<link wikidata="Q44202" start="1886" end="1897" title="Arab Legion" label="Arab Legion"/>
<link wikidata="Q56061998" start="1949" end="1956" title="Allenby" label="Allenby"/>
<link wikidata="Q49097" start="2027" end="2050" title="1947–1949 Palestine war" label="1947–1949 Palestine war"/>
<link wikidata="Q2893000" start="2095" end="2125" title="Jordanian annexation of the West Bank" label="Jordanian-ruled East Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q49077" start="2221" end="2232" title="Six-Day War" label="Six-Day War"/>
<link wikidata="Q773403" start="2352" end="2370" title="no man&amp;#x27;s land" label="no man&amp;#x27;s land"/>
<link wikidata="Q56364019" start="2504" end="2519" title="industrial region" label="industrial zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915238" start="2557" end="2564" title="Mamilla" label="Mamilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q7922624" start="2607" end="2630" title="Versailles wedding hall disaster" label="Versailles wedding hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918536" start="3065" end="3071" title="Arnona" label="Arnona"/>
<link wikidata="Q558093" start="3193" end="3199" title="Hinnom" label="Hinnom"/>
<link wikidata="Q860532" start="3204" end="3217" title="Kidron Valley" label="Kidron Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q213274" start="3228" end="3236" title="Old City (Jerusalem)" label="Old City"/>
<link wikidata="Q332160" start="3245" end="3258" title="Derech Hevron" label="Derech Hevron"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920377" start="3391" end="3403" title="East Talpiot" label="East Talpiot"/>
<link wikidata="Q31374404" start="3855" end="3868" title="shopping mall" label="shopping mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q433116" start="3943" end="3956" title="Marie-Pierre Kœnig" label="Pierre Koenig"/>
<link wikidata="Q7624088" start="4073" end="4083" title="strip mall" label="strip mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q770899" start="4086" end="4105" title="Light industry" label="light manufacturing"/>
<link wikidata="Q786803" start="4129" end="4143" title="car dealership" label="car dealership"/>
<link wikidata="Q1310967" start="4178" end="4194" title="auto repair shop" label="auto repair shop"/>
<link wikidata="Q954536" start="4848" end="4868" title="Jerusalem Foundation" label="Jerusalem Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6086987" start="5078" end="5094" title="Israel Hershberg" label="Israel Hershberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q7743131" start="5143" end="5166" title="Jerusalem Studio School" label="Jerusalem Studio School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153108" start="5276" end="5292" title="multiplex cinema" label="multiplex cinema"/>
<link wikidata="Q3177899" start="5296" end="5303" title="bowling" label="bowling"/>
<link wikidata="Q11020" start="5313" end="5322" title="Pool (cue sports)" label="pool hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q622425" start="5344" end="5353" title="nightclub" label="nightclub"/>
<link wikidata="Q5651518" start="5434" end="5443" title="Haoman 17" label="Haoman 17"/>
<link wikidata="Q4809618" start="5502" end="5550" title="Association of Americans and Canadians in Israel" label="Association of Americans and Canadians in Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q15675642" start="5575" end="5599" title="women&amp;#x27;s empowerment" label="women&amp;#x27;s empowerment"/>
<link wikidata="Q7136545" start="5605" end="5639" title="Pardes Institute of Jewish Studies" label="Pardes Institute of Jewish Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q540882" start="5759" end="5771" title="Talpiot Tomb" label="Talpiot Tomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q5765369" start="5776" end="5793" title="Jesus Family Tomb" label="Jesus Family Tomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q255595" start="5869" end="5878" title="ossuaries" label="ossuaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918520" start="6201" end="6208" title="Abu Tor" label="Abu Tor"/>
<link wikidata="Q23883" start="6306" end="6314" title="Dead Sea" label="Dead Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q9181" start="6337" end="6344" title="Abraham" label="Abraham"/>
<link wikidata="Q20978866" start="6355" end="6367" title="Moriah" label="Mount Moriah"/>
<link wikidata="Q5007906" start="6388" end="6404" title="binding of Isaac" label="binding of Isaac"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845" start="6424" end="6429" title="Bible" label="Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q474" start="6477" end="6485" title="aqueduct (watercourse)" label="aqueduct"/>
<link wikidata="Q51672" start="6495" end="6510" title="Herod the Great" label="Herod the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q913099" start="6570" end="6578" title="Herodium" label="Herodium"/>
<link wikidata="Q728428" start="6587" end="6600" title="Second Temple" label="Second Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="6685" end="6700" title="State of Israel" label="State of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q28980421" start="6717" end="6743" title="reunification of Jerusalem" label="reunification of Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="6818" end="6832" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7157376" start="6966" end="6978" title="Peace Forest" label="Peace Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q6907971" start="7242" end="7258" title="Ethiopian Jewish" label="Ethiopian Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919475" start="7306" end="7310" title="Sigd" label="Sigd"/>
<link wikidata="Q133042" start="7605" end="7623" title="Shmuel Yosef Agnon" label="Shmuel Yosef Agnon"/>
<link wikidata="Q37922" start="7639" end="7664" title="Nobel Prize in Literature" label="Nobel Prize in Literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q133042" start="7790" end="7800" title="Beit Agnon" label="Beit Agnon"/>
<link wikidata="Q964668" start="7900" end="7915" title="Joseph Klausner" label="Joseph Klausner"/>
<link wikidata="Q151872" start="7941" end="7948" title="Amos Oz" label="Amos Oz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124669" start="7986" end="8013" title="A Tale of Love and Darkness" label="A Tale of Love and Darkness"/>
<link wikidata="Q8141" start="8125" end="8138" title="Modern Hebrew language" label="Modern Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q181728" start="8140" end="8158" title="Eliezer Ben-Yehuda" label="Eliezer Ben-Yehuda"/>
<link wikidata="Q12404494" start="8204" end="8219" title="Beit Ben-Yehuda" label="Beit Ben-Yehuda"/>
<link wikidata="Q540882" start="8316" end="8328" title="Talpiot Tomb" label="Talpiot Tomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q2130036" start="8331" end="8343" title="Ramat Rachel" label="Ramat Rachel"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="230620" wikidata="Q962653" url="?curid=230620" title="Dundaga">
<text>Dundaga () is a village in Talsi Municipality in the Courland region of Latvia. From 2009 until 2021, the village served as the administrative centre of the former Dundaga Municipality.

Dundaga is known for its castle, constructed by the Archbishopric of Riga in the late 13th century. From the 16th century until 1918, Dundaga Castle (formerly Dundagen) was the centre of the largest private estate in Courland, belonging to the Baron Osten-Sacken family, an important local Baltic-German noble dynasty.

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q962653" start="0" end="7" title="Dundaga" label="Dundaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q532" start="16" end="23" title="village" label="village"/>
<link wikidata="Q97232890" start="27" end="45" title="Talsi Municipality" label="Talsi Municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q185072" start="53" end="61" title="Courland" label="Courland"/>
<link wikidata="Q211" start="72" end="78" title="Latvia" label="Latvia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2274832" start="164" end="184" title="Dundaga Municipality" label="Dundaga Municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q15471939" start="239" end="260" title="Archbishopric of Riga" label="Archbishopric of Riga"/>
<link wikidata="Q5314718" start="321" end="335" title="Dundaga Castle" label="Dundaga Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q185072" start="404" end="412" title="Courland" label="Courland"/>
<link wikidata="Q165503" start="431" end="436" title="Baron" label="Baron"/>
<link wikidata="Q42149149" start="437" end="449" title="Osten-Sacken" label="Osten-Sacken"/>
<link wikidata="Q157139" start="477" end="490" title="Baltic-German" label="Baltic-German"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="230623" wikidata="Q211414" url="?curid=230623" title="Miss Moneypenny">
<text>Miss Moneypenny, later assigned the first names of Eve or Jane, is a fictional character in the James Bond novels and films. She is secretary to M, who is Bond&#x27;s superior officer and head of the British Secret Intelligence Service (MI6).

Although she has a small part in most of the films, it is always highlighted by the underscored romantic tension between her and Bond (something that is virtually non-existent in Ian Fleming&#x27;s novels, although it is somewhat more apparent in the Bond novels by John Gardner and Raymond Benson). On that note, she is not always considered to be a Bond girl, having never had anything more than a professional relationship with Bond.

Although not given a first name by Fleming, the character was given the name Jane in the spin-off book series, &quot;The Moneypenny Diaries&quot;; in the films, she received the first name of Eve in &quot;Skyfall&quot; (2012), which is set in the new continuity opened by 2006&#x27;s &quot;Casino Royale&quot;, where the character spent time as a field officer before becoming secretary to M. According to the film &quot;You Only Live Twice&quot; (1967), she holds the rank of second officer in the Women&#x27;s Royal Naval Service.

==Background==
In Ian Fleming&#x27;s first draft of &quot;Casino Royale&quot; (1953), Moneypenny&#x27;s name was originally &quot;Miss &#x27;Petty&#x27; Pettaval&quot;, which was taken from Kathleen Pettigrew, the personal assistant to MI6 director Stewart Menzies. Fleming changed it to be less obvious. Other candidates for Moneypenny&#x27;s inspiration include Vera Atkins of Special Operations Executive; Paddy Ridsdale, a Naval Intelligence secretary; Joan Bright Astley, whom Fleming dated during World War II, and who was noted for giving a warm and friendly reception to senior officers who visited her office to view confidential papers; and Joan Howe, Fleming&#x27;s red-haired secretary at &quot;The Times&quot; who had typed the manuscript of &quot;Casino Royale&quot;. The BBC has used the term &quot;Fleming&#x27;s Miss Moneypenny&quot; when referring to Jean Frampton, who typed out the manuscripts for Fleming&#x27;s later works and made plot suggestions to him, even though the two never met.

==Summary==

Miss Moneypenny is the private secretary of M, the head of MI6. She holds the rank of Second Officer in the Women&#x27;s Royal Naval Service, which is a prerequisite rank for this position. She is cleared for Top Secret, Eyes Only, and Cabinet-Level intelligence reports, the last of which she is often required to prepare, and in some cases present.

M&#x27;s personal assistant is utterly dedicated to her work, which means she has little time for a social life. A close confidante of her boss, she also enjoys a flirtatious—though never consummated—relationship with James Bond, whom she understands perfectly.

Moneypenny was never given any backstory until the film &quot;Skyfall&quot; (2012), when she was re-introduced to the series following the 2006 reboot of the series&#x27; continuity. Moneypenny, now played by Naomie Harris and given the first name Eve, is originally a field officer assigned to work with Bond on an operation in Istanbul. It ends in disaster when she is ordered to shoot through Bond while he is fighting hand-to-hand combat with the mercenary they are chasing. She hits Bond, who falls off a bridge and is assumed dead. She is temporarily suspended for this and reassigned to desk duty, assisting Gareth Mallory (Ralph Fiennes), the Chairman of the Intelligence and Security Committee, who has been assigned to watch over MI6. When Bond resurfaces and returns to duty, she meets with him in Macau and aids in locating an agent of main villain Raoul Silva&#x27;s (Javier Bardem) before returning to London. Later in the film, she is a participant in another shootout with Silva, when he ambushes a public inquiry into MI6. By the end of the film, she decides to retire from fieldwork and becomes Mallory&#x27;s secretary once he takes over the role of M.

==Role==
 In both the Bond novels and films based upon them, Moneypenny is smitten with Bond. For example, in the novel &quot;Thunderball&quot; (1961), Fleming wrote that she &quot;often dreamed hopelessly about Bond.&quot; However, she never explicitly voices these feelings.

Miss Moneypenny&#x27;s role in Fleming&#x27;s novels is even smaller than her role in the films. In the novels, Bond also has his own secretary, Loelia Ponsonby and later Mary Goodnight, both of whose lines and relationships were often transferred to Miss Moneypenny for the films. As a rule, Moneypenny generally never directly participates in Bond&#x27;s missions. However, in &quot;Skyfall&quot;, Moneypenny is an MI6 officer who directly assists Bond in the field before becoming the new M&#x27;s secretary. In the film &quot;Octopussy&quot;, Moneypenny has an assistant named Penelope Smallbone (Michaela Clavell), who appears to be equally smitten with Bond, despite a &quot;thorough briefing&quot; on the subject by Moneypenny. Intended as either a foil or a replacement for Moneypenny, Smallbone appeared only that once.

In most of the Bond films, there is a scene, usually Bond&#x27;s arrival at M&#x27;s office, in which Bond and Moneypenny exchange witty, flirtatious conversation. (&quot;Flattery will get you nowhere, but don&#x27;t stop trying.&quot;) In the earlier films, these exchanges are more sexually charged, with Bond often kissing or caressing Moneypenny sensually. In &quot;Die Another Day&quot; (2002), she puts on Q&#x27;s (John Cleese) virtual reality glasses and runs a simulation in which she and Bond finally consummate their relationship. Q interrupts her, and she pretends she was using it as a combat simulation.

In the original film version of &quot;Casino Royale&quot;, actress Barbara Bouchet plays M&#x27;s current secretary and explains to Sir James Bond (played by David Niven) upon their first meeting that she is actually Miss Moneypenny&#x27;s daughter. She is referred to thereafter, and in the closing credits, as Moneypenny.

Since the character&#x27;s first appearance in &quot;Casino Royale&quot;, neither Fleming nor any succeeding Bond novelist gave Moneypenny a first name. In a number of books and at least one film, Bond refers to her by the nickname &quot;Penny&quot; (a shortened version of her last name). However, &quot;The Moneypenny Diaries&quot; gives her first name as Jane, while in &quot;Skyfall&quot;, the character is named Eve.

After Lois Maxwell&#x27;s death, Roger Moore recalled that she would have liked to have become the new M after Moore&#x27;s retirement. She had suggested herself for the role of M but had been turned down. &quot;I think it was a great disappointment to her that she had not been promoted to play M. She would have been a wonderful M.&quot;

==&quot;The Moneypenny Diaries&quot;==
On 10 October 2005, John Murray published &quot;The Moneypenny Diaries: Guardian Angel&quot; (2005), the first of three Ian Fleming Publications&#x27; sanctioned novels written by Samantha Weinberg under the pseudonym Kate Westbrook, from the point of view of Miss Moneypenny. The rest of &quot;The Moneypenny Diaries&quot; trilogy was released over the next three years, consisting of &quot;Secret Servant: The Moneypenny Diaries&quot; (2006) and &quot;The Moneypenny Diaries: Final Fling&quot; (2008).

==Films==
Moneypenny has been played by six actresses in the Bond films: four in the Eon film series, plus two in the non-Eon films. The last three actresses to play Moneypenny (Caroline Bliss, Samantha Bond and Naomie Harris) are all alumni of Bristol Old Vic Theatre School.

===Eon Productions series===
;Lois Maxwell
#&quot;Dr. No&quot; (1962)
#&quot;From Russia with Love&quot; (1963)
#&quot;Goldfinger&quot; (1964)
#&quot;Thunderball&quot; (1965)
#&quot;You Only Live Twice&quot; (1967)
#&quot;On Her Majesty&#x27;s Secret Service&quot; (1969)
#&quot;Diamonds Are Forever&quot; (1971)
#&quot;Live and Let Die&quot; (1973)
#&quot;The Man with the Golden Gun&quot; (1974)
#&quot;The Spy Who Loved Me&quot; (1977)
#&quot;Moonraker&quot; (1979)
#&quot;For Your Eyes Only&quot; (1981)
#&quot;Octopussy&quot; (1983)
#&quot;A View to a Kill&quot; (1985)

;Caroline Bliss

#&quot;The Living Daylights&quot; (1987)
#&quot;Licence to Kill&quot; (1989)

;Samantha Bond
#&quot;GoldenEye&quot; (1995)
#&quot;Tomorrow Never Dies&quot; (1997)
#&quot;The World Is Not Enough&quot; (1999)
#&quot;Die Another Day&quot; (2002)

;Naomie Harris (as &quot;Eve Moneypenny&quot;)
#&quot;Skyfall&quot; (2012)
#&quot;Spectre&quot; (2015)
#&quot;No Time to Die&quot; (2021)

===Non-Eon films===
;Barbara Bouchet
#&quot;Casino Royale&quot; (1967) (Bouchet actually plays Moneypenny&#x27;s daughter)

;Pamela Salem
#&quot;Never Say Never Again&quot; (1983)

===Other appearances===
* Lois Maxwell portrays Moneypenny in the television special &quot;Welcome to Japan, Mr. Bond&quot; (1967), which was produced by United Artists Television.
* Lois Maxwell played herself in the Italian film &quot;OK Connery&quot; (1967) and played Miss Moneypenny in the 1975 French film &quot;Bons baisers de Hong Kong&quot;.
* Samantha Bond took up the role again in an advertisement for London&#x27;s (ultimately successful) London 2012 Olympic bid. She appeared alongside Roger Moore, who played 007 between 1973 and 1985.
* In the video game &quot;From Russia with Love&quot; (2005), Moneypenny appears with Lois Maxwell&#x27;s likeness in the same film. She is voiced by Karly Rothenberg (who also voices Rosa Klebb in the game).
* Moneypenny appears in Dynamite Entertainment&#x27;s 2015 &quot;James Bond&quot; comic book series. Though the series is heavily inspired by the original Ian Fleming stories, this version of Moneypenny is black, much like Naomie Harris&#x27; portrayal in the movies. This rendition of the character is both M&#x27;s secretary and personal security agent, who tends to defend her superior from physical threats by all means at all cost. A spin-off one-shot created by Jody Houser and Jacob Edgar, starring this rendition of the character was published in August 2017.
* Miss Moneypenny is a non-player-character to interact with in the role-playing game &quot;James Bond 007&quot;. She is described as a crack shot, having shot a would-be assassin trying to kill M; she placed six shots in the assassin that could be covered by a tea saucer. It is even a mild rebuke for an agent with poor marksmanship if M ever says, &quot;My assistant can shoot better than you.&quot;

==In other media==
In &quot;The Last Resort: A Memoir of Zimbabwe&quot; (2009), Douglas Rogers dedicated chapter 11 (titled &quot;Miss Moneypenny&quot;) to his father Ian&#x27;s black market currency dealer in Mutare.

In the 2011 British TV drama series &quot;The Hour&quot;, set in the mid-1950s when Fleming&#x27;s James Bond books first became popular, the characters Freddie and Bel address each other as &#x27;Moneypenny&#x27; and &#x27;James.&#x27;

In the 1990s and early-to-mid-2000s the famous Birmingham nightclub &quot;Moneypennys&quot; was based on her character fitting the theme of Glam-House Music. The insinuation of the brand instigating &quot;Bond Girls Only&quot; complete with its venues booked in High Class Outlets, Manor Parks and Designer Apparel wearing attendees clearly visible in the queues all fitting to the James Bond Glamour theme. In addition
the High end Sports cars, supercars and luxury vehicles in the clubs car park a clear sign you had arrived at the right venue for the best night out. DJs from the world over were flown in including Roger Sanchez, Eric Morillo and Little Louie Vega.

==See also==
* List of James Bond allies

==Notes==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q211414" start="0" end="15" title="Miss Moneypenny" label="Miss Moneypenny"/>
<link wikidata="Q211414" start="51" end="54" title="Miss Moneypenny" label="Eve"/>
<link wikidata="Q211414" start="58" end="62" title="Miss Moneypenny" label="Jane"/>
<link wikidata="Q844" start="96" end="106" title="James Bond" label="James Bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q246154" start="145" end="146" title="M (James Bond)" label="M"/>
<link wikidata="Q184560" start="208" end="235" title="Secret Intelligence Service" label="Secret Intelligence Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q184560" start="237" end="240" title="MI6" label="MI6"/>
<link wikidata="Q82104" start="423" end="434" title="Ian Fleming" label="Ian Fleming"/>
<link wikidata="Q1383799" start="510" end="522" title="John Gardner (thriller writer)" label="John Gardner"/>
<link wikidata="Q721999" start="527" end="541" title="Raymond Benson" label="Raymond Benson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649366" start="595" end="604" title="Bond girl" label="Bond girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q7752011" start="799" end="821" title="The Moneypenny Diaries" label="The Moneypenny Diaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q4941" start="887" end="894" title="Skyfall" label="Skyfall"/>
<link wikidata="Q151904" start="972" end="985" title="Casino Royale (2006 film)" label="Casino Royale"/>
<link wikidata="Q107761" start="1103" end="1122" title="You Only Live Twice (film)" label="You Only Live Twice"/>
<link wikidata="Q457271" start="1159" end="1173" title="Lieutenant (navy)" label="second officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q475996" start="1181" end="1213" title="Women&amp;#x27;s Royal Naval Service" label="Women&amp;#x27;s Royal Naval Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q82104" start="1234" end="1245" title="Ian Fleming" label="Ian Fleming"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047711" start="1274" end="1287" title="Casino Royale (novel)" label="Casino Royale"/>
<link wikidata="Q184560" start="1452" end="1455" title="MI6" label="MI6"/>
<link wikidata="Q2811920" start="1465" end="1480" title="Stewart Menzies" label="Stewart Menzies"/>
<link wikidata="Q433595" start="1580" end="1591" title="Vera Atkins" label="Vera Atkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q240390" start="1595" end="1623" title="Special Operations Executive" label="Special Operations Executive"/>
<link wikidata="Q7123609" start="1625" end="1639" title="Paddy Ridsdale" label="Paddy Ridsdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q4168000" start="1643" end="1661" title="Military intelligence" label="Naval Intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q6204890" start="1673" end="1691" title="Joan Bright Astley" label="Joan Bright Astley"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1719" end="1731" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q50008" start="1923" end="1932" title="The Times" label="The Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="2002" end="2005" title="British Broadcasting Corporation" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q246154" start="2284" end="2285" title="M (James Bond)" label="M"/>
<link wikidata="Q184560" start="2299" end="2302" title="MI6" label="MI6"/>
<link wikidata="Q475996" start="2348" end="2380" title="Women&amp;#x27;s Royal Naval Service" label="Women&amp;#x27;s Royal Naval Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q846498" start="2449" end="2459" title="Top Secret" label="Top Secret"/>
<link wikidata="Q5422806" start="2461" end="2470" title="Eyes Only" label="Eyes Only"/>
<link wikidata="Q246154" start="2592" end="2593" title="M (James Bond)" label="M"/>
<link wikidata="Q2009573" start="2810" end="2820" title="James Bond (character)" label="James Bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q6453156" start="2886" end="2895" title="backstory" label="backstory"/>
<link wikidata="Q4941" start="2917" end="2924" title="Skyfall" label="Skyfall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343020" start="2999" end="3005" title="reboot (fiction)" label="reboot"/>
<link wikidata="Q156586" start="3064" end="3077" title="Naomie Harris" label="Naomie Harris"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3470" end="3484" title="M (James Bond)#Ralph Fiennes: 2012–present" label="Gareth Mallory"/>
<link wikidata="Q28493" start="3486" end="3499" title="Ralph Fiennes" label="Ralph Fiennes"/>
<link wikidata="Q16986518" start="3522" end="3557" title="Intelligence and Security Committee" label="Intelligence and Security Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q14773" start="3664" end="3669" title="Macau" label="Macau"/>
<link wikidata="Q3930174" start="3716" end="3727" title="Raoul Silva" label="Raoul Silva"/>
<link wikidata="Q134895" start="3736" end="3749" title="Javier Bardem" label="Javier Bardem"/>
<link wikidata="Q20669447" start="3870" end="3884" title="public inquiry" label="public inquiry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952957" start="4154" end="4165" title="Thunderball (novel)" label="Thunderball"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4451" end="4466" title="List of James Bond allies#Loelia Ponsonby, Loelia" label="Loelia Ponsonby"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304007" start="4477" end="4491" title="Mary Goodnight" label="Mary Goodnight"/>
<link wikidata="Q4941" start="4691" end="4698" title="Skyfall" label="Skyfall"/>
<link wikidata="Q5446967" start="4727" end="4734" title="field agent" label="officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q204398" start="4836" end="4845" title="Octopussy" label="Octopussy"/>
<link wikidata="Q316802" start="4907" end="4923" title="Michaela Clavell" label="Michaela Clavell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5563727" start="5062" end="5066" title="Foil (literature)" label="foil"/>
<link wikidata="Q30931" start="5506" end="5521" title="Die Another Day" label="Die Another Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q287297" start="5548" end="5549" title="Q (James Bond)" label="Q"/>
<link wikidata="Q25014" start="5558" end="5569" title="John Cleese" label="John Cleese"/>
<link wikidata="Q170519" start="5571" end="5586" title="virtual reality" label="virtual reality"/>
<link wikidata="Q591272" start="5793" end="5806" title="Casino Royale (1967 film)" label="Casino Royale"/>
<link wikidata="Q455280" start="5822" end="5837" title="Barbara Bouchet" label="Barbara Bouchet"/>
<link wikidata="Q181917" start="5913" end="5924" title="David Niven" label="David Niven"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047711" start="6133" end="6146" title="Casino Royale (novel)" label="Casino Royale"/>
<link wikidata="Q7752011" start="6385" end="6407" title="The Moneypenny Diaries" label="The Moneypenny Diaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q4941" start="6459" end="6466" title="Skyfall" label="Skyfall"/>
<link wikidata="Q134333" start="6536" end="6547" title="Roger Moore" label="Roger Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1232629" start="6903" end="6914" title="John Murray (publishing house)" label="John Murray"/>
<link wikidata="" start="6931" end="6969" title="The Moneypenny Diaries: Guardian Angel" label="The Moneypenny Diaries: Guardian Angel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2262061" start="7003" end="7027" title="Ian Fleming Publications" label="Ian Fleming Publications"/>
<link wikidata="Q768038" start="7063" end="7080" title="Samantha Weinberg" label="Samantha Weinberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q7752011" start="7178" end="7200" title="The Moneypenny Diaries" label="The Moneypenny Diaries"/>
<link wikidata="" start="7275" end="7313" title="Secret Servant: The Moneypenny Diaries" label="Secret Servant: The Moneypenny Diaries"/>
<link wikidata="" start="7337" end="7372" title="The Moneypenny Diaries: Final Fling" label="The Moneypenny Diaries: Final Fling"/>
<link wikidata="Q219135" start="7473" end="7476" title="Eon Productions" label="Eon"/>
<link wikidata="Q608723" start="7633" end="7663" title="Bristol Old Vic Theatre School" label="Bristol Old Vic Theatre School"/>
<link wikidata="Q102754" start="7716" end="7722" title="Dr. No (film)" label="Dr. No"/>
<link wikidata="Q106571" start="7743" end="7764" title="From Russia with Love (film)" label="From Russia with Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q106440" start="7785" end="7795" title="Goldfinger (film)" label="Goldfinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q107724" start="7816" end="7827" title="Thunderball (film)" label="Thunderball"/>
<link wikidata="Q107761" start="7848" end="7867" title="You Only Live Twice (film)" label="You Only Live Twice"/>
<link wikidata="Q107894" start="7888" end="7924" title="On Her Majesty&amp;#x27;s Secret Service (film)" label="On Her Majesty&amp;#x27;s Secret Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q107914" start="7945" end="7965" title="Diamonds Are Forever (film)" label="Diamonds Are Forever"/>
<link wikidata="Q27204" start="7986" end="8002" title="Live and Let Die (film)" label="Live and Let Die"/>
<link wikidata="Q309289" start="8023" end="8050" title="The Man with the Golden Gun (film)" label="The Man with the Golden Gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q320423" start="8071" end="8091" title="The Spy Who Loved Me (film)" label="The Spy Who Loved Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q334780" start="8112" end="8121" title="Moonraker (film)" label="Moonraker"/>
<link wikidata="Q332330" start="8142" end="8160" title="For Your Eyes Only (film)" label="For Your Eyes Only"/>
<link wikidata="Q204398" start="8181" end="8190" title="Octopussy" label="Octopussy"/>
<link wikidata="Q332368" start="8211" end="8227" title="A View to a Kill" label="A View to a Kill"/>
<link wikidata="Q272064" start="8266" end="8286" title="The Living Daylights" label="The Living Daylights"/>
<link wikidata="Q309086" start="8307" end="8322" title="Licence to Kill" label="Licence to Kill"/>
<link wikidata="Q19089" start="8359" end="8368" title="GoldenEye" label="GoldenEye"/>
<link wikidata="Q207916" start="8389" end="8408" title="Tomorrow Never Dies" label="Tomorrow Never Dies"/>
<link wikidata="Q212145" start="8429" end="8452" title="The World Is Not Enough" label="The World Is Not Enough"/>
<link wikidata="Q30931" start="8473" end="8488" title="Die Another Day" label="Die Another Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q4941" start="8557" end="8564" title="Skyfall" label="Skyfall"/>
<link wikidata="Q18602670" start="8585" end="8592" title="Spectre (2015 film)" label="Spectre"/>
<link wikidata="Q21534241" start="8613" end="8627" title="No Time to Die" label="No Time to Die"/>
<link wikidata="Q591272" start="8686" end="8699" title="Casino Royale (1967 film)" label="Casino Royale"/>
<link wikidata="Q180279" start="8787" end="8808" title="Never Say Never Again" label="Never Say Never Again"/>
<link wikidata="Q107761" start="8914" end="8940" title="Welcome to Japan, Mr. Bond" label="Welcome to Japan, Mr. Bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q3550689" start="8977" end="9002" title="United Artists Television" label="United Artists Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638257" start="9060" end="9070" title="OK Connery" label="OK Connery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1767400" start="9141" end="9166" title="Bons baisers de Hong Kong" label="Bons baisers de Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q6671078" start="9275" end="9298" title="London 2012 Olympic bid" label="London 2012 Olympic bid"/>
<link wikidata="Q134333" start="9323" end="9334" title="Roger Moore" label="Roger Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783005" start="9400" end="9421" title="From Russia with Love (video game)" label="From Russia with Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q3193502" start="9524" end="9540" title="Karly Rothenberg" label="Karly Rothenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2307276" start="9558" end="9568" title="Rosa Klebb" label="Rosa Klebb"/>
<link wikidata="Q965905" start="9607" end="9629" title="Dynamite Entertainment" label="Dynamite Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q21539903" start="9648" end="9658" title="James Bond (Dynamite Entertainment)" label="James Bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q110876442" start="10051" end="10062" title="Jody Houser" label="Jody Houser"/>
<link wikidata="Q3160946" start="10237" end="10263" title="James Bond 007 (role-playing game)" label="&amp;quot;James Bond 007&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5301946" start="10635" end="10649" title="Douglas Rogers (writer)" label="Douglas Rogers"/>
<link wikidata="Q50851" start="10733" end="10745" title="black market" label="black market"/>
<link wikidata="Q399322" start="10765" end="10771" title="Mutare" label="Mutare"/>
<link wikidata="Q1893509" start="10816" end="10824" title="The Hour (2011 TV series)" label="The Hour"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304007" start="11697" end="11722" title="List of James Bond allies" label="List of James Bond allies"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="230626" wikidata="Q5327201" url="?curid=230626" title="Earthbound (The 5th Dimension album)">
<text>Earthbound is the twelfth album by American pop group the 5th Dimension, released in 1975 by ABC Records. It is the last album for the group&#x27;s original line-up of Billy Davis Jr., Marilyn McCoo, Florence LaRue, Lamonte McLemore and Ron Townson. After touring with the 5th Dimension in support of this album, Billy Davis Jr. and Marilyn McCoo (being married since 1969) left the group to work as a duo and as solo artists.

In contrast to most of their previous albums, &quot;Earthbound&quot; features synthesizers prominently in many of its tracks—particularly &quot;Magic In My Life&quot; and &quot;Moonlight Mile&quot;. &quot;Magic in My Life&quot;, the second and final single released from the album (after &quot;Walk Your Feet in the Sunshine&quot;), was also unusual in that it was the first 5th Dimension single to feature Florence LaRue on the lead. She would frequently be the lead on successive 5th Dimension singles with various line-ups.

Perhaps owing to its singular status as an ABC Records release, for decades the album remained the only one recorded by the original 5th Dimension line-up to not be issued on CD. It finally was released on CD in June 2014, through Real Gone Music.

==Track listing==
All songs were written by Jimmy Webb, except where indicated.

#&quot;Prologue&quot; (Jimmy Webb) / &quot;Be Here Now&quot; (George Harrison) – 4:05
#&quot;Don&#x27;t Stop For Nothing&quot; (James C. Johnson) – 2:43
#&quot;I&#x27;ve Got a Feeling&quot; (John Lennon, Paul McCartney) – 4:23
#&quot;Magic in My Life&quot; (James C. Johnson) – 3:17
#&quot;Walk Your Feet in the Sunshine&quot; – 4:13
#&quot;When Did I Lose Your Love&quot; – 2:47
#&quot;Lean On Me Always&quot; – 4:28
#&quot;Speaking With My Heart&quot; – 3:40
#&quot;Moonlight Mile&quot; (Mick Jagger, Keith Richards) – 5:15
#&quot;Epilogue&quot; – 2:37

==Personnel==
;Music
* Billy Davis Jr. – baritone vocals
* Florence LaRue – alto vocals
* Marilyn McCoo – soprano vocals
* Lamonte McLemore – bass vocals
* Ron Townson – tenor vocals
* Harvey Mason – drums, percussion
* Jeff Porcaro – drums (&quot;Moonlight Mile&quot;)
* Fred Tackett – guitar
* Jesse Ed Davis – guitar
* Dennis Budimir – guitar
* Dan Ferguson – guitar
* Paul Stallworth – bass
* Bill Cuomo – ARP synthesizer
* John Myles – keyboards
* David Paich – keyboards (&quot;Magic In My Life&quot;)
* Michael Lawrence – brass
* David Duke – French horn
* Vincent DeRosa – French horn
* Sid Sharp – strings
* John Myles – vocal arrangements and special vocal backgrounds
* Larry Coryell – acoustic guitar solos

;Production
* Jimmy Webb – producer and arranger
* John Haeny – engineer (basic tracks)
* Alan O&#x27;Duffy – engineer (vocals, strings, and mixing)
* Carole Rubinstein – cover painting
* Sunset Sound and Village Recorders – recording
* Wally Heider – mixing
* ABC Recording Studios Inc. - mastering

==Charts==
==References==
&#x27;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1753111" start="54" end="71" title="the 5th Dimension" label="the 5th Dimension"/>
<link wikidata="Q287177" start="93" end="104" title="ABC Records" label="ABC Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q4912436" start="168" end="183" title="Billy Davis Jr." label="Billy Davis Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q6763597" start="185" end="198" title="Marilyn McCoo" label="Marilyn McCoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5460677" start="200" end="214" title="Florence LaRue" label="Florence LaRue"/>
<link wikidata="Q25999377" start="216" end="232" title="Lamonte McLemore" label="Lamonte McLemore"/>
<link wikidata="Q7365333" start="237" end="248" title="Ron Townson" label="Ron Townson"/>
<link wikidata="Q163829" start="506" end="517" title="synthesizer" label="synthesizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q12327581" start="605" end="619" title="Moonlight Mile (Rolling Stones song)" label="Moonlight Mile"/>
<link wikidata="Q4875509" start="1329" end="1340" title="Be Here Now (George Harrison song)" label="Be Here Now"/>
<link wikidata="Q2643" start="1348" end="1363" title="George Harrison" label="George Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q6104970" start="1414" end="1430" title="James C. Johnson" label="James C. Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2272704" start="1446" end="1469" title="I&amp;#x27;ve Got a Feeling" label="I&amp;#x27;ve Got a Feeling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203" start="1477" end="1488" title="John Lennon" label="John Lennon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599" start="1490" end="1504" title="Paul McCartney" label="Paul McCartney"/>
<link wikidata="Q12327581" start="1754" end="1768" title="Moonlight Mile (Rolling Stones song)" label="Moonlight Mile"/>
<link wikidata="Q128121" start="1776" end="1787" title="Mick Jagger" label="Mick Jagger"/>
<link wikidata="Q189599" start="1789" end="1803" title="Keith Richards" label="Keith Richards"/>
<link wikidata="Q4912436" start="1865" end="1880" title="Billy Davis Jr." label="Billy Davis Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q5460677" start="1901" end="1915" title="Florence LaRue" label="Florence LaRue"/>
<link wikidata="Q6763597" start="1932" end="1945" title="Marilyn McCoo" label="Marilyn McCoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q25999377" start="1965" end="1981" title="Lamonte McLemore" label="Lamonte McLemore"/>
<link wikidata="Q7365333" start="1998" end="2009" title="Ron Townson" label="Ron Townson"/>
<link wikidata="Q914034" start="2027" end="2039" title="Harvey Mason" label="Harvey Mason"/>
<link wikidata="Q350353" start="2062" end="2074" title="Jeff Porcaro" label="Jeff Porcaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q327068" start="2114" end="2126" title="Fred Tackett" label="Fred Tackett"/>
<link wikidata="Q1956512" start="2138" end="2152" title="Jesse Ed Davis" label="Jesse Ed Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189006" start="2164" end="2178" title="Dennis Budimir" label="Dennis Budimir"/>
<link wikidata="Q466980" start="2295" end="2306" title="David Paich" label="David Paich"/>
<link wikidata="Q7931748" start="2406" end="2420" title="Vincent DeRosa" label="Vincent DeRosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q498715" start="2523" end="2536" title="Larry Coryell" label="Larry Coryell"/>
<link wikidata="Q18705233" start="2613" end="2623" title="John Haeny" label="John Haeny"/>
<link wikidata="Q3304002" start="2750" end="2762" title="Sunset Sound" label="Sunset Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q3647991" start="2767" end="2784" title="Village Recorders" label="Village Recorders"/>
<link wikidata="Q124842714" start="2823" end="2844" title="ABC Recording Studios" label="ABC Recording Studios"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="230629" wikidata="Q76710" url="?curid=230629" title="Franz Rosenzweig">
<text>Franz Rosenzweig (; ; 25 December 1886 – 10 December 1929) was a German theologian, philosopher, and translator.

==Early life and education==
Franz Rosenzweig was born in Kassel, Germany, to an affluent, minimally observant Jewish family. His father owned a factory for dyestuff and was a city council member. Through his granduncle, Adam Rosenzweig, he came in contact with traditional Judaism and was inspired to request Hebrew lessons when he was around 11 years old. He started to study medicine for five semesters in Göttingen, Munich, and Freiburg. In 1907 he changed subjects and studied history and philosophy in Freiburg and Berlin.

Rosenzweig, under the influence of his colleague and close friend Eugen Rosenstock-Huessy, considered converting to Christianity. Determined to embrace the faith as the early Christians did, he resolved to live as an observant Jew first, before becoming Christian. After attending Yom Kippur services at a small Orthodox synagogue in Berlin, he underwent a mystical experience. As a result, he became a baal teshuva. Although he never recorded what transpired, he never again entertained converting to Christianity.

In 1913, he turned to Jewish philosophy. His letters to his cousin and close friend Eugen Rosenstock-Huessy, whom he had nearly followed into Christianity, have been published as ‘’Judaism Despite Christianity’&#x27;. Rosenzweig was a student of Hermann Cohen, and the two became close. While writing a doctoral dissertation on Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel, ‘’Hegel and the State’&#x27;, Rosenzweig turned against idealism and sought a philosophy that did not begin with an abstract notion of the human.

Later in the decade, Rosenzweig discovered a manuscript apparently written in Hegel’s hand, which he named “The Oldest Systematic Program of German Idealism.” The manuscript (first published in 1917) has been dated to 1796 and appears to show the influence of F. W. J. Schelling and Friedrich Hölderlin. Despite early debate about the authorship of the document, scholars now generally accept that it was written by Hegel, making Rosenzweig’s discovery valuable for contemporary Hegel scholarship.

==Career==
===&quot;The Star of Redemption&quot;===

Rosenzweig&#x27;s major work is &quot;The Star of Redemption&quot; (first published in 1921). It is a description of the relationships between God, humanity, and the world, as they are connected by creation, revelation and redemption. If one makes a diagram with God at the top, and the World and the Self below, the inter-relationships generate a Star of David map. He is critical of any attempt to replace actual human existence with an ideal. In Rosenzweig&#x27;s scheme, revelation arises not in metaphysics but in the here and now. We are called to love God, and to do so is to return to the world, and that is redemption.

Two translations into English have appeared, the most recent by Dr. Barbara E. Galli of McGill University in 2005 and by Professor William Wolfgang Hallo in 1971.

===Collaboration with Buber===
Rosenzweig was engaged critically with the Jewish Zionist scholar Martin Buber. The two exchanged letters on the subject of a lecture series which Buber had given. In 1923, one of the letters was published by Rosenzweig as an open letter entitled &quot;The Builders&quot;.

Unlike Buber, Rosenzweig felt that a return to Israel would embroil the Jews into a worldly history that they should eschew. Rosenzweig criticized Buber&#x27;s dialogical philosophy because it is based not only on the I-Thou relation but also on I-It, a notion that Rosenzweig rejected. He thought that the counterpart to I-Thou should be He-It, namely “as He said and it became”: building the &quot;it&quot; around the human &quot;I&quot;—the human mind—is an idealistic mistake. Rosenzweig and Buber worked together on a translation of the Tanakh, or Hebrew Bible, from Hebrew to German. The translation, while contested, has led to several other translations in other languages that use the same methodology and principles. Their publications concerning the nature and philosophy of translation are still widely read.

===Educational activities===
Rosenzweig, unimpressed with the impersonal learning of the academy, founded the in Frankfurt in 1920, which sought to engage in dialogue with human beings rather than merely accumulate knowledge. Many prominent Jewish intellectuals were associated with the &quot;Lehrhaus&quot;, as it was known in Germany, such as Leo Löwenthal, the liberal rabbi Benno Jacob, historian of medicine Richard Koch, the chemist Eduard Strauß, the feminist Bertha Pappenheim, Siegfried Kracauer, a culture critic for the Frankfurter Zeitung, S.Y. Agnon, who later won the Nobel Prize for Literature, and Gershom Scholem, the founder of modern secular studies of the Kabbalah and Jewish mysticism (some of these intellectuals are also associated with the Frankfurt School of critical theory). In October 1922, Rudolf Hallo took over the leadership of the Lehrhaus. The Lehrhaus stayed open until 1930 and was reopened by Martin Buber in 1933.

==Illness and death==
Rosenzweig suffered from the muscular degenerative disease amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (also known as motor neurone disease (MND) or Lou Gehrig&#x27;s disease). Towards the end of his life, he had to write with the help of his wife, Edith, who would recite letters of the alphabet until he indicated for her to stop, continuing until she could guess the word or phrase he intended (or, at other times, Rosenzweig would point to the letter on the plate of his typewriter). They also developed a communication system based on him blinking his eyes.

Rosenzweig&#x27;s final attempt to communicate his thought, via the laborious typewriter-alphabet method, consisted in the partial sentence: &quot;And now it comes, the point of all points, which the Lord has truly revealed to me in my sleep, the point of all points for which there—&quot;. The writing was interrupted by his doctor, with whom he had a short discussion using the same method. When the doctor left, Rosenzweig did not wish to continue with the writing, and he died on the night of 10 December 1929, in Frankfurt, the sentence left unfinished.

Rosenzweig was buried on 12 December 1929. There was no eulogy; Buber read Psalm 73.

After his death, his son Rafael fled Germany for Palestine in 1939. Rosenzweig&#x27;s library with about 3,000 volumes was to follow him, but the cargo ship was diverted to Tunis during the Second World War. It is now in the National Library of Tunisia, Dâr Al-Kutub Al-Wataniya.

==See also==

* Interfaith dialogue
* André Neher
* Wissenschaft des Judentums

==References==
==Further reading==
* Anckaert, Luc &amp; Casper, Bernhard Moses Casper, &quot;Franz Rosenzweig - a primary and secondary bibliography&quot; (Leuven, 1990)
* Amir, Yehoyada, &quot;Towards mutual Listening: the Notion of Sermon in Franz Rosenzweig&#x27;s Philosophy&quot;, in: Alexander Deeg, Walter Homolka &amp; Heinz–Günter Schöttler (eds.), &quot;Preaching in Judaism and Christianity&quot; (Berlin, 2008), 113–130
* Amir, Yehoyada, Turner, Joseph (Yossi), Brasser, Martin, &quot;Faith, Truth, and Reason - New Perspectives on Franz Rosenzweig&#x27;s Star of Redemption&quot; (Karl Alber, 2012)
* Belloni, Claudio, Filosofia e rivelazione. Rosenzweig nella scia dell’ultimo Schelling, Marsilio, Venezia 2002
* Bienenstock, Myriam &quot;Cohen face à Rosenzweig. Débat sur la pensée allemande&quot; (Paris, Vrin, 2009)
* Bienenstock, Myriam (ed.). &quot;Héritages de Franz Rosenzweig. &quot;Nous et les autres&quot;&quot; (Paris, éditions de l&#x27;éclat, 2011)
* Bowler, Maurice Gerald, &quot;The Reconciliation of Church and Synagogue in Franz Rosenzweig,&quot; M.A. Thesis, Sir George Williams University, Montreal, 1973
* Chamiel, Ephraim, The Dual Truth, Studies on Nineteenth-Century Modern Religious Thought and its Influence on Twentieth-Century Jewish Philosophy, Academic Studies Press, Boston 2019, Vol II, pp. 308–332.
* Hans Ehrenberg, Franz Rosenzweig and Eugen Rosenstock-Huessy (Sons for Peace), &quot;Ways of Peace, Lights of Peace&quot;, Vol 1 &amp; 2, (Rome: Vatican Press, 1910, New York: Bible Society, 1910).
* Gibbs, Robert, &quot;Correlations in Rosenzweig and Levinas&quot; (1994)
* Glatzer, Nahum Norbert &quot;Essays in Jewish thought&quot; (1978)
* Glatzer, Nahum Norbert, &quot;Franz Rosenzweig - his life and thought&quot; (New York, 1953)
* Guttmann, Isaak Julius. &quot;Philosophies of Judaism: the history of Jewish philosophy from biblical times to Franz Rosenzweig&quot; (New York, 1964)
* Maybaum, Ignaz &quot;Trialogue between Jew, Christian and Muslim (London, 1973)
* Mendes-Flohr, Paul R., &quot;German Jews - a dual identity&quot; (New Haven, CT, 1999)
* Miller, Ronald Henry &quot;Dialogue and disagreement - Franz Rosenzweig&#x27;s relevance to contemporary Jewish-Christian understanding&quot; (Lanham, 1989)
* Putnam, Hilary &quot;Jewish philosophy as a guide to life - Rosenzweig, Buber, Levinas, Wittgenstein&quot; (Bloomington, IN, 2008)
* Rahel-Freund, Else &quot;Die Existenz philosophie Franz Rosenzweigs&quot; (Breslau 1933, Hamburg 1959)
* Rahel-Freund, Else &quot;Franz Rosenzweig&#x27;s philosophy of existence - an analysis of The star of redemption&quot; (The Hague, 1979)
* Samuelson, Norbert Max, The Legacy of Franz Rosenzweig: Collected Essays (Cornell University Press, 2004)
* Santner, Eric L. &quot;The Psychotheology of Everyday Life - Reflections on Freud and Rosenzweig&quot; (Chicago, IL, 2001)
* Schwartz, Michal, Metapher und Offenbarung. Zur Sprache von Franz Rosenzweigs Stern der Erlösung(Berlin, 2003)
* Tolone, Oreste. &quot;La malattia immortale. Nuovo pensiero e nuova medicina tra Rosenzweig e Weizsäcker&quot;, (Pisa 2008)
*Zohar Mihaely, &quot;Rosenzweig&#x27;s Critique of Islam and its Value Today&quot;, in: Roczniki Kulturoznawcze Vol. 11 No. 2 (2020) pp. 5–34.

==External links==
* Arnold Betz&#x27;s essay on Rosenzweig and &quot;The Star of Redemption&quot; at Vanderbilt University
* Franz Rosenzweig&#x27;s &quot;Der Stern der Erlösung&quot; online (in German)
* Review of &quot;The Star of Redemption&quot; by Spengler in &quot;Asia Times&quot;
* &quot;Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy&quot; entry on Franz Rosenzweig
* Guide to the Papers of Franz Rosenzweig (1886-1929) at the Leo Baeck Institute, New York.
* Guide to the Franz Rosenzweig - Martin Buber notebooks at the Leo Baeck Institute, New York.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q76710" start="0" end="16" title="Franz Rosenzweig" label="Franz Rosenzweig"/>
<link wikidata="Q34178" start="72" end="82" title="theology" label="theologian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891" start="84" end="95" title="philosophy" label="philosopher"/>
<link wikidata="Q7553" start="101" end="111" title="Translation" label="translator"/>
<link wikidata="Q2865" start="172" end="178" title="Kassel" label="Kassel"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="180" end="187" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="225" end="231" title="Jewish" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="388" end="395" title="Judaism" label="Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9288" start="424" end="430" title="Hebrew" label="Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q11190" start="492" end="500" title="medicine" label="medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3033" start="523" end="532" title="Göttingen" label="Göttingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726" start="534" end="540" title="Munich" label="Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q2833" start="546" end="554" title="Freiburg" label="Freiburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2833" start="622" end="630" title="Freiburg im Breisgau" label="Freiburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="635" end="641" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q66732" start="710" end="733" title="Eugen Rosenstock-Huessy" label="Eugen Rosenstock-Huessy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="760" end="772" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q132994" start="925" end="935" title="Yom Kippur" label="Yom Kippur"/>
<link wikidata="Q2742872" start="1047" end="1059" title="baal teshuva" label="baal teshuva"/>
<link wikidata="Q837795" start="1183" end="1200" title="Jewish philosophy" label="Jewish philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q76709" start="1407" end="1420" title="Hermann Cohen" label="Hermann Cohen"/>
<link wikidata="Q9235" start="1489" end="1518" title="Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel" label="Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel"/>
<link wikidata="Q33442" start="1576" end="1584" title="idealism" label="idealism"/>
<link wikidata="Q16934411" start="1775" end="1823" title="The Oldest Systematic Program of German Idealism" label="The Oldest Systematic Program of German Idealism"/>
<link wikidata="Q60070" start="1927" end="1945" title="F. W. J. Schelling" label="F. W. J. Schelling"/>
<link wikidata="Q75889" start="1950" end="1969" title="Friedrich Hölderlin" label="Friedrich Hölderlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q190" start="2362" end="2365" title="God" label="God"/>
<link wikidata="Q935362" start="2442" end="2452" title="Redemption (theology)" label="redemption"/>
<link wikidata="Q161396" start="2567" end="2580" title="Star of David" label="Star of David"/>
<link wikidata="Q201492" start="2936" end="2953" title="McGill University" label="McGill University"/>
<link wikidata="Q214523" start="2979" end="3001" title="William Wolfgang Hallo" label="William Wolfgang Hallo"/>
<link wikidata="Q42388" start="3093" end="3100" title="Zionist" label="Zionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q84423" start="3109" end="3121" title="Martin Buber" label="Martin Buber"/>
<link wikidata="Q646754" start="3269" end="3280" title="open letter" label="open letter"/>
<link wikidata="Q732870" start="3859" end="3865" title="Tanakh" label="Tanakh"/>
<link wikidata="Q9288" start="3889" end="3895" title="Hebrew" label="Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="3899" end="3905" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q1794" start="4252" end="4261" title="Frankfurt" label="Frankfurt"/>
<link wikidata="Q77146" start="4484" end="4497" title="Leo Löwenthal" label="Leo Löwenthal"/>
<link wikidata="Q96536" start="4517" end="4528" title="Benno Jacob" label="Benno Jacob"/>
<link wikidata="Q61178" start="4606" end="4623" title="Bertha Pappenheim" label="Bertha Pappenheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q76435" start="4625" end="4643" title="Siegfried Kracauer" label="Siegfried Kracauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q561972" start="4670" end="4689" title="Frankfurter Zeitung" label="Frankfurter Zeitung"/>
<link wikidata="Q133042" start="4691" end="4701" title="Shmuel Yosef Agnon" label="S.Y. Agnon"/>
<link wikidata="Q138850" start="4753" end="4768" title="Gershom Scholem" label="Gershom Scholem"/>
<link wikidata="Q123006" start="4815" end="4823" title="Kabbalah" label="Kabbalah"/>
<link wikidata="Q12409136" start="4828" end="4844" title="Jewish mysticism" label="Jewish mysticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q151843" start="4903" end="4919" title="Frankfurt School" label="Frankfurt School"/>
<link wikidata="Q301751" start="4923" end="4938" title="critical theory" label="critical theory"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4958" end="4970" title="Rudolf Hallo" label="Rudolf Hallo"/>
<link wikidata="Q206901" start="5173" end="5202" title="amyotrophic lateral sclerosis" label="amyotrophic lateral sclerosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1794" start="6182" end="6191" title="Frankfurt" label="Frankfurt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7253935" start="6299" end="6307" title="Psalm 73" label="Psalm 73"/>
<link wikidata="Q606065" start="6535" end="6562" title="National Library of Tunisia" label="National Library of Tunisia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1304214" start="6607" end="6626" title="Interfaith dialogue" label="Interfaith dialogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1457834" start="6629" end="6640" title="André Neher" label="André Neher"/>
<link wikidata="Q329170" start="6643" end="6669" title="Wissenschaft des Judentums" label="Wissenschaft des Judentums"/>
<link wikidata="Q90371" start="6978" end="6992" title="Walter Homolka" label="Walter Homolka"/>
<link wikidata="Q64508" start="9759" end="9769" title="Viktor von Weizsäcker" label="Weizsäcker"/>
<link wikidata="Q15242248" start="10360" end="10389" title="Leo Baeck Institute, New York" label="Leo Baeck Institute, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q15242248" start="10455" end="10484" title="Leo Baeck Institute, New York" label="Leo Baeck Institute, New York"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="230631" wikidata="Q83578" url="?curid=230631" title="Asger Jorn">
<text>Asger Oluf Jorn (3 March 1914 – 1 May 1973) was a Danish painter, sculptor, ceramic artist, and author. He was a founding member of the avant-garde movement COBRA and the Situationist International. 

The largest collection of Jorn&#x27;s works—including his major work &quot;Stalingrad&quot;—can be seen in the Museum Jorn, Silkeborg, Denmark. Jorn willed his property and the works of art located inside to the Municipality of Albissola Marina (Savona), so the Italian museum called &quot;Casa Museo Jorn&quot; was created for displaying his works.

==Early life==

He was born in Vejrum, in the northwest corner of Jutland, Denmark, and baptized Asger Oluf Jørgensen.

He was the second oldest of six children, an elder brother to Jørgen Nash. Both of his parents were teachers. His father, Lars Peter Jørgensen, a fundamentalist Christian, died from pneumonia (contracted after a car crash) when Asger was 12 years old. His mother, Maren, &quot;née&quot; Nielsen, was more liberal but nevertheless a deeply committed Christian. This early heavy Christian influence had a negative effect on Asger who began progressively to inwardly rebel against it, and more generally against other forms of authority.

In 1929, aged 15, he was diagnosed with tuberculosis, although he made a recovery from it after spending three months on the west coast of Jutland. By the age of 16 he was influenced by N. F. S. Grundtvig, and although he had already started to paint, Asger enrolled in the Vinthers Seminarium, a teacher-training college in Silkeborg where he paid particular attention to a course in 19th century Scandinavian thought. Also at about this time Jorn became the subject of a number of oil paintings by the painter Martin Kaalund-Jørgensen, which encouraged Jorn to try his hand in this medium.

== Early career ==
When he graduated from college in 1935, the principal wrote a reference for him which said that he had attained &quot;an extraordinary rich personal development and maturity&quot; – especially because of his wide reading in areas outside the topics required for his studies. While at college he joined the small Silkeborg branch of the Communist Party of Denmark and came under the direct influence of the syndicalist Christian Christensen, with whom he became close friends and who, Jorn was later to write, was to become a second father to him.

In 1936 he traveled (on a BSA motorbike he had scraped together enough money to buy) to Paris to become a student of Kandinsky. However, when he discovered that Kandinsky was having economic difficulties, barely able to sell his own paintings, Jorn decided to join Fernand Léger&#x27;s &quot;Académie Contemporaine&quot;; it was during this period that he turned away from figurative painting and to abstract art. In 1937 he joined Le Corbusier in working on the Pavillon des Temps Nouveaux at the 1937 Paris Exhibition. He returned again to Denmark in the summer of 1937. He again traveled to Paris in the summer of 1938, before returning to Denmark, traveling to Løkken, Silkeborg and Copenhagen. Asger Jorn was a good friend of the Danish art dealer Børge Birch, owner of Galerie Birch, who sold his art as early as the 1930s. Later on Jorn held many group exhibitions and solo exhibitions in different galleries.

From 1937 to 1942, he studied at the Royal Danish Academy of Fine Arts in Copenhagen.

==World War II==
The occupation of Denmark by Nazi Germany was a time of deep crisis for Jorn, who had been deeply inculcated with pacifism. The occupation initially sank him into deep depression. He subsequently became active in the communist resistance movement. During the war he also co-founded with the architect Robert Dahlmann Olsen the underground art group, Helhesten or &quot;hell-horse,&quot; and was a contributor to its journal with the same name, &quot;Helhesten&quot;. In 1939, he wrote the key theoretical essay, &quot;Intimate Banalities,&quot; published in &quot;Helhesten&quot;, which claimed that the future of art was kitsch and praised amateur landscape paintings as &quot;the best art today.&quot; He was also the first person to translate Franz Kafka into Danish.

== Post-war ==
After the war, he complained that opportunities for critical thinking within the context of the communist arena had been curtailed by what he characterised as a centralised bourgeois political control. Finding this unacceptable, he broke with the Communist Party of Denmark, although he did not hand in his membership until the mid-1960s and remained committed philosophically to a revision of the Marxist analysis of capitalism from the point of view of the artist.

He traveled again to France where in the autumn of 1948 he, together with Christian Dotremont and Constant, founded COBRA (a European avant-garde art movement), and edited monographs of the Bibliothèque Cobra. However, by 1949 Jorn had started a relationship with Matie van Domselaer, the daughter of the composer Jakob van Domselaer and music teacher Maike Middelkoop. She had been married to Constant since 1942 and they had not separated yet. Constant did not take to this kindly, which played a role in the later falling apart of the Cobra Movement. This caused tension in the COBRA group with the Dutch artists boycotting a conference held at Bregnerød later that year. Matie and Jorn were married in 1950 and they had a son Ole and daughter Bodil. The COBRA group dissolved in 1951

He returned, impoverished and seriously ill with tuberculosis, to Silkeborg in 1951 and resumed work in the ceramics field in 1953. The following year he traveled to Albissola Marina in Italy where he became involved with an offshoot of COBRA, the International Movement for an Imaginist Bauhaus.

===Situationist International===
In 1954 he met Guy Debord, who was to become a close friend. The two men collaborated on two artist&#x27;s books, &quot;Fin de Copenhague&quot; (1957) and &quot;Mémoires&quot; (1959), along with prints, and forewords to each other&#x27;s work.
He participated in the conference that led to the merger of the International Movement for an Imaginist Bauhaus, the Lettriste Internationale, and London Psychogeographical Association to form the Situationist International in 1957. Here he applied his scientific and mathematical knowledge drawn from Henri Poincaré and Niels Bohr to develop his situlogical technique. Jorn never believed in a conception of the Situationist ideas as exclusively artistic and separated from political involvement. He was at the root and at the core of the Situationist International project, fully sharing the revolutionary intentions with Debord. The Situationist general principles were an attack on the capitalist exploitation and degradation of the life of people, and solution of alternative life experiences, construction of situations, unitary urbanism, psychogeography, with the union of play, freedom and critical thinking. Such general principles were applied by Jorn to painting.

In 1961 he amicably quit his activity in the SI, still fully supporting its contents and goals, and continuing to support it financially, but believing that the new strategy of the SI was ineffective.

He went on to found the Scandinavian Institute of Comparative Vandalism in Silkeborg and contributed material to the &quot;Situationist Times&quot;. Later, he donated a museum for modern art to the Danish town of Silkeborg, near where he grew up. He was to remain close to Debord, however, and continued to fund Situationist publications.

His philosophical system Triolectics was given a practical manifestation through the development of three sided football.

=== Later years ===
His first American solo exhibition was at the Lefebre Gallery in 1962. After 1966, Jorn continued to produce oil paintings while traveling throughout Europe collecting images with photographer Gerard Franceschi for his vast archive of &quot;10,000 Years of Nordic Folk Art&quot;. He traveled extensively, to Cuba, England, and the far east. Jorn traveled to the United States for the only time in 1970, for a gallery opening at Lefebre Gallery. He had earlier asserted that he refused to travel to a country that made visitors sign a statement maintaining that they were not communists.

In 1964, he was awarded a Guggenheim Award including a generous cash prize, by an international jury assembled by Lawrence Alloway. The following day Jorn sent this telegram to the president of the Guggenheim, Harry F. Guggenheim:

GO TO HELL WITH YOUR MONEY BASTARD—STOP—REFUSE PRICE [sic] —STOP—NEVER ASKED FOR IT—STOP—AGAINST ALL DECENSY [sic] MIX ARTIST AGAINST HIS WILL IN YOUR PUBLICITY—STOP—I WANT PUBLIC CONFIRMATION NOT TO HAVE PARTICIPATED IN YOUR RIDICULOUS GAME JORN

During the course of his artistic career he produced over 2,500 paintings, prints, drawings, ceramics, sculptures, artist&#x27;s books, collages, décollages, and collaborative tapestries.

He died in Aarhus, Denmark on 1 May 1973. He is buried in the cemetery at Grötlingbo Church, on the island of Gotland in Sweden.

==Writing==

=== Luck and Chance: Dagger and Guitar (1952) ===
The first edition of &quot;Luck and Chance&quot; was Jorn&#x27;s first published book, issued privately to subscribers in 1952. It was written at the Silkeborg Sanatorium during his convalescence from a serious attack of tuberculosis aggravated by malnutrition and scurvy. Later in the process, it also became intended as a doctoral dissertation which was refused by a professor of philosophy at Copenhagen University. It is, amongst other things, a critique of Kierkegaard&#x27;s triad of aesthetic, ethical and religious stages, and of his definition of truth. Another powerful influence appears to be present in ghostly form : Friedrich Nietzsche. It is one of the most fundamental texts to understand Jorn&#x27;s undertaking of &quot;a reconstruction of philosophy from the point of view of an artist&quot;.

=== &quot;Internationale Situationniste&quot; (1957–1961) ===
*&quot;Originality and Magnitude (on Isou&#x27;s System)&quot; (1960), article in Internationale Situationiste No. 4.
*&quot;Open Creation and its Enemies&quot; (1960), article in Internationale Situationiste No. 5.
*&quot;Pataphysics, A Religion in the Making&quot; (1961), article in Internationale Situationiste No. 6.

=== Value and Economy ===
Critique of Political Economy and the Exploitation of the Unique (1961)

This book consists of two parts. The first is a concise critique of the apparent contradictions in Marx&#x27;s &quot;Das Kapital&quot; which Jorn uses to prepare the ground for a discussion of how the work of &quot;the creative elite&quot; can have &quot;value&quot; in any future society aligned on communist principles. This was originally published in French in 1959 by the &quot;Internationale Situationniste&quot; and is the most straightforward and least discursive of all of Jorn&#x27;s texts, probably because Guy Debord had a hand in the editing. The second part is a long polemic against contemporaneous Russian revisionism and the failed attempt by Denmark and Britain to join the Common Market, before coming to Jorn&#x27;s main proposal, an economically independent international &quot;creative elite&quot; adopting typical Scandinavian institutions to realize &quot;artistic value&quot; for the greater universal good. He also attempts to reconcile the unique and individual position of the &quot;creative elite&quot; with his socialist principles. The second part alternates between objective and subjective modes.

=== The Natural Order (1962) ===
:&quot;If this is a critique of Niels Bohr&#x27;s theory of complementarity, then it is also to just the same high degree a critique of that dialectical materialism, that I in my earliest youth took to my heart and perceived to be the only acceptable principle for thought.&quot; (Asger Jorn)

=== &quot;Signes gravés sur les églises de l&#x27;Eure et du Calvados&quot; (1964) ===
Jorn had noticed some graffiti scratched into the porch at the church in Damville during a visit in 1946. Having noticed similar scratchings in Scandinavia at the cathedrals in Ribe, Lund, and Trondheim, Jorn decided to study the phenomenon. He was able to make a trip to Normandy in 1961 with Franceschi. They were able to record a number of such markings in Eure and Calvados, but not elsewhere. The results of the study were published as a book.

==See also==
*Art of Denmark
*List of Danish painters
*Members of the Situationist International
*Museum Jorn, Silkeborg
*Tachisme

==Notes==
== References ==
*Guy Atkins, Asger Jorn and Troels Andersen: Asger Jorn. Jorn In Scandinavia. 1930 - 1953. A study of Asger Jorn&#x27;s artistic development from 1930 to 1953 and a catalogue of his oil paintings from that period. London, 1968
*Guy Atkins, Asger Jorn and Troels Andersen: Asger Jorn. The Crucial Years 1954 - 1964. A study of Asger Jorn&#x27;s artistic development from 1954 to 1964 and a catalogue of his oil paintings from that period. London 1977
*Guy Atkins, Asger Jorn and Troels Andersen: Asger Jorn. The Final Years, 1965 - 1973. A study of Asger Jorn&#x27;s artistic development from 1965 to 1973 and a catalogue of his oil painting from that period. London 1980
*Guy Atkins and Troels Andersen: Asger Jorn. Supplement to the oeuvre catalogue of his paintings from 1930 to 1973. London 1986
*Guy Atkins and Troels Andersen: Asger Jorn. Revised supplement to the œuvre catalogue of his paintings from 1930 to 1973. Copenhagen 2006
*Jens Staubrand: &quot;Asger Jorn – On the author Ager Jorn and his five books from the Scandinavian Institute of Comparative Vandalism and Index to Asger Jorn&#x27;s five books from the Scandinavian Institute of Comparative Vandalism&quot;, Copenhagen 2009. . The book is in English and Danish.
*Jens Staubrand: &quot;Asger Jorn-aforismer, og andre korte tekststykker&quot;, Valby 1995 . / 9788721001759
*Niels Viggo Bentzon (chamber music work): &#x27;Det banale&#x27;[The Banal], for mezzosopran og cello, Frederiksberg 1995. At The Royal Library, Copenhagen, Denmark.
*Asger Jorn: &quot;Naturens Orden [The Natural Order] &quot;, København 1962
*Asger Jorn: &quot;Værdi og Økonomi [Value and Economy] &quot;, København 1962
*Asger Jorn: &quot;Held og Hasard [Luck and Chance] &quot;, København1963
*Asger Jorn: &quot;Ting og Polis [Thing and Polis] &quot;, København 1964
*Asger Jorn: &quot;Alfa og Omega [Alpha and Omega] &quot;, København 1963–64
*Graham Birtwistle: ’&#x27;Asger Jorn&#x27;s comprehensive theory of art between Helhesten and Cobra 1946–1949&#x27;’, Utrecht 1986.
*Troels Andersen, Brian Rasmussen and Roald Pay: ‘&#x27;Jorn in Havanna&#x27;’, Copenhagen 2005. The book is in English and Danish.
* &quot;Comparative Vandalism: Asger Jorn and the artistic attitude to life&quot; by Peter Shield, Borgen/Ashgate (1998)
* &quot;The Natural Order and Other Texts&quot; by Asger Jorn (Translated by Peter Shield), Ashgate (2002)
* &quot;Asger Jorn : en biografi&quot; Troels Andersen, Copenhagen (1994) 2 volumes.
* Tom McDonough (2002) &quot;Art in America&quot; July 2002
* Norbert Haas/Vreni Haas: &quot;Jorn paa Laesoe&quot;. Vaduz: Chaosmos Press 2012. 
* Norbert Haas: &quot;Jorns Stalingrad&quot;. -In: Liechtensteiner Exkurse VI, Eggingen: Edition Isele 2007, S. 275-296.
* Norbert Haas: &quot;Forever Jorn&quot;. Wädenswil am Zürichsee: Nimbus. Kunst und Bücher 2014. 208 Seiten. .

==External links==

*Biography, pictures and huge list of exhibited paintings at Galerie Birch, famous for Asger Jorn and the COBRA-movement
* Asger Jorn in Høst, Cobra, Group Spur and Situationists in German
*Actual exhibitions with Asger Jorn
*Museum Jorn, Silkeborg (formerly Silkeborg Kunstmuseum)
*Exhibition at Fundació Antoni Tàpies</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q83578" start="0" end="15" title="Asger Jorn" label="Asger Oluf Jorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q13464614" start="76" end="90" title="ceramic artist" label="ceramic artist"/>
<link wikidata="Q102932" start="136" end="147" title="avant-garde" label="avant-garde"/>
<link wikidata="Q212611" start="157" end="162" title="COBRA (avant-garde movement)" label="COBRA"/>
<link wikidata="Q850181" start="171" end="197" title="Situationist International" label="Situationist International"/>
<link wikidata="Q4456917" start="276" end="286" title="Stalingrad (painting)" label="Stalingrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q3125109" start="312" end="334" title="Museum Jorn, Silkeborg" label="Museum Jorn, Silkeborg"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="583" end="589" title="Vejrum" label="Vejrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q25389" start="618" end="625" title="Jutland" label="Jutland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3119253" start="734" end="745" title="Jørgen Nash" label="Jørgen Nash"/>
<link wikidata="Q9149" start="818" end="832" title="fundamentalist" label="fundamentalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q12204" start="1248" end="1260" title="tuberculosis" label="tuberculosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q331893" start="1394" end="1412" title="N. F. S. Grundtvig" label="N. F. S. Grundtvig"/>
<link wikidata="Q21180" start="1533" end="1542" title="Silkeborg" label="Silkeborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q21195" start="1606" end="1617" title="Scandinavia" label="Scandinavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164324" start="2156" end="2182" title="Communist Party of Denmark" label="Communist Party of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q2353993" start="2226" end="2237" title="syndicalism" label="syndicalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q12305866" start="2238" end="2259" title="Christian Christensen (author)" label="Christian Christensen"/>
<link wikidata="Q686178" start="2394" end="2397" title="Birmingham Small Arms Company" label="BSA"/>
<link wikidata="Q61064" start="2485" end="2494" title="Wassily Kandinsky" label="Kandinsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q157183" start="2633" end="2646" title="Fernand Léger" label="Fernand Léger"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2660" end="2682" title="Académie Contemporaine" label="Académie Contemporaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4724" start="2800" end="2812" title="Le Corbusier" label="Le Corbusier"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2831" end="2858" title="Pavillon des Temps Nouveaux" label="Pavillon des Temps Nouveaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165755" start="2866" end="2887" title="1937 Paris Exhibition" label="1937 Paris Exhibition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021910" start="3033" end="3039" title="Løkken, Denmark" label="Løkken"/>
<link wikidata="Q21180" start="3041" end="3050" title="Silkeborg" label="Silkeborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748" start="3055" end="3065" title="Copenhagen" label="Copenhagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641001" start="3323" end="3356" title="Royal Danish Academy of Fine Arts" label="Royal Danish Academy of Fine Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q138796" start="3617" end="3636" title="resistance movement" label="resistance movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2443415" start="3840" end="3849" title="Helhesten" label="Helhesten"/>
<link wikidata="Q905" start="4136" end="4147" title="Franz Kafka" label="Franz Kafka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164324" start="4424" end="4450" title="Communist Party of Denmark" label="Communist Party of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q2038439" start="4719" end="4738" title="Christian Dotremont" label="Christian Dotremont"/>
<link wikidata="Q697681" start="4743" end="4751" title="Constant Nieuwenhuys" label="Constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q212611" start="4761" end="4766" title="COBRA (avant-garde movement)" label="COBRA"/>
<link wikidata="Q102932" start="4779" end="4790" title="avant-garde" label="avant-garde"/>
<link wikidata="Q2275181" start="4959" end="4978" title="Jakob van Domselaer" label="Jakob van Domselaer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397223" start="5293" end="5302" title="Farum Municipality" label="Bregnerød"/>
<link wikidata="Q270497" start="5600" end="5616" title="Albissola Marina" label="Albissola Marina"/>
<link wikidata="Q3866634" start="5682" end="5729" title="International Movement for an Imaginist Bauhaus" label="International Movement for an Imaginist Bauhaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q298075" start="5780" end="5790" title="Guy Debord" label="Guy Debord"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062404" start="5858" end="5876" title="artist&amp;#x27;s book" label="artist&amp;#x27;s book"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5885" end="5902" title="Mémoires#Fin de Copenhague" label="Fin de Copenhague"/>
<link wikidata="Q6950086" start="5926" end="5934" title="Mémoires" label="Mémoires"/>
<link wikidata="Q3866634" start="6073" end="6120" title="International Movement for an Imaginist Bauhaus" label="International Movement for an Imaginist Bauhaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2717088" start="6126" end="6150" title="Lettriste Internationale" label="Lettriste Internationale"/>
<link wikidata="Q2985628" start="6156" end="6193" title="London Psychogeographical Association" label="London Psychogeographical Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q850181" start="6206" end="6232" title="Situationist International" label="Situationist International"/>
<link wikidata="Q81082" start="6311" end="6325" title="Henri Poincaré" label="Henri Poincaré"/>
<link wikidata="Q7085" start="6330" end="6340" title="Niels Bohr" label="Niels Bohr"/>
<link wikidata="Q5958045" start="6356" end="6367" title="situlogy" label="situlogical"/>
<link wikidata="Q5307241" start="7211" end="7258" title="Scandinavian Institute of Comparative Vandalism" label="Scandinavian Institute of Comparative Vandalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q21180" start="7262" end="7271" title="Silkeborg" label="Silkeborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q7532173" start="7310" end="7328" title="Situationist Times" label="Situationist Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q185443" start="7552" end="7563" title="Trivalent logic" label="Triolectics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239547" start="7627" end="7647" title="three sided football" label="three sided football"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7863" end="7880" title="Gerard Franceschi" label="Gerard Franceschi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316544" start="8284" end="8300" title="Guggenheim Award" label="Guggenheim Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q957215" start="8372" end="8388" title="Lawrence Alloway" label="Lawrence Alloway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1586488" start="8468" end="8487" title="Harry Frank Guggenheim" label="Harry F. Guggenheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q25319" start="8938" end="8944" title="Aarhus" label="Aarhus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1742873" start="9001" end="9018" title="Grötlingbo Church" label="Grötlingbo Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q7085" start="11613" end="11623" title="Niels Bohr" label="Niels Bohr"/>
<link wikidata="Q899805" start="11641" end="11656" title="Complementarity (physics)" label="complementarity"/>
<link wikidata="Q181207" start="11722" end="11745" title="dialectical materialism" label="dialectical materialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q317336" start="12035" end="12043" title="Damville, Eure" label="Damville"/>
<link wikidata="Q322361" start="12139" end="12143" title="Ribe" label="Ribe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2167" start="12145" end="12149" title="Lund" label="Lund"/>
<link wikidata="Q25804" start="12155" end="12164" title="Trondheim" label="Trondheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q3372" start="12322" end="12326" title="Eure" label="Eure"/>
<link wikidata="Q3249" start="12331" end="12339" title="Calvados (department)" label="Calvados"/>
<link wikidata="Q3450228" start="12426" end="12440" title="Art of Denmark" label="Art of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q634548" start="12442" end="12465" title="List of Danish painters" label="List of Danish painters"/>
<link wikidata="Q3305357" start="12467" end="12508" title="Members of the Situationist International" label="Members of the Situationist International"/>
<link wikidata="Q3125109" start="12510" end="12532" title="Museum Jorn, Silkeborg" label="Museum Jorn, Silkeborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q372600" start="12534" end="12542" title="Tachisme" label="Tachisme"/>
<link wikidata="Q1825044" start="13915" end="13934" title="Niels Viggo Bentzon" label="Niels Viggo Bentzon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14463" end="14480" title="Graham Birtwistle" label="Graham Birtwistle"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14596" end="14642" title="Troels Andersen, Brian Rasmussen and Roald Pay" label="Troels Andersen, Brian Rasmussen and Roald Pay"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14812" end="14824" title="Peter Shield" label="Peter Shield"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15042" end="15055" title="Tom McDonough" label="Tom McDonough"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="230639" wikidata="Q7914565" url="?curid=230639" title="Vandzene">
<text>Vandzene is a village in Vandzene parish, Talsi Municipality, in the Courland region of Latvia. The community&#x27;s elevation is 49 m (160 ft).

The Vandzene Manor was built at the start of the 19th century. At present, Vandzene Gymnasium occupies the estate.

The grand-stone of Vandzene, with a circumference of 26 metres, is the third largest stone in Latvia. In ancient times it was a place of worship and stood amid an apple orchard and birch grove.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7914568" start="25" end="40" title="Vandzene parish" label="Vandzene parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q97232890" start="42" end="60" title="Talsi Municipality" label="Talsi Municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q185072" start="69" end="77" title="Courland" label="Courland"/>
<link wikidata="Q211" start="88" end="94" title="Latvia" label="Latvia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633778" start="117" end="126" title="elevation" label="elevation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7914566" start="150" end="164" title="Vandzene Manor" label="Vandzene Manor"/>
<link wikidata="Q89" start="425" end="430" title="apple" label="apple"/>
<link wikidata="Q25243" start="443" end="448" title="birch" label="birch"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="230641" wikidata="Q605757" url="?curid=230641" title="Copper interconnects">
<text>Copper interconnects are used in integrated circuits to reduce propagation delays and power consumption. Since copper is a better conductor than aluminium, ICs using copper for their interconnects can have interconnects with narrower dimensions, and use less energy to pass electricity through them. Together, these effects lead to ICs with better performance. They were first introduced by IBM, with assistance from Motorola, in 1997.

The transition from aluminium to copper required significant developments in fabrication techniques, including radically different methods for patterning the metal as well as the introduction of barrier metal layers to isolate the silicon from potentially damaging copper atoms.

Although the methods of superconformal copper electrodepostion were known since late 1960, their application at the (sub)micron via scale (e.g. in microchips) started only in 1988-1995 (see figure). By year 2002 it became a mature technology, and research and development efforts in this field started to decline.

==Patterning==
Although some form of volatile copper compound has been known to exist since 1947, with more discovered as the century progressed, none were in industrial use, so copper could not be patterned by the previous techniques of photoresist masking and plasma etching that had been used with great success with aluminium. The inability to plasma etch copper called for a drastic rethinking of the metal patterning process and the result of this rethinking was a process referred to as an &quot;additive patterning&quot;, also known as a &quot;Damascene&quot; or &quot;dual-Damascene&quot; process by analogy to a traditional technique of metal inlaying.

In this process, the underlying silicon oxide insulating layer is patterned with open trenches where the conductor should be. A thick coating of copper that significantly overfills the trenches is deposited on the insulator, and chemical-mechanical planarization (CMP) is used to remove the copper (known as &quot;overburden&quot;) that extends above the top of the insulating layer. Copper sunken within the trenches of the insulating layer is not removed and becomes the patterned conductor. Damascene processes generally form and fill a single feature with copper per Damascene stage. Dual-Damascene processes generally form and fill two features with copper at once, e.g., a trench overlying a via may both be filled with a single copper deposition using dual-Damascene.

With successive layers of insulator and copper, a multilayer interconnect structure is created. The number of layers depends on the IC&#x27;s function, 10 or more metal layers are possible. Without the ability of CMP to remove the copper coating in a planar and uniform fashion, and without the ability of the CMP process to stop repeatably at the copper-insulator interface, this technology would not be realizable.

==Barrier metal==
A barrier metal layer must completely surround all copper interconnect, since diffusion of copper into surrounding materials would degrade their properties. For instance, silicon forms deep-level traps when doped with copper. As the name implies, a barrier metal must limit copper diffusivity sufficiently to chemically isolate the copper conductor from the silicon below, yet have high electrical conductivity in order to maintain a good electronic contact.

The thickness of the barrier film is also quite important; with too thin a layer, the copper contacts poison the very devices that they connect to; with too thick a layer, the stack of two barrier metal films and a copper conductor have a greater total resistance than aluminium interconnects, eliminating any benefit.

The improvement in conductivity in going from earlier aluminium to copper based conductors was modest, and not as good as to be expected by a simple comparison of bulk conductivities of aluminium and copper. The addition of barrier metals on all four sides of the copper conductor significantly reduces the cross-sectional area of the conductor that is composed of pure, low resistance, copper. Aluminium, while requiring a thin barrier metal to promote low ohmic resistance when making a contact directly to silicon or aluminium layers, did not require barrier metals on the sides of the metal lines to isolate aluminium from the surrounding silicon oxide insulators. Therefore scientists are looking for new ways to reduce the diffusion of copper into silicon substrates without using the buffer layer. One method is to use copper-germanium alloy as the interconnect material so that buffer layer (e.g. titanium nitride) is no longer needed. Epitaxial Cu3Ge layer has been fabricated with an average resistivity of 6 ± 1 μΩ cm and work function of ~4.47 ± 0.02 eV respectively, qualifying it as a good alternative to copper.

==Electromigration==
Resistance to electromigration, the process by which a metal conductor changes shape under the influence of an electric current flowing through it and which eventually leads to the breaking of the conductor, is significantly better with copper than with aluminium. This improvement in electromigration resistance allows higher currents to flow through a given size copper conductor compared to aluminium. The combination of a modest increase in conductivity along with this improvement in electromigration resistance was to prove highly attractive. The overall benefits derived from these performance improvements were ultimately enough to drive full-scale investment in copper-based technologies and fabrication methods for high performance semiconductor devices, and copper-based processes continue to be the state of the art for the semiconductor industry today.

==Superconformal electrodeposition of copper==

Around 2005 the processor frequency reached 3 GHz due to continuous decrease in the on-chip transistor size in the previous years. At this point, the capacitive RC coupling of interconnects became the speed(frequency)-limiting factor.

The process of reducing both R and C started in the late 1990’s, when Al (aluminium) was replaced with Cu (copper) for lower R (resistance), and SiO2 was replaced with low-κ dielectrics for lower C (capacitance). Cu was selected as the replacement for Al, because it has the lowest electronic resistance among low-cost materials at room temperature, and because Cu shows a slower electromigration than Al. Noteworthy, in the case of Al interconnects was patterning process involves selective Al etching (i.e. subtractive manufacturing process) in uncoated areas, followed by deposition of a dielectric. Since no method of spatially-selective etching of copper was known, etching (patterning) of the dielectric was implemented instead. For the Cu deposition (i.e. an additive manufacturing process), the IBM team in the late 1990’s selected electroplating. This started the ‘copper revolution” in the semiconductor / microchip industry. 

The copper plating starts with coating the walls of a via with a protective layer (Ta, TaN, SiN or SiC), that prevents Cu diffusion into silicon. Then, physical vapor deposition of a thin seed Cu layer on the via walls is performed.
 This “seed layer” servers as the promoter for the next step of electrodeposition. Normally, due to slower mass-transport of Cu2+ ion, the electroplating is slower deep inside the vias. Under such conditions, via filling results in a formation of a void inside. In order to avoid such defects, bottom-up filling (or superconformal) filling is required, as shown in Fig. A. 

Liquid solutions for superconformal copper electroplating typically comprise several additives in mM concentrations: chloride ion, a suppressor (such as polyethyleneglycol), an accelerator (e.g. bis(3-sulfopropyl)disulfide) and a leveling agent (e.g. Janus Green B). 
Two main models for superconformal metal electroplating have been proposed:

1) curvature enhanced adsorbate concentration (CEAC) model suggests, that as the curvature of the copper layer on the bottom of the via increases, and the surface coverage of the adsorbed accelerator increases as well, facilitating kinetically limited Cu deposition in these areas. This model emphasizes the role of accelerator.

2) S-shaped negative differential resistance (S-NDR) model claims instead, that the main effect comes from the suppressor, which due to its high molecular weight/slow diffusion does not reach the bottom of the via and preferentially adsorbs at the top of the via, where it inhibits Cu plating. 

There is experimental evidence to support either model. The reconciliatory opinion is that in the early stages of the bottom-up via filling the higher rate of Cu plating at the bottom is due to the lack of the PEG suppressor molecules there (their diffusion coefficienct is too low to provide a fast enough mass-transport). The accelerator, which is a smaller and faster diffusing molecule, reaches the bottom of the via, where is accelerates the rate of Cu plating without the suppressor. At the end of plating, the accelerator remains in a high concentration on the surface of the plated copper, causing the formation of a final bump.

==See also==
* Carbon nanotubes in interconnects

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q605757" start="0" end="20" title="Copper interconnects" label="Copper interconnects"/>
<link wikidata="Q80831" start="33" end="51" title="integrated circuit" label="integrated circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144416" start="63" end="80" title="propagation delay" label="propagation delay"/>
<link wikidata="Q29954" start="86" end="103" title="power consumption" label="power consumption"/>
<link wikidata="Q663" start="145" end="154" title="aluminium" label="aluminium"/>
<link wikidata="Q60769211" start="183" end="196" title="Interconnect (integrated circuit)" label="interconnects"/>
<link wikidata="Q37156" start="391" end="394" title="IBM" label="IBM"/>
<link wikidata="Q259011" start="417" end="425" title="Motorola" label="Motorola"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570432" start="514" end="525" title="fabrication (semiconductor)" label="fabrication"/>
<link wikidata="Q622938" start="1270" end="1289" title="photolithography" label="photoresist masking"/>
<link wikidata="Q2392011" start="1294" end="1308" title="plasma etching" label="plasma etching"/>
<link wikidata="Q2295879" start="1578" end="1599" title="Damascening" label="&amp;quot;Damascene&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069404" start="1925" end="1958" title="chemical-mechanical planarization" label="chemical-mechanical planarization"/>
<link wikidata="Q374105" start="2394" end="2397" title="via (electronics)" label="via"/>
<link wikidata="Q5275435" start="2910" end="2923" title="barrier metal" label="barrier metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q163214" start="2986" end="2995" title="diffusion" label="diffusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q670" start="3079" end="3086" title="silicon" label="silicon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5250052" start="3093" end="3108" title="deep-level trap" label="deep-level trap"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130571" start="3115" end="3120" title="doping (semiconductor)" label="doped"/>
<link wikidata="Q65402698" start="3295" end="3318" title="electrical conductivity" label="electrical conductivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q415638" start="4593" end="4609" title="titanium nitride" label="titanium nitride"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319010" start="4851" end="4867" title="electromigration" label="electromigration"/>
<link wikidata="Q663" start="6062" end="6071" title="aluminium" label="aluminium"/>
<link wikidata="Q753" start="6095" end="6101" title="copper" label="copper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1872538" start="6156" end="6173" title="Low-κ dielectric" label="low-κ dielectrics"/>
<link wikidata="Q410083" start="7687" end="7705" title="polyethyleneglycol" label="polyethyleneglycol"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7729" end="7756" title="bis(3-sulfopropyl)disulfide" label="bis(3-sulfopropyl)disulfide"/>
<link wikidata="Q28324866" start="9158" end="9191" title="Carbon nanotubes in interconnects" label="Carbon nanotubes in interconnects"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="230643" wikidata="Q320809" url="?curid=230643" title="Braid">
<text>A braid (also referred to as a plait; ) is a complex structure or pattern formed by interlacing three or more strands of flexible material such as textile yarns, wire, or hair.
The simplest and most common version is a flat, solid, three-stranded structure. More complex patterns can be constructed from an arbitrary number of strands to create a wider range of structures (such as a fishtail braid, a five-stranded braid, rope braid, a French braid and a waterfall braid). The structure is usually long and narrow with each component strand functionally equivalent in zigzagging forward through the overlapping mass of the others. It can be compared with the process of weaving, which usually involves two separate perpendicular groups of strands (warp and weft).

Historically, the materials used have depended on the indigenous plants and animals available in the local area. During the Industrial Revolution, mechanized braiding equipment was invented to increase production. The braiding technique was used to make ropes with both natural and synthetic fibers as well as coaxial cables for radios using copper wire. In more recent times it has been used to create a covering for fuel pipes in jet aircraft and ships (first using glass fibre, then stainless steel and Kevlar). Hoses for domestic plumbing are often covered with stainless steel braid.

== Hair braiding ==

The oldest known reproduction of hair braiding may go back about 30,000 years: the Venus of Willendorf, a female figurine estimated to have been made between about 28,000 and 25,000 BC in modern-day Austria. The Venus of Brassempouy from the southwest of France is estimated to be about 25,000 years old and shows a braided hairstyle.

Although many cultures want to take sole credit for the braid, they cannot be traced to a single origin. Like how different versions of Cinderella are traceable to nearly every culture, braids, too, are . One early example of hair braiding takes place in 1279-1213 BCE as recorded in the story of Isis: &quot;when some of the queen&#x27;s maidens came to the well, she greeted them kindly and began to braid their hair.&quot;

During the Bronze Age and Iron Age, many peoples in the Near East, Asia Minor, Caucasus, East Mediterranean and North Africa are depicted in art with braided or plaited hair and beards. Similarly, the practice is recorded in Europe, Africa, India, China, Japan, Australasia and Central Asia.

Braiding is traditionally a social art. Because of the time it takes to braid hair, people have often taken time to socialize while braiding and having their hair braided. It begins with the elders making simple knots and braids for younger children. Older children watch and learn from them, start practicing on younger children, and eventually learn the traditional designs. This carries on a tradition of bonding between elders and the new generation.
== Industrial history and use == 

Early braids had many uses, such as costume decoration, animal regalia (like camel girths), sword decoration, bowls and hats (from palm leaves), locks (such as those made in Japan to secure precious tea supplies through the use of elaborate knots), and weapons (e.g. slings).

Materials that are used in braids can vary depending on local materials. For instance, South Americans used the very fine fibers from the wool of alpaca and llama, while North American people made use of bison fibers. Throughout the world, vegetable fibers such as grass, nettle, and hemp have been used to create braids. In China, Korea, and Japan silk still remains the main material used. In the Americas, the braiding of leather is also common. Plaiting with kangaroo leather has been a widely practiced tradition in rural Australia since pioneering times. It is used in the production of fine leather belts, hatbands, bridles, dog leads, bullwhips, stockwhips, etc. Other leathers are used for the plaiting of heavier products suitable for everyday use.

For nomadic peoples, braiding was a practical means of producing useful and decorative textiles. In other areas, such as the Pacific islands (where leaves and grasses are braided), and for many hill tribes, braids are made using minimal equipment. It was only when braiding became a popular occupation in the home or school, as it is in China and Japan, and when the Industrial Revolution came about, that specific tools were developed to increase production and make it easier to produce more complicated patterns of braids.

Braids are also very good for making rope and decorative objects. Complex braids have been used to create hanging fibre artworks.

Gold braids and silver braids are components or trims of many kinds of formal dress, including military uniform (in epaulettes, aiguillettes, on headgear).

===Ropes and cables===

Braiding creates a composite rope that is thicker than the non-interlaced strands of yarns. Braided ropes are preferred by arborists, rock climbers, and in sport sailing because they do not twist under load, as does an ordinary twisted-strand rope. These ropes consist of one or more concentric tubular braided jackets surrounding either several small twisted fibre cords, or a single untwisted yarn of straight fibres, and are known as Kernmantle ropes.

In electrical and electronic cables, &quot;braid&quot; is a tubular sheath made of braided strands of metal placed around a central cable for shielding against electromagnetic interference. The braid is grounded while the central conductor(s) carries the signal. The braid may be used in addition to a foil jacket to increase shielding and durability. Litz wire uses braids of thin insulated wires to carry high frequency signals with much lower losses from skin effect or to minimise proximity effect in transformers. Flat braids made of many copper wires can also be used for flexible electrical connections between large components. The numerous smaller wires comprising the braid are much more resistant to breaking under repeated motion and vibration than is a cable of larger wires. A common example of this may be found connecting a car battery&#x27;s negative terminal to the metal chassis.

Similar braiding is used on pressurized hoses, such as in plumbing and hydraulic brake systems in automobiles. Braiding is also used for fibres for composite reinforcements.

A property of the basic braid is that removing one strand unlinks the other two, as they are not twisted around each other. Mathematically, a braid with that property is called a Brunnian braid.

== Onion and garlic ==
Onion and garlic stalks are often braided for storage after they are partially dried.

==Metaphors==

Braids are often used figuratively to represent interweaving or combination, such as in, &quot;He braided many different ideas into a new whole.&quot;

In some river and stream systems, small streams join and redivide in many places. Such stream systems are said to be braided. These are often found in alluvial fans at the outlet of canyons. This is a result of heavy sediment deposition at high flows followed by re-erosion at low flows.

==Gallery==
==See also==
* African hair threading
* Braiding machines
* Braid theory
* Ceinture fléchée
* Kumihimo, Japanese braid
* List of hairstyles
* Ply-split braiding
* Sennit
* Lucet

==References==
== External links ==
* 
*Minnesota Statute Sec.155A.28 https://www.revisor.mn.gov/statutes/cite/155A.28</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q320809" start="2" end="7" title="Braid" label="braid"/>
<link wikidata="Q320809" start="31" end="36" title="Braid" label="plait"/>
<link wikidata="Q10607082" start="437" end="449" title="French braid" label="French braid"/>
<link wikidata="Q192296" start="671" end="678" title="weaving" label="weaving"/>
<link wikidata="Q116214300" start="749" end="753" title="Warp (weaving)" label="warp"/>
<link wikidata="Q116214300" start="758" end="762" title="weft" label="weft"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269" start="890" end="911" title="Industrial Revolution" label="Industrial Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q31029" start="1020" end="1024" title="rope" label="rope"/>
<link wikidata="Q183389" start="1076" end="1089" title="coaxial cable" label="coaxial cable"/>
<link wikidata="Q2811078" start="1108" end="1119" title="Copper wire and cable" label="copper wire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5861" start="1234" end="1245" title="glass fibre" label="glass fibre"/>
<link wikidata="Q207344" start="1272" end="1278" title="Kevlar" label="Kevlar"/>
<link wikidata="Q131397" start="1460" end="1479" title="Venus of Willendorf" label="Venus of Willendorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q248726" start="1490" end="1498" title="Venus figurines" label="figurine"/>
<link wikidata="Q849063" start="1589" end="1609" title="Venus of Brassempouy" label="Venus of Brassempouy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="2151" end="2161" title="Bronze Age" label="Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q11764" start="2166" end="2174" title="Iron Age" label="Iron Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q48214" start="2196" end="2205" title="Near East" label="Near East"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="2207" end="2217" title="Asia Minor" label="Asia Minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q18869" start="2219" end="2227" title="Caucasus" label="Caucasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3301962" start="2229" end="2247" title="East Mediterranean" label="East Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q27381" start="2252" end="2264" title="North Africa" label="North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="2365" end="2371" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="2373" end="2379" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="2381" end="2386" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="2388" end="2393" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="2395" end="2400" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q45256" start="2402" end="2413" title="Australasia" label="Australasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q27275" start="2418" end="2430" title="Central Asia" label="Central Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q119814" start="2986" end="2993" title="regalia" label="regalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12791" start="3015" end="3020" title="sword" label="sword"/>
<link wikidata="Q14080" start="3054" end="3065" title="Arecaceae" label="palm leaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q228039" start="3068" end="3072" title="lock (security device)" label="lock"/>
<link wikidata="Q122181742" start="3346" end="3352" title="alpaca" label="alpaca"/>
<link wikidata="Q42569" start="3357" end="3362" title="llama" label="llama"/>
<link wikidata="Q18099" start="3404" end="3409" title="bison" label="bison"/>
<link wikidata="Q43238" start="3465" end="3470" title="Poaceae" label="grass"/>
<link wikidata="Q16872290" start="3472" end="3478" title="List of plants known as nettle" label="nettle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7150699" start="3484" end="3488" title="hemp" label="hemp"/>
<link wikidata="Q37681" start="3549" end="3553" title="silk" label="silk"/>
<link wikidata="Q286" start="3625" end="3632" title="leather" label="leather"/>
<link wikidata="Q5070208" start="3663" end="3671" title="kangaroo" label="kangaroo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5202866" start="3743" end="3753" title="Pioneering (Scouting)" label="pioneering"/>
<link wikidata="Q7618279" start="3854" end="3863" title="stockwhip" label="stockwhip"/>
<link wikidata="Q19617380" start="4085" end="4100" title="Pacific Islands" label="Pacific islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151364" start="4689" end="4701" title="formal dress" label="formal dress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196123" start="4713" end="4729" title="military uniform" label="military uniform"/>
<link wikidata="Q616200" start="4734" end="4743" title="epaulette" label="epaulette"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094374" start="4746" end="4757" title="aiguillette" label="aiguillette"/>
<link wikidata="Q49007" start="4884" end="4889" title="yarn" label="yarns"/>
<link wikidata="Q776268" start="4922" end="4930" title="arborist" label="arborist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154336" start="4933" end="4946" title="rock climbing" label="rock climbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q14085739" start="4955" end="4968" title="sport sailing" label="sport sailing"/>
<link wikidata="Q17148580" start="5236" end="5251" title="Kernmantle rope" label="Kernmantle rope"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474513" start="5415" end="5443" title="electromagnetic interference" label="electromagnetic interference"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393921" start="5607" end="5616" title="Litz wire" label="Litz wire"/>
<link wikidata="Q664150" start="5713" end="5724" title="skin effect" label="skin effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514331" start="5740" end="5756" title="proximity effect (electromagnetism)" label="proximity effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q902054" start="6095" end="6106" title="Automotive battery" label="car battery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068107" start="6145" end="6152" title="chassis" label="chassis"/>
<link wikidata="Q176440" start="6195" end="6200" title="Hose (tubing)" label="hoses"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640133" start="6226" end="6241" title="hydraulic brake" label="hydraulic brake"/>
<link wikidata="Q3055232" start="6509" end="6523" title="Brunnian braid" label="Brunnian braid"/>
<link wikidata="Q5514687" start="6628" end="6633" title="Food drying" label="dried"/>
<link wikidata="Q590219" start="6920" end="6927" title="Braided river" label="braided"/>
<link wikidata="Q465088" start="6954" end="6966" title="alluvial fan" label="alluvial fan"/>
<link wikidata="Q150784" start="6985" end="6991" title="canyon" label="canyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q180184" start="7020" end="7028" title="sediment" label="sediment"/>
<link wikidata="Q124284719" start="7119" end="7141" title="African hair threading" label="African hair threading"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002709" start="7144" end="7160" title="Braiding machine" label="Braiding machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q220409" start="7164" end="7176" title="Braid theory" label="Braid theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2943844" start="7179" end="7195" title="Ceinture fléchée" label="Ceinture fléchée"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779913" start="7198" end="7206" title="Kumihimo" label="Kumihimo"/>
<link wikidata="Q450779" start="7225" end="7243" title="List of hairstyles" label="List of hairstyles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205726" start="7246" end="7264" title="Ply-split braiding" label="Ply-split braiding"/>
<link wikidata="Q7450880" start="7267" end="7273" title="Sennit" label="Sennit"/>
<link wikidata="Q6696523" start="7276" end="7281" title="Lucet" label="Lucet"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="230646" wikidata="Q650475" url="?curid=230646" title="Sabile">
<text>Sabile (; ) is a town in Talsi Municipality, in the Courland region of Latvia.

Sabile was first mentioned in chronicles in 1253. From the 14th century to the 16th century, it was a site of a castle of the Livonian Order and a village near the castle. Sabile became a town in 1917. The Sabile Wine hill (&quot;Sabiles Vīna Kalns&quot;) used to be the most northern open-air vineyard in the world, registered in the Guinness Book of Records. The winemaking tradition in Sabile dates back to the 16th century. For the first time, wine production was created here during Livonia (14th century), and the hill was completely restored in 1936 during by the mayor Osvalds Rezebergs. The Sabile Castle Mound, which was the center of the district from the 10th century to the 13th century, overlooks Sabile and the valley of the Abava River.
== Notable people ==

* Alberts Šeibelis (1906–1972), footballer
* Ainars Zvirgzdiņš (born 1959), basketball coach
* Markus Riva (born 1986), singer
* Dzintars Čīča (born 1993), singer

==See also==
*List of cities in Latvia

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q650475" start="0" end="6" title="Sabile" label="Sabile"/>
<link wikidata="Q3957" start="17" end="21" title="town" label="town"/>
<link wikidata="Q97232890" start="25" end="43" title="Talsi Municipality" label="Talsi Municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q185072" start="52" end="60" title="Courland" label="Courland"/>
<link wikidata="Q211" start="71" end="77" title="Latvia" label="Latvia"/>
<link wikidata="Q29140" start="206" end="220" title="Livonian Order" label="Livonian Order"/>
<link wikidata="" start="310" end="328" title=":lv:Sabiles_Vīna_kalns" label="Sabiles Vīna Kalns"/>
<link wikidata="Q41675" start="415" end="439" title="Guinness Book of Records" label="Guinness Book of Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q4663589" start="802" end="812" title="Abava Valley" label="the valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q305700" start="820" end="831" title="Abava River" label="Abava River"/>
<link wikidata="Q38306" start="857" end="873" title="Alberts Šeibelis" label="Alberts Šeibelis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4697549" start="900" end="917" title="Ainars Zvirgzdiņš" label="Ainars Zvirgzdiņš"/>
<link wikidata="Q20564810" start="950" end="961" title="Markus Riva" label="Markus Riva"/>
<link wikidata="Q210851" start="984" end="997" title="Dzintars Čīča" label="Dzintars Čīča"/>
<link wikidata="Q106978" start="1033" end="1057" title="List of cities in Latvia" label="List of cities in Latvia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="230647" wikidata="Q2586354" url="?curid=230647" title="Knowledge transfer">
<text>Knowledge transfer refers to transferring an awareness of facts or practical skills from one entity to another. The particular profile of transfer processes activated for a given situation depends on (a) the type of knowledge to be transferred and how it is represented (the source and recipient relationship with this knowledge) and (b) the processing demands of the transfer task. From this perspective, knowledge transfer in humans encompasses expertise from different disciplines: psychology, cognitive anthropology, anthropology of knowledge, communication studies and media ecology.

== Overview ==
Because of the rapid development of strategies for promoting wider information use during the &quot;information age&quot;, a family of terms – knowledge transfer, learning, transfer of learning, and knowledge sharing – are often used interchangeably or as synonyms. While the concepts of knowledge transfer, learning, and transfer of learning are defined in closely related terms, they are different notions. According to conventional usage in psychology, Transfer of Learning occurs in people when they apply already learned information, strategies, and skills to a new situation or context. Another concept of learning is attributed to all animals and even certain plants. Learning in humans starts before birth. According to cognitive psychology, learning begins from unaware and, even before birth during pregnancy, from non-perceptual processes of distinguishing sensory stimuli. In contrast to both above, knowledge transfer is a process in humans that requires intention from both sides: to share facts or skills from one side and acquire new knowledge from another (see the definition of knowledge transfer).

The most significant difficulties exist with separating the terms knowledge transfer and knowledge sharing. According to Paulin and Suneson (2012), their distinction is based on different representations of the relationship between knowledge and its context by different authors. Scientists who use the term knowledge transfer intend knowledge as an object without regard to the context; they amplify the enablers, suppress disabling conditions, and overcome obstacles, including the barriers, if they want to create good conditions for knowledge flow. Scholars who believe that knowledge is something that is constructed in a social context and which cannot be separated from the context (or the individual) use knowledge sharing and focus more on the development of &quot;space&quot; or &quot;environment&quot; to better fit individuals who need to develop personal knowledge with the help of those who have already developed it. Another approach suggests that knowledge sharing is a subset of knowledge transfer. Knowledge sharing refers to a linear (unidirectional) process using a personalization strategy. Knowledge transfer is a non-linear (bidirectional) process that may also proceed unidirectionally (as those linear in Knowledge sharing). According to Tangaraja and colleagues (2016), the essential peculiarity of knowledge transfer is that it is distinguished by the strategy used. Indeed, the meaning of the word transfer implies the aim since the dictionary defines it as the process &quot;to move someone or something from one place, vehicle, person, or group to another&quot;. In contrast, sharing refers to &quot;having or using something simultaneously as someone else&quot; without targeting.

The brief overview of related fields of knowledge introduces the main concepts that scholars consider when studying the current topic.

In cognitive anthropology, scholars tend to study patterns of shared knowledge. Cognitive anthropology is concerned with what people from different groups know and how that implicit knowledge changes how people perceive and relate to the world around them. This discipline attempts to understand the impact of culture on developing the cognitive schema – a culturally specific mental structure responsible for an active organization of past experiences, implying activation of the whole. Cognitive anthropologists strive to identify and systematize certain essential aspects of culture to understand how these peculiarities affect knowledge transfer. Because the cognitive schemas on the same issue may differ in different cultures, the particularities of knowledge transfer in different environments are essential.

In psychology, knowledge transfer is also based on the notion of cognitive schema and involves essential processes of Assimilation and Accommodation. Assimilation refers to an interpretation of new information within the framework of existing cognitive schema. It is the reuse of existing schemata to fit the new information. Accommodation refers to making minor changes to acquired knowledge to create a new schema for that knowledge to cope with things that do not fit existing schemas. In terms of psychology, knowledge transfer relates to the transformability of the transferred knowledge for assimilating by existing cognitive schemas and the translatability of the source practice for creating the new cognitive schema in the accommodation.

In communication studies, basic concepts like &quot;sender&quot;, &quot;receiver&quot;, &quot;message&quot;, &quot;channel&quot;, &quot;signal&quot;, &quot;encoding&quot;, &quot;decoding&quot;, &quot;noise&quot;, &quot;feedback&quot;, and &quot;context&quot;, appear in different models, which are classified in many ways. Models of communication adhere to the main properties of any model: &quot;Mapping&quot; (emulating something existing in objective reality); &quot;Reduction&quot; (including only attributes that appear relevant to the model&#x27;s creator or user); &quot;Pragmatism&quot; (not relating unambiguously to its original). Communication studies recognize two main categories of models for describing knowledge transfer. The linear direction category presents a unidirectional process in which messages flow from the communicator to the audience. Conversely, the non-linear category is multi-directional: messages are sent back and forth between participants.

In organizational theory, knowledge transfer is the practical problem of transferring knowledge from one part of the organization to another. Like knowledge management, knowledge transfer seeks to organize, create, capture or distribute knowledge and ensure its availability for future users. It is considered to be more than just a communication problem. If it were merely that, then a memorandum, an e-mail or a meeting would accomplish the knowledge transfer. Knowledge transfer is more complex because:

* knowledge resides in organizational members, tools, tasks, and their subnetworks and 
* much knowledge in organizations is tacit or hard to articulate.

The subject has been taken up under the title of knowledge management since the 1990s. The term has also been applied to the transfer of knowledge at the international level.

In business, knowledge transfer now has become a common topic in mergers and acquisitions. It focuses on transferring technological platforms, market experience, managerial expertise, corporate culture, and other intellectual capital that can improve the companies&#x27; competence. Since technical skills and knowledge are very important assets for firms&#x27; competence in the global competition, unsuccessful knowledge transfer can have a negative impact on corporations and lead to expensive and time-consuming M&amp;A not creating values to the firms.

== History ==
Knowledge transfer between humans is a practice that likely dates back to the &quot;Great Leap Forward&quot; in behavioral modernity about 80,000 years ago, with the origin of speech initiating as far back as 100,000 BCE. Many scholars agree that modern human behavior can be characterized by abstract thinking, planning depth, symbolic behavior (e.g., art, ornamentation), music and dance, exploitation of large game, and blade technology, among others – &quot;a set of traits that have come to be accepted as indicators of behavioral modernity&quot;

The scientific study of knowledge transfer began in the first half of the twentieth century, focusing mainly on innovation adoption by individuals. In 1943, Ryan and Gross (1943) recognized the diffusion of innovation as an essential social process where interpersonal contact may play a pivotal role.

The period since 1945 has been characterized as the information age that increased motivation to develop strategies for promoting its wider use. After the Second War, three principal demands encouraged academic research on the topic: (a) a desire for rapid technological change to stimulate more significant economic growth; (b) a desire to enhance the transfer of technology emerging from defence and space-related research; and (c) a desire to promote the adoption of innovations in health, education, and human services. Numerous research studies tested different strategies of knowledge distribution: print materials, films, videotapes, audiocassettes, consultation, organization development, technical assistance, network arrangements, training conferences and workshops, and participant observation. 
In 1991, Backer (1991) proposed six crucial points for knowledge utilization: 
* Interpersonal contact: To get an innovation used in new settings, there needs to be direct, personal contact between the source and recipient;
* Planning and conceptual foresight: a thought-out plan for how the innovation will be adopted in a new setting;
* Outside consultation on the change process; 
* User-oriented transformation of information: what is known about an innovation needs to be translated to the recipient; 
* Individual and organizational championship: influential staff members and organizational leaders express enthusiasm for its adoption;
* Potential user involvement: everyone who will have to live with the results of an organizational change needs to be involved in planning for innovation adoption.

During the first years after its reemergence, the notion of Knowledge transfer was usually treated in line with the notion of the knowledge-based theory of the firm. One of the most commonly cited authors here was Szulanski, who in numerous books and articles had developed the notion of knowledge transfer, especially regarding intra-firm knowledge. His early work clearly stated that knowledge is regarded as a firm&#x27;s stock. Szulanski&#x27;s doctoral dissertation (&quot;Exploring internal stickiness: Impediments to the transfer of best practice within the firm&quot;) proposed that knowledge transfer within a firm is inhibited by factors other than a lack of incentive. How well knowledge about best practices remains broadly accessible within a firm depends upon the nature of that knowledge, from where (or whom) it comes, who gets it, and the organizational context within which any transfer occurs. &quot;Stickiness&quot; is a metaphor that comes from the difficulty of circulating fluid around an oil refinery (including effects of the fluid&#x27;s native viscosity). It is worth noting that his analysis does not apply to scientific theories, where a different set of dynamics and rewards apply.

Argote and Ingram (2000) defined knowledge transfer as &quot;the process through which one unit (e.g., group, department, or division) is affected by the experience of another&quot; (p. 151). They further pointed out the transfer of organizational knowledge (i.e., routine or best practices) can be observed through changes in the knowledge or performance of recipient units. Even though the benefits of knowledge transfer are well known, the effectiveness of the process varies considerably. The transfer of organizational knowledge, such as best practices, can be quite difficult to achieve.

== Modern theories ==
Knowledge transfer can lead to a number of outcomes for organizations, including: greater decision making, improved customer relations, innovation performance, financial performance, transfer effectiveness, transfer efficiency, patent, new product development, and technological leadership. The growing body of literature shows two sets of research on knowledge transfer. One set of studies focus on understanding the individual level and extending to group dynamics, e.g. aiming to better understand trust, respect, relationships, self-efficacy. The second set of studies focus on the organizational level, e.g. discussing cultural aspects, structure, rewards and recognition, policy norms, training, relations.

* Evolutionary theory of innovation: The theory concerns the external local network embeddedness, stating that subsidiaries&#x27; relational embeddedness with the external local network is essential for developing local innovations. It highlights the role of previous reverse knowledge transfers in functional areas; the transformation of local into global innovations is more likely to happen due to these previous reverse knowledge transfers. Reverse knowledge transfers indicate internal embeddedness, which is essential for transforming local innovation into global innovation. The theory argues that subsidiaries&#x27; relational embeddedness with the external local network is positively associated with local innovation.
* Institutional theory: The theory argues that the benefits firms can derive from innovation offshoring depend on the institutional environment at home. It explores institutions that facilitate reverse knowledge transfer or institutional arbitrage with respect to innovation-related activities.
* Internationalization theory: The theory concerns firm-level and country-level antecedents of R&amp;D internationalization strategies (the knowledge flow between the foreign and home locations), focusing on differences between enterprises in emerging and advanced economies. It argues that Home-base-exploiting strategies are mostly driven by firm-level factors. Home-base-augmenting strategies are mostly driven by country-level factors.
* Knowledge-based view of firm: This study investigates the role of a strong subsidiary leadership and entrepreneurial culture in the promotion of marketing knowledge inflows and their consequences on the subsidiary&#x27;s ability to develop new products when moderated by the tacitness of knowledge. It argues that subsidiaries&#x27; strong leadership support and entrepreneurial culture are fundamental mechanisms that foster marketing knowledge inflows from both the headquarters and peer subsidiaries. Moreover, marketing knowledge inflows enhance the focal subsidiary&#x27;s innovation abilities. Tacit knowledge exerts contradictory moderating effects on the transfers of marketing knowledge, carrying distinct implications for a subsidiary&#x27;s knowledge management.
* Organization learning theory: The theory contributes to knowledge about the positive impact of knowledge inflows on the innovation of an organizational unit by studying the role of knowledge outflows during knowledge transfer. This paper argues that knowledge outflows influence innovation through a self-learning mechanism and a fairness assessment mechanism and play a unique and important role in team innovation. A theoretical model examines the distinct and synergistic effects of total and balanced knowledge flows on employees&#x27; innovative behavior in an organizational unit.
* Resource based view: This is the study on impact of managerial top-down knowledge transfer on a middle manager&#x27;s individual ambidexterity and decision performance. Top-down managerial knowledge inflow benefits middle manager strategic decision making and short- and long-term performance.
* Social capital theory: The study analyses the importance of different knowledge management practices to promote organizational innovation in multinational companies. It concerns the links among internationalization, reverse knowledge transfer, social capital, and organizational innovation. Internalization does not directly affect organizational innovation but indirectly through the transfer of knowledge from external subsidiaries to headquarters. This knowledge and others from internal and external social capital are essential for developing innovations.
* Social network theory: The theory combines research in international business with social theory, showing that subsidiaries that extensively draw on external knowledge sources are also more likely to generate knowledge outflows to local firms. It argues that this may be explained by the subsidiaries&#x27; willingness to build the trust that facilitates the establishment of reciprocal knowledge linkages.
* Upper echelon theory: The theory concerns antecedents of innovation performance for the subsidiaries of multinational enterprises (MNEs) using the microfoundations approach. The ability of foreign subsidiaries to generate innovation plays an increasingly important role in enhancing the performance of MNEs. The study suggests that the international experience of the top management team of a subsidiary and its CEO&#x27;s industry experience positively affect subsidiary innovation.

Three related concepts are &quot;knowledge utilization&quot;, &quot;research utilization&quot; and &quot;implementation&quot;, which are used in the health sciences to describe the process of bringing a new idea, practice or technology into consistent and appropriate use in a clinical setting. The study of knowledge utilization/implementation (KU/I) is a direct outgrowth of the movement toward evidence-based medicine and research concluding that health care practices with demonstrated efficacy are not consistently used in practice settings.

Knowledge transfer within organisations and between nations also raises ethical considerations particularly where there is an imbalance in power relationships (e.g. employer and employee) or in the levels of relative need for knowledge resources (such as developed and developing worlds).

Knowledge transfer includes, but encompasses more than, technology transfer.

== Mechanisms ==
=== Message ===
Translation of knowledge implies the decontextualization and contextualization of knowledge which the entity possess in explicit and tacit forms (also see the Section &quot;Overview&quot;). Explicit knowledge is an awareness of facts or skills that can be readily articulated, conceptualized, codified, formalized, stored and accessed. Tacit knowledge can be defined as skills, ideas and experiences that are possessed by people but are not codified and may not necessarily be easily expressed.
According to Professor Nonaka (2009), the distinction between explicit and tacit knowledge suggests four basic patterns for translating knowledge where they interact in a spiral manner.

* from tacit to tacit knowledge
* from tacit to explicit knowledge
* from explicit to explicit knowledge
* from explicit to tacit knowledge.

The transfer of knowledge can be viewed as the transmission of a chain of small, interchangeable, semantic units. A Knowledge Transfer Unit was defined as the smallest amount of information that can be accurately communicated.

=== Channels ===
Communication studies systematize our understanding of the communication process by introducing models of communication that describe different modalities of message exchange (see also the section &quot;Overview&quot;). In the case of explicit knowledge, all models are reduced to the simple scheme. A source (a sender in terms of communication studies) encodes information as a message and sends it to the recipient (a receiver) through a channel. The recipient needs to decode the message to understand the initial idea and provides some form of feedback. In both cases, the third player is the noise that may interfere and distort the message. The two modes of knowledge transfer – the linear (a unidirectional process) and non-linear (a multi-directional) – encompass a set of different configurations of models.
For instance, according to Sailer and colleagues (2021), based on the number of sources and recipients, all types of knowledge transfer can be reduced to 3 subtypes, namely: linear, divergent, and convergent. Linear knowledge transfer occurs when there is one source and one recipient (e.g. when one person explains a specific topic to someone else). Divergent knowledge transfer occurs when there is one source and multiple recipients (e.g. when a team leader outlines specific tasks for the team). Convergent knowledge transfer occurs when one recipient acquires information from different sources. A typical example of convergent knowledge transfer is when a patient receives information about a condition from several doctors. Convergent knowledge transfer is especially efficient in producing in-depth knowledge of a specific topic.

A 2009 survey of MIT professors found the following channels for knowledge transfer in order of importance:

# formal consulting;
# publications (journal and conference papers);
# hiring former students by industry;
# research collaboration;
# co-supervising students;
# patents and licenses;
# informal conversations;
# conference presentations.

The transfer of tacit knowledge has yet to be studied.

=== Procedure ===
Given the contributions of key theorists (see the above sections), a guide to the knowledge transfer process may be generalized in the following translation procedure:

1) The first stage aims at establishing the transfer design considering multiple actors, their different interests, perceptions, and interpretations in shaping translations that the existing theory suggests:
* Identifying the knowledge holders within the organization
* Motivating them to share
* Exploring and formulating the difference in the source and recipient contexts, for designing (a) the similarity between the source and recipient (whether translation is possible or not), and (b) the SWOT analysis of the translation
* Understanding what is known about an innovation needs to be translated to the recipient to create User-oriented transformation of information
* Decontextualizing the knowledge obtained from knowers
* Contextualizing the transferring knowledge by translating an abstract representation into concrete materialized practices in the recipient context
* Designing a sharing mechanism to facilitate the transfer by planning and conceptual foresight: a thought-out plan for how the innovation will be adopted in a new setting
* Identifying influential staff members and organizational leaders in the recipient organization that express enthusiasm for the new knowledge adoption (individual and organizational championship)
* Involving potential users: everyone who will have to live with the results of an organizational change needs to be involved in planning for innovation adoption

2) The second stage forms the transfer design rules based on the activity in the first stage: 
* Establishing a direct, personal contact between the source and recipient
* Identifying the best mode of translation from the range: the reproducing mode, the modifying mode, and the radical mode
* Executing the transfer plan

3) The third stage aims at studying what a difference the translation makes:
* Measuring to ensure the transfer
* Applying the knowledge transferred
* Monitoring and evaluating

== Between public and private domains ==
With the move of advanced economies from a resource-based to a knowledge-based production, many national governments have increasingly recognized &quot;knowledge&quot; and &quot;innovation&quot; as significant driving forces of economic growth, social development, and job creation. In this context the promotion of &#x27;knowledge transfer&#x27; has increasingly become a subject of public and economic policy. However, the long list of changing global, national and regional government programmes indicates the tension between the need to conduct &#x27;free&#x27; research – that is motivated by interest and by private sector &#x27;short term&#x27; objectives – and research for public interests and general common good.

The underlying assumption that there is a potential for increased collaboration between industry and universities is also underlined in much of the current innovation literature. In particular the Open Innovation approach to developing business value is explicitly based on an assumption that Universities are a &quot;vital source for accessing external ideas&quot;. Moreover, Universities have been deemed to be &quot;the great, largely unknown, and certainly underexploited, resource contributing to the creation of wealth and economic competitiveness.&quot;

Universities and other public sector research organisations (PSROs) have accumulated much practical experience over the years in the transfer of knowledge &quot;across&quot; the divide between the domains of publicly produced knowledge and the private exploitation of it. Many colleges and PSROs have developed processes and policies to discover, protect and exploit intellectual property (IP) rights, and to ensure that IP is successfully transferred to private corporations, or vested in new companies formed for the purposes of exploitation. Routes to commercialization of IP produced by PSROs and colleges include licensing, joint venture, new company formation and royalty-based assignments.

Organisations such as AUTM in the US, the Institute of Knowledge Transfer in the UK, SNITTS in Sweden and the Association of European Science and Technology Transfer Professionals in Europe have provided a conduit for knowledge transfer professionals across the public and private sectors to identify best practice and develop effective tools and techniques for the management of PSRO/college produced IP. On-line communities of practice for knowledge transfer practitioners are also emerging to facilitate connectivity (such as The Global Innovation Network and the knowledge Pool).

Business-University Collaboration was the subject of the Lambert Review in the UK in 2003.

Neuro-education seeks to improve quality of didactic methods and reduce the so called &quot;research practice gap&quot;.

==In the knowledge economy==

With the production factors of the knowledge economy having broadly reshaped and supplanted those of prior economic models, researchers have characterized the management and processing of organizational knowledge as vital to organizational success, with knowledge transfer in particular playing a key role in the practice of technology sharing, personnel transfers, and strategic integration.

Knowledge transfer can also be achieved through investment programme, both intentionally and unintentionally in the form of skills, technology, and &quot;tacit knowledge&quot; including management and organisational practices. For example, foreign investment in African countries have shown to provide some knowledge transfer.

=== As a competitive advantage in firm ===
Knowledge, and especially knowledge transfer, has emerged as a key resource in the post-industrial era. This makes it an important resource for creating a sustainable competitive advantage. The resource-based view (RBV) emphasizes knowledge as a main source of competitive advantage. Knowledge transfer thus becomes a rare, valuable, imperfectly imitable and also non-substitutable strategic axis for organizations. Moreover, according to the knowledge-based vision (KBV), the more knowledge an organization has, the more it will be able to learn new knowledge, so the competitive advantage based on knowledge will be sustainable over time.

In organizations, knowledge is regularly passed on by employees to each other. Subsequently, organization resources are increased and/or updated, which allows employees to improve and adjust their practices. The acquisition of skills by employees is closely linked to the organization&#x27;s performance, which is mainly the result of the skills accumulated and put into practice by employees.

One of the remarkable effects of knowledge transfer is the increase in profits and the development of competitive advantage. In a few words, a competitive advantage is the possibility for an organization to strengthen its core competencies by using knowledge from outside. For this, three elements have been defined to measure it:
* Knowledge transfer contributes to the development of research and development capabilities;
* Knowledge transfer provides the opportunity to replace old technologies with new ones;
* Knowledge transfer contributes to reducing research and development time.
These three elements are possible when the organization possesses skills that are equal to or superior to those of its competitors, which allows it to gain a competitive advantage. In these situations, the transfer of knowledge acts on the evolution and in particular on the development of the basic knowledge already acquired by the organization. This acquisition manifests itself in the improvement of the organization&#x27;s performance and therefore in the gain of a competitive advantage.

==In landscape ecology==
By knowledge transfer in landscape ecology, means a group of activities that increase the understanding of landscape ecology with the goal of encouraging application of this knowledge. Five factors will influence knowledge transfer from the view of forest landscape ecology: the generation of research capacity, the potential for application, the users of the knowledge, the infrastructure capacity, and the process by which knowledge is transferred (Turner, 2006).

== Platforms ==
A recent trend is the development of online platforms aiming to optimize knowledge transfer and collaboration. Information technology (IT) systems are common computer platforms/systems that try to help organizations and people to share information and knowledge. IT systems can store, share and collect knowledge that is important to the organization. In practice, the need for IT systems or knowledge management systems is often strategic. Different knowledge management systems and platforms can provide big advantages for data systems looking to identify, transfer, share and display important metrics. Different knowledge transfer platforms are tools to share knowledge faster and more efficiently. The main idea is to help people work productively with data and knowledge.

* Knowledge management systems (KMS) are computer-based systems designed to assist organizations with managing knowledge related actions. This usually involves for example: document administration, cooperation or social networking. Some of the most commonly used knowledge management systems are Microsoft SharePoint, Confluence and Documentum.
* Learning management systems (LMS) are software applications, which aid with management, delivery and inspection of educational courses and training programs. They can be used in workplaces to back online or combined learning and trace learning outcomes. Among these systems are Blackboard or Moodle, although companies may use different systems such as Google Classroom, Second Life, Edmondo or others, if they are correctly adapted for the needs of the company.
* Enterprise social networks (ESN) refer to specific social media platforms explicitly designed for usage within organizations. These platforms usually involve features such as instant, direct messaging and file sharing. ESNs are widely considered a form of knowledge management technology to gather their collective intelligence and improve productivity. Commonly used platforms are Microsoft Teams, Yammer or Slack.
* Video conferencing tools have become increasingly popular as a tool to simplify knowledge transfer. The growth in popularity of video conferencing is mainly due to growing trend of remote work and online learning. The value of video conferencing for knowledge transfer comes from instantaneous communication, cooperation and feedback between team members. The usage of video conferencing tools is usually accompanied by the usage of other previously mentioned knowledge transfer platforms. Among these platforms belong Zoom, Microsoft Teams, Google Meet, Skype, Cisco Webex and others.
* Virtual reality (VR) and augmented reality (AR) platforms have been found to be effective due to their potential to create engaging experiences. These technologies allow real-world scenario simulations and interaction with digital objects. The engaging way in which these processes are conducted has been found to lead to improved work and learning outcomes. The usage of VR and AR is enabled by VR and AR headsets. Oculus Quest 2, Microsoft HoloLens, Google Glass and ZSpace are all among the examples for virtual and augmented reality headsets. These headsets run on various operating systems, some of which are specifically developed for the headsets, while others are modified versions of regular operating systems used by other smart devices.

== Challenges ==
Factors that complicate knowledge transfer include:
* The inability to recognize and articulate &quot;compiled&quot; or highly intuitive competencies – tacit knowledge idea
* Different views on explicitness of knowledge
* Geography or distance
* Limitations of information and communication technologies (ICTs)
* Lack of a shared/superordinate social identity
* Language
* Areas of expertise
* Internal conflicts (for example, professional territoriality)
* Generational differences
* Union-management relations
* Incentives
* Problems with sharing beliefs, assumptions, heuristics and cultural norms.
* The use of visual representations to transfer knowledge (knowledge visualization)
* Previous exposure or experience with something
* Misconceptions
* Faulty information
* Organizational culture non-conducive to knowledge sharing (the &quot;Knowledge is power&quot; culture)
* Motivational issues, such as resistance to change and power struggles
* Lack of trust
* Capabilities of the receptor to interpret and absorb knowledge
* Context of the knowledge (tacit, context-specific knowledge)
* Inability to detect the opportunity of knowledge sharing

Everett Rogers pioneered diffusion of innovations theory, presenting a research-based model for how and why individuals and social networks adopt new ideas, practices and products. In anthropology, the concept of diffusion also explores the spread of ideas among cultures.

== Practices ==
* Mentorship
* Guided experience
* Simulation
* Guided experimentation
* Work shadowing
* Paired work
* Community of practice
* Narrative transfer
* Practices

== Incorrect usage ==
Knowledge transfer is often used as a synonym for training. Furthermore, information should not be confused with knowledge, nor is it, strictly speaking, possible to &quot;transfer&quot; experiential knowledge to other people. Information might be thought of as facts or understood data; however, knowledge has to do with flexible and adaptable skills – a person&#x27;s unique ability to wield and apply information. This fluency of application is in part what differentiates information from knowledge. Knowledge tends to be both tacit and personal; the knowledge one person has is difficult to quantify, store, and retrieve for someone else to use.

Knowledge transfer (KT) and knowledge sharing (KS) are sometimes used interchangeably or are considered to share common features. Since some knowledge management researchers assume that these two concepts are rather similar and have overlapping content, there is often confusion, especially among researchers and practitioners, about what a certain concept means. For this reason, terms such as KS and KT get used incorrectly without any respect to their real meaning and these meanings can change from paper to paper.

== See also ==

* Communities of practice
* Customer knowledge
* Explicit knowledge
* Ignorance management
* Industrial knowledge theft
* Information society
* Institutional memory
* Instructional theory
* Knowledge management
* Knowledge tagging
* Knowledge translation
* Media richness theory
* Technology brokering
* Technology transfer
* Transfer of learning
* Value presentation
== References ==
==Further reading==
* Argote, L. &quot;et al.&quot; (2000). &quot;Knowledge Transfer in Organizations: Learning from the Experience of Others&quot;, &quot;Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes&quot;, 82(1) (May): 1–8
* Castells, M. (1996). Conclusion, The Rise of the Network Society. The Information Age: Economy, Society &amp; Culture, Volume 1. (pp. 469–478). Oxford: Blackwell
* Leonard, D.; and Swap, W. (2005) &quot;Deep Smarts: How to cultivate and transfer enduring business wisdom&quot;, HBSP. 
* Lipphardt, Veronika / Ludwig, David: &quot;Knowledge Transfer and Science Transfer&quot;, European History Online, Mainz: Institute of European History, 2011, retrieved: January 11, 2012
* Shaw, M. (2001). &quot;Integrating Learning Technologies: The social-cultural, pragmatic and technology design contexts&quot;, &quot;Teaching and Learning with Technology&quot;, (6)
* Trautman, Steve (2006). &quot;Teach What You Know: A Practical Leader&#x27;s Guide to Knowledge Transfer&quot; , Addison-Wesley
* Davenport, Thomas H.; and Prusak, Laurence (2000). &quot;Working Knowledge: How Organizations Manage What They Know&quot;, Boston Massachusetts, Harvard Business School Press
* Turner, (2006). Knowledge Transfer in Forest Landscape Ecology: A Primer. In: Forest landscape ecology, transferring knowledge to practice. Perera. A.H., Buse, L.J. and Crow, T.R. (Eds), New York, Springer, 1–2.

== External links ==
* Project of knowledge transfer of the CIPRA &quot;Future in the Alps&quot;
* &quot;Knowledge Transfer Study – 2 Year study project for the European Commission&quot;
* Learn MERN and improve your Knowledge&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2586354" start="0" end="18" title="Knowledge transfer" label="Knowledge transfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q9418" start="485" end="495" title="psychology" label="psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2853045" start="497" end="519" title="cognitive anthropology" label="cognitive anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q11680831" start="548" end="569" title="communication studies" label="communication studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2583195" start="574" end="587" title="media ecology" label="media ecology"/>
<link wikidata="Q133500" start="768" end="776" title="learning" label="learning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1820378" start="778" end="798" title="transfer of learning" label="transfer of learning"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423395" start="804" end="821" title="knowledge sharing" label="knowledge sharing"/>
<link wikidata="Q9418" start="1049" end="1059" title="psychology" label="psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q23373" start="1333" end="1353" title="cognitive psychology" label="cognitive psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q706622" start="1573" end="1582" title="intention" label="intention"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423395" start="1812" end="1829" title="knowledge sharing" label="knowledge sharing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2853045" start="3575" end="3597" title="cognitive anthropology" label="cognitive anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q11680831" start="5140" end="5161" title="communication studies" label="communication studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q628523" start="5231" end="5238" title="message" label="message"/>
<link wikidata="Q174984" start="5273" end="5279" title="signal" label="signal"/>
<link wikidata="Q188889" start="5293" end="5301" title="Code" label="encoding"/>
<link wikidata="Q183635" start="5356" end="5364" title="feedback" label="feedback"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416645" start="5460" end="5483" title="Models of communication" label="Models of communication"/>
<link wikidata="Q149584" start="6118" end="6139" title="organizational theory" label="organizational theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q192060" start="6262" end="6282" title="knowledge management" label="knowledge management"/>
<link wikidata="Q11024" start="6448" end="6461" title="communication" label="communication"/>
<link wikidata="Q660651" start="6502" end="6512" title="memorandum" label="memorandum"/>
<link wikidata="Q9158" start="6517" end="6523" title="e-mail" label="e-mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q743861" start="6748" end="6753" title="tacit knowledge" label="tacit"/>
<link wikidata="Q4830453" start="6957" end="6965" title="business" label="business"/>
<link wikidata="Q731112" start="7019" end="7043" title="mergers and acquisitions" label="mergers and acquisitions"/>
<link wikidata="Q2706556" start="7639" end="7659" title="behavioral modernity" label="behavioral modernity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7102483" start="7693" end="7709" title="origin of speech" label="origin of speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q5" start="7781" end="7786" title="human" label="human"/>
<link wikidata="Q673661" start="7820" end="7837" title="Abstraction" label="abstract thinking"/>
<link wikidata="Q309100" start="7839" end="7847" title="planning" label="planning"/>
<link wikidata="Q80071" start="7855" end="7861" title="symbol" label="symbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q735" start="7880" end="7883" title="art" label="art"/>
<link wikidata="Q335261" start="7885" end="7898" title="Ornament (art)" label="ornamentation"/>
<link wikidata="Q638" start="7901" end="7906" title="music" label="music"/>
<link wikidata="Q11639" start="7911" end="7916" title="dance" label="dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q223930" start="7940" end="7944" title="Game (hunting)" label="game"/>
<link wikidata="Q3045036" start="7950" end="7955" title="Blade (archaeology)" label="blade"/>
<link wikidata="Q691640" start="17522" end="17545" title="evidence-based medicine" label="evidence-based medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061910" start="18019" end="18038" title="technology transfer" label="technology transfer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18247" end="18255" title="#Overview" label="Overview"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323686" start="18264" end="18282" title="Explicit knowledge" label="Explicit knowledge"/>
<link wikidata="Q743861" start="18644" end="18659" title="tacit knowledge" label="tacit knowledge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416645" start="19239" end="19262" title="models of communication" label="models of communication"/>
<link wikidata="Q49108" start="20816" end="20819" title="MIT" label="MIT"/>
<link wikidata="Q175096" start="21886" end="21899" title="SWOT analysis" label="SWOT analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q9081" start="23494" end="23503" title="knowledge" label="knowledge"/>
<link wikidata="Q174165" start="23520" end="23530" title="innovation" label="innovation"/>
<link wikidata="Q189833" start="23570" end="23585" title="economic growth" label="economic growth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1510761" start="23587" end="23605" title="Social change" label="social development"/>
<link wikidata="Q41171" start="23611" end="23623" title="Unemployment" label="job creation"/>
<link wikidata="Q546113" start="23726" end="23732" title="Public policy" label="public"/>
<link wikidata="Q582577" start="23737" end="23752" title="economic policy" label="economic policy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25349" end="25353" title="AUTM" label="AUTM"/>
<link wikidata="Q6040479" start="25369" end="25400" title="Institute of Knowledge Transfer" label="Institute of Knowledge Transfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="25422" end="25428" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q4809787" start="25437" end="25506" title="Association of European Science and Technology Transfer Professionals" label="Association of European Science and Technology Transfer Professionals"/>
<link wikidata="Q936635" start="25741" end="25764" title="communities of practice" label="communities of practice"/>
<link wikidata="Q6481288" start="25969" end="25983" title="Lambert Review" label="Lambert Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q2614722" start="26004" end="26019" title="neuroeducation" label="Neuro-education"/>
<link wikidata="Q7921" start="26048" end="26063" title="didactic method" label="didactic method"/>
<link wikidata="Q830170" start="26191" end="26208" title="knowledge economy" label="knowledge economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q205961" start="26674" end="26680" title="skills" label="skills"/>
<link wikidata="Q11016" start="26682" end="26692" title="technology" label="technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920921" start="26736" end="26746" title="management" label="management"/>
<link wikidata="Q738011" start="29093" end="29110" title="landscape ecology" label="landscape ecology"/>
<link wikidata="Q18833" start="30626" end="30646" title="Microsoft SharePoint" label="Microsoft SharePoint"/>
<link wikidata="Q723748" start="30648" end="30658" title="Confluence" label="Confluence"/>
<link wikidata="Q5287684" start="30663" end="30673" title="Documentum" label="Documentum"/>
<link wikidata="Q15933979" start="30955" end="30965" title="Blackboard Learn" label="Blackboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q190434" start="30969" end="30975" title="Moodle" label="Moodle"/>
<link wikidata="Q16927658" start="31030" end="31046" title="Google Classroom" label="Google Classroom"/>
<link wikidata="Q106827" start="31048" end="31059" title="Second Life" label="Second Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q16766145" start="31061" end="31068" title="Edmondo" label="Edmondo"/>
<link wikidata="Q94979732" start="32079" end="32083" title="Zoom (software)" label="Zoom"/>
<link wikidata="Q28406404" start="32085" end="32100" title="Microsoft Teams" label="Microsoft Teams"/>
<link wikidata="Q56669074" start="32102" end="32113" title="Google Meet" label="Google Meet"/>
<link wikidata="Q40984" start="32115" end="32120" title="Skype" label="Skype"/>
<link wikidata="Q498944" start="32122" end="32133" title="Cisco Webex" label="Cisco Webex"/>
<link wikidata="Q99620218" start="32564" end="32578" title="Oculus Quest 2" label="Oculus Quest 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q18844389" start="32580" end="32598" title="Microsoft HoloLens" label="Microsoft HoloLens"/>
<link wikidata="Q575092" start="32600" end="32612" title="Google Glass" label="Google Glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q16968483" start="32617" end="32623" title="zSpace (company)" label="ZSpace"/>
<link wikidata="Q170519" start="32655" end="32662" title="virtual reality" label="virtual"/>
<link wikidata="Q254183" start="32667" end="32684" title="augmented reality" label="augmented reality"/>
<link wikidata="Q844569" start="33258" end="33273" title="social identity" label="social identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q183366" start="33354" end="33368" title="territory (country subdivision)" label="territoriality"/>
<link wikidata="Q201413" start="33485" end="33495" title="heuristics" label="heuristics"/>
<link wikidata="Q451553" start="33575" end="33598" title="knowledge visualization" label="knowledge visualization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1812788" start="33758" end="33776" title="Knowledge is power" label="Knowledge is power"/>
<link wikidata="Q3061477" start="34068" end="34082" title="Everett Rogers" label="Everett Rogers"/>
<link wikidata="Q304994" start="34093" end="34117" title="diffusion of innovations" label="diffusion of innovations"/>
<link wikidata="Q9213532" start="34281" end="34290" title="Diffusion (anthropology)" label="diffusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q967647" start="34360" end="34370" title="Mentorship" label="Mentorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q936635" start="34462" end="34483" title="Community of practice" label="Community of practice"/>
<link wikidata="Q918385" start="34590" end="34598" title="training" label="training"/>
<link wikidata="Q11028" start="34613" end="34624" title="information" label="information"/>
<link wikidata="Q188572" start="34802" end="34807" title="facts" label="facts"/>
<link wikidata="Q42848" start="34822" end="34826" title="data" label="data"/>
<link wikidata="Q205961" start="34885" end="34891" title="skills" label="skills"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35136" end="35144" title=":wikt:quantify" label="quantify"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423395" start="35220" end="35237" title="knowledge sharing" label="knowledge sharing"/>
<link wikidata="Q936635" start="35730" end="35753" title="Communities of practice" label="Communities of practice"/>
<link wikidata="Q18922868" start="35756" end="35774" title="Customer knowledge" label="Customer knowledge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323686" start="35777" end="35795" title="Explicit knowledge" label="Explicit knowledge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5993028" start="35798" end="35818" title="Ignorance management" label="Ignorance management"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160650" start="35821" end="35847" title="Industrial espionage" label="Industrial knowledge theft"/>
<link wikidata="Q184708" start="35850" end="35869" title="Information society" label="Information society"/>
<link wikidata="Q911621" start="35872" end="35892" title="Institutional memory" label="Institutional memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1313234" start="35895" end="35915" title="Instructional theory" label="Instructional theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q192060" start="35918" end="35938" title="Knowledge management" label="Knowledge management"/>
<link wikidata="Q658349" start="35941" end="35958" title="Knowledge tagging" label="Knowledge tagging"/>
<link wikidata="Q66104672" start="35961" end="35982" title="Knowledge translation" label="Knowledge translation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1916442" start="35985" end="36006" title="Media richness theory" label="Media richness theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7692595" start="36009" end="36029" title="Technology brokering" label="Technology brokering"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061910" start="36032" end="36051" title="Technology transfer" label="Technology transfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1820378" start="36054" end="36074" title="Transfer of learning" label="Transfer of learning"/>
<link wikidata="Q7912770" start="36077" end="36095" title="Value presentation" label="Value presentation"/>
<link wikidata="Q74496008" start="36135" end="36145" title="Linda Argote" label="Argote, L."/>
<link wikidata="" start="36380" end="36411" title="The Information Age: Economy, Society and Culture#The Rise of the Network Society" label="The Rise of the Network Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165207" start="36724" end="36747" title="European History Online" label="European History Online"/>
<link wikidata="Q327772" start="36756" end="36785" title="Institute of European History" label="Institute of European History"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="230651" wikidata="Q463121" url="?curid=230651" title="Karlheinz Zöller">
<text>Karlheinz Zöller (24 August 1928 – 29 July 2005) was a German flutist, and solo fluteplayer in the Berlin Philharmonic Orchestra between 1960–1969 and 1976–1993.

==Early life and education==
Karlheinz Zöller was born in Höhr-Grenzhausen (near Frankfurt), Westerwald, Germany.

He began his studies in Frankfurt and later studied with Kurt Redel in Detmold. While in Detmold, he met his wife-to-be Gertrud, herself a flautist studying under Hans-Peter Schmitz. After World War II, at the age of 17, he obtained a position in the Frankfurt Opera Orchestra. He had not yet attended college but the experience was invaluable. After engagements in Cologne and Herford, he joined the Berlin Philharmonic Orchestra as solo flautist in 1960.

==Teaching==
In 1968, Zöller was appointed professor at the Hamburg Music Academy, and later he taught at the Hochschule der Künste in Berlin and at the Hamburg Music Academy.

Zöller and his wife became renowned as a teaching team and one of their students later recalled, &quot;extensive technical training, especially from her, and music and tone, from him.&quot; Many of his former students later played with orchestras all over Europe or became music professors themselves; Roswitha Staege became professor of flute at the Berlin Arts Academy; Wolfgang Ritter became solo flautist with the North German Radio Symphony Orchestra; Maren Distel became a celebrated flautist as well; Michael Faust became solo flautist with the Westdeutscher Rundfunk Sinfonieorchester in 1988 and professor at the Musik Hochschule in Düsseldorf.

==New music==
Zöller was a tremendous supporter of new music and commissioned flute concerti from several composers. These included new works by Siegfried Matthus, Diether de la Motte, Manfred Trojahn and Isang Yun.

==Personal tragedy==
In 1968, while travelling in a taxi from the hotel to the concert hall in Buenos Aires, Zöller was critically injured in an accident. The cab driver died and Zöller’s lung was pierced by a piece of metal. This severely limited his lung capacity and as a result he was replaced by James Galway as principal flautist with the Berlin Philharmonic. However, he remained active as a chamber and solo player and maintained a busy teaching and concert schedule. Later, in the 1970s, he had an operation to reattach his non-functional lung. The operation was a success and Zöller regained his position as principal flautist with the Philharmonic, when Galway left to teach at the Eastman School of Music.

==Family life==
After Gertrud&#x27;s death, Karlheinz married Anna-Luise some years later. She had children and grandchildren from a former marriage and Karlheinz took them to heart as his own.

Zöller died of cancer in Berlin on 29 July 2005.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q463121" start="0" end="16" title="Karlheinz Zöller" label="Karlheinz Zöller"/>
<link wikidata="Q11405" start="62" end="69" title="flutist" label="flutist"/>
<link wikidata="Q152222" start="99" end="128" title="Berlin Philharmonic Orchestra" label="Berlin Philharmonic Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q50899" start="221" end="237" title="Höhr-Grenzhausen" label="Höhr-Grenzhausen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1794" start="244" end="253" title="Frankfurt" label="Frankfurt"/>
<link wikidata="Q640966" start="256" end="266" title="Westerwald" label="Westerwald"/>
<link wikidata="Q75109" start="335" end="345" title="Kurt Redel" label="Kurt Redel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3922" start="349" end="356" title="Detmold" label="Detmold"/>
<link wikidata="Q365" start="644" end="651" title="Cologne" label="Cologne"/>
<link wikidata="Q3971" start="656" end="663" title="Herford" label="Herford"/>
<link wikidata="Q55038" start="846" end="867" title="Hochschule der Künste" label="Hochschule der Künste"/>
<link wikidata="Q706354" start="1331" end="1368" title="North German Radio Symphony Orchestra" label="North German Radio Symphony Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q829283" start="1465" end="1505" title="WDR Symphony Orchestra Cologne" label="Westdeutscher Rundfunk Sinfonieorchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q314654" start="1713" end="1730" title="Siegfried Matthus" label="Siegfried Matthus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1223232" start="1732" end="1751" title="Diether de la Motte" label="Diether de la Motte"/>
<link wikidata="Q1681779" start="1753" end="1768" title="Manfred Trojahn" label="Manfred Trojahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q153611" start="1773" end="1782" title="Isang Yun" label="Isang Yun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1486" start="1880" end="1892" title="Buenos Aires" label="Buenos Aires"/>
<link wikidata="Q160371" start="2086" end="2098" title="James Galway" label="James Galway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278284" start="2478" end="2501" title="Eastman School of Music" label="Eastman School of Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="2724" end="2730" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="230652" wikidata="Q675763" url="?curid=230652" title="Gareth Morris">
<text>Gareth Charles Walter Morris (13 May 192014 February 2007) was a British flautist. He was the principal flautist of a number of London orchestras including the Boyd Neel Orchestra before joining the Philharmonia Orchestra. He was the principal flautist of this orchestra for 24 years and Professor of the Flute at the Royal Academy of Music from 1945 to 1985. Morris was known for using a wooden flute, at a time when most other players had switched to using metal flutes.

Gareth Morris was born in Clevedon, Somerset, England and was educated at Bristol Cathedral Choir School. He began to play the flute when he was aged 12, and subsequently studied privately with Robert Murchie. At 18 he won a scholarship to the Royal Academy of Music where his main teacher was Charles Stainer. At the academy he met Dennis Brain and became his lifelong friend. Morris was best man for Brain&#x27;s wedding. Morris&#x27;s Wigmore Hall debut was in 1939 and he played in chamber music groups, including the Dennis Brain Wind Ensemble and the London Wind Quintet. During the Second World War he joined the Royal Air Force and was principal flute in the RAF Symphony Orchestra.

Morris succeeded Arthur Gleghorn as principal flute in the Philharmonia Orchestra in 1948. 
He played at Queen Elizabeth II&#x27;s Coronation in 1953. The Philharmonia Orchestra had been founded by Walter Legge in 1945 but in 1964 Legge announced that he intended to disband it. However the members dissented from this and agreed that the orchestra should continue, that it should be self-governing, and that it should be renamed the New Philharmonia Orchestra. In 1966 Morris became chairman of this orchestra with Otto Klemperer as the principal conductor. Morris had a close and deeply respectful relationship with Klemperer, but his relationship with Karajan has been described as &quot;at best cordial, but he respected the conductor&#x27;s talent&quot;.

Klemperer retired in 1971 when he was aged 87, and was succeeded by Lorin Maazel followed by Riccardo Muti. Morris retired shortly afterwards from the orchestra. The press release at the time spoke of &quot;irreconcilable artistic differences&quot; which had contributed to his resignation. However, there was another, possibly more important, factor. While on tour with the orchestra in New York City, Morris was mugged and seriously injured. Amongst these injuries, a nerve in his mouth had been damaged and as a result, he had to completely give up playing the flute.

Morris&#x27;s flute was originally a Rudall-Carte with open G-sharp and vented D, and later in his career he performed on an instrument bequeathed to him by Robert Murchie. His style was of the English school, with a tight embouchure and he produced a very solid and powerful tone which was also capable of incredible delicacy. He eschewed the use of excessive vibrato. He was said to be &quot;at the forefront of English flute playing for more than half a century&quot;. Many composers wrote works for him, including Gordon Jacob and Alan Rawsthorne. During his career he gave the first British performance of Poulenc&#x27;s Flute Sonata in 1958.

Morris married first, in 1954, Joy Hazelrigg of Kentucky and they had a daughter, Emily. Following a divorce, in 1975 he married Patricia Murray, with whom he had three children, Thomas, Mary and Catharine.

Morris retired to Bristol and there continued to teach. In 1991 he published a tutorial entitled &quot;Flute Technique&quot;. His other activities included being an adjudicator, an orchestral coach and a lecturer. He frequently taught at the Dartington Summer School. His siblings are Christopher, a music publisher at the Oxford University Press, and Jan Morris, the travel writer. A photographic portrait taken in 1968 by Godfrey Argent is held by the National Portrait Gallery.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q675763" start="0" end="28" title="Gareth Morris" label="Gareth Charles Walter Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q11405" start="73" end="81" title="flautist" label="flautist"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="128" end="134" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="160" end="179" title="Boyd Neel#The Boyd Neel Orchestra" label="Boyd Neel Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046309" start="199" end="221" title="Philharmonia Orchestra" label="Philharmonia Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144673" start="318" end="340" title="Royal Academy of Music" label="Royal Academy of Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q209554" start="396" end="401" title="Western concert flute" label="flute"/>
<link wikidata="Q670079" start="500" end="508" title="Clevedon" label="Clevedon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4968833" start="548" end="578" title="Bristol Cathedral Choir School" label="Bristol Cathedral Choir School"/>
<link wikidata="Q109120876" start="668" end="682" title="Robert Murchie" label="Robert Murchie"/>
<link wikidata="Q919550" start="807" end="819" title="Dennis Brain" label="Dennis Brain"/>
<link wikidata="Q781834" start="912" end="924" title="Wigmore Hall" label="Wigmore Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q189201" start="960" end="973" title="chamber music" label="chamber music"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1063" end="1079" title="World War II" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="1094" end="1109" title="Royal Air Force" label="Royal Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1183" end="1198" title="Arthur Gleghorn" label="Arthur Gleghorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="1277" end="1289" title="Elizabeth II" label="Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q464122" start="1297" end="1307" title="Coronation of the British monarch" label="Coronation"/>
<link wikidata="Q671014" start="1364" end="1376" title="Walter Legge" label="Walter Legge"/>
<link wikidata="Q155136" start="1682" end="1696" title="Otto Klemperer" label="Otto Klemperer"/>
<link wikidata="Q117710" start="1995" end="2007" title="Lorin Maazel" label="Lorin Maazel"/>
<link wikidata="Q276038" start="2020" end="2033" title="Riccardo Muti" label="Riccardo Muti"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="2315" end="2328" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q175234" start="2722" end="2732" title="embouchure" label="embouchure"/>
<link wikidata="Q377435" start="2860" end="2867" title="vibrato" label="vibrato"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350215" start="3017" end="3029" title="Gordon Jacob" label="Gordon Jacob"/>
<link wikidata="Q428560" start="3034" end="3049" title="Alan Rawsthorne" label="Alan Rawsthorne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967091" start="3110" end="3137" title="Flute Sonata (Poulenc)" label="Poulenc&amp;#x27;s Flute Sonata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1603" start="3196" end="3204" title="Kentucky" label="Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q2234405" start="3521" end="3532" title="adjudicator" label="adjudicator"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3598" end="3622" title="Dartington Hall#Dartington Music Summer School &amp;amp; Festival" label="Dartington Summer School"/>
<link wikidata="Q3972943" start="3662" end="3671" title="Publishing" label="publisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q217595" start="3679" end="3702" title="Oxford University Press" label="Oxford University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q3395844" start="3708" end="3718" title="Jan Morris" label="Jan Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q19041059" start="3780" end="3794" title="Godfrey Argent" label="Godfrey Argent"/>
<link wikidata="Q238587" start="3810" end="3835" title="National Portrait Gallery (United Kingdom)" label="National Portrait Gallery"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="230656" wikidata="Q928173" url="?curid=230656" title="Memorial Cup">
<text>The Memorial Cup () is the national championship of the Canadian Hockey League (CHL), a consortium of three major junior ice hockey leagues operating in Canada and parts of the United States. It is a four-team round-robin tournament played among the champions of the Ontario Hockey League (OHL), Quebec Maritimes Junior Hockey League (QMJHL) and Western Hockey League (WHL), and a host team, which alternates on an annual basis between the three member leagues. The Memorial Cup trophy was established by Captain James T. Sutherland to honour those who died in service during World War I. It was rededicated during the 2010 tournament to honour all soldiers who died fighting for Canada in any conflict.

The trophy was originally known as the OHA Memorial Cup and was donated by the Ontario Hockey Association (OHA) in 1919 to be awarded to the junior ice hockey champion of Canada. From its inception until 1971, the Memorial Cup was open to all Junior A teams in the country and was awarded following a series of league, provincial and regional playoffs culminating in an east–west championship. The three-league tournament format began in 1972, a season after the Canadian Amateur Hockey Association divided the Junior A rank into two tiers, naming the Memorial Cup as the championship of the Major Junior level.

The Memorial Cup is sometimes referred to as one of the hardest championships to win in hockey, factoring in the number of teams across the CHL&#x27;s member leagues nationwide, the Memorial Cup tournament being played between their top teams, and the limited eligibility period for players to compete at the major junior level.

==History==
Capt. Sutherland, who was serving overseas, was President of the Ontario Hockey Association and he brought forward the idea to present a trophy to honour all the young Canadian hockey players who died in battle and have it awarded to the best junior hockey team in Canada. The Ontario Hockey Association (OHA)&#x27;s annual meeting was unanimous that a fitting memorial be established to members of the OHA who had fallen on the field of war.

&quot;Past President Capt. J. T. Sutherland, now in France, spoke of the splendid work done by Canadian boys in France and suggested the erection of a suitable memorial to hockey players who have fallen.&quot;—&quot;The Globe, Toronto, Ontario, Dec. 9, 1918&quot;.

&quot;The (Memorial) cup, coveted prize of Canadian junior hockey, was the brainchild of Capt. Jim (Sutherland) when he was overseas in the Great War (1914–18) and at the time, President of the Ontario Hockey Association (1915–17). He wrote suggesting the trophy in memory of the boys who were killed in the war and no doubt a big part of the idea was instigated by his devotion to his beloved (Alan) Scotty Davidson*, who fell (June 6, 1915) with many other hockey players in the world conflict (including Capt. George T. Richardson*, who died in France, Feb. 9, 1916. (*Both are members of the Hockey Hall of Fame.) --William J. Walshe, Comments on Sport, &quot;The Kingston Whig-Standard&quot;, January 6, 1939.

It started as an &quot;East-versus-West&quot; format, where the George Richardson Memorial Trophy champions from the East would play the Abbott Cup champions from the West.

From 1919 to 1928, the Memorial Cup Final was a two-game total goals affair between a champion from Eastern Canada and a champion from Western Canada, both of which were determined through a series of playdowns under the auspices of the Canadian Amateur Hockey Association. In 1929, the Memorial Cup Final became a best-of-three series.

In 1934, when the junior hockey teams were further divided between Junior &#x27;A&#x27; and Junior &#x27;B&#x27;, the Memorial Cup served as the Junior &#x27;A&#x27; championship trophy, and the Sutherland Cup became the Junior &#x27;B&#x27; trophy. From 1937 the Memorial Cup was a best-of-five series, and in 1943 reverted to a best-of-seven series.

For the 1970–1971 season, the Junior &#x27;A&#x27; rank was further split into the Major Junior rank and a second-tier rank (referred nowadays as Junior &#x27;A&#x27;), with the Memorial Cup serving as the Major Junior championship trophy, and the Manitoba Centennial Trophy, and later the Royal Bank Cup, serving as the second tier championship trophy.

In 1972, the Memorial Cup was contested between three teams: the champions of the three leagues of the Canadian Hockey League: the Ed Chynoweth Cup Champs (WHL), J. Ross Robertson Cup Champs (OHL), and the President&#x27;s Cup Champs (QMJHL). From 1972 to 1973 these three teams played a single round-robin (two games each), with the top two teams advancing to a single-game final. A semi-final game was added in 1974. In 1977 the tournament was expanded to a double round-robin (four games each), with no semi-final. The tournament was held at a pre-determined site which was rotated among the three leagues.

The 1983 Memorial Cup tournament saw the inclusion of a fourth team, the team hosting the event, which was done to boost tournament attendance. The first tournament under this format was held in Portland, Oregon, and marked the first time that an American city hosted the Memorial Cup. The host Winter Hawks also won the Cup that year, becoming the first American team to win the Memorial Cup, as well as becoming the first host team to win it. The four teams played a single round-robin (three games each). If two teams are tied for third place, then a tie-breaker game is played on Thursday, followed by a semi-final game between the second and third-place teams and a final between the first-place team and the semi-final winner. This format continues to be used to this day, with the honour of hosting the tournament rotated amongst the CHL&#x27;s three member leagues.

If the host team also wins its respective league championship, the Memorial Cup berth reserved for the league champion is instead awarded to that league&#x27;s runner-up. This was the case in 2006, when the Quebec Remparts lost to the Moncton Wildcats in the QMJHL Finals. However, since Moncton was hosting the Memorial Cup that year, Quebec was awarded the QMJHL berth to the Memorial Cup tournament. The Remparts went on to win the Memorial Cup that season, the first time that a team has won the tournament without qualifying as the tournament host or as the champions of their respective league.

In the history of the cup, there have been two major mishaps with the cup itself. At the 2008 tournament, a replica trophy, which is the one teams are presented with on the ice after the game, broke apart as captain Chris Bruton of the victorious Spokane Chiefs tried to hand it off to a teammate after being presented the cup on the ice. The crowd started heckling after the replica cup broke apart, while the Chiefs took apart the trophy and shared it around with teammates. In 2012, defenceman Dillon Donnelly of the Shawinigan Cataractes accidentally dropped the trophy, significantly damaging it. The official cup is typically kept at the Hockey Hall of Fame in Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, both the 2020 (scheduled for Kelowna) and the 2021 (to be hosted by the OHL) editions of the tournament were cancelled as a result of provincial restrictions. The QMJHL was the only league of the CHL to declare a champion during the 2020–21 season. The Memorial Cup tournament resumed in 2022.

==Champions==


==Memorial Cup awards==
Starting in 1972, the Memorial Cup committee has awarded honours for play at the Memorial Cup tournament. There are now five annual awards presented.

==References==

==External links==
* Canadian Hockey League
* Memorial Cup web site
* Legends of Hockey–Memorial Cup
* Hockey and the Canadian military—Remembering those who served Veterans Affairs Canada</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q928173" start="4" end="16" title="Memorial Cup" label="Memorial Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q847451" start="56" end="78" title="Canadian Hockey League" label="Canadian Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q3139013" start="108" end="120" title="Junior ice hockey" label="major junior"/>
<link wikidata="Q841144" start="210" end="232" title="round-robin tournament" label="round-robin tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q902860" start="267" end="288" title="Ontario Hockey League" label="Ontario Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431391" start="296" end="333" title="Quebec Maritimes Junior Hockey League" label="Quebec Maritimes Junior Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q849096" start="346" end="367" title="Western Hockey League" label="Western Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q4405015" start="513" end="532" title="James T. Sutherland" label="James T. Sutherland"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="576" end="587" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164935" start="619" end="634" title="2010 Memorial Cup" label="2010 tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q928173" start="744" end="760" title="Memorial Cup" label="OHA Memorial Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q3882782" start="784" end="810" title="Ontario Hockey Association" label="Ontario Hockey Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q3139013" start="846" end="863" title="junior ice hockey" label="junior ice hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2999317" start="1143" end="1147" title="1972 Memorial Cup" label="1972"/>
<link wikidata="Q1622622" start="1168" end="1203" title="Hockey Canada" label="Canadian Amateur Hockey Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153629" start="1216" end="1229" title="Canadian Junior Hockey League" label="Junior A rank"/>
<link wikidata="Q928635" start="3034" end="3060" title="The Kingston Whig-Standard" label="The Kingston Whig-Standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3540411" start="3150" end="3183" title="George Richardson Memorial Trophy" label="George Richardson Memorial Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2999040" start="3223" end="3233" title="Abbott Cup" label="Abbott Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032034" start="3497" end="3532" title="Canadian Amateur Hockey Association" label="Canadian Amateur Hockey Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q17103384" start="3793" end="3807" title="Sutherland Cup" label="Sutherland Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q27020041" start="3969" end="3975" title="Season (sports)" label="season"/>
<link wikidata="Q913735" start="4199" end="4225" title="Manitoba Centennial Trophy" label="Manitoba Centennial Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q913735" start="4241" end="4255" title="Royal Bank Cup" label="Royal Bank Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2999317" start="4309" end="4313" title="1972 Memorial Cup" label="1972"/>
<link wikidata="Q623109" start="4394" end="4401" title="Sports league" label="leagues"/>
<link wikidata="Q847451" start="4409" end="4431" title="Canadian Hockey League" label="Canadian Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282307" start="4437" end="4466" title="Ed Chynoweth Cup" label="Ed Chynoweth Cup Champs (WHL)"/>
<link wikidata="Q639272" start="4468" end="4502" title="J. Ross Robertson Cup" label="J. Ross Robertson Cup Champs (OHL)"/>
<link wikidata="Q974282" start="4512" end="4547" title="President&amp;#x27;s Cup (QMJHL)" label="President&amp;#x27;s Cup Champs (QMJHL)"/>
<link wikidata="Q841144" start="4601" end="4612" title="Round-robin tournament" label="round-robin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2999321" start="4719" end="4723" title="1974 Memorial Cup" label="1974"/>
<link wikidata="Q2999324" start="4728" end="4732" title="1977 Memorial Cup" label="1977"/>
<link wikidata="Q2999332" start="4921" end="4938" title="1983 Memorial Cup" label="1983 Memorial Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q6106" start="5112" end="5128" title="Portland, Oregon" label="Portland, Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="5164" end="5172" title="United States" label="American"/>
<link wikidata="Q739501" start="5212" end="5224" title="Portland Winter Hawks" label="Winter Hawks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1920066" start="5984" end="5988" title="2006 Memorial Cup" label="2006"/>
<link wikidata="Q405705" start="5999" end="6014" title="Quebec Remparts" label="Quebec Remparts"/>
<link wikidata="Q682845" start="6027" end="6043" title="Moncton Wildcats" label="Moncton Wildcats"/>
<link wikidata="Q1792846" start="6483" end="6498" title="2008 Memorial Cup" label="2008 tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q16200624" start="6610" end="6622" title="Chris Bruton" label="Chris Bruton"/>
<link wikidata="Q269750" start="6641" end="6655" title="Spokane Chiefs" label="Spokane Chiefs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328898" start="6874" end="6878" title="2012 Memorial Cup" label="2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q733803" start="6914" end="6935" title="Shawinigan Cataractes" label="Shawinigan Cataractes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136687" start="7038" end="7057" title="Hockey Hall of Fame" label="Hockey Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="7061" end="7068" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="7099" end="7116" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q928173" start="7127" end="7131" title="2020 Memorial Cup" label="2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q928173" start="7164" end="7168" title="2021 Memorial Cup" label="2021"/>
<link wikidata="Q111169384" start="7406" end="7410" title="2022 Memorial Cup" label="2022"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="230657" wikidata="Q5275705" url="?curid=230657" title="DigiCipher 2">
<text>DigiCipher 2, or simply DCII, is a proprietary standard format of digital signal transmission and it doubles as an encryption standard with MPEG-2/MPEG-4 signal video compression used on many communications satellite television and audio signals. The DCII standard was originally developed in 1997 by General Instrument, which then became the Home and Network Mobility division of Motorola, then bought by Google in Aug 2011, and lastly became the Home portion of the division to Arris.

The original attempt for a North American digital signal encryption and compression standard was DigiCipher 1, which was used most notably in the now-defunct PrimeStar medium-power direct broadcast satellite (DBS) system during the early 1990s. The DCII standard predates wide acceptance of DVB-based digital terrestrial television compression (although not cable or satellite DVB) and therefore is incompatible with the DVB standard.

Approximately 70% of newer first-generation digital cable networks in North America use the 4DTV/DigiCipher 2 format. The use of DCII is most prevalent in North American digital cable television set-top boxes. DCII is also used on Motorola&#x27;s 4DTV digital satellite television tuner and Shaw Direct&#x27;s DBS receiver.

The DigiCipher 2 encryption standard was reverse engineered in 2016. 

==Technical specifications==
DigiCipher II uses QPSK and BPSK at the same time. The primary difference between DigiCipher 2 and DVB lies in how each standard handles SI metadata, or System Information, where DVB reserves packet identifiers from 16 to 31 for metadata, DigiCipher reserves only packet identifier 8187 for its master guide table which acts as a &quot;look-up table&quot; for all other metadata tables. DigiCipher 2 also extends the MPEG &quot;program number&quot; that is assigned for each service in a transport stream with the concept of a virtual channel number, whereas the DVB system never defined this type of remapping preferring to use a registry of &quot;network&quot; identifiers to further differentiate &quot;program numbers&quot; from those used in other transport streams. There are also private non-standard additions to DVB that add virtual channel remapping using &quot;logical channel numbers&quot;. Also unlike DVB, all text used in descriptors can be compressed using standard Huffman coding which saves on broadcast bandwidth and loading times. DigiCipher II uses Dolby Digital AC-3 audio for all channels, although MPEG-1 Level 2 audio is not supported.

==External links==
*Technical page on digital satellite signals
*Historical Perspective: HBO Implements Scrambling

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5275705" start="0" end="12" title="DigiCipher 2" label="DigiCipher 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q5275705" start="24" end="28" title="DigiCipher 2" label="DCII"/>
<link wikidata="Q141090" start="115" end="125" title="encryption" label="encryption"/>
<link wikidata="Q2493" start="161" end="178" title="video compression" label="video compression"/>
<link wikidata="Q149918" start="192" end="216" title="communications satellite" label="communications satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q289" start="217" end="227" title="television" label="television"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501636" start="301" end="319" title="General Instrument" label="General Instrument"/>
<link wikidata="Q259011" start="381" end="389" title="Motorola" label="Motorola"/>
<link wikidata="Q95" start="406" end="412" title="Google" label="Google"/>
<link wikidata="Q4033073" start="480" end="485" title="Arris Group" label="Arris"/>
<link wikidata="Q7243222" start="646" end="655" title="PrimeStar" label="PrimeStar"/>
<link wikidata="Q209588" start="669" end="695" title="direct broadcast satellite" label="direct broadcast satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q178562" start="779" end="782" title="Digital Video Broadcasting" label="DVB"/>
<link wikidata="Q5276046" start="968" end="981" title="digital cable" label="digital cable"/>
<link wikidata="Q4638882" start="1016" end="1020" title="4DTV" label="4DTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q184452" start="1102" end="1118" title="cable television" label="cable television"/>
<link wikidata="Q842729" start="1119" end="1130" title="set-top box" label="set-top box"/>
<link wikidata="Q209588" start="1184" end="1204" title="satellite television" label="satellite television"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544018" start="1205" end="1210" title="tuner (television)" label="tuner"/>
<link wikidata="Q3481598" start="1215" end="1226" title="Shaw Direct" label="Shaw Direct"/>
<link wikidata="Q180160" start="1489" end="1497" title="metadata" label="metadata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062494" start="1644" end="1662" title="Program and System Information Protocol" label="master guide table"/>
<link wikidata="Q2291875" start="1876" end="1891" title="virtual channel" label="virtual channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2647" start="2331" end="2345" title="Huffman coding" label="Huffman coding"/>
<link wikidata="Q622624" start="2419" end="2437" title="Dolby Digital" label="Dolby Digital AC-3"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="230661" wikidata="Q457634" url="?curid=230661" title="Alec Issigonis">
<text>Sir Alexander Arnold Constantine Issigonis (Greek: σερ Άλεκ, Αλέξανδρος Αρνόλδος Κωνσταντίνος Ισηγόνης) (18 November 1906 – 2 October 1988) was a British-Greek automotive designer. He designed the Mini, launched by the British Motor Corporation in 1959, and voted the second most influential car of the 20th century in 1999.

==Early life and education==




Issigonis was born on 18 November 1906 in the Ottoman port city of Smyrna, the only child of Constantine Issigonis and Hulda Prokopp. His paternal grandfather, Demosthenis, had migrated to Smyrna from the Greek island of Paros in the 1830s and Constantine was a successful and wealthy shipbuilding engineer. His maternal ancestors originated in the Kingdom of Württemberg. It was through his mother&#x27;s kinships that Issigonis was a first cousin once removed to BMW and Volkswagen director Bernd Pischetsrieder.

As British subjects, his father having naturalised whilst studying engineering in London in 1897, Issigonis and his parents were evacuated to Malta by the Royal Navy in September 1922 ahead of the Great Fire of Smyrna and the Turkish capture of Smyrna at the end of the Greco-Turkish War. His father died shortly after and Issigonis and his mother moved to the United Kingdom in 1923. Issigonis studied engineering at Battersea Polytechnic in London. Having failed his mathematics exams three times, subsequently declaring it &#x27;the most uncreative subject you can study&#x27;, Issigonis decided to enter the University of London External Programme to complete his university education.

== Career ==
Despite the political upheavals the Issigonis family lived an affluent and comfortable life. Issigonis was maintained by his family so that he could pursue racing sport as a hobby. Issigonis went into the motor industry as an engineer and designer working for Humber Limited. He competed successfully in motor racing during the 1930s and 1940s. Starting around 1930, he raced a supercharged &quot;Ulster&quot; Austin Seven, later fitting it with a front axle of his own design, leading to employment at Austin. This greatly modified machine was replaced with a radical special completed in 1939, constructed of plywood laminated in aluminium sheeting. The suspension was also of advanced design, with trailing arm front suspension attached to a steel cross-member, and swing axle rear, all with rubber springs made of catapult elastic. This car was remarkably light, weighing 587 lb, of which the engine contributed 252 lb. By the time the chassis had been completed (hard labour; it was all done by hand, no power tools), Issigonis had moved to Morris Motors Limited, but Austin supplied a &quot;works&quot; specification supercharged side-valve engine. Issigonis usually won, even when entered in the 1100cc class if there was no 750cc category. Most events entered were sprints, but he also raced at circuits.

=== Morris Motors ===
In 1936 Issigonis was given the opportunity to work for a leading motor manufacturer as suspension designer. Morris Motors was based in Cowley near Oxford. Issigonis worked on an independent front suspension system for the Morris 10. The war prevented this design from going into production but it was later used on the MG Y-type. He worked on various projects for Morris through the war and towards its end started work on an advanced post war car codenamed &quot;Mosquito&quot; that became the Morris Minor, which was produced from 1948 until 1971.

=== Alvis Cars ===
In 1952, just as the British Motor Corporation (BMC) was formed by the merger of Morris and Austin, he moved to Alvis Cars where he designed an advanced saloon with all-aluminium V-8 engine, and experimented with interconnected independent suspension systems. This prototype was never manufactured because its cost was beyond Alvis&#x27;s resources.

=== BMC ===
At the end of 1955, Issigonis was recruited back into BMC, this time into the Austin plant at Longbridge, by its chairman Sir Leonard Lord, to design a new model family of three cars. The XC (experimental car) code names assigned for the new cars were &quot;XC/9001&quot;, for a large comfortable car, &quot;XC/9002&quot;, for a medium-sized family car, and &quot;XC/9003&quot;, for a small town car. During 1956 Issigonis concentrated on the larger two cars, producing several prototypes for testing.

=== The Mini ===
However, at the end of 1956, following fuel rationing brought about by the Suez Crisis, Issigonis was ordered by Lord to bring the smaller car, &quot;XC/9003&quot;, to production as quickly as possible. By early 1957, prototypes were running, and by mid-1957 the project was given an official drawing office project number (&quot;ADO15&quot;) so that the thousands of drawings required for production could be produced. In August 1959 the car was launched as the Morris Mini Minor and the Austin Seven, which soon became known as the Austin Mini. In later years, the car would become known simply as the &quot;Mini&quot;. Due to time pressures, the interconnected suspension system that Issigonis had planned for the car was replaced by an equally novel, but cruder, rubber cone system designed by Alex Moulton. The Mini went on to become the best selling British car in history with a production run of 5.3 million cars. BMC and Issigonis were awarded the Dewar Trophy by the Royal Automobile Club (RAC) for the innovative design and production of the Mini. This ground-breaking design, with its front wheel drive, transverse engine, sump gearbox, 10-inch wheels, and phenomenal space efficiency, was still being manufactured in 2000 and has been the inspiration for almost all small front-wheel drive cars produced since the early 1960s.

In 1961, with the Mini gaining popularity, Issigonis was promoted to Technical Director of BMC. He continued to be responsible for his original &quot;XC&quot; projects. &quot;XC/9002&quot; became &quot;ADO16&quot; and was launched as the Morris 1100 with the Hydrolastic interconnected suspension system in August 1962. &quot;XC/9001&quot; became &quot;ADO17&quot; and was launched, also with the Hydrolastic suspension system, as the Austin 1800 in October 1964.The same principle was carried over for his next production car the Austin Maxi, However, by then he had become more aware of the cost considerations of vehicle manufacture and in service warranty costs which were crippling BMC. It certainly appeared by the Maxi development era that Issigonis wanted to &quot;do his own thing&quot; as cost cutting and development costs spiraled. He would instead research work on his Mini replacement the 9X with its compact transverse engine. He was also responsible for the development of the Mini Moke, initially intended for military use, which later achieved cult status.

With the creation of British Leyland in 1969, new chairman Lord Stokes quickly sidelined Issigonis and made him into what was termed &quot;Special Developments Director&quot;, replacing him with Harry Webster as the new Technical Director (Small/Medium cars). Stokes was heard on his appointment to say: &quot;We&#x27;ll sharp sort this bloke Issigonis out!&quot;.

=== Acclaim as an engineer ===
Issigonis was nicknamed &quot;the Greek god&quot; by his contemporaries. Whilst he is most famous for his creation of the Mini, he was most proud of his participation in the design of the Morris Minor. He considered it to be a vehicle that combined many of the luxuries and conveniences of a good motor car with a price suitable for the working classes; in contrast to the Mini which was a spartan design. Issigonis often commented to friends and colleagues that the Austin 1800 (ADO17) was the design he was most proud of, even though it never was as commercially successful as his three preceding designs.

Issigonis officially retired from the motor industry in 1971. He continued working until shortly before his own death in 1988 at his house in Edgbaston, Birmingham. He was cremated at the Lodge Hill Cemetery in nearby Selly Oak.

==Legacy==
On 15 October 2006 a rally was held at the Heritage Motor Centre in Gaydon, England, to celebrate the centenary of Issigonis&#x27;s birth.

There is a road named &quot;Alec Issigonis Way&quot; in the Oxford Business Park on the former site of the Morris Motors factory in Cowley, Oxfordshire.

==Honours==
Issigonis was appointed a Commander of the Order of the British Empire (CBE) in the 1964 Birthday Honours.

In 1964 Issigonis was appointed a Royal Designer for Industry (RDI).

He was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society (FRS) in 1967.

He was granted the rank of Knight Bachelor in the 1969 Birthday Honours and was knighted by Queen Elizabeth II during an investiture ceremony at Buckingham Palace on 22 July of the same year.

In 2003 he was inducted into the Automotive Hall of Fame in the United States.

The Weeny Issi, a car based on Mini in 2013 video game Grand Theft Auto V named in his honour.

==Some of his cars==
* 1948 Morris Minor
* 1948 Morris Oxford MO
* 1959 Mini
* 1962 BMC ADO16
* 1964 BMC ADO17
* 1969 Austin Maxi

==Notes==
==References==
*
*

== External links ==
*Alec Issigonis Automotive Designer (1906–1988) from the website of the Design Museum in London
*Portraits of Sir Alec Issigonis at the National Portrait Gallery (London)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q457634" start="0" end="42" title="Alec Issigonis" label="Sir Alexander Arnold Constantine Issigonis"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="44" end="49" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q787489" start="160" end="177" title="automotive design" label="automotive design"/>
<link wikidata="Q36024" start="197" end="201" title="Mini" label="Mini"/>
<link wikidata="Q386065" start="219" end="244" title="British Motor Corporation" label="British Motor Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2073222" start="275" end="315" title="Car of the Century" label="most influential car of the 20th century"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="405" end="412" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379299" start="426" end="432" title="Smyrna" label="Smyrna"/>
<link wikidata="Q201272" start="580" end="585" title="Paros" label="Paros"/>
<link wikidata="Q159631" start="708" end="730" title="Kingdom of Württemberg" label="Kingdom of Württemberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q26678" start="824" end="827" title="BMW" label="BMW"/>
<link wikidata="Q246" start="832" end="842" title="Volkswagen" label="Volkswagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q68648" start="852" end="872" title="Bernd Pischetsrieder" label="Bernd Pischetsrieder"/>
<link wikidata="Q6744657" start="1017" end="1022" title="Crown Colony of Malta" label="Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="1030" end="1040" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205622" start="1072" end="1092" title="Great Fire of Smyrna" label="Great Fire of Smyrna"/>
<link wikidata="Q87138" start="1145" end="1162" title="Greco-Turkish War (1919–1922)" label="Greco-Turkish War"/>
<link wikidata="Q546976" start="1293" end="1314" title="Battersea Polytechnic" label="Battersea Polytechnic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895637" start="1487" end="1526" title="University of London Worldwide" label="University of London External Programme"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636194" start="1839" end="1853" title="Humber Limited" label="Humber Limited"/>
<link wikidata="Q781028" start="1989" end="2001" title="Austin 7" label="Austin Seven"/>
<link wikidata="Q781156" start="2082" end="2088" title="Austin Motor Company" label="Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q776997" start="2625" end="2646" title="Morris Motors" label="Morris Motors Limited"/>
<link wikidata="Q776997" start="3024" end="3037" title="Morris Motors" label="Morris Motors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1948539" start="3138" end="3147" title="Morris 10" label="Morris 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q1468996" start="3235" end="3244" title="MG Y-type" label="MG Y-type"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548674" start="3411" end="3423" title="Morris Minor" label="Morris Minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q386065" start="3507" end="3532" title="British Motor Corporation" label="British Motor Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q26952" start="3598" end="3608" title="Alvis Cars" label="Alvis Cars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1310203" start="3714" end="3736" title="independent suspension" label="independent suspension"/>
<link wikidata="Q2946478" start="3975" end="3987" title="Leonard Lord" label="Leonard Lord"/>
<link wikidata="Q49101" start="4444" end="4455" title="Suez Crisis" label="Suez Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q36024" start="4979" end="4983" title="Mini" label="Mini"/>
<link wikidata="Q715942" start="5167" end="5179" title="Alex Moulton" label="Alex Moulton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5268084" start="5326" end="5338" title="Dewar Trophy" label="Dewar Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3445883" start="5346" end="5367" title="Royal Automobile Club" label="Royal Automobile Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q847962" start="5466" end="5483" title="front wheel drive" label="front wheel drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q611714" start="5485" end="5502" title="transverse engine" label="transverse engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q796306" start="5948" end="5959" title="Morris 1100" label="Morris 1100"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543468" start="5969" end="5980" title="Hydrolastic" label="Hydrolastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q266681" start="6145" end="6156" title="Austin 1800" label="Austin 1800"/>
<link wikidata="Q796303" start="6241" end="6252" title="Austin Maxi" label="Austin Maxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q36024" start="6592" end="6596" title="Mini" label="Mini"/>
<link wikidata="Q611714" start="6633" end="6650" title="transverse engine" label="transverse engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q927952" start="6703" end="6712" title="Mini Moke" label="Mini Moke"/>
<link wikidata="Q2046187" start="6807" end="6822" title="British Leyland" label="British Leyland"/>
<link wikidata="Q162861" start="6845" end="6856" title="Lord Stokes" label="Lord Stokes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3047556" start="7934" end="7943" title="Edgbaston" label="Edgbaston"/>
<link wikidata="Q6666307" start="7980" end="7999" title="Lodge Hill Cemetery" label="Lodge Hill Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788078" start="8010" end="8019" title="Selly Oak" label="Selly Oak"/>
<link wikidata="Q5738949" start="8076" end="8097" title="Heritage Motor Centre" label="Heritage Motor Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q776997" start="8280" end="8293" title="Morris Motors" label="Morris Motors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1953777" start="8305" end="8324" title="Cowley, Oxfordshire" label="Cowley, Oxfordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q14420" start="8365" end="8409" title="Commander of the Order of the British Empire" label="Commander of the Order of the British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q16949363" start="8423" end="8444" title="1964 Birthday Honours" label="1964 Birthday Honours"/>
<link wikidata="Q3445914" start="8481" end="8508" title="Royal Designer for Industry" label="Royal Designer for Industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q15631401" start="8534" end="8561" title="Fellow of the Royal Society" label="Fellow of the Royal Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q833163" start="8605" end="8620" title="Knight Bachelor" label="Knight Bachelor"/>
<link wikidata="Q17985927" start="8628" end="8649" title="1969 Birthday Honours" label="1969 Birthday Honours"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="8670" end="8688" title="Elizabeth II" label="Queen Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q42182" start="8723" end="8740" title="Buckingham Palace" label="Buckingham Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q787908" start="8804" end="8827" title="Automotive Hall of Fame" label="Automotive Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q17452" start="8906" end="8924" title="Grand Theft Auto V" label="Grand Theft Auto V"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548674" start="8975" end="8987" title="Morris Minor" label="Morris Minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q19116104" start="8995" end="9011" title="Morris Oxford MO" label="Morris Oxford MO"/>
<link wikidata="Q36024" start="9019" end="9023" title="Mini" label="Mini"/>
<link wikidata="Q796306" start="9031" end="9040" title="BMC ADO16" label="BMC ADO16"/>
<link wikidata="Q266681" start="9048" end="9057" title="BMC ADO17" label="BMC ADO17"/>
<link wikidata="Q796303" start="9065" end="9076" title="Austin Maxi" label="Austin Maxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q571249" start="9201" end="9214" title="Design Museum" label="Design Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q238587" start="9265" end="9299" title="National Portrait Gallery (London)" label="National Portrait Gallery (London)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="230664" wikidata="Q205314" url="?curid=230664" title="Janet Leigh">
<text>Jeanette Helen Morrison (July 6, 1927 – October 3, 2004), known professionally as Janet Leigh, was an American actress. Raised in Stockton, California, by working-class parents, Leigh was discovered at 18 by actress Norma Shearer, who helped her secure a contract with Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer. With MGM, she appeared in films such as the drama &quot;The Romance of Rosy Ridge&quot; (1947), the crime drama &quot;Act of Violence&quot; (1948), the adaptation of &quot;Little Women&quot; (1949), the comedy &quot;Angels in the Outfield&quot; (1951), the swashbuckler romance &quot;Scaramouche&quot; (1952), the Western drama &quot;The Naked Spur&quot; (1953), and Alfred Hitchcock’s &quot;Psycho&quot; along with Anthony Perkins (1960). 

Leigh was married to actor Tony Curtis from 1951 to 1962. After leaving MGM in 1954, she starred in films such as &quot;Safari&quot; (1956) and Orson Welles&#x27; &quot;Touch of Evil&quot; (1958). She then achieved her biggest success playing Marion Crane in Alfred Hitchcock&#x27;s horror film &quot;Psycho&quot; (1960), winning the Golden Globe Award for Best Supporting Actress and earning a nomination for the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress. In her most enduring role, Leigh was established as one of the earliest scream queens and received a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame that same year. 

After marrying Robert Brandt in 1962, Leigh starred in the political thriller &quot;The Manchurian Candidate&quot; (1962), the musical film &quot;Bye Bye Birdie&quot; (1963), and the thriller &quot;Harper&quot; (1966) before scaling back her career. She made her Broadway debut in a production of &quot;Murder Among Friends&quot; (1975) and appeared in the horror film &quot;Night of the Lepus&quot; (1972) and the thriller &quot;Boardwalk&quot; (1979). She later starred with her daughter, Jamie Lee Curtis, in the horror films &quot;The Fog&quot; (1980) and &quot;Halloween H20: 20 Years Later&quot; (1998). 

Leigh amassed several screen and stage credits in a career spanning five decades. In addition to her work as an actress, she wrote four books between 1984 and 2002, two of which were novels. She died at the age of 77 after a year-long battle with vasculitis.

== Early life and education ==

Jeanette Helen Morrison was born on July 6, 1927, in Merced, California, the child of Helen Lita (née Westergaard) and Frederick Robert Morrison. Her maternal grandparents were immigrants from Denmark, and her father had Scots-Irish and German ancestry. Shortly after Leigh&#x27;s birth, the family relocated to Stockton where she spent her early life. She was brought up in poverty as her father struggled to support the family with his factory employment, and he took various additional jobs after the Great Depression.

Leigh was raised Presbyterian and sang in the local church choir throughout her childhood. In 1941 when her paternal grandfather became terminally ill, the family relocated to Merced, moving into her grandparents&#x27; home. She attended Weber Grammar School in Stockton and later Stockton High School. Leigh excelled in academics and graduated from high school at age sixteen. Though Leigh initially left college to pursue her film career, she re-enrolled in night classes at the University of Southern California in early 1947.

== Career ==

=== 1940s ===

In February 1946, actress Norma Shearer was vacationing at Sugar Bowl, a ski resort in the Sierra Nevada mountains where Leigh&#x27;s parents were working at the time. In the resort lobby, Shearer noticed a photograph of Leigh taken by her father over the Christmas holiday, which he had printed and placed in a photo album available for guests to browse. 

Upon returning to Los Angeles, Shearer showed Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer (MGM) talent agent Lew Wasserman the photograph of the then 18-year-old Leigh (Shearer&#x27;s late husband Irving Thalberg had been head of production at MGM). She would later recall that &quot;that smile made it the most fascinating face I had seen in years. I felt I had to show that face to somebody at the studio.&quot; Through her association with MGM, Shearer was able to facilitate screen tests for Leigh with Selena Royle, after which Wasserman negotiated a contract for her, despite her having no acting experience. Leigh dropped out of college that year and was soon placed under the tutelage of drama coach Lillian Burns. 

Prior to beginning her film career, Leigh was a guest star on the radio drama anthology &quot;The Cresta Blanca Hollywood Players&quot;. Her initial appearance on radio at age 19 was for the program&#x27;s production &quot;All Through the House,&quot; a Christmas special that aired on December 24, 1946. She made her film debut in the big-budget Civil War film &quot;The Romance of Rosy Ridge&quot; (1947) as the romantic interest of box-office star Van Johnson&#x27;s character. She got the role when performing Phyllis Thaxter&#x27;s long speech in &quot;Thirty Seconds Over Tokyo&quot; for the head of the studio talent department. During the film shoot, Leigh&#x27;s name was first changed to &quot;Jeanette Reames&quot;, then to &quot;Janet Leigh&quot;, and finally back to her birth name &quot;Jeanette Morrison&quot;, as the studio felt &quot;Janet Leigh&quot; might cause confusion with actress Vivien Leigh. However, Johnson did not like the name and it was ultimately changed back to &quot;Janet Leigh&quot; (pronounced &quot;Lee&quot;).
Immediately after the release of &quot;The Romance of Rosy Ridge&quot;, Leigh was cast with Walter Pidgeon, Deborah Kerr, and Angela Lansbury in the drama &quot;If Winter Comes&quot; (1947), playing a young pregnant woman in an English village. By early 1948, Leigh was occupied with the shooting of the Lassie film &quot;Hills of Home&quot; (1948), her third feature and the first in which she received star billing. She played the young wife of composer Richard Rodgers in MGM&#x27;s all-star musical, &quot;Words and Music&quot; (1948). In late 1948, she was hailed the &quot;No. 1 glamour girl&quot; of Hollywood, even though she was known for her polite, generous, and down-to-earth persona.

Leigh appeared in a number of films in 1949, including the thriller &quot;Act of Violence&quot; (1949) with Van Heflin and Robert Ryan, directed by Fred Zinnemann. Though a financial failure, it was well received by critics. She also had a significant hit with MGM&#x27;s version of &quot;Little Women&quot;, based on the novel by Louisa May Alcott, in which she portrayed Meg March, alongside June Allyson and Elizabeth Taylor. The film was also generally praised by critics. Then Leigh appeared as a nun in the anti-communist drama &quot;The Red Danube&quot;, which earned her critical acclaim, followed by a role as Glenn Ford&#x27;s love interest in &quot;The Doctor and the Girl&quot;. Other credits from 1949 include the role of June Forsyte in &quot;That Forsyte Woman&quot; (1949), opposite Greer Garson and Errol Flynn, and as Robert Mitchum&#x27;s leading co-star in the RKO-produced &quot;Holiday Affair&quot; (1949). That December, she started work on Josef von Sternberg&#x27;s adventure-drama film &quot;Jet Pilot&quot; as the female lead opposite John Wayne. Producer Howard Hughes&#x27; constant re-editing would cause the film to be delayed almost eight years before being released.

=== 1950s ===

At MGM she appeared in &quot;Strictly Dishonorable&quot; (1951), a comedy with Ezio Pinza, based on a play by Preston Sturges. The film received mild critical acclaim. Leigh then appeared in the baseball-themed fantasy farce &quot;Angels in the Outfield&quot; (1951), which was a commercial hit. The same year, RKO borrowed Leigh to appear in the musical &quot;Two Tickets to Broadway&quot; (1951), which was a box-office success. She was one of many stars in the anthology film &quot;It&#x27;s a Big Country: An American Anthology&quot; (1952) and appeared in a romantic comedy with Peter Lawford, &quot;Just This Once&quot; (1952). Leigh had another significant commercial success with the swashbuckler &quot;Scaramouche&quot; (1952), in which she starred as Aline de Gavrillac opposite Stewart Granger and Eleanor Parker. Next, she received top-billing in the critically acclaimed comedy &quot;Fearless Fagan&quot; (1952), about a clown drafted into the military, followed by a role opposite James Stewart in the Western &quot;The Naked Spur&quot; (1953). The latter, though a low-budget feature, was one of the top-grossing films of the year and was noted by several critics for its psychological components. Less well received was the comedy &quot;Confidentially Connie&quot; (1953), in which Leigh starred opposite Van Johnson as a pregnant housewife who helps trigger a price war at a local butcher shop.

Paramount borrowed Leigh and Tony Curtis for the biographical feature &quot;Houdini&quot; (1953) the couple&#x27;s first film together with the two appearing as Bess and Harry Houdini, respectively. The couple also appeared as guests on Martin and Lewis&#x27; &quot;Colgate Comedy Hour&quot; before Leigh was loaned to Universal to appear in the musical &quot;Walking My Baby Back Home&quot; (1953). Leigh was cast as Robert Wagner&#x27;s love interest in the Fox-produced adventure film &quot;Prince Valiant&quot; (1954), a Viking-themed feature based on Hal Foster&#x27;s comic of the same name. Also in 1954, Leigh had a supporting role in the Dean Martin and Jerry Lewis comedy &quot;Living It Up&quot; (1954) for Paramount, followed by Universal&#x27;s swashbuckler film &quot;The Black Shield of Falworth&quot; (1954), in which she performed opposite Curtis for a second time. Leigh also starred opposite Robert Taylor in MGM&#x27;s film noir &quot;Rogue Cop&quot; (1954), portraying a femme fatale lounge singer. &quot;Variety&quot; deemed her performance in the film &quot;satisfactory&quot; but faulted the screenplay for being illogical. Following that film, Leigh ended her contract with MGM after eight years. 

In April 1954 Leigh signed a four-picture contract with Universal, where her now husband Tony was based. She also signed a contract with Columbia to make one film a year for five years. Leigh appeared in &quot;Pete Kelly&#x27;s Blues&quot; (1954) with Jack Webb (who also directed) and subsequently starred in her first feature under the deal with Columbia: the title role in the musical comedy &quot;My Sister Eileen&quot; (1955), co-starring Jack Lemmon, Betty Garrett, and Dick York, and based on a series of &quot;New Yorker&quot; stories about two sisters living in New York City. In early 1955, Leigh and Curtis formed their own independent film production company, Curtleigh Productions. Columbia cast Leigh in &quot;Safari&quot; (1956), opposite Victor Mature and shot in Kenya for Warwick Pictures. The same year, Leigh and Curtis gave birth to their first child, daughter Kelly. She subsequently made her television debut in an episode of &quot;Schlitz Playhouse&quot;, &quot;Carriage from Britain&quot;. In 1957, the film &quot;Jet Pilot&quot;, which Leigh had filmed in 1949, was finally released.
In 1958, Leigh starred as Susan Vargas in the Orson Welles film noir classic &quot;Touch of Evil&quot; (1958), made at Universal with Charlton Heston a film with numerous similarities to Alfred Hitchcock&#x27;s &quot;Psycho&quot;, which was produced two years later. In it, she plays a newlywed tormented in a Mexican border town. Leigh would later describe shooting the film as a &quot;great experience&quot; but added: &quot;Universal just couldn&#x27;t understand it, so they recut it. Gone was the undisciplined but brilliant film Orson had made.&quot; Next, Leigh co-starred in her fourth film with Curtis, &quot;The Vikings&quot; (1958), produced by and co-starring Kirk Douglas and released in June 1958. Distributed by United Artists, the film had one of the most expensive marketing campaigns of the 1950s. It was ultimately a blockbuster, grossing over $13 million internationally. Leigh&#x27;s next film, &quot;The Perfect Furlough&quot;, was released in early 1959, in which she again co-starred with Curtis, playing a psychiatrist lieutenant in Paris. 

=== 1960s ===
Leigh and Curtis next co-starred in the Columbia Pictures farce &quot;Who Was That Lady?&quot; (released in early 1960), in which Leigh portrayed a wife who catches her professor husband (Curtis) cheating on her, triggering a series of mishaps.
Also in 1960, Leigh was cast in her most iconic role as the morally conflicted murder victim Marion Crane in Alfred Hitchcock&#x27;s &quot;Psycho&quot;, co-starring with John Gavin, Vera Miles, and Anthony Perkins, and released by Universal. Leigh was reportedly so traumatized from watching her character&#x27;s shower murder scene that she went to great lengths to avoid showers for the rest of her life. Released in June 1960, &quot;Psycho&quot; was a major critical and commercial success. For her performance, Leigh received a Golden Globe Award for Best Supporting Actress and was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress. Leigh&#x27;s role in &quot;Psycho&quot; became career-defining and she later commented: &quot;I&#x27;ve been in a great many films, but I suppose if an actor can be remembered for one role, then they&#x27;re very fortunate. And in that sense I&#x27;m fortunate.&quot; Her character&#x27;s death early in the film has been noted as historically relevant by film scholars, as it violated narrative conventions of the time, while her murder scene itself is considered among both critics and film scholars to be one of the most iconic scenes in cinematic history.

Leigh and Curtis both had cameos in Columbia&#x27;s all-star &quot;Pepe&quot; (1960), marking their last film together. In 1962, while Leigh was filming the thriller &quot;The Manchurian Candidate&quot;, Curtis filed for divorce. The divorce was finalized in Ciudad Juárez, Mexico, on September 14, 1962; the following day, Leigh married stockbroker Robert Brandt (1927–2009) in a private ceremony in Las Vegas, Nevada. Leigh would later comment that their divorce was the result of &quot;outside problems&quot;, which included the death of Curtis&#x27;s father. Next, Leigh appeared in the musical comedy &quot;Bye Bye Birdie&quot; (1963), based on the hit Broadway show. She was also in the comedy &quot;Wives and Lovers&quot; (1963) for director Hal Wallis at Paramount. 

Leigh took a three-year break from her acting career and turned down several roles, including the role of Simone Clouseau in &quot;The Pink Panther&quot;, because she did not want to go on location and be separated from her young daughters. She returned to film in 1966, appearing in multiple projects: the western &quot;Kid Rodelo&quot; (1966), and the private detective story &quot;Harper&quot; (1966), in which she played Paul Newman&#x27;s estranged wife opposite Lauren Bacall. She next portrayed a psychiatrist opposite Jerry Lewis in the comedy &quot;Three on a Couch&quot;, followed by a lead role in &quot;An American Dream&quot;, based on the Norman Mailer novel of the same name; the latter film received critical backlash.

=== 1970s and 1980s ===
Leigh&#x27;s initial television appearances were on anthology programs such as &quot;Bob Hope Presents the Chrysler Theatre&quot; and &quot;The Red Skelton Hour&quot;. She also starred in several made-for-TV films, most notably the off-length (135 minutes instead of the usual 100) &quot;The House on Greenapple Road&quot;, which premiered on ABC in January 1970 to high ratings. In 1972, Leigh starred in the science-fiction film &quot;Night of the Lepus&quot; with Stuart Whitman, as well as the drama &quot;One Is a Lonely Number&quot; with Trish Van Devere. In 1975, she played an ex-Hollywood song-and-dance star opposite Peter Falk and John Payne in the &quot;Columbo&quot; episode &quot;Forgotten Lady&quot;. The episode utilizes footage of Leigh from the film &quot;Walking My Baby Back Home&quot; (1953). Her many other guest appearances on television series include &quot;The Man from U.N.C.L.E.&quot; in a two-part episode, &quot;The Concrete Overcoat Affair&quot;, in which she played a sadistic Thrush agent named Miss Dyketon, a highly provocative role for mainstream television at the time. The two-part episode was released in Europe as a feature film entitled &quot;The Spy in the Green Hat&quot; (1967). She also appeared in the title role in &quot;The Virginian&quot; episode &quot;Jenny&quot; (1970). In 1973, she appeared in the episode &quot;Beginner&#x27;s Luck&quot; of the romantic anthology series &quot;Love Story&quot;.
Leigh made her stage debut opposite Jack Cassidy in the original Broadway production of &quot;Murder Among Friends&quot;, which opened at the Biltmore Theatre on December 28, 1975. The play ran for seventeen performances, closing on January 10, 1976. The play received varied reviews, with some critics who attended preview performances disliking the show. In 1979, Leigh appeared in a supporting role in &quot;Boardwalk&quot;, opposite Ruth Gordon and Lee Strasberg, and received critical praise, with Vincent Canby of &quot;The New York Times&quot; lauding it as her &quot;best role in years&quot;. 

In addition to her work as an actress, Leigh also authored four books. Her first, the memoir &quot;There Really Was a Hollywood&quot; (1984), became a &quot;New York Times&quot; bestseller.

=== 1990s and 2000s ===
In 1995, Leigh published the non-fiction book &quot;Psycho: Behind the Scenes of the Classic Thriller&quot;. In 1996, she published her first novel, &quot;House of Destiny&quot;, which explored the lives of two friends who forged an empire that would change the course of Hollywood&#x27;s history. The book&#x27;s success spawned a follow-up novel, &quot;The Dream Factory&quot; (2002), which was set in Hollywood during the height of the studio system.

Leigh subsequently appeared opposite her daughter, Jamie Lee Curtis, in John Carpenter&#x27;s supernatural horror film &quot;The Fog&quot; (1980), in which a phantom schooner unleashes ghosts on a small coastal community. Leigh would appear with her daughter once again in &quot;Halloween H20: 20 Years Later&quot; (1998), playing the secretary of Laurie Strode. On television Leigh acted in the &quot;Murder, She Wrote&quot; episode &quot;Doom with a View&quot; (1987), as Barbara LeMay in an episode of &quot;The Twilight Zone&quot; (&quot;Rendezvous in a dark place&quot;, 1989), and the &quot;Touched by an Angel&quot; episode &quot;Charade&quot; (1997). She guest-starred twice as different characters on both &quot;Fantasy Island&quot; and &quot;The Love Boat&quot;, as well as &quot;Tales of the Unexpected&quot;. 

Leigh continued to grant interviews and appear at red carpet events through the early 2000s. Her final film credit was in the teen film &quot;Bad Girls from Valley High&quot; (2005), opposite Christopher Lloyd.

== Personal life ==
When she was still in high school, Leigh married 18-year-old John Kenneth Carlisle in Reno, Nevada, on August 1, 1942. The marriage was annulled five months later on December 28, 1942.
After a tenure at Stockton College (now San Joaquin Delta College), Leigh enrolled at the College of the Pacific (now University of the Pacific) in September 1943, where she majored in music and psychology. During the college years, she joined the Alpha Theta Tau sorority and also sang with the college&#x27;s a cappella choir. In order to help support her family, she spent Christmas and summer vacations working at retail shops and dime stores, as well as working at the college&#x27;s information desk during the semesters. It was at this time that Leigh met Stanley Reames, a U.S. Navy sailor who was enrolled at a nearby V-12 Program. They married on October 6, 1945, when she was 18. Their marriage, however, was also short lived, and they divorced less than three years later.

On June 4, 1951, Leigh married actor Tony Curtis in a private ceremony in Greenwich, Connecticut. Their romance and marriage were frequent topics in gossip columns and film tabloids. From 1951 to 1954 Leigh and Curtis appeared in numerous home movies directed by their friend Jerry Lewis. Leigh credited the experimental and informal nature of these films for allowing her to stretch her acting ability and attempt different roles. On June 17, 1956, Leigh gave birth to her first daughter, Kelly Lee Curtis. On November 22, 1958, Leigh gave birth to her second daughter with Curtis, Jamie Lee Curtis. Curtis and Leigh divorced in 1962. She married stockbroker Robert Brandt later that year. 

A lifelong Democrat, Leigh supported John F. Kennedy in the 1960 U.S. presidential election and Lyndon B. Johnson in the 1964 presidential election. She also served on the board of directors of the Motion Picture and Television Foundation, a medical-services provider for actors.

== Death ==

Leigh died at her home in Beverly Hills on October 3, 2004, at age 77 after a protracted battle with vasculitis. Her death surprised many, as she had not disclosed her illness to the public. She was survived by her daughters Kelly and Jamie and her husband of 42 years, Robert Brandt. Leigh was cremated and her ashes were entombed at Westwood Village Memorial Park Cemetery in the Westwood Village neighborhood of Los Angeles.

== Legacy ==
In the 2012 film &quot;Hitchcock&quot;, Leigh is played by Scarlett Johansson. She has a ski trail named after her, Leigh Lane, at Sun Valley Resort&#x27;s Bald Mountain skiing area in Sun Valley, Idaho. Leigh kept a second home there for more than 30 years.

In 2003, she received the Ted M. Larson Award at the Fargo Film Festival for her contribution to cinema.

Leigh was awarded an honorary Doctor of Fine Arts degree at the University of the Pacific in Stockton, California, on May 14, 2004, where she had attended college. At the time, Leigh&#x27;s health was compromised by vasculitis, and she delivered a speech at the ceremony from a wheelchair. On October 13, 2006, Jamie Lee Curtis and Kelly Curtis unveiled a bronze plaque of their mother to honor her early life in Stockton. The memorial is located in the downtown Stockton plaza adjacent to the City Center Cinemas, since renamed &quot;Janet Leigh Plaza&quot;.

Leigh was honored posthumously by University of the Pacific with the naming of the &quot;Janet Leigh Theatre&quot; on the Stockton campus on June 25, 2010. The plaque at the theatre reads:

Pacific&#x27;s Janet Leigh Theatre - Made possible by a generous gift from the Robert Brandt and Janet Leigh Brandt Estate. The Janet Leigh Theatre was created to bind the experiences and friendships that Janet Leigh valued while a student at Pacific. This memorial is a tribute to her life and career in the Stockton region as well as her magnificent contributions to the Hollywood film industry as an actress, wife, mother and humanitarian. Dedicated Friday, June 25, 2010.

== Filmography ==
==Bibliography==
* &quot;There Really Was a Hollywood&quot;. Doubleday, 1984; .
* &quot;Psycho: Behind the Scenes of the Classic Thriller&quot;. Harmony Books, 1995; .
* &quot;House of Destiny&quot;. Mira Books, 1996; .
* &quot;The Dream Factory&quot;. Mira Books, 2002; .

==Awards and nominations==
==Notes==
==References==

=== Citations ===
=== Sources ===
*

==External links==
* 
* 
* Reelclassics.com Page
* Janet Leigh at Virtual History
* Janet Leigh Collection available at the Holt-Atherton Special Collections and Archives</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q205314" start="0" end="23" title="Janet Leigh" label="Jeanette Helen Morrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q205314" start="82" end="93" title="Janet Leigh" label="Janet Leigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q49240" start="130" end="150" title="Stockton, California" label="Stockton, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q95019" start="216" end="229" title="Norma Shearer" label="Norma Shearer"/>
<link wikidata="Q179200" start="269" end="288" title="Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer" label="Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3203487" start="346" end="371" title="The Romance of Rosy Ridge" label="The Romance of Rosy Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q421750" start="408" end="423" title="Act of Violence" label="Act of Violence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1466426" start="462" end="474" title="Little Women (1949 film)" label="Little Women"/>
<link wikidata="Q4763098" start="506" end="528" title="Angels in the Outfield (1951 film)" label="Angels in the Outfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q6194437" start="547" end="559" title="swashbuckler" label="swashbuckler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897321" start="574" end="585" title="Scaramouche (1952 film)" label="Scaramouche"/>
<link wikidata="Q172980" start="604" end="611" title="Western film" label="Western"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275343" start="624" end="638" title="The Naked Spur" label="The Naked Spur"/>
<link wikidata="Q163038" start="682" end="688" title="Psycho (1960 film)" label="Psycho"/>
<link wikidata="Q162389" start="759" end="770" title="Tony Curtis" label="Tony Curtis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3461246" start="852" end="858" title="Safari (1956 film)" label="Safari"/>
<link wikidata="Q24829" start="876" end="888" title="Orson Welles" label="Orson Welles"/>
<link wikidata="Q778161" start="901" end="914" title="Touch of Evil" label="Touch of Evil"/>
<link wikidata="Q6765157" start="975" end="987" title="Marion Crane" label="Marion Crane"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374" start="991" end="1007" title="Alfred Hitchcock" label="Alfred Hitchcock"/>
<link wikidata="Q163038" start="1033" end="1039" title="Psycho (1960 film)" label="Psycho"/>
<link wikidata="Q822907" start="1066" end="1112" title="Golden Globe Award for Best Supporting Actress – Motion Picture" label="Golden Globe Award for Best Supporting Actress"/>
<link wikidata="Q106301" start="1146" end="1187" title="Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress" label="Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1381535" start="1261" end="1274" title="Scream queen" label="scream queens"/>
<link wikidata="Q71719" start="1302" end="1324" title="Hollywood Walk of Fame" label="Hollywood Walk of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q521387" start="1427" end="1451" title="The Manchurian Candidate (1962 film)" label="The Manchurian Candidate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018487" start="1489" end="1503" title="Bye Bye Birdie (1963 film)" label="Bye Bye Birdie"/>
<link wikidata="Q262980" start="1541" end="1547" title="Harper (film)" label="Harper"/>
<link wikidata="Q235065" start="1606" end="1614" title="Broadway theatre" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235162" start="1718" end="1736" title="Night of the Lepus" label="Night of the Lepus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4931447" start="1773" end="1782" title="Boardwalk (film)" label="Boardwalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q106997" start="1834" end="1850" title="Jamie Lee Curtis" label="Jamie Lee Curtis"/>
<link wikidata="Q500403" start="1878" end="1885" title="The Fog" label="The Fog"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1909" end="1938" title="Halloween H20: 20 Years Later" label="Halloween H20: 20 Years Later"/>
<link wikidata="Q96219376" start="1969" end="2001" title="List of Janet Leigh performances" label="several screen and stage credits"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2086" end="2096" title="Janet Leigh#Bibliography" label="four books"/>
<link wikidata="Q644318" start="2202" end="2212" title="vasculitis" label="vasculitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q499189" start="2300" end="2318" title="Merced, California" label="Merced, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q49240" start="2559" end="2567" title="Stockton, California" label="Stockton"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="2751" end="2767" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q178169" start="2787" end="2799" title="Presbyterianism" label="Presbyterian"/>
<link wikidata="Q96406556" start="3051" end="3071" title="Stockton High School (California)" label="Stockton High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q4614" start="3251" end="3284" title="University of Southern California" label="University of Southern California"/>
<link wikidata="Q95019" start="3356" end="3369" title="Norma Shearer" label="Norma Shearer"/>
<link wikidata="Q14684041" start="3389" end="3399" title="Sugar Bowl Ski Resort" label="Sugar Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q26777" start="3421" end="3434" title="Sierra Nevada (U.S.)" label="Sierra Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q179200" start="3734" end="3753" title="Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer" label="Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361763" start="3773" end="3786" title="Lew Wasserman" label="Lew Wasserman"/>
<link wikidata="Q438472" start="3861" end="3876" title="Irving Thalberg" label="Irving Thalberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q529503" start="4171" end="4183" title="Selena Royle" label="Selena Royle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635894" start="4461" end="4466" title="Radio drama" label="drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q18149023" start="4483" end="4518" title="The Cresta Blanca Hollywood Players" label="The Cresta Blanca Hollywood Players"/>
<link wikidata="Q19809" start="4643" end="4652" title="Christmas" label="Christmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3203487" start="4757" end="4782" title="The Romance of Rosy Ridge" label="The Romance of Rosy Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q436638" start="4840" end="4851" title="Van Johnson" label="Van Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q270753" start="4903" end="4918" title="Phyllis Thaxter" label="Phyllis Thaxter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258295" start="4947" end="4972" title="Thirty Seconds Over Tokyo" label="Thirty Seconds Over Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q129429" start="5293" end="5305" title="Vivien Leigh" label="Vivien Leigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q350640" start="5530" end="5544" title="Walter Pidgeon" label="Walter Pidgeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q104146" start="5546" end="5558" title="Deborah Kerr" label="Deborah Kerr"/>
<link wikidata="Q206856" start="5564" end="5579" title="Angela Lansbury" label="Angela Lansbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q921599" start="5599" end="5614" title="If Winter Comes" label="If Winter Comes"/>
<link wikidata="Q941640" start="5742" end="5748" title="Lassie" label="Lassie"/>
<link wikidata="Q918180" start="5760" end="5773" title="Hills of Home (film)" label="Hills of Home"/>
<link wikidata="Q269094" start="5894" end="5909" title="Richard Rodgers" label="Richard Rodgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507560" start="5948" end="5963" title="Words and Music (1948 film)" label="Words and Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q421750" start="6210" end="6225" title="Act of Violence" label="Act of Violence"/>
<link wikidata="Q350678" start="6244" end="6254" title="Van Heflin" label="Van Heflin"/>
<link wikidata="Q350680" start="6259" end="6270" title="Robert Ryan" label="Robert Ryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q55420" start="6284" end="6298" title="Fred Zinnemann" label="Fred Zinnemann"/>
<link wikidata="Q1466426" start="6425" end="6437" title="Little Women (1949 film)" label="Little Women"/>
<link wikidata="Q185696" start="6467" end="6484" title="Louisa May Alcott" label="Louisa May Alcott"/>
<link wikidata="Q232863" start="6530" end="6542" title="June Allyson" label="June Allyson"/>
<link wikidata="Q34851" start="6547" end="6563" title="Elizabeth Taylor" label="Elizabeth Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q191808" start="6638" end="6641" title="nun" label="nun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754248" start="6676" end="6690" title="The Red Danube" label="The Red Danube"/>
<link wikidata="Q212048" start="6755" end="6765" title="Glenn Ford" label="Glenn Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q2997778" start="6796" end="6819" title="The Doctor and the Girl" label="The Doctor and the Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1170235" start="6893" end="6911" title="That Forsyte Woman" label="That Forsyte Woman"/>
<link wikidata="Q182486" start="6935" end="6947" title="Greer Garson" label="Greer Garson"/>
<link wikidata="Q93188" start="6952" end="6963" title="Errol Flynn" label="Errol Flynn"/>
<link wikidata="Q16472" start="6972" end="6986" title="Robert Mitchum" label="Robert Mitchum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079627" start="7036" end="7050" title="Holiday Affair" label="Holiday Affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q78719" start="7100" end="7119" title="Josef von Sternberg" label="Josef von Sternberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q862956" start="7154" end="7163" title="Jet Pilot (film)" label="Jet Pilot"/>
<link wikidata="Q40531" start="7198" end="7208" title="John Wayne" label="John Wayne"/>
<link wikidata="Q189081" start="7219" end="7232" title="Howard Hughes" label="Howard Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3407576" start="7381" end="7402" title="Strictly Dishonorable (1951 film)" label="Strictly Dishonorable"/>
<link wikidata="Q543293" start="7431" end="7441" title="Ezio Pinza" label="Ezio Pinza"/>
<link wikidata="Q546204" start="7462" end="7477" title="Preston Sturges" label="Preston Sturges"/>
<link wikidata="Q4763098" start="7583" end="7605" title="Angels in the Outfield (1951 film)" label="Angels in the Outfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q73944" start="7713" end="7736" title="Two Tickets to Broadway" label="Two Tickets to Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2710105" start="7837" end="7883" title="It&amp;#x27;s a Big Country" label="It&amp;#x27;s a Big Country: An American Anthology"/>
<link wikidata="Q345517" start="7936" end="7949" title="Peter Lawford" label="Peter Lawford"/>
<link wikidata="Q16252140" start="7957" end="7971" title="Just This Once (film)" label="Just This Once"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897321" start="8063" end="8074" title="Scaramouche (1952 film)" label="Scaramouche"/>
<link wikidata="Q310150" start="8141" end="8156" title="Stewart Granger" label="Stewart Granger"/>
<link wikidata="Q237399" start="8161" end="8175" title="Eleanor Parker" label="Eleanor Parker"/>
<link wikidata="Q3204287" start="8249" end="8263" title="Fearless Fagan" label="Fearless Fagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7358" start="8286" end="8291" title="clown" label="clown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275343" start="8382" end="8396" title="The Naked Spur" label="The Naked Spur"/>
<link wikidata="Q5160104" start="8605" end="8626" title="Confidentially Connie" label="Confidentially Connie"/>
<link wikidata="Q436638" start="8673" end="8684" title="Van Johnson" label="Van Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2668479" start="8729" end="8738" title="price war" label="price war"/>
<link wikidata="Q162389" start="8794" end="8805" title="Tony Curtis" label="Tony Curtis"/>
<link wikidata="Q934122" start="8841" end="8848" title="Houdini (1953 film)" label="Houdini"/>
<link wikidata="Q4896361" start="8926" end="8930" title="Bess Houdini" label="Bess"/>
<link wikidata="Q131545" start="8935" end="8948" title="Harry Houdini" label="Harry Houdini"/>
<link wikidata="Q831060" start="9002" end="9018" title="Martin and Lewis" label="Martin and Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252607" start="9031" end="9050" title="Colgate Comedy Hour" label="Colgate Comedy Hour"/>
<link wikidata="Q2671850" start="9125" end="9150" title="Walking My Baby Back Home (film)" label="Walking My Baby Back Home"/>
<link wikidata="Q310493" start="9183" end="9196" title="Robert Wagner" label="Robert Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1605973" start="9259" end="9273" title="Prince Valiant (1954 film)" label="Prince Valiant"/>
<link wikidata="Q719676" start="9321" end="9331" title="Hal Foster" label="Hal Foster"/>
<link wikidata="Q48209" start="9339" end="9361" title="Prince Valiant" label="comic of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q831060" start="9412" end="9439" title="Martin and Lewis" label="Dean Martin and Jerry Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199661" start="9453" end="9465" title="Living It Up" label="Living It Up"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198533" start="9547" end="9575" title="The Black Shield of Falworth" label="The Black Shield of Falworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q145132" start="9676" end="9689" title="Robert Taylor (American actor)" label="Robert Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q971165" start="9720" end="9729" title="Rogue Cop" label="Rogue Cop"/>
<link wikidata="Q222573" start="9757" end="9769" title="femme fatale" label="femme fatale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1445520" start="10199" end="10222" title="Pete Kelly&amp;#x27;s Blues (film)" label="Pete Kelly&amp;#x27;s Blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q1287651" start="10241" end="10250" title="Jack Webb" label="Jack Webb"/>
<link wikidata="Q3273584" start="10390" end="10406" title="My Sister Eileen" label="My Sister Eileen"/>
<link wikidata="Q94123" start="10433" end="10444" title="Jack Lemmon" label="Jack Lemmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q235196" start="10446" end="10459" title="Betty Garrett" label="Betty Garrett"/>
<link wikidata="Q708140" start="10465" end="10474" title="Dick York" label="Dick York"/>
<link wikidata="Q217305" start="10507" end="10517" title="The New Yorker" label="New Yorker"/>
<link wikidata="Q107391544" start="10661" end="10682" title="Curtleigh Productions" label="Curtleigh Productions"/>
<link wikidata="Q3461246" start="10713" end="10719" title="Safari (1955 film)" label="Safari"/>
<link wikidata="Q358317" start="10743" end="10756" title="Victor Mature" label="Victor Mature"/>
<link wikidata="Q7971135" start="10779" end="10795" title="Warwick Pictures" label="Warwick Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q273574" start="10871" end="10876" title="Kelly Curtis" label="Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q3952135" start="10944" end="10961" title="Schlitz Playhouse" label="Schlitz Playhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q24829" start="11145" end="11157" title="Orson Welles" label="Orson Welles"/>
<link wikidata="Q185867" start="11158" end="11167" title="film noir" label="film noir"/>
<link wikidata="Q778161" start="11182" end="11195" title="Touch of Evil" label="Touch of Evil"/>
<link wikidata="Q80739" start="11233" end="11248" title="Charlton Heston" label="Charlton Heston"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374" start="11286" end="11302" title="Alfred Hitchcock" label="Alfred Hitchcock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146960" start="11717" end="11728" title="The Vikings (1958 film)" label="The Vikings"/>
<link wikidata="Q104027" start="11771" end="11783" title="Kirk Douglas" label="Kirk Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q219400" start="11826" end="11840" title="United Artists" label="United Artists"/>
<link wikidata="Q505119" start="11935" end="11946" title="Blockbuster (entertainment)" label="blockbuster"/>
<link wikidata="Q2321751" start="12021" end="12041" title="The Perfect Furlough" label="The Perfect Furlough"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="12157" end="12162" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q2322404" start="12250" end="12268" title="Who Was That Lady?" label="Who Was That Lady?"/>
<link wikidata="Q6765157" start="12518" end="12530" title="Marion Crane" label="Marion Crane"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374" start="12534" end="12550" title="Alfred Hitchcock" label="Alfred Hitchcock"/>
<link wikidata="Q163038" start="12564" end="12570" title="Psycho (1960 film)" label="Psycho"/>
<link wikidata="Q145627" start="12595" end="12605" title="John Gavin" label="John Gavin"/>
<link wikidata="Q237864" start="12607" end="12617" title="Vera Miles" label="Vera Miles"/>
<link wikidata="Q193146" start="12623" end="12638" title="Anthony Perkins" label="Anthony Perkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q822907" start="12957" end="13003" title="Golden Globe Award for Best Supporting Actress - Motion Picture" label="Golden Globe Award for Best Supporting Actress"/>
<link wikidata="Q106301" start="13030" end="13071" title="Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress" label="Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress"/>
<link wikidata="Q2562884" start="13701" end="13705" title="Pepe (1960 film)" label="Pepe"/>
<link wikidata="Q521387" start="13806" end="13830" title="The Manchurian Candidate (1962 film)" label="The Manchurian Candidate"/>
<link wikidata="Q26590" start="13893" end="13906" title="Ciudad Juárez" label="Ciudad Juárez"/>
<link wikidata="Q23768" start="14035" end="14052" title="Las Vegas" label="Las Vegas, Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018487" start="14246" end="14260" title="Bye Bye Birdie (1963 film)" label="Bye Bye Birdie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058046" start="14340" end="14356" title="Wives and Lovers (film)" label="Wives and Lovers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131556" start="14541" end="14557" title="The Pink Panther (1963 film)" label="The Pink Panther"/>
<link wikidata="Q1119367" start="14731" end="14741" title="Kid Rodelo" label="Kid Rodelo"/>
<link wikidata="Q262980" start="14794" end="14800" title="Harper (film)" label="Harper"/>
<link wikidata="Q41871" start="14835" end="14846" title="Paul Newman" label="Paul Newman"/>
<link wikidata="Q104000" start="14878" end="14891" title="Lauren Bacall" label="Lauren Bacall"/>
<link wikidata="Q294927" start="14936" end="14947" title="Jerry Lewis" label="Jerry Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1646487" start="14968" end="14984" title="Three on a Couch" label="Three on a Couch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1582583" start="15025" end="15042" title="An American Dream (film)" label="An American Dream"/>
<link wikidata="Q180962" start="15063" end="15076" title="Norman Mailer" label="Norman Mailer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4749758" start="15077" end="15099" title="An American Dream (novel)" label="novel of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q1565710" start="15255" end="15293" title="Bob Hope Presents the Chrysler Theatre" label="Bob Hope Presents the Chrysler Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2960406" start="15310" end="15330" title="The Red Skelton Hour" label="The Red Skelton Hour"/>
<link wikidata="Q593541" start="15458" end="15486" title="The House on Greenapple Road" label="The House on Greenapple Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q169889" start="15513" end="15516" title="American Broadcasting Company" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235162" start="15607" end="15625" title="Night of the Lepus" label="Night of the Lepus"/>
<link wikidata="Q470998" start="15637" end="15651" title="Stuart Whitman" label="Stuart Whitman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4004213" start="15680" end="15702" title="One Is a Lonely Number" label="One Is a Lonely Number"/>
<link wikidata="Q458459" start="15714" end="15730" title="Trish Van Devere" label="Trish Van Devere"/>
<link wikidata="Q484881" start="15797" end="15807" title="Peter Falk" label="Peter Falk"/>
<link wikidata="Q723415" start="15812" end="15822" title="John Payne (actor)" label="John Payne"/>
<link wikidata="Q371207" start="15836" end="15843" title="Columbo" label="Columbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2671850" start="15944" end="15969" title="Walking My Baby Back Home (film)" label="Walking My Baby Back Home"/>
<link wikidata="Q1264983" start="16052" end="16075" title="The Man from U.N.C.L.E." label="The Man from U.N.C.L.E."/>
<link wikidata="Q7766087" start="16353" end="16377" title="The Spy in the Green Hat" label="The Spy in the Green Hat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1214471" start="16437" end="16450" title="The Virginian (TV series)" label="The Virginian"/>
<link wikidata="Q18151945" start="16600" end="16610" title="Love Story (1973 TV series)" label="Love Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350489" start="16654" end="16666" title="Jack Cassidy" label="Jack Cassidy"/>
<link wikidata="Q235065" start="16683" end="16691" title="Broadway theatre" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5935075" start="16760" end="16776" title="Samuel J. Friedman Theatre" label="Biltmore Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q4931447" start="17029" end="17038" title="Boardwalk (film)" label="Boardwalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q232562" start="17055" end="17066" title="Ruth Gordon" label="Ruth Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q297945" start="17071" end="17084" title="Lee Strasberg" label="Lee Strasberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q716442" start="17121" end="17134" title="Vincent Canby" label="Vincent Canby"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="17378" end="17392" title="New York Times" label="New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q106997" start="17942" end="17958" title="Jamie Lee Curtis" label="Jamie Lee Curtis"/>
<link wikidata="Q95008" start="17963" end="17977" title="John Carpenter" label="John Carpenter"/>
<link wikidata="Q500403" start="18016" end="18023" title="The Fog" label="The Fog"/>
<link wikidata="" start="18170" end="18199" title="Halloween H20: 20 Years Later" label="Halloween H20: 20 Years Later"/>
<link wikidata="Q738551" start="18239" end="18252" title="Laurie Strode" label="Laurie Strode"/>
<link wikidata="Q833322" start="18293" end="18310" title="Murder, She Wrote" label="Murder, She Wrote"/>
<link wikidata="Q14329491" start="18402" end="18419" title="The Twilight Zone" label="The Twilight Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q174972" start="18488" end="18507" title="Touched by an Angel" label="Touched by an Angel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395913" start="18612" end="18626" title="Fantasy Island" label="Fantasy Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q181998" start="18643" end="18656" title="The Love Boat" label="The Love Boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q176027" start="18681" end="18704" title="Tales of the Unexpected (TV series)" label="Tales of the Unexpected"/>
<link wikidata="Q4840318" start="18856" end="18882" title="Bad Girls from Valley High" label="Bad Girls from Valley High"/>
<link wikidata="Q109324" start="18906" end="18923" title="Christopher Lloyd" label="Christopher Lloyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q49225" start="19032" end="19044" title="Reno, Nevada" label="Reno, Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q17066372" start="19171" end="19196" title="San Joaquin Delta College" label="San Joaquin Delta College"/>
<link wikidata="Q630226" start="19221" end="19243" title="University of the Pacific (United States)" label="College of the Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q630226" start="19249" end="19274" title="University of the Pacific (United States)" label="University of the Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q9418" start="19326" end="19336" title="psychology" label="psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q185298" start="19442" end="19452" title="a cappella" label="a cappella"/>
<link wikidata="Q2301114" start="19566" end="19576" title="variety store" label="dime store"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="19712" end="19721" title="United States Navy" label="U.S. Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7905616" start="19758" end="19770" title="V-12 Navy College Training Program" label="V-12 Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q162389" start="19954" end="19965" title="Tony Curtis" label="Tony Curtis"/>
<link wikidata="Q49202" start="19991" end="20013" title="Greenwich, Connecticut" label="Greenwich, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q294927" start="20193" end="20204" title="Jerry Lewis" label="Jerry Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q273574" start="20407" end="20423" title="Kelly Curtis" label="Kelly Lee Curtis"/>
<link wikidata="Q106997" start="20500" end="20516" title="Jamie Lee Curtis" label="Jamie Lee Curtis"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="20621" end="20629" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q9696" start="20647" end="20662" title="John F. Kennedy" label="John F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q699590" start="20670" end="20701" title="1960 United States presidential election" label="1960 U.S. presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q9640" start="20706" end="20723" title="Lyndon B. Johnson" label="Lyndon B. Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q699646" start="20731" end="20757" title="1964 United States presidential election" label="1964 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q644318" start="21005" end="21015" title="vasculitis" label="vasculitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358639" start="21239" end="21278" title="Westwood Village Memorial Park Cemetery" label="Westwood Village Memorial Park Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q247733" start="21369" end="21378" title="Hitchcock (film)" label="Hitchcock"/>
<link wikidata="Q34436" start="21405" end="21423" title="Scarlett Johansson" label="Scarlett Johansson"/>
<link wikidata="Q748604" start="21502" end="21515" title="Bald Mountain (Idaho)" label="Bald Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q955969" start="21531" end="21548" title="Sun Valley, Idaho" label="Sun Valley, Idaho"/>
<link wikidata="Q5435124" start="21659" end="21678" title="Fargo Film Festival" label="Fargo Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q5287507" start="21742" end="21761" title="Doctor of Fine Arts" label="Doctor of Fine Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q630226" start="21776" end="21801" title="University of the Pacific (United States)" label="University of the Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q49240" start="21805" end="21825" title="Stockton, California" label="Stockton, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q644318" start="21928" end="21938" title="vasculitis" label="vasculitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q630226" start="22307" end="22332" title="University of the Pacific (United States)" label="University of the Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251563" start="23019" end="23028" title="Doubleday (publisher)" label="Doubleday"/>
<link wikidata="Q5659457" start="23103" end="23116" title="Harmony Books" label="Harmony Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q6872193" start="23158" end="23168" title="Mira Books" label="Mira Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q6872193" start="23211" end="23221" title="Mira Books" label="Mira Books"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="230665" wikidata="Q7142444" url="?curid=230665" title="Passacaglia über Heidelberg">
<text>Passacaglia über Heidelberg is a musical work by Juan Maria Solare for clarinet, violin and cello (Cologne, 30 January–11 February 1996) [7&#x27;00&quot;]. It is dedicated to the city of Heidelberg on the occasion of its 800th anniversary. 

==Performances and recordings==
It was first performed on 4 April 1997 by Martin Vogel (clarinet), Mayumi Hasegawa (violin) and Monika Schwamberger (cello) at the Church of the Holy Spirit in Heidelberg, as first piece of the opening concert of the 11th Festival &quot;Gegenwelten&quot; for New Music, organized by the Kulturinstitut Komponistinnen. A fragment of this recording was aired on 15 April 1997, in the programme &quot;World of classical music&quot; of the Latin American desk of the radio Deutsche Welle. It was performed again by the Ensemble Octandre in Bologna on 29 March 2000 and on 8 November 2000. Performed at the Círculo de Bellas Artes of Madrid on 12 July 2001 by members of the JONDE (Joven Orquesta Nacional de España); the concert was repeated in Segovia on 1 August 2001.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q566338" start="49" end="66" title="Juan Maria Solare" label="Juan Maria Solare"/>
<link wikidata="Q8343" start="71" end="79" title="clarinet" label="clarinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q8355" start="81" end="87" title="violin" label="violin"/>
<link wikidata="Q8371" start="92" end="97" title="cello" label="cello"/>
<link wikidata="Q2966" start="187" end="197" title="Heidelberg" label="Heidelberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q574702" start="405" end="430" title="Church of the Holy Spirit (Heidelberg)" label="Church of the Holy Spirit"/>
<link wikidata="Q153770" start="743" end="757" title="Deutsche Welle" label="Deutsche Welle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891" start="810" end="817" title="Bologna" label="Bologna"/>
<link wikidata="Q2807" start="903" end="909" title="Madrid" label="Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q15684" start="1015" end="1022" title="Segovia" label="Segovia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="230677" wikidata="Q435801" url="?curid=230677" title="Peter Senge">
<text>Peter Michael Senge (born 1947) is an American systems scientist who is a senior lecturer at the MIT Sloan School of Management, co-faculty at the New England Complex Systems Institute, and the founder of the Society for Organizational Learning. He is known as the author of the book &quot;The Fifth Discipline: The Art and Practice of the Learning Organization&quot; (1990, rev. 2006).

== Life and career ==
Peter Senge was born in Stanford, California. He received a B.S. in Aerospace engineering from Stanford University. While at Stanford, Senge also studied philosophy. He later earned an M.S. in social systems modeling from MIT in 1972, as well as a PhD in Management from the MIT Sloan School of Management in 1978.

He is the founding chair of the Society for Organizational Learning (SoL). This organization helps with the communication of ideas between large corporations. It replaced the previous organization known as the Center for Organizational Learning at MIT.

He is co-Founder, and sits on the Board of Directors, of the Academy for Systems Change. This non-profit organization works with leaders to grow their ability to lead in complex social systems that foster biological, social and economic well-being. The focus is on awareness-based systems thinking tools, methods and approaches.

He has had a regular meditation practice since 1996 and began meditating with a trip to Tassajara, a Zen Buddhist monastery, before attending Stanford. He recommends meditation or similar forms of contemplative practice.

== Work ==
An engineer by training, Peter was a protégé of John H. Hopkins and has followed closely the works of Michael Peters and Robert Fritz and based his books on pioneering work with the five disciplines at Ford, Chrysler, Shell, AT&amp;T Corporation, Hanover Insurance, and Harley-Davidson, since the 1970s.

=== Organization development ===
Senge emerged in the 1990s as a major figure in organizational development with the book &quot;The Fifth Discipline,&quot; in which he developed the notion of a learning organization. This conceptualizes organizations as dynamic systems (as defined in Systemics), in states of continuous adaptation and improvement.

In 1997, &quot;Harvard Business Review&quot; identified &quot;The Fifth Discipline&quot; as one of the seminal management books of the previous 75 years. For this work, he was named &quot;Strategist of the Century&quot; by the Journal &quot;of Business Strategy,&quot; which said that he was one of a very few people who &quot;had the greatest impact on the way we conduct business today.&quot;

The book&#x27;s premise is that too many businesses are engaged in endless search for a heroic leader who can inspire people to change. This effort creates grand strategies that are never fully developed. The effort to change creates resistance that finally overcomes the effort.

Senge believes that real firms in real markets face both opportunities and natural limits to their development. Most efforts to change are hampered by resistance created by the cultural habits of the prevailing system. No amount of expert advice is useful. It&#x27;s essential to develop reflection and inquiry skills so that the real problems can be discussed.

According to Senge, there are four challenges in initiating changes.
* There must be a compelling case for change.
* There must be time to change.
* There must be help during the change process.
* As the perceived barriers to change are removed, it is important that some new problem, not before considered important or perhaps not even recognized, doesn&#x27;t become a critical barrier.

=== Learning organization and systems thinking ===
According to Senge &#x27;learning organizations&#x27; are those organizations where people continually expand their capacity to create the results they truly desire, where new and expansive patterns of thinking are nurtured, where collective aspiration is set free, and where people are continually learning to see the whole together.&quot; He argues that only those organizations that are able to adapt quickly and effectively will be able to excel in their field or market. In order to be a learning organization, there must be two conditions present at all times. The first is the ability to design the organization to match the intended or desired outcomes, and second, the ability to recognize when the initial direction of the organization is different from the desired outcome and follow the necessary steps to correct this mismatch. Organizations that are able to do this are exemplary.

Senge also believed in the theory of systems thinking which has sometimes been referred to as the &#x27;Cornerstone&#x27; of the learning organization. Systems thinking focuses on how the individual that is being studied interacts with the other constituents of the system. Rather than focusing on the individuals within an organization, it prefers to look at a larger number of interactions within the organization and in between organizations as a whole.

== Publications ==
Peter Senge has written several books and articles throughout his career. A selection of his works:
* 1990, &quot;The Fifth Discipline: The art and practice of the learning organization&quot;, Doubleday, New York.
* 1994, &quot;The Fifth Discipline Fieldbook&quot;
* 1999, &quot;The Dance of Change&quot;
* 2000, &quot;Schools that Learn: A Fifth Discipline Fieldbook for Educators, Parents, and Everyone Who Cares about Education&quot;
* 2004, &quot;Presence: Human Purpose and the Field of the Future&quot;
* 2005, with C. Otto Scharmer, Joseph Jaworski &amp; Betty Sue Flowers, &quot;Presence: An Exploration of Profound Change in People, &#x27;Organizations, and Society&#x27;
* 2008, with Bryan Smith, Nina Kruschwitz, Joe Laur &amp; Sara Schley, &quot;The Necessary Revolution: How Individuals and Organizations Are Working Together to Create a Sustainable World&quot;

== See also ==
* Organizational learning
* System dynamics
* Systems thinking
* Strategy dynamics
* Strategic management
* Organizational communication

== References ==
Notes
==External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q435801" start="0" end="19" title="Peter Senge" label="Peter Michael Senge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2167061" start="47" end="64" title="systems science" label="systems scientist"/>
<link wikidata="Q142740" start="97" end="127" title="MIT Sloan School of Management" label="MIT Sloan School of Management"/>
<link wikidata="Q1982545" start="147" end="184" title="New England Complex Systems Institute" label="New England Complex Systems Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q7552189" start="209" end="244" title="Society for Organizational Learning" label="Society for Organizational Learning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1763759" start="290" end="361" title="The Fifth Discipline" label="The Fifth Discipline: The Art and Practice of the Learning Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q173813" start="434" end="454" title="Stanford, California" label="Stanford, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q3798668" start="478" end="499" title="Aerospace engineering" label="Aerospace engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q41506" start="505" end="524" title="Stanford University" label="Stanford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q950900" start="595" end="599" title="Master of Science" label="M.S."/>
<link wikidata="Q49108" start="632" end="635" title="MIT" label="MIT"/>
<link wikidata="Q142740" start="685" end="715" title="MIT Sloan School of Management" label="MIT Sloan School of Management"/>
<link wikidata="Q7552189" start="758" end="793" title="Society for Organizational Learning" label="Society for Organizational Learning"/>
<link wikidata="Q108458" start="1331" end="1341" title="meditation" label="meditation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4452341" start="1398" end="1407" title="Tassajara Zen Mountain Center" label="Tassajara"/>
<link wikidata="Q7953" start="1411" end="1423" title="Zen Buddhist" label="Zen Buddhist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7344547" start="1664" end="1676" title="Robert Fritz" label="Robert Fritz"/>
<link wikidata="Q44294" start="1745" end="1749" title="Ford Motor Company" label="Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q181114" start="1751" end="1759" title="Chrysler" label="Chrysler"/>
<link wikidata="Q154950" start="1761" end="1766" title="Royal Dutch Shell" label="Shell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2843047" start="1768" end="1788" title="AT&amp;amp;T Corporation" label="AT&amp;amp;T Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5649395" start="1790" end="1807" title="Hanover Insurance" label="Hanover Insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q192814" start="1813" end="1828" title="Harley-Davidson" label="Harley-Davidson"/>
<link wikidata="Q650472" start="1929" end="1955" title="organizational development" label="organizational development"/>
<link wikidata="Q1763759" start="1976" end="1996" title="The Fifth Discipline" label="The Fifth Discipline"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328304" start="2042" end="2063" title="learning organization" label="learning organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q58778" start="2110" end="2117" title="systems" label="systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q11703922" start="2133" end="2142" title="Systemics" label="Systemics"/>
<link wikidata="Q277351" start="2213" end="2236" title="Harvard Business Review" label="Harvard Business Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340474" start="4612" end="4628" title="systems thinking" label="systems thinking"/>
<link wikidata="Q1763759" start="5166" end="5237" title="The Fifth Discipline" label="The Fifth Discipline: The art and practice of the learning organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q7109801" start="5577" end="5590" title="Otto Scharmer" label="Otto Scharmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430172" start="5945" end="5968" title="Organizational learning" label="Organizational learning"/>
<link wikidata="Q598451" start="5971" end="5986" title="System dynamics" label="System dynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340474" start="5989" end="6005" title="Systems thinking" label="Systems thinking"/>
<link wikidata="Q7621890" start="6008" end="6025" title="Strategy dynamics" label="Strategy dynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q376657" start="6028" end="6048" title="Strategic management" label="Strategic management"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937189" start="6051" end="6079" title="Organizational communication" label="Organizational communication"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="230680" wikidata="Q20274" url="?curid=230680" title="Weißeritzkreis">
<text>The Weißeritzkreis is a former district (&quot;Kreis&quot;) in the south of Saxony, Germany. Neighboring districts were (from west clockwise) Freiberg, Meißen, the district-free city Dresden, Sächsische Schweiz, and to the south it bordered the Czech Republic.

== History ==
The district was created in 1994 when the two districts Dippoldiswalde and Freital were merged. In August 2008, as a part of the district reform in Saxony, the districts of Sächsische Schweiz and Weißeritzkreis were merged into the new district Sächsische Schweiz-Osterzgebirge.

== Geography ==
The district is located in the Ore Mountains, the central part is the Tharandt Forest. The district got its name after the two rivers Wild Weißeritz and Red Weißeritz, who merge near Freital into the Weißeritz river, and then mouths into the Elbe in Dresden. The highest elevation is the Kahleberg at .

During the flooding in August 2002 the Weißeritz river had to drain many times the normal amount of water, and did destroy a lot of buildings in the river valley - houses, streets and bridges.

==Partnerships==
#Rottweil
#Berchtesgadener Land
#Göttingen
#Zollernalbkreis

== Coat of arms ==
==Towns and municipalities==
== External links ==
* (German)
*Website about the 2002 Flooding (German)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q20274" start="4" end="18" title="Weißeritzkreis" label="Weißeritzkreis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202" start="76" end="82" title="Saxony" label="Saxony"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="84" end="91" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q20236" start="142" end="150" title="Freiberg (district)" label="Freiberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q6313" start="152" end="158" title="Meißen (district)" label="Meißen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1731" start="183" end="190" title="Dresden" label="Dresden"/>
<link wikidata="Q20264" start="192" end="210" title="Sächsische Schweiz" label="Sächsische Schweiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q213" start="245" end="259" title="Czech Republic" label="Czech Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6323" start="521" end="553" title="Sächsische Schweiz-Osterzgebirge" label="Sächsische Schweiz-Osterzgebirge"/>
<link wikidata="Q4198" start="603" end="616" title="Ore Mountains" label="Ore Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q2409158" start="642" end="657" title="Tharandt Forest" label="Tharandt Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q20286" start="706" end="720" title="Wild Weißeritz" label="Wild Weißeritz"/>
<link wikidata="Q20288" start="725" end="738" title="Red Weißeritz" label="Red Weißeritz"/>
<link wikidata="Q20282" start="772" end="781" title="Weißeritz" label="Weißeritz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1644" start="814" end="818" title="Elbe" label="Elbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1720762" start="860" end="869" title="Kahleberg" label="Kahleberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q8211" start="1088" end="1096" title="Rottweil (district)" label="Rottweil"/>
<link wikidata="Q10530" start="1098" end="1118" title="Berchtesgadener Land" label="Berchtesgadener Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q6022" start="1120" end="1129" title="Göttingen (district)" label="Göttingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q8233" start="1131" end="1146" title="Zollernalbkreis" label="Zollernalbkreis"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="230690" wikidata="Q595133" url="?curid=230690" title="WYSIWYM">
<text>In computing, What You See Is What You Mean (WYSIWYM, ) is a paradigm for editing a structured document. It is an adjunct to the WYSIWYG (What You See Is What You Get) paradigm, which displays the result of a formatted document as it will appear on screen or in print—without showing the descriptive code underneath.

In a WYSIWYM editor, the user writes the contents in a structured way, marking the content according to its meaning, its significance in the document, and leaves its final appearance up to one or more separate style sheets. In essence, it aims to accurately display the contents being conveyed, rather than the actual formatting associated with it.

For example, in a WYSIWYM document, one would manually mark text as the title of the document, the name of a section, the caption associated with a figure, or the name of an author; this would in turn allow one element, such as section headings, to be rendered as large bold text in one style sheet, or as red center justified text in another, without further manual intervention. More often than not, this requires the semantic structure of the document to be decided in advance before writing it. The editor also needs a system for exporting structured content to generate the document&#x27;s final format, following the indicated structure.

The main advantage of this system is the total separation of content and presentation: users can structure and write the document once, rather than repeatedly alternating between the two modes of presentation—an approach which comes with its own switch cost. And since the rendering of formatting is left to the export system, this also makes it easier to achieve consistency in design as well.

==Document processors==
Unlike an unstructured, fixed-presentation document, a document processor rather than a word processor must be used for WYSIWYM. The first document processor which articulated itself through the WYSIWYM term was LyX document processor, although similar concepts can be traced back to earlier publishing systems such as LaTeX, TPS (modeled on pioneering experiments at Xerox PARC) and FrameMaker.

For example, in FrameMaker, a document may be authored (i.e., viewed and edited) using two possible page views, the styling tags (called &quot;formats&quot;) and contents of a document reside in &quot;body pages&quot;, while structure and presentation are defined by &quot;master pages&quot;. Multiple such documents can be linked together and programmed conditionally for a variety of applications. These elements can then be exported to corresponding tags which preserve some or all of their functionality in a markup language such as XML/HTML/CSS and PDF, or directly rendered down for final presentation in anything from PostScript to raw text.

A different approach to the WYSIWYM philosophy is taken by GNU TeXmacs, which combines the on-screen representation of the document structure with an almost-faithful WYSIWYG rendering.

==In web environments==
Major software vendors have integrated web-page creation features into their WYSIWYG products to increase their utility. Users can create an HTML web page in a word processor with no knowledge of HTML, but like nearly all IDE authored or handwritten web markup, these tools&#x27; automated analysis of the source format rarely accounts for a distinction between HTML&#x27;s content and its presentation through means such as CSS during output.

Such fixed-presentation HTML generators have been criticized, primarily because of the bloatedness and low quality of their code, and there are voices advocating for changes to the WYSIWYM model.

One example of a WYSIWYM Web page editor is WYMeditor. In this editor, the structure of the documents is defined by the class attributes of HTML elements. These classes also allow the final appearance of the document to be applied. Although WYMeditor follows a WYSIWYM model, the document format is always HTML, so the new structures to be defined are limited to new classes, and the final document will always be built by applying presentational elements to these classes.

Other CMSs are moving in the direction of providing some WYSIWYM interface for their users editing content.

==See also==
*Comparison of document-markup languages
*Lightweight markup language
*List of document markup languages
*Single-source publishing

==Notes==
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q179310" start="3" end="12" title="computing" label="computing"/>
<link wikidata="Q595133" start="14" end="43" title="WYSIWYM" label="What You See Is What You Mean"/>
<link wikidata="Q595133" start="45" end="53" title="WYSIWYM" label="WYSIWYM,"/>
<link wikidata="Q28643" start="61" end="69" title="paradigm" label="paradigm"/>
<link wikidata="Q7625198" start="84" end="103" title="structured document" label="structured document"/>
<link wikidata="Q170542" start="129" end="136" title="WYSIWYG" label="WYSIWYG"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029123" start="528" end="540" title="style sheet language" label="style sheets"/>
<link wikidata="Q796212" start="1088" end="1096" title="semantics" label="semantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3511030" start="1360" end="1398" title="separation of content and presentation" label="separation of content and presentation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1559" end="1570" title="Task switching (psychology)#Switch cost" label="switch cost"/>
<link wikidata="Q54277" start="1788" end="1806" title="document processor" label="document processor"/>
<link wikidata="Q54277" start="1821" end="1835" title="word processor" label="word processor"/>
<link wikidata="Q823591" start="1945" end="1948" title="LyX" label="LyX"/>
<link wikidata="Q5310" start="2052" end="2057" title="LaTeX" label="LaTeX"/>
<link wikidata="Q3799482" start="2059" end="2062" title="Interleaf" label="TPS"/>
<link wikidata="Q750428" start="2101" end="2111" title="PARC (company)" label="Xerox PARC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1440655" start="2117" end="2127" title="FrameMaker" label="FrameMaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q37045" start="2643" end="2658" title="markup language" label="markup language"/>
<link wikidata="Q2115" start="2667" end="2670" title="XML" label="XML"/>
<link wikidata="Q8811" start="2671" end="2675" title="HTML" label="HTML"/>
<link wikidata="Q46441" start="2676" end="2679" title="CSS" label="CSS"/>
<link wikidata="Q42332" start="2684" end="2687" title="PDF" label="PDF"/>
<link wikidata="Q218170" start="2755" end="2765" title="PostScript" label="PostScript"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464634" start="2839" end="2850" title="GNU TeXmacs" label="GNU TeXmacs"/>
<link wikidata="Q170542" start="3067" end="3074" title="WYSIWYG" label="WYSIWYG"/>
<link wikidata="Q8811" start="3131" end="3135" title="HTML" label="HTML"/>
<link wikidata="Q13741" start="3212" end="3215" title="Integrated development environment" label="IDE"/>
<link wikidata="Q5140061" start="3522" end="3533" title="Code bloat" label="bloatedness"/>
<link wikidata="Q7958089" start="3676" end="3685" title="WYMeditor" label="WYMeditor"/>
<link wikidata="Q131093" start="4113" end="4117" title="Content management system" label="CMSs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5155868" start="4230" end="4269" title="Comparison of document-markup languages" label="Comparison of document-markup languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028939" start="4271" end="4298" title="Lightweight markup language" label="Lightweight markup language"/>
<link wikidata="Q3867281" start="4300" end="4333" title="List of document markup languages" label="List of document markup languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q2289277" start="4335" end="4359" title="Single-source publishing" label="Single-source publishing"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="230691" wikidata="Q2865308" url="?curid=230691" title="Arthur Q. Bryan">
<text>Arthur Quirk Bryan (May 8, 1899 – November 30, 1959) was an American actor and radio personality. He is best remembered for his longtime recurring role as well-spoken, wisecracking Dr. Gamble on the radio comedy &quot;Fibber McGee and Molly&quot; and for voicing the Warner Bros. cartoon character Elmer Fudd.

==Early life==
Arthur Q. Bryan was born in Brooklyn, New York City, on May 8, 1899. He sang in a number of churches in the New York City area and had plans to be a professional singer. In 1918, he began working as an insurance clerk at the Mutual Life Insurance Company. He sang tenor with the Seiberling Singers and the Jeddo Highlanders on NBC radio.

==Career==
===Radio===
He started as a singer in 1926 on WGBS and he continued as a tenor soloist on WEAF in 1928. In 1929, Bryan was an announcer at WOR radio in New Jersey. Contemporary radio listings in a daily newspaper indicate that he was still at WOR as late as September 13, 1931. In October 1931, he began working as an announcer at WCAU in Philadelphia, and in 1933 he moved to Philadelphia&#x27;s WIP By 1934, he was heard on WHN in New York. In 1938–1940, he was a regular on &quot;The Grouch Club&quot;, which aired on the CBS Pacific network and was featured in some short-subject films made by the group. Bryan started voicing Elmer in 1940 in &quot;Elmer&#x27;s Candid Camera&quot; and voiced the character all the way until his death.

Bryan&#x27;s work in animation did not go unnoticed by radio producers. Although his first forays into that medium were accompanied by instructions that he use the Fudd voice, Bryan soon came to the attention of Don Quinn and Phil Leslie, the production and writing team responsible for &quot;Fibber McGee and Molly&quot; and their supporting characters, two of whom spun off into their radio hits, &quot;The Great Gildersleeve&quot; and &quot;Beulah&quot;. The Gildersleeve character, played by Harold Peary, became series broadcasting&#x27;s first successful spin-off hit; that plus the onset of World War II (which cost &quot;Fibber McGee &amp; Molly&quot; their Mayor La Trivia, when Gale Gordon went into the Coast Guard in early 1942, and &quot;The Old Timer&quot; Bill Thompson was drafted almost a year later) nabbed nearly every other remaining male voice.

Bryan was first hired for the new &quot;Great Gildersleeve&quot; series, to play the part of Cousin Octavia&#x27;s secretary/assistant, Lucius Llewellyn (using the Elmer Fudd voice), and later one of Gildersleeve&#x27;s cronies, Floyd Munson, the barber. His work on the series (in Bryan&#x27;s natural voice) so impressed Quinn and Leslie, that Bryan was added to the cast of their main show, &quot;Fibber McGee and Molly&quot;, in 1943.

In the early 1940s, Bryan played Waymond Wadcliffe on the &quot;Al Pearce &amp; His Gang&quot; program on CBS. Bryan starred as Major Hoople (from June 22, 1942, to April 26, 1943), appeared in the cast of &quot;The Charlotte Greenwood Show&quot;, and played Lt. Levinson on radio&#x27;s &quot;Richard Diamond, Private Detective&quot; (from September 6, 1950, to June 29, 1951). In the mid-1940s, he had the role of Duke on &quot;Forever Ernest&quot;.

On May 5th 1949, Bryan appeared as &quot;Clarence, the Guardian Angel&quot; on the Screen Directors Playhouse radio series&#x27; rendition of Frank Capra&#x27;s film &quot;It&#x27;s a Wonderful Life&quot;. The episode also starred James Stewart reprising his film role as &quot;George Bailey&quot;.

===Films===
Bryan first became involved with the film industry when he moved to Hollywood in 1936 to become a scenario writer for Paramount Pictures.

Bryan&#x27;s live-action work remained largely in uncredited cameo roles, usually employing the Fudd persona, or minor supporting roles in B-movies (like the apoplectic newspaper editor in the Bela Lugosi thriller &quot;The Devil Bat&quot;). In the 1940 Charley Chase short &quot;South of the Boudoir&quot;, he speaks in his normal voice, but at one point slips into his Fudd voice while coming on to Chase&#x27;s wife. He did work steadily, appearing in dozens of films over the years, in such successful releases as &quot;Samson and Delilah&quot;; two Bob Hope/Bing Crosby &quot;Road to ...&quot; films, &quot;Road to Singapore&quot; and &quot;Road to Rio&quot;; and the Ozzie and Harriet feature &quot;Here Come the Nelsons&quot;. He appeared frequently in live-action short-subjects for Warner Bros. and Columbia Pictures.

Bryan continued as the &quot;Fibber&quot; show&#x27;s secondary male lead, even after Thompson and (for a time) Gordon returned to the show, and he stayed as Dr. Gamble all the way through its final incarnation on the NBC &quot;Monitor&quot; series in 1959, as well as playing Floyd on &quot;Gildersleeve&quot; through its conclusion in 1954. Bryan&#x27;s final original work as Fudd came in the Warner Bros. Edward R. Murrow spoof &quot;Person to Bunny&quot;.

===Television===
Bryan was a panelist on the early TV quiz show &quot;Quizzing the News&quot; (1948–49). He would be found in numerous productions in the early 1950s predominantly in 1-episode bit parts, such as in the early filmed television comedy, &quot;Beulah&quot;. He also landed a minor television role in 1955, as the handyman Mr. Boggs in the short-lived CBS sitcom &quot;Professional Father&quot;. On &quot;The Halls of Ivy&quot;, Bryan played Professor Warren, head of the college&#x27;s history department, a role he also had on the radio program of the same name. On September 17, 1956, he became ill with acute gastritis while rehearsing for an episode for &quot;Producers&#x27; Showcase&quot; called &quot;The Lord Don&#x27;t Play Favorites&quot;, three hours before its airtime. Staging director Bretaigne Windust replaced Bryan during production.

==Death==
Bryan died of a sudden heart attack at age 60 on November 30, 1959, in Hollywood. Bryan is buried in Valhalla Memorial Park Cemetery.

==Legacy==
The DVD specials for some cartoons such as &quot;What&#x27;s Opera, Doc?&quot;, in &quot;Looney Tunes Golden Collection&quot;, include bits of conversation between Bryan and Mel Blanc, affording a rare opportunity to hear them working together and to hear Bryan&#x27;s natural voice. Bryan&#x27;s natural voice is also heard as the tired hotel guest in &quot;A Pest in the House&quot;, in which Bryan &quot;talks to himself&quot;; Elmer Fudd is the hotel manager.

==Selected filmography==

*&quot;The Great Library Misery&quot; (1938, Short) – Mr. F.T Smith
*&quot;Broadway Serenade&quot; (1939) – Process Server (uncredited)
*&quot;Dangerous Dan McFoo&quot; (1939, Short) – Dan McFoo (voice, uncredited)
*&quot;I Stole a Million&quot; (1939) – Cafe Mgr. Forbidding Dancing (uncredited)
*&quot;These Glamour Girls&quot; (1939) – Dance Customer (uncredited)
*&quot;Dad for a Day&quot; (1939, Short) – Spanky&#x27;s Father
*&quot;Little Accident&quot; (1939) – Customer
*&quot;Elmer&#x27;s Candid Camera&quot; (1940, Short) – Elmer Fudd (voice, uncredited)
*&quot;Road to Singapore&quot; (1940) – Bartender (uncredited)
*&quot;Millionaire Playboy&quot; (1940) – J.B. Zany
*&quot;Confederate Honey&quot; (1940, Short) – Ned Cutler (voice, uncredited)
*&quot;The Hardship of Miles Standish&quot; (1940, Short) – John Alden (voice, uncredited)
*&quot;South of the Boudoir&quot; (1940, Short) – Thomas Bailey
*&quot;Swing with Bing&quot; (1940, Short) – Golf Duffer
*&quot;A Wild Hare&quot; (1940, Short) – Elmer Fudd (voice, uncredited)
*&quot;The Devil Bat&quot; (1940) – Joe McGinty
*&quot;Elmer&#x27;s Pet Rabbit&quot; (1941, Short) – Elmer Fudd (voice, uncredited)
*&quot;Manpower&quot; (1941) – Drunk Texan (uncredited)
*&quot;Ellery Queen and the Perfect Crime&quot; (1941) – Book Salesman
*&quot;Look Who&#x27;s Laughing&quot; (1941) – Mayor Duncan&#x27;s Aide (uncredited)
*&quot;Wabbit Twouble&quot; (1941, Short) – Elmer Fudd (voice, uncredited)
*&quot;The Wabbit Who Came to Supper&quot; (1942, Short) – Elmer Fudd (voice, uncredited)
*&quot;The Wacky Wabbit&quot; (1942, Short) – Elmer Fudd (voice, uncredited)
*&quot;Fresh Hare&quot; (1942, Short) - Elmer Fudd (voice, uncredited)
*&quot;Larceny, Inc.&quot; (1942) – Man in Street Socking Jug (uncredited)
*&quot;A Desperate Chance for Ellery Queen&quot; (1942) – Waymond Wadcwiff (uncredited)
*&quot;Grand Center Murder&quot; (1942) – Medical Examiner (uncredited)
*&quot;Johnny Doughboy&quot; (1942) – Irish Mayor (uncredited)
*&quot;Swing Out the Blues&quot; (1943) – Larry Stringfellow
*&quot;An Itch in Time&quot; (1943) – Elmer Fudd (voice, uncredited)
*&quot;National Barn Dance&quot; (1944) – Samson (uncredited)
*&quot;I&#x27;m from Arkansas&quot; (1944) – Commissioner of Agriculture
*&quot;She Wouldn&#x27;t Say Yes&quot; (1945) – Train Passenger in sleeping car (speaking in Elmer Fudd voice)
*&quot;Idea Girl&quot; (1946) – Commissioner P.J. Maple
*&quot;The Dark Horse&quot; (1946) – Mr. Hodges (uncredited)
*&quot;The Devil Thumbs a Ride&quot; (1947) – Santa Ana Police Desk Sergeant (uncredited)
*&quot;Road to Rio&quot; (1947) – Mr. Stanton (uncredited)
*&quot;A Pest in the House&quot; (1947) – Elmer Fudd, Hotel Guest (voice, uncredited)
*&quot;Samson and Delilah&quot; (1949) – Fat Philistine Merchant Wearing No Robe
*&quot;The Greatest Show on Earth&quot; (1952) – Spectator (uncredited)
*&quot;Here Come the Nelsons&quot; (1952) – Deputy (uncredited)
*&quot;The Life of Riley&quot; (1953–1957, TV Series) – The Country Store Owner / Curtiss
*&quot;Broken Lance&quot; (1954) – Bit Part (uncredited)
*&quot;Hell&#x27;s Outpost&quot; (1954) – Harry – Bank Accomplice
*&quot;Hare Brush&quot; (1955) – Elmer Fudd (voice, uncredited)
*&quot;Rabbit Rampage&quot; (1955) – Elmer Fudd (voice, uncredited, cameo)
*&quot;The Lieutenant Wore Skirts&quot; (1956) – Mr. Curtis
*&quot;Wideo Wabbit&quot; (1956, Short) – Elmer Fudd (voice, uncredited)
* &quot;The Go-Getter&quot; (1956) – The Handyman
*&quot;What&#x27;s Opera, Doc?&quot; (1957) – Elmer Fudd (voice, uncredited)
*&quot;The Adventures of Jim Bowie&quot; (1957, TV Series) – Hotel Clerk / Henri
*&quot;A Mutt in a Rut&quot; (1959, Short) – Elmer Fudd (voice, uncredited)
*&quot;Person to Bunny&quot; (1960) – Elmer Fudd (voice, uncredited, final role) (Posthumous release)
*&quot;Bugs Bunny&#x27;s 3rd Movie: 1001 Rabbit Tales&quot; (1982) – Elmer Fudd (voice) (Archival recordings)
==Notes==
==References==
==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2865308" start="0" end="18" title="Arthur Q. Bryan" label="Arthur Quirk Bryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4355416" start="218" end="240" title="Fibber McGee and Molly" label="Fibber McGee and Molly"/>
<link wikidata="Q126399" start="267" end="279" title="Warner Bros." label="Warner Bros."/>
<link wikidata="Q844904" start="298" end="308" title="Elmer Fudd" label="Elmer Fudd"/>
<link wikidata="Q18419" start="354" end="362" title="Brooklyn" label="Brooklyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q160054" start="551" end="580" title="Axa" label="Mutual Life Insurance Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="653" end="656" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q3564690" start="722" end="726" title="WINS (AM)" label="WGBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1106511" start="766" end="770" title="WNBC (AM)" label="WEAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q3564763" start="815" end="818" title="WOR (AM)" label="WOR"/>
<link wikidata="Q7954308" start="1007" end="1011" title="WPHT" label="WCAU"/>
<link wikidata="Q7950867" start="1073" end="1076" title="WTEL (AM)" label="WIP"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1102" end="1105" title="WEPN (AM)#WHN" label="WHN"/>
<link wikidata="Q17110342" start="1159" end="1174" title="The Grouch Club" label="The Grouch Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="1201" end="1204" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q3051550" start="1330" end="1356" title="Elmer&amp;#x27;s Candid Camera" label="Elmer&amp;#x27;s Candid Camera"/>
<link wikidata="Q21069508" start="1630" end="1639" title="Don Quinn" label="Don Quinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7182118" start="1644" end="1655" title="Phil Leslie" label="Phil Leslie"/>
<link wikidata="Q4355416" start="1711" end="1733" title="Fibber McGee and Molly" label="Fibber McGee and Molly"/>
<link wikidata="Q11897194" start="1823" end="1845" title="The Great Gildersleeve" label="The Great Gildersleeve"/>
<link wikidata="Q4899252" start="1862" end="1868" title="Beulah (series)" label="Beulah"/>
<link wikidata="Q3127630" start="1914" end="1926" title="Harold Peary" label="Harold Peary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351121" start="2106" end="2117" title="Gale Gordon" label="Gale Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2450732" start="2189" end="2202" title="Bill Thompson (voice actor)" label="Bill Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="2831" end="2834" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2853" end="2865" title="Our Boarding House#Radio" label="Major Hoople"/>
<link wikidata="Q19881270" start="2937" end="2965" title="The Charlotte Greenwood Show" label="The Charlotte Greenwood Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q1578746" start="3019" end="3053" title="Richard Diamond, Private Detective" label="Richard Diamond, Private Detective"/>
<link wikidata="Q3221319" start="3261" end="3287" title="Screen Directors Playhouse" label="Screen Directors Playhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q51492" start="3320" end="3331" title="Frank Capra" label="Frank Capra"/>
<link wikidata="Q204191" start="3350" end="3376" title="It&amp;#x27;s a Wonderful Life" label="It&amp;#x27;s a Wonderful Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q102462" start="3409" end="3422" title="James Stewart" label="James Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415395" start="3527" end="3540" title="film industry" label="film industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q159846" start="3608" end="3626" title="Paramount Pictures" label="Paramount Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q34529" start="3822" end="3833" title="Bela Lugosi" label="Bela Lugosi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3520610" start="3849" end="3862" title="The Devil Bat" label="The Devil Bat"/>
<link wikidata="Q726089" start="3883" end="3896" title="Charley Chase" label="Charley Chase"/>
<link wikidata="Q426352" start="4153" end="4171" title="Samson and Delilah (1949 film)" label="Samson and Delilah"/>
<link wikidata="Q94081" start="4183" end="4191" title="Bob Hope" label="Bob Hope"/>
<link wikidata="Q72984" start="4192" end="4203" title="Bing Crosby" label="Bing Crosby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891168" start="4210" end="4221" title="Road to ..." label="Road to ..."/>
<link wikidata="Q325538" start="4241" end="4258" title="Road to Singapore" label="Road to Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q2307428" start="4275" end="4286" title="Road to Rio" label="Road to Rio"/>
<link wikidata="Q952841" start="4302" end="4319" title="Ozzie and Harriet" label="Ozzie and Harriet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5535549" start="4334" end="4355" title="Here Come the Nelsons" label="Here Come the Nelsons"/>
<link wikidata="Q126399" start="4420" end="4432" title="Warner Bros." label="Warner Bros."/>
<link wikidata="Q186941" start="4437" end="4454" title="Columbia Pictures" label="Columbia Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q353935" start="4866" end="4882" title="Edward R. Murrow" label="Edward R. Murrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q7170442" start="4895" end="4910" title="Person to Bunny" label="Person to Bunny"/>
<link wikidata="Q2839883" start="4989" end="5006" title="Quizzing the News" label="Quizzing the News"/>
<link wikidata="Q4899252" start="5176" end="5182" title="Beulah (series)" label="Beulah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1552579" start="5245" end="5253" title="handyman" label="handyman"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="5283" end="5286" title="Columbia Broadcasting System" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5300" end="5319" title="Professional Father" label="Professional Father"/>
<link wikidata="Q7738671" start="5336" end="5352" title="The Halls of Ivy" label="The Halls of Ivy"/>
<link wikidata="Q183130" start="5538" end="5553" title="acute gastritis" label="acute gastritis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7247693" start="5596" end="5620" title="Producers&amp;#x27; Showcase" label="Producers&amp;#x27; Showcase"/>
<link wikidata="Q2924560" start="5731" end="5748" title="Bretaigne Windust" label="Bretaigne Windust"/>
<link wikidata="Q12152" start="5817" end="5829" title="Myocardial infarction" label="heart attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q4007954" start="5895" end="5926" title="Valhalla Memorial Park Cemetery" label="Valhalla Memorial Park Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635222" start="5989" end="6012" title="What&amp;#x27;s Opera, Doc?" label="What&amp;#x27;s Opera, Doc?"/>
<link wikidata="Q6675675" start="6029" end="6059" title="Looney Tunes Golden Collection" label="Looney Tunes Golden Collection"/>
<link wikidata="Q4658798" start="6299" end="6318" title="A Pest in the House" label="A Pest in the House"/>
<link wikidata="Q3645188" start="6506" end="6523" title="Broadway Serenade" label="Broadway Serenade"/>
<link wikidata="Q5216081" start="6574" end="6593" title="Dangerous Dan McFoo" label="Dangerous Dan McFoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5979072" start="6653" end="6670" title="I Stole a Million" label="I Stole a Million"/>
<link wikidata="Q2639326" start="6735" end="6754" title="These Glamour Girls" label="These Glamour Girls"/>
<link wikidata="Q5207862" start="6805" end="6818" title="Dad for a Day (1939 film)" label="Dad for a Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q16981414" start="6869" end="6884" title="Little Accident" label="Little Accident"/>
<link wikidata="Q3051550" start="6916" end="6942" title="Elmer&amp;#x27;s Candid Camera" label="Elmer&amp;#x27;s Candid Camera"/>
<link wikidata="Q844904" start="6965" end="6975" title="Elmer Fudd" label="Elmer Fudd"/>
<link wikidata="Q325538" start="7003" end="7020" title="Road to Singapore" label="Road to Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q16866169" start="7066" end="7085" title="Millionaire Playboy" label="Millionaire Playboy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5159675" start="7118" end="7135" title="Confederate Honey" label="Confederate Honey"/>
<link wikidata="Q24904788" start="7196" end="7226" title="The Hardship of Miles Standish" label="The Hardship of Miles Standish"/>
<link wikidata="Q104026540" start="7351" end="7366" title="Swing with Bing" label="Swing with Bing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143315" start="7408" end="7419" title="A Wild Hare" label="A Wild Hare"/>
<link wikidata="Q3520610" start="7480" end="7493" title="The Devil Bat" label="The Devil Bat"/>
<link wikidata="Q3051554" start="7528" end="7551" title="Elmer&amp;#x27;s Pet Rabbit" label="Elmer&amp;#x27;s Pet Rabbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1615135" start="7612" end="7620" title="Manpower (1941 film)" label="Manpower"/>
<link wikidata="Q83697716" start="7668" end="7702" title="Ellery Queen and the Perfect Crime" label="Ellery Queen and the Perfect Crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q10319683" start="7739" end="7763" title="Look Who&amp;#x27;s Laughing" label="Look Who&amp;#x27;s Laughing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3564932" start="7824" end="7838" title="Wabbit Twouble" label="Wabbit Twouble"/>
<link wikidata="Q3523253" start="7899" end="7928" title="The Wabbit Who Came to Supper" label="The Wabbit Who Came to Supper"/>
<link wikidata="Q3523255" start="7989" end="8005" title="The Wacky Wabbit" label="The Wacky Wabbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q645510" start="8066" end="8076" title="Fresh Hare" label="Fresh Hare"/>
<link wikidata="Q3791357" start="8137" end="8150" title="Larceny, Inc." label="Larceny, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q16252083" start="8372" end="8387" title="Johnny Doughboy" label="Johnny Doughboy"/>
<link wikidata="Q47500771" start="8435" end="8454" title="Swing Out the Blues" label="Swing Out the Blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q4750121" start="8496" end="8511" title="An Itch in Time" label="An Itch in Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q5967043" start="8627" end="8649" title="I&amp;#x27;m from Arkansas" label="I&amp;#x27;m from Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7492105" start="8700" end="8725" title="She Wouldn&amp;#x27;t Say Yes" label="She Wouldn&amp;#x27;t Say Yes"/>
<link wikidata="Q62076013" start="8811" end="8820" title="Idea Girl" label="Idea Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q65058938" start="8867" end="8881" title="The Dark Horse (1946 film)" label="The Dark Horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2292071" start="8928" end="8951" title="The Devil Thumbs a Ride" label="The Devil Thumbs a Ride"/>
<link wikidata="Q2307428" start="9018" end="9029" title="Road to Rio" label="Road to Rio"/>
<link wikidata="Q4658798" start="9077" end="9096" title="A Pest in the House" label="A Pest in the House"/>
<link wikidata="Q426352" start="9163" end="9181" title="Samson and Delilah (1949 film)" label="Samson and Delilah"/>
<link wikidata="Q641061" start="9244" end="9270" title="The Greatest Show on Earth (film)" label="The Greatest Show on Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5535549" start="9316" end="9337" title="Here Come the Nelsons" label="Here Come the Nelsons"/>
<link wikidata="Q12061166" start="9380" end="9397" title="The Life of Riley" label="The Life of Riley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218313" start="9470" end="9482" title="Broken Lance" label="Broken Lance"/>
<link wikidata="Q10742204" start="9527" end="9546" title="Hell&amp;#x27;s Outpost" label="Hell&amp;#x27;s Outpost"/>
<link wikidata="Q12124698" start="9593" end="9603" title="Hare Brush" label="Hare Brush"/>
<link wikidata="Q7278609" start="9657" end="9671" title="Rabbit Rampage" label="Rabbit Rampage"/>
<link wikidata="Q3855990" start="9732" end="9758" title="The Lieutenant Wore Skirts" label="The Lieutenant Wore Skirts"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567946" start="9792" end="9804" title="Wideo Wabbit" label="Wideo Wabbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q111914374" start="9866" end="9879" title="The Go-Getter (1956 film)" label="The Go-Getter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635222" start="9915" end="9938" title="What&amp;#x27;s Opera, Doc?" label="What&amp;#x27;s Opera, Doc?"/>
<link wikidata="Q7712556" start="9992" end="10019" title="The Adventures of Jim Bowie" label="The Adventures of Jim Bowie"/>
<link wikidata="Q16253445" start="10073" end="10088" title="A Mutt in a Rut" label="A Mutt in a Rut"/>
<link wikidata="Q7170442" start="10149" end="10164" title="Person to Bunny" label="Person to Bunny"/>
<link wikidata="" start="10251" end="10297" title="Bugs Bunny&amp;#x27;s 3rd Movie: 1001 Rabbit Tales" label="Bugs Bunny&amp;#x27;s 3rd Movie: 1001 Rabbit Tales"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="230693" wikidata="Q5353285" url="?curid=230693" title="Elaine Shaffer">
<text>Elaine Shaffer (October 22, 1925 – February 19, 1973) was an American flutist and principal of the Houston Symphony Orchestra between 1948 and 1953.

==Biography==
Elaine Shaffer was born in Altoona, Pennsylvania. She attended the Curtis Institute of Music in Philadelphia and was the prize student of William Kincaid, the &#x27;grandfather&#x27; of the majority of flutists in the United States. That he willed his platinum flute to her makes his regard for her talent evident. Kincaid was her only formal flute teacher; prior to that, she was entirely self-taught, according to an interview with Shaffer&#x27;s widowed husband, Efrem Kurtz, published in the National Flute Association Newsletter in the 1980s.

Shaffer played for a season as second flute in the Kansas City Philharmonic (1947–1948). Apparently she was not shy — she really did not want to accept the position, though she had been recommended by an oboist in the orchestra, Laila Storch — and she held out not only for more money, but to be allowed to fulfill another engagement prior to starting the job, and a concerto appearance with the orchestra. She surprised the critics, the audience, and Kurtz not only with her playing, but her artistry as well. As this was the 1940s, women had just begun to get positions in orchestras, making Shaffer something of a trail-blazer. The music director at the time was Efrem Kurtz, which was how they first met, though the two did not marry until 1955, after she had left the Houston Symphony Orchestra — and he had divorced his wife.

After holding the principal flutist&#x27;s chair in Houston for five years (1948–1953), she left to pursue a career as a soloist and chamber musician (another first for an American woman) winning praise for her debut recital in London. She performed at many festivals in Europe, and worked closely with violinist Yehudi Menuhin, pianist Hephzibah Menuhin, and harpsichordist George Malcolm. The composer Ernest Bloch dedicated two works to her: &quot;Suite Modale&quot; and &quot;Two Last Poems (Maybe...)&quot;. The former piece had been commissioned by the flutist; at her request, Bloch also orchestrated the piece (written for flute and piano) for flute and string orchestra. Shaffer also gave the world premiere of the latter work. She was also a friend of Marc Chagall (who did a drawing for her), Karl Barth, and Hermann Hesse.

The death of William Kincaid, her principal teacher, in 1967 was difficult for her because she had a special bond with him. John Solum, a flutist and pioneering baroque flutist, became the prime mover (along with a group of other students and admirers of Kincaid) behind the commission of Aaron Copland&#x27;s &quot;Duo for Flute and Piano&quot;, dedicated to Kincaid&#x27;s memory. Solum, a close friend and colleague of Shaffer, invited her and Hephzibah Menuhin to perform the world premiere of that work in October 1971 at a benefit for the Settlement Music School in Philadelphia. A short while later, Shaffer was diagnosed with lung cancer. She was able to complete two final projects that were important to her: a concert of J. S. Bach&#x27;s sonatas for flute, and the first recording of the Copland. Two months after the recording was completed, Elaine Shaffer died in London on February 19, 1973.

==Recordings==

*Johann Sebastian Bach
**Three Flute Sonatas (volume 1): Sonata in b minor BWV 1030, Sonata in A Major BWV 1032 (2nd and 3rd movements), Sonata in E Minor BWV 1034 - with George Malcolm - harpsichord, Ambrose Gauntlett - viola da gamba - Angel S36337
**Three Flute Sonatas (volume 2): Sonata in c major BWV 1033, BWV 1035, BWV 1031, BWV 1020 - with George Malcolm - harpsichord, Ambrose Gauntlett - viola da gamba - Angel 
**Suite No.2 in B Minor, BWV 1067 : with Yehudi Menuhin / Bath Festival Orchestra
**Musical Offering, BWV 1079 : Ricercare / 5 Canons / Trio Sonata / 5 Canons / Ricercare - with Archie Camden / Ronald Kinloch Anderson / Yehudi Menuhin
**Brandenburg Concerto No.5 in D, BWV 1050 : with Yehudi Menuhin / George Malcolm / Bath Festival Orchestra
*Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart
**Concerto for flute and orchestra, K 313
**Concerto for flute and orchestra, K 314
**Andante in C for flute and orchestra, K 315
**Concerto for flute and harp, K 299 (with Marilyn Costello, harp)
*Georg Philipp Telemann
**Suite in A minor for flute and strings
*Franz Schubert
**Variations on &quot;Trockne Blumen&quot;, op 160
*Friedrich Kuhlau
**Sonata in E minor
*Franz Xavier Mozart
**Sonata movement (mistakenly called &quot;Rondo&quot; on the recording)
*Aaron Copland
**Duo for Flute and Piano - with Aaron Copland - piano - On Modern American Music Series M32737 - Copland Performs and Conducts Copland - CBS 1974

Some of these recordings are now available on CD : Suite No. 2/Musical Offering/ Brandenburg V included in the Christmas Box 2001 - Bach Orchestral Suites / Brandenburgs / Violin Concertos - Yehudi Menuhin / Bath Festival Orchestra on EMI Classics 0724357443920.

She also performed the major standard flute repertoire of the 20th century, including sonatas by Hindemith, Prokofiev and Poulenc, and the flute concerti of Ibert and Nielsen. She gave the world premiere of Virgil Thomson&#x27;s &quot;Flute Concerto&quot;, as well as five performances with Italian orchestras of a concerto by Franco Mannino for flute, trombone obbligato, and orchestra.

==Sources==
==External links==
* Mozart - Elaine Shaffer, 1959: Flute Concerto No. 1 in G major, K. 313 - Allegro Maestoso

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5353285" start="0" end="14" title="Elaine Shaffer" label="Elaine Shaffer"/>
<link wikidata="Q11405" start="70" end="77" title="flutist" label="flutist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631506" start="99" end="125" title="Houston Symphony Orchestra" label="Houston Symphony Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q444210" start="191" end="212" title="Altoona, Pennsylvania" label="Altoona, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q60450" start="231" end="256" title="Curtis Institute of Music" label="Curtis Institute of Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="260" end="272" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4220859" start="302" end="317" title="William Kincaid (flutist)" label="William Kincaid"/>
<link wikidata="Q383955" start="630" end="641" title="Efrem Kurtz" label="Efrem Kurtz"/>
<link wikidata="Q6972714" start="660" end="686" title="National Flute Association" label="National Flute Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q16851575" start="764" end="788" title="Kansas City Philharmonic" label="Kansas City Philharmonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q15105318" start="942" end="954" title="Laila Storch" label="Laila Storch"/>
<link wikidata="Q16555" start="1598" end="1605" title="Houston" label="Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q189201" start="1679" end="1692" title="chamber music" label="chamber music"/>
<link wikidata="Q8355" start="1849" end="1855" title="violin" label="violin"/>
<link wikidata="Q156814" start="1859" end="1873" title="Yehudi Menuhin" label="Yehudi Menuhin"/>
<link wikidata="Q486748" start="1875" end="1882" title="pianist" label="pianist"/>
<link wikidata="Q455882" start="1883" end="1900" title="Hephzibah Menuhin" label="Hephzibah Menuhin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5371902" start="1906" end="1920" title="harpsichordist" label="harpsichordist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5542078" start="1921" end="1935" title="George Malcolm (musician)" label="George Malcolm"/>
<link wikidata="Q123234" start="1950" end="1962" title="Ernest Bloch" label="Ernest Bloch"/>
<link wikidata="Q93284" start="2308" end="2320" title="Marc Chagall" label="Marc Chagall"/>
<link wikidata="Q107473" start="2350" end="2360" title="Karl Barth" label="Karl Barth"/>
<link wikidata="Q25973" start="2366" end="2379" title="Hermann Hesse" label="Hermann Hesse"/>
<link wikidata="Q6258482" start="2506" end="2516" title="John Solum" label="John Solum"/>
<link wikidata="Q192185" start="2671" end="2684" title="Aaron Copland" label="Aaron Copland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7456922" start="2927" end="2950" title="Settlement Music School" label="Settlement Music School"/>
<link wikidata="Q47912" start="3016" end="3027" title="lung cancer" label="lung cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339" start="3114" end="3124" title="Johann Sebastian Bach" label="J. S. Bach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339" start="3307" end="3328" title="Johann Sebastian Bach" label="Johann Sebastian Bach"/>
<link wikidata="Q5542078" start="3477" end="3491" title="George Malcolm (musician)" label="George Malcolm"/>
<link wikidata="Q5542078" start="3655" end="3669" title="George Malcolm (musician)" label="George Malcolm"/>
<link wikidata="Q156814" start="3770" end="3784" title="Yehudi Menuhin" label="Yehudi Menuhin"/>
<link wikidata="Q264954" start="3907" end="3920" title="Archie Camden" label="Archie Camden"/>
<link wikidata="Q156814" start="3949" end="3963" title="Yehudi Menuhin" label="Yehudi Menuhin"/>
<link wikidata="Q156814" start="4014" end="4028" title="Yehudi Menuhin" label="Yehudi Menuhin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5542078" start="4031" end="4045" title="George Malcolm (musician)" label="George Malcolm"/>
<link wikidata="Q254" start="4073" end="4096" title="Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart" label="Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart"/>
<link wikidata="Q75854" start="4295" end="4317" title="Georg Philipp Telemann" label="Georg Philipp Telemann"/>
<link wikidata="Q7312" start="4360" end="4374" title="Franz Schubert" label="Franz Schubert"/>
<link wikidata="Q765966" start="4397" end="4411" title="Trockne Blumen" label="Trockne Blumen"/>
<link wikidata="Q157865" start="4427" end="4443" title="Friedrich Kuhlau" label="Friedrich Kuhlau"/>
<link wikidata="Q156023" start="4465" end="4484" title="Franz Xavier Mozart" label="Franz Xavier Mozart"/>
<link wikidata="Q192185" start="4559" end="4572" title="Aaron Copland" label="Aaron Copland"/>
<link wikidata="Q192185" start="4606" end="4619" title="Aaron Copland" label="Aaron Copland"/>
<link wikidata="Q156814" start="4912" end="4926" title="Yehudi Menuhin" label="Yehudi Menuhin"/>
<link wikidata="Q57244" start="5082" end="5091" title="Paul Hindemith" label="Hindemith"/>
<link wikidata="Q49481" start="5093" end="5102" title="Sergei Prokofiev" label="Prokofiev"/>
<link wikidata="Q191408" start="5107" end="5114" title="Francis Poulenc" label="Poulenc"/>
<link wikidata="Q296828" start="5142" end="5147" title="Jacques Ibert" label="Ibert"/>
<link wikidata="Q205139" start="5152" end="5159" title="Carl Nielsen" label="Nielsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q544485" start="5192" end="5206" title="Virgil Thomson" label="Virgil Thomson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3082382" start="5312" end="5326" title="Franco Mannino" label="Franco Mannino"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="230695" wikidata="Q3477692" url="?curid=230695" title="Kutub al-Lughah">
<text>Kutub al-Lughah is a work of Hebrew linguistics by Saadia Gaon, twelve &quot;Books on Language&quot; which are also designated as the twelve parts of a work entitled &quot;The Book on Language&quot;, in which, as the author himself states in his &quot;Sefer ha-Galui&quot;, he sought to explain the &quot;i&#x27;rab&quot;, or the grammatical formation of the Hebrew language. Of this Hebrew grammar, which is the oldest one known, fragments of greater or less extent have been preserved, especially in Saadia&#x27;s commentary on Sefer Yetzirah and by Dunash ben Labrat.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q9288" start="29" end="35" title="Hebrew language" label="Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q8162" start="36" end="47" title="linguistics" label="linguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q328748" start="51" end="62" title="Saadia Gaon" label="Saadia Gaon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147199" start="530" end="544" title="Sefer Yetzirah" label="Sefer Yetzirah"/>
<link wikidata="Q720129" start="552" end="569" title="Dunash ben Labrat" label="Dunash ben Labrat"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="230696" wikidata="Q2777400" url="?curid=230696" title="The Book of Beliefs and Opinions">
<text>The Book of Beliefs and Opinions (; ) is a book written by Saadia Gaon (completed 933) which is the first systematic presentation and philosophic foundation of the dogmas of Judaism.

The work was originally in Judeo-Arabic in Hebrew letters with quotations from the Torah. The first Hebrew translation was done in 1186 by Judah ben Saul ibn Tibbon, titled &quot;Emunot ve-Deot&quot; ( &quot;Beliefs and Opinions&quot;). An unabridged translation into English by Samuel Rosenblatt was published in 1948.

An introduction prefaces the work and has ten chapters; it was completed in 933.

==Premise and introduction==

The work was mainly written to defend Rabbinic Judaism against Karaite Judaism, which rejects the Oral Torah (Mishnah and Talmud).

In his detailed introduction, Saadia speaks of the reasons that led him to compose it. His heart was grieved when he saw the confusion concerning matters of religion that prevailed among his contemporaries, finding an unintelligent belief and unenlightened views current among those who professed Judaism while those who denied the faith triumphantly vaunted their errors. Men were sunken in the sea of doubt and overwhelmed by the waves of spiritual error, and there was none to help them, so Saadia felt called and duty-bound to save them from their peril by strengthening the faithful in their belief and by removing the fears of those who were in doubt.

After a general presentation of the causes of uncertainty and doubt and the essence of belief, Saadia describes the three natural sources of knowledge: namely, the perceptions of the senses, the light of reason, and logical necessity, as well as the fourth source of knowledge possessed by those that fear God, the &quot;veritable revelation&quot; contained in the Scriptures. He shows that a belief in the teachings of revelation does not exclude an independent search for knowledge but that speculation on religious subjects rather endeavours to prove the truth of the teachings received from the Prophets and to refute attacks upon revealed doctrine, which must be raised by philosophical investigation to the plane of actual knowledge.

==Contents==

In the first two sections, Saadia discusses the metaphysical problems of the creation of the world (i.) and the unity of the Creator (ii.); in the following sections, he discusses revelation (iii.) and the doctrines of belief based upon divine justice, including obedience and disobedience (iv.), as well as merit and demerit (v.). Closely connected with these sections are those that treat of the soul and of death (vi.), and of the resurrection of the dead (vii.), which, according to the author, forms part of the theory of the Messianic redemption (viii.). The work concludes with a section on the rewards and punishments of the future life (ix.). The tenth section, on the best mode of life for mankind in this world, must be regarded as an appendix, since its admonitions to moral conduct supplement the exhortations to right thought and right belief contained in the main body.

The most important points contained in the individual sections are as follows:

===i The creation of the world===
For the doctrine of the creation of the world, Saadia offers four proofs; three of these show the influence of Aristotelian philosophy, which may also be traced elsewhere in his writings. After his rational demonstrations have led him to the conclusion that the world was created ex nihilo, he proceeds to state and refute the twelve theories of the origin of the world. This part of the first section gives a most interesting insight into Saadia&#x27;s knowledge of the Greek philosophers, which he probably derived from reading Aristotle. At the end of the section, Saadia refutes specific objections to the Jewish doctrine of Creation, especially those that proceed from the concepts of time and space.

===ii The unity of the Creator===
The theory of God is prefaced by a development of the view that human knowledge arises by degrees from the merest sensuous impressions to the most subtle concepts so that the idea of the divine, which transcends all other knowledge in subtlety, is itself a proof of its verity. The concept of God in Judaism as a creator necessarily implies the attributes of life, power, and knowledge. In like manner, the concept of a creator demonstrates the unity of God. For this view three direct and three indirect proofs are offered by Saadia, the latter showing that dualism is absurd. See apophatic theology and divine simplicity.

The thesis of God&#x27;s absolute unity is established by refuting the Christian doctrine of the Trinity, which, in Saadia&#x27;s opinion, arises from a misinterpretation of the three attributes of God already named: life, power, and knowledge. Connected with the refutation of the dogma of the Trinity is an outline of the various theories respecting the person of Jesus that reveals an accurate understanding of Christian controversies. See Jewish principles of faith: Divine Unity.

To render possible an understanding of the monotheistic concept of God in all its purity, and to free the statements of the Scriptures from their apparent contradictions of the spirituality of the absolute idea of God, Saadia interprets all the difficulties of the Bible that bear upon this problem, using the scheme of the ten Aristotelian categories, none of which, he shows, may be applied to God. After this section, the author shows a deep religious feeling about the relation to the Deity sustained by the human soul when permeated by the true knowledge of God.

===iii Revelation and the Commandments===
The mitzvot &quot;divine commandments&quot; revealed in the Torah have been given to man by the grace of God as a means to attain the highest blessedness. According to a classification borrowed by Saadia from the Muʿtazila but based upon an essentially Jewish view, the commandments are divided into those of reason and of revelation, although even the latter may be explained rationally, as is shown by numerous examples. An excursus, in which Saadia attacks the view of the Hindu sect of the &quot;Barahima&quot; (Brahmans) to the effect that man needs no prophets, introduces his account of prophecy and his apology for the Prophets. This is followed by theses on the essential content of the Bible and the credibility of Biblical tradition, by a detailed refutation of the Christian and Islamic view that the Law revealed in Israel has been repealed, and by a polemic against a series of Hiwi al-Balkhi&#x27;s objections to the authority of the Scriptures.

===iv Free will: obedience and disobedience===
The foundation of this section is the theory of the freedom of the will and its reconciliation with the omnipotence and omniscience of God. In its opening portion Saadia postulates the anthropocentric doctrine that regards man as the object of all creation; and at its close he explains under eight headings those passages of the Bible that might cause doubt regarding the freedom of the acts of man.
See Free will In Jewish thought.

===v Merit and demerit===
People fall into ten classes concerning merit, demerit, and religious and moral bearings. In his description of the first two, the pious and the impious, Saadia devotes himself to the problem of the sufferings of the devout and the good fortune of the impious. In contrast, the description of the last class, that of the contrite, leads him to detailed considerations, based upon the Bible, of repentance, prayer, and other evidences of human piety.

===vi The soul and death===
A survey of six other theories prefaces his view on the soul. The list is a parallel of those provided already by Aristotle and Pseudo-Plutarch. He states the relation of the soul to the body, the basis of their union, their cooperation in human activity, their coexistence or the appointed term of life, their separation or death, and the state of the soul after death. The section concludes with refuting the doctrine of gilgul or metempsychosis.

===vii The resurrection of the dead===
Here Saadia refutes the objections made, based on nature, reason, and the Bible, to the doctrine of the resurrection of the dead, and presents the proof for it contained in tradition. He then discusses ten questions bearing on this doctrine, which are of interest as &quot;affording an insight into popular views that then prevailed, and which, despite their singularity, could not be ignored even by such a man as Saadia&quot; (Guttmann).

===viii Messianic redemption===
The teachings regarding Messianic redemption are based almost entirely on statements of the Bible and the Talmud, the definite year of salvation being fixed by an interpretation of well-known passages in the Book of Daniel. In the concluding portion the author refutes those who assume that the Messianic prophecies refer to the time of the Second Temple; he also argues against the Christian doctrine of the Messiah.

===ix The world to come===
Saadia demonstrates that the compensations of the world to come are proved by reason, the Bible, and tradition, and answers various questions bearing upon this subject.

===x Moral conduct, thought and belief===
The system of ethics contained in the appendix is based mostly on a description and criticism of thirteen different objects of life, to which Saadia adds his own counsels for rational and moral living. He also adds that in the case of each of the five senses, only the concordant union of sensuous impressions is beneficial, thus showing how great the need is for a harmonious combination of the qualities and the impulses of the soul of man. He concludes with the statement that he intends his book only to purify and ennoble the hearts of his readers.

==Translation==

===Ibn Tibbon===
Although the work was originally in Arabic, it was translated by rabbi and physician Judah ben Saul ibn Tibbon, who also translated the &quot;Kuzari&quot; of Judah Halevi. This version was first printed in Constantinople in 1562 and frequently republished, while the original was edited in Arabic characters by Samuel Landauer (Leiden, 1880), and another (superior) Judeo-Arabic edition prepared by Yosef Qafih in 1970.

===Others===

Another translation, or rather paraphrase, of the &quot;Kitāb al-Amānāt wa l-Iʿtiqādāt&quot;, of uncertain authorship, is contained in several manuscripts (the most important being MS. Vatican 266); large portions of this rendering were edited by Gollancz (; comp. &quot;Monatsschrift,&quot; xlvi. 536). It was the principal means by which Saadia&#x27;s philosophy was known to non-Arabic speaking Jews during the twelfth and thirteenth centuries. The Paraphrase was an important and influential document to the evolution of theology of the early medieval &quot;Haside Ashkenaz&quot; (not to be confused with Hasidic Judaism of the 18th century), the Maimonidean controversy and early Kabbalah. Its language is highly poetic. The seventh section, on the resurrection, is contained in two versions, the first of which, the basis of the translation of ibn Tibbon, has been edited by Bacher in the &quot;Steinschneider Festschrift,&quot; pp. 98–112, and the second by Landauer. This paraphrase, entitled &quot;Pitron Sefer ha-Emunot ve-Ḥerṣav ha-Binot&quot;, will be published by the Israel Academy of Sciences and the Humanities.

==External links and references==

Bibliography
* Saadia B. Joseph public domain, 1906 Jewish Encyclopedia

Resources
* Full text (Hebrew), daat.ac.il
* Full text in Hebrew (Rashi Script)
* &quot;Saadia Gaon-the Book of Beliefs and Opinions&quot;. Transl. Samuel Rosenblatt. Yale Judaica (1942). 
* Full Text in Arabic</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q328748" start="59" end="70" title="Saadia Gaon" label="Saadia Gaon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="106" end="116" title=":wikt:systematic" label="systematic"/>
<link wikidata="Q620749" start="164" end="169" title="dogma" label="dogma"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="174" end="181" title="Judaism" label="Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q37733" start="211" end="223" title="Judeo-Arabic" label="Judeo-Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q33513" start="227" end="241" title="Hebrew letters" label="Hebrew letters"/>
<link wikidata="Q745336" start="323" end="348" title="Judah ben Saul ibn Tibbon" label="Judah ben Saul ibn Tibbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366914" start="655" end="671" title="Rabbinic Judaism" label="Rabbinic Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q208398" start="680" end="695" title="Karaite Judaism" label="Karaite Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2621334" start="715" end="725" title="Oral Torah" label="Oral Torah"/>
<link wikidata="Q191825" start="727" end="734" title="Mishnah" label="Mishnah"/>
<link wikidata="Q43290" start="739" end="745" title="Talmud" label="Talmud"/>
<link wikidata="Q137651" start="3187" end="3208" title="Genesis creation narrative" label="creation of the world"/>
<link wikidata="Q868" start="3274" end="3297" title="Aristotle" label="Aristotelian philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139338" start="3443" end="3452" title="ex nihilo" label="ex nihilo"/>
<link wikidata="Q11471" start="3853" end="3857" title="time" label="time"/>
<link wikidata="Q107" start="3862" end="3867" title="space" label="space"/>
<link wikidata="Q190" start="3918" end="3921" title="God" label="God"/>
<link wikidata="Q9081" start="3974" end="3983" title="knowledge" label="knowledge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2155501" start="4197" end="4211" title="God in Judaism" label="God in Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4486" end="4504" title="apophatic theology#In the Jewish tradition" label="apophatic theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q3484782" start="4509" end="4526" title="divine simplicity" label="divine simplicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q216545" start="4600" end="4618" title="Christian doctrine" label="Christian doctrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q37090" start="4626" end="4633" title="Trinity" label="Trinity"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4972" end="5012" title="Jewish principles of faith#God is One" label="Jewish principles of faith: Divine Unity"/>
<link wikidata="Q265424" start="5630" end="5637" title="mitzvah" label="mitzvot"/>
<link wikidata="Q34990" start="5686" end="5691" title="Torah" label="Torah"/>
<link wikidata="Q10090" start="6102" end="6107" title="Hindu" label="Hindu"/>
<link wikidata="Q746990" start="6142" end="6149" title="Brahman" label="Brahman"/>
<link wikidata="Q956234" start="6518" end="6532" title="Hiwi al-Balkhi" label="Hiwi al-Balkhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q9476" start="6687" end="6706" title="free will" label="freedom of the will"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141803" start="6739" end="6750" title="omnipotence" label="omnipotence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424662" start="6755" end="6766" title="omniscience" label="omniscience"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7040" end="7067" title="Free will#In Jewish thought" label="Free will In Jewish thought"/>
<link wikidata="Q497263" start="7490" end="7500" title="repentance" label="repentance"/>
<link wikidata="Q40953" start="7502" end="7508" title="prayer" label="prayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q868" start="7689" end="7698" title="Aristotle" label="Aristotle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2657275" start="7703" end="7718" title="Pseudo-Plutarch" label="Pseudo-Plutarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5266353" start="7998" end="8004" title="gilgul" label="gilgul"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262856" start="8008" end="8022" title="metempsychosis" label="metempsychosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q188681" start="8168" end="8180" title="resurrection" label="resurrection"/>
<link wikidata="Q51626" start="8561" end="8570" title="Messiah" label="Messianic"/>
<link wikidata="Q43290" start="8643" end="8649" title="Talmud" label="Talmud"/>
<link wikidata="Q80115" start="8745" end="8759" title="Book of Daniel" label="Book of Daniel"/>
<link wikidata="Q178354" start="9061" end="9067" title="reason" label="reason"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144567" start="9084" end="9093" title="oral law" label="tradition"/>
<link wikidata="Q9465" start="9209" end="9215" title="ethics" label="ethics"/>
<link wikidata="Q133485" start="9849" end="9854" title="rabbi" label="rabbi"/>
<link wikidata="Q745336" start="9869" end="9894" title="Judah ben Saul ibn Tibbon" label="Judah ben Saul ibn Tibbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2315123" start="9926" end="9932" title="Kuzari" label="Kuzari"/>
<link wikidata="Q299200" start="9942" end="9954" title="Judah Halevi" label="Judah Halevi"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="9990" end="10004" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411966" start="10095" end="10110" title="Samuel Landauer" label="Samuel Landauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q43631" start="10112" end="10118" title="Leiden" label="Leiden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2911194" start="10183" end="10194" title="Yosef Qafih" label="Yosef Qafih"/>
<link wikidata="Q171201" start="10828" end="10843" title="Hasidic Judaism" label="Hasidic Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9288" start="11479" end="11485" title="Hebrew language" label="Hebrew"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="230698" wikidata="Q349391" url="?curid=230698" title="Helen Mirren">
<text>Dame Helen Mirren (; born Helen Lydia Mironoff; 26 July 1945) is an English actor. In a career spanning 60 years, she is the recipient of numerous accolades including an Academy Award, four BAFTA Awards, five Emmy Awards, three Golden Globe Awards, an Olivier Award and a Tony Award. She has been honored with the BAFTA Fellowship in 2014, the Honorary Golden Bear in 2020, and the Screen Actors Guild Life Achievement Award in 2022. Mirren was made a Dame Commander of the Order of the British Empire (DBE) by Queen Elizabeth II in 2003.

Mirren started her career at the age of 18 as a performer with the National Youth Theatre, where she played Cleopatra in &quot;Antony and Cleopatra&quot; (1965). She later joined the Royal Shakespeare Company and made her West End stage debut in 1975. She went on to receive the Laurence Olivier Award for Best Actress for playing Elizabeth II in the Peter Morgan play &quot;The Audience&quot; (2013). She reprised the role on Broadway and won the Tony Award for Best Actress in a Play. She was Tony-nominated for &quot;A Month in the Country&quot; (1995) and &quot;The Dance of Death&quot; (2002).

Mirren won the Academy Award for Best Actress for her portrayal of Queen Elizabeth II in the drama &quot;The Queen&quot; (2006). She was Oscar-nominated for her roles in &quot;The Madness of King George&quot; (1994), &quot;Gosford Park&quot; (2001), and &quot;The Last Station&quot; (2009). She has acted in films such as &quot;Caligula&quot; (1979), &quot;Excalibur&quot; (1981), &quot;The Cook, the Thief, His Wife &amp; Her Lover&quot; (1989), &quot;The Tempest&quot; (2010), &quot;Hitchcock&quot; (2012), &quot;Eye in the Sky&quot; (2015), and &quot;Trumbo&quot; (2015). She has also acted in the action films &quot;Red&quot; (2010) and its 2013 sequel, as well as four films in the &quot;Fast &amp; Furious&quot; film franchise.

On television, Mirren played DCI Jane Tennison in the police procedural &quot;Prime Suspect&quot; (1991–2006), where she earned three British Academy Television Awards for Best Actress and two Primetime Emmy Awards for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Miniseries or Movie. She also earned Emmy Awards for portraying Ayn Rand in the Showtime television film &quot;The Passion of Ayn Rand&quot; (1999) and Queen Elizabeth I in the HBO miniseries &quot;Elizabeth I&quot; (2005). She also acted in &quot;Door to Door&quot; (2002), &quot;Phil Spector&quot; (2013), &quot;Catherine the Great&quot; (2019), and &quot;1923&quot; (2022).

==Early life and background ==

Mirren was born Helen Lydia Mironoff on 26 July 1945 at Queen Charlotte&#x27;s and Chelsea Hospital in the Hammersmith district of London, to an English mother and Russian father. Her mother, Kathleen &quot;Kitty&quot; Alexandrina Eva Matilda (née Rogers; 1908–1996), was a working-class woman from West Ham, the thirteenth of fourteen children born to a butcher whose own father was the butcher to Queen Victoria. Mirren&#x27;s father, Vasily Petrovich Mironoff (1913–1980), was a member of an old exiled family of the Russian nobility dating back to the first half of the 15th century; he was taken to England when he was two by his father, Pyotr Vasilievich Mironov (1880–1957). Pyotr Vasilievich Mironov owned a large family estate near Gzhatsk (now Gagarin) in the Russian Empire. His mother, Mirren&#x27;s great-grandmother, was Countess Lydia Andreevna Kamenskaya (1848–1928), an aristocrat and a descendant of Count Mikhail Fedotovich Kamensky, a prominent Russian general in the Napoleonic Wars. Her grandfather, Pyotr Vasilievich Mironov also served as a colonel in the Imperial Russian Army and fought in the 1904 Russo-Japanese War. He later became a diplomat in the service of Nicholas II and was negotiating an arms deal in Britain when he and his family were stranded by the Russian Revolution in 1917. He settled in London and became a cab driver to support his family.

Vasily Mironoff also played the viola with the London Philharmonic Orchestra before World War II. He was an ambulance driver during the war, and served in the East End of London during the Blitz. He and Kathleen Rogers married in Hammersmith in 1938, and at some point before 1951 he anglicised his first name to Basil. Shortly after Helen&#x27;s birth, her father left the orchestra and returned to driving a cab to support the family. He later worked as a driving-test examiner, then became a civil servant with the Ministry of Transport. In 1951, he changed the family name to Mirren by deed poll. Mirren considers her upbringing to have been &quot;very anti-monarchist&quot;. She was the second of three children; she has an older sister Katherine (&quot;Kate&quot;; born 1942) and had a younger brother Peter Basil (1947–2002). Her paternal cousin was Tania Mallet, a model and Bond girl. Mirren was brought up in Leigh-on-Sea, Essex.

Mirren attended Hamlet Court primary school in Westcliff-on-Sea, where she had the lead role in a school production of &quot;Hansel and Gretel&quot;, and St Bernard&#x27;s High School for Girls in Southend-on-Sea, where she also acted in school productions. She subsequently attended a teaching college, the New College of Speech and Drama in London, &quot;housed within Anna Pavlova&#x27;s old home, Ivy House&quot; on North End Road in Golders Green. At the age of eighteen, she passed the audition for the National Youth Theatre (NYT); and at twenty, she played Cleopatra in the NYT production of &quot;Antony and Cleopatra&quot; at the Old Vic, a role which she says &quot;launched my career&quot; and led to her signing with agent Al Parker.

== Career ==
=== 1965–1979: Royal Shakespeare Company and acclaim ===
As a result of her work for the National Youth Theatre, Mirren was invited to join the Royal Shakespeare Company (RSC). While with the RSC, she played Castiza in Trevor Nunn&#x27;s 1966 staging of &quot;The Revenger&#x27;s Tragedy&quot;, Diana in &quot;All&#x27;s Well That Ends Well&quot; (1967), Cressida in &quot;Troilus and Cressida&quot; (1968), Rosalind in &quot;As You Like It&quot; (1968), Julia in &quot;The Two Gentlemen of Verona&quot; (1970), Tatiana in Gorky&#x27;s &quot;Enemies&quot; at the Aldwych (1971), and the title role in &quot;Miss Julie&quot; at The Other Place (1971). She also appeared in four productions, directed by Braham Murray for Century Theatre at the University Theatre in Manchester, between 1965 and 1967.

In 1970, the director and producer John Goldschmidt made a documentary film, &quot;Doing Her Own Thing&quot;, about Mirren during her time with the Royal Shakespeare Company. Made for ATV, it was shown on the ITV network in the UK. In 1972 and 1973, Mirren worked with Peter Brook&#x27;s International Centre for Theatre Research and joined the group&#x27;s tour in North Africa and the US, during which they created &quot;The Conference of the Birds&quot;. She then rejoined the RSC, playing Lady Macbeth at Stratford in 1974 and at the Aldwych Theatre in 1975. In 1976, she appeared with Laurence Olivier, Alan Bates and Malcolm McDowell in a production of Harold Pinter&#x27;s &quot;The Collection&quot; as part of the &quot;Laurence Olivier Presents&quot; series.

Sally Beauman reported, in her 1982 history of the RSC, that Mirren—while appearing in Nunn&#x27;s &quot;Macbeth&quot; (1974), and in a letter to &quot;The Guardian&quot; newspaper—had sharply criticised both the National Theatre and the RSC for their lavish production expenditure, declaring it &quot;unnecessary and destructive to the art of the Theatre&quot;, and adding, &quot;The realms of truth, emotion and imagination reached for in acting a great play have become more and more remote, often totally unreachable across an abyss of costume and technicalities...&quot; This started a big debate, and led to a question in parliament. There were no discernible repercussions for this rebuke of the RSC.

At the West End&#x27;s Royal Court Theatre in September 1975, she played the role of a rock star named Maggie in &quot;Teeth &#x27;n&#x27; Smiles&quot;, a musical play by David Hare; she reprised the role the following year in a revival of the play at Wyndham&#x27;s Theatre in May 1976. Beginning in November 1975, Mirren played in West End repertory with the Lyric Theatre Company as Nina in &quot;The Seagull&quot; and Ella in Ben Travers&#x27;s new farce &quot;The Bed Before Yesterday&quot; (&quot;Mirren is stirringly voluptuous as the Harlowesque good-time girl&quot;: Michael Billington, &quot;The Guardian&quot;). At the RSC in Stratford in 1977, and at the Aldwych the following year, she played a steely Queen Margaret in Terry Hands&#x27; production of the three parts of &quot;Henry VI&quot;, while 1979 saw her &#x27;bursting with grace&#x27;, and winning acclaim for her performance as Isabella in Peter Gill&#x27;s production of &quot;Measure for Measure&quot; at Riverside Studios. Mirren has appeared in a large number of films throughout her career. Some of her earlier film appearances include roles in &quot;Herostratus&quot; (1967, Dir. Don Levy), &quot;A Midsummer Night&#x27;s Dream&quot; (1968), &quot;Age of Consent&quot; (1969), and &quot;O Lucky Man!&quot; (1973).

=== 1980–1999: Early film roles and &quot;Prime Suspect&quot; ===

In 1981, she returned to the Royal Court for the London premiere of Brian Friel&#x27;s &quot;Faith Healer&quot;. That same year she also won acclaim for her performance in the title role of John Webster&#x27;s &quot;The Duchess of Malfi&quot;, a production of Manchester&#x27;s Royal Exchange Theatre which was later transferred to The Roundhouse in Chalk Farm, London. Reviewing her portrayal for &quot;The Sunday Telegraph&quot;, Francis King wrote: &quot;Miss Mirren never leaves it in doubt that even in her absences, this ardent, beautiful woman is the most important character of the story.&quot; In her performance as Moll Cutpurse in &quot;The Roaring Girl&quot;—at the Royal Shakespeare Theatre in January 1983, and at the Barbican Theatre in April 1983—she was described as having &quot;swaggered through the action with radiant singularity of purpose, filling in areas of light and shade that even Thomas Middleton and Thomas Dekker omitted.&quot; – Michael Coveney, &quot;Financial Times&quot;, April 1983. During this time, Mirren took roles in &quot;Caligula&quot; (1979), &quot;The Long Good Friday&quot; (1980)—co-starring with Bob Hoskins in what was her breakthrough film role, &quot;Excalibur&quot; (1981), &quot;2010&quot; (1984), &quot;White Nights&quot; (1985), &quot;The Mosquito Coast&quot; (1986), &quot;Pascali&#x27;s Island&quot; (1988) and &quot;When the Whales Came&quot; (1989). Mirren&#x27;s television performances include &quot;Cousin Bette&quot; (1971); &quot;As You Like It&quot; (1979); &quot;Blue Remembered Hills&quot; (1979); and &quot;The Twilight Zone&quot; episode &quot;Dead Woman&#x27;s Shoes&quot; (1985).

At the beginning of 1989, Mirren co-starred with Bob Peck at the Young Vic in the London premiere of the Arthur Miller double-bill, &quot;Two Way Mirror&quot;, performances which prompted Miller to remark: &quot;What is so good about English actors is that they are not afraid of the open expression of large emotions. British actors like to speak. In London, there&#x27;s a much more open-hearted kind of exchange between stage and audience&quot; (interview by Sheridan Morley: &quot;The Times&quot; 11 January 1989). In &quot;Elegy for a Lady&quot; she played the svelte proprietress of a classy boutique, while as the blonde hooker in &quot;Some Kind of Love Story&quot; she was &quot;clad in a Freudian slip and shifting easily from waif-like vulnerability to sexual aggression, giving the role a breathy Monroesque quality&quot;.

Mirren is known for her role as detective Jane Tennison in the widely viewed &quot;Prime Suspect&quot;, a multiple award-winning television drama series that was noted for its high quality and popularity. Her portrayal of Tennison won her three consecutive British Academy Television Awards for Best Actress between 1992 and 1994 (making her one of four actors to have received three consecutive BAFTA TV Awards for a role, alongside Robbie Coltrane, Julie Walters and Michael Gambon). Primarily due to &quot;Prime Suspect&quot;, in 2006 Mirren came 29th on ITV&#x27;s poll of TV&#x27;s 50 Greatest Stars voted by the British public. A further stage breakthrough came in 1994, in an Yvonne Arnaud Theatre production bound for the West End, when Bill Bryden cast her as Natalya Petrovna in Ivan Turgenev&#x27;s &quot;A Month in the Country&quot;. Her co-stars were John Hurt as her aimless lover Rakitin and Joseph Fiennes in only his second professional stage appearance as the cocksure young tutor Belyaev. Prior to 2015, Mirren had twice been nominated for Broadway&#x27;s Tony Award for Best Actress in a Play: in 1995 for her Broadway debut in &quot;A Month in the Country&quot; and then again in 2002 for &quot;The Dance of Death&quot;, co-starring with Sir Ian McKellen, their fraught rehearsal period coinciding with the terrorist attacks on New York on 11 September 2001.

She appeared in &quot;The Madness of King George&quot; (1994), &quot;Some Mother&#x27;s Son&quot; (1996), &quot;Painted Lady&quot; (1997) and &quot;The Prince of Egypt&quot; (1998). In Peter Greenaway&#x27;s colourful &quot;The Cook, The Thief, His Wife and Her Lover&quot;, Mirren plays the wife opposite Michael Gambon. In &quot;Teaching Mrs. Tingle&quot; (1999), she plays sadistic history teacher Mrs. Eve Tingle. In 1998, Mirren played Cleopatra to Alan Rickman&#x27;s Antony in &quot;Antony and Cleopatra&quot; at the National Theatre. The production received poor reviews; &quot;The Guardian&quot; called it &quot;plodding spectacle rarely informed by powerful passion&quot;, while &quot;The Daily Telegraph&quot; said &quot;the crucial sexual chemistry on which any great production ultimately depends is fatally absent&quot;. In 2000 Nicholas Hytner, who had worked with Mirren on the film version of &quot;The Madness of King George&quot;, cast her as Lady Torrance in his revival of Tennessee Williams&#x27; &quot;Orpheus Descending&quot; at the Donmar Warehouse in London. Michael Billington, reviewing for &quot;The Guardian&quot;, described her performance as &quot;an exemplary study of an immigrant woman who has acquired a patina of resilient toughness but who slowly acknowledges her sensuality.&quot;

=== 2000–2006: Film stardom and awards success ===

She portrayed Ayn Rand in the television film, &quot;The Passion of Ayn Rand&quot; (1999), where her performance won her an Emmy; &quot;Door to Door&quot; (2002); and &quot;The Roman Spring of Mrs. Stone&quot; (2003). At the National Theatre in November 2003 she again won praise playing Christine Mannon (&quot;defiantly cool, camp and skittish&quot;, &quot;Evening Standard&quot;; &quot;glows with mature sexual allure&quot;, &quot;Daily Telegraph&quot;) in a revival of Eugene O&#x27;Neill&#x27;s &quot;Mourning Becomes Electra&quot; directed by Howard Davies. &quot;This production was one of the best experiences of my professional life, The play was four and a half hours long, and I have never known that kind of response from an audience ... It was the serendipity of a beautifully cast play, with great design and direction, It will be hard to be in anything better.&quot; She played the title role in Jean Racine&#x27;s &quot;Phèdre&quot; at the National in 2009, in a production directed by Nicholas Hytner. The production was also staged at the Epidaurus amphitheatre on 11 and 12 July 2009.

Mirren continued her successful film career when she starred in &quot;Gosford Park&quot; (2001) with Maggie Smith and &quot;Calendar Girls&quot; (2003) with Julie Walters. Other more recent appearances include &quot;The Clearing&quot; (2004), &quot;Pride&quot; (2004), &quot;Raising Helen&quot; (2004), and &quot;Shadowboxer&quot; (2005). Mirren also provided the voice for the supercomputer &quot;Deep Thought&quot; in the film adaptation of Douglas Adams&#x27;s &quot;The Hitchhiker&#x27;s Guide to the Galaxy&quot; (2005). During her career, she has portrayed three British queens in different films and television series: Elizabeth I in the television series &quot;Elizabeth I&quot; (2005), Elizabeth II in &quot;The Queen&quot; (2006), and Charlotte in &quot;The Madness of King George&quot; (1994). She is the only actor to have portrayed both Queens Elizabeth on the screen. Mirren&#x27;s first film of the 2000s was Joel Hershman&#x27;s &quot;Greenfingers&quot; (2000), a comedy based on the true story about the prisoners of HMP Leyhill, a minimum-security prison, who won gardening awards. Mirren portrayed a devoted plantswoman in the film, who coaches a team of prison gardeners, led by Clive Owen, to victory at a prestigious flower show. The project received lukewarm reviews, which suggested that it added &quot;nothing new to this already saturated genre&quot; of British feel-good films. The same year she acted in &quot;The Pledge&quot;, Sean Penn&#x27;s third directorial effort, in which she played a child psychologist. A critical success, the ensemble film tanked at the box office. Also that year, she filmed the American-Icelandic satirical drama &quot;No Such Thing&quot; opposite Sarah Polley. Directed by Hal Hartley, Mirren portrayed a soulless television producer in the film, who strives for sensationalistic stories. It was largely panned by critics.
Her biggest critical and commercial success, released in 2001, became Robert Altman&#x27;s all-star ensemble mystery film &quot;Gosford Park&quot;. A homage to writer Agatha Christie&#x27;s whodunit style, the story follows a party of wealthy Britons and an American, and their servants, who gather for a shooting weekend at an English country house, resulting in an unexpected murder. It received multiple awards and nominations, including a second Academy Award nomination and first Screen Actors Guild Award win for Mirren&#x27;s portrayal of the sternly devoted head servant Mrs. Wilson. Mirren&#x27;s last film that year was Fred Schepisi&#x27;s dramedy film &quot;Last Orders&quot; opposite Michael Caine and Bob Hoskins. In 2003, Mirren starred in Nigel Cole&#x27;s comedy &quot;Calendar Girls&quot;, inspired by the true story of a group of Yorkshire women who produced a nude calendar to raise money for Leukaemia Research under the auspices of the Women&#x27;s Institutes. Mirren initially was reluctant to join the project, dismissing it as another middling British picture, but rethought her decision upon learning of the casting of co-star Julie Walters. The film was generally well received by critics, and grossed $96 million worldwide. In addition, the picture earned Satellite, Golden Globe, and European Film Award nominations for Mirren. Her other film that year was the Showtime television film &quot;The Roman Spring of Mrs. Stone&quot; opposite Olivier Martinez, and Anne Bancroft, based on the 1950 novel of the same title by Tennessee Williams.

She also played Queen Elizabeth I in 2005, in the television serial &quot;Elizabeth I&quot;, for Channel 4 and HBO, for which she received an Emmy Award and a Golden Globe Award. Mirren won another Emmy Award on 16 September 2007 for her role in &quot;Prime Suspect: The Final Act&quot; on PBS in the same category as in 2006. Mirren hosted &quot;Saturday Night Live&quot; on 9 April 2011. In 2006, Helen Mirren starred in &quot;The Queen&quot; directed by Stephen Frears, for which she won an Academy Award for Best Actress. Mirren&#x27;s title role of &quot;The Queen&quot; earned her numerous acting awards including a BAFTA, a Golden Globe, and an Academy Award, among many others. During her acceptance speech at the Academy Award ceremony, she praised and thanked Elizabeth II and stated that she had maintained her dignity and weathered many storms during her reign. Mirren later appeared in supporting roles in the films &quot;National Treasure: Book of Secrets&quot;, &quot;Inkheart&quot;, &quot;State of Play&quot;, and &quot;The Last Station&quot;, for which she was nominated for an Oscar.

=== 2007–2019: Established actress ===

In 2007, she claimed that the director Michael Winner had treated her &quot;like a piece of meat&quot; at a casting call in 1964. Asked about the incident, Winner told &quot;The Guardian&quot;, &quot;I don&#x27;t remember asking her to turn around but if I did I wasn&#x27;t being serious. I was only doing what the [casting] agent asked me – and for this I get reviled! Helen&#x27;s a lovely person, she&#x27;s a great actor and I&#x27;m a huge fan, but her memory of that moment is a little flawed.&quot; In 2010, Mirren appeared in five films. In &quot;Love Ranch&quot;, directed by her husband Taylor Hackford, she portrayed Sally Conforte, one half of a married couple who opened the first legal brothel in the US, the Mustang Ranch in Storey County, Nevada. Mirren starred in the principal role of Prospera, the duchess of Milan, in Julie Taymor&#x27;s &quot;The Tempest&quot;. This was based on the play of the same name by Shakespeare; Taymor changed the original character&#x27;s gender to cast Mirren as her lead. While the actor garnered strong reviews for her portrayal, the film itself was largely panned by critics.

Mirren played a gutsy tea-shop owner who tries to save one of her young employees from marrying a teenage killer in Rowan Joffé&#x27;s &quot;Brighton Rock&quot;, a crime film loosely based on Graham Greene&#x27;s 1938 novel. The film noir premiered at the Toronto International Film Festival in September 2010, where it received mixed reviews. Mirren&#x27;s biggest critical and commercial success of the year was Robert Schwentke&#x27;s ensemble action comedy &quot;Red&quot;, based on Warren Ellis&#x27;s graphic novel, in which she portrayed Victoria, an ex-MI6 assassin. Mirren was initially hesitant to sign on due to film&#x27;s graphic violence, but changed her mind upon learning of Bruce Willis&#x27;s involvement. Released to positive reviews, it grossed $186.5 million worldwide. Also in 2010, the actor lent her voice to Zack Snyder&#x27;s animated fantasy film &quot;Legend of the Guardians: The Owls of Ga&#x27;Hoole&quot;, voicing antagonist Nyra, a leader of a group of owls. The film grossed $140.1 million on an $80 million budget. Mirren&#x27;s next film was the comedy film &quot;Arthur&quot;, a remake of the 1981 film of the same name, starring Russell Brand in the lead role. &quot;Arthur&quot; received generally negative reviews from critics, who declared it an &quot;irritating, unnecessary remake&quot;.

In preparation for her role as a retired Israeli Mossad agent in the film &quot;The Debt&quot;, Mirren reportedly immersed herself in studies of Hebrew language, Jewish history, and Holocaust writing, including the life of Simon Wiesenthal, while in Israel in 2009 for the filming of some of the movie&#x27;s scenes. The film is a remake of a 2007 Israeli film of the same name. In 2012, Mirren played Alfred Hitchcock&#x27;s wife Alma Reville in the 2012 biopic &quot;Hitchcock&quot; based on Stephen Rebello&#x27;s non-fiction book &quot;Alfred Hitchcock and the Making of Psycho&quot;. The film centres on the pair&#x27;s relationship during the making of &quot;Psycho&quot;, a controversial horror film that became one of the most acclaimed and influential works in the filmmaker&#x27;s career. It became a moderate arthouse success and garnered a lukewarm critical response from critics, who felt that it suffered from &quot;tonal inconsistency and a lack of truly insightful retrospection.&quot; Mirren was universally praised, however, with Roger Ebert noting that the film depended most on her portrayal, which he found to be &quot;warm and effective&quot;. Her other film that year was &quot;The Door&quot;, a claustrophobic drama film directed by István Szabó, based on the Hungarian novel of the same name. Set at the height of communist rule in 1960s Hungary, the story of the adaptation centres on the abrasive influence that a mysterious housekeeper wields over her employer and successful novelist, played Martina Gedeck. Mirren found the role &quot;difficult to play&quot; and cited doing it as &quot;one of the hardest things [she has] ever done&quot;.
On 15 February 2013, at the West End&#x27;s Gielgud Theatre she began a turn as Elizabeth II in the World Premiere of Peter Morgan&#x27;s &quot;The Audience&quot;. The show was directed by Stephen Daldry. Michael Billington of &quot;The Guardian&quot; wrote of her performance, &quot;who once again gives a faultless performance that transcends mere impersonation to endow the monarch with a sense of inner life and a quasi-Shakespearean aura of solitude.&quot; In April she was named best actress at the Olivier Awards for her role. On 7 June 2015‚ Mirren won the Tony Award for Best Actress in a Play‚ for her portrayal of Queen Elizabeth II in &quot;The Audience&quot; (a performance which also won her the Laurence Olivier Award for Best Actress). Her Tony Award win made her one of the few actors to achieve the US &quot;Triple Crown of Acting&quot;, joining the ranks of acclaimed performers including Ingrid Bergman‚ Dame Maggie Smith, and Al Pacino.

The following year, Mirren replaced Bette Midler in David Mamet&#x27;s biographical television film &quot;Phil Spector&quot; about the American musician. The HBO film focuses on the relationship between Spector and his defence attorney Linda Kenney Baden, played by Mirren, during the first of his two murder trials for the death in 2003 of Lana Clarkson in his California mansion. &quot;Spector&quot; received largely mixed to positive reviews from critics, particularly for Mirren and co-star Al Pacino&#x27;s performances, and was nominated for eleven Primetime Emmy Awards, also winning Mirren a Screen Actors Guild Award at the 20th awards ceremony. The film drew criticism both from Clarkson&#x27;s family and friends, who charged that the suicide defence was given more merit than it deserved, and from Spector&#x27;s wife, who argued that Spector was portrayed as a &quot;foul-mouthed megalomaniac&quot; and a &quot;minotaur&quot;. Also in 2013, Mirren voiced the character of Dean Abigail Hardscrabble in Pixar&#x27;s animated comedy film &quot;Monsters University&quot;, which grossed $743 million against its estimated budget of $200 million, and reprised her role in the sequel film &quot;Red 2&quot;. The action comedy received a mixed reviews from film critics, who called it a &quot;lackadaisical sequel&quot;, but became another commercial success, making over $140 million worldwide.

Mirren&#x27;s only film of 2014 was the comedy-drama &quot;The Hundred-Foot Journey&quot; opposite the Indian actor Om Puri. Directed by Lasse Hallström and produced by Steven Spielberg and Oprah Winfrey, the film is based on Richard C. Morais&#x27;s 2010 novel with the same name and tells the story of a feud between two adjacent restaurants in a French town. Mirren garnered largely positive reviews for her performance of a snobby restaurateur, a role which she accepted as she was keen to play a French character, reflecting her &quot;pathetic attempt at being a French actress.&quot; The film earned her another Golden Globe nomination and became a modest commercial success, grossing $88.9 million worldwide.

In 2015, Mirren reunited with her former assistant Simon Curtis on &quot;Woman in Gold&quot;, co-starring Ryan Reynolds. The film was based on the true story of Jewish refugee Maria Altmann who, together with her young lawyer Randy Schoenberg, fought the Austrian government to be reunited with Gustav Klimt&#x27;s painting of her aunt, the famous &quot;Portrait of Adele Bloch-Bauer I&quot;. The film received mixed reviews from critics, although Mirren and Reynold&#x27;s performances were widely praised. A commercial success, &quot;Woman in Gold&quot; became one of the highest-grossing specialty films of the year. The same year, Mirren appeared in Gavin Hood&#x27;s thriller &quot;Eye in the Sky&quot; (2015), in which she played as a military intelligence officer who leads a secret drone mission to capture a terrorist group living in Nairobi, Kenya. Mirren&#x27;s last film that year was Jay Roach&#x27;s biographical drama &quot;Trumbo&quot;, co-starring Bryan Cranston and Diane Lane. The actor played Hedda Hopper, the famous actress and gossip columnist, in the film, which received generally positive reviews from critics and garnered her a 14th Golden Globe nomination.
Mirren&#x27;s only film of 2016 was &quot;Collateral Beauty&quot;, directed by David Frankel. Co-Starring Will Smith, Keira Knightley, and Kate Winslet, the ensemble drama follows a man who copes with his daughter&#x27;s death by writing letters to time, death, and love. The film earned largely negative reviews from critics, who called it &quot;well-meaning but fundamentally flawed.&quot; In 2017, Mirren narrated &quot;Cries from Syria&quot;, a documentary film about the Syrian Civil War, directed by Evgeny Afineevsky. Also that year, she made an uncredited cameo appearance in F. Gary Gray&#x27;s &quot;The Fate of the Furious&quot;, the eighth instalment in the &quot;Fast &amp; Furious&quot; franchise, playing Magdalene, the mother of Owen and Deckard Shaw. Mirren had a larger role in director Paolo Virzì&#x27;s English-language debut &quot;The Leisure Seeker&quot;, based on the 2009 novel of the same name. On set, she was reunited with Donald Sutherland with whom she had not worked again since &quot;&quot; (1990), portraying a terminally ill couple who escape from their retirement home and take one last cross-country adventure in a vintage van. At the 75th awards ceremony, Mirren received her 15th Golden Globe nomination.

In 2018, Mirren portrayed heiress Sarah Winchester in the supernatural horror film &quot;Winchester&quot;, directed by The Spierig Brothers. In the same year, she starred as Mother Ginger in Disney&#x27;s adaptation of &quot;The Nutcracker&quot;, titled &quot;The Nutcracker and the Four Realms&quot;, directed by Lasse Hallström and Joe Johnston. In 2019, she appeared in the ensemble film &quot;Berlin, I Love You&quot;, the French crime thriller film &quot;Anna&quot;, directed and written by Luc Besson, and co-starred in the &quot;Fast and the Furious&quot; spin-off &quot;Hobbs &amp; Shaw&quot;.

=== 2020–present ===
In March 2021, she was cast as the villain Hespera in the superhero film &quot;Shazam! Fury of the Gods&quot;. She also appeared in the 2022 music video for Kendrick Lamar&#x27;s &quot;Count Me Out&quot; as a therapist. Since 2022, she portrays Cara Dutton in the &quot;Yellowstone&quot; spinoff &quot;1923&quot;, which also features Harrison Ford and Timothy Dalton. Mirren portrayed Golda Meir, prime minister of Israel from 1969 to 1974, in a 2023 biopic entitled &quot;Golda&quot;. Reviewing the film in &quot;Variety&quot;, Owen Gleiberman wrote that &quot;Mirren makes her terse, decisive, and ferociously alive.&quot; She played the narrator in Greta Gerwig&#x27;s satirical comedy &quot;Barbie&quot; (2023).

==Personal life==
=== Marriage and relationships ===

Mirren lived with Northern Irish actor Liam Neeson during the early 1980s; they met while working on &quot;Excalibur&quot; (1981). When interviewed by James Lipton for &quot;Inside the Actors Studio&quot;, Neeson said Mirren was instrumental in his getting an agent.

In 1985 on the set of &quot;White Nights&quot;, Mirren met American director Taylor Hackford. The pair began dating in 1986. The couple married on 31 December 1997, Hackford&#x27;s 53rd birthday, at the Ardersier Parish Church near Inverness in the Scottish Highlands. It is her first marriage and his third. He has two children from his previous marriages. She has no children herself, and has stated that she has &quot;no maternal instinct whatsoever&quot;. Mirren&#x27;s autobiography, &quot;In the Frame: My Life in Words and Pictures&quot;, was published in the UK by Weidenfeld &amp; Nicolson in September 2007. Reviewing for &quot;The Stage&quot;, John Thaxter wrote: &quot;Sumptuously illustrated, at first sight it looks like another of those photo albums of the stars. But between the pictures there are almost 200 pages of densely printed text, an unusually frank story of her private and professional life, mainly in the theatre, the words clearly Mirren&#x27;s own, delivered with forthright candour.&quot;

=== Political views ===
In 2006, Mirren stated that she was never a member of any political party. Mirren became a U.S. citizen in 2017 and voted in her first U.S. election in 2020. She supported Patricia Ackerman in her unsuccessful 2020 campaign against Mark Amodei in . Mirren has openly stated she supports Israel and is a Zionist: &quot;I believe in Israel, in the existence of Israel, and I believe Israel has to go forward into the future, for the rest of eternity ... I believe in Israel because of the Holocaust.&quot;

In April 2021, she took part in the music video &quot;La Vacinada&quot; (meaning &quot;the vaccinated woman&quot; in broken Spanish language) of Italian comedian and singer Checco Zalone. In the song and video, Zalone jokes about the fact that, in times of COVID-19 pandemic, it is safer to have an affair with someone who has already been vaccinated against the virus, and as the elderly get vaccinated first, an older partner (played by Mirren in the video) is now the best choice.

=== Health and beliefs ===
In 1990, Mirren said in an interview that she was an atheist. In the August 2011 issue of &quot;Esquire&quot;, she said, &quot;I am quite spiritual. I believed in fairies when I was a child. I still do sort of believe in the fairies. And the leprechauns. But I don&#x27;t believe in God.&quot;

In a 2008 interview with &quot;GQ&quot;, Mirren revealed she was date raped as a student, and had often taken cocaine at parties in her twenties and until the 1980s. She stopped using it after reading that Klaus Barbie made a living from cocaine dealing.

She told the &quot;Radio Times&quot;, &quot;I&#x27;m a naturist at heart. I love being on beaches where everyone is naked. Ugly people, beautiful people, old people, whatever. It&#x27;s so unisexual and so liberating.&quot; In 2004, she was named Naturist of the Year by British Naturism. She said: &quot;Many thanks to British Naturism for this great honour. I do believe in naturism and am my happiest on a nude beach with people of all ages and races!&quot;

== Recognition and image ==
On 11 May 2010, Mirren attended the unveiling of her waxwork at Madame Tussauds in London. In 2012, she was among the British cultural icons selected by artist Sir Peter Blake to appear in a new version of his most famous artwork—The Beatles&#x27; &quot;Sgt. Pepper&#x27;s Lonely Hearts Club Band&quot; album cover—to celebrate the British cultural figures of his life that he most admired. In 2010, she was named Sexiest Woman Alive by &quot;Esquire&quot;, and in a 2011 photo shoot for the magazine, she stripped down and covered up with the Union Jack.

In 2013, Mirren was announced as one of several new models for Marks &amp; Spencer&#x27;s &quot;Womanism&quot; campaign. Subtitled &quot;Britain&#x27;s leading ladies&quot;, the campaign featured Mirren alongside British women from various fields, including pop singer Ellie Goulding, double Olympic gold medal-winning boxer Nicola Adams, and writer Monica Ali. In March 2013, &quot;The Guardian&quot; listed Mirren as one of the 50 Best-Dressed Over 50. In March 2024, to commemorate the 65th anniversary of International Women&#x27;s Day, Mirren was one of a number of female celebrities who had their likeness turned into Barbie dolls.

==Acting credits and accolades ==
Among her major competitive awards, Mirren has won one Academy Award, four BAFTA Awards, three Golden Globe Awards, five Emmy Awards, and one Tony Award. She is the recipient of numerous accolades and is the only performer to have achieved both the American and the British Triple Crowns of Acting. Her numerous honorary awards include the BAFTA Fellowship from the British Academy of Film and Television Arts and Gala Tribute presented by the Film Society of Lincoln Center as well as a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame in 2013, the Honorary Golden Bear in 2020, and Screen Actors Guild Life Achievement Award in 2022.

In the Queen&#x27;s 2003 Birthday Honours, Mirren was appointed a Dame Commander of the Order of the British Empire (DBE) for services to drama, with investiture taking place at Buckingham Palace in December. In January 2009, Mirren was named on &quot;The Times&quot;&#x27; list of the top 10 British actresses of all time. The list included Julie Andrews, Helena Bonham Carter, Judi Dench and Audrey Hepburn. In 2021, Mirren was named by Carnegie Corporation of New York as an honoree of the Great Immigrants Award.

==Bibliography==

==See also==
* List of British actors
* List of British Academy Award nominees and winners
* List of actors with Academy Award nominations
* List of actors with two or more Academy Award nominations in acting categories

==References==
== Further reading ==
* A survey of the actor&#x27;s early career.

==External links==
* 
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q349391" start="0" end="17" title="Helen Mirren" label="Dame Helen Mirren"/>
<link wikidata="Q349391" start="26" end="46" title="Helen Mirren" label="Helen Lydia Mironoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q11811793" start="138" end="156" title="List of awards and nominations received by Helen Mirren" label="numerous accolades"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="170" end="183" title="Academy Award" label="Academy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q732997" start="190" end="202" title="BAFTA Awards" label="BAFTA Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q123737" start="209" end="220" title="Emmy Awards" label="Emmy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011547" start="228" end="247" title="Golden Globe Awards" label="Golden Globe Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q28470" start="252" end="265" title="Olivier Award" label="Olivier Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q191874" start="272" end="282" title="Tony Award" label="Tony Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q787148" start="314" end="330" title="BAFTA Fellowship" label="BAFTA Fellowship"/>
<link wikidata="Q287062" start="344" end="364" title="Honorary Golden Bear" label="Honorary Golden Bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631998" start="382" end="424" title="Screen Actors Guild Life Achievement Award" label="Screen Actors Guild Life Achievement Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q901407" start="452" end="501" title="Dame" label="Dame Commander of the Order of the British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="517" end="529" title="Elizabeth II" label="Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q4601160" start="533" end="537" title="2003 Birthday Honours" label="2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q2087430" start="607" end="629" title="National Youth Theatre" label="National Youth Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q635" start="648" end="657" title="Cleopatra" label="Cleopatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q606830" start="667" end="687" title="Antony and Cleopatra" label="Antony and Cleopatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146254" start="723" end="748" title="Royal Shakespeare Company" label="Royal Shakespeare Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359589" start="762" end="770" title="West End theatre" label="West End"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500774" start="819" end="858" title="Laurence Olivier Award for Best Actress" label="Laurence Olivier Award for Best Actress"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="871" end="883" title="Elizabeth II" label="Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q948122" start="891" end="903" title="Peter Morgan" label="Peter Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7714882" start="915" end="927" title="The Audience (play)" label="The Audience"/>
<link wikidata="Q235065" start="967" end="975" title="Broadway (theatre)" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q185299" start="988" end="1025" title="Tony Award for Best Actress in a Play" label="Tony Award for Best Actress in a Play"/>
<link wikidata="Q3548839" start="1060" end="1082" title="A Month in the Country (play)" label="A Month in the Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639545" start="1106" end="1124" title="The Dance of Death (Strindberg play)" label="The Dance of Death"/>
<link wikidata="Q103618" start="1155" end="1185" title="Academy Award for Best Actress" label="Academy Award for Best Actress"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="1213" end="1225" title="Elizabeth II" label="Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q223367" start="1245" end="1254" title="The Queen (2006 film)" label="The Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q581501" start="1316" end="1342" title="The Madness of King George" label="The Madness of King George"/>
<link wikidata="Q165392" start="1363" end="1375" title="Gosford Park" label="Gosford Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q535081" start="1400" end="1416" title="The Last Station" label="The Last Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q217685" start="1468" end="1476" title="Caligula (film)" label="Caligula"/>
<link wikidata="Q206461" start="1497" end="1506" title="Excalibur (1981 film)" label="Excalibur"/>
<link wikidata="Q661202" start="1527" end="1572" title="The Cook, the Thief, His Wife &amp;amp; Her Lover" label="The Cook, the Thief, His Wife &amp;amp; Her Lover"/>
<link wikidata="Q478579" start="1593" end="1604" title="The Tempest (2010 film)" label="The Tempest"/>
<link wikidata="Q247733" start="1625" end="1634" title="Hitchcock (film)" label="Hitchcock"/>
<link wikidata="Q18149766" start="1655" end="1669" title="Eye in the Sky (2015 film)" label="Eye in the Sky"/>
<link wikidata="Q18692630" start="1694" end="1700" title="Trumbo (2015 film)" label="Trumbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q858842" start="1760" end="1763" title="Red (2010 film)" label="Red"/>
<link wikidata="Q903930" start="1785" end="1796" title="Red 2 (film)" label="2013 sequel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1576873" start="1833" end="1851" title="Fast &amp;amp; Furious" label="Fast &amp;amp; Furious"/>
<link wikidata="Q2321734" start="1929" end="1946" title="police procedural" label="police procedural"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518758" start="1953" end="1966" title="Prime Suspect" label="Prime Suspect"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2009" end="2059" title="British Academy Television Award for Best Actress#1990s" label="British Academy Television Awards for Best Actress"/>
<link wikidata="Q989447" start="2068" end="2143" title="Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Limited or Anthology Series or Movie" label="Primetime Emmy Awards for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Miniseries or Movie"/>
<link wikidata="Q132524" start="2188" end="2196" title="Ayn Rand" label="Ayn Rand"/>
<link wikidata="Q23589" start="2204" end="2212" title="Showtime (TV network)" label="Showtime"/>
<link wikidata="Q7756265" start="2235" end="2258" title="The Passion of Ayn Rand (film)" label="The Passion of Ayn Rand"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207" start="2276" end="2293" title="Queen Elizabeth I" label="Queen Elizabeth I"/>
<link wikidata="Q23633" start="2301" end="2304" title="HBO" label="HBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q624806" start="2322" end="2333" title="Elizabeth I (2005 TV series)" label="Elizabeth I"/>
<link wikidata="Q637610" start="2372" end="2384" title="Door to Door (film)" label="Door to Door"/>
<link wikidata="Q7182429" start="2405" end="2417" title="Phil Spector (film)" label="Phil Spector"/>
<link wikidata="Q60769157" start="2438" end="2457" title="Catherine the Great (miniseries)" label="Catherine the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q112862420" start="2482" end="2486" title="1923 (TV series)" label="1923"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270242" start="2590" end="2633" title="Queen Charlotte&amp;#x27;s and Chelsea Hospital" label="Queen Charlotte&amp;#x27;s and Chelsea Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q277162" start="2641" end="2652" title="Hammersmith" label="Hammersmith"/>
<link wikidata="Q42406" start="2679" end="2686" title="English people" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q49542" start="2698" end="2705" title="Russians" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q939617" start="2833" end="2841" title="West Ham" label="West Ham"/>
<link wikidata="Q9439" start="2933" end="2947" title="Queen Victoria" label="Queen Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q971558" start="3054" end="3070" title="Russian nobility" label="Russian nobility"/>
<link wikidata="Q134318" start="3288" end="3295" title="Gagarin, Smolensk Oblast" label="Gagarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="3304" end="3318" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3394" end="3404" title=":ru:Каменские" label="Kamenskaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q932448" start="3452" end="3485" title="Mikhail Kamensky" label="Count Mikhail Fedotovich Kamensky"/>
<link wikidata="Q78994" start="3522" end="3537" title="Napoleonic Wars" label="Napoleonic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078222" start="3614" end="3635" title="Imperial Russian Army" label="Imperial Russian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q159950" start="3659" end="3677" title="Russo-Japanese War" label="Russo-Japanese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q40787" start="3724" end="3735" title="Nicholas II of Russia" label="Nicholas II"/>
<link wikidata="Q8729" start="3824" end="3842" title="Russian Revolution" label="Russian Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q863397" start="3968" end="3997" title="London Philharmonic Orchestra" label="London Philharmonic Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="4005" end="4017" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q739700" start="4080" end="4098" title="East End of London" label="East End of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q6900329" start="4106" end="4115" title="the Blitz" label="the Blitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2982287" start="4439" end="4460" title="Department for Transport" label="Ministry of Transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1182303" start="4511" end="4520" title="deed poll" label="deed poll"/>
<link wikidata="Q528691" start="4778" end="4790" title="Tania Mallet" label="Tania Mallet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649366" start="4804" end="4813" title="Bond girl" label="Bond girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q541590" start="4840" end="4852" title="Leigh-on-Sea" label="Leigh-on-Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2584915" start="4909" end="4925" title="Westcliff-on-Sea" label="Westcliff-on-Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q11829" start="4987" end="5004" title="Hansel and Gretel" label="Hansel and Gretel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7592655" start="5016" end="5055" title="St Bernard&amp;#x27;s High School for Girls" label="St Bernard&amp;#x27;s High School for Girls"/>
<link wikidata="Q203995" start="5059" end="5074" title="Southend-on-Sea" label="Southend-on-Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760791" start="5170" end="5201" title="Middlesex University" label="New College of Speech and Drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q151874" start="5233" end="5245" title="Anna Pavlova" label="Anna Pavlova"/>
<link wikidata="Q68628983" start="5282" end="5296" title="North End Road, Golders Green" label="North End Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q149684" start="5300" end="5313" title="Golders Green" label="Golders Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q2087430" start="5371" end="5393" title="National Youth Theatre" label="National Youth Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q635" start="5427" end="5436" title="Cleopatra VII of Egypt" label="Cleopatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q606830" start="5468" end="5488" title="Antony and Cleopatra" label="Antony and Cleopatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q868806" start="5502" end="5509" title="Old Vic" label="Old Vic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2011506" start="5598" end="5607" title="Albert Parker (director)" label="Al Parker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146254" start="5767" end="5792" title="Royal Shakespeare Company" label="Royal Shakespeare Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334509" start="5842" end="5853" title="Trevor Nunn" label="Trevor Nunn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7760512" start="5883" end="5910" title="The Revenger&amp;#x27;s Tragedy" label="The Revenger&amp;#x27;s Tragedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q506865" start="5933" end="5963" title="All&amp;#x27;s Well That Ends Well" label="All&amp;#x27;s Well That Ends Well"/>
<link wikidata="Q183304" start="5996" end="6016" title="Troilus and Cressida" label="Troilus and Cressida"/>
<link wikidata="Q237572" start="6049" end="6063" title="As You Like It" label="As You Like It"/>
<link wikidata="Q232042" start="6093" end="6120" title="The Two Gentlemen of Verona" label="The Two Gentlemen of Verona"/>
<link wikidata="Q12706" start="6146" end="6151" title="Maxim Gorky" label="Gorky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783531" start="6186" end="6193" title="Aldwych Theatre" label="Aldwych"/>
<link wikidata="Q658557" start="6230" end="6240" title="Miss Julie" label="Miss Julie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7755513" start="6250" end="6265" title="The Other Place (theatre)" label="The Other Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q4955439" start="6325" end="6338" title="Braham Murray" label="Braham Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q6235648" start="6459" end="6475" title="John Goldschmidt" label="John Goldschmidt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5399070" start="6608" end="6611" title="Associated TeleVision" label="ATV"/>
<link wikidata="Q49760" start="6693" end="6704" title="Peter Brook" label="Peter Brook"/>
<link wikidata="Q2271966" start="6847" end="6874" title="The Conference of the Birds" label="The Conference of the Birds"/>
<link wikidata="Q2454065" start="6917" end="6929" title="Lady Macbeth" label="Lady Macbeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375404" start="6933" end="6942" title="Royal Shakespeare Theatre" label="Stratford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783531" start="6962" end="6977" title="Aldwych Theatre" label="Aldwych Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q55245" start="7014" end="7030" title="Laurence Olivier" label="Laurence Olivier"/>
<link wikidata="Q309160" start="7032" end="7042" title="Alan Bates" label="Alan Bates"/>
<link wikidata="Q117392" start="7047" end="7063" title="Malcolm McDowell" label="Malcolm McDowell"/>
<link wikidata="Q41042" start="7083" end="7096" title="Harold Pinter" label="Harold Pinter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3207576" start="7110" end="7124" title="The Collection (play)" label="The Collection"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500819" start="7152" end="7177" title="Laurence Olivier Presents" label="Laurence Olivier Presents"/>
<link wikidata="Q3945643" start="7193" end="7206" title="Sally Beauman" label="Sally Beauman"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="7345" end="7357" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q511108" start="7406" end="7422" title="Royal National Theatre" label="National Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359589" start="7909" end="7917" title="West End theatre" label="West End"/>
<link wikidata="Q1169370" start="7925" end="7944" title="Royal Court Theatre" label="Royal Court Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q17059244" start="8021" end="8047" title="Teeth &amp;#x27;n&amp;#x27; Smiles (play)" label="Teeth &amp;#x27;n&amp;#x27; Smiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1174676" start="8073" end="8083" title="David Hare (dramatist)" label="David Hare"/>
<link wikidata="Q931899" start="8154" end="8176" title="Wyndham&amp;#x27;s Theatre" label="Wyndham&amp;#x27;s Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q650063" start="8302" end="8313" title="The Seagull" label="The Seagull"/>
<link wikidata="Q2895588" start="8332" end="8343" title="Ben Travers" label="Ben Travers"/>
<link wikidata="Q105719" start="8444" end="8455" title="Jean Harlow" label="Harlowesque"/>
<link wikidata="Q15488776" start="8478" end="8496" title="Michael Billington (critic)" label="Michael Billington"/>
<link wikidata="Q975377" start="8635" end="8646" title="Terry Hands" label="Terry Hands"/>
<link wikidata="Q20857440" start="8692" end="8700" title="Henry VI (play)" label="Henry VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q7174237" start="8815" end="8825" title="Peter Gill (playwright)" label="Peter Gill"/>
<link wikidata="Q665446" start="8853" end="8872" title="Measure for Measure" label="Measure for Measure"/>
<link wikidata="Q7338619" start="8882" end="8899" title="Riverside Studios" label="Riverside Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q5743596" start="9031" end="9042" title="Herostratus (film)" label="Herostratus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4658231" start="9078" end="9108" title="A Midsummer Night&amp;#x27;s Dream (1968 film)" label="A Midsummer Night&amp;#x27;s Dream"/>
<link wikidata="Q4691874" start="9129" end="9143" title="Age of Consent (film)" label="Age of Consent"/>
<link wikidata="Q2306978" start="9168" end="9180" title="O Lucky Man!" label="O Lucky Man!"/>
<link wikidata="Q283227" start="9331" end="9342" title="Brian Friel" label="Brian Friel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5431193" start="9356" end="9368" title="Faith Healer" label="Faith Healer"/>
<link wikidata="Q225904" start="9453" end="9465" title="John Webster" label="John Webster"/>
<link wikidata="Q3408612" start="9479" end="9499" title="The Duchess of Malfi" label="The Duchess of Malfi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3445926" start="9541" end="9563" title="Royal Exchange, Manchester" label="Royal Exchange Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780197" start="9595" end="9609" title="The Roundhouse" label="The Roundhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2648511" start="9613" end="9623" title="Chalk Farm" label="Chalk Farm"/>
<link wikidata="Q12741725" start="9667" end="9687" title="The Sunday Telegraph" label="The Sunday Telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q921262" start="9695" end="9707" title="Francis King" label="Francis King"/>
<link wikidata="Q7761178" start="9911" end="9927" title="The Roaring Girl" label="The Roaring Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375404" start="9941" end="9966" title="Royal Shakespeare Theatre" label="Royal Shakespeare Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q653858" start="9995" end="10011" title="Barbican Theatre" label="Barbican Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q344865" start="10172" end="10188" title="Thomas Middleton" label="Thomas Middleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q336189" start="10193" end="10206" title="Thomas Dekker (poet)" label="Thomas Dekker"/>
<link wikidata="Q14948640" start="10224" end="10239" title="Michael Coveney" label="Michael Coveney"/>
<link wikidata="Q183399" start="10247" end="10262" title="Financial Times" label="Financial Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q217685" start="10327" end="10335" title="Caligula (film)" label="Caligula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055796" start="10356" end="10376" title="The Long Good Friday" label="The Long Good Friday"/>
<link wikidata="Q211283" start="10407" end="10418" title="Bob Hoskins" label="Bob Hoskins"/>
<link wikidata="Q206461" start="10465" end="10474" title="Excalibur (film)" label="Excalibur"/>
<link wikidata="Q211784" start="10495" end="10499" title="2010 (film)" label="2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345242" start="10520" end="10532" title="White Nights (1985 film)" label="White Nights"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479291" start="10553" end="10571" title="The Mosquito Coast (film)" label="The Mosquito Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058981" start="10592" end="10613" title="Pascali&amp;#x27;s Island (film)" label="Pascali&amp;#x27;s Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q7993055" start="10637" end="10657" title="When the Whales Came" label="When the Whales Came"/>
<link wikidata="Q2712800" start="10724" end="10736" title="Cousin Bette" label="Cousin Bette"/>
<link wikidata="Q3631723" start="10757" end="10771" title="BBC Television Shakespeare" label="As You Like It"/>
<link wikidata="Q4929662" start="10792" end="10813" title="Blue Remembered Hills" label="Blue Remembered Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q559270" start="10838" end="10855" title="The Twilight Zone (1985 TV series)" label="The Twilight Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3255565" start="10876" end="10899" title="Dead Woman&amp;#x27;s Shoes" label="Dead Woman&amp;#x27;s Shoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q888194" start="10964" end="10972" title="Bob Peck" label="Bob Peck"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665408" start="10980" end="10989" title="Young Vic" label="Young Vic"/>
<link wikidata="Q80596" start="11020" end="11033" title="Arthur Miller" label="Arthur Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q7494902" start="11377" end="11392" title="Sheridan Morley" label="Sheridan Morley"/>
<link wikidata="Q50008" start="11400" end="11409" title="The Times" label="The Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q5358711" start="11443" end="11459" title="Elegy for a Lady" label="Elegy for a Lady"/>
<link wikidata="Q7559425" start="11559" end="11582" title="Some Kind of Love Story" label="Some Kind of Love Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518758" start="11834" end="11847" title="Prime Suspect" label="Prime Suspect"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11990" end="12058" title="British Academy Television Award for Best Actress#1990s" label="three consecutive British Academy Television Awards for Best Actress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369077" start="12147" end="12162" title="BAFTA TV Awards" label="BAFTA TV Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q296008" start="12185" end="12200" title="Robbie Coltrane" label="Robbie Coltrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q228747" start="12202" end="12215" title="Julie Walters" label="Julie Walters"/>
<link wikidata="Q203545" start="12220" end="12234" title="Michael Gambon" label="Michael Gambon"/>
<link wikidata="Q220072" start="12309" end="12312" title="ITV (TV network)" label="ITV"/>
<link wikidata="Q7672062" start="12328" end="12355" title="TV&amp;#x27;s 50 Greatest Stars" label="TV&amp;#x27;s 50 Greatest Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q8062416" start="12434" end="12455" title="Yvonne Arnaud Theatre" label="Yvonne Arnaud Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2903137" start="12496" end="12507" title="Bill Bryden" label="Bill Bryden"/>
<link wikidata="Q42831" start="12540" end="12553" title="Ivan Turgenev" label="Ivan Turgenev"/>
<link wikidata="Q3548839" start="12567" end="12589" title="A Month in the Country (play)" label="A Month in the Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q200405" start="12615" end="12624" title="John Hurt" label="John Hurt"/>
<link wikidata="Q223790" start="12658" end="12672" title="Joseph Fiennes" label="Joseph Fiennes"/>
<link wikidata="Q191874" start="12826" end="12836" title="Tony Award" label="Tony Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q3548839" start="12905" end="12927" title="A Month in the Country (play)" label="A Month in the Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639545" start="12967" end="12985" title="The Dance of Death (Strindberg)" label="The Dance of Death"/>
<link wikidata="Q170510" start="13014" end="13026" title="Ian McKellen" label="Ian McKellen"/>
<link wikidata="Q581501" start="13154" end="13180" title="The Madness of King George" label="The Madness of King George"/>
<link wikidata="Q1787836" start="13201" end="13223" title="Some Mother&amp;#x27;s Son" label="Some Mother&amp;#x27;s Son"/>
<link wikidata="Q7125016" start="13244" end="13256" title="Painted Lady (TV series)" label="Painted Lady"/>
<link wikidata="Q245227" start="13280" end="13299" title="The Prince of Egypt" label="The Prince of Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q55282" start="13317" end="13332" title="Peter Greenaway" label="Peter Greenaway"/>
<link wikidata="Q661202" start="13356" end="13399" title="The Cook, The Thief, His Wife and Her Lover" label="The Cook, The Thief, His Wife and Her Lover"/>
<link wikidata="Q203545" start="13438" end="13452" title="Michael Gambon" label="Michael Gambon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541608" start="13463" end="13483" title="Teaching Mrs. Tingle" label="Teaching Mrs. Tingle"/>
<link wikidata="Q635" start="13573" end="13582" title="Cleopatra" label="Cleopatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q106481" start="13586" end="13598" title="Alan Rickman" label="Alan Rickman"/>
<link wikidata="Q51673" start="13606" end="13612" title="Mark Antony" label="Antony"/>
<link wikidata="Q606830" start="13622" end="13642" title="Antony and Cleopatra" label="Antony and Cleopatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q511108" start="13656" end="13672" title="Royal National Theatre" label="National Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="13718" end="13730" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q192621" start="13827" end="13846" title="The Daily Telegraph" label="The Daily Telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q967302" start="13975" end="13990" title="Nicholas Hytner" label="Nicholas Hytner"/>
<link wikidata="Q581501" start="14048" end="14074" title="The Madness of King George" label="The Madness of King George"/>
<link wikidata="Q134262" start="14126" end="14144" title="Tennessee Williams" label="Tennessee Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q3208255" start="14157" end="14175" title="Orpheus Descending" label="Orpheus Descending"/>
<link wikidata="Q5296262" start="14189" end="14205" title="Donmar Warehouse" label="Donmar Warehouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="14257" end="14269" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q132524" start="14519" end="14527" title="Ayn Rand" label="Ayn Rand"/>
<link wikidata="Q7756265" start="14558" end="14581" title="The Passion of Ayn Rand (film)" label="The Passion of Ayn Rand"/>
<link wikidata="Q123737" start="14629" end="14633" title="Emmy" label="Emmy"/>
<link wikidata="Q637610" start="14641" end="14653" title="Door to Door (film)" label="Door to Door"/>
<link wikidata="Q3989072" start="14678" end="14708" title="The Roman Spring of Mrs. Stone (2003 film)" label="The Roman Spring of Mrs. Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q666494" start="14864" end="14880" title="Evening Standard" label="Evening Standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q192621" start="14939" end="14954" title="Daily Telegraph" label="Daily Telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q93157" start="14978" end="14997" title="Eugene O&amp;#x27;Neill" label="Eugene O&amp;#x27;Neill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2520460" start="15011" end="15035" title="Mourning Becomes Electra" label="Mourning Becomes Electra"/>
<link wikidata="Q5919448" start="15054" end="15067" title="Howard Davies (Theatre Director)" label="Howard Davies"/>
<link wikidata="Q742" start="15416" end="15427" title="Jean Racine" label="Jean Racine"/>
<link wikidata="Q969098" start="15441" end="15447" title="Phèdre" label="Phèdre"/>
<link wikidata="Q967302" start="15507" end="15522" title="Nicholas Hytner" label="Nicholas Hytner"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15562" end="15584" title="Epidaurus#Theatre" label="Epidaurus amphitheatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q165392" start="15680" end="15692" title="Gosford Park" label="Gosford Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q172653" start="15711" end="15723" title="Maggie Smith" label="Maggie Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q83789" start="15734" end="15748" title="Calendar Girls" label="Calendar Girls"/>
<link wikidata="Q228747" start="15767" end="15780" title="Julie Walters" label="Julie Walters"/>
<link wikidata="Q488345" start="15826" end="15838" title="The Clearing (film)" label="The Clearing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2040235" start="15859" end="15864" title="Pride (2004 film)" label="Pride"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422400" start="15885" end="15898" title="Raising Helen" label="Raising Helen"/>
<link wikidata="Q537166" start="15923" end="15934" title="Shadowboxer" label="Shadowboxer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1039078" start="16008" end="16020" title="Minor characters from The Hitchhiker&amp;#x27;s Guide to the Galaxy" label="Deep Thought"/>
<link wikidata="Q42" start="16053" end="16066" title="Douglas Adams" label="Douglas Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q836821" start="16080" end="16121" title="The Hitchhiker&amp;#x27;s Guide to the Galaxy (film)" label="The Hitchhiker&amp;#x27;s Guide to the Galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207" start="16236" end="16247" title="Elizabeth I" label="Elizabeth I"/>
<link wikidata="Q624806" start="16279" end="16290" title="Elizabeth I (2005 TV series)" label="Elizabeth I"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="16305" end="16317" title="Elizabeth II" label="Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q223367" start="16327" end="16336" title="The Queen (2006 film)" label="The Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q161159" start="16355" end="16364" title="Queen Charlotte" label="Charlotte"/>
<link wikidata="Q581501" start="16374" end="16400" title="The Madness of King George" label="The Madness of King George"/>
<link wikidata="Q6213554" start="16534" end="16547" title="Joel Hershman" label="Joel Hershman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507635" start="16561" end="16573" title="Greenfingers" label="Greenfingers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5635220" start="16644" end="16655" title="Leyhill Prison" label="HMP Leyhill"/>
<link wikidata="Q183178" start="16809" end="16819" title="Clive Owen" label="Clive Owen"/>
<link wikidata="Q918098" start="16990" end="17013" title="Britcom" label="British feel-good films"/>
<link wikidata="Q1170710" start="17048" end="17058" title="The Pledge (film)" label="The Pledge"/>
<link wikidata="Q44221" start="17066" end="17075" title="Sean Penn" label="Sean Penn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154757" start="17175" end="17188" title="ensemble film" label="ensemble film"/>
<link wikidata="Q3481111" start="17287" end="17300" title="No Such Thing (film)" label="No Such Thing"/>
<link wikidata="Q234212" start="17316" end="17328" title="Sarah Polley" label="Sarah Polley"/>
<link wikidata="Q446294" start="17342" end="17353" title="Hal Hartley" label="Hal Hartley"/>
<link wikidata="Q55163" start="17562" end="17575" title="Robert Altman" label="Robert Altman"/>
<link wikidata="Q165392" start="17620" end="17632" title="Gosford Park" label="Gosford Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q16249975" start="17642" end="17648" title="homage (arts)" label="homage"/>
<link wikidata="Q35064" start="17659" end="17674" title="Agatha Christie" label="Agatha Christie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494434" start="17682" end="17690" title="whodunit" label="whodunit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343246" start="17820" end="17841" title="English country house" label="English country house"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="17942" end="17955" title="Academy Award" label="Academy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320315" start="17977" end="18002" title="Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by a Female Actor in a Supporting Role" label="Screen Actors Guild Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q703727" start="18122" end="18135" title="Fred Schepisi" label="Fred Schepisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3423109" start="18162" end="18173" title="Last Orders (film)" label="Last Orders"/>
<link wikidata="Q123351" start="18189" end="18202" title="Michael Caine" label="Michael Caine"/>
<link wikidata="Q211283" start="18207" end="18218" title="Bob Hoskins" label="Bob Hoskins"/>
<link wikidata="Q365726" start="18247" end="18257" title="Nigel Cole" label="Nigel Cole"/>
<link wikidata="Q83789" start="18278" end="18292" title="Calendar Girls" label="Calendar Girls"/>
<link wikidata="Q163" start="18341" end="18350" title="Yorkshire" label="Yorkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3650640" start="18372" end="18385" title="nude calendar" label="nude calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q16996206" start="18405" end="18423" title="Leukaemia &amp;amp; Lymphoma Research" label="Leukaemia Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q2925762" start="18450" end="18473" title="Women&amp;#x27;s Institutes" label="Women&amp;#x27;s Institutes"/>
<link wikidata="Q228747" start="18645" end="18658" title="Julie Walters" label="Julie Walters"/>
<link wikidata="Q40024" start="18776" end="18785" title="Satellite Award" label="Satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011547" start="18787" end="18799" title="Golden Globe" label="Golden Globe"/>
<link wikidata="Q223740" start="18805" end="18824" title="European Film Award" label="European Film Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q7503319" start="18882" end="18890" title="Showtime Networks" label="Showtime"/>
<link wikidata="Q3989072" start="18913" end="18943" title="The Roman Spring of Mrs. Stone (2003 film)" label="The Roman Spring of Mrs. Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q504886" start="18959" end="18975" title="Olivier Martinez" label="Olivier Martinez"/>
<link wikidata="Q183532" start="18981" end="18994" title="Anne Bancroft" label="Anne Bancroft"/>
<link wikidata="Q134262" start="19041" end="19059" title="Tennessee Williams" label="Tennessee Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207" start="19078" end="19095" title="Queen Elizabeth I" label="Queen Elizabeth I"/>
<link wikidata="Q624806" start="19136" end="19147" title="Elizabeth I (2005 miniseries)" label="Elizabeth I"/>
<link wikidata="Q501070" start="19159" end="19168" title="Channel 4" label="Channel 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q23633" start="19173" end="19176" title="HBO" label="HBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q123737" start="19204" end="19214" title="Emmy Award" label="Emmy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011547" start="19221" end="19239" title="Golden Globe Award" label="Golden Globe Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518758" start="19314" end="19342" title="Prime Suspect" label="Prime Suspect: The Final Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q13979" start="19409" end="19428" title="Saturday Night Live" label="Saturday Night Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q223367" start="19491" end="19500" title="The Queen (2006 film)" label="The Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q55258" start="19519" end="19533" title="Stephen Frears" label="Stephen Frears"/>
<link wikidata="Q687123" start="19684" end="19689" title="BAFTA Award for Best Actress in a Leading Role" label="BAFTA"/>
<link wikidata="Q463085" start="19693" end="19705" title="Golden Globe Award for Best Actress in a Motion Picture – Drama" label="Golden Globe"/>
<link wikidata="Q103618" start="19714" end="19727" title="Academy Award for Best Actress" label="Academy Award"/>
<link wikidata="" start="19997" end="20031" title="National Treasure: Book of Secrets" label="National Treasure: Book of Secrets"/>
<link wikidata="Q310734" start="20045" end="20053" title="Inkheart (film)" label="Inkheart"/>
<link wikidata="Q733570" start="20067" end="20080" title="State of Play (film)" label="State of Play"/>
<link wikidata="Q535081" start="20098" end="20114" title="The Last Station" label="The Last Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q722890" start="20244" end="20258" title="Michael Winner" label="Michael Winner"/>
<link wikidata="Q849891" start="20313" end="20325" title="Casting (performing arts)" label="casting call"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="20379" end="20391" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q549902" start="20761" end="20771" title="Love Ranch" label="Love Ranch"/>
<link wikidata="Q545573" start="20803" end="20818" title="Taylor Hackford" label="Taylor Hackford"/>
<link wikidata="Q105580944" start="20834" end="20848" title="Joe Conforte" label="Sally Conforte"/>
<link wikidata="Q131295" start="20906" end="20913" title="brothel" label="brothel"/>
<link wikidata="Q9292762" start="20929" end="20942" title="Mustang Ranch" label="Mustang Ranch"/>
<link wikidata="Q484431" start="20946" end="20967" title="Storey County, Nevada" label="Storey County, Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q978952" start="21009" end="21017" title="Prospero" label="Prospera"/>
<link wikidata="Q490" start="21034" end="21039" title="Milan" label="Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q240490" start="21044" end="21056" title="Julie Taymor" label="Julie Taymor"/>
<link wikidata="Q478579" start="21070" end="21081" title="The Tempest (2010 film)" label="The Tempest"/>
<link wikidata="Q86440" start="21111" end="21132" title="The Tempest" label="play of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="21136" end="21147" title="William Shakespeare" label="Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q2170671" start="21452" end="21463" title="Rowan Joffé" label="Rowan Joffé"/>
<link wikidata="Q915845" start="21477" end="21490" title="Brighton Rock (2010 film)" label="Brighton Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q959790" start="21500" end="21510" title="crime film" label="crime film"/>
<link wikidata="Q128560" start="21528" end="21541" title="Graham Greene" label="Graham Greene"/>
<link wikidata="Q2056663" start="21554" end="21559" title="Brighton Rock (novel)" label="novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q185867" start="21565" end="21574" title="film noir" label="film noir"/>
<link wikidata="Q204854" start="21575" end="21584" title="Film premiere" label="premiered"/>
<link wikidata="Q390018" start="21592" end="21627" title="Toronto International Film Festival" label="Toronto International Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q66867" start="21750" end="21766" title="Robert Schwentke" label="Robert Schwentke"/>
<link wikidata="Q858842" start="21803" end="21806" title="Red (2010 film)" label="Red"/>
<link wikidata="Q540787" start="21823" end="21835" title="Warren Ellis" label="Warren Ellis"/>
<link wikidata="Q184560" start="21897" end="21900" title="MI6" label="MI6"/>
<link wikidata="Q2680" start="22027" end="22039" title="Bruce Willis" label="Bruce Willis"/>
<link wikidata="Q139890" start="22169" end="22180" title="Zack Snyder" label="Zack Snyder"/>
<link wikidata="" start="22216" end="22266" title="Legend of the Guardians: The Owls of Ga&amp;#x27;Hoole" label="Legend of the Guardians: The Owls of Ga&amp;#x27;Hoole"/>
<link wikidata="Q245204" start="22282" end="22292" title="antagonist" label="antagonist"/>
<link wikidata="Q708306" start="22436" end="22442" title="Arthur (2011 film)" label="Arthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q627438" start="22471" end="22492" title="Arthur (1981 film)" label="film of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q296609" start="22503" end="22516" title="Russell Brand" label="Russell Brand"/>
<link wikidata="Q34216" start="22717" end="22723" title="Mossad" label="Mossad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1306837" start="22748" end="22756" title="The Debt (2011 film)" label="The Debt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="22850" end="22859" title="Holocaust" label="Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q49086" start="22891" end="22907" title="Simon Wiesenthal" label="Simon Wiesenthal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3520548" start="23011" end="23045" title="The Debt (2007 film)" label="2007 Israeli film of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374" start="23070" end="23086" title="Alfred Hitchcock" label="Alfred Hitchcock"/>
<link wikidata="Q203165" start="23099" end="23111" title="Alma Reville" label="Alma Reville"/>
<link wikidata="Q247733" start="23137" end="23146" title="Hitchcock (film)" label="Hitchcock"/>
<link wikidata="Q7610339" start="23162" end="23177" title="Stephen Rebello" label="Stephen Rebello"/>
<link wikidata="Q4722865" start="23208" end="23249" title="Alfred Hitchcock and the Making of Psycho" label="Alfred Hitchcock and the Making of Psycho"/>
<link wikidata="Q163038" start="23333" end="23339" title="Psycho (1960 film)" label="Psycho"/>
<link wikidata="Q200092" start="23363" end="23374" title="horror film" label="horror film"/>
<link wikidata="Q212173" start="23716" end="23727" title="Roger Ebert" label="Roger Ebert"/>
<link wikidata="Q7730684" start="23869" end="23877" title="The Door (2012 film)" label="The Door"/>
<link wikidata="Q55218" start="23925" end="23937" title="István Szabó" label="István Szabó"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="24007" end="24016" title="communist" label="communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q65111" start="24189" end="24203" title="Martina Gedeck" label="Martina Gedeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q5559772" start="24382" end="24397" title="Gielgud Theatre" label="Gielgud Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="24418" end="24430" title="Elizabeth II" label="Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q948122" start="24456" end="24468" title="Peter Morgan" label="Peter Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7714882" start="24482" end="24494" title="The Audience (2013 play)" label="The Audience"/>
<link wikidata="Q313506" start="24527" end="24541" title="Stephen Daldry" label="Stephen Daldry"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="24571" end="24583" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q28470" start="24843" end="24857" title="Olivier Awards" label="Olivier Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q28470" start="25048" end="25070" title="Laurence Olivier Award" label="Laurence Olivier Award"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25164" end="25186" title="Triple Crown of Acting#Helen Mirren" label="Triple Crown of Acting"/>
<link wikidata="Q43247" start="25246" end="25260" title="Ingrid Bergman" label="Ingrid Bergman"/>
<link wikidata="Q172653" start="25267" end="25279" title="Maggie Smith" label="Maggie Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q41163" start="25285" end="25294" title="Al Pacino" label="Al Pacino"/>
<link wikidata="Q190631" start="25333" end="25345" title="Bette Midler" label="Bette Midler"/>
<link wikidata="Q269927" start="25349" end="25360" title="David Mamet" label="David Mamet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7182429" start="25403" end="25415" title="Phil Spector (film)" label="Phil Spector"/>
<link wikidata="Q213793" start="25428" end="25449" title="Phil Spector" label="the American musician"/>
<link wikidata="Q23633" start="25455" end="25458" title="HBO" label="HBO"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25599" end="25634" title="Phil Spector#Murder conviction" label="murder trials for the death in 2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q257277" start="25638" end="25651" title="Lana Clarkson" label="Lana Clarkson"/>
<link wikidata="Q41163" start="25792" end="25801" title="Al Pacino" label="Al Pacino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044427" start="25852" end="25872" title="Primetime Emmy Award" label="Primetime Emmy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q2462064" start="25897" end="25922" title="Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by a Female Actor in a Miniseries or Television Movie" label="Screen Actors Guild Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q15298679" start="25930" end="25950" title="20th Screen Actors Guild Awards" label="20th awards ceremony"/>
<link wikidata="Q127552" start="26311" end="26316" title="Pixar" label="Pixar"/>
<link wikidata="Q641362" start="26351" end="26370" title="Monsters University" label="Monsters University"/>
<link wikidata="Q903930" start="26498" end="26503" title="Red 2 (film)" label="Red 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q15220568" start="26758" end="26782" title="The Hundred-Foot Journey (film)" label="The Hundred-Foot Journey"/>
<link wikidata="Q80309" start="26815" end="26822" title="Om Puri" label="Om Puri"/>
<link wikidata="Q316051" start="26836" end="26851" title="Lasse Hallström" label="Lasse Hallström"/>
<link wikidata="Q8877" start="26868" end="26884" title="Steven Spielberg" label="Steven Spielberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q55800" start="26889" end="26902" title="Oprah Winfrey" label="Oprah Winfrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q21062583" start="26925" end="26942" title="Richard C. Morais" label="Richard C. Morais"/>
<link wikidata="Q17079318" start="26961" end="26979" title="The Hundred-Foot Journey" label="with the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011547" start="27317" end="27329" title="Golden Globe" label="Golden Globe"/>
<link wikidata="Q368493" start="27467" end="27479" title="Simon Curtis (filmmaker)" label="Simon Curtis"/>
<link wikidata="Q17184103" start="27489" end="27502" title="Woman in Gold (film)" label="Woman in Gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q192682" start="27522" end="27535" title="Ryan Reynolds" label="Ryan Reynolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q85048" start="27592" end="27605" title="Maria Altmann" label="Maria Altmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273556" start="27642" end="27658" title="E. Randol Schoenberg" label="Randy Schoenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q34661" start="27711" end="27723" title="Gustav Klimt" label="Gustav Klimt"/>
<link wikidata="Q354396" start="27770" end="27801" title="Portrait of Adele Bloch-Bauer I" label="Portrait of Adele Bloch-Bauer I"/>
<link wikidata="Q443106" start="28070" end="28080" title="Gavin Hood" label="Gavin Hood"/>
<link wikidata="Q18149766" start="28103" end="28117" title="Eye in the Sky (2015 film)" label="Eye in the Sky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195578" start="28206" end="28211" title="Unmanned combat aerial vehicle" label="drone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3870" start="28259" end="28273" title="Nairobi, Kenya" label="Nairobi, Kenya"/>
<link wikidata="Q524278" start="28313" end="28322" title="Jay Roach" label="Jay Roach"/>
<link wikidata="Q18692630" start="28355" end="28361" title="Trumbo (2015 film)" label="Trumbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q23547" start="28381" end="28395" title="Bryan Cranston" label="Bryan Cranston"/>
<link wikidata="Q255070" start="28400" end="28410" title="Diane Lane" label="Diane Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q271324" start="28429" end="28441" title="Hedda Hopper" label="Hedda Hopper"/>
<link wikidata="Q10986570" start="28466" end="28482" title="gossip columnist" label="gossip columnist"/>
<link wikidata="Q22977777" start="28643" end="28660" title="Collateral Beauty" label="Collateral Beauty"/>
<link wikidata="Q934964" start="28680" end="28693" title="David Frankel" label="David Frankel"/>
<link wikidata="Q40096" start="28707" end="28717" title="Will Smith" label="Will Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q42581" start="28719" end="28734" title="Keira Knightley" label="Keira Knightley"/>
<link wikidata="Q202765" start="28740" end="28752" title="Kate Winslet" label="Kate Winslet"/>
<link wikidata="Q11471" start="28850" end="28854" title="time" label="time"/>
<link wikidata="Q4" start="28856" end="28861" title="death" label="death"/>
<link wikidata="Q316" start="28867" end="28871" title="love" label="love"/>
<link wikidata="Q28841958" start="29024" end="29040" title="Cries from Syria" label="Cries from Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q93204" start="29050" end="29066" title="documentary film" label="documentary film"/>
<link wikidata="Q178810" start="29077" end="29093" title="Syrian Civil War" label="Syrian Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4072750" start="29107" end="29124" title="Evgeny Afineevsky" label="Evgeny Afineevsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q191796" start="29165" end="29181" title="cameo appearance" label="cameo appearance"/>
<link wikidata="Q462078" start="29185" end="29197" title="F. Gary Gray" label="F. Gary Gray"/>
<link wikidata="Q19829521" start="29211" end="29234" title="The Fate of the Furious" label="The Fate of the Furious"/>
<link wikidata="Q1576873" start="29271" end="29301" title="The Fast and the Furious" label="&amp;quot;Fast &amp;amp; Furious&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2714923" start="29355" end="29367" title="Deckard Shaw" label="Deckard Shaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q607190" start="29406" end="29417" title="Paolo Virzì" label="Paolo Virzì"/>
<link wikidata="Q27590115" start="29454" end="29472" title="The Leisure Seeker" label="The Leisure Seeker"/>
<link wikidata="Q41663531" start="29493" end="29520" title="The Leisure Seeker (novel)" label="2009 novel of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q103784" start="29552" end="29569" title="Donald Sutherland" label="Donald Sutherland"/>
<link wikidata="Q43228264" start="29772" end="29792" title="75th Golden Globe Awards" label="75th awards ceremony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011547" start="29819" end="29831" title="Golden Globe" label="Golden Globe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2628788" start="29879" end="29895" title="Sarah Winchester" label="Sarah Winchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q28968028" start="29934" end="29944" title="Winchester (film)" label="Winchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q7577128" start="29964" end="29984" title="The Spierig Brothers" label="The Spierig Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q193705" start="30070" end="30084" title="The Nutcracker" label="The Nutcracker"/>
<link wikidata="Q24290097" start="30105" end="30139" title="The Nutcracker and the Four Realms" label="The Nutcracker and the Four Realms"/>
<link wikidata="Q316051" start="30159" end="30174" title="Lasse Hallström" label="Lasse Hallström"/>
<link wikidata="Q352948" start="30179" end="30191" title="Joe Johnston" label="Joe Johnston"/>
<link wikidata="Q38526462" start="30242" end="30260" title="Berlin, I Love You" label="Berlin, I Love You"/>
<link wikidata="Q43184957" start="30305" end="30309" title="Anna (2019 feature film)" label="Anna"/>
<link wikidata="Q484779" start="30341" end="30351" title="Luc Besson" label="Luc Besson"/>
<link wikidata="Q56559254" start="30423" end="30439" title="Hobbs &amp;amp; Shaw" label="Hobbs &amp;amp; Shaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q84712809" start="30548" end="30572" title="Shazam! Fury of the Gods" label="Shazam! Fury of the Gods"/>
<link wikidata="Q130798" start="30626" end="30640" title="Kendrick Lamar" label="Kendrick Lamar"/>
<link wikidata="Q111653455" start="30654" end="30666" title="Count Me Out (Kendrick Lamar song)" label="Count Me Out"/>
<link wikidata="Q47452423" start="30739" end="30750" title="Yellowstone (American TV series)" label="Yellowstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q112862420" start="30771" end="30775" title="1923 (TV series)" label="1923"/>
<link wikidata="Q81328" start="30803" end="30816" title="Harrison Ford" label="Harrison Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q41233" start="30821" end="30835" title="Timothy Dalton" label="Timothy Dalton"/>
<link wikidata="Q42992" start="30854" end="30864" title="Golda Meir" label="Golda Meir"/>
<link wikidata="Q645928" start="30920" end="30926" title="biopic" label="biopic"/>
<link wikidata="Q107621661" start="30942" end="30947" title="Golda (film)" label="Golda"/>
<link wikidata="Q471728" start="30983" end="30990" title="Variety (magazine)" label="Variety"/>
<link wikidata="Q7114488" start="30998" end="31013" title="Owen Gleiberman" label="Owen Gleiberman"/>
<link wikidata="Q271967" start="31121" end="31133" title="Greta Gerwig" label="Greta Gerwig"/>
<link wikidata="Q55436290" start="31164" end="31170" title="Barbie (2023 film)" label="Barbie"/>
<link wikidata="Q58444" start="31279" end="31290" title="Liam Neeson" label="Liam Neeson"/>
<link wikidata="Q206461" start="31347" end="31356" title="Excalibur (film)" label="Excalibur"/>
<link wikidata="Q937232" start="31391" end="31403" title="James Lipton" label="James Lipton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144268" start="31414" end="31438" title="Inside the Actors Studio" label="Inside the Actors Studio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345242" start="31536" end="31548" title="White Nights (1985 film)" label="White Nights"/>
<link wikidata="Q545573" start="31585" end="31600" title="Taylor Hackford" label="Taylor Hackford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011351" start="31711" end="31720" title="Ardersier" label="Ardersier"/>
<link wikidata="Q160493" start="31740" end="31749" title="Inverness" label="Inverness"/>
<link wikidata="Q106652" start="31757" end="31775" title="Scottish Highlands" label="Scottish Highlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567082" start="32081" end="32106" title="Weidenfeld &amp;amp; Nicolson" label="Weidenfeld &amp;amp; Nicolson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5235126" start="32146" end="32155" title="The Stage" label="The Stage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757551" start="32611" end="32626" title="List of political parties in the United Kingdom" label="political party"/>
<link wikidata="Q15133865" start="32644" end="32656" title="U.S. citizen" label="U.S. citizen"/>
<link wikidata="Q23944" start="32785" end="32796" title="Mark Amodei" label="Mark Amodei"/>
<link wikidata="Q193977" start="33094" end="33105" title="music video" label="music video"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="33182" end="33198" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish language"/>
<link wikidata="Q3666978" start="33231" end="33244" title="Checco Zalone" label="Checco Zalone"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="33315" end="33332" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772698" start="33357" end="33363" title="affair" label="affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q134808" start="33398" end="33408" title="vaccinated" label="vaccinated"/>
<link wikidata="Q808" start="33421" end="33426" title="virus" label="virus"/>
<link wikidata="Q191089" start="33435" end="33446" title="the elderly" label="the elderly"/>
<link wikidata="Q7066" start="33623" end="33630" title="Atheism" label="atheist"/>
<link wikidata="Q762195" start="33666" end="33673" title="Esquire (magazine)" label="Esquire"/>
<link wikidata="Q8028" start="33795" end="33802" title="fairies" label="fairies"/>
<link wikidata="Q244392" start="33812" end="33823" title="leprechauns" label="leprechauns"/>
<link wikidata="Q311249" start="33896" end="33898" title="GQ" label="GQ"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165309" start="33930" end="33939" title="date rape" label="date rape"/>
<link wikidata="Q41576" start="33975" end="33982" title="cocaine" label="cocaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q77088" start="34071" end="34083" title="Klaus Barbie" label="Klaus Barbie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3461827" start="34140" end="34151" title="Radio Times" label="Radio Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q152311" start="34176" end="34184" title="naturism" label="naturist"/>
<link wikidata="Q4970547" start="34392" end="34408" title="British Naturism" label="British Naturism"/>
<link wikidata="Q186309" start="34675" end="34690" title="Madame Tussauds" label="Madame Tussauds"/>
<link wikidata="Q504611" start="34775" end="34786" title="Peter Blake (artist)" label="Peter Blake"/>
<link wikidata="Q169226" start="34865" end="34907" title="Sgt. Pepper&amp;#x27;s Lonely Hearts Club Band" label="Sgt. Pepper&amp;#x27;s Lonely Hearts Club Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q3173323" start="35155" end="35165" title="Union Jack" label="Union Jack"/>
<link wikidata="Q714491" start="35231" end="35250" title="Marks &amp;amp; Spencer" label="Marks &amp;amp; Spencer"/>
<link wikidata="Q31164" start="35437" end="35451" title="Ellie Goulding" label="Ellie Goulding"/>
<link wikidata="Q441314" start="35493" end="35505" title="Nicola Adams" label="Nicola Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q464960" start="35518" end="35528" title="Monica Ali" label="Monica Ali"/>
<link wikidata="Q38964" start="35677" end="35707" title="International Women&amp;#x27;s Day" label="International Women&amp;#x27;s Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q167447" start="35793" end="35805" title="Barbie" label="Barbie dolls"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="35897" end="35910" title="Academy Awards" label="Academy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q159661" start="35917" end="35929" title="British Academy of Film and Television Arts" label="BAFTA Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011547" start="35937" end="35956" title="Golden Globe Awards" label="Golden Globe Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q123737" start="35963" end="35974" title="Emmy Awards" label="Emmy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q191874" start="35984" end="35994" title="Tony Awards" label="Tony Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q11811793" start="36020" end="36038" title="List of awards and nominations received by Helen Mirren" label="numerous accolades"/>
<link wikidata="Q23016572" start="36087" end="36099" title="Triple Crown of Acting" label="the American"/>
<link wikidata="Q111182618" start="36104" end="36115" title="Triple Crown (UK entertainment)" label="the British"/>
<link wikidata="Q787148" start="36182" end="36198" title="BAFTA Fellowship" label="BAFTA Fellowship"/>
<link wikidata="Q159661" start="36208" end="36251" title="British Academy of Film and Television Arts" label="British Academy of Film and Television Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q627964" start="36286" end="36316" title="Film Society of Lincoln Center" label="Film Society of Lincoln Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q71719" start="36342" end="36364" title="Hollywood Walk of Fame" label="Hollywood Walk of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q287062" start="36378" end="36398" title="Honorary Golden Bear" label="Honorary Golden Bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631998" start="36412" end="36454" title="Screen Actors Guild Life Achievement Award" label="Screen Actors Guild Life Achievement Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q4601160" start="36472" end="36506" title="2003 Birthday Honours" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s 2003 Birthday Honours"/>
<link wikidata="Q14420" start="36531" end="36580" title="Order of the British Empire" label="Dame Commander of the Order of the British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q42182" start="36643" end="36660" title="Buckingham Palace" label="Buckingham Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q50008" start="36717" end="36726" title="The Times" label="The Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q161819" start="36807" end="36820" title="Julie Andrews" label="Julie Andrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q170428" start="36822" end="36842" title="Helena Bonham Carter" label="Helena Bonham Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q28054" start="36844" end="36854" title="Judi Dench" label="Judi Dench"/>
<link wikidata="Q42786" start="36859" end="36873" title="Audrey Hepburn" label="Audrey Hepburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q3660410" start="36904" end="36936" title="Carnegie Corporation of New York" label="Carnegie Corporation of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q121359767" start="36958" end="36980" title="Great Immigrants Award" label="Great Immigrants Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q6564849" start="37016" end="37038" title="List of British actors" label="List of British actors"/>
<link wikidata="Q6570069" start="37041" end="37091" title="List of British Academy Award nominees and winners" label="List of British Academy Award nominees and winners"/>
<link wikidata="Q24063766" start="37094" end="37139" title="List of actors with Academy Award nominations" label="List of actors with Academy Award nominations"/>
<link wikidata="Q18151712" start="37142" end="37220" title="List of actors with two or more Academy Award nominations in acting categories" label="List of actors with two or more Academy Award nominations in acting categories"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="230699" wikidata="Q759815" url="?curid=230699" title="Conveyancing">
<text>In law, conveyancing is the transfer of legal title of real property from one person to another, or the granting of an encumbrance such as a mortgage or a lien. A typical conveyancing transaction has two major phases: the exchange of contracts (when equitable interests are created) and completion (also called settlement, when legal title passes and equitable rights merge with the legal title).

The sale of land is governed by the laws and practices of the jurisdiction in which the land is located. It is a legal requirement in all jurisdictions that contracts for the sale of land be in writing. An exchange of contracts involves two copies of a contract of sale being signed, one copy of which is retained by each party. When the parties are together, both would usually sign both copies, one copy of which being retained by each party, sometimes with a formal handing over of a copy from one party to the other. However, it is usually sufficient that only the copy retained by each party be signed by the other party only — hence contracts are &quot;exchanged&quot;. This rule enables contracts to be &quot;exchanged&quot; by mail. Both copies of the contract of sale become binding only after each party is in possession of a copy of the contract signed by the other party—i.e., the exchange is said to be &quot;complete&quot;. An exchange by electronic means is generally insufficient for an exchange, unless the laws of the jurisdiction expressly validate such signatures.

It is the responsibility of the buyer of real property to ensure that he or she obtains a good and marketable title to the land—i.e., that the seller is the owner, has the right to sell the property, and there is no factor which would impede a mortgage or re-sale. Some jurisdictions have legislated some protections for the buyer, besides the ability for the buyer to do searches relating to the property.

A system of conveyancing is usually designed to ensure that the buyer secures title to the land together with all the rights that run with the land, and is notified of any restrictions in advance of purchase. Many jurisdictions have adopted a system of land registration to facilitate conveyancing and encourage reliance on public records and assure purchasers of land that they are taking good title.

== Public record ==
In the Roman tradition, private rights to land were enforceable even if secret; this tradition remained to some extent in Europe up through the 19th century, but modern systems no longer allow for such secrecy.
In many civil law countries, the real estate transfers are usually supervised by notaries who, after a due diligence verification, execute the deed of sale and send it to the Public Registers. The involvement of civil law notaries, qualified legal experts delegated by the State (they must have a University Degree in Law), represents - besides an assistance for the involved parties in the property transfer process - also a gatekeeping for the soundness of the economic system and the protection of vulnerable parties.

== England and Wales ==

In England and Wales, conveyancing is usually done by a solicitor or a licensed conveyancer; either may employ or supervise an unqualified conveyancer. What is being conveyed, or transferred, is a piece of land or property, that historically (especially in England) may or may not include the &quot;messuage&quot;, that would be the principal dwelling, and might include an orchard, any outbuildings, and curtilage if present. The domestic conveyancing market is price competitive, with a high number of firms of solicitors and conveyancing companies offering a similar service. It is possible for someone to carry out their own conveyancing, but it is labour-intensive. If the transaction involves a mortgage, it is almost certain that the lender will insist that a solicitor is used for the conveyancing.

It is a common myth that conveyancing has to be carried out by a local solicitor or conveyancer. This is no longer the case, with many conveyancers and solicitors conducting transactions from a distance using email and online technology. However, the Law Society warns solicitors to be wary of clients instructing their firm with no geographic connection to them for risk of money laundering.

There were approximately 5,357 firms operating in the conveyancing market in 2015, but this number has fallen from 5,871 the year before. The number of firms in the market is almost a third lower than the 7,779 firms recording transactions in 2005, following a severe conveyancing shortage during the recession.

Under English law, agreements are not legally binding until contracts are exchanged. This affords both the advantage of freedom before contract, but also the disadvantage of wasted time and expense in the event the deal is not done.

The normal practice is for the buyer to negotiate an agreed price with the seller then organise a survey and have the solicitor (or conveyancer) carry out their searches and pre-contract enquiries. The seller&#x27;s solicitor or conveyancer will prepare the draft contract to be approved by the buyer&#x27;s solicitor. The seller&#x27;s solicitor will also collect and prepare property information to be provided to the buyer&#x27;s solicitors, in line with the Law Society&#x27;s National Protocol for domestic conveyancing. When undertaking property transactions, the conveyancer&#x27;s role is to carry out due diligence by submitting queries – known as conveyancing searches – about the transacted property. These are designed to uncover factors the estate agent or surveyor may not know about, which could impact the buyer&#x27;s enjoyment of the property.

It takes on average 10–12 weeks to complete a conveyancing transaction, but while some transactions are quicker, many take longer. The timescale is determined by a host of factors – legal, personal, social and financial. During this period prior to exchange of contracts (exchange being the point at which the transaction becomes legally binding) either party can pull out of the transaction at any time and for any reason, with no legal obligation to the other. This gives rise to a risk of gazumping and its converse, gazundering. Conveyancing is a component of the cost of moving house in the United Kingdom.

=== Conveyancing searches ===
The conveyancer’s role is to carry out due diligence by submitting queries – known as searches – about the transacted property. These are designed to uncover factors that the estate agent or surveyor may not know about, which could impact the buyer’s enjoyment of the property. Conveyancing searches include: 
* Land Registry search – to confirm ownership and boundaries by checking the ‘title register’ and ‘title plan’.
* Local authority search – to reveal any charges or restrictions of use on the property.
* Water authority search – to find out if any public drains on the property might affect extensions or building works. 
* Flood risk search – to discover potential hazards from coastal, river or surface water flooding.
* Chancel repair liability search – to ensure there are no potential leftover medieval liabilities on the property to help pay for church repairs. 
* Environmental search – to provide information about contaminated land, landfill sites, former and current industry, radon gas hazard, ground stability issues, and other related information at or around the property. 
* Optional and location specific searches – sometimes extra searches are required or recommended depending on the location or type of property or due to particular concerns raised by the buyer. These could include:
** Tin mining searches in Cornwall.
** Mining searches in various parts of the UK.
** Cheshire brine searches.
** Additional local authority searches for potential issues such as: Pipelines, noise abatement zones, common land, etc.

=== Search providers ===
Local authority searches, according to the Law Society, are a ‘vital part of the conveyancing process and give buyers important information about matters affecting a property that is registered or recorded with the local authority. However, over the years, delays with local authority searches have prompted lawyers to order a ‘personal’ search, carried out by a third party or a search provider, who visits the council office and inspects and records the information kept by the local authority on behalf of the conveyancer or solicitor.

Private search companies and ordering platforms have been integrating Land Registry&#x27;s data to speed up the process of search ordering, improve accuracy and reduce the chances of human error. One example is the use of Land Registry&#x27;s National Spatial Dataset to display boundary maps on-screen using a live data link to help validate property locations.

==Scotland==
In Scots law, conveyancing is carried out as a second stage in the voluntary transfer of land after the completion of the contractual stage. The position in Scotland under Scots law is that the contract is generally concluded at a much earlier stage than in the English &amp; Welsh and common law jurisdictions. The contractual stage of the transfer is called the missives of sale between the buyer, or buyer&#x27;s agent, and seller, or seller&#x27;s agent. Missives are letters the body of which contain the contract of sale is formed. Once all the contractual terms are agreed, the missives are said to be concluded, and these serve as a binding contract for the sale of the property. Normally the contract is conditional upon matters such as the sellers being able, before completion of the transaction, to prove that they have good title to the property and to exhibit clear searches from the land registers and the local authority.

From 1 December 2008 properties for sale are marketed with a &#x27;Home Information Report. This consists of: a Single Survey, an Energy Report and a Property Questionnaire. The Home Report is available on request to prospective buyers of the property. The date of final settlement is in Scotland known as the &quot;date of entry&quot;, the date on which the Buyer is able to take possession of the property. The transfer of ownership itself only completes after the completion of the registration of the disposition document in the Land Register of Scotland.

Solicitors, advocates and licensed conveyancing practitioners are the only individuals legally permitted to conduct conveyancing for a fee in Scotland, and as such enjoy a conveyancing monopoly, under the Solicitors (Scotland) Act 1980 section 32 which creates a criminal offence for any unlicensed person preparing conveyancing documents in the expectation of a fee. Having said that, there is no legal requirement in Scotland to use the services of a solicitor, advocate or licensed conveyancing practitioner to transfer property ownership/land title. A willing buyer and seller can submit all the necessary completed documents to the Land Register of Scotland themselves.

== Australia ==
Most privately owned land in Australia is now regulated under the Torrens system of land registration, introduced between 1857 and 1875. Some parcels of land are still unregistered and commonly referred to as general law land. Property law in Australia is derived from English common law.

Conveyancing in Australia (also called a transfer) is usually carried out by a solicitor or a licensed conveyancer. Kits are available for the buyer to complete the process themselves, but due to the complexity of varying state and council laws and processes, this is usually not recommended.

Queensland and New South Wales have a 5 days &quot;cooling off&quot; period for residential contracts. Victoria has a 3 business day cooling off period on private sales and South Australia has 2 days. During this time the purchaser may reconsider the purchase and, if they so wish, cancel the contract, in which case the purchaser may be legally bound to pay 0.25% of the purchasing price to the seller (0.2% in Victoria). Not all contracts have a cooling off period such as when the property is purchased at auction or if the purchaser expedites the process.

A common conveyance by a solicitor or a licensed conveyancer usually takes 4 to 6 weeks. Most firms offer fixed price services which normally include costs for searches, legal advice and other outlays. In most states and territories a typical conveyance includes, but is not limited to, the following:

* checking for encumbrances and restrictions on the property
* ensuring special conditions mentioned in the contract are met
* making sure rates, land tax and water consumption charges are paid by the appropriate party
* arranging for the payment of fees and charges and government duties
* preparation of legal documents
* for the purchaser, liaising with the financiers of the purchaser to satisfy their requirements before settlement 
* for the vendor, liaising with the financiers of the vendor to arrange settlement and obtain discharge of mortgages on the title 
* arranging and attending final settlement.

Searches tend to take up the bulk of the conveyance. Due to the three level system of government (federal, state and local), it must be made sure that the vendor is entitled to all rights and title. Most information is retrieved from state or local (council) authorities. Conveyancing processes, legal documentation, contract requirements, and search requirements vary between each state and territory.

Requirements, searches and costs can vary between jurisdictions, depending on local property legislation and regulations. Depending on the circumstances of each case, and depending on the jurisdiction, a title search may also involve:

* registered plan search or building units/group titles plan search
* company search
* contaminated land search
* council property search
* full council inspection of records search
* land tax search
* main roads search.

With the introduction of the &quot;Electronic Conveyancing National Law&quot; in 2012, all Australian states are in the process of transitioning to electronic conveyancing in accordance with state-based mandates.

== United States ==
The conveyancing process in the United States varies from state to state depending on local legal requirements and historical practice. In rare situations, the parties will engage in a formal &quot;closing.&quot; In a formal closing three attorneys will be involved in the process: one each to represent the buyer, seller, and mortgage holder; frequently all three will sit around a table with the buyer and seller and literally &quot;pass papers&quot; to effect the transaction.

Much more commonly, the transaction is closed by use of an escrow. (&quot;See also&quot; Escrow § Real estate.) Practice vary from state to state as to who conducts the title search to make sure the seller has or can convey clear title, including what liens must be paid, and as to who acts as the escrow holder. In many states attorneys still act as the escrow agent and title inspector. In many others those functions are conducted by licensed escrow agents who often are affiliated with or even employed by a title insurance company. Some use a mix, such as having an attorney conduct the escrow while the title investigation is handled by the title insurance company or its agent.

In order to protect themselves from defects in the title, buyers will frequently purchase title insurance at this time for themselves. They will almost always be required to purchase title insurance for their lender as a condition of the loan.

In most states, a prospective buyer&#x27;s offer to purchase is made in the form of a written contract and bound with a deposit on the purchase price. The offer will set out conditions (such as appraisal, title clearance, inspection, occupancy, and financing) under which the buyer may withdraw the offer without forfeiting the deposit. Once the conditions have been met (or waived), the buyer has &quot;equitable title&quot; and conveyancing proceeds or may be compelled by court order. There may be other last-minute conditions to closing, such as &quot;broom clean&quot; premises, evictions, and repairs.

Typical papers at a conveyancing include: deed(s), certified checks, promissory note, mortgage, certificate of liens, &quot;pro rata&quot; property taxes, title insurance binder, and fire insurance binder. There may also be side agreements (e.g., holdover tenants, delivery contracts, payment holdback for unacceptable repairs), seller&#x27;s right of first refusal for resale, declaration of trust, or other entity formation or consolidation (incorporation, limited partnership investors, etc.). Where &quot;time is of the essence,&quot; there have been cases where the entire deposit is forfeited (as liquidated damages) if the conveyancing is delayed beyond the time limits of the buyer&#x27;s contingencies, even if the purchase is completed.

Words used to indicate conveyance, or words of conveyance include grant, devise, give, and sell.

== See also ==
* List of real estate topics
* Real estate appraisal
* Transfer of equity
* Verification and validation

==Notes==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q759815" start="8" end="20" title="Conveyancing" label="conveyancing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5393493" start="46" end="51" title="Title (property)" label="title"/>
<link wikidata="Q10494269" start="55" end="68" title="real property" label="real property"/>
<link wikidata="Q4329865" start="119" end="130" title="encumbrance" label="encumbrance"/>
<link wikidata="Q111699874" start="141" end="149" title="mortgage law" label="mortgage"/>
<link wikidata="Q4469383" start="155" end="159" title="lien" label="lien"/>
<link wikidata="Q7301136" start="234" end="243" title="Real estate contract" label="contracts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5384634" start="250" end="268" title="equitable interest" label="equitable interest"/>
<link wikidata="Q66493932" start="402" end="414" title="Land tenure" label="sale of land"/>
<link wikidata="Q672598" start="2145" end="2162" title="land registration" label="land registration"/>
<link wikidata="Q5950118" start="2534" end="2543" title="Civil law (legal system)" label="civil law"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2701" end="2716" title="Public Register" label="Public Register"/>
<link wikidata="Q189010" start="2748" end="2756" title="notaries" label="notaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156248" start="3076" end="3093" title="England and Wales" label="England and Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q14284" start="3129" end="3138" title="solicitor" label="solicitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6543044" start="3144" end="3164" title="Licensed Conveyancer" label="licensed conveyancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5166535" start="3212" end="3223" title="conveyancer" label="conveyancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5195627" start="3478" end="3487" title="curtilage" label="curtilage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138780" start="4594" end="4605" title="English law" label="English law"/>
<link wikidata="Q6503534" start="5284" end="5295" title="Law Society" label="Law Society"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5303" end="5320" title="National Protocol" label="National Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5479" end="5500" title="Conveyancing#Conveyancing searches" label="conveyancing searches"/>
<link wikidata="Q5529206" start="6177" end="6183" title="gazump" label="gazump"/>
<link wikidata="Q5529206" start="6205" end="6216" title="gazundering" label="gazundering"/>
<link wikidata="Q4689027" start="6253" end="6295" title="cost of moving house in the United Kingdom" label="cost of moving house in the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q5166535" start="6332" end="6343" title="conveyancer" label="conveyancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q794134" start="6367" end="6380" title="due diligence" label="due diligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q16148831" start="6503" end="6515" title="estate agent" label="estate agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q816425" start="6519" end="6527" title="surveying" label="surveyor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5635120" start="6640" end="6653" title="Land Registry (United Kingdom)" label="Land Registry"/>
<link wikidata="Q6663959" start="6752" end="6774" title="Local authority search" label="Local authority search"/>
<link wikidata="Q7309187" start="6841" end="6856" title="Regional water authority" label="Water authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q5460077" start="6961" end="6971" title="Flood risk assessment" label="Flood risk"/>
<link wikidata="Q5070758" start="7060" end="7084" title="Chancel repair liability" label="Chancel repair liability"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164914" start="7260" end="7277" title="contaminated land" label="contaminated land"/>
<link wikidata="Q152810" start="7279" end="7287" title="landfill" label="landfill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133" start="7324" end="7329" title="radon" label="radon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7807842" start="7643" end="7653" title="Tin mining" label="Tin mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q6865570" start="7666" end="7674" title="Mining in Cornwall and Devon" label="Cornwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7405983" start="7726" end="7740" title="Salt in Cheshire" label="Cheshire brine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1879301" start="7831" end="7852" title="Noise control" label="noise abatement zones"/>
<link wikidata="Q2259176" start="7854" end="7865" title="common land" label="common land"/>
<link wikidata="Q40348" start="8206" end="8213" title="lawyers" label="lawyers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4321471" start="8310" end="8317" title="County council" label="council"/>
<link wikidata="Q5937752" start="8621" end="8632" title="human error" label="human error"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="8972" end="8980" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972557" start="8987" end="8996" title="Scots law" label="Scots law"/>
<link wikidata="Q131005600" start="9101" end="9125" title="List of national legal systems" label="common law jurisdictions"/>
<link wikidata="Q7309422" start="10287" end="10312" title="Registers of Scotland" label="Land Register of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067173" start="11073" end="11087" title="Torrens system" label="Torrens system"/>
<link wikidata="Q672598" start="11091" end="11108" title="land registration" label="land registration"/>
<link wikidata="Q14284" start="11376" end="11385" title="solicitor" label="solicitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6543044" start="11391" end="11411" title="licensed conveyancer" label="licensed conveyancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q36074" start="11591" end="11601" title="Queensland" label="Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224" start="11606" end="11621" title="New South Wales" label="New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q36687" start="11694" end="11702" title="Victoria, Australia" label="Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q35715" start="11764" end="11779" title="South Australia" label="South Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7810134" start="12312" end="12320" title="Title search" label="searches"/>
<link wikidata="Q93288" start="12563" end="12571" title="contract" label="contract"/>
<link wikidata="Q849837" start="12594" end="12599" title="rates (tax)" label="rates"/>
<link wikidata="Q3150005" start="12761" end="12775" title="legal document" label="legal document"/>
<link wikidata="Q7810134" start="13677" end="13689" title="title search" label="title search"/>
<link wikidata="Q783794" start="13779" end="13786" title="company" label="company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057250" start="13893" end="13901" title="land tax" label="land tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q759815" start="14079" end="14102" title="electronic conveyancing" label="electronic conveyancing"/>
<link wikidata="Q338451" start="14705" end="14711" title="escrow" label="escrow"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14735" end="14755" title="Escrow#Real estate" label="Escrow § Real estate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7810126" start="15422" end="15437" title="title insurance" label="title insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193004" start="15620" end="15637" title="Offer and acceptance" label="offer to purchase"/>
<link wikidata="Q4070898" start="15799" end="15809" title="building inspection" label="inspection"/>
<link wikidata="Q5393493" start="15981" end="15996" title="equitable title" label="equitable title"/>
<link wikidata="Q696617" start="16052" end="16063" title="court order" label="court order"/>
<link wikidata="Q2971994" start="16237" end="16252" title="certified check" label="certified check"/>
<link wikidata="Q12202207" start="16479" end="16487" title="statutory holdback" label="holdback"/>
<link wikidata="Q874771" start="16789" end="16807" title="liquidated damages" label="liquidated damages"/>
<link wikidata="Q6019043" start="17049" end="17075" title="List of real estate topics" label="List of real estate topics"/>
<link wikidata="Q512599" start="17078" end="17099" title="Real estate appraisal" label="Real estate appraisal"/>
<link wikidata="Q18751069" start="17102" end="17120" title="Transfer of equity" label="Transfer of equity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919644" start="17123" end="17150" title="Verification and validation" label="Verification and validation"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="230704" wikidata="Q1069124" url="?curid=230704" title="Chelsea Flower Show">
<text>The RHS Chelsea Flower Show, formally known as the Great Spring Show, is a garden show held for five days in May by the Royal Horticultural Society (RHS) in the grounds of the Royal Hospital Chelsea in Chelsea, London. Held at Chelsea since 1912, the show is attended by members of the British royal family.

Highlights to the Chelsea Flower Show include the avant-garde show gardens designed by leading names with Floral Marquee at the centrepiece. The Show also features smaller gardens such as the Artisan and Urban Gardens.

==History==
===Great Spring Show===
The first Royal Horticultural Society Great Spring Show was held in 1862, at the RHS garden in Kensington. Before this date the RHS had held flower shows from 1833 in their garden in Chiswick, which themselves had been preceded by fetes. The Kensington Garden was chosen as a site because the flower shows in Chiswick were experiencing falling visitor numbers due to problems such as poor transport links. The Great Spring Show was held at Kensington for twenty-six years but in 1888 the RHS decided to move the show to the heart of London. The site chosen was the Temple Gardens, situated between the Embankment and Fleet Street, which had a recorded history dating back to 1307 and which were said to date from the time of the Knights Templar. The roses for which these Temple Gardens were famous were alluded to in Shakespeare&#x27;s &quot;Henry VI Part 1&quot;. Using three marquees requisitioned from the old Kensington shows, the 1888 show was a success with exhibits from both amateurs and commercial firms. By 1897 five marquees were being used with many of the best known plant and seed merchants being attracted to the event including Suttons and Sons.

===Royal International Horticultural Exhibition===
In 1912, the Temple Show was cancelled to make way for the Royal International Horticultural Exhibition. Sir Harry Veitch, the great nurseryman, secured the grounds of the Royal Hospital, Chelsea for this one-off event. It proved such a good site for an exhibition that the Great Spring Show was moved there in 1913, where it has taken place almost every year since. There have been two breaks for world wars.

===Royal Hospital, Chelsea – early 20th century===
The RHS first became involved with the Chelsea Hospital in 1905. Three years before, it had leased the grounds of Holland House in Kensington to hold what was first advertised as a Coronation Rose Show, but which turned into a more general show (with not many roses) by the time it actually opened in June. Two further two-day summer shows took place at Holland House in 1903 and 1904, but then, to the general satisfaction of exhibitors and press, a three-day Summer Show was staged in the hospital grounds, a more spacious site than Holland House had allowed, with room for five tents. The Summer Shows reverted to Holland House for the years thereafter, except in 1911, when both it and Chelsea proved unavailable, and the Show was held at the Olympia exhibition hall.

The Royal International Horticultural Exhibition of 1912 used the grounds of Chelsea Hospital as the site for the show, and for 1913, the Great Spring Show was moved there. The first Chelsea Flower Show opened on 20 May. The Summer Show reverted to Holland House. Despite the First World War, the show was held 1914–1916, but was cancelled in 1917 and 1918.

By the 1920s, the Chelsea Flower Show had returned to its previous form; the famous Chelsea tea parties were established and Royal visits resumed. In 1926 the show was held a week late due to the General Strike.

In 1937, King George VI and Queen Elizabeth celebrated their Coronation Year, and an Empire Exhibition was staged to mark the occasion. It featured wattles from Australia, pines from Canada, gladioli from East Africa and even a prickly pear from Palestine.

The show was cancelled during the Second World War, as the land was required by the War Office for an anti-aircraft site. Some doubt arose as to whether the show would resume in 1947. The majority of exhibitors wanted a postponement, as stocks of plants were low, staff much depleted and fuel for greenhouses was obtainable only with special permits, but Lord Aberconway (then RHS President) and the RHS Council felt strongly that the show should resume as soon as possible. The show eventually successfully went ahead in 1947.

===Royal Hospital, Chelsea – later 20th century===

The Queen attended in 1953, the year of her coronation, and she was also a regular visitor prior to this date with her father, George VI. 

The show went on to increase in popularity throughout the second half of the 20th century and crowding became a major problem. Crowding within the tents had been a recurring issue during the interwar years, but was always handled by increasing the number of tents; photographs show heavy crowds in the open, especially in the vicinity of the rock gardens. As the 1970s progressed, attendance at the show climbed by 6,000 visitors in a single year (1978). In 1979, crowding became so severe in the mornings that the turnstiles were temporarily closed. It was decided to open the show at 8a.m. the next year, and close it at 8.30p.m. in the evenings, with a reduced price for entry after 4p.m., to try to draw people away from the morning timeslot; a one-way system was also laid out in the marquee (a solution that had been rejected as impractical 20 years earlier).

The new arrangements for the show were successful in 1980, and a majority of the Council voted for the imposition of a ceiling on the number of tickets sold. However, visitor numbers continued to increase, and in 1987 the turnstiles were closed again. In 1988 a cap had to be placed on the number of visitors attending the show due to problems that were occurring with overcrowding. A limit of 40,000 visitors per day was imposed – a reduction of 90,000 in total from the previous year – and members were charged for tickets for the first time. An immediate response was a fall in attendance; by April, ticket booking was so slow that national advertisements were taken out to encourage people to come to Chelsea, and the original announcement that tickets would not be available at the gates was rescinded.

In response to issues with attendance numbers, the council began to look seriously at the idea of moving the show to a larger venue. Battersea Park, Osterley Park, and Wisley were suggested; one proposal was that Chelsea should be limited to plant sales, and the sundries rerouted elsewhere; the firm Land Use Consultants was also hired to prepare a feasibility study. However, after considering these options, it was concluded that the show should stay at Chelsea. Despite this, the show&#x27;s programme was expanded into other venues, with the Hampton Court Palace Flower Show taken over in 1993; the increased options for both members and for exhibitors meant that the intense criticisms and conflict of the 1980s over the future of the show did not return.

==Present day==
The Chelsea Flower Show is attended by 157,000 visitors each year (a number limited by the capacity of the ground), and all tickets must be purchased in advance. From 2005 the show was increased from four days to five, with the first two days only open to RHS members. The show is extensively covered on television by the BBC. An official DVD of the show is produced on behalf of the RHS by ONE TWO FOUR. Several members of the British royal family attend a preview of the show, as part of the royal patronage of the RHS. The area of land devoted to show gardens increased steadily between 1970 and 2000 and the show has become an important venue for watching trends. New plants are often launched at the show and the popularity of older varieties revived under the focus of the horticultural world.

Highlights from the 2011 RHS Chelsea Flower Show included The Irish Sky Garden by Diarmuid Gavin, based on the idea of a restaurant in the sky. Other notable gardens included the HESCO Garden by Leeds City Council, who reconstructed an impressive and idyllic working water wheel in the grounds of the Royal Hospital.

The 2011 show also saw the introduction of the new Artisan garden category, which was created for designers who use natural materials.

At the 2023 show, Catherine, Princess of Wales, hosted the first children&#x27;s picnic at a newly created garden at the show with pupils from ten schools from the RHS&#x27;s school gardening campaign invited.

In 2024 the show was visited by King Charles III and Queen Camilla.

Since 2022 the show has been sponsored by The Newt in Somerset.

==Awards==

There are four grades of award presented – gold, silver-gilt, silver and bronze – in each of the awards categories. Bronze grade exhibits do not actually receive a medal.

===Awards categories===
* – Gardens and floral exhibits
* – Exhibits of trees
* – Exhibits of vegetables, including herbs
* – Exhibits of special educational or scientific interest
* – Exhibits of pictures, photographs, floral arrangements and floristry

===Special awards===
* Best Show Garden Award
* Best Courtyard Garden Award
* Best Chic Garden Award
* Best City Garden Award
* RHS Sundries Bowl
* RHS Junior Display Trophy
* RHS Floral Arrangement Trophies
* RHS Floristry Trophies
* Show Certificates of Merit
* Certificates for Junior Displays
* RHS President&#x27;s Award
* RHS Best Tradestand Award
* RHS Director General&#x27;s Award for the Best Tradestand.

==Significant gardens and exhibits==

*1929 – Sherman Hoyt&#x27;s exhibit of American cacti, complete with painted backdrops depicting the Mojave desert, which was acquired for Kew and had its own glasshouse there for over half a century, before being absorbed into the Princess of Wales Conservatory
*1930s – J. Macdonald&#x27;s grass gardens, declaring the merits of ornamental grasses
*1936 – Hilliers&#x27; &#x27;Dingley Dell&#x27; exhibit
*1937 – Coronation Year: the Empire Exhibition, with displays of ornamental and economic plants from around the Empire
*1953 – another Coronation Year: William Wood of Taplow staged a &#x27;Cutty Sark&#x27; garden
*1959 – &quot;The Times″&quot; &#x27;Garden of Tomorrow&#x27;, complete with radio-controlled lawn mower
*1960 – The great orchid display to accompany the Third World Orchid Conference
*1964 – &quot;Popular Gardening&quot;″s &#x27;Garden of Today&#x27;
*1967 – The first garden for the disabled at Chelsea
*1968 – Wisley&#x27;s exhibit of hostas, which gave a great boost to their popularity
*1980 – Display of penjing from China
*1982 – Brenda Hyatt&#x27;s display of auriculas, which launched these plants back into popularity
*1988 – John Chambers&#x27;s honeybee garden. This was the last year the Wilkinson Sword for Best Show Garden was awarded.
*1991 – The RHS reinstated the Best Show Garden Award in conjunction with Fiskars (who were the owners of the Wilkinson brand and were relaunching the brand Fiskars). The new award was the Sword of Excellence and was presented by the RHS President to the &quot;Daily Express&quot; Garden &#x27;The Forgotten Pavilion&#x27; designed by John Van Hage, who became the youngest-ever designer to win a RHS Gold medal at Chelsea.
*1993 – Julie Toll&#x27;s seaside garden controversially won the short-lived Fiskars Sword of Excellence for best show garden, described by David Stevens as &quot;a sand dune garden that was well planted and beautiful, but visitors said it wasn&#x27;t a garden.&quot;
*1994 – Isabel and Julian Bannerman&#x27;s &quot;Daily Telegraph&quot; Old Abbey garden with a virtuoso display of mature tree transplanting. The &quot;Sunday Express&quot; Railway Garden by Julian Dowle was a very popular themed garden featuring Railway artefacts, wild flowers, a vegetable plot and a colourful display of cottage plants.
*1996 – Dan Pearson&#x27;s London roof garden for the 1990s
*1997 – Christopher Bradley-Hole&#x27;s Latin Garden, the first garden at Chelsea to exhibit the new fashion for sparse planting
*2000 – The Garden History Society&#x27;s Le Nôtre Garden, and Piet Oudolf&#x27;s winning &#x27;Evolution&#x27; garden
*2002 – Mary Reynolds became the youngest garden designer to win a gold medal at the show
*2004 – Tourism New Zealand presented the first authentic thermal New Zealand garden entitled &quot;Ora Garden of Well-being&quot; winning a gold medal.
*2009 – James May&#x27;s &quot;Paradise in Plasticine&quot;, a garden made entirely of Plasticine. Its concept and creation was documented for &quot;James May&#x27;s Toy Stories&quot;.
*2010 – Kebony Naturally Norway Garden designed by Darren Saines. It was the first time Norway was represented in Chelsea Flower Show with a big show garden. Exotic orchids from Taiwan were presented by the Taiwan Orchid Growers Association (TOGA). This was the first time that Taiwan was invited to the Chelsea Flower Show.
*2011 – Diarmuid Gavin&#x27;s Irish Sky Garden. This was the first garden to be suspended in the air.
*2016 – The largest-ever display in the Great Pavilion – Bowdens Nursery in Devon brought in The British Belmond Pullman Carriage &#x27;Zena&#x27; – 63 feet long and 38 tonnes and built a breathtaking display at The Monument Step celebrating plant hunters throughout the world. It was a walk-through exhibition with thousands of plants, hostas, ferns, tree fern and bamboos and hosted 30,000 visitors during the show walking through the train carriage bedecked in art deco luggae and fine glass and crockery. It changed the game for displays in the Pavilion. 
*2016 – A display of 300,000 individually crocheted poppies, covering nearly , designed by Phillip Johnson and made by over 50,000 contributors.
*2017 – Bowdens bring The Queen&#x27;s Australian State Coach to Chelsea and build a display of Commonwealth plants around it.
*2019 – The Duchess of Cambridge worked with the RHS as one of the co-designers for a garden display at the 2019 Chelsea Flower Show. She designed the &quot;Back to Nature Garden&quot; together with Andree Davies and Adam White. The garden, which featured &quot;a tree house, waterfall, rustic den and a campfire&quot; among other parts, was unveiled at the Chelsea Flower Show in May 2019 to emphasise &quot;the benefits the natural world brings to mental and physical well-being&quot;.
*2022 – The Queen&#x27;s Platinum Jubilee Garden. Laser-cut steel silhouettes of the Queen were featured, surrounded by 70 planted terracotta pots planted with lily of the valley, the Queen&#x27;s favourite flower.

==See also==
* Chelsea Fringe
* Tatton Park Flower Show
* Hampton Court Palace Flower Show
* Garden festival
* Cultural icon

==References==
==External links==

* RHS Chelsea Flower Show official site
* Hampton Court Palace Flower Show official site
* Coverage from the &quot;BBC&quot;
* Coverage from &quot;The Guardian&quot;
* Coverage from &quot;The Daily Telegraph&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1069124" start="4" end="27" title="Chelsea Flower Show" label="RHS Chelsea Flower Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069124" start="51" end="68" title="Chelsea Flower Show" label="Great Spring Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107656" start="75" end="81" title="garden" label="garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032739" start="120" end="147" title="Royal Horticultural Society" label="Royal Horticultural Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1628509" start="176" end="198" title="Royal Hospital Chelsea" label="Royal Hospital Chelsea"/>
<link wikidata="Q743535" start="202" end="217" title="Chelsea, London" label="Chelsea, London"/>
<link wikidata="Q645968" start="286" end="306" title="British royal family" label="British royal family"/>
<link wikidata="Q288781" start="660" end="670" title="Kensington" label="Kensington"/>
<link wikidata="Q845015" start="748" end="756" title="Chiswick" label="Chiswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q3624241" start="1130" end="1144" title="Temple Gardens" label="Temple Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q846686" start="1182" end="1194" title="Fleet Street" label="Fleet Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q41300" start="1294" end="1309" title="Knights Templar" label="Knights Templar"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="1383" end="1394" title="Shakespeare" label="Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q643236" start="1408" end="1423" title="Henry VI Part 1" label="Henry VI Part 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q16933596" start="1710" end="1726" title="Suttons and Sons" label="Suttons and Sons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069124" start="1839" end="1883" title="Royal International Horticultural Exhibition" label="Royal International Horticultural Exhibition"/>
<link wikidata="Q5673040" start="1885" end="1901" title="Harry Veitch" label="Sir Harry Veitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1628509" start="1952" end="1975" title="Royal Hospital, Chelsea" label="Royal Hospital, Chelsea"/>
<link wikidata="Q3797766" start="4466" end="4480" title="coronation of Queen Elizabeth II" label="her coronation"/>
<link wikidata="Q810947" start="6375" end="6389" title="Battersea Park" label="Battersea Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1441598" start="6391" end="6404" title="Osterley Park" label="Osterley Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5679170" start="6410" end="6416" title="RHS Garden, Wisley" label="Wisley"/>
<link wikidata="Q205666" start="6789" end="6809" title="Hampton Court Palace" label="Hampton Court Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q289" start="7325" end="7335" title="television" label="television"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="7343" end="7346" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7859468" start="7412" end="7424" title="ONE TWO FOUR" label="ONE TWO FOUR"/>
<link wikidata="Q645968" start="7449" end="7469" title="British royal family" label="British royal family"/>
<link wikidata="Q265939" start="7521" end="7530" title="patronage" label="patronage"/>
<link wikidata="Q5271910" start="7904" end="7918" title="Diarmuid Gavin" label="Diarmuid Gavin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6515870" start="8017" end="8035" title="Leeds City Council" label="Leeds City Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q10479" start="8294" end="8322" title="Catherine, Princess of Wales" label="Catherine, Princess of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q43274" start="8524" end="8535" title="Charles III" label="Charles III"/>
<link wikidata="Q152239" start="8540" end="8553" title="Queen Camilla" label="Queen Camilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q5638097" start="8598" end="8618" title="Hadspen House" label="The Newt in Somerset"/>
<link wikidata="Q131647" start="8797" end="8802" title="medal" label="medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q637125" start="9049" end="9058" title="floristry" label="floristry"/>
<link wikidata="Q623347" start="10473" end="10478" title="hosta" label="hosta"/>
<link wikidata="Q3058669" start="10545" end="10552" title="penjing" label="penjing"/>
<link wikidata="Q164186" start="10603" end="10612" title="Primula auricula" label="auriculas"/>
<link wikidata="Q102857" start="10692" end="10700" title="honeybee" label="honeybee"/>
<link wikidata="Q15105390" start="11826" end="11837" title="Dan Pearson (garden designer)" label="Dan Pearson"/>
<link wikidata="Q35397057" start="12134" end="12147" title="Mary Reynolds (landscape designer)" label="Mary Reynolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q314504" start="12377" end="12386" title="James May" label="James May"/>
<link wikidata="Q840688" start="12456" end="12466" title="Plasticine" label="Plasticine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3806671" start="12518" end="12546" title="James May&amp;#x27;s Toy Stories" label="James May&amp;#x27;s Toy Stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q25308" start="12719" end="12726" title="orchids" label="orchids"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="12732" end="12738" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5271910" start="12887" end="12901" title="Diarmuid Gavin" label="Diarmuid Gavin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13454" end="13460" title="luggae" label="luggae"/>
<link wikidata="Q4824709" start="13725" end="13747" title="Australian State Coach" label="Australian State Coach"/>
<link wikidata="Q10479" start="13825" end="13845" title="Catherine, Princess of Wales" label="Duchess of Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q101711" start="14461" end="14479" title="lily of the valley" label="lily of the valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5090074" start="14532" end="14546" title="Chelsea Fringe" label="Chelsea Fringe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7688441" start="14549" end="14572" title="Tatton Park Flower Show" label="Tatton Park Flower Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q3782899" start="14575" end="14607" title="Hampton Court Palace Flower Show" label="Hampton Court Palace Flower Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q154012" start="14610" end="14625" title="Garden festival" label="Garden festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q3139104" start="14628" end="14641" title="Cultural icon" label="Cultural icon"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="14793" end="14796" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="14825" end="14837" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q192621" start="14866" end="14885" title="The Daily Telegraph" label="The Daily Telegraph"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="230705" wikidata="Q671993" url="?curid=230705" title="John H. Coates">
<text>John Henry Coates (26 January 1945 – 9 May 2022) was an Australian mathematician who was the Sadleirian Professor of Pure Mathematics at the University of Cambridge in the United Kingdom from 1986 to 2012.

==Early life and education==
Coates was born the son of J. H. Coates and B. L. Lee on 26 January 1945 and grew up in Possum Brush (near Taree) in New South Wales, Australia. Coates Road in Possum Brush is named after the family farm on which he grew up. Before university he spent a summer working for BHP in Newcastle, New South Wales, though he was not successful in gaining a university scholarship with the company. Coates attended Australian National University on scholarship as one of the first undergraduates, from which he gained a BSc degree. He then moved to France, doing further study at the École Normale Supérieure in Paris, before moving again, this time to England.

==Career==
In England he did postgraduate research at the University of Cambridge, his doctoral dissertation being on &quot;p&quot;-adic analogues of Baker&#x27;s method. In 1969, Coates was appointed assistant professor of mathematics at Harvard University in the United States, before moving again in 1972 to Stanford University where he became an associate professor.

In 1975, he returned to England, where he was made a fellow of Emmanuel College, and took up a lectureship. Here he supervised the PhD of Andrew Wiles, and together they proved a partial case of the Birch and Swinnerton-Dyer conjecture for elliptic curves with complex multiplication.

In 1977, Coates moved back to Australia, becoming a professor at the Australian National University, where he had been an undergraduate. The following year, he moved back to France, taking up a professorship at the University of Paris XI at Orsay. In 1985, he returned to the École Normale Supérieure, this time as professor and director of mathematics.

From 1986 until his death, Coates worked in the Department of Pure Mathematics and Mathematical Statistics (DPMMS) of the University of Cambridge. He was head of DPMMS from 1991 to 1997.

His research interests included Iwasawa theory, number theory and arithmetical algebraic geometry.

He served on the Mathematical Sciences jury for the Infosys Prize in 2009.

==Awards and honours==
Coates was elected a fellow of the Royal Society of London in 1985, and was President of the London Mathematical Society from 1988 to 1990. The latter organisation awarded him the Senior Whitehead Prize in 1997, for &quot;his fundamental research in number theory and for his many contributions to mathematical life both in the UK and internationally&quot;. His nomination for the Royal Society reads:

==Personal life==
Coates married Julie Turner in 1966, with whom he had three sons. He collected Japanese pottery and porcelain. He died on 9 May 2022.

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q671993" start="0" end="17" title="John H. Coates" label="John Henry Coates"/>
<link wikidata="Q2947691" start="93" end="133" title="Sadleirian Professor of Pure Mathematics" label="Sadleirian Professor of Pure Mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q35794" start="141" end="164" title="University of Cambridge" label="University of Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543632" start="343" end="348" title="Taree" label="Taree"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224" start="353" end="368" title="New South Wales" label="New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q625713" start="509" end="512" title="BHP" label="BHP"/>
<link wikidata="Q57278" start="516" end="542" title="Newcastle, New South Wales" label="Newcastle, New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q127990" start="643" end="673" title="Australian National University" label="Australian National University"/>
<link wikidata="Q83259" start="812" end="836" title="École normale supérieure (Paris)" label="École Normale Supérieure"/>
<link wikidata="Q311627" start="1009" end="1027" title="P-adic number" label="&amp;quot;p&amp;quot;-adic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3527009" start="1041" end="1060" title="Baker&amp;#x27;s theorem" label="Baker&amp;#x27;s method"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="1130" end="1148" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q41506" start="1202" end="1221" title="Stanford University" label="Stanford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404101" start="1316" end="1322" title="fellow" label="fellow"/>
<link wikidata="Q797892" start="1326" end="1342" title="Emmanuel College, Cambridge" label="Emmanuel College"/>
<link wikidata="Q184433" start="1401" end="1413" title="Andrew Wiles" label="Andrew Wiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q527863" start="1462" end="1498" title="Birch and Swinnerton-Dyer conjecture" label="Birch and Swinnerton-Dyer conjecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q268493" start="1503" end="1517" title="elliptic curve" label="elliptic curve"/>
<link wikidata="Q2654923" start="1524" end="1546" title="complex multiplication" label="complex multiplication"/>
<link wikidata="Q127990" start="1618" end="1648" title="Australian National University" label="Australian National University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1480643" start="1764" end="1786" title="Paris-Sud University" label="University of Paris XI"/>
<link wikidata="Q372281" start="1790" end="1795" title="Orsay" label="Orsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q5429016" start="1952" end="2018" title="Faculty of Mathematics, University of Cambridge" label="Department of Pure Mathematics and Mathematical Statistics (DPMMS)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1392559" start="2124" end="2138" title="Iwasawa theory" label="Iwasawa theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q6031368" start="2244" end="2257" title="Infosys Prize" label="Infosys Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q123885" start="2326" end="2339" title="Royal Society" label="Royal Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810244" start="2384" end="2411" title="London Mathematical Society" label="London Mathematical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q943724" start="2471" end="2493" title="Senior Whitehead Prize" label="Senior Whitehead Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q910924" start="2791" end="2821" title="Japanese pottery and porcelain" label="Japanese pottery and porcelain"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="230708" wikidata="Q1139868" url="?curid=230708" title="Solera">
<text>Solera is a process for aging liquids such as wine, beer, vinegar, and brandy, by fractional blending in such a way that the finished product is a mixture of ages, with the average age gradually increasing as the process continues over many years. The purpose of this labor-intensive process is the maintenance of a reliable style and quality of the beverage over time. &quot;Solera&quot; means &#x27;on the ground&#x27; in Spanish, and it refers to the lower level of the set of barrels or other containers used in the process; the liquid is traditionally transferred from barrel to barrel, top to bottom, the oldest mixtures being in the barrel right &quot;on the ground&quot;. The containers in today&#x27;s process are not necessarily stacked physically in this way but merely carefully labeled. Products which are often solera aged include Sherry, Madeira, Lillet, Marsala, Mavrodafni, Muscat, and Muscadelle wines; balsamic vinegar, Commandaria, some vins doux naturels, and sherry vinegars; Brandy de Jerez; beer; rums; and whiskies. Since the origin of this process is the Iberian peninsula, most of the traditional terminology is in Spanish and Portuguese.

==Solera process==

In the solera process, a succession of containers are filled with the product over a series of equal aging intervals (usually a year). A group of one or more containers, called scales, &quot;criaderas&quot; (&#x27;nurseries&#x27;), or &quot;clases&quot; are filled for each interval. At the end of the interval after the last scale is filled, the oldest scale in the solera is tapped for part of its content, which is bottled. Then that scale is refilled from the next oldest scale, and that one in succession from the second-oldest, down to the youngest scale, which is refilled with new product. This procedure is repeated at the end of each aging interval. The transferred product mixes with the older product in the next barrel.
No container is ever completely drained, so some of the earlier product always remains in each container. This remnant diminishes to a tiny level, but there can be significant traces of product much older than the average, depending on the transfer fraction. In theory traces of the very first product placed in the solera may be present even after 50 or more cycles. In Andalusia, Spain, the latest regulations for labeling require careful labeling and record-keeping, usually via computer, allowing the winemaker or regulator to easily access the average age of each container, which depends not only on the refreshment interval and number of scales, but also the relative volumes that are chosen for the refreshment process—a larger refreshment and final removal for bottling will result in a younger average age (see Aging). The upper quality levels implied by the labeling system require the bottled wine to be greater in age than the regulatory requirements.

==Aging==

The age of product from the first bottling is the number of containers times the aging interval. As the solera matures, the average age of product asymptotically approaches one plus the number of scales (excluding the top scale) (K) divided by the fraction of a scale transferred or bottled (α), or .

For instance, suppose the solera consists of three barrels of wine, and half of each barrel is transferred once a year. At the end of the third year (and each subsequent year), half the third barrel is bottled. This first bottling is aged three years. The third barrel is then refilled by transferring half of the wine from the second barrel. The wine transferred from the second barrel has an average age of 2.5 years (at the end of year 2, after barrel transfers, it was half 2-year old wine, half 1-year old wine, for an average age of 1.5 years; at the end of year 3, before barrel transfers, it will have aged another year for an average age of 2.5 years). The second bottling will then be half 3.5 years old and half four years old (the wine left in the last barrel at the previous cycle), for an average age of 3.75 years. The third bottling will be an average age of 4.25 years (one half wine that was left over from the second bottling—average age 4.75 years, and one half wine transferred from the second barrel after the second bottling—average age 3.75 years). After 20 years, the output of the solera would be a mix of wine from 3 to 20 years old, averaging very slightly under five years. The average age asymptotically converges on five years as the solera continues.

==History==
The first written mention of the solera may be in the 1849 inventory of the house of Garvey, though the term was probably in use earlier.

==Solera in different countries==
This process is known as solera in Spanish, and was developed by the producers of sherry. In a Spanish sherry solera, the vintner may transfer about a third of each barrel a year. A solera sherry has to be at least three years old when bottled.

A quite similar process is called &quot;sostrera&quot;, used to produce fortified wines in the Mediterranean regions of France.

In Sicily, where Marsala wine is made, the system is called &quot;in perpetuum&quot;.

Solera vinification is used in the making of Mavrodafni (&#x27;Black Laurel&#x27;), a fortified red dessert wine made in the northern Peloponnese in Greece. Exceptional &quot;Mavrodafni&quot; vintages are released every 20 or 30 years: they are of minimal availability and expensive.

Vintners in Rutherglen, Australia, produce fortified muscat-style and Tokay-style wines using the solera process. In South Australia, some fortified wines (akin to tawny port) are made from blends of Shiraz, Grenache, and Mourvèdre.

Glenfiddich, a Speyside distillery in Scotland, has a 15-year-old whisky that uses a vatting process similar to the solera. The whisky is labelled as their &quot;15 year old single malt Scotch Whisky&quot;. For Scotch whisky, the stated age must refer to the youngest of whisky&#x27;s components. Barrels are emptied into the solera vat and mixed. Then whisky is drawn from the vat to be bottled, with the vat never being more than half emptied. Since the process began in 1998, the vat has never been emptied.

The oldest port wine producer in America, Old Vine Tinta Solera at Ficklin, has used a solera since 1948.

In Okinawa, Japan, where &quot;awamori&quot; is made, the traditional system similar to the solera is called &quot;shitsugi&quot;.

The solera process has been used since the 17th century to produce sour ales in Sweden, where it is known as &quot;hundraårig öl&quot; (&#x27;hundred-year beer&#x27;). The beer is rarely commercially available, being instead made at the large manors for private consumption.

A process of partially emptying and refilling barrels with beer is undertaken by craft breweries in the United States.

==See also==
* Perpetual stew 

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==
* Website of the Denominación de Origen of Jerez
* Website of the Denominación de Origen Montilla-Moriles: Criaderas and Soleras 
* Aging: the Solera Method demystified... by The Rum Project
* The Solera system on SherryNotes</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1139868" start="0" end="6" title="Solera" label="Solera"/>
<link wikidata="Q439086" start="24" end="29" title="Aging of wine" label="aging"/>
<link wikidata="Q282" start="46" end="50" title="wine" label="wine"/>
<link wikidata="Q44" start="52" end="56" title="beer" label="beer"/>
<link wikidata="Q41354" start="58" end="65" title="vinegar" label="vinegar"/>
<link wikidata="Q146470" start="71" end="77" title="brandy" label="brandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q16398" start="845" end="851" title="Sherry" label="Sherry"/>
<link wikidata="Q27697" start="853" end="860" title="Madeira wine" label="Madeira"/>
<link wikidata="Q1644339" start="862" end="868" title="Lillet" label="Lillet"/>
<link wikidata="Q842052" start="870" end="877" title="Marsala wine" label="Marsala"/>
<link wikidata="Q475684" start="879" end="889" title="Mavrodafni" label="Mavrodafni"/>
<link wikidata="Q181486" start="891" end="897" title="Muscat (grape)" label="Muscat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934770" start="903" end="913" title="Muscadelle" label="Muscadelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q170037" start="921" end="937" title="balsamic vinegar" label="balsamic vinegar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115080" start="939" end="950" title="Commandaria" label="Commandaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q722338" start="957" end="975" title="vins doux naturels" label="vins doux naturels"/>
<link wikidata="Q2766624" start="981" end="995" title="sherry vinegar" label="sherry vinegar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2537880" start="998" end="1013" title="Brandy de Jerez" label="Brandy de Jerez"/>
<link wikidata="Q44" start="1015" end="1019" title="beer" label="beer"/>
<link wikidata="Q83376" start="1021" end="1024" title="rum" label="rum"/>
<link wikidata="Q281" start="1031" end="1039" title="Whisky" label="whiskies"/>
<link wikidata="Q332154" start="2741" end="2746" title="Ageing" label="Aging"/>
<link wikidata="Q179436" start="3044" end="3058" title="Asymptote" label="asymptotically"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="5046" end="5052" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q842052" start="5060" end="5072" title="Marsala wine" label="Marsala wine"/>
<link wikidata="Q475684" start="5175" end="5185" title="Mavrodafni" label="Mavrodafni"/>
<link wikidata="Q78967" start="5264" end="5275" title="Peloponnese" label="Peloponnese"/>
<link wikidata="Q2375558" start="5427" end="5448" title="Rutherglen, Victoria" label="Rutherglen, Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q667850" start="5485" end="5490" title="Tokaji" label="Tokay"/>
<link wikidata="Q332720" start="5615" end="5621" title="Syrah" label="Shiraz"/>
<link wikidata="Q390242" start="5623" end="5631" title="Grenache" label="Grenache"/>
<link wikidata="Q161864" start="5637" end="5646" title="Mourvèdre" label="Mourvèdre"/>
<link wikidata="Q911587" start="5649" end="5660" title="Glenfiddich distillery" label="Glenfiddich"/>
<link wikidata="Q92615" start="5664" end="5672" title="Strathspey, Scotland" label="Speyside"/>
<link wikidata="Q281" start="5715" end="5721" title="whisky" label="whisky"/>
<link wikidata="Q10668296" start="5823" end="5841" title="single malt Scotch" label="single malt Scotch"/>
<link wikidata="Q191034" start="6172" end="6181" title="port wine" label="port wine"/>
<link wikidata="Q766445" start="6271" end="6278" title="Okinawa Prefecture" label="Okinawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069948" start="6299" end="6306" title="awamori" label="awamori"/>
<link wikidata="Q7565081" start="6467" end="6476" title="sour beer" label="sour ales"/>
<link wikidata="Q5487333" start="6757" end="6762" title="craft beer" label="craft"/>
<link wikidata="Q131734" start="6763" end="6772" title="Brewery" label="breweries"/>
<link wikidata="Q7169555" start="6811" end="6825" title="Perpetual stew" label="Perpetual stew"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="230711" wikidata="Q131721" url="?curid=230711" title="Johannes Diderik van der Waals">
<text>Johannes Diderik van der Waals (; 23 November 1837 – 8 March 1923) was a Dutch physicist who received the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1910 &quot;for his work on the equation of state for gases and liquids&quot;. Van der Waals started his career as a schoolteacher. He became the first physics professor of the University of Amsterdam when its status was upgraded to Municipal University in 1877.

His name is primarily associated with the Van der Waals equation of state that describes the behavior of gases and their condensation to the liquid phase. His name is also associated with Van der Waals forces (forces between stable molecules), with Van der Waals molecules (small molecular clusters bound by Van der Waals forces), and with Van der Waals radii (sizes of molecules). James Clerk Maxwell once said that, &quot;there can be no doubt that the name of Van der Waals will soon be among the foremost in molecular science.&quot;

In his 1873 thesis, Van der Waals noted the non-ideality of real gases and attributed it to the existence of intermolecular interactions. He introduced the first equation of state derived by the assumption of a finite volume occupied by the constituent molecules. Spearheaded by Ernst Mach and Wilhelm Ostwald, a strong philosophical current that denied the existence of molecules arose towards the end of the 19th century. The molecular existence was considered unproven and the molecular hypothesis unnecessary. At the time Van der Waals&#x27;s thesis was written (1873), the molecular structure of fluids had not been accepted by most physicists, and liquid and vapor were often considered as chemically distinct. But Van der Waals&#x27;s work affirmed the reality of molecules and allowed an assessment of their size and attractive strength. His new formula revolutionized the study of equations of state. By comparing his equation of state with experimental data, Van der Waals was able to obtain estimates for the actual size of molecules and the strength of their mutual attraction.

The effect of Van der Waals&#x27;s work on molecular physics in the 20th century was direct and fundamental. By introducing parameters characterizing molecular size and attraction in constructing his equation of state, Van der Waals set the tone for modern molecular science. That molecular aspects such as size, shape, attraction, and multipolar interactions should form the basis for mathematical formulations of the thermodynamic and transport properties of fluids is presently considered an axiom. With the help of the Van der Waals&#x27;s equation of state, the critical-point parameters of gases could be accurately predicted from thermodynamic measurements made at much higher temperatures. Nitrogen, oxygen, hydrogen, and helium subsequently succumbed to liquefaction. Heike Kamerlingh Onnes was significantly influenced by the pioneering work of Van der Waals. In 1908, Onnes became the first to make liquid helium; this led directly to his 1911 discovery of superconductivity.

==Biography==

===Early years and education===
Johannes Diderik van der Waals was born on 23 November 1837 in Leiden in the Netherlands. He was the eldest of ten children born to Jacobus van der Waals and Elisabeth van den Berg. His father was a carpenter in Leiden. As was usual for all girls and working-class boys in the 19th century, he did not go to the kind of secondary school that would have given him the right to enter university. Instead he went to a school of “advanced primary education”, which he finished at the age of fifteen. He then became a teacher&#x27;s apprentice in an elementary school. Between 1856 and 1861 he followed courses and gained the necessary qualifications to become a primary school teacher and head teacher.

In 1862, he began to attend lectures in mathematics, physics and astronomy at the university in his city of birth, although he was not qualified to be enrolled as a regular student in part because of his lack of education in classical languages. However, Leiden University had a provision that enabled outside students to take up to four courses a year. In 1863 the Dutch government started a new kind of secondary school (HBS, a school aiming at the children of the higher middle classes). Van der Waals—at that time head of an elementary school—wanted to become a HBS teacher in mathematics and physics and spent two years studying in his spare time for the required examinations.

In 1865, he was appointed as a physics teacher at the HBS in Deventer and in 1866, he received such a position in The Hague, which was close enough to Leiden to allow Van der Waals to resume his courses at the university there. In September 1865, just before moving to Deventer, Van der Waals married the eighteen-year-old Anna Magdalena Smit.

===Professorship===
Van der Waals still lacked the knowledge of the classical languages that would have given him the right to enter university as a regular student and to take examinations. However, it so happened that the law regulating the university entrance was changed and dispensation from the study of classical languages could be given by the minister of education. Van der Waals was given this dispensation and passed the qualification exams in physics and mathematics for doctoral studies.

At Leiden University, on June 14, 1873, he defended his doctoral thesis &quot;Over de Continuïteit van den Gas- en Vloeistoftoestand&quot; (on the continuity of the gaseous and liquid state) under Pieter Rijke. In the thesis, he introduced the concepts of molecular volume and molecular attraction.

In September 1877, Van der Waals was appointed the first professor of physics at the newly founded Municipal University of Amsterdam. Two of his notable colleagues were the physical chemist Jacobus Henricus van &#x27;t Hoff and the biologist Hugo de Vries. Until his retirement at the age of 70, Van der Waals remained at the Amsterdam University. He was succeeded by his son Johannes Diderik van der Waals, Jr., who also was a theoretical physicist. In 1910, at the age of 72, Van der Waals was awarded the Nobel Prize in physics. He died at the age of 85 on March 8, 1923.

==Scientific work==

The main interest of Van der Waals was in the field of thermodynamics. He was influenced by Rudolf Clausius&#x27;s 1857 treatise entitled &quot;Über die Art der Bewegung, welche wir Wärme nennen&quot; (&quot;On the Kind of Motion which we Call Heat&quot;). Van der Waals was later greatly influenced by the writings of James Clerk Maxwell, Ludwig Boltzmann, and Willard Gibbs. Clausius&#x27;s work led him to look for an explanation of Thomas Andrews&#x27;s experiments that had revealed, in 1869, the existence of critical temperatures in fluids. He managed to give a semi-quantitative description of the phenomena of condensation and critical temperatures in his 1873 thesis, entitled &quot;Over de Continuïteit van den Gas- en Vloeistoftoestand&quot; (On the continuity of the gas and liquid state). This dissertation represented a hallmark in physics and was immediately recognized as such, e.g. by James Clerk Maxwell who reviewed it in Nature in a laudatory manner.

In this thesis he derived the equation of state bearing his name. This work gave a model in which the liquid and the gas phase of a substance merge into each other in a continuous manner. It shows that the two phases are of the same nature. In deriving his equation of state Van der Waals assumed not only the existence of molecules (the existence of atoms was disputed at the time), but also that they are of finite size and attract each other. Since he was one of the first to postulate an intermolecular force, however rudimentary, such a force is now sometimes called a Van der Waals force.

A second major discovery was the 1880 the law of corresponding states, which showed that the Van der Waals equation of state can be expressed as a simple function of the critical pressure, critical volume, and critical temperature. This general form is applicable to all substances (see Van der Waals equation.) The compound-specific constants &quot;a&quot; and &quot;b&quot; in the original equation are replaced by universal (compound-independent) quantities. It was this law which served as a guide during experiments which ultimately led to the liquefaction of hydrogen by James Dewar in 1898 and of helium by Heike Kamerlingh Onnes in 1908.

In 1890, Van der Waals published a treatise on the &quot;Theory of Binary Solutions&quot; in the Archives Néerlandaises. By relating his equation of state with the second law of thermodynamics, in the form first proposed by Willard Gibbs, he was able to arrive at a graphical representation of his mathematical formulations in the form of a surface which he called Ψ (Psi) surface following Gibbs, who used the Greek letter Ψ for the free energy of a system with different phases in equilibrium.

Mention should also be made of Van der Waals&#x27;s theory of capillarity, which in its basic form first appeared in 1893. In contrast to the mechanical perspective on the subject provided earlier by Pierre-Simon Laplace, Van der Waals took a thermodynamic approach. This was controversial at the time, since the existence of molecules and their permanent, rapid motion were not universally accepted before Jean Baptiste Perrin&#x27;s experimental verification of Albert Einstein&#x27;s theoretical explanation of Brownian motion.

===Personal life===
He married his wife Anna Magdalena Smit in 1865, and the couple had three daughters (Anne Madeleine, , Johanna Diderica) and one son, the physicist , who also worked at the University of Amsterdam. Jacqueline was a poet of some note. Van der Waals&#x27;s nephew Peter van der Waals was a cabinet maker and a leading figure in the Sapperton, Gloucestershire school of the Arts and Crafts movement. His wife died of tuberculosis at 34 years old in 1881. After becoming a widower Van der Waals never remarried and was so shaken by the death of his wife that he did not publish anything for about a decade. He died in Amsterdam on March 8, 1923, one year after his daughter Jacqueline had died.

==Honours==
Van der Waals received numerous honors and distinctions, besides winning the 1910 Nobel Prize in Physics. He was awarded an honorary doctorate of the University of Cambridge; was made Honorary Member of the Imperial Society of Naturalists of Moscow, the Royal Irish Academy, and the American Philosophical Society (1916); Corresponding Member of the Institut de France and the Royal Academy of Sciences of Berlin; Associate Member of the Royal Academy of Sciences of Belgium; and Foreign Member of the Chemical Society of London, the National Academy of Sciences of the United States (1913), and of the Accademia dei Lincei of Rome. Van der Waals became a member of the Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1875. From 1896 until 1912, he was secretary of this society. He was furthermore elected as Honorary Member of the Netherlands Chemical Society in 1912.

Minor planet 32893 van der Waals is named in his honor.

==Related quotes==


==See also==
*Van der Waals equation
*Van der Waals strain
*Van der Waals radius
*Van der Waals force
*Redlich–Kwong equation of state
*Peng–Robinson equation of state

== Notes ==
== References ==
=== Citations ===
=== Sources ===


==Further reading==
* Kipnis, A. Ya.; Yavelov, B. E.; Rowlinson, J. S. (trans.): &quot;Van der Waals and Molecular Science&quot;. (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1996) 
* Sengers, Johanna Levelt: &quot;How Fluids Unmix: Discoveries by the School of Van der Waals and Kamerlingh Onnes&quot;. (Amsterdam : Koninklijke Nerlandse Akademie van Wetenschappen, 2002) 
* Shachtman, Tom: &quot;Absolute Zero and the Conquest of Cold&quot;. (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1999)
* Van Delft, Dirk: &quot;Freezing Physics: Heike Kamerlingh Onnes and the Quest for Cold&quot;. (Amsterdam: Koninklijke Nerlandse Akademie van Wetenschappen, 2008)
* Van der Waals, J. D.: Edited and Intro. J. S. Rowlinson: &quot;On the Continuity of the Liquid and Gaseous States&quot;. (New York: Dover Publications, 2004, 320pp)

==External links==
* Scientists of the Dutch School Van der Waals, Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences
* Albert van Helden &quot;Johannes Diderik van der Waals 1837 – 1923&quot; In: K. van Berkel, A. van Helden and L. Palm ed., A History of Science in the Netherlands. Survey, Themes and Reference (Leiden: Brill, 1999) 596 – 598.
* including the Nobel Lecture, December 12, 1910 &quot;The Equation of State for Gases and Liquids&quot;
* Museum Boerhaave  
* H.A.M. Snelders, &quot;Waals Sr., Johannes Diderik van der (1837–1923)&quot;, in Biografisch Woordenboek van Nederland.
* Biography of &quot;Johannes Diderik van der Waals (1837–1923)&quot; at the National Library of the Netherlands.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q131721" start="0" end="30" title="Johannes Diderik van der Waals" label="Johannes Diderik van der Waals"/>
<link wikidata="Q169470" start="79" end="88" title="physicist" label="physicist"/>
<link wikidata="Q38104" start="106" end="128" title="Nobel Prize in Physics" label="Nobel Prize in Physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q214967" start="163" end="180" title="equation of state" label="equation of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q11432" start="185" end="188" title="gas" label="gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q11435" start="195" end="201" title="liquid" label="liquid"/>
<link wikidata="Q413" start="283" end="290" title="physics" label="physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q214341" start="308" end="331" title="University of Amsterdam" label="University of Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q254329" start="437" end="459" title="Van der Waals equation" label="Van der Waals equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q214967" start="463" end="468" title="equation of state" label="state"/>
<link wikidata="Q104837" start="543" end="548" title="Phase (matter)" label="phase"/>
<link wikidata="Q189627" start="583" end="603" title="Van der Waals forces" label="Van der Waals forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q11369" start="627" end="636" title="molecules" label="molecules"/>
<link wikidata="Q7913888" start="644" end="666" title="Van der Waals molecule" label="Van der Waals molecule"/>
<link wikidata="Q166879" start="735" end="754" title="Van der Waals radius" label="Van der Waals radii"/>
<link wikidata="Q9095" start="777" end="796" title="James Clerk Maxwell" label="James Clerk Maxwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q489328" start="907" end="924" title="molecular science" label="molecular science"/>
<link wikidata="Q172280" start="977" end="989" title="ideal gas" label="non-ideality"/>
<link wikidata="Q908724" start="993" end="1003" title="real gases" label="real gases"/>
<link wikidata="Q245031" start="1042" end="1069" title="intermolecular interactions" label="intermolecular interactions"/>
<link wikidata="Q214967" start="1095" end="1112" title="equation of state" label="equation of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q93996" start="1212" end="1222" title="Ernst Mach" label="Ernst Mach"/>
<link wikidata="Q12658" start="1227" end="1242" title="Wilhelm Ostwald" label="Wilhelm Ostwald"/>
<link wikidata="Q11369" start="1304" end="1313" title="molecules" label="molecules"/>
<link wikidata="Q911331" start="1511" end="1530" title="molecular structure" label="molecular structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q102205" start="1534" end="1540" title="fluids" label="fluids"/>
<link wikidata="Q11435" start="1587" end="1593" title="liquid" label="liquid"/>
<link wikidata="Q255722" start="1598" end="1603" title="vapor" label="vapor"/>
<link wikidata="Q189627" start="1758" end="1777" title="Van der Waals forces" label="attractive strength"/>
<link wikidata="Q254329" start="1856" end="1877" title="Van der Waals equation of state" label="his equation of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q189627" start="1998" end="2021" title="Van der Waals forces" label="their mutual attraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q489328" start="2067" end="2084" title="molecular physics" label="molecular physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q834226" start="2136" end="2158" title="Van der Waals constants (data page)" label="introducing parameters"/>
<link wikidata="Q214967" start="2224" end="2241" title="equation of state" label="equation of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q489328" start="2281" end="2298" title="molecular science" label="molecular science"/>
<link wikidata="Q245031" start="2360" end="2383" title="intermolecular force" label="multipolar interactions"/>
<link wikidata="Q102205" start="2485" end="2491" title="fluids" label="fluids"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139370" start="2722" end="2730" title="liquid nitrogen" label="Nitrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q618153" start="2732" end="2738" title="liquid oxygen" label="oxygen"/>
<link wikidata="Q622779" start="2740" end="2748" title="liquid hydrogen" label="hydrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203476" start="2754" end="2760" title="liquid helium" label="helium"/>
<link wikidata="Q951166" start="2787" end="2799" title="liquefaction of gases" label="liquefaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q62891" start="2801" end="2823" title="Heike Kamerlingh Onnes" label="Heike Kamerlingh Onnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203476" start="2934" end="2947" title="liquid helium" label="liquid helium"/>
<link wikidata="Q124131" start="2992" end="3009" title="superconductivity" label="superconductivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q43631" start="3122" end="3128" title="Leiden" label="Leiden"/>
<link wikidata="Q203605" start="3258" end="3267" title="carpenter" label="carpenter"/>
<link wikidata="Q949174" start="3984" end="4002" title="classical language" label="classical language"/>
<link wikidata="Q156598" start="4014" end="4031" title="Leiden University" label="Leiden University"/>
<link wikidata="Q10001" start="4504" end="4512" title="Deventer" label="Deventer"/>
<link wikidata="Q36600" start="4557" end="4566" title="The Hague" label="The Hague"/>
<link wikidata="Q949174" start="4856" end="4875" title="classical languages" label="classical languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q752297" start="5271" end="5287" title="doctoral studies" label="doctoral studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q9286544" start="5487" end="5499" title="Pieter Rijke" label="Pieter Rijke"/>
<link wikidata="Q214341" start="5689" end="5722" title="University of Amsterdam" label="Municipal University of Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q102822" start="5780" end="5813" title="Jacobus Henricus van &amp;#x27;t Hoff" label="Jacobus Henricus van &amp;#x27;t Hoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q160192" start="5832" end="5845" title="Hugo de Vries" label="Hugo de Vries"/>
<link wikidata="Q11473" start="6242" end="6256" title="thermodynamics" label="thermodynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q30693" start="6279" end="6294" title="Rudolf Clausius" label="Rudolf Clausius"/>
<link wikidata="Q9095" start="6506" end="6525" title="James Clerk Maxwell" label="James Clerk Maxwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q84296" start="6527" end="6543" title="Ludwig Boltzmann" label="Ludwig Boltzmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q153243" start="6549" end="6562" title="Willard Gibbs" label="Willard Gibbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q500440" start="6623" end="6637" title="Thomas Andrews (scientist)" label="Thomas Andrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q166583" start="6806" end="6818" title="condensation" label="condensation"/>
<link wikidata="Q9095" start="7090" end="7109" title="James Clerk Maxwell" label="James Clerk Maxwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q180445" start="7129" end="7135" title="Nature (journal)" label="Nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q189627" start="7734" end="7753" title="Van der Waals force" label="Van der Waals force"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8043" end="8065" title="Van der Waals equation#Reduced form" label="Van der Waals equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11173" start="8072" end="8080" title="Compound (chemistry)" label="compound"/>
<link wikidata="Q180208" start="8305" end="8317" title="liquefaction" label="liquefaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q556" start="8321" end="8329" title="hydrogen" label="hydrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q277579" start="8333" end="8344" title="James Dewar" label="James Dewar"/>
<link wikidata="Q560" start="8360" end="8366" title="helium" label="helium"/>
<link wikidata="Q62891" start="8370" end="8392" title="Heike Kamerlingh Onnes" label="Heike Kamerlingh Onnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q177045" start="8567" end="8595" title="second law of thermodynamics" label="second law of thermodynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146448" start="8837" end="8848" title="Thermodynamic free energy" label="free energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q188603" start="8962" end="8973" title="capillarity" label="capillarity"/>
<link wikidata="Q11397" start="9042" end="9052" title="Classical mechanics" label="mechanical"/>
<link wikidata="Q44481" start="9100" end="9120" title="Pierre-Simon Laplace" label="Pierre-Simon Laplace"/>
<link wikidata="Q134085" start="9307" end="9327" title="Jean Baptiste Perrin" label="Jean Baptiste Perrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q937" start="9364" end="9379" title="Albert Einstein" label="Albert Einstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q178036" start="9414" end="9429" title="Brownian motion" label="Brownian motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7177537" start="9714" end="9733" title="Peter van der Waals" label="Peter van der Waals"/>
<link wikidata="Q2236150" start="9782" end="9808" title="Sapperton, Gloucestershire" label="Sapperton, Gloucestershire"/>
<link wikidata="Q330369" start="9823" end="9847" title="Arts and Crafts movement" label="Arts and Crafts movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q12204" start="9866" end="9878" title="tuberculosis" label="tuberculosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q727" start="10066" end="10075" title="Amsterdam" label="Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q35794" start="10306" end="10329" title="University of Cambridge" label="University of Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1965654" start="10363" end="10404" title="Imperial Society of Naturalists of Moscow" label="Imperial Society of Naturalists of Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q110587" start="10410" end="10429" title="Royal Irish Academy" label="Royal Irish Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q466089" start="10439" end="10469" title="American Philosophical Society" label="American Philosophical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q377066" start="10506" end="10524" title="Institut de France" label="Institut de France"/>
<link wikidata="Q941221" start="10658" end="10684" title="Chemical Society of London" label="Chemical Society of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q270794" start="10690" end="10739" title="National Academy of Sciences of the United States" label="National Academy of Sciences of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q338432" start="10759" end="10779" title="Accademia dei Lincei" label="Accademia dei Lincei"/>
<link wikidata="Q253439" start="10826" end="10872" title="Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences" label="Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q2066202" start="10991" end="11019" title="Royal Netherlands Chemical Society" label="Netherlands Chemical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246097" start="11043" end="11062" title="32893 van der Waals" label="32893 van der Waals"/>
<link wikidata="Q254329" start="11122" end="11144" title="Van der Waals equation" label="Van der Waals equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7913889" start="11146" end="11166" title="Van der Waals strain" label="Van der Waals strain"/>
<link wikidata="Q166879" start="11168" end="11188" title="Van der Waals radius" label="Van der Waals radius"/>
<link wikidata="Q189627" start="11190" end="11209" title="Van der Waals force" label="Van der Waals force"/>
<link wikidata="Q903139" start="11211" end="11242" title="Redlich–Kwong equation of state" label="Redlich–Kwong equation of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q22668086" start="11244" end="11275" title="Peng–Robinson equation of state" label="Peng–Robinson equation of state"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="230714" wikidata="Q860556" url="?curid=230714" title="Flanders and Swann">
<text>Flanders and Swann were a British comedy duo and musicians. Michael Flanders (1922–1975) was a lyricist, actor, and singer. He collaborated with Donald Swann (1923–1994), a composer and pianist, in writing and performing comic songs. They first worked together in a school revue in 1939 and eventually wrote more than 100 comic songs together.

Flanders and Swann performed their songs, interspersed with comic monologues, in their long-running two-man revues &quot;At the Drop of a Hat&quot; (1956-1959) and &quot;At the Drop of Another Hat&quot; (1963-1967), which they toured in Britain and abroad. Both revues were recorded in concert (by George Martin). The duo also made several studio recordings.

==Musical partnership==
Flanders and Swann both attended Westminster School (where in July and August 1940 they staged a revue called &quot;Go To It&quot;) and Christ Church, Oxford, two institutions linked by ancient tradition. The pair went their separate ways during World War II, but a chance meeting in 1948 led to their forming a musical partnership writing songs and light opera. Flanders provided the words and Swann composed the music. Their songs have been sung by performers such as Ian Wallace and Joyce Grenfell.

In December 1956, Flanders and Swann hired the New Lindsey Theatre, Notting Hill, to perform their two-man revue &quot;At the Drop of a Hat&quot;, which opened on New Year&#x27;s Eve. Flanders sang a selection of the songs that they had written, interspersed with comic monologues, accompanied by Swann on the piano. An unusual feature of their act was that both men remained seated for their shows: Swann behind his piano and Flanders in a wheelchair (having contracted poliomyelitis in 1943). The show was successful and transferred the next month to the Fortune Theatre, where it ran for over two years, before touring in the UK, the United States, Canada and Switzerland.

In 1963, Flanders and Swann opened in a second revue, &quot;At the Drop of Another Hat&quot;, at the Haymarket Theatre. Over the next four years they toured a combination of the two shows in the UK, Australia, New Zealand, Hong Kong, the United States and Canada, before finishing at the Booth Theatre on Broadway in New York City. On 9 April 1967, they performed their last live show together. Ten days later, they moved into a studio theater and recorded the show for television.

Over the course of 11 years, Flanders and Swann gave nearly 2,000 live performances. Although their performing partnership ended in 1967, they remained friends afterwards and collaborated on occasional projects.

===Timeline and venues of the revues===
==Discography==
Their records were originally released on the Parlophone label; CD reissues are on EMI.

===45s===
* 1957 – &quot;A Gnu&quot; b/w &quot;Misalliance&quot;

===EPs===
* 1957 – &quot;More out of the Hat!&quot; (EP)
* 1959 – &quot;Excerpts from at the Drop of a Hat&quot; (EP)
* 1959 – &quot;More Excerpts from at the Drop of a Hat&quot; (EP)
* 1962 – &quot;The Bestiary of Flanders &amp; Swann&quot; (EP)
* 1964 – &quot;Favourites from at the Drop of Another Hat&quot; (EP)
* 1964 – &quot;More out of the New Hat&quot; (EP)

===LPs===
* 1957 – &quot;At the Drop of a Hat&quot; (Parlophone PMC 1033 mono) (Recorded live at the Fortune Theatre, London, 21 February 1957.
* 1960 - &quot;At The Drop Of A Hat&quot; (1959 Stereo re-recording) (Parlophone PCS 3001) (Recorded during the final performance at the Fortune Theatre, London, on 2 May 1959. Parlophone&#x27;s first stereo LP release.)
* 1961 - &quot;The Bestiary Of Flanders &amp; Swann&quot; Parlophone PMC 1164 (mono)/ PCS 3026 (stereo)
* 1964 – &quot;At the Drop of Another Hat&quot; (produced by George Martin) Parlophone PMC 1126 (mono) / PCS 3052 (stereo)
* 1975 – &quot;And Then We Wrote...&quot;
* 1977 – &quot;Tried by the Centre Court&quot;

===Cassettes===
* 1996 – &quot;EMI Comedy Classics&quot; (&quot;Hat&quot; and &quot;Another Hat&quot; on two cassettes)
* 1997 – &quot;More out of the Drop of a Hat – Again!&quot; (double cassette)

===CDs===
* 1991 – &quot;The Complete Flanders &amp; Swann&quot; (first three albums, in stereo in a boxed set)
* 1994 – &quot;A Transport of Delight: The Best of Flanders &amp; Swann&quot;
* 1999 – &quot;The Flanders and Swann Collection&quot;
* 2000 – &quot;A Drop of Hilarity from Flanders &amp; Swann&quot;
* 2007 – &quot;Hat Trick: Flanders &amp; Swann Collector&#x27;s Edition&quot;

==Bibliography==
* 1977 – &quot;Songs of Michael Flanders and Donald Swann&quot; (Michael Flanders &amp; Donald Swann, scores)
* 1991 – &quot;The Hippopotamus Song: A Muddy Love Story&quot; (Michael Flanders &amp; Donald Swann, children&#x27;s book)

==Videography==
* 1992 – &quot;The Only Flanders &amp; Swann Video&quot; (recorded in New York, 19 April 1967, 10 days after the close of &quot;At The Drop of Another Hat)&quot;
* 1994 – &quot;Flanders &amp; Swann - Documentary by John Amis&quot; (for BBC2, utilizing footage from &quot;At The Drop of a Hat&quot; recorded at the Haymarket Theatre in 1962, and footage from the above NY performance in 1967)

== Songs ==
Flanders and Swann&#x27;s songs are characterised by wit, gentle satire, complex rhyming schemes, and memorable choruses. Flanders commented during the recorded performance of &quot;At the Drop of Another Hat&quot;,
They wrote over a hundred comic songs together. The following selection gives an indication of their range.
A very rare song, &quot;Vendor Librorum Floreat&quot; (Let the bookseller flourish), was released as a single in 1960. It was written for the annual American Booksellers Association, the only known time Flanders &amp; Swann accepted a private commission.

== Monologues ==
Flanders&#x27; comic monologues include:
* &quot;By Air&quot;—about the vogue for air travel. &quot;I agree with the old lady who said, &#x27;If God had intended us to fly, He would never have given us the railways.
* &quot;Tried by the Centre Court&quot;—a parody of the poem &quot;A Subaltern&#x27;s Love Song&quot; by John Betjeman, about a third-round ladies singles match at Wimbledon, between Miss L. Hammerfest and Miss J. Hunter-Dunn, as related by the bored central umpire. &quot;They are bashing a ball with the gut of a cat&quot;.
* &quot;Greensleeves&quot;—about the background to the composition of the famous English air. An annotated version explains all the jokes.
* &quot;Los Olividados&quot;— a satire on bullfighting, about &quot;the almost unbearable drama of a corrida d&#x27;olivas, or festival of olive-stuffing&quot;. &quot;A cruel sport: some may think it so. But this is surely more than a sport, this is more than a vital artform. What we have experienced here today is total catharsis, in the acting out of that primeval drama, of man pitted against the olive.&quot; The title is a reference to &quot;Los Olvidados&quot;, or &quot;The Forgotten Ones&quot;, a 1950 movie by the director Luis Buñuel.
* &quot;Built-up Area&quot;—a prehistoric inhabitant of Salisbury Plain complains about a new development: Stonehenge.

==Homage and parody==
The British comedy double act Armstrong &amp; Miller have a recurring sketch on &quot;The Armstrong and Miller Show&quot; in which they parody Flanders and Swann, as Donald Brabbins (Armstrong as Flanders) and Teddy Fyffe (Miller as Swann). The parodies begin like a typical Flanders and Swann performance, but the songs are far more bawdy, often being mock-censored for comedic effect.

British singer-songwriter Frank Turner covered &quot;The Armadillo&quot; in his &quot;Mittens&quot; EP.

==See also==
*List of songwriter tandems
*List of people educated at Westminster School

==References==
==External links==
* Flanders and Swann at h2g2
* Flanders &amp; Swann Online (archived)
* An Evening of Flanders and Swann tribute act (archived)
* Flanders and Swann: At the Drop of a Hippopotamus tribute act</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q860556" start="0" end="18" title="Flanders and Swann" label="Flanders and Swann"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141470" start="34" end="44" title="comedy duo" label="comedy duo"/>
<link wikidata="Q10748975" start="60" end="76" title="Michael Flanders" label="Michael Flanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q710220" start="145" end="157" title="Donald Swann" label="Donald Swann"/>
<link wikidata="Q5151495" start="221" end="232" title="comedy music" label="comic songs"/>
<link wikidata="Q918727" start="453" end="458" title="revue" label="revue"/>
<link wikidata="Q4812494" start="466" end="486" title="At the Drop of a Hat" label="At the Drop of a Hat"/>
<link wikidata="Q4812493" start="515" end="541" title="At the Drop of Another Hat" label="At the Drop of Another Hat"/>
<link wikidata="Q191819" start="643" end="656" title="George Martin" label="George Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341516" start="762" end="780" title="Westminster School" label="Westminster School"/>
<link wikidata="Q745967" start="865" end="886" title="Christ Church, Oxford" label="Christ Church, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="975" end="987" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q13220650" start="1079" end="1090" title="light opera" label="light opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q2571907" start="1199" end="1210" title="Ian Wallace (singer)" label="Ian Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q6297498" start="1215" end="1229" title="Joyce Grenfell" label="Joyce Grenfell"/>
<link wikidata="Q215354" start="1300" end="1312" title="Notting Hill" label="Notting Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q12195" start="1703" end="1716" title="poliomyelitis" label="poliomyelitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q9292634" start="1789" end="1804" title="Fortune Theatre" label="Fortune Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q540426" start="2010" end="2027" title="Haymarket Theatre" label="Haymarket Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="2132" end="2141" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q3527434" start="2197" end="2210" title="Booth Theatre" label="Booth Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q235065" start="2214" end="2222" title="Broadway theatre" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q208909" start="2707" end="2717" title="Parlophone Records" label="Parlophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3629023" start="2744" end="2747" title="EMI Records" label="EMI"/>
<link wikidata="Q7736861" start="2775" end="2780" title="The Gnu" label="A Gnu"/>
<link wikidata="Q169930" start="2930" end="2932" title="Extended play" label="EP"/>
<link wikidata="Q4812494" start="3208" end="3228" title="At the Drop of a Hat" label="At the Drop of a Hat"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3342" end="3362" title="At The Drop Of A Hat" label="At The Drop Of A Hat"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3563" end="3599" title="The Bestiary Of Flanders &amp;amp; Swann" label="The Bestiary Of Flanders &amp;amp; Swann"/>
<link wikidata="Q4812493" start="3667" end="3693" title="At the Drop of Another Hat" label="At the Drop of Another Hat"/>
<link wikidata="Q6218907" start="4936" end="4945" title="John Amis" label="John Amis"/>
<link wikidata="Q216108" start="4957" end="4961" title="BBC Two" label="BBC2"/>
<link wikidata="Q962308" start="6044" end="6057" title="John Betjeman" label="John Betjeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q41520" start="6103" end="6112" title="The Championships, Wimbledon" label="Wimbledon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6205162" start="6145" end="6164" title="Joan Jackson" label="Miss J. Hunter-Dunn"/>
<link wikidata="Q674738" start="6339" end="6357" title="Greensleeves" label="famous English air"/>
<link wikidata="Q184940" start="6446" end="6458" title="bullfighting" label="bullfighting"/>
<link wikidata="Q572522" start="6852" end="6865" title="Los Olvidados" label="Los Olvidados"/>
<link wikidata="Q51545" start="6937" end="6948" title="Luis Buñuel" label="Luis Buñuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472049" start="7006" end="7021" title="Salisbury Plain" label="Salisbury Plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q39671" start="7057" end="7067" title="Stonehenge" label="Stonehenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141470" start="7111" end="7121" title="double act" label="double act"/>
<link wikidata="Q4794014" start="7122" end="7144" title="Armstrong and Miller (comedians)" label="Armstrong &amp;amp; Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q7714308" start="7178" end="7207" title="The Armstrong and Miller Show" label="The Armstrong and Miller Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q226901" start="7426" end="7431" title="bawdy" label="bawdy"/>
<link wikidata="Q451028" start="7506" end="7518" title="Frank Turner" label="Frank Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q6640164" start="7599" end="7625" title="List of songwriter tandems" label="List of songwriter tandems"/>
<link wikidata="Q11723058" start="7627" end="7672" title="List of people educated at Westminster School" label="List of people educated at Westminster School"/>
<link wikidata="Q285194" start="7732" end="7736" title="h2g2" label="h2g2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190668" start="7813" end="7824" title="tribute act" label="tribute act"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="230715" wikidata="Q244691" url="?curid=230715" title="Nakhon Si Thammarat province">
<text>Nakhon Si Thammarat province (, ) is a province (&quot;changwat&quot;) of Thailand, on the western shore of the Gulf of Thailand. , it was the most populous province of Southern Thailand, with a population of approximately 1.5 million. Neighboring provinces are (from south clockwise) Songkhla, Phatthalung, Trang, Krabi and Surat Thani.

==Toponymy==
&quot;Nakhon Si Thammarat&quot; is the Thai form of Sanskrit &quot;Nagara Sri Dharmaraja&quot;, meaning &#x27;City of the Sacred Dharma King&#x27;. The name is sometimes abbreviated to &quot;Nakhon Si&quot; () or simply, &quot;Nakhon&quot; (). The province is also colloquially called &quot;Muangkhon&quot; () and its people &quot;Khonkhon&quot; ().

==Geography==
The province is on the Gulf of Thailand on the east side of the Malay Peninsula. The terrain is mostly rugged hilly forest. The province is home to south Thailand&#x27;s highest peak, Khao Luang, at .The total forest area is or 18.4 percent of provincial area.
===National parks===
There area a total of six national parks, five of which, along with fifteen other national parks, make up region 5 (Nakhon Si Thammarat) and Khao Pu–Khao Ya in region 6 (Songkhla) of Thailand&#x27;s protected areas.
* Khao Pu–Khao Ya National Park, 
* Khao Luang National Park, 
* Khao Nan National Park, 
* Hat Khanom–Mu Ko Thale Tai National Park, 
* Namtok Yong National Park, 
* Namtok Si Khit National Park, 

==History==
Nakhon Si Thammarat is one of the oldest cities in Thailand with a rich history. The earliest settlement in the vicinity of the city was Tha Rua, about ten kilometers south of the modern city, where ceramics from the Song dynasty were found dated to the twelfth century.
In ancient times, Nakhon Si Thammarat was under the rule of the Srivijaya, the king of Srivijaya had established a foothold on the Malay Peninsula at Ligor&quot; by 775, where he &quot;built various edifices, including a sanctuary dedicated to the Buddha and to the Bodhisattvas Padmapani and Vajrapani. 

The &quot;Chronicles of Nakhon Si Thammarat&quot;, composed in the seventeenth century, attributed the foundation of current city of Nakhon Si Thammarat to King Sri Thammasok in the thirteenth century. An inscription found at Chaiya stated that King Sri Thammasok ruled Tambralinga in 1231. King Sri Thammasok constructed Wat Phra Mahathat and introduced Singhalese Theravada Buddhism. The Nakhon Si Thammarat Kingdom held authorities over &quot;twelve cities&quot; that extended from Chumphon to the north and Pahang to the south. The Ramkamhaeng Stele of Sukhothai first mentioned &quot;Nakhon Si Thammarat&quot; in 1292, which means &quot;The City of King Sri Thammasok&quot; or &quot;The City of the Virtuous king&quot;. The Nakhon Si Thammarat kingdom ended and the city perished in the fourteenth century. The ruler of Phetchaburi known as Phra Phanom Thale sent his son Phra Phanom Wang to re-establish the city and rule. Nakhon Si Thammarat then came under the influence of Central Siamese Kingdom of Ayutthaya under the mandala system.

===Ayutthaya Period===
Nakhon Si Thammarat was further incorporated into Ayutthaya, who appointed governors to the city, through centralization under King Trailokanat in the fifteenth century. Nakhon Si Thammarat served as the main seat of Siamese authority over Southern Thailand and the Malay Peninsula, becoming Muang Ek or first-level city. Yamada Nagamasa, the Japanese adventurer, was appointed as the governor of Nakhon Si Thammarat in 1629.

After the Siamese revolution of 1688, the governor of Nakhon Si Thammarat rebelled against the new King Phetracha. King Phetracha sent troops to put down rebels in Nakhon Si Thammarat in 1692.

===Thonburi Period===
After the Fall of Ayutthaya in 1767, Phra Palat Nu the vice-governor of Nakhon Si Thammarat established himself as the local warlord and ruler over Southern Thailand. King Taksin of Thonburi marched south to subjugate Phra Palat Nu or &quot;Chao Phraya&quot; Nakhon Nu in 1769. &quot;Chao Phraya&quot; Nakhon Nu was taken to Thonburi but King Taksin re-installed Nakhon Nu as a tributary ruler of Nakhon Si Thammarat in 1776.

===Rattanakosin Period===
After Chaophraya Nakhon (Noi), his son and grandson became respective governors of Nakhon Si Thammarat. During the reforms of King Chulalongkorn, the traditional governorship of Nakhon Si Thammarat was abolished and the city was incorporated into the Monthon Nakhon Si Thammarat in 1896. 

When the monthon system was abolished in 1932, Nakhon Si Thammarat then became a province until the present.

==Environment==
Forested peat swamp forests cover more than 9,900 hectares on the borders of Nakhon Si Thammarat, Phatthalung, and Songkhla provinces. About 800 hectares of the peat swamp were destroyed by 88 fires in the first half of 2019. The Royal Forest Department says that most of the fires in the Khuan Khreng peat swamp forest were man-made. Criminals clear the forest for the illegal expansion of rubber and oil palm plantations. Honey collectors and fishermen were also complicit as they burn grass to catch fish or to collect wild honey. Khuan Khreng peat swamp was hit by drought in what is normally the rainy season making it susceptible to arson. The forest is surrounded by oil palm plantations and surface water in the forest has been drained out to feed the plantations.

The province is home to Khao Luang National Park and Hat Khanom–Mu Ko Thale Tai National Park.

==Religion==
Nakhon Si Thammarat people Most believe in Buddhism , approximately 92.08%, followed by Islam, approximately 7.03%, Christianity , approximately 0.89%, in addition to other religions (population data: 1,516,499 people in 2009)

==Economy==
Tourism has become a first-tier tourist province, as defined by the central government, joining 22 other first-tier provinces. In 2019, it is projected to receive four million tourists—80% of them domestic—largely attracted by religious sites. They contributed more than 11 billion baht to the provincial economy. The Airports Department plans to expand Nakhon Si Thammarat airport runways and terminal by 2022 to deal with an anticipated increase in international flights to support foreign visitor arrivals. The province has 320 hotels with 8,800 rooms, up from 310 hotels and 7,000 rooms in 2018.

==Symbols==
The provincial seal shows the Phra Baromathat chedi of Wat Phra Mahathat Voramahavihan, one of the most important historical sites in southern Thailand. According to the city chronicle it was already built in 311, but archaeology dates it to the 13th century. The chedi was built by the ruler of Malay Buddha Kingdom of Tambralinga, named Chandrabhanu Sridhamaraja of The Patama Vamsa (Lotus Dynasty). The chedi is surrounded by the animals of the Chinese zodiac in the seal. The twelve animals represent the twelve Naksat cities or city-states which were tributary to the Nakhon Si Thammarat kingdom: the Rat of Saiburi; the Ox of Pattani; the Tiger of Kelantan; the Rabbit of Pahang (actually a city in Pahang which is said to be submerged by a lake now); the Dragon of Kedah; the Snake of Phatthalung; the Horse of Trang; the Goat of Chumphon; the Monkey of Bantaysamer (might be Chaiya, or a town in Krabi province); the Rooster of Sa-ulau (unidentified city, might be Songkhla, Kanchanadit or Pla Tha); the Dog of Takua Pa and a Pig of Kraburi.

The provincial flower is the Golden Shower Tree (&quot;Cassia fistula&quot;), and the provincial tree is &quot;Millettia atropurpurea&quot;. The provincial aquatic life is the climbing perch (&quot;Anabas testudineus&quot;).

The provincial slogan is เมืองประวัติศาสตร์ พระธาตุทองคำ ชื่นฉ่ำธรรมชาติ แร่ธาตุอุดม เครื่องถมสามกษัตริย์ มากวัดมากศิลป์ ครบสิ้นกุ้งปู, which translates to &quot;A historical town, the golden Phra That, plentiful minerals, three-metal nielloware, numerous temples, abundant shellfish.&quot;

==Administrative divisions==
===Provincial government===
Nakhon Si Thammarat is divided into 23 districts (&quot;amphoes&quot;). The districts are further divided into 165 subdistricts (&quot;tambons&quot;) and 1428 villages (&quot;mubans&quot;).
===Local government===
As of 26 November 2019, there are: one Nakhon Si Thammarat Provincial Administration Organisation (&quot;&quot;) and 54 municipal (&quot;thesaban&quot;) areas in the province. Nakhon Si Thammarat has (&quot;thesaban nakhon&quot;) status. Pak Phun, Thung Son and Pak Panang have town (&quot;thesaban mueang&quot;) status. Further 50 subdistrict municipalities (&quot;thesaban tambon&quot;). The non-municipal areas are administered by 130 Subdistrict Administrative Organisations - SAO (&quot;ongkan borihan suan tambon&quot;).

==Transport==
Nakhon Si Thammarat is served by Nakhon Si Thammarat Airport and the Nakhon Si Thammarat Railway Station.

== Health ==
Maharaj Nakhon Si Thammarat Hospital is the main hospital of the province, operated by the Ministry of Public Health.

==Education==
===Universities===
====Public universities====
* Walailak University
* Nakhon Si Thammarat Rajabhat University
* Rajamangala University of Technology Srivijaya
** College of Industrial Technology and Management
** Nakhon Si Thammarat Saiyai Campus
** Nakhon Si Thammarat Thungyai Campus
* Thaksin University
** Management for Development College, Nakhon Si Thammarat Education Center
* Mahachulalongkornrajavidyalaya University, Nakhon Si Thammarat Campus
* Mahamakut Buddhist University, Sithammasokkarat Campus
* Ramkhamhaeng University, Nakhon Si Thammarat Regional Campus in Honour of His Majesty the King
* Sukhothai Thammathirat Open University, Nakhon Si Thammarat Regional Distance Education Center
* Boromarajonani College of Nursing Nakhon Si Thammarat

===Vocational colleges===
====Public vocational colleges====
* Nakhon Si Thammarat Technical College
* Thung Song Technical College
* Sichon Technical College
* Nakhon Si Thammarat Seaboard Industrial College
* Nakhon Si Thammarat Polytechnic College
* Nakhon Si Thammarat Vocational College
* Nakhon Si Thammarat Arts and Crafts College
* Nakhon Si Thammarat College of Agriculture and Technology
* Nakhon Si Thammarat Industrial and Community Education College
* Hua Sai Industrial and Community Education College
* Phrom Khiri Industrial and Community Education College
* Nakhon Si Thammarat Colleges of Dramatic Arts
* Nakhon Si Thammarat College of Fine Arts

====Private vocational colleges====
* Innovation Technological College
* Jaruspichakorn College of Technology
* Satapat Nakhon Technological College
* Thurakit Bundit Technological College
* Nakhon Commercial Vocational College
* Prateesasana Business Administration College
* Thaksin Vocational Technological College
* Pakphanang Vocational College
* Southern Technological College
* Thungsong Commercial College
* Charoenmit Commercial Technological College
* Sichon Commercial Technological College
* Virasinpin Vocational College
* Sakdisilpin Commercial School

==Human achievement index 2022==

==Sports==
===Football===
===Volleyball clubs===
==See also==
*Nakhon Si Thammarat Kingdom

==References==
==External links==

*Website of province (Thai)
*Nakhon Si Thammarat provincial map, coat of arms and postal stamp
*Everything in Nakhon Si Thammarat
*Tambralinga</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q244691" start="0" end="28" title="Nakhon Si Thammarat province" label="Nakhon Si Thammarat province"/>
<link wikidata="Q50198" start="39" end="47" title="Provinces of Thailand" label="province"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="74" end="82" title="Thailand" label="Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q131217" start="112" end="128" title="Gulf of Thailand" label="Gulf of Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069853" start="169" end="186" title="Southern Thailand" label="Southern Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q235574" start="285" end="293" title="Songkhla province" label="Songkhla"/>
<link wikidata="Q243808" start="295" end="306" title="Phatthalung province" label="Phatthalung"/>
<link wikidata="Q243805" start="308" end="313" title="Trang province" label="Trang"/>
<link wikidata="Q236769" start="315" end="320" title="Krabi province" label="Krabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q240463" start="325" end="336" title="Surat Thani province" label="Surat Thani"/>
<link wikidata="Q11059" start="404" end="412" title="Sanskrit" label="Sanskrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q134293" start="481" end="487" title="Dharma" label="Dharma"/>
<link wikidata="Q131217" start="740" end="756" title="Gulf of Thailand" label="Gulf of Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q18758" start="781" end="796" title="Malay Peninsula" label="Malay Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542964" start="901" end="911" title="Khao Luang" label="Khao Luang"/>
<link wikidata="Q105773345" start="1105" end="1135" title="Protected Areas Regional Offices of Thailand" label="region 5 (Nakhon Si Thammarat)"/>
<link wikidata="Q105773345" start="1159" end="1178" title="Protected Areas Regional Offices of Thailand" label="region 6 (Songkhla)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968822" start="1217" end="1246" title="Khao Pu–Khao Ya National Park" label="Khao Pu–Khao Ya National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542964" start="1251" end="1275" title="Khao Luang National Park" label="Khao Luang National Park"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1280" end="1302" title="Khao Nan National Park" label="Khao Nan National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5680801" start="1307" end="1347" title="Hat Khanom–Mu Ko Thale Tai National Park" label="Hat Khanom–Mu Ko Thale Tai National Park"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1352" end="1377" title="Namtok Yong National Park" label="Namtok Yong National Park"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1382" end="1410" title="Namtok Si Khit National Park" label="Namtok Si Khit National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q7462" start="1643" end="1655" title="Song dynasty" label="Song dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q234197" start="1761" end="1770" title="Srivijaya" label="Srivijaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q234197" start="1784" end="1793" title="Srivijaya" label="Srivijaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q18758" start="1828" end="1843" title="Malay Peninsula" label="Malay Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q9441" start="1945" end="1951" title="Buddha" label="Buddha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366849" start="1990" end="1999" title="Vajrapani" label="Vajrapani"/>
<link wikidata="Q2552354" start="2325" end="2342" title="Wat Phra Mahathat" label="Wat Phra Mahathat"/>
<link wikidata="Q132265" start="2369" end="2387" title="Theravada Buddhism" label="Theravada Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1483643" start="2393" end="2420" title="Nakhon Si Thammarat Kingdom" label="Nakhon Si Thammarat Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q637500" start="2488" end="2496" title="Chumphon" label="Chumphon"/>
<link wikidata="Q191346" start="2514" end="2520" title="Pahang" label="Pahang"/>
<link wikidata="Q4924088" start="2539" end="2556" title="Ram Khamhaeng Inscription" label="Ramkamhaeng Stele"/>
<link wikidata="Q863279" start="2560" end="2569" title="Sukhothai Kingdom" label="Sukhothai"/>
<link wikidata="Q641383" start="2828" end="2839" title="Phetchaburi" label="Phetchaburi"/>
<link wikidata="Q841364" start="3001" end="3021" title="Kingdom of Ayutthaya" label="Kingdom of Ayutthaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q765018" start="3032" end="3046" title="Mandala (Southeast Asian political model)" label="mandala system"/>
<link wikidata="Q841364" start="3122" end="3131" title="Ayutthaya Kingdom" label="Ayutthaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q889173" start="3204" end="3215" title="Trailokanat" label="Trailokanat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188845" start="3394" end="3409" title="Yamada Nagamasa" label="Yamada Nagamasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7506756" start="3509" end="3535" title="Siamese revolution of 1688" label="Siamese revolution of 1688"/>
<link wikidata="Q561295" start="3598" end="3612" title="King Phetracha" label="King Phetracha"/>
<link wikidata="Q31307" start="3725" end="3742" title="Burmese–Siamese War (1765–1767)" label="Fall of Ayutthaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q320097" start="3882" end="3893" title="King Taksin" label="King Taksin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115291" start="3897" end="3905" title="Thonburi Kingdom" label="Thonburi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241965" start="4093" end="4108" title="tributary state" label="tributary ruler"/>
<link wikidata="Q30610451" start="4174" end="4197" title="Chaophraya Nakhon (Noi)" label="Chaophraya Nakhon (Noi)"/>
<link wikidata="Q158861" start="4294" end="4312" title="King Chulalongkorn" label="King Chulalongkorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q6905899" start="4419" end="4446" title="Monthon Nakhon Si Thammarat" label="Monthon Nakhon Si Thammarat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1936511" start="4467" end="4474" title="monthon" label="monthon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2352401" start="4593" end="4610" title="peat swamp forest" label="peat swamp forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q35852" start="4634" end="4641" title="hectare" label="hectare"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542964" start="5382" end="5406" title="Khao Luang National Park" label="Khao Luang National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5680801" start="5411" end="5451" title="Hat Khanom–Mu Ko Thale Tai National Park" label="Hat Khanom–Mu Ko Thale Tai National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q177882" start="5989" end="5993" title="Thai baht" label="baht"/>
<link wikidata="Q25539829" start="6025" end="6044" title="Department of Airports (Thailand)" label="Airports Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q1819245" start="6324" end="6339" title="Seals of the provinces of Thailand" label="provincial seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q180987" start="6366" end="6371" title="stupa" label="chedi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1976204" start="6768" end="6782" title="Chinese zodiac" label="Chinese zodiac"/>
<link wikidata="Q1483643" start="6836" end="6849" title="Naksat city" label="Naksat cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q721997" start="6926" end="6929" title="Rat (zodiac)" label="Rat"/>
<link wikidata="Q476581" start="6933" end="6940" title="Sai Buri District" label="Saiburi"/>
<link wikidata="Q599644" start="6946" end="6948" title="Ox (zodiac)" label="Ox"/>
<link wikidata="Q584435" start="6952" end="6959" title="Pattani kingdom" label="Pattani"/>
<link wikidata="Q740762" start="6965" end="6970" title="Tiger (zodiac)" label="Tiger"/>
<link wikidata="Q185944" start="6974" end="6982" title="Kelantan" label="Kelantan"/>
<link wikidata="Q844723" start="6988" end="6994" title="Rabbit (zodiac)" label="Rabbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q191346" start="6998" end="7004" title="Pahang" label="Pahang"/>
<link wikidata="Q731434" start="7082" end="7088" title="Dragon (zodiac)" label="Dragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q188947" start="7092" end="7097" title="Kedah" label="Kedah"/>
<link wikidata="Q756692" start="7103" end="7108" title="Snake (zodiac)" label="Snake"/>
<link wikidata="Q179539" start="7112" end="7123" title="Phatthalung" label="Phatthalung"/>
<link wikidata="Q869595" start="7129" end="7134" title="Horse (zodiac)" label="Horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014322" start="7138" end="7143" title="Trang, Trang" label="Trang"/>
<link wikidata="Q867696" start="7149" end="7153" title="Goat (zodiac)" label="Goat"/>
<link wikidata="Q637500" start="7157" end="7165" title="Chumphon" label="Chumphon"/>
<link wikidata="Q740674" start="7171" end="7177" title="Monkey (zodiac)" label="Monkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q475330" start="7203" end="7209" title="Chaiya" label="Chaiya"/>
<link wikidata="Q236769" start="7224" end="7238" title="Krabi province" label="Krabi province"/>
<link wikidata="Q822621" start="7245" end="7252" title="Rooster (zodiac)" label="Rooster"/>
<link wikidata="Q795595" start="7293" end="7301" title="Songkhla" label="Songkhla"/>
<link wikidata="Q474849" start="7303" end="7314" title="Kanchanadit" label="Kanchanadit"/>
<link wikidata="Q218967" start="7318" end="7325" title="Amphoe Sathing Phra" label="Pla Tha"/>
<link wikidata="Q755126" start="7332" end="7335" title="Dog (zodiac)" label="Dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q476805" start="7339" end="7347" title="Takua Pa" label="Takua Pa"/>
<link wikidata="Q877261" start="7354" end="7357" title="Pig (zodiac)" label="Pig"/>
<link wikidata="Q475824" start="7361" end="7368" title="Kraburi" label="Kraburi"/>
<link wikidata="Q161117" start="7400" end="7418" title="Golden Shower Tree" label="Golden Shower Tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q13019783" start="7457" end="7472" title="list of Thai provincial trees" label="provincial tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q109886273" start="7482" end="7504" title="Millettia atropurpurea" label="Millettia atropurpurea"/>
<link wikidata="Q10540515" start="7547" end="7561" title="Anabas testudineus" label="climbing perch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164661" start="7832" end="7842" title="nielloware" label="nielloware"/>
<link wikidata="Q475061" start="8002" end="8008" title="Districts of Thailand" label="amphoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077097" start="8081" end="8087" title="tambon" label="tambon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368879" start="8121" end="8126" title="muban" label="muban"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155688" start="8366" end="8381" title="thesaban nakhon" label="thesaban nakhon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155688" start="8449" end="8464" title="thesaban mueang" label="thesaban mueang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155688" start="8525" end="8540" title="thesaban tambon" label="thesaban tambon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1388166" start="8734" end="8761" title="Nakhon Si Thammarat Airport" label="Nakhon Si Thammarat Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q6633336" start="8770" end="8805" title="Nakhon Si Thammarat Railway Station" label="Nakhon Si Thammarat Railway Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q16353830" start="8821" end="8857" title="Maharaj Nakhon Si Thammarat Hospital" label="Maharaj Nakhon Si Thammarat Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q5970641" start="8912" end="8937" title="Ministry of Public Health (Thailand)" label="Ministry of Public Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q844581" start="9003" end="9022" title="Walailak University" label="Walailak University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6583864" start="9067" end="9113" title="Rajamangala University of Technology Srivijaya" label="Rajamangala University of Technology Srivijaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519674" start="9243" end="9261" title="Thaksin University" label="Thaksin University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186786" start="9340" end="9381" title="Mahachulalongkornrajavidyalaya University" label="Mahachulalongkornrajavidyalaya University"/>
<link wikidata="Q206074" start="9412" end="9441" title="Mahamakut Buddhist University" label="Mahamakut Buddhist University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185548" start="9469" end="9492" title="Ramkhamhaeng University" label="Ramkhamhaeng University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2015579" start="9566" end="9604" title="Sukhothai Thammathirat Open University" label="Sukhothai Thammathirat Open University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1483643" start="11047" end="11074" title="Nakhon Si Thammarat Kingdom" label="Nakhon Si Thammarat Kingdom"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="230716" wikidata="Q2302413" url="?curid=230716" title="Smoked salmon">
<text>Smoked salmon is a preparation of salmon, typically a fillet that has been cured and hot or cold smoked.

Due to its moderately high price in some regions, smoked salmon is considered a delicacy. Although the term lox is sometimes applied to smoked salmon, they are different products.

==Presentation==
Smoked salmon is a popular ingredient in canapés, often combined with cream cheese and lemon juice.

In New York City and Philadelphia and other cities of North America, smoked salmon is known as &quot;nova&quot; after the sources in Nova Scotia, and is likely to be sliced very thinly and served on bagels with cream cheese or with sliced red onion, lemon and capers. In Pacific Northwest cuisine of the United States and Canada, smoked salmon may also be fillets or nuggets, including hickory or alder-smoked varieties and candied salmon (smoked and honey, or sugar-glazed, also known as &quot;Indian candy&quot;).

In Europe, smoked salmon may be found thinly sliced or in thicker fillets, or sold as chopped &quot;scraps&quot; for use in cooking. It is often used in pâtés, quiches and pasta sauces. Scrambled eggs with smoked salmon mixed in is another popular dish. Smoked salmon salad is a strong-flavored salad, with ingredients such as iceberg lettuce, boiled eggs, tomato, olives, capers and leeks, and with flavored yogurt as a condiment.

Slices of smoked salmon are a popular appetizer in Europe, usually served with some kind of bread. In the United Kingdom they are typically eaten with brown bread and a squeeze of lemon. In Germany they are eaten on toast or black bread.

In Jewish cuisine, heavily salted salmon is called lox and is usually eaten on a bagel with cream cheese. Lox is often smoked.

Smoked salmon is sometimes used in sushi, though not widely in Japan; it is more likely to be encountered in North American sushi bars. The Philly Roll combines smoked salmon and cream cheese and rolls these in rice and nori.

== History ==
Smoking is used to preserve salmon against microorganism spoilage. During the process of smoking salmon the fish is cured and partially dehydrated, which impedes the activity of bacteria. An important example of this is &quot;Clostridium botulinum&quot;, which can be present in seafood and is inhibited by the salt content of the food.

Smoked salmon has featured in many Native American cultures for a long time. Smoked salmon was also a common dish in Greek and Roman culture throughout history, often being eaten at large gatherings and celebrations. During the Middle Ages, smoked salmon became part of people&#x27;s diet and was consumed in soups and salads. The first smoking factory was from Poland in the 7th century A.D. The 19th century marked the rise of the American smoked salmon industry in the West Coast, processing Pacific salmon from Alaska and Oregon.

== Nutrition ==
Salmon is a fish with high fat content and smoked salmon is a good source of omega-3 fatty acids including docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) and eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA). Smoked salmon has a high sodium content due to the salt added during brining and curing. of smoked salmon contains approximately 660 mg of sodium, while an equivalent portion of fresh cooked salmon contains about 50 mg. Although high salt content prevents the growth of microorganisms in smoked salmon by limiting water activity, the American Heart Association recommends limiting sodium consumption.

Smoked foods, including smoked salmon also contain nitrates and nitrites which are by-products of the smoking process. Nitrites and nitrates can be converted into nitrosamines, some of which are carcinogenic. However, smoked salmon is not a major source of nitrosamine exposure to humans.

=== Salt replacement ===
Studies have been conducted in which some of the sodium chloride used in smoking salmon had been replaced by potassium chloride. The study found that up to one third of the sodium chloride can be replaced by potassium chloride without changing the sensory properties of the smoked salmon. Although potassium chloride has a bitter and metallic taste, the saltiness of the smoked salmon might have masked its undesirable flavor.
*Based on a 2,000 calorie diet – Serving size: about 3 oz or 85 g, cooked.

==Production==
In the Atlantic basin all smoked salmon comes from the Atlantic salmon, much of it farmed in Norway, Scotland, Ireland and the east coast of Canada (particularly in the Bay of Fundy). In the Pacific, a variety of salmon species may be used. Because fish farming is prohibited by state law, all of Alaska&#x27;s salmon species are wild Pacific species. Pacific species of salmon include chinook (&quot;King&quot;), sockeye (&quot;red&quot;), coho (&quot;silver&quot;), chum (&quot;keta&quot;), and pink (&quot;humpback&quot;).

===Cold smoking===
Most smoked salmon is cold smoked, typically at 37 °C (99 °F). Cold smoking does not cook the fish, resulting in a delicate texture. Although some smoke houses go for a deliberately &#x27;oaky&#x27; style with prolonged exposure to smoke from oak chips, industrial production favours less exposure to smoke and a blander style, using cheaper woods.

Originally, prepared fish were upside hung in lines on racks, or tenters, within the kiln. Workers would climb up and straddle the racks while hanging the individual lines in ascending order. Small circular wood chip fires would be lit at floor level and allowed to smoke slowly throughout the night. The wood fire was damped with sawdust to create smoke; this was constantly tended as naked flames would cook the fish rather than smoke it. The required duration of smoking has always been gauged by a skilled or &#x27;master smoker&#x27; who manually checks for optimum smoking conditions.

In Britain the smoking process has changed over the years and many contemporary smokehouses have left behind the traditional methods using brick kilns, in favour of commercial methods. Only a handful of traditional smokehouses remain such as John Ross Jr (Aberdeen) Ltd and the Stornoway Smokehouse in the Outer Hebrides. The oldest smokehouse in Scotland is the Old Salmon Fish House built on the banks of the River Ugie in 1585, although not at first for smoking. The oldest smokehouse in England is the 1760 Old Smokehouse in Raglan Street, Lowestoft. Smoked salmon was also brought into London&#x27;s East End by Jewish immigrants from Russia and Poland in the late 19th century. They smoked salmon as way to preserve it as refrigeration was very basic. In the early years, they were not aware that there was a salmon native to the UK so they imported Baltic salmon in barrels of salt water. However, having discovered the wild Scottish salmon coming down to the fish market at Billingsgate each summer, they started smoking these fish instead. The oldest salmon smoker in the world, H.Forman &amp; Son, is based in East London and dates back to 1905 remaining within the same family. Their &quot;London Cure Smoked Salmon&quot; became the first ever London based food to be awarded &quot;Protected Geographic Indication&quot; status

Indigenous peoples in the Pacific Northwest and Alaska have a cold smoking style that is unique, resulting in a dried, &quot;jerky-style&quot; smoked salmon. In the Pacific Northwest this style of salmon has been used for centuries as a primary source of food for numerous indigenous people. Traditionally smoked salmon has been a staple of north-western American tribes and Canadian First Nations people. To preserve it indefinitely, the fish is now typically pressure-cooked.

===Hot smoking===
Commonly used for both salmon and trout, hot smoking &#x27;cooks&#x27; the salmon making it less moist, and firmer, with a less delicate taste. It may be eaten like cold smoked salmon, or mixed with salads or pasta. It is essential to brine the salmon sufficiently and dry the skin enough to form a pellicle prior to smoking. Without a sufficient pellicle, albumin will ooze out of the fish as it cooks, resulting in an unsightly presentation.

===Brining salmon===
There are three main curing methods that are typically used to cure salmon prior to smoking.

# Wet brining: Brining in a solution containing water, salt, sugar, spices, with (or without) sodium nitrite for a number of hours or days.
# Dry curing: This method is a method often used in Europe, in which salmon fillets are covered with a mix of salt, sugar, and sometimes other spices (traditional London Cure smoked salmon uses salt only). Dry curing tends to be faster than wet brining, as the salt tends to draw out moisture from the fish during the curing process and less drying time is needed in the smokehouse. 
# Injection: This is the least typical method as it damages the delicate flesh of salmon. This is the fastest method of all as it injects the curing solution — hence allowing a faster cure throughout the flesh.

The proteins in the fish are modified (denatured) by the salt, which enables the flesh of the salmon to hold moisture better than it would if not brined. In the United States, the addition of salt is regulated by the FDA as it is a major processing aid to ensure the safety of the product. The sugar is hydrophilic, and adds to the moistness of the smoked salmon. Salt and sugar are also preservatives, extending the storage life and freshness of the salmon. Table salt (iodized salt) is not used in any of these methods, as the iodine can impart a dark color and bitter taste to the fish.

===Curing===

Indian hard smoked salmon is first kippered with salt, sugar and spices and then smoked until hard and jerky-like. See cured salmon. The Scandinavian dish gravlax is cured, but is not smoked.

== Packaging ==

=== Canning ===
In British Columbia, canning salmon can be traced back to Alexander Loggie in 1870 who established the first recorded commercial cannery on the Fraser River. Canning soon became the preferred method of preserving salmon in BC growing from three canneries in 1876 to more than ninety by the turn of the century. Sockeye and Pink Salmon make up the majority of canned salmon, with the traditional product containing skin and bones – important sources of calcium and nutrients.

The enzymes of fish operate at an optimum temperature of about 5 °C, the temperature of the water from which they came. Bacteriologically sterile, fish still have a large number of bacteria in their slimy surface and digestive tracts. These bacteria multiply rapidly once the fish dies and start to attack the tissues. The growth of microorganism can greatly affect the quality of the salmon.

The salmon is first dressed and washed, then cut into pieces and filled in cans (previously sterilized) in saline. The cans must then undergo a double steaming process in a vacuum-sealed environment. The steam is pressurized at 121.1 °C for 90 minutes to kill any bacteria. After heating, the cans are cooled under running water, dried and stored in a controlled environment between 10 and 15.5 °C. Before leaving the canneries, they are examined to ensure both the can integrity and safety of the fish.

The Canadian Food and Inspection Agency (CFIA) is responsible for policies, labeling requirements, permitted additives, and inspections for all fish products. All establishments which process fish for export or inter-provincial trade must be registered federally and implement a Quality Management Program (QMP) plan.

=== Retort pouch ===

Cooking low-acid food items in a retortable pouch is a relatively new process, with the first commercial use of such retort pouches found in Italy in 1960, Denmark in 1966, and in Japan in 1969. It consists of enclosing the fish in &quot;a multilayer flexible packaging consisting mainly of polypropylene (PP), aluminum foil, and polyester (PET)&quot; instead of the metal can or glass jar used in canning; but from there the technique is quite similar. Four different retort pouch structures were used; namely cast polypropylene (CPP), polyethylene terephthalate (PET)/silicon oxide-coated nylon/CPP (SIOX), Aluminum oxide-coated PET/nylon/CPP (ALOX), and PET/aluminum foil/CPP (FOIL).

==== Advantages ====
# Retort pouch salmon minimizes the thermal damage to nutrient, sensory, and other food quality characteristics due to quicker heating based on the thinner package profile when compared to metal cans.
# Pouched food can be eaten without heating, or it can be heated quickly by placing the pouch in boiling water for a few minutes. Frozen foods, in contrast, require heating for about half an hour. Thus, less energy is required for heating a retort pouch. Pouched food can also be heated in a microwave oven simply by removing it from the pouch before heating.
# Compare to cans and glass, it is easier to open and safer.
# Pouch-packed salmon had firmer, more fibrous, drier and chewier texture than that product in a can of equal fill weight.
# Utilising the plastic retort pouch over these other forms, particularly for delicate foods such as smoked salmon. T.D. Durance and L.S. Collins found that &quot;processing of late-run chum salmon in retortable pouches resulted in 48% reduction in processing time&quot; for a given level of lethality to microorganisms, a clear advantage over traditional canning techniques.

==== Disadvantages ====
# Color changes, vitamin losses, production of undesirable odors, and texture changes of salmon in the conventional retort processing.
# The aluminum foil barrier layer is not suitable for microwave heating. (However, there are newly made microwavable retort pouches now.)

==Labelling==
In the UK, &quot;Scottish smoked salmon&quot; is sometimes used to refer to salmon that is smoked in Scotland but sourced from elsewhere. This is despite Food Standards Agency recommendations that such salmon be described as &quot;Salmon smoked in Scotland&quot; instead. Labelling must also include the method of production (&#x27;farmed&#x27;, &#x27;cultivated&#x27;, &#x27;caught&#x27;).

== Jerky ==
Smoked salmon jerky is a dehydrated salmon product that is bought ready to eat for consumers and requires no further refrigeration or cooking. (Note there are &quot;fresh&quot; non-heat treated versions made by smaller local producers that require refrigeration.) It is typically made from the trimmings and by-products of salmon products in other smoking facilities. Smoked salmon jerky undergoes the most heat processing of all other smoked salmon products yet still maintains its quality as a good source of omega-3 fatty acids.

=== Processing ===
The two main processing techniques for salmon jerky are wet-brining and dry salting. In both cases the salmon is trimmed into narrow slices and then stored cold for less than one day. After being skinned and frozen, if the fish is to undergo the brining method it will require an additional step in which the salmon is left soaking in wet brine (salt solution) for one hour. It is then removed and the excess water is discarded. After this, in both the wet-brining and dry salting method, ingredients such as non-iodized salt, potato starch, or light brown sugar are added. In some smoked salmon jerky products preservatives may also be added to extend the shelf life of the final product. The salmon is then minced with the additives and reformed into thin strips that will be smoked for twenty hours. Between the brining and salting methods for smoked salmon jerky the brining method has been found to leave the salmon more tender with up to double the moisture content of salted jerky. The salmon jerky that undergoes the dry salting method has a tougher texture due to the lower moisture content and water activity. Both forms of salmon jerky still have a much lower moisture content than is found in raw salmon.

=== Packaging ===
Smoked salmon jerky is packaged using aseptic packaging to ensure the product is in a sterilized environment. The smoked salmon jerky is commonly packaged in a vacuum sealed bag in which the oxygen has been removed, or in a controlled atmospheric package in which the oxygen has been replaced with nitrogen to inhibit the growth of microorganisms. Because of the high heat nature of which smoked salmon jerky is processed it is a shelf stable product. Depending on the integrity of the packaging and if preservatives were used, smoked salmon jerky may have an approximate shelf-life of six months to one year. Smaller local producers of salmon jerky make a &quot;fresh&quot;, non-heat treated product that is not shelf stable.

==See also==

* List of fish dishes
* List of smoked foods
*Sashimi

==References==
==External links==

* Smoking Fish At Home
* How to Cook Smoked Salmon? Do it in 7 Easy Steps!</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2302413" start="0" end="13" title="Smoked salmon" label="Smoked salmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7405484" start="34" end="40" title="Salmon as food" label="salmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q15944430" start="54" end="60" title="Fish fillet" label="fillet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5194698" start="75" end="80" title="Cured fish" label="cured"/>
<link wikidata="Q70608" start="97" end="103" title="Smoked fish" label="smoked"/>
<link wikidata="Q2312129" start="186" end="194" title="delicacy" label="delicacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202221" start="214" end="217" title="lox" label="lox"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032806" start="345" end="351" title="canapé" label="canapé"/>
<link wikidata="Q426337" start="374" end="386" title="cream cheese" label="cream cheese"/>
<link wikidata="Q156251" start="665" end="670" title="caper" label="caper"/>
<link wikidata="Q7122597" start="676" end="701" title="Pacific Northwest cuisine" label="Pacific Northwest cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q816704" start="1075" end="1079" title="pâté" label="pâté"/>
<link wikidata="Q722595" start="1082" end="1088" title="quiche" label="quiche"/>
<link wikidata="Q178" start="1094" end="1099" title="pasta" label="pasta"/>
<link wikidata="Q668855" start="1108" end="1122" title="Scrambled eggs" label="Scrambled eggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q83193" start="1249" end="1264" title="iceberg lettuce" label="iceberg lettuce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062531" start="1266" end="1276" title="boiled egg" label="boiled egg"/>
<link wikidata="Q23501" start="1279" end="1285" title="tomato" label="tomato"/>
<link wikidata="Q37083" start="1287" end="1292" title="olive" label="olive"/>
<link wikidata="Q156251" start="1295" end="1300" title="caper" label="caper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1807269" start="1306" end="1310" title="leek" label="leek"/>
<link wikidata="Q3893120" start="1580" end="1591" title="black bread" label="black bread"/>
<link wikidata="Q284288" start="1597" end="1611" title="Jewish cuisine" label="Jewish cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202221" start="1645" end="1648" title="lox" label="lox"/>
<link wikidata="Q34421086" start="1675" end="1698" title="Bagel and cream cheese" label="bagel with cream cheese"/>
<link wikidata="Q46383" start="1757" end="1762" title="sushi" label="sushi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4381008" start="1862" end="1873" title="Philadelphia roll" label="Philly Roll"/>
<link wikidata="Q201565" start="1942" end="1946" title="nori" label="nori"/>
<link wikidata="Q193713" start="1963" end="1970" title="Smoking (cooking)" label="Smoking"/>
<link wikidata="Q131268" start="2189" end="2210" title="Clostridium botulinum" label="Clostridium botulinum"/>
<link wikidata="Q191756" start="2929" end="2947" title="omega-3 fatty acid" label="omega-3 fatty acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q423345" start="2959" end="2979" title="docosahexaenoic acid" label="docosahexaenoic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q409990" start="2990" end="3011" title="eicosapentaenoic acid" label="eicosapentaenoic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q464880" start="3353" end="3379" title="American Heart Association" label="American Heart Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q413779" start="3584" end="3595" title="nitrosamine" label="nitrosamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q184630" start="3845" end="3863" title="potassium chloride" label="potassium chloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q188879" start="4309" end="4324" title="Atlantic salmon" label="Atlantic salmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q181857" start="4423" end="4435" title="Bay of Fundy" label="Bay of Fundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2796766" start="4467" end="4473" title="salmon" label="salmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q833503" start="4640" end="4647" title="Chinook salmon" label="chinook"/>
<link wikidata="Q44064" start="4668" end="4675" title="Sockeye salmon" label="sockeye"/>
<link wikidata="Q934874" start="4695" end="4699" title="Coho salmon" label="coho"/>
<link wikidata="Q475211" start="4722" end="4726" title="Chum salmon" label="chum"/>
<link wikidata="Q673380" start="4751" end="4755" title="Pink salmon" label="pink"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="6359" end="6365" title="Jewish" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783406" start="6724" end="6736" title="Billingsgate" label="Billingsgate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2258881" start="7612" end="7617" title="trout" label="trout"/>
<link wikidata="Q17094522" start="7877" end="7885" title="Pellicle (cooking)" label="pellicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q169219" start="7935" end="7942" title="albumin" label="albumin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1442496" start="8649" end="8659" title="smokehouse" label="smokehouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q192197" start="9177" end="9188" title="hydrophilic" label="hydrophilic"/>
<link wikidata="Q274579" start="9262" end="9274" title="preservative" label="preservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q6575260" start="9514" end="9522" title="kippering" label="kippered"/>
<link wikidata="Q5194698" start="9598" end="9610" title="cured salmon" label="cured salmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q21195" start="9616" end="9627" title="Scandinavia" label="Scandinavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q252630" start="9634" end="9641" title="gravlax" label="gravlax"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973" start="9708" end="9724" title="British Columbia" label="British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741994" start="13718" end="13739" title="Food Standards Agency" label="Food Standards Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q17097933" start="16500" end="16519" title="List of fish dishes" label="List of fish dishes"/>
<link wikidata="Q17067517" start="16522" end="16542" title="List of smoked foods" label="List of smoked foods"/>
<link wikidata="Q190715" start="16544" end="16551" title="Sashimi" label="Sashimi"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="230721" wikidata="Q7813521" url="?curid=230721" title="Tokay">
<text>Tokay may refer to:

==Viniculture==
* Tokaji (formerly spelled &quot;Tokay&quot; in English), wines produced in the Tokaj region of Hungary and Slovakia
* Muscadelle, called Tokay in Australia
* Tocai Friulano, a defunct synonym for Sauvignon vert in the Friuli-Venezia Giulia wine region in Italy
* Tokay d&#x27;Alsace, an obsolete name for Pinot gris grapes in Alsace
* Tokay (grape), an alternative name for the Hungarian wine grape Furmint
* Viura, a Spanish wine grape with Tokay as a synonym
* Catawba (grape), an American grape with Tokay as a synonym

==Other uses==
* Tokay gecko, a gecko native to southeast Asia and the Indo-Australian Archipelago
* Tokay High School, a high school in Lodi, California
* Tokay Mammadov (1927–2018), Azerbaijani sculptor-monumentalist
* &quot;Tokay&quot;, a song from the 1929 operetta &quot;Bitter Sweet&quot;
* The former name of Malaga, California

==See also==
*Tokai (disambiguation), which covers Tōkai and Tokai
*Tokaj (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7813521" start="0" end="5" title="Tokay" label="Tokay"/>
<link wikidata="Q667850" start="39" end="45" title="Tokaji" label="Tokaji"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934770" start="156" end="166" title="Muscadelle" label="Muscadelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1468853" start="196" end="210" title="Sauvignon vert" label="Tocai Friulano"/>
<link wikidata="Q778601" start="301" end="320" title="Tokay d&amp;#x27;Alsace" label="Tokay d&amp;#x27;Alsace"/>
<link wikidata="Q940015" start="373" end="386" title="Tokay (grape)" label="Tokay (grape)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756570" start="447" end="452" title="Viura" label="Viura"/>
<link wikidata="Q989673" start="501" end="516" title="Catawba (grape)" label="Catawba (grape)"/>
<link wikidata="Q331213" start="578" end="589" title="Tokay gecko" label="Tokay gecko"/>
<link wikidata="Q7813522" start="662" end="679" title="Tokay High School" label="Tokay High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q4279873" start="717" end="731" title="Tokay Mammadov" label="Tokay Mammadov"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741471" start="837" end="849" title="Bitter Sweet (operetta)" label="Bitter Sweet"/>
<link wikidata="Q159162" start="877" end="895" title="Malaga, California" label="Malaga, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q175962" start="911" end="933" title="Tokai (disambiguation)" label="Tokai (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q368202" start="965" end="987" title="Tokaj (disambiguation)" label="Tokaj (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="230725" wikidata="Q216541" url="?curid=230725" title="Chauffeur">
<text>A chauffeur () is a person employed to drive a passenger motor vehicle, especially a luxury vehicle such as a large sedan or a limousine.

Initially, such drivers were often personal employees of the vehicle owner, but this has changed to specialist chauffeur service companies or individual drivers that provide both driver and vehicle for hire. Some service companies merely offer the driver.

==History==
The term &quot;chauffeur&quot; comes from the French term for stoker because the earliest automobiles, like their railroad and sea vessel counterparts, were steam-powered and required the driver to stoke the engine. The chauffeur also maintained the car, including routine maintenance and cleaning, and had to be a skilled mechanic to deal with breakdowns and tyre punctures en route, which were very common in the earliest years of the automobile.

Only the wealthy could afford the first automobiles, and they generally employed chauffeurs rather than driving themselves. A 1906 article in &quot;The New York Times&quot; reported that &quot;the chauffeur problem to-day is one of the most serious that the automobilist has to deal with&quot;, and complained that &quot;young men of no particular ability, who have been earning from $10 to $12 a week, are suddenly elevated to salaried positions paying from $25 to $50&quot; and recommended the re-training of existing coach drivers.

==Scope==
While the term may refer to anybody who drives for a living, it usually implies a driver of an elegant passenger vehicle such as a horse-drawn carriage, luxury sedan, motor coach, or especially a limousine; those who operate buses or non-passenger vehicles are generally referred to as &quot;drivers&quot;. In some countries, particularly developing nations where a ready supply of labor ensures that even the middle classes can afford domestic staff and among the wealthy, the chauffeur may simply be called the &quot;driver&quot;.

Some people may employ chauffeurs full-time to drive them in their vehicles, while professional services offer on-request limousines or rental cars that include chauffeurs. This is similar to but much more luxurious than taking a taxicab. A variety of benefits are cited for using chauffeurs, including convenience, productivity, and time savings, and driving safety for business people and seniors. Insurance costs for luxury vehicles are often lower if the designated driver is a chauffeur.

The legal requirements for being a chauffeur vary depending on the local jurisdiction and class of vehicle. In some cases, a simple permit is required. Still, in others, an additional professional license with specific minimum standards in areas such as age, health, driving experience, criminal record, local geographic knowledge, or training is needed.

==Training==
In addition to the minimum legal requirements, limousine companies often require their chauffeurs to undergo specific extra training. These courses may involve evasive driving or defensive driving techniques, the proper methods to ensure safety in the most extreme conditions, such as inclement weather, a flat tire at high speeds, or other exterior influences for loss of vehicular control, etc.

Many companies also have courses on what they expect from their chauffeurs. Chauffeurs may be taught proper etiquette when they are in the presence of their . They may also be trained for services to the client beyond the car itself, such as for a personal valet or bodyguard.

Many companies and local licensing agencies require random drug screening for chauffeurs. There have been increased requirements for compliance in drug and alcohol testing in the United States. The problem was highlighted after professional ice hockey player Vladimir Konstantinov&#x27;s career-ending injuries when his recently hired chauffeur, Richard Gnida, lost control of their limousine and crashed. Another concern are company drug and alcohol policies for chauffeurs in those states where marijuana is legal because of the potential impact and impairment to perform their job safely and effectively.

==Notable chauffeurs==
* William Greer, chauffeur to John F. Kennedy
* William Grover-Williams, chauffeur to William Orpen
* Leopold Lojka, chauffeur to Archduke Franz Ferdinand
* Erich Kempka, chauffeur to Adolf Hitler from 1936 to 1945
* Julius Schreck, chauffeur to Adolf Hitler from 1926 to 1936
* Kay Summersby, chauffeur to Supreme Commander Allied Expeditionary Force Dwight D. Eisenhower
* Roosevelt Zanders, drove Fidel Castro, Richard Nixon, Winston Churchill, Eleanor Roosevelt, Harry S. Truman, and many others

===In fiction===
* Aloysius &quot;Nosey&quot; Parker
* Thomas Watkins
* Bigger Thomas in &quot;Native Son&quot;
* &quot;Driving Miss Daisy&quot;: 1987 play, 1989 film, and 2014 film
* Frank Martin, driver in The Transporter series of films
* Tom Branson, chauffeur turned son-in-law of Lord Grantham in &quot;Downton Abbey&quot;
* Alfred Pennyworth, chauffeur to Batman
* Logan in &quot;Logan&quot;
* Kato the chauffeur and assistant to &quot;The Green Hornet&quot;
* Thomas Fairchild, Sabrina&#x27;s father, in the 1953 play and in the 1954 and 1995 films.

== References ==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q216541" start="2" end="11" title="Chauffeur" label="chauffeur"/>
<link wikidata="Q5581707" start="85" end="99" title="luxury vehicle" label="luxury vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q190578" start="116" end="121" title="Sedan (automobile)" label="sedan"/>
<link wikidata="Q188475" start="127" end="136" title="limousine" label="limousine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1762479" start="329" end="345" title="vehicle for hire" label="vehicle for hire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147709" start="470" end="476" title="Stoker (occupation)" label="stoker"/>
<link wikidata="Q12760" start="565" end="578" title="Steam engine" label="steam-powered"/>
<link wikidata="Q169545" start="768" end="772" title="Tire" label="tyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1221610" start="1378" end="1391" title="coachman" label="coach drivers"/>
<link wikidata="Q235356" start="1535" end="1555" title="horse-drawn carriage" label="horse-drawn carriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q190578" start="1557" end="1569" title="sedan (car)" label="luxury sedan"/>
<link wikidata="Q12334006" start="1571" end="1582" title="coach (vehicle)" label="motor coach"/>
<link wikidata="Q188475" start="1600" end="1609" title="limousine" label="limousine"/>
<link wikidata="Q241588" start="1814" end="1826" title="middle class" label="middle class"/>
<link wikidata="Q54128" start="1840" end="1854" title="domestic worker" label="domestic staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q82650" start="2168" end="2175" title="taxicab" label="taxicab"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068361" start="2338" end="2347" title="Vehicle insurance" label="Insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061983" start="2980" end="3008" title="defensive driving" label="defensive driving techniques"/>
<link wikidata="Q188907" start="3307" end="3316" title="etiquette" label="etiquette"/>
<link wikidata="Q13472752" start="3456" end="3461" title="valet" label="valet"/>
<link wikidata="Q851436" start="3465" end="3474" title="bodyguard" label="bodyguard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1260023" start="3536" end="3550" title="drug screening" label="drug screening"/>
<link wikidata="Q41466" start="3718" end="3728" title="ice hockey" label="ice hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q371766" start="3736" end="3757" title="Vladimir Konstantinov" label="Vladimir Konstantinov"/>
<link wikidata="Q143986" start="4111" end="4124" title="William Greer" label="William Greer"/>
<link wikidata="Q9696" start="4139" end="4154" title="John F. Kennedy" label="John F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2702458" start="4157" end="4180" title="William Grover-Williams" label="William Grover-Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q922483" start="4195" end="4208" title="William Orpen" label="William Orpen"/>
<link wikidata="Q874527" start="4211" end="4224" title="Leopold Lojka" label="Leopold Lojka"/>
<link wikidata="Q43063" start="4239" end="4263" title="Archduke Franz Ferdinand" label="Archduke Franz Ferdinand"/>
<link wikidata="Q58782" start="4266" end="4278" title="Erich Kempka" label="Erich Kempka"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="4293" end="4305" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q58046" start="4326" end="4340" title="Julius Schreck" label="Julius Schreck"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="4355" end="4367" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q6380290" start="4388" end="4401" title="Kay Summersby" label="Kay Summersby"/>
<link wikidata="Q647033" start="4416" end="4460" title="Supreme Headquarters Allied Expeditionary Force" label="Supreme Commander Allied Expeditionary Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q9916" start="4461" end="4481" title="Dwight D. Eisenhower" label="Dwight D. Eisenhower"/>
<link wikidata="Q7366515" start="4484" end="4501" title="Roosevelt Zanders" label="Roosevelt Zanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q11256" start="4509" end="4521" title="Fidel Castro" label="Fidel Castro"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="4523" end="4536" title="Richard Nixon" label="Richard Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="4538" end="4555" title="Winston Churchill" label="Winston Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q83396" start="4557" end="4574" title="Eleanor Roosevelt" label="Eleanor Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q11613" start="4576" end="4591" title="Harry S. Truman" label="Harry S. Truman"/>
<link wikidata="Q980650" start="4629" end="4662" title="Aloysius &amp;quot;Nosey&amp;quot; Parker" label="Aloysius &amp;quot;Nosey&amp;quot; Parker"/>
<link wikidata="Q7794918" start="4665" end="4679" title="Thomas Watkins" label="Thomas Watkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q105658292" start="4682" end="4695" title="Bigger Thomas" label="Bigger Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q165599" start="4705" end="4715" title="Native Son" label="Native Son"/>
<link wikidata="Q5308061" start="4756" end="4765" title="Driving Miss Daisy (play)" label="1987 play"/>
<link wikidata="Q211373" start="4767" end="4776" title="Driving Miss Daisy" label="1989 film"/>
<link wikidata="Q25136553" start="4782" end="4791" title="Driving Miss Daisy (2014 film)" label="2014 film"/>
<link wikidata="Q2076792" start="4794" end="4806" title="Frank Martin (Transporter)" label="Frank Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2076792" start="4818" end="4833" title="The Transporter (franchise)" label="The Transporter"/>
<link wikidata="Q6382340" start="4852" end="4863" title="Tom Branson" label="Tom Branson"/>
<link wikidata="Q83071" start="4919" end="4932" title="Downton Abbey" label="Downton Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q159051" start="4941" end="4958" title="Alfred Pennyworth" label="Alfred Pennyworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q97275436" start="4982" end="4987" title="Logan (film series character)" label="Logan"/>
<link wikidata="Q24053263" start="4991" end="5008" title="Logan (film)" label="&amp;quot;Logan&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q645144" start="5011" end="5015" title="Kato (The Green Hornet)" label="Kato"/>
<link wikidata="Q1510225" start="5053" end="5069" title="The Green Hornet" label="The Green Hornet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7396410" start="5126" end="5135" title="Sabrina_Fair" label="1953 play"/>
<link wikidata="Q152493" start="5147" end="5151" title="Sabrina (1954 film)" label="1954"/>
<link wikidata="Q900708" start="5156" end="5160" title="Sabrina (1995 film)" label="1995"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="230726" wikidata="Q353656" url="?curid=230726" title="Cab">
<text>Cab or CAB may refer to:

== Transport ==
* Cab (locomotive), the driving compartment of a locomotive
* Cab car
* Cabin (truck), an enclosed space in a truck where the driver is seated
* Cabriolet (carriage) (obsolete), a type of horse-drawn carriage
* Civil Aeronautics Board, an agency of the federal government of the United States
* Constructions Aéronautiques du Béarn, former French aircraft manufacturer
* Controller anti-lock brake, see Anti-lock braking system
* NATO reporting name for the Lisunov Li-2, aircraft
* Taxi, a type of vehicle for hire with a driver
* Tractor unit of an articulated lorry, known in Britain as an artic cab

== People ==
* Cab Calloway (1907–1994), American jazz singer and bandleader
* Cris Cab (born 1993), American singer and songwriter

===Fictional characters===
* Cab (&quot;Transformers&quot;), a fictional character from the &quot;Transformers&quot; TV series

== Places ==
* Čab, a village in Nitra District in Slovakia

===Buildings and structures===
* Causeway Bay station, Hong Kong; MTR station code CAB
* Church Administration Building of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints

== Music ==
* The Cab, an American pop-rock band
* CAB (band), a jazz fusion band
** &quot;CAB&quot; (album), 2000
* &quot;Cab&quot; (song), a 2005 song by Train
* &quot;C.A.B. (Catch a Body)&quot;, a 2022 song by Chris Brown

== Computing ==
* Cabinet (file format), with filename extension &quot;CAB&quot;, a Microsoft Windows installation archive format
* Central African Backbone
* Change-advisory board
* Choose and Book, UK NHS E-booking software
* Composite UI Application Block, a part of Microsoft&#x27;s .NET Framework used to create user interfaces
* CA/Browser Forum (Certification Authority Browser Forum)

== Sports ==
* Logo of Club Atlético Banfield, a football team in Argentina
* Logo of Club Atlético Belgrano, a football team in Argentina
* Club Athlétique Bizertin, a football club from Bizerte in Tunisia
* Cricket Association of Bengal, governing body for cricket in West Bengal, India
* Curaçaose Atletiek Bond, the governing body for athletics in Curaçao

== Groups, organizations, companies ==
* Cambodia Asia Bank (CAB), a bank of Cambodia
* Canadian Association of Broadcasters
* Citizens Advice Bureau, UK charity giving free advice for money, legal, consumer and other issues
* Citizens Advice Bureau New Zealand, NZ charity giving free advice for money, legal, consumer and other issues
* Cooperative Analysis of Broadcasting, company originating the Crossley ratings for radio programs
* Credito Agrario Bresciano, defunct bank of Italy
* Criminal Assets Bureau, Irish agency targeting proceeds of crime 

== Other uses ==
* &quot;C.A.B.&quot;, a British television show
* Cabernet Sauvignon
* Cabochon, also called &quot;cab&quot;, a shaped, polished gemstone
* Cellulose acetate butyrate, a type of plastic
* Certified Angus Beef, meat grading designation set up by the American Angus Association
* Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 2019, a law enacted by the Parliament of India
* Combat Action Badge, a military badge worn in the U.S.
* Combat Aviation Brigade, a helicopter unit in the United States Army
* Complete or Combined Androgen Blockade (CAB), see Maximum androgen blockade, medical treatment for prostate cancer
* Comprehensive Agreement on the Bangsamoro, a peace agreement
* Comic Arts Brooklyn, an annual comics festival in Brooklyn, New York

==See also==
* KAB (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q353656" start="0" end="3" title="Cab" label="Cab"/>
<link wikidata="Q353656" start="7" end="10" title="Cab" label="CAB"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418299" start="44" end="60" title="Cab (locomotive)" label="Cab (locomotive)"/>
<link wikidata="Q910157" start="104" end="111" title="Cab car" label="Cab car"/>
<link wikidata="Q43193" start="114" end="127" title="Cabin (truck)" label="Cabin (truck)"/>
<link wikidata="Q403008" start="187" end="207" title="Cabriolet (carriage)" label="Cabriolet (carriage)"/>
<link wikidata="Q17675706" start="253" end="276" title="Civil Aeronautics Board" label="Civil Aeronautics Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995302" start="337" end="373" title="Constructions Aéronautiques du Béarn" label="Constructions Aéronautiques du Béarn"/>
<link wikidata="Q190660" start="445" end="469" title="Anti-lock braking system" label="Anti-lock braking system"/>
<link wikidata="Q662591" start="500" end="512" title="Lisunov Li-2" label="Lisunov Li-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q82650" start="525" end="529" title="Taxi" label="Taxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q59569" start="574" end="586" title="Tractor unit" label="Tractor unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q273079" start="661" end="673" title="Cab Calloway" label="Cab Calloway"/>
<link wikidata="Q15845167" start="725" end="733" title="Cris Cab" label="Cris Cab"/>
<link wikidata="Q2985264" start="808" end="838" title="Cab (Transformers)" label="Cab (&amp;quot;Transformers&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q678113" start="922" end="925" title="Čab" label="Čab"/>
<link wikidata="Q2106561" start="1001" end="1021" title="Causeway Bay station" label="Causeway Bay station"/>
<link wikidata="Q5116549" start="1057" end="1087" title="Church Administration Building" label="Church Administration Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753323" start="1154" end="1161" title="The Cab" label="The Cab"/>
<link wikidata="Q2740467" start="1191" end="1201" title="CAB (band)" label="CAB (band)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5008523" start="1225" end="1248" title="CAB (album)" label="&amp;quot;CAB&amp;quot; (album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3649118" start="1257" end="1279" title="Cab (song)" label="&amp;quot;Cab&amp;quot; (song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q110275890" start="1310" end="1331" title="C.A.B. (Catch a Body)" label="C.A.B. (Catch a Body)"/>
<link wikidata="Q194831" start="1385" end="1406" title="Cabinet (file format)" label="Cabinet (file format)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5060266" start="1499" end="1523" title="Central African Backbone" label="Central African Backbone"/>
<link wikidata="Q5071788" start="1526" end="1547" title="Change-advisory board" label="Change-advisory board"/>
<link wikidata="Q5104774" start="1550" end="1565" title="Choose and Book" label="Choose and Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q5156744" start="1595" end="1625" title="Composite UI Application Block" label="Composite UI Application Block"/>
<link wikidata="Q5008462" start="1702" end="1718" title="CA/Browser Forum" label="CA/Browser Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q692646" start="1783" end="1805" title="Club Atlético Banfield" label="Club Atlético Banfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q59962" start="1846" end="1868" title="Club Atlético Belgrano" label="Club Atlético Belgrano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1102961" start="1901" end="1925" title="Club Athlétique Bizertin" label="Club Athlétique Bizertin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5184956" start="1969" end="1998" title="Cricket Association of Bengal" label="Cricket Association of Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5194633" start="2051" end="2074" title="Curaçaose Atletiek Bond" label="Curaçaose Atletiek Bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q5025108" start="2162" end="2180" title="Cambodia Asia Bank" label="Cambodia Asia Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q5029719" start="2209" end="2245" title="Canadian Association of Broadcasters" label="Canadian Association of Broadcasters"/>
<link wikidata="Q5122657" start="2248" end="2270" title="Citizens Advice Bureau" label="Citizens Advice Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q130548409" start="2348" end="2382" title="Citizens Advice Bureau New Zealand" label="Citizens Advice Bureau New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q5188715" start="2522" end="2538" title="Crossley ratings" label="Crossley ratings"/>
<link wikidata="Q25057152" start="2560" end="2585" title="Credito Agrario Bresciano" label="Credito Agrario Bresciano"/>
<link wikidata="Q5185528" start="2611" end="2633" title="Criminal Assets Bureau" label="Criminal Assets Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q5005971" start="2703" end="2709" title="C.A.B." label="C.A.B."/>
<link wikidata="Q207310" start="2745" end="2763" title="Cabernet Sauvignon" label="Cabernet Sauvignon"/>
<link wikidata="Q615008" start="2766" end="2774" title="Cabochon" label="Cabochon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4073308" start="2835" end="2861" title="Cellulose acetate butyrate" label="Cellulose acetate butyrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q109298169" start="2944" end="2970" title="American Angus Association" label="American Angus Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q61066827" start="2973" end="3006" title="Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 2019" label="Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 2019"/>
<link wikidata="Q5150599" start="3051" end="3070" title="Combat Action Badge" label="Combat Action Badge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5150607" start="3108" end="3131" title="Combat Aviation Brigade" label="Combat Aviation Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q20707646" start="3229" end="3254" title="Maximum androgen blockade" label="Maximum androgen blockade"/>
<link wikidata="Q16959036" start="3296" end="3337" title="Comprehensive Agreement on the Bangsamoro" label="Comprehensive Agreement on the Bangsamoro"/>
<link wikidata="Q59564162" start="3359" end="3378" title="Comic Arts Brooklyn" label="Comic Arts Brooklyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q240027" start="3444" end="3464" title="KAB (disambiguation)" label="KAB (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="230728" wikidata="Q457369" url="?curid=230728" title="Sir William Johnson, 1st Baronet">
<text>Major-General Sir William Johnson, 1st Baronet ( – 11 July 1774), was a British Army officer and colonial administrator from Ireland known for his military and governance work in British colonial America. 

As a young man, Johnson moved to the Province of New York to manage an estate purchased by his uncle, Royal Navy officer Peter Warren, which was located in territory of the Mohawk, one of the Six Nations of the Iroquois League, or &quot;Haudenosaunee&quot;. 

Johnson learned the Mohawk language and Iroquois customs, and was appointed the British agent to the Iroquois. Johnson commanded Iroquois and colonial militia forces against the French and their allies during the French and Indian War (1754–1763). His role in the British victory at the Battle of Lake George in 1755 earned him a baronetcy of New York. His capture of Fort Niagara from the French in 1759 brought him additional renown. 

Throughout his career as a British official among the Iroquois, Johnson combined personal business with official diplomacy, acquiring tens of thousands of acres of Native land and becoming very wealthy. 

==Early life and career==

William Johnson was born around 1715 in County Meath, in the Kingdom of Ireland. He was the eldest son of Christopher Johnson (1687–1764) of Smithstown, County Meath and Anne Warren, daughter of Michael Warren of Warrenstown, County Meath and Catherine Aylmer, sister of Admiral Matthew Aylmer, 1st Baron Aylmer.

His mother Anne was from an &quot;Old English&quot; Catholic gentry family who had, in previous generations, lost much of their status to the &quot;New English&quot;. His father was descended from the O&#x27;Neill dynasty of County Armagh. William Johnson&#x27;s paternal grandfather was originally known as William MacShane, but changed his surname to &quot;Johnson&quot;, the Anglicization of the Gaelic &quot;Mac Seáin&quot; or &quot;Seagháin&quot;. 

Some early biographers portrayed William Johnson as living in poverty in Ireland, but modern studies reveal that his family lived a comfortable, if modest, lifestyle. Although the Johnson family had a history of Jacobitism, William Johnson&#x27;s maternal uncle Peter Warren was raised as a Protestant to enable him to pursue a career in the British Royal Navy. He achieved considerable success, gaining wealth along the way.

As a Catholic, William Johnson had limited opportunities for advancement in the institutions of the British Empire. Never particularly religious, Johnson converted to Protestantism when offered an opportunity to work for his uncle in British America.

==Immigration to the colonies==

Peter Warren had purchased a large tract of undeveloped land along the south side of the Mohawk River in the province of New York then known as Warrensberg (or Warrensbush) (now present day Florida, NY). Warren convinced Johnson to lead an effort to establish a settlement there, to be known as Warrensburgh, with the implied understanding that Johnson would inherit much of the land. Johnson arrived in about 1738 with twelve Irish Protestant families and began to clear the land. He purchased enslaved Africans to do the heavy labor of clearance; they were the first of many slaves bought by Johnson.

Warren intended Johnson to become involved in trading with American Indians, largely the Mohawk and other of the Six Nations of the Iroquois, tribes who dominated the area west of Albany. Johnson soon discovered that the trade routes were to the north, on the opposite side of the river from Warrensburgh. Acting on his own initiative, in 1739 Johnson bought a house and small farm on the north side of the river, where he built a store and a sawmill. From this location, which he called &quot;Mount Johnson&quot;, Johnson was able to cut into Albany&#x27;s Indian trade. He supplied goods to traders who were headed to Fort Oswego, and bought furs from them when they returned downriver. He dealt directly with New York City merchants, thus avoiding the middlemen at Albany. The Albany merchants were irate, and Warren was not pleased that his nephew was becoming independent.

Johnson became closely associated with the Mohawk, the easternmost nation of the Six Nations of the Iroquois League. By the time Johnson arrived, their population had collapsed to 580 persons, due to chronic infectious diseases unwittingly introduced by Europeans and warfare with competing tribes related to the lucrative beaver trade. The Mohawk thought an alliance with Johnson could advance their interests in the British imperial system. Around 1742, they adopted him as an honorary sachem, or civil chief, and gave him the name &quot;Warraghiyagey,&quot; which he translated as &quot;A Man who undertakes great Things&quot;.

==King George&#x27;s War==
In 1744, the War of the Austrian Succession spread to colonial America, where it was known as King George&#x27;s War. Because of his close relationship with the Mohawk, in 1746 Johnson was appointed by the British colonial government as New York&#x27;s sole agent to the Iroquois, replacing the ineffective Albany-based Indian commissioners. 

The newly created &quot;Colonel of the Warriors of the Six Nations&quot; was instructed to enlist and equip colonists and Indians for a campaign against the French. Recruiting Iroquois warriors was difficult: ever since the so-called Grand Settlement of 1701, the Iroquois nations had maintained a policy of neutrality in colonial wars between France and Great Britain. Working with the Mohawk chief Hendrick Theyanoguin, Johnson recruited Mohawk warriors to fight on the side of the British.
Johnson organized small raiding parties, which were sent against the settlements of the French and their Indian allies. In accordance with New York&#x27;s Scalp Act of 1747, Johnson paid bounties for scalps, although he realized this encouraged the scalping of non-combatants of all ages and both sexes. In June 1748, Johnson was appointed as &quot;Colonel of the New York levies&quot;, a position that gave him additional responsibility for the colonial militias at Albany. In July 1748, word was received of a peace settlement. The Mohawk had suffered heavy casualties in the war, which lessened Johnson&#x27;s prestige among them for a while.

In 1748, Johnson built a new stone house upriver from Mount Johnson, which became known as Fort Johnson. The home was strongly fortified when the next war approached.

==Relations with New York==

After King George&#x27;s War, Johnson was caught between rival New York political factions. One faction was led by Governor George Clinton, who had appointed Johnson as New York&#x27;s Indian agent and, in 1750, appointed him to the Governor&#x27;s Council. Governor Clinton urged the New York Assembly to repay Johnson&#x27;s outstanding wartime expenses, which amounted to £2,000. Repayment was blocked by Clinton&#x27;s political rivals led by Lieutenant Governor James De Lancey, who was connected to the Albany Indian commissioners whom Johnson had supplanted. De Lancey was also the brother-in-law of Admiral Warren, which added to the strain in the relationship between Johnson and Warren.

An exasperated Johnson resigned as New York&#x27;s Indian commissioner in 1751, focusing instead on his business interests. When Warren died in July 1752, he left nothing to Johnson in his will; instead, he stipulated that his nephew was now responsible for all outstanding expenses from the establishment of Warrensberg.

In 1755, Johnson shifted the primary meeting place for diplomatic councils between the British and the Iroquois from Albany to Fort Johnson. He also bought houses in Schenectady and Albany to stop at on his business trips to New York.

==French and Indian War==

In June 1753, Hendrick Theyanoguin and a delegation of Mohawk traveled to New York City, where they announced to Governor Clinton that the Covenant Chain—the diplomatic relationship between the British and the Iroquois—was broken. The British government ordered Clinton to convene the Albany Congress of 1754 to repair the Covenant Chain. At the Congress, the Mohawk insisted that the alliance would be restored only if Johnson were reinstated as their agent.

Johnson&#x27;s reinstatement as Indian agent came the following year, just as the French and Indian War, the North American theater of the Seven Years&#x27; War, was escalating. In 1755, Major General Edward Braddock, sent to North America to direct the British war effort, turned to Johnson for assistance in obtaining Native scouts. Although Johnson had little military experience, he was commissioned as a major general and instructed to lead an expedition against the French fort at Crown Point. His troops were provincial soldiers paid for by the colonies, rather than regular soldiers of the British Army, which meant that he had to deal with six different colonial governments while organizing the expedition.

Johnson initially had nearly 5,000 colonials at his command, but General William Shirley, Governor of Massachusetts and ordered to lead a simultaneous expedition to Fort Niagara, shifted some of Johnson&#x27;s men and resources to his own campaign against the French post. Tensions escalated as the two generals worked against each other in recruiting Native allies. The dispute was complicated by the unusual command structure: as Braddock&#x27;s second-in-command, General Shirley was Johnson&#x27;s superior officer, but when it came to Indian affairs, Johnson was theoretically in charge. In time, Shirley would blame the failure of his expedition on Johnson&#x27;s refusal to provide him with adequate Indian support. According to the Johnson biographer Milton Hamilton, historians usually portrayed Johnson as acting unreasonably in the controversy with Shirley, but Hamilton argued that Johnson was simply reacting to Shirley&#x27;s clumsy Indian diplomacy, which harmed the British relationship with the Six Nations.

===Crown Point expedition===
Marching north into French territory, in August 1755 Johnson renamed Lac du Saint-Sacrement to Lake George in honour of his king. On 8 September 1755, Johnson&#x27;s forces held their ground in the Battle of Lake George. Johnson was wounded by a ball that was to remain in his hip or thigh for the rest of his life. Hendrick Theyanoguin, Johnson&#x27;s Mohawk ally, was killed in the battle, and Baron Dieskau, the French commander, was captured. Johnson prevented the Mohawk from killing the wounded Dieskau, an act memorialized in later paintings of the event.


The battle ended the expedition against Crown Point. Johnson built Fort William Henry at Lake George to strengthen British defences. In December, tired of army life, Johnson resigned his generalship. General Shirley, who had become the commander-in-chief upon Braddock&#x27;s death, sought to have Johnson&#x27;s commission as Indian agent modified, forcing Johnson to work for him directly. This attempt at retaliation was foiled when Shirley was unexpectedly removed from office and recalled to England.

Although the Battle of Lake George was hardly a decisive victory, the British needed a military hero in a year of major setbacks, and Johnson became that man. Claims that Johnson had been disabled by his wound early in the battle, and thus did not participate in the victory, did not reduce the recognition given to him. As a reward for his services, Parliament voted Johnson £5,000 and King George made him a baronet. &quot;Never was such an insignificant encounter so generously rewarded&quot;, wrote the historian Julian Gwyn.

In January 1756, the British government made Johnson sole Superintendent of Indian Affairs for the northern colonies. This position gave him great influence and power, since he would report directly to the government in London and would not be controlled by provincial governments. Of all the Indian nations in the northern colonies, Johnson was most knowledgeable about, and most closely connected to, the Iroquois Six Nations, especially the Mohawk. As superintendent, he would make the Iroquois the focus of British diplomacy, promoting and even exaggerating the power of the Iroquois Confederacy. Johnson also began a long process of seeking to dominate the Confederacy&#x27;s diplomatic and political administration, attempting &quot;nothing less than the refurbishment of the Iroquois confederacy with himself as to its centre&quot;.

===Capture of Fort Niagara===
Although Johnson was no longer a British general, he continued to lead Iroquois and frontier militia. In August 1757, after the French began their siege of Fort William Henry, Johnson arrived at Fort Edward with 180 Indians and 1,500 militia. Greatly overestimating the size of the French army, British General Daniel Webb decided against sending a relief force from Fort Edward to Fort William Henry. The British were compelled to surrender Fort William Henry, after which many were killed in an infamous massacre. Stories circulated that Johnson was enraged by Webb&#x27;s decision not to send help, and that he stripped naked in front of Webb to express his disgust.

With the war going badly for the British, Johnson found it difficult to enlist the support of the Six Nations, who were not eager to join a losing cause. In July 1758, he managed to raise 450 warriors to take part in a massive expedition led by the new British commander, General James Abercrombie. The campaign ended ingloriously with Abercrombie&#x27;s disastrous attempt to take Fort Carillon from the French. Johnson and his Indian auxiliaries could do little as British forces stormed the French positions in fruitless frontal assaults.

In 1758, with the capture of Louisbourg, Fort Frontenac, and Fort Duquesne, the war&#x27;s momentum began to shift in favour of the British. Johnson was able to recruit more Iroquois warriors. In the summer of 1759, he led nearly 1,000 Iroquois warriors—practically the entire military strength of the Six Nations—as part of General John Prideaux&#x27;s expedition to capture Fort Niagara. When Prideaux was killed, Johnson took command.

He captured the fort after ambushing and defeating a French relief force at the Battle of La Belle-Famille. Johnson is usually credited with leading or at least planning this ambush, but the historian Francis Jennings argued that Johnson was not present at the battle, and that he exaggerated his role in official dispatches. The conquest of Niagara drove the French line back from the Great Lakes. Once more, Johnson was celebrated as a hero, although some professional soldiers expressed doubts about his military abilities and the value of the Iroquois in the victory. Johnson commanded the &quot;largest Native American force ever assembled under the British flag.&quot;

Johnson accompanied General Jeffery Amherst in the final North American campaign of the Seven Years&#x27; War, the capture of Montreal in 1760. With the fall of New France to the British, Johnson and his deputy George Croghan spent much time negotiating with the former Indian allies of the French. In 1761, Johnson made a 1,000-mile (1,600 km) round trip to Detroit to hold a conference with the regional American Indians. Johnson confronted the assembled chiefs about the anti-British rumours that were circulating among the Natives, and managed, for the time being, to forestall outright resistance to the British military occupation of the West. Normand Macleod met Johnson at this conference and returned with him to New York. Macleod was later appointed as commander of Fort Oswego, on Lake Ontario.

==British Superintendent of Indian Affairs==

Because of his knowledge of Iroquois languages and customs and his success in business and governance, he was appointed the newly established British Superintendent of Indian Affairs for the northern district, serving from 1756 until his death in 1774. In this role, Johnson worked to keep American Indians attached to the British interest. Johnson&#x27;s counterpart for the southern colonies was John Stuart.

==Postwar development==
After the French and Indian War, Johnson hoped to concentrate on expanding and improving his land holdings. In December 1760, the Mohawk of Canajoharie gave Johnson a tract of about north of the Mohawk River. This grant proved to be controversial because other land speculators had already obtained licenses to purchase lands that the Mohawk released for sale, but Sir William had not. In 1769, after years of manoeuvring and lobbying, Johnson finally gained royal approval for the grant. This was one of several large tracts of land that Johnson acquired from the Mohawk and Iroquois using his position as a royal Indian agent. By the time of his death, Johnson had accumulated about and was one of the largest land owners in British America, surpassed only by the Penn and van Rensselaer families. According to historian Julian Gwyn:

In all this he acted no differently from dozens of other speculators in Indian lands. He was distinguished only by the great advantages he possessed through his office and his long intimacy with the Indians. He was indeed one of their principal exploiters...

In 1762, Johnson founded the city of Johnstown on his grant, about west of Schenectady, New York, north of the Mohawk River. He named the new settlement, originally called John&#x27;s Town, after his son John. There, at the Crown expense, he established a free school for both white and Mohawk children.

Outside the town, in 1763 he built Johnson Hall, where he lived until his death. He recruited numerous Irish immigrant tenant farmers for his extensive lands, and lived essentially as a feudal landlord. He also purchased enslaved Africans to work as labourers, especially in his lumber operations. Johnson had some 60 slaves working for him, making him the largest slaveholder in the county and likely in the province, comparable to major planters in the American South. In 1766, Johnson organised St. Patrick&#x27;s Lodge, No. 4, a Freemason lodge, at Johnson Hall, and was installed as its master. His nephew Guy Johnson succeeded him as master of this lodge in 1770.

Johnson was a strong supporter of the Anglican Church in the colony. To counter the influence of French Catholic missionaries in western New York, in 1769 he paid for the construction of an Anglican church for the Mohawk of &quot;Canajoharie&quot;, a village the British called the &quot;Upper Castle&quot;. The building, later used by European-American congregations and known as Indian Castle Church, still stands near Danube, New York. It is part of the Mohawk Upper Castle Historic District, a National Historic Landmark. In 1771, Johnson built St. John&#x27;s Episcopal Church in Johnstown, but soon complained that it was &quot;small and very ill built.&quot; Within five years, he arranged for a larger church of stone to be constructed to accommodate the growing congregation in Johnstown. The historic church is still operating.

==Pontiac&#x27;s War and final years==
In 1763, Pontiac&#x27;s War resulted from Native American discontent with British policy following the French and Indian War. For several years prior to the uprising, Johnson had advised General Jeffery Amherst to observe Iroquois diplomatic practices, for instance, awarding gifts to Native leaders, a practice they considered an important cultural symbol of respect and significant to maintaining good relations. Amherst, who rejected Johnson&#x27;s advice, was recalled to London and replaced by General Thomas Gage. Amherst&#x27;s recall strengthened Johnson&#x27;s position, because a policy of compromise was required with the Indians, and this was Johnson&#x27;s domain. Johnson negotiated a treaty with Pontiac in 1766, which finally ended the war.

From July to August 1764, Johnson negotiated a treaty at Fort Niagara with about 2,000 American Indians in attendance, primarily Iroquois. Although most Iroquois had stayed out of the war, the Seneca from the Genesee River valley had taken up arms against the British, and Johnson worked to bring them back into the Covenant Chain alliance. Johnson convinced the Iroquois to send a war party against the Seneca involved in the uprising, but otherwise the Iroquois did not contribute to the war effort as much as Johnson had desired.

Johnson was a proponent of the Royal Proclamation of 1763, which called for tighter imperial control and restraint of westward colonial expansion. Johnson negotiated the details of the boundary defined in the Fort Stanwix Treaty of 1768. Against instructions from London, Johnson pushed the boundary to the west, enabling him and other land speculators to acquire much more land than originally authorised by the British government. Johnson was strongly criticised for exceeding his instructions, but many of the land speculators were well-connected in the government, and the expanded boundary was allowed to stand. During this time he became a member of the American Philosophical Society through his election to membership in 1768.

Native American discontent continued to grow in the west in the 1770s. Johnson spent his final years attempting to prevent another uprising like Pontiac&#x27;s War. Pursuing a policy of divide and rule, he worked to block the emergence of intertribal Native American alliances. His final success was his isolation of the Shawnee before Dunmore&#x27;s War in 1774.

==Marriage and family==
In his lifetime, Johnson gained a reputation as a man who had numerous children with several European and Native American women. At the time, men were not ostracised for having illegitimate children, as long as they could afford it and supported them. One 20th-century scholar estimated that Johnson had perhaps 100 illegitimate children, but the historian Francis Jennings argued that &quot;there is no truth in wild stories that he slept with innumerable Mohawk women.&quot; In his will, Johnson acknowledged children by Catherine Weisenberg and Molly Brant, German and Mohawk, respectively, with whom he had long-term relationships. He implicitly acknowledged several other children by unnamed mothers.

In 1739, shortly after arriving in America, Johnson began a relationship with Catherine Weisenberg (c. 1723–1759), a German immigrant from the Electorate of the Palatinate. She originally came to the colonies as an indentured servant, but had run away, perhaps with the help of friends or relatives. According to tradition, she was working for another family near Warrensburgh when Johnson purchased the remainder of her indenture contract, perhaps initially to have her serve as his housekeeper. While there is no record that the couple ever formally married, New York did not require civil marriage licenses or certificates to be filed at that time, and Weisenberg was Johnson&#x27;s common-law wife. The couple had three known children together, including daughters Nancy and Mary (Polly), and a son John, first christened only under the surname Weisenberg at Fort Hunter. The senior Johnson later arranged for his son John to inherit his title and estates as John Johnson. A grandson of Sir William Johnson was the 3rd Baronet Sir Adam Gordon Johnson who was, through his grandmother Ann Watts, a descendant of the Schuyler, Delancey, and Van Cortlandt families of British North America.

At the same time, Johnson had a relationship with Elizabeth Brant, a Mohawk woman by whom he had three known children: &quot;Keghneghtago&quot; or Brant (born in 1742), Thomas (1744) and Christian (1745); the latter two boys died in infancy. About 1750, Johnson had a son named &quot;Tagawirunta,&quot; also known as William of Canajoharie, by a Mohawk woman, possibly Margaret Brant, Elizabeth&#x27;s younger sister. Johnson may have also been intimate with the sisters Susannah and Elizabeth Wormwood, and an Irish woman named Mary McGrath by whom he appeared to have had a daughter named Mary. Mary, &quot;Keghneghtago&quot; (Brant), and &quot;Tagawirunta&quot; (William) received inheritances in Johnson&#x27;s will.

In 1759, Johnson began a common-law relationship with Molly Brant, a Mohawk woman who lived with Johnson as his consort at Johnson Hall for the rest of his life. Molly was the older sister of Joseph Brant, who joined the household when he was young. Johnson&#x27;s relationship with Molly gave him additional influence with the Mohawk. The couple had eight children together, all of whom received land from Johnson by his will. A grandson of William Johnson and Molly Brant was William Johnson Kerr, who married Elizabeth Brant, a daughter of Joseph Brant and granddaughter of George Croghan and their Mohawk wives.

==Death and legacy==

Johnson died from a stroke at Johnson Hall on 11 July 1774 during an Indian conference. Guy Johnson, William&#x27;s nephew and son-in-law (he had married Mary/Polly), reported that Johnson died when he was &quot;seized of a suffocation.&quot; His funeral in Johnstown was attended by more than 2,000 people. His pallbearers included Governor William Franklin of New Jersey and the justices of the New York Supreme Court. He was buried beneath the altar in St. John&#x27;s Episcopal church, the church he founded in Johnstown. The next day chiefs of the Six Nations performed the condolence ceremony and recognized Guy Johnson as Sir William&#x27;s successor.

During the American Revolution, the rebel New York legislature seized all of Johnson&#x27;s lands and property, as his heirs were Loyalists. 

===Indian Relations===
Johnson&#x27;s most important legacy is the comparatively peaceful co-existence of Anglo-Americans and Indians during his tenure as Indian Agent for British North America. As an adopted Mohawk chief and husband of Mohawk Mary (Molly) Brant, according to Iroquois law, he was a trusted counselor and member of the Mohawk nation. Through that affiliation, he was considered a member of the Six Nations of the Iroquois. That position gave him standing not only to lead Iroquois into battle on the side of the English, but also to negotiate two treaties of Fort Stanwix (which developed as modern-day Rome, New York). While the treaties deprived many Indians of land without their knowledge, they gave favorable terms to the Iroquois, and resulted in decades of comparative peace between traditional Indian residents and new settlers.

Co-existence was part of Johnson&#x27;s other major historical legacy: the protection of British sovereignty and Anglo-American settlement as a bulwark against French control of northern New York and the Great Lakes region more generally. Johnson was instrumental in sustaining British-Iroquois alliance through the Covenant Chain, which consolidated both Iroquois and British territorial and commercial interests against the rival Algonquin and French interests in New France before 1763. After Britain assumed control of former French territories east of the Mississippi River, Johnson eventually won a political dispute over Indian policy with Lord Jeffery Amherst. He had disdained the Iroquois alliance which Johnson had so devoted himself to nurturing and defending. It was to Johnson that Pontiac finally surrendered after the eventual failure of the conflict named for him.

===Structures===
Old Fort Johnson, his first home built in 1749, is on the Historic American Buildings Survey. It is now used by the Montgomery County Historical Society, which operates a museum and gift shop there, as well as allowing it to be an event venue. Guy Park Manor, built in 1773, for Sir William&#x27;s daughter Mary (Polly) and her husband, his nephew Guy Johnson, is also open to the public.

In 1960 Johnson Hall was named a National Historic Landmark. It is a designated State Historic Site and open to the public.
===Papers===
A 1911 fire at the New York State Library damaged or destroyed a collection of about 6550 pieces of Johnson&#x27;s papers. A 1921 publication of the papers collected from salvaged documents, other archives, and from an early printer&#x27;s proof of his works exists for historians interested in studying Sir William.

==In popular culture==
The Johnstown High School mascot is the &quot;Sir Bill&quot; in Johnson&#x27;s honor (or &quot;Lady Bill&quot; for all-female teams). The teams&#x27; sportswear often depicts Johnson&#x27;s silhouette, wearing a tricorne hat.

Johnson appears as an antagonist as a secret member of the Templar Order in the 2012 video game &quot;Assassin&#x27;s Creed III.&quot; He is instructed by the Templars to seize and control Native American lands and in retaliation he is killed by the game&#x27;s Mohawk protagonist, Ratonhnhaké:ton. 
He also makes an appearance in the 2014 video game prequel &quot;Assassin&#x27;s Creed Rogue&quot; where he allies and helps mentor the game&#x27;s protagonist, Shay Patrick Cormac.

He is a prominent character in the 2007 book &quot;Manituana&quot; by Wu Ming and briefly features in Robert Louis Stevenson&#x27;s novel, &quot;The Master of Ballantrae&quot; (1889).

Johnson was portrayed by Chris Wiggins in the 1990 television film &quot;Divided Loyalties&quot;, and by Pierce Brosnan in the 1993 television movie &quot;The Broken Chain&quot;.

Johnson was portrayed by actor Jeff Monahan in the PBS docudrama &quot;The War that Made America&quot; (2006). Monahan studied contemporary physical deportment and speaking in a northern Irish accent for the role.

&quot;Wilderness Empire&quot; (1968), by Allan W Eckert, tells Johnson&#x27;s story through the device of historical fiction. Eckert bases his novel on historical documents but also creates imagined events and dialogs that make it accessible to the average reader.

==Ancestors==

==References==
===Citations===
===General References===
* 
* 

== Further reading ==
==External links==

*Sir William Johnson, 1715-1774 - Papers, 1738-1808 (finding aid) at the New York State Library, accessed May 18, 2016.
*Johnson Hall State Historic Site 
*Fort Johnson Historic Landmark
* Sir William Johnson Letters at the Newberry Library
*References to Sir William Johnson in Haldimand Collection (Papers)
*Robert Adems&#x27;s &#x27;Daybok&#x27; 1768—1773, recording purchases of daily goods made by Johnson&#x27;s household between the years 1768–1773. A transcription (by Dr. Michael D. Elliot) of Hamilton&#x27;s 1962 edition.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q287709" start="0" end="13" title="Major-general (United Kingdom)" label="Major-General"/>
<link wikidata="Q457369" start="14" end="46" title="Sir William Johnson, 1st Baronet" label="Sir William Johnson, 1st Baronet"/>
<link wikidata="Q222595" start="72" end="84" title="British Army" label="British Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q215530" start="125" end="132" title="Kingdom of Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q769668" start="244" end="264" title="Province of New York" label="Province of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="309" end="319" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3376953" start="328" end="340" title="Peter Warren (Royal Navy officer)" label="Peter Warren"/>
<link wikidata="Q116971" start="380" end="386" title="Mohawk people" label="Mohawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q68518" start="418" end="433" title="Iroquois" label="Iroquois League"/>
<link wikidata="Q68518" start="444" end="457" title="Haudenosaunee" label="Haudenosaunee"/>
<link wikidata="Q13339" start="487" end="502" title="Mohawk language" label="Mohawk language"/>
<link wikidata="Q154697" start="680" end="701" title="French and Indian War" label="French and Indian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q579971" start="754" end="775" title="Battle of Lake George" label="Battle of Lake George"/>
<link wikidata="Q125782955" start="797" end="818" title="Johnson baronets of New York (1755)" label="baronetcy of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q2888557" start="824" end="847" title="siege of Fort Niagara" label="capture of Fort Niagara"/>
<link wikidata="Q183544" start="1177" end="1189" title="County Meath" label="County Meath"/>
<link wikidata="Q215530" start="1198" end="1216" title="Kingdom of Ireland" label="Kingdom of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q183544" start="1290" end="1302" title="County Meath" label="County Meath"/>
<link wikidata="Q183544" start="1363" end="1375" title="County Meath" label="County Meath"/>
<link wikidata="Q647967" start="1416" end="1448" title="Matthew Aylmer, 1st Baron Aylmer" label="Matthew Aylmer, 1st Baron Aylmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q921901" start="1485" end="1496" title="Old English (Ireland)" label="Old English"/>
<link wikidata="Q844586" start="1512" end="1518" title="gentry" label="gentry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2849692" start="1593" end="1616" title="Anglo-Irish people" label="&amp;quot;New English&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3779240" start="1652" end="1672" title="O&amp;#x27;Neill dynasty" label="O&amp;#x27;Neill dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q192761" start="1676" end="1689" title="County Armagh" label="County Armagh"/>
<link wikidata="Q6722111" start="1767" end="1775" title="MacShane" label="MacShane"/>
<link wikidata="Q9142" start="1850" end="1856" title="Irish language" label="Gaelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q212983" start="2118" end="2128" title="Jacobitism" label="Jacobitism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3376953" start="2168" end="2180" title="Sir Peter Warren" label="Peter Warren"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="2256" end="2266" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="2433" end="2447" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q258532" start="2567" end="2582" title="British America" label="British America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345896" start="2707" end="2719" title="Mohawk River" label="Mohawk River"/>
<link wikidata="Q769668" start="2727" end="2747" title="province of New York" label="province of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q5027600" start="2808" end="2819" title="Florida, Montgomery County, New York" label="Florida, NY"/>
<link wikidata="Q7539285" start="3113" end="3130" title="Slavery in the colonial history of the United States" label="enslaved Africans"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="3281" end="3297" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="American Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q24861" start="3402" end="3408" title="Albany, New York" label="Albany"/>
<link wikidata="Q315054" start="3842" end="3853" title="Fort Oswego" label="Fort Oswego"/>
<link wikidata="Q116971" start="4144" end="4150" title="Mohawk nation" label="Mohawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q68518" start="4201" end="4216" title="Iroquois League" label="Iroquois League"/>
<link wikidata="Q166231" start="4309" end="4327" title="infectious disease" label="infectious disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q878138" start="4424" end="4436" title="fur trade" label="beaver trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433209" start="4589" end="4595" title="sachem" label="sachem"/>
<link wikidata="Q32929" start="4773" end="4803" title="War of the Austrian Succession" label="War of the Austrian Succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055643" start="4814" end="4830" title="Colonial history of the United States" label="colonial America"/>
<link wikidata="Q517578" start="4854" end="4876" title="King George&amp;#x27;s War" label="King George&amp;#x27;s War"/>
<link wikidata="Q326028" start="5338" end="5362" title="Great Peace of Montreal" label="Grand Settlement of 1701"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259323" start="5498" end="5503" title="Tribal chief" label="chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345118" start="5504" end="5524" title="Hendrick Theyanoguin" label="Hendrick Theyanoguin"/>
<link wikidata="Q13694993" start="5797" end="5803" title="scalping" label="scalps"/>
<link wikidata="Q7084030" start="6335" end="6347" title="Old Fort Johnson" label="Fort Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5537983" start="6565" end="6579" title="George Clinton (Royal Navy officer)" label="George Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q115815791" start="6674" end="6697" title="New York Executive Council" label="Governor&amp;#x27;s Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470702" start="6726" end="6743" title="New York Assembly" label="New York Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q3161014" start="6908" end="6923" title="James De Lancey" label="James De Lancey"/>
<link wikidata="Q331380" start="7628" end="7639" title="Schenectady, New York" label="Schenectady"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345118" start="7739" end="7759" title="Hendrick Theyanoguin" label="Hendrick Theyanoguin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138032" start="7864" end="7878" title="Covenant Chain" label="Covenant Chain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2301178" start="8010" end="8025" title="Albany Congress" label="Albany Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q154697" start="8268" end="8289" title="French and Indian War" label="French and Indian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q33143" start="8325" end="8346" title="Seven Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Seven Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q113412" start="8387" end="8402" title="Edward Braddock" label="Edward Braddock"/>
<link wikidata="Q157148" start="8595" end="8608" title="major general" label="major general"/>
<link wikidata="Q3078036" start="8658" end="8669" title="Fort St. Frédéric" label="French fort"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013523" start="8673" end="8684" title="Crown Point, New York" label="Crown Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q222595" start="8784" end="8796" title="British Army" label="British Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q331323" start="8977" end="8992" title="William Shirley" label="William Shirley"/>
<link wikidata="Q362553" start="9069" end="9081" title="Fort Niagara" label="Fort Niagara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1495651" start="10054" end="10065" title="Lake George (lake), New York" label="Lake George"/>
<link wikidata="Q579971" start="10157" end="10178" title="Battle of Lake George" label="Battle of Lake George"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345118" start="10275" end="10295" title="Hendrick Theyanoguin" label="Hendrick Theyanoguin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3163736" start="10355" end="10368" title="Jean Erdman, Baron Dieskau" label="Baron Dieskau"/>
<link wikidata="Q519254" start="10591" end="10609" title="Fort William Henry" label="Fort William Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q131981" start="11418" end="11429" title="George II of Great Britain" label="King George"/>
<link wikidata="Q6268490" start="11441" end="11448" title="Johnson Baronets" label="baronet"/>
<link wikidata="Q717649" start="11620" end="11652" title="Indian Department" label="Superintendent of Indian Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2080325" start="12580" end="12607" title="siege of Fort William Henry" label="siege of Fort William Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q592240" start="12628" end="12639" title="Fort Edward (village), New York" label="Fort Edward"/>
<link wikidata="Q16206671" start="12744" end="12755" title="Daniel Webb (British Army officer)" label="Daniel Webb"/>
<link wikidata="Q570947" start="13384" end="13401" title="James Abercrombie (British Army general)" label="James Abercrombie"/>
<link wikidata="Q697897" start="13481" end="13499" title="Battle of Carillon" label="take Fort Carillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3050672" start="13676" end="13686" title="Siege of Louisbourg (1758)" label="Louisbourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2888548" start="13688" end="13702" title="Battle of Fort Frontenac" label="Fort Frontenac"/>
<link wikidata="Q2391801" start="13708" end="13721" title="Battle of Fort Duquesne" label="Fort Duquesne"/>
<link wikidata="Q6253416" start="13980" end="13993" title="John Prideaux (general)" label="John Prideaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q2888557" start="14015" end="14035" title="Siege of Fort Niagara" label="capture Fort Niagara"/>
<link wikidata="Q328447" start="14166" end="14192" title="Battle of La Belle-Famille" label="Battle of La Belle-Famille"/>
<link wikidata="Q5481486" start="14287" end="14303" title="Francis Jennings" label="Francis Jennings"/>
<link wikidata="Q335063" start="14790" end="14805" title="Jeffery Amherst, 1st Baron Amherst" label="Jeffery Amherst"/>
<link wikidata="Q33143" start="14850" end="14871" title="Seven Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Seven Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q85851457" start="14877" end="14896" title="Montreal Campaign" label="capture of Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q170604" start="14923" end="14933" title="New France" label="New France"/>
<link wikidata="Q5538228" start="14973" end="14987" title="George Croghan" label="George Croghan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7053018" start="15412" end="15427" title="Normand Macleod" label="Normand Macleod"/>
<link wikidata="Q315054" start="15538" end="15549" title="Fort Oswego" label="Fort Oswego"/>
<link wikidata="Q717649" start="15757" end="15797" title="British Indian Department" label="British Superintendent of Indian Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q6259520" start="16013" end="16024" title="John Stuart (loyalist)" label="John Stuart"/>
<link wikidata="Q5030948" start="16191" end="16202" title="Canajoharie" label="Canajoharie"/>
<link wikidata="Q258532" start="16778" end="16793" title="British America" label="British America"/>
<link wikidata="Q209152" start="16817" end="16821" title="William Penn" label="Penn"/>
<link wikidata="Q57198497" start="16826" end="16840" title="Van Rensselaer (family)" label="van Rensselaer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377991" start="17185" end="17194" title="Johnstown (city), New York" label="Johnstown"/>
<link wikidata="Q331380" start="17223" end="17234" title="Schenectady, New York" label="Schenectady"/>
<link wikidata="Q3809760" start="17488" end="17500" title="Johnson Hall State Historic Site" label="Johnson Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q55630100" start="17892" end="17900" title="Planter class" label="planters"/>
<link wikidata="Q49042" start="17908" end="17922" title="Southern United States" label="American South"/>
<link wikidata="Q41726" start="17986" end="17995" title="Freemasonry" label="Freemason"/>
<link wikidata="Q5622372" start="18064" end="18075" title="Guy Johnson" label="Guy Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5030948" start="18354" end="18365" title="Canajoharie" label="Canajoharie"/>
<link wikidata="Q6019976" start="18505" end="18525" title="Indian Castle Church" label="Indian Castle Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q3708297" start="18545" end="18561" title="Danube, New York" label="Danube, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q6893817" start="18581" end="18618" title="Mohawk Upper Castle Historic District" label="Mohawk Upper Castle Historic District"/>
<link wikidata="Q624232" start="18622" end="18648" title="National Historic Landmark" label="National Historic Landmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q179077" start="19011" end="19029" title="Pontiac&amp;#x27;s War" label="Pontiac&amp;#x27;s War"/>
<link wikidata="Q335063" start="19197" end="19212" title="Jeffery Amherst, 1st Baron Amherst" label="Jeffery Amherst"/>
<link wikidata="Q581935" start="19509" end="19520" title="Thomas Gage" label="Thomas Gage"/>
<link wikidata="Q314960" start="19713" end="19720" title="Pontiac (Ottawa leader)" label="Pontiac"/>
<link wikidata="Q7837062" start="19807" end="19829" title="Treaty of Fort Niagara" label="treaty at Fort Niagara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422687" start="19969" end="19982" title="Genesee River" label="Genesee River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138032" start="20076" end="20090" title="Covenant Chain" label="Covenant Chain"/>
<link wikidata="Q209573" start="20325" end="20351" title="Royal Proclamation of 1763" label="Royal Proclamation of 1763"/>
<link wikidata="Q246501" start="20503" end="20522" title="Fort Stanwix Treaty" label="Fort Stanwix Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q466089" start="20954" end="20984" title="American Philosophical Society" label="American Philosophical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q68951" start="21216" end="21231" title="divide and rule" label="divide and rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q253436" start="21351" end="21358" title="Shawnee" label="Shawnee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632175" start="21366" end="21384" title="Dunmore&amp;#x27;s War" label="Dunmore&amp;#x27;s War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396262" start="21967" end="21978" title="Molly Brant" label="Molly Brant"/>
<link wikidata="Q22880" start="22269" end="22297" title="Electorate of the Palatinate" label="Electorate of the Palatinate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122364" start="22341" end="22359" title="indentured servant" label="indentured servant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377445" start="22812" end="22822" title="common law marriage" label="common-law"/>
<link wikidata="Q108574085" start="22895" end="22900" title="Ann Claus" label="Nancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7527858" start="23089" end="23101" title="Sir John Johnson, 2nd Baronet" label="John Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7433084" start="23245" end="23253" title="Schuyler family" label="Schuyler"/>
<link wikidata="Q3161014" start="23255" end="23263" title="James De Lancey" label="Delancey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7913255" start="23269" end="23282" title="Van Cortlandt family" label="Van Cortlandt"/>
<link wikidata="Q248452" start="23295" end="23316" title="British North America" label="British North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q5030948" start="23647" end="23658" title="Canajoharie" label="Canajoharie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396262" start="24095" end="24106" title="Molly Brant" label="Molly Brant"/>
<link wikidata="Q3809760" start="24164" end="24176" title="Johnson Hall State Historic Site" label="Johnson Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q505146" start="24233" end="24245" title="Joseph Brant" label="Joseph Brant"/>
<link wikidata="Q505146" start="24584" end="24596" title="Joseph Brant" label="Joseph Brant"/>
<link wikidata="Q5538228" start="24618" end="24632" title="George Croghan" label="George Croghan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5622372" start="24768" end="24779" title="Guy Johnson" label="Guy Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4020008" start="25022" end="25038" title="William Franklin" label="William Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7588692" start="25136" end="25161" title="St. John&amp;#x27;s Episcopal Church (Johnstown, New York)" label="St. John&amp;#x27;s Episcopal"/>
<link wikidata="Q109941537" start="25259" end="25278" title="condolence ceremony" label="condolence ceremony"/>
<link wikidata="Q192769" start="25351" end="25370" title="American Revolution" label="American Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2555173" start="25470" end="25479" title="Loyalists" label="Loyalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q566356" start="26059" end="26071" title="Fort Stanwix" label="Fort Stanwix"/>
<link wikidata="Q6586" start="26103" end="26117" title="Rome, New York" label="Rome, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548416" start="26542" end="26560" title="Great Lakes region" label="Great Lakes region"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138032" start="26654" end="26668" title="Covenant Chain" label="Covenant Chain"/>
<link wikidata="Q170604" start="26804" end="26814" title="New France" label="New France"/>
<link wikidata="Q335063" start="26985" end="27005" title="Jeffery Amherst, 1st Baron Amherst" label="Lord Jeffery Amherst"/>
<link wikidata="Q314960" start="27134" end="27141" title="Pontiac (Ottawa leader)" label="Pontiac"/>
<link wikidata="Q179077" start="27196" end="27204" title="Pontiac&amp;#x27;s War" label="conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q7084030" start="27238" end="27254" title="Old Fort Johnson" label="Old Fort Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q913956" start="27296" end="27330" title="Historic American Buildings Survey" label="Historic American Buildings Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q14706307" start="27482" end="27490" title="Guy Park" label="Guy Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q624232" start="27661" end="27687" title="National Historic Landmark" label="National Historic Landmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q3809760" start="27708" end="27727" title="Johnson Hall State Historic Site" label="State Historic Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q6268784" start="28110" end="28131" title="Johnstown High School" label="Johnstown High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q763457" start="28318" end="28330" title="tricorne hat" label="tricorne hat"/>
<link wikidata="Q245204" start="28355" end="28365" title="antagonist" label="antagonist"/>
<link wikidata="Q41300" start="28392" end="28405" title="Knights Templar" label="Templar Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q40166" start="28435" end="28460" title="Assassin&amp;#x27;s Creed III" label="Assassin&amp;#x27;s Creed III"/>
<link wikidata="Q215972" start="28602" end="28613" title="protagonist" label="protagonist"/>
<link wikidata="" start="28615" end="28630" title="Ratonhnhaké:ton" label="Ratonhnhaké:ton"/>
<link wikidata="Q17486360" start="28698" end="28725" title="Assassin&amp;#x27;s Creed Rogue" label="Assassin&amp;#x27;s Creed Rogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599910" start="28794" end="28813" title="Shay Patrick Cormac" label="Shay Patrick Cormac"/>
<link wikidata="Q3844708" start="28867" end="28876" title="Manituana" label="Manituana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752976" start="28886" end="28893" title="Wu Ming" label="Wu Ming"/>
<link wikidata="Q1512" start="28918" end="28940" title="Robert Louis Stevenson" label="Robert Louis Stevenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2615930" start="28961" end="28985" title="The Master of Ballantrae" label="The Master of Ballantrae"/>
<link wikidata="Q5108470" start="29026" end="29039" title="Chris Wiggins" label="Chris Wiggins"/>
<link wikidata="Q117005035" start="29074" end="29091" title="Divided Loyalties (film)" label="Divided Loyalties"/>
<link wikidata="Q81520" start="29106" end="29120" title="Pierce Brosnan" label="Pierce Brosnan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4388705" start="29156" end="29172" title="The Broken Chain" label="The Broken Chain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7773526" start="29252" end="29277" title="The War that Made America" label="The War that Made America"/>
<link wikidata="Q524567" start="29437" end="29451" title="Allan W. Eckert" label="Allan W Eckert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196408" start="29502" end="29520" title="historical fiction" label="historical fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q7014140" start="29855" end="29877" title="New York State Library" label="New York State Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q616527" start="30002" end="30022" title="the Newberry Library" label="the Newberry Library"/>
</links>
</doc>
