<doc id="116799" wikidata="Q1637790" url="?curid=116799" title="Holyoke, Massachusetts">
<text>Holyoke is a city in Hampden County, Massachusetts, United States, that lies between the western bank of the Connecticut River and the Mount Tom Range. As of the 2020 census, the city had a population of 38,247. Located north of Springfield, Holyoke is part of the Springfield Metropolitan Area, one of the two distinct metropolitan areas in Massachusetts.

Holyoke is among the early planned industrial cities in the United States. Built in tandem with the Holyoke Dam to utilize the water power of Hadley Falls, it is one of a handful of cities in New England built on the grid plan. During the late 19th century the city produced an estimated 80% of the writing paper used in the United States and was home to the largest paper mill architectural firm in the country, as well as the largest paper, silk, and alpaca wool mills in the world. Although a considerably smaller number of businesses in Holyoke work in the paper industry today, it is still commonly referred to as &quot;The Paper City&quot;. Today the city contains a number of specialty manufacturing companies, as well as the Massachusetts Green High Performance Computing Center, an intercollegiate research facility which opened in 2012. Holyoke is also home to the Volleyball Hall of Fame and known as the &quot;Birthplace of Volleyball&quot;, as the internationally played Olympic sport was invented and first played at the local YMCA chapter by William G. Morgan in 1895.

While managing the Holyoke Testing Flume in the 1880s, hydraulic engineer Clemens Herschel invented the Venturi meter to determine the water use of individual mills in the Holyoke Canal System. This device, the first accurate means of measuring large-scale flows, is widely used in a number of engineering applications today, including waterworks and carburators, as well as aviation instrumentation. Powered by these municipally-owned canals, Holyoke has among the lowest electricity costs in the Commonwealth, and as of 2016 between 85% and 90% of the city&#x27;s energy was carbon neutral, with administrative goals in place to reach 100% in the future.

== History ==


The Indigenous people of Holyoke and South Hadley Falls were the Algonquian peoples. Though records are incomplete, the area was settled by the Pocomtuc, sometimes referred to as the Agawam or Nonotuck.

English colonists arrived in the Connecticut River Valley in 1633, when traders from the Plymouth Plantation established a post at Windsor, Connecticut. In 1636, Massachusetts Bay Colony assistant treasurer and Puritan iconoclast William Pynchon led a group of settlers from Roxbury, Massachusetts to the Valley to establish Springfield on land scouts had found to be advantageous for farming and trading. This settlement was built north of the Connecticut River&#x27;s first major falls, Enfield Falls, where seagoing vessels had to transfer cargo into smaller shallops to continue northward on the river. Due to its proximity to the banks of the river Springfield quickly became a successful settlement on the Bay Path to Boston, as well as the Massachusetts Path to Albany. Originally, the settlement spanned both sides of the river but was partitioned in 1774 with the land on the western bank becoming West Springfield, Massachusetts. This area, previously allotted to landowners on the east side of the river in Springfield, was settled by colonists by 1655, and included what is now Holyoke. Holyoke as a geographic entity was initially incorporated as the 3rd parish of West Springfield on July 7, 1786, and was called &quot;Ireland&quot; or &quot;Ireland Parish&quot;. The area&#x27;s first post office, &quot;Ireland&quot;, was established June 3, 1822, with Martin Chapin as first postmaster; it was discontinued in 1883. Another, &quot;Ireland Depot&quot;, was established February 26, 1847, with John M. Chapin as first postmaster, and assumed the town name upon Holyoke&#x27;s incorporation. Though the name Hampden was considered, the area was subsequently named for earlier Springfield settler William Pynchon&#x27;s son-in-law, Elizur Holyoke, who had first explored the area in the 1650s. Following land acquisitions and development by the Hadley Falls Company, the town of Holyoke was officially incorporated on March 14, 1850. The first official town meeting took place a week later, on March 22, 1850.

A part of Northampton known as Smith&#x27;s Ferry was separated from the rest of the town by the creation of Easthampton in 1809. The shortest path to downtown Northampton was on a road near the Connecticut River oxbow, which was subject to frequent flooding. The neighborhood became the northern part of Holyoke in 1909.

Holyoke had few inhabitants until the construction of the dam and the Holyoke Canal System in 1849 and the subsequent construction of water-powered mills, particularly paper mills, the first and last to operate in the city, being those of the Parsons Paper Company. At one point over 25 paper mills were in operation in the city. The Holyoke Machine Company, manufacturer of the Hercules water turbine, was among many industrial developments of the era.

Holyoke&#x27;s population rose from just under 5,000 in 1860 to over 60,000 in 1920. Due to this staggering growth the municipality was officially incorporated as a city on April 7, 1873, only 23 years after its initial incorporation as the &quot;Town of Holyoke&quot;. Later that year the city elected its first mayor, William B. C. Pearsons, who, a quarter-century earlier, had established himself among the first lawyers in the city, and was the first editorial writer of the area newspaper-of-record, the &quot;Hampden Freeman&quot;, best known as the &quot;Holyoke Transcript-Telegram&quot;.

By 1885, Holyoke was the largest single producer of paper of any city in the United States, producing around 190 tons per day, more than double the next-largest producer, Philadelphia, producing 69 tons per day despite having a population nearly 40 times its size. Before 1900 Holyoke would produce 320 tons per day, predominantly of writing paper. In 1888, Holyoke&#x27;s paper industry spurred the foundation of the American Pad &amp; Paper Company (AMPAD), which was one of the largest suppliers of office products in the world. Holyoke was also previously the location of the headquarters of the American Writing Paper Company, a trust company established in 1899 with the merging of 23 rag paper mills, 13 of which were located in Holyoke. At one point the company was the largest producer of fine papers in the world, but leadership lacking technical knowledge of the industry led the company to fold by 1963. The availability of water power enabled Holyoke to support its own electric utility company and maintain it independently of America&#x27;s major regional utilities. The city was thus a rare unaffected area in the Northeast blackout of 1965, for example.

In addition to developments in the paper and textile industries, a number of industrial inventions would arise out of the city in the late 19th and early 20th centuries. The first and most prominent hydraulic testing lab in the United States, the Holyoke Testing Flume performed 3,176 tests to establish turbine efficiency from 1870 to 1932. Among the flume&#x27;s resulting developments were Clemens Herschel&#x27;s Venturi meter in 1888, the first accurate way to measure large-scale flows, as well as the Hercules turbine by John B. McCormick in 1899, the first mixed flow turbine. Other pioneering developments included the first use of Hans Goldschmidt&#x27;s exothermic welding process in the Americas in 1904, by George E. Pellissier and the Holyoke Street Railway. In electronics, the world&#x27;s first commercial toll line, between the city&#x27;s Hotel Jess and a location in Springfield, entered service on June 15, 1878. The city was also home to Thaddeus Cahill&#x27;s New England Electric Music Company which, on March 16, 1906, demonstrated the Telharmonium, the world&#x27;s first electromechanical instrument, a predecessor of the synthesizer.

==Geography==

Holyoke is located at (42.203191, −72.623969). According to the United States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of , of which is land and (6.70%) is water. The city is bordered by Southampton and Westfield to the west, Easthampton to the north, Hadley, South Hadley and Chicopee as river borders to the east, and West Springfield to the south.

Holyoke is the location of East Mountain, the Mount Tom Range, and Mount Tom, at the highest traprock peak on the Metacomet Ridge, a linear mountain range that extends from Long Island Sound to the Vermont border. The most densely populated area, lying between the Mount Tom Range and the Connecticut River, is characterized by a series of terraces separated by wooded ravines, known as dingles, which drain to the river. Mount Tom is characterized by its high cliffs, sweeping vistas, and microclimate ecosystems. The Metacomet-Monadnock Trail traverses the Mount Tom Range and East Mountain. Fossilized dinosaur tracks and specimens can be found at the foot of these mountains due to their unique geology. A species of dinosaur, &quot;Podokesaurus holyokensis&quot;, whose fossils were first discovered across the river in South Hadley, was given its name for the area, and the city has in recent years passed measures to try to protect fossils in parks from theft or vandalism.

===Neighborhoods===
The city of Holyoke contains 15 distinct neighborhoods. Some, like Springdale and Oakdale, were conceived by individual developers as streetcar suburbs for mill workers in the 19th century, whereas others like Rock Valley and Elmwood were villages within West Springfield that predate the city. Additionally a number of names such as Ewingville and Elmwood Heights have been used historically but have become defunct as separate entities. In alphabetical order, Holyoke&#x27;s neighborhoods are:

* Churchill – features Wistariahurst and the Holyoke Senior Center.
* Downtown – features City Hall and the Volleyball Hall of Fame.
* Elmwood – the city&#x27;s oldest neighborhood; predating Holyoke, it was originally known as &quot;Baptist Village&quot;
* The Flats – features the Holyoke Canal System and many prominent structures built by the Hadley Falls Company in the mid-19th century, as well as the Holyoke Innovation District
* Highlands
* Highland Park
* Homestead Avenue – features the Ashley Reservoir, Holyoke Community College.
* Ingleside – features the Holyoke Mall and Nuestras Raices.
* Jarvis Avenue
* Oakdale – features Forestdale Cemetery, Rohan Park, and the Holyoke Medical Center.
* Rock Valley
* Smith&#x27;s Ferry – features the Dinosaur Footprints Reservation. Annexed from Northampton in 1909.
* South Holyoke – features the Puerto Rican-Afro Caribbean Cultural Center and the Holyoke Turner Hall
* Springdale – features Springdale Park, the city&#x27;s largest flagship park designed by the Olmsted Brothers
* Whiting Farms

===Architecture===


Holyoke&#x27;s industrial development in the late 19th and early 20th centuries led to a massive demand for new housing as the population grew by more than 1000% from the years from 1850 to 1890. Initially this demand was filled by company housing, including such examples as the Hadley Falls Company Housing District, whose structures were built in 1847–1848. Gradually the Holyoke Water Power Company began building housing on its land holdings to sell to working families, and by the end of the 19th century more private developments had begun to appear. Holyoke&#x27;s architecture can be characterized by a mixture of Italianate, Gothic Revival, Queen Anne and Second Empire, with some Tudor revival examples throughout its neighborhoods. The city is also home to at least two examples of works by national architects, the Holyoke City Hall designed in the Gothic Revival style by Charles B. Atwood, and the now-defunct Connecticut River Railroad Station designed by eminent architect H. H. Richardson. Philadelphia rowhouses are also a common feature among residential streets in downtown area.

Throughout its history Holyoke has been home to a number of architects who shaped its unique urban landscape. The most prominent included George P. B. Alderman, who designed industrial buildings as well as the Holyoke Post Office, apartment blocks, and many of the city&#x27;s iconic Victorian estates. Alderman started his independent practice after being an apprentice to James A. Clough of Clough &amp; Reid, who is best known as the architect of the former iconic Mount Tom Summit Houses as well as the Holyoke Public Library. Architect Oscar Beauchemin&#x27;s work shaped both the Main Street landscape of Springdale and many large multi-colored brick tenements built in mixed density housing can be attributed to him, often with Renaissance Revival architectural motifs.

Holyoke&#x27;s own millwright engineers and architects David and Ashley Tower, doing business as D. H. &amp; A. B. Tower, would go on to design more than 100 mills in the latter half of the 19th century, and in many respects made Holyoke synonymous with its present-day handle &quot;The Paper City&quot;. Holyoke&#x27;s paper mills from this period were largely the work of the brothers, who designed mills on five continents and among the first of Kimberly-Clark and Crane Currency. In sum they would design 16 factories and mills in Holyoke and, including minor design roles, performed engineering work in some capacity on 25 of the city&#x27;s in total.

===Planned industrial community===

As one of the first planned industrial communities in the United States, downtown Holyoke features rectilinear street grids—a novelty in New England. This street hierarchy was seen as an economic development tool as it lends well to high-rise buildings, and the surrounding canals could be landscaped for recreation. Whereas New York&#x27;s Commissioner&#x27;s Plan of 1811 lays out a system of numbered streets and avenues, engineer Philander Anderson laid out the names of routes in Holyoke&#x27;s grid system alternating between tree species for North to South streets (Sycamore, Locust, Linden, Oak, Beech, Pine, Walnut, Elm, Chestnut, Maple), and the names of the Hadley Falls Company founders (Lyman, Dwight, Appleton, Cabot, Sargeant, Jackson), as well as several Massachusetts counties (Hampden, Suffolk, Essex, Hampshire, Franklin) for thoroughfares running east to west. The city&#x27;s advantageous location on the Connecticut River—the largest river in New England—beside Hadley Falls, the river&#x27;s steepest drop (60 feet), attracted the Boston Associates, who had successfully developed Lowell, Massachusetts&#x27; textile industry. From the late 19th century until the mid-20th century, Holyoke was the world&#x27;s biggest paper manufacturer. The elaborate Holyoke Canal System, built to power paper and textile mills, distinguishes it from other Connecticut River cities. A series of railways running parallel to these canals also provided easy access to freight, a number of which remain operational today under the Pioneer Valley Railroad.

==Demographics==
As of the census of 2020, there were 38,247 people in 15,062 households. There were 16,874 housing units in the city.

The racial makeup in 2017 was 84.9% white (33.0% non-Hispanic white), 21.8% black, 0.4% Native American, 1.6% Asian (0.4% Cambodian, 0.4% Indian, 0.3% Chinese, 0.3% Korean, 0.1% Pakistani), 0.1% Pacific Islander, 6.6% some other race, and 4.6% from mixed race. Hispanics and Latinos of any race were 51.2% of the population (40.7% Puerto Rican, 7.3% Dominican, 6.4% Venezuelan, 1.8% Mexican, 1.5% Colombian, 1.9% Cuban, 0.3% Salvadoran, 0.2% Argentine, 0.1% Honduran, 0.1% Guatemalan). The ten largest ancestry groups in the city were Irish (13.4%), Polish (8.3%), French (7.2%), German (4.4%), Italian (3.8%), English (3.6%), French-Canadian (3.3%), American (2.8%), Scottish (1.0%), and sub-Saharan African (0.9%). Immigrants accounted for 28.8% of the population. The ten most common countries of origin for immigrants in the city were the Dominican Republic, Poland, Germany, China, El Salvador, the United Kingdom, Colombia, Kenya, and Mexico.

There were 15,361 households in 2010, out of which 34.9% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 30.5% were headed by married couples living together, 24.9% had a female householder with no husband present, and 39.3% were non-families. Of all households, 32.0% were made up of individuals, and 12.3% were someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.51, and the average family size was 3.16.

In the city, 26.4% of the population were under the age of 18, 10.2% were from 18 to 24, 25.5% were from 25 to 44, 23.8% were from 45 to 64, and 14.2% were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 35.0 years. For every 100 females, there were 88.3 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 83.4 males.

The city reached a peak rank as the 82nd largest city in the United States by 1900, comparable to the standing of Buffalo (83rd) or Scottsdale (85th) among cities in 2018. Holyoke reached its peak population before the end of the First World War with an estimated 62,300 residents according reported in 1913 by the school superintendent at that time, and 65,286 reported for 1916 by the World Book. Following a period of de-industrialization after the war and into the end of the 20th century, the population briefly stabilized during the first decade of the 21st century before continuing to decline during the 2010s.

===Employment and income===

For the period 2013–2017, the estimated median annual income for a household in the city was $37,954, and the median income for a family was $46,940. Male full-time workers had a median income of $46,888 versus $41,406 for females. The per capita income for the city was $22,625. About 24.7% of families and 28.6% of the population were below the poverty line, including 45.6% of those under age 18 and 19.8% of those age 65 or over.

As of 2017, the city had the most recipients of Supplemental Nutrition Assistance per capita of any in Massachusetts, with 37% of residents receiving such benefits. Of all ZIP codes in the Commonwealth, including those of Boston, Holyoke had the third highest total households receiving such assistance, with the highest per capita of any of the state&#x27;s 351 municipalities, representing 54% of all households. A 2020 study by the Urban Institute found Holyoke to be the least socio-economically inclusive city in New England for minorities, despite them representing the largest group demographically. The report found between 2010 and 2015 the racial educational attainment gap narrowed by 30%, but homeownership declined slightly, and the proportion of working poor marginally increased.

===Ethnicity and immigration===


Throughout its history Holyoke has undergone fluctuations in different foreign-born demographics. In the 1890 census, Holyoke had the third most foreign-born residents, per capita, of any city in the United States, with 47% of residents born in another country; this was exceeded only by Fall River, Massachusetts and Duluth, Minnesota. Later waves of immigration led to significant growth and cultural influence of communities of Germans, Italians, Jews, Poles, and Scots into the first half of the 20th century, and Puerto Ricans, Greeks, Colombians, and Dominicans in the subsequent decades.

Historically, a city of working-class immigrants, the first wave of millworkers was predominantly Irish. Irish immigrants began settling in the region before the construction of the dam and industrialization that followed, granting the area the name &quot;Ireland&quot; or &quot;Ireland Parish.&quot; While colonists had claimed lands by 1655, it was only in the following decade that homesteads would appear. Traditional accounts refer to John Riley as the first permanent settler of Holyoke, but while Riley owned 28 acres along &quot;Riley&#x27;s Brook&quot; (Tannery Brook in modern-day Ingleside), his daughters Mary and Margaret, and their Irish Protestant husbands, Joseph Ely and William MacCranny, first resided there beginning in 1667. By the time West Springfield was partitioned in 1707, a number of Irish families had moved to the Parish. With the emergence of Holyoke&#x27;s industrial base, a new wave of Irish Catholic immigration occurred and by 1855 a third of residents were of Irish heritage. Holyoke&#x27;s Irish roots are celebrated today in its annual St. Patrick&#x27;s Day Parade.

In the 1850s, mill owners began to recruit French-Canadians, regarded as docile and less likely to create labor unions due to their agrarian backgrounds and anti-unionism promoted by Québecois clergy at that time. Many Québecois workers were first recruited by Nicholas Proulx (anglicized as Prew) who hailed from Saint-Ours, Quebec and arrived in Holyoke in 1856. He and his sons would import a number of line workers for Lyman Mills, including his son John J. Prew, who founded Springdale and became the first French member of the city council, then the board of aldermen. By 1900, one in three residents were French or French Canadian descent, and when the city reached its peak population of 62,300 in 1913, this number had become one in four, while the city contained the 7th largest French or French Canadian immigrant population in the country, exceeding Chicago&#x27;s at that time. By 1980, reflecting economic and cultural changes, this population comprised 10% of the population, a similar figure to those who identified as French or French Canadian in the 2010 census.

Beginning at the end of World War II, an influx of Puerto Ricans and other Latino groups began to migrate to the Northeast United States, driven largely by the Farm Labor Program initiated by the US Department of Labor. Not unlike the Bracero program, in the following decades the agency recruited Puerto Rican laborers to work on agricultural land in the continental United States; in the case of Holyoke, many worked on valley tobacco farms, and arrived in the city in search of better job opportunities at the mills as previous generations had. The first permanent Puerto Rican resident was said to have been Domingo Perez; a landlord who later became among the first to be appointed in city government, he was reported to have arrived in Holyoke around 1955. By 1970 the number of Puerto Rican residents numbered around 5,000; however, by that time, many faced a city economy in free fall. Holyoke&#x27;s mills had closed due to the changing economic landscape of early globalization and deindustrialization; from 1955 to 1970, one of every two industrial jobs vanished. Despite economic and social difficulties the population grew significantly during the 1980s, and from 1990 to 2016, the buying power of the Latino community at-large increased by nearly 300%. Today Latinos form the city&#x27;s largest minority group, with the largest Puerto Rican population per capita of any American city outside Puerto Rico proper, at 44.7%. The entire Latino population of Holyoke, as of the 2010 census, was 19,313, or 48.4% of the city&#x27;s population of 39,880.

===Religion===
Holyoke is home to houses of worship for numerous denominations of Christianity and Judaism. One of the city&#x27;s oldest monikers was Baptist Village as the first congregation established there was the First Baptist Church of Holyoke, which first erected a meetinghouse in 1792, traces its origins to five baptisms on the shores of the Connecticut in 1725, and continues as a congregation today.

As of 2010 an estimated 60% of Holyoke was religious, with the largest demographic being Christians, more specifically Roman Catholics, who comprised 49% of the city&#x27;s population. In 2011, two Catholic parishes, Holy Cross and Mater Dolorosa were merged into Our Lady of the Cross Parish. A number of other Catholic parishes, including Our Lady of Guadalupe, St. Jerome&#x27;s, Blessed Sacrament and Immaculate Conception Parish also reside in the city.

In addition to its parishes, the city has a number of convents of sisters including the Sisters of Providence of Holyoke in Ingleside, the Sisters of St. Joseph of Springfield who maintain group homes there, and the Sisters of St. Francis of Assisi in Highland Park.

Protestant congregations have played a significant role in Holyoke&#x27;s civic life since its founding, including the First Congregational Church of Holyoke, founded in 1850, the First Lutheran Church of Holyoke, founded in 1867, and the United Methodist Church of Holyoke, South Hadley, and Granby, which meets in South Hadley, which was founded in 1810.

A Greek Orthodox church, Holy Trinity Greek Orthodox Church, has also existed in the city since its founding in 1917.

Holyoke is also home to a significant Jewish population. As one of 35 municipalities in Massachusetts with more than 100 Jewish residents, Holyoke is home to an estimated 1,300 residents observing the faith and two synagogues, Congregation Sons of Zion, a Conservative congregation, and Congregation Rodphey Sholom, practicing Orthodoxy. Both congregations originated in the 19th century, with Rodphey Sholom founded in 1903 but tracing its heritage to the Paper City Lodge of the Order Brith Abraham, founded in 1899, and Sons of Zion being founded in 1901. Today both congregations hold joint services during certain holidays.

==Economy==
===Manufacturing===

Known by its moniker, the &quot;Paper City&quot;, Holyoke&#x27;s economic base was developed almost entirely around the paper industry for the better part of the late 19th and early 20th century; at one time the city was reportedly the largest producer of stationery, writing, and archival goods in the world. While writing paper production has left the city, Holyoke is still home to a number of specialty paper manufacturers and converters, including companies like Eureka Lab Book, Hampden Paper, Hazen Paper, United Paper Box, and University Products. Several international companies also maintain manufacturing facilities in the area, including a power transmission factory for U.S. Tsubaki in Springdale, and a Sonoco cardboard recycling plant in South Holyoke. Some former mills have in the past been used as incubators for new manufacturing businesses as well; from 1973 until 1983, when it relocated to a newly constructed factory in Deerfield, Yankee Candle&#x27;s first factory was located in one such building in the canal district.

Today the City of Holyoke has one of three foreign-trade zones in the Commonwealth, the other two being the Port of New Bedford and the Massachusetts Port Authority of Boston. Though the number of service-based jobs overtook Holyoke manufacturing jobs in 1972, the city is still home to an array of manufacturing concerns outside of the paper and textile industries, including several producing industrial machinery and components. Until 2017, its oldest manufacturer was the Holyoke Machine Company which, incorporated in 1863, served large mills and factories with specialty roll parts and service; the firm manufactured a number of different products. At one time the company produced the &quot;Holyoke Hercules&quot; model of water turbine which served the city&#x27;s industries on the canal system, and previously their shops cast bronze doors for the U.S. Capitol Building. Today the city is still home to a number of firms specializing in such equipment as medical devices, industrial vacuums, solid waste containers, plastics and rubber manufacturing, bookbinding agents and archival supplies.

In recent years the city has also seen a handful of food manufacturing firms, due to its proximity to large metropolitan areas like New York City and Boston. In 1996 the Paper City Brewing Company opened out of one of the former Farr Alpaca Company&#x27;s facilities, following a period of financial difficulties in 2017, the brewery closed temporarily, with plans in place to reopen in the future. Another notable firm, Dan&#x27;s Power Plant, produces nut-based cheese substitutes known as &quot;Fauxmaggio&quot;, as a vegan alternative, selling many of their products in upscale markets in New York, Connecticut, and Massachusetts.

===Technology===

In recent years there have been successful efforts to attract high-tech jobs to Holyoke and diversify its economic base. For example, a coalition of universities and tech companies have built the Massachusetts Green High Performance Computing Center, an energy-efficient, high-performance computing center, in Holyoke which opened in 2012. Partners in this project include Cisco Systems, Harvard University, the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT,) the University of Massachusetts, Boston University, Northeastern University, EMC Corporation, and Accenture PLC. The data center has been built in Holyoke in part due to hydropower accessibility as well as the city&#x27;s extensive fiber network. In 2015, the editors of Popular Mechanics ranked Holyoke as 6th on a list of 14 cities they considered to be best for startups in the United States, citing these factors. ISO New England, one of the United States&#x27; eight electricity regional transmission organizations, is based in Holyoke, utilizing the city&#x27;s central location for easy access to metropolitan areas in New England and New York.

===Services===

The retail sector has been a major employer since the construction of the Holyoke Mall, the third largest shopping mall in New England, in 1979. Retail has provided the city with a large and steady tax base, contributing over $7 million in taxes annually.

The city also features the corporate headquarters of PeoplesBank, the largest bank in Western Massachusetts, as well as the local Holyoke Credit Union which was originally started as a credit union for the students of a former parochial school.

===Urban agriculture===

Despite a reputation as an industrial city, agriculture has played a continuing role in the Holyoke&#x27;s livelihood throughout its history. On July 24, 1917, it became the first city in Western Massachusetts to open a modern farmers market, a novelty at the time, bringing producers directly to consumers. The current farmers market, which began in 1979, is regularly held outside city hall on Thursdays from 10 to 2 from May to October. As late as the 1950s, the city maintained a poor farm while, in contrast, during the late 19th century a number of wealthy manufacturers raised thoroughbred Jersey cattle. This trend began in 1881, when the city went from a population of zero to fifty head of registered Jerseys, the largest herd in the Connecticut Valley being that of William Whiting. This prize-winning herd, then 75 head, was lost, however, to an incendiary fire that destroyed Whiting Farm&#x27;s stock barn in 1919. Conventional dairy and cattle farming remained extant through most of the 20th century, with the last conventional livestock farm closing in 1982.

Nevertheless smaller market agriculture operations, which began in the 20th century, endure today. Among Holyoke&#x27;s most notable contemporary agricultural organizations is Nuestras Raices. Established in 1992 by members of the La Finquita community garden of South Holyoke, the nonprofit organization has worked with state and federal agencies to help new farmers build skills and expertise, particularly in the Puerto Rican community, through microloans, direct marketing, and land leasing.

Holyoke also has a prominent example of ecosystem garden permaculture—the Holyoke Edible Food Forest Garden, established in 2004 by Eric Toensmeier and Jonathan Bates. In the following decade the two designed and developed their tenth of an acre backyard into a year-round food producing garden, with over 100 perennial plant species which sustain limited wildlife populations, and have remediated soil on the site. Their permaculture garden has been featured in &quot;The New York Times&quot;, as well as lectures at Harvard and Yale University. A detailed account of the design and management of this space and the principles behind it can be found in the book by the two, &quot;Paradise Lot&quot;, released in 2013 by Chelsea Green Publishing.

Soon after medical marijuana was legalized in Massachusetts, Mayor Alex Morse began promoting the city as a growth and distribution center for the new industry, due to its low energy costs and proximity to several metropolitan markets. Since the legalization of recreational weed in Massachusetts in 2016, the city has been approached by several cultivation businesses hoping to establish themselves in former mills. In 2018, the first cannabis cultivation operation, a $10 million investment, opened in the city, with plans to open a dispensary in the future.

==Education==
The city&#x27;s educational needs are served by Holyoke Public Schools, including Holyoke High School, and a number of private institutions. The school system is currently in receivership and managed by Dr. Stephen Zrike, a receiver appointed by the Massachusetts Department of Elementary and Secondary Education; as superintendent, the receiver presides over school curriculum and practices. The city&#x27;s private schools include First Lutheran School and Mater Dolorosa Catholic School.

The city is also home to Holyoke Community College, the first community college in the state, which was initially created by the city&#x27;s school board. Today the 2-year college selectively allows high school seniors to enroll in its coursework for transferable college credit, and has the highest percentage of student graduates completing associate degrees and certificate programs among the state&#x27;s community colleges. With the aid of state and federal education grants the college opened the HCC MGM Culinary Arts Institute in cooperation with MGM Springfield in April 2018.

In 2016, Bard College established the first of its microcolleges in Holyoke, its other being based out of Brooklyn. Bard Microcollege Holyoke operates in partnership with local nonprofit The Care Center, which provides educational and career opportunities to pregnant and parenting teens. Associates of Arts degrees are granted to a small class of young mothers who have completed The Care Center&#x27;s own educational programs in addition to those by Bard.

===Library===
Holyoke Public Library, found at 335 Maple Street, is one of the very few examples of neoclassical architecture in the city of Holyoke, designed by prominent local architect James A. Clough. It sits on Library Park, which was donated by the Holyoke Water Power Company in 1887. The library established in 1870 was originally a room in the old Appleton Street School, and by 1876 moved to a central room on the main floor of City Hall. It remained there until its collections had outgrown this space and a modern facility was required.

Holyoke&#x27;s citizens were charged to raise money to construct the library building and provide additional books. Under the leadership of Henry Chase, $95,000 was raised. William Whiting and William Skinner, each gave $10,000. Clough, the architect who designed the building, gave his services gratis because his daughter was a faithful patron of the library. It opened officially in 1902.

At the dedication ceremony William Whiting, library president at the time, referred to the library as the &quot;people&#x27;s college&quot; and added that: &quot;A library is as much a part of the intellectual life of a community as its schools, and should be supported generously as part of our educational system. Within these walls you will find authors devoted to literature, arts and science, and they are free to any who will ask. We can say to the citizens of Holyoke you have only to ask her and you will find knowledge to make your life useful and happy.&quot;

==Culture==


A number of artists have been associated with the city since its founding, including Irish-American sculptor Jerome Connor, who moved to the city at the age of 14, and became best known for his sculptures in Washington, D.C. including Nuns of the Battlefield, one of only two such memorials in the capital to honor the role of women in the American Civil War.

On May 2, 1885, Clark W. Bryan, a publisher and stakeholder in &quot;The Republican&quot;, launched &quot;Good Housekeeping&quot; magazine, originally described as &quot;not to be a bi-monthly cookbook&quot; but &quot;a family journal conducted in the interests of the higher life of the household&quot;. The magazine was subsequently published in Springfield after March 1887, and moved to New York following its acquisition in 1911 by the Hearst Corporation. In literature, Holyoke was the hometown of John Clellon Holmes, whose novel Go is considered to be the first published novel depicting the Beat Generation, predating works of his contemporaries Jack Kerouac and Allen Ginsberg. Though not as well known as Holmes, the critically acclaimed novelist Raymond Kennedy set a number of his works in a fictional Holyoke, referred to as &quot;Ireland Parish&quot;. Several acclaimed photographers originate from Holyoke, including Ray D&#x27;Addario, chief photographer of the Nuremberg trials, William Wegman, known nationally for his compositions of costumed weimaraners, and Mitch Epstein, whose photo essay &quot;Family Business&quot; received the United Kingdom&#x27;s Kraszna-Krausz Photography Book Award in 2004. The 2003 book covered the final days of his father&#x27;s furniture and real estate businesses in the city, mirroring its deindustrialization and decline. Similarly, the city&#x27;s struggles with race, inequity, and deindustrialization were chronicled in Pulitzer Prize winner Tracy Kidder&#x27;s 1989 book, &quot;Among Schoolchildren&quot;, after Kidder spent a year following a fifth-grade class at Marcella Kelly Elementary.

During the height of its industrial prowess Holyoke was a regular stop on Vaudeville circuits, with its most famous actress, Eva Tanguay, known as &quot;The Girl Who Made Vaudeville Famous&quot;. Tanguay moved to Holyoke at a young age, spending her childhood in the city where she began performing songs at an amateur show at the local Parsons Hall in the 1880s. Tanguay was soon discovered by a Pennsylvania touring company, and went on to become the first American popular musician to achieve mass-media celebrity. During her career her name was known from coast-to-coast and she would out-earn such celebrities as Enrico Caruso and Harry Houdini. Edward Bernays, the &quot;father of public relations&quot; went on to describe her celebrity as &quot;our first symbol of emergence from the Victorian age&quot;. Tanguay&#x27;s was just one of many acts associated with the city&#x27;s history, it was in Holyoke that vaudevillian Sophie Tucker was found by the Theatrical Syndicate&#x27;s Marc Klaw who introduced her to Broadway&#x27;s Ziegfeld Follies in 1909.

Even as Vaudeville declined in the 1920s, the city remained a regular stop for actors and musicians alike. Among other acts, Bing Crosby and The Marx Brothers were known to have played shows in the city at its Victory Theater. Performers from the B. F. Keith Circuit would regularly tour Mountain Park&#x27;s own playhouse which also hosted the Valley Players, with whom actor Hal Holbrook most famously launched his career. Perhaps the most prominent venue after the 1920s, the Valley Arena Gardens hosted a wide variety of musical acts including the likes of Count Basie, Duke Ellington, The Dorsey Brothers, The Glenn Miller Orchestra, Frances Langford, Cab Calloway, and Sarah Vaughn among many others still known in American popular culture today. Holyoke City Hall during this period also regularly served as a venue for notable music acts as well, including several by the New York Philharmonic Orchestra annually from 1912–1925 under the direction Josef Stránský and subsequently Willem Mengelberg, and at least one performance by the Boston Symphony Orchestra in 1926. These concerts were organized by the Chamber of Commerce, Holyoke Music Club, and Mount Holyoke College, which also brought a number of internationally-renowned artists to Holyoke High School as well, including violinist Efrem Zimbalist, baritone Reinald Werrenrath, Berlin State Opera contralto Margarethe Arndt-Ober, and pianist-composers Ethel Leginska and Percy Grainger.

Of venues that once defined Holyoke&#x27;s stage history, few remain; for the last decade an effort has been underway to restore the Victory Theater by the Massachusetts International Festival of the Arts. These efforts have included introduction of the Victory Players in 2018, an international music residency program which plays contemporary classical music to support the funding of future theater programming. Today Holyoke&#x27;s venues include Gateway City Arts, a converted paper factory now serving as a regular music venue, as well as the site of the former Mountain Park, now used for some large outdoor concerts, and the Holyoke Turner Hall, which features smaller shows. The city has its own symphony as well; the Holyoke Civic Symphony, originally a project of the Holyoke Community College, has been playing popular and classical works since 1967, and is based out of the college&#x27;s Leslie Phillips Theater.

===Museums===

In addition to the Volleyball Hall of Fame the city is also home to Wistariahurst. Named for the flowered vines that adorn its gardens, the estate was home to the Skinner Family which produced sewing silk and satins, becoming the largest producer of the latter in the world. The museum is home to a wide variety of contemporary and historic gallery events and contains numerous archival collections for research. Though no longer in the museum collections, Wistariahurst was once home to the eminent Belle Skinner Collection of Musical Instruments, curated by its namesake Belle Skinner. Several decades after her death, the collection became a substantial part of the Yale University Collection of Musical Instruments.

The Children&#x27;s Museum at Holyoke, started by the Junior League of Holyoke in 1984, features a number of hands-on exhibits, including a water table, Lite-Brite wall, and a variety of displays including 2,000 collector Pez dispensers.

===Annual events===


Holyoke is home to the second-largest St. Patrick&#x27;s Day parade in the United States, surpassed only by the New York City parade. Held annually since 1952 on the Sunday following St. Patrick&#x27;s Day, the parade draws hundreds of thousands of people from across New England and the Eastern seaboard of United States. In recent years the Holyoke Saint Patrick&#x27;s Day Parade typically attracts 350,000 to 450,000 people each year. Featured in the parade every year since the first in 1952 is the Holyoke Caledonian Pipe Band, founded in 1910, it is the oldest pipe band continuously operating in the United States.

Since 1962, the city has held an annual Shad Derby every year in May with rare exception. The contest, begun under the Holyoke Water Power Company, is now run by the municipal energy department Holyoke Gas &amp; Electric. Though not weighed in time to enter Derby records, the section of the Connecticut south of the Holyoke Dam at Hadley Falls holds the world record for the largest American shad caught, which weighed 11 pounds, 4 ounces when it was hooked in 1986. Thanks to conservation measures, the river is known for a thriving American shad population, which has fluctuated between 226,000 and 778,000 fish since 2000.

Every June since it was first introduced by mayor and LGBT activist Alex Morse in 2012, the city has held a rainbow flag-raising ceremony in recognition of Gay Pride Month with the event often featuring speakers, music, and a moment of silence for victims of discrimination and persecution.

The Puerto Rican community of Holyoke holds an annual Puerto Rican Day parade on the third weekend of July as part of an Annual Hispanic Family Festival held by La Familia Hispana, inc. Every year the parade grows in popularity, attracting Puerto Ricans from across the northeast.

In the last week of August, the city hosts &quot;Celebrate Holyoke&quot; at Holyoke Heritage State Park. Launched in 1986 to celebrate the opening of the then-new state park, it features live music, food, and open house events for businesses in the downtown and canal district. In its first year alone the event featured a laser show, and had as many as 60 thousand attendants over the course of four days; financial difficulties, however, led to its cancellation in 1995. The event was revived in 2015, and has continued as a two-day event since.

Since 2016, every September the neighborhood association of South Holyoke has hosted &quot;El Sabor de South Holyoke&quot; (Taste of South Holyoke) a festival featuring local Puerto Rican cuisine, live music, and other events, including honoring local organizations for their contributions to the community.

Every November, the International Volleyball Hall of Fame presents awards to its next class of inductees, as the best players of that year are named. The Hall presents three additional awards annually: the Court of Honor Award for contributions of teams or organizations to volleyball, the William G. Morgan Award for outstanding support or promotion of the sport, and Mintonette Medallion of Merit Award in recognition of significant individual achievement, including coaches, referees, scorekeepers and other notable contributors to the sport.

===Points of interest===

* Dinosaur Footprints Reservation, preserved dinosaur footprints along the Connecticut River
* East Mountain
* Gateway City Arts, a co-working space for artists and creatives
* Holyoke Canal System
* Holyoke Heritage State Park
* Holyoke Mall at Ingleside
* Holyoke Merry-Go-Round
* Mackenzie Stadium, home of the Valley Blue Sox of the New England Collegiate Baseball League
* Metacomet-Monadnock Trail
* Mount Tom of the Mount Tom Range
* Robert E. Barrett Fishway, lift system to allow fish to swim upstream of the Holyoke Dam
* Scott Tower
* Holyoke U.S. Post Office, &quot;Captain Alezue Holyoke&#x27;s Exploring Party on the Connecticut River&quot;, an oil on canvas mural, painted by Ross Moffett and installed in 1936.
* Victory Theater
* Wistariahurst Museum

==Sports==

===Birthplace of volleyball===

On February 9, 1895, William G. Morgan invented volleyball, originally known as &quot;mintonette&quot; for its similarity to badminton, at the Holyoke YMCA. Though the original YMCA building in which the sport was first played was lost to fire in 1943, the Greater Holyoke YMCA remains an active chapter. Today the Volleyball Hall of Fame resides at Holyoke Heritage State Park and inducts a new class of athletes, coaches, and contributors every October. The city&#x27;s legacy in the creation of the sport is also honored by two volleyball clubs in the Netherlands, which borrow its name—Belfeldse Volleybalclub Holyoke, of Belfeld, and Volleybalvereniging Holyoke of Enter.

===Baseball===
The Valley Blue Sox, a member of the New England Collegiate Baseball League, play their home games at Mackenzie Stadium. Previously the Concord Quarry Dogs from 2001 until 2006, the collegiate summer baseball franchise moved to Holyoke in 2007, winning their first NECBL Championship in 2017.

Holyoke has been home to a handful of minor league and collegiate baseball teams, among the first was the Holyoke Paperweights of the Connecticut League from 1903 to 1911. The Holyoke Millers, a Double-A team, moved to the city following a single season in Pittsfield as the Berkshire Brewers. Early planning proved difficult for the team as they often had to coordinate with the athletic departments of Holyoke High School and Holyoke Catholic High School for use of the field at that time. The Millers would leave for New Hampshire after their 1982 season, when the franchise changed its affiliation from the Milwaukee Brewers to the California Angels; that franchise is now the Harrisburg Senators.

While unsuccessful attempts were made to attract a new team in the years that followed, Holyoke would not host another until 2004. Following their departure from Middletown, Connecticut, the Holyoke Giants, an NECBL team, made Mackenzie Stadium their home until 2007, subsequently becoming the North Shore Navigators of Lynn.

===Boxing===

Holyoke has a rich history in the world of boxing. It was in Holyoke that bantamweight Sixto Escobar, the first Puerto Rican to become a world champion, fought and won his first match in the United States, on May 7, 1934, against bantamweight contender and Canadian flyweight champion Bobby Leitham. Most notably, Rocky Marciano&#x27;s professional debut took place at the Valley Arena Gardens on St. Patrick&#x27;s Day, March 17, 1947; the venue also served as the ring for many other well-known fighters including Beau Jack, Fritzie Zivic, and Tony DeMarco. Prior to his professional career, one of Mike Tyson&#x27;s earliest fights was at the Holyoke Boys and Girls Club on February 12, 1983. As the eighth ranked amateur super-heavyweight in the country at the age of 16, Tyson won the fight handily with a knock-out, and gained the Western Massachusetts Golden Gloves title. The Golden Gloves tournament was held in Holyoke from 1958 until 2005, when it was relocated to Vernon, Connecticut. Following an eight-year departure, it returned briefly to the city, and is held in Springfield today. Though other materials would be used following their bankruptcy, in the early 20th century Skinner&#x27;s Silk manufactured the satins for Everlast&#x27;s iconic boxing trunks.

===Golf===
Holyoke has two private golf courses in Smith&#x27;s Ferry, on opposite sides of Mount Tom, the nine-hole Holyoke Country Club and the 18-hole Wyckoff Country Club, the latter of which was originally designed by noted golf course architect Donald Ross. With the construction of Interstate 91 in the 1960s, the course required a redesign. From 1966 to 1967 much of the landscape was reshaped by golf architect Al Zikorus; today, five holes and seven greens remain of Ross&#x27;s original designs.

The Wyckoff course opened in 1899 as the Mount Tom Golf Club, and was described as rocky and unrefined in its early years. In 1910, Joseph L. Wyckoff, partner of stationery maker White &amp; Wyckoff, and the club&#x27;s eventual namesake, was playing a round with then-president of the Boston Athletic Association Edward E. Babb. Wyckoff remarked the course at the time was &quot;an apology for a [golf] course&quot; and that he wished to find a man who &quot;really knew about the laying out a golf course&quot;. Babb, a member of Oakley Country Club, said he knew such a person, introducing Wyckoff to Ross later that year. Wyckoff brought Ross back to the course, where he suggested key changes, but was unable to prepare plans as he had just signed a two-year contract as professional for the Essex Golf &amp; Country Club. Upon completion of this contract he returned to Holyoke in 1914 where he was put up in a house built for him by Wyckoff, who was a member of the executive committee of the Massachusetts Golf Association, and saw himself as a patron of Ross, offering him financial backing to pursue a broader career in golf course architecture. It is unknown what duration Ross lived in the city, as he had summer homes and travelled often, though a &quot;Boston Herald&quot; article places him there in 1919. He would work with the club for many years, completing a full redesign of the course by 1922, which remained unchanged until the construction of I-91 in 1965.

==Parks and recreation==


Holyoke is home to a wide array of municipal, state, and private land trust parks, including several designed by the Olmsted Brothers. The largest of these is Springdale Park, designed by the brothers in 1905–1906, and today the site of the annual Western Massachusetts Puerto Rican Parade and Festival. The park is one of three of the city&#x27;s flagship parks, the other two being Pulaski Park, also an Olmsted design, and the Roberts Sports Complex, former site of Elmwood Park, which abuts Mackenzie Stadium. In total the city department of parks and recreation maintains 47 listed municipal facilities comprising nearly 250 acres, and including several baseball diamonds, playgrounds, a skatepark, basketball courts, tennis courts, a municipal pool, and a dog park. The Holyoke Water Works also maintains land holdings for the preservation of its watershed, some of which are open to the public, including Ashley Reservoir and Whiting Street Reservoir, which allow hiking but bar certain activities such as fishing, dog walking, and swimming. This same area, which transects the Metacomet Ridge, also contains a portion of the New England National Scenic Trail, managed by the National Park Service.

There are two state parks in Holyoke maintained by the Commonwealth&#x27;s Department of Conservation and Recreation, the largest being the Mount Tom State Reservation, as well as the urban Holyoke Heritage State Park which was built on the site of the former Skinner Silk Mill, adjacent to City Hall.

The Trustees of Reservations maintain a number of parks in the city, including the Dinosaur Footprints Reservation, Land of Providence, and Little Tom Mountain. The latter, once part of the Mount Tom Ski Area, has remained closed since the ski resort shuttered in 1998, and was subsequently purchased in part by the Trustees, along with the U.S. Fish &amp; Wildlife Service, Holyoke Boys &amp; Girls Club. In recent years there has been discussion of reopening the property as a nature camp, or potentially as a special permit skiing area, not unlike Mount Snow, but while some have still used the remaining ski slopes in recent years, the area has been subject to vandalism and remains closed with no plans for reopening agreed on by its landholders.

==Government and politics==


Holyoke has a strong mayor – council government where the executive historically has broad powers to directly appoint officials or commissions which perform the same function, as well as present an initial budget before the city council. Taken into consideration with the authority of the city council, the office, however, has been described by the Massachusetts state government as having limited executive powers. For example, the mayor retains appointment of the chief of police directly, including terms of their contract, as well as the three members of the fire commission, without council approval. The fire commission, however, has exclusive authority to appoint or suspend the chief and other officers. Other municipal positions such as treasurer or city clerk are elected directly, unless said officeholder is appointed by the mayor in an acting capacity. In 2015 voters passed a resolution raising mayoral terms from two to four years. In 2021, Joshua A. Garcia was elected, and assumed the remainder of the term of Terence Murphy on November 15, 2021, who had assumed the office in an acting capacity.

Holyoke&#x27;s legislative body is its City Council, which features seven ward representatives and six councilors at large. Historic records refer to the city council as the &quot;Board of Aldermen&quot; until its name changed in 1992; however, the title also reflected a separate body. From 1874 until 1896, the City Council was bicameral; the Board of Aldermen consisted of seven at-large members, and a Common Council of 21 presided with three representatives per ward. From the ratification of the 1896 charter until the 1950s, the common council was eliminated and the Board comprised 21 members with 14 at-large, subsequently changed to eight at-large and seven ward members. In 2015 the city voted to reduce the number of councilors from 15 to 13, removing two at-large seats and creating a majority of ward-based seats. The City Council passes the city&#x27;s final budget, holds hearings, creates departments and commissions, and amends zoning laws.

The city government comprises 33 offices, departments, and agencies, including utilities which are municipally owned and operated, Holyoke Gas and Electric and the Holyoke Water Works.

In the Massachusetts House of Representatives, Holyoke is represented by Patricia Duffy of the 5th Hampden District, which is conterminous with the city&#x27;s boundaries. The city&#x27;s state senator is John Velis, of the 2nd Hampshire and Hampden District. It is part of the Eighth Massachusetts Governor&#x27;s Council district, represented by Tara Jacobs. In the United States Congress the city is represented by Richard Neal of the state&#x27;s 1st district, and senators Elizabeth Warren and Edward Markey.

Politically, the city&#x27;s largest block of voters are those belonging to no political party, but in recent years the city has largely supported candidates from the Democratic Party by a wide margin. In the 2012 elections, voters supported President Barack Obama over Mitt Romney by a margin of 76–22%, and Elizabeth Warren over incumbent Senator Scott Brown 70–30%. Holyoke elected an openly gay mayor, Alex Morse, in the 2011 municipal election.

===Public safety===
As of 2025 Holyoke maintains a full-service law enforcement agency, the Holyoke Police Department, established in the 1850s. As of August 2024 the department employed 88 sworn employees.

Following the collapse of Holyoke&#x27;s industrial base in the 1970s, the city began to see civil unrest which gained notoriety both in state and national coverage; a wave of crime set in and the population declined nearly 20% from 1970 through 1990. Since that time, crime has gradually declined, with an increased state police presence, and greater state socio-economic support programs. Since 2011, state and federal authorities have worked with the Holyoke Police Department in a Safe Neighborhood Initiative, attempting to suppress gang violence and creating greater after-school programming and opportunities for at-risk youth. This demographic has been described by Massachusetts&#x27; Shannon Community Safety Initiative as those most affected by violent crime in the city. In 2016, the HPD estimated 3 out of 4 violent crimes were committed by an estimated 589 gang members between Holyoke and Chicopee, often with members being offenders and victims in turf battles over narcotics trafficking.

Between 2010 and 2018, the violent crime rate for Holyoke decreased by approximately 14.6%, whereas the property crime rate declined by 26.5%; both rates remain more than twice their respective state averages, as of 2018.

The Holyoke Fire Department responds to fires and other emergencies within the city. Emergency Medical Services are contracted to a private ambulance company. This contract is currently held by Cataldo Ambulance Service.

==Media==
===Newspapers===
&quot;The Republican&quot;, based in Springfield, and the &quot;Daily Hampshire Gazette&quot; of Northampton are the two daily newspapers regularly covering the city. Holyoke&#x27;s own newspaper of record, the &quot;Holyoke Transcript-Telegram&quot;, which had been connected with the city since its founding under several variations of that name, ceased publication in 1993. Since this time Holyoke has not had its own daily news source but has been served by the weekly &quot;Holyoke Sun&quot;, managed by Turley Publications, which began publication in 1995. On September 16, 2019, the &quot;Daily Hampshire Gazette&quot; announced that it was expanding its coverage to Holyoke full-time, opening a bureau there.

Since 2004 the area has also been covered by the bilingual monthly &quot;El Sol Latino&quot;; published independently out of Amherst, it covers the news of the Pioneer Valley&#x27;s Puerto Rican community, with considerable coverage given to Holyoke. The Republican also publishes a free Spanish-language weekly known as El Pueblo Latino, with distribution mainly in Springfield and Holyoke. Historically Holyoke has had numerous non-English news publications. Between 1874 and 1910 more than twelve French newspapers were published. Many of these were printed for only a matter of weeks, while the best documented, the weekly &quot;La Justice&quot;, was published from 1909 to 1964, being biweekly in its last six years. Another prominent example was the Polish language &quot;Gwiazda&quot;, or &quot;Polish Weekly-Star&quot;, among the best documented of at least four such publications.

===Radio and television===
Holyoke is served by , including its own WCCH, Holyoke Community College&#x27;s radio station, Mount Holyoke College&#x27;s WMHC of South Hadley, and WMUA of UMass Amherst. A Christian radio station WREA also broadcasts Spanish-language religious programming from a studio in downtown Holyoke.

In addition to television stations serving the Springfield market, the city is also home to Holyoke Media, a public-access media non-profit.

===Film===
In its history many smaller productions have been filmed in Holyoke, as well a handful of notable pictures including the neo-noir film &quot;Malice&quot; (1993) and mystery horror drama &quot;The Reincarnation of Peter Proud&quot; (1975). The city served as a filming location for the 1977 bodybuilding documentary &quot;Pumping Iron&quot;, as Mountain Park then held bodybuilding championships at its Clambake Pavilion. The Holyoke Merry-Go-Round was also the setting of a music video sequence in the 2007 British documentary &quot;Young@Heart&quot;, chronicling a New England chorus of elders from Northampton who cover classic and contemporary rock songs.

==Infrastructure==
=== Healthcare ===
The Holyoke Medical Center offers comprehensive health services. It was named a top hospital by The Leapfrog Group in 2016, and in 2018 received multiple awards for its stroke care from the Paul Coverdell National Acute Stroke Program of the Massachusetts Department of Public Health, and the American Heart Association. The city&#x27;s Providence Behavioral Health Hospital offers a number of programs for psychiatric health as well, with emphasis on new substance abuse treatment programs. It has been affiliated with the Sisters of Providence of Holyoke, who have operated medical facilities in the city since they first received their charter in 1892.

The Soldiers&#x27; Home in Holyoke is one of two state-operated veterans healthcare facilities in the Commonwealth, offering longterm residential care as well as outpatient services to Massachusetts veterans. In 2018, the facility received high marks from the Department of Veterans Affairs, showing improved safety measures for elderly residents and no deficiencies in provided care.

===Telecom and public fiber===
Since September 1997, the city&#x27;s municipal utility, Holyoke Gas &amp; Electric, has provided fiber optic high-speed internet service to municipal agencies, as well as commercial and industrial businesses. This network would also play a decisive role in the location of the Massachusetts Green High Performance Computing Center in the city, due to its 1 gbps service offered to commercial customers, and a dedicated link exceeding 10 gbps for the facility&#x27;s educational affiliates, on specialized networks such as Internet2.

The municipal fiber line network has also served as an internet service provider to other area towns, including commercial customers in Chicopee, Metro Center Springfield, and Greenfield (until 2017), as well as network operator to residential customers in Leverett. With renewed public interest in net neutrality, civic groups have rallied for the city to offer a limited or complete rollout of this fiber-to-the-home service in Holyoke and Chicopee. However, despite orders by the council to further explore this measure, no immediate plan for residential service had been given by the municipal utility as of 2018. On November 6, 2019, city voters passed a nonbinding question calling for a feasibility study and cost estimate of a gradual rollout of residential service.

=== Transportation ===
====Highways====
Interstate highways serving Greater Holyoke include:
* – North to Northampton, Hatfield, Greenfield, and South to Springfield, Hartford.
* – South to Chicopee, and Springfield.

Immediately south of Holyoke is the Massachusetts Turnpike, accessible from exit 14 on I-91 South: 
* – East to Worcester and Boston, and West to Stockbridge, and Albany

U.S. Highways serving Greater Holyoke include:
* – Running from Ingleside to Smith&#x27;s Ferry, connecting West Springfield to Easthampton and Northampton.
* – Running from South Hadley via the Joseph E. Muller Bridge to Westfield, Massachusetts.

Massachusetts highways in the area include:
* – A minor freeway bypassing downtown Holyoke, connecting Chicopee to South Hadley via the Willimansett Bridge and the Vietnam Memorial Bridge.
* – A minor freeway connecting Easthampton over Mount Tom, through downtown via Appleton Street and Main Street in South Holyoke to Chicopee via I-391.

====Bus and rail====
Several buses from the Pioneer Valley Transit Authority operate in the city including the Paper City Express with a route across town as well as routes to South Hadley, Westfield, Northampton, Amherst, and Springfield, connecting with Peter Pan Buslines at the Holyoke Transportation Center.

Passenger rail service returned to Holyoke in August 2015, after being absent since 1967. Amtrak&#x27;s &quot;Vermonter&quot; stops at the Holyoke station once a day in each direction, and the &quot;Valley Flyer&quot; commenced in Spring 2019 linking Holyoke to adjacent stations in Northampton and Springfield, as far north as Greenfield and south as New Haven, Connecticut, with two trains operating in the morning and the evening. The route links travelers as far north as Greenfield and as far south as New Haven, Connecticut, with connections to New York City on Amtrak and Metro-North Railroad.

Freight rail service is provided to the city&#x27;s industrial and warehouse railways in Springdale, South Holyoke, and The Flats by the Pioneer Valley Railroad, with connections to Pan Am Southern to Springfield and Greenfield, and a line to Westfield with connections to Southampton and the CSX system. The PVRR also provides annual fall foliage passenger rides from the Holyoke Heritage State Park to Westfield, and an annual Santa Train at the park.

====Airports====
General aviation service is close by, at Westover Metropolitan Airport and Northampton Airport. The closest major domestic and limited international air service is available through Bradley International Airport (BDL) in Windsor Locks, Connecticut.

====Cycling and walking====
Taken in its entirety, Holyoke has a moderate Walk Score of 55, though walkability is highly variable between neighborhoods. For example, whereas the rural neighborhood of Rock Valley is entirely car-dependent with a score of 3, the downtown area, with its grid central to stores, residences, and businesses, yields a Walk Score of 84.

In an effort to make the mixed industrial and residential area around the canals more accessible, the city has in recent years constructed the eponymous Canalwalk, a series of walkways linking the downtown to The Flats and South Holyoke.

== Environment ==
Despite its industrial history, Holyoke contains no Superfund sites. One of the greatest producers of pollution in the area was the former Mount Tom Station, a coal plant in Smith&#x27;s Ferry. Citizens cited higher rates of asthma, attributing them to the plant and after many years of discussion it was finally shuttered in December 2014. In October 2016 ground was broken at the site for the construction of a new solar farm.

===Flora and fauna===
Due to a combination of MassWildlife&#x27;s Natural Heritage &amp; Endangered Species Program, as well as public health protections for the watershed of the Holyoke Water Works, much of the city&#x27;s area west of Interstate 91 is designated for limited development and often requires additional permitting. Of the city&#x27;s 14,605 acres, approximate 8,105 along the Metacomet Ridge and Mount Tom Range have been identified as core habitat for the more than 242 species of vertebrates extant in the city&#x27;s boundaries, and of this area about 52% of its acreage is managed by municipal, state, and federal agencies, with sustainable development plans in place to encourage development within the city&#x27;s dense grid to the east. Of the wildlife identified in Holyoke, there are 29 species of fish, 21 of amphibians, 18 of reptiles, at least 160 species of birds including ruby-throated hummingbirds and bald eagles, as well as 42 species of mammals such as black bears and moose. In recent years the area has seen a growing black bear population, with the occasional individual wandering into the downtown center.

==Global outreach==
Holyoke has in the past established sister city relationships with cities abroad, including:

* Svaliava, Zakarpattia Oblast, Ukraine (1997)
* Tralee, Ireland (2017)

Less formal relationships representing symbolic and technical exchanges have also been established with the following cities:

* Montreal, Quebec, Canada (1888), on January 26, 1888, a delegation from Montreal was received by Mayor Delaney. Arriving by train, they comprised 200 members of &quot;Le Canadien&quot; and &quot;La Trappeur&quot; snowshoe clubs, as well as Laurent-Olivier David MP, former Mayor and folklorist Honoré Beaugrand, and Québecois poet laureate Louis Fréchette. In the midst of an evening snowstorm, they were greeted by 10,000 residents and a grand fireworks display. Throughout the night, several French and English speeches were made at city hall, before an audience including reporters from several Franco-American newspapers, with a speech by Delaney lamenting the tragic Precious Blood Church fire, and a tribute by Beaugrand honoring President Cleveland.
* Beijing, Qing China (1906), in May 1906, Chen Jintao, regarded as China&#x27;s first foreign scholar, was sent to the city on assignment to study its budding paper-making industry and infrastructure, reporting back to the Chinese government after a month of observation. He would be received not only by mill owners but the city government itself, including city engineer James Tighe who would show him the infrastructure of the Holyoke Reservoir System. Chen, possibly a member of the Tongmenghui, would go on to serve numerous important roles in both the Qing and Republic of China governments, including Acting Minister of Foreign Affairs for the latter.
* Dublin, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland (1906), on November 9, 1906, two Irish envoys were received by Mayor Avery, Richard Hazleton MP, and Tom Kettle MP, both Irish nationalist home-rule advocates touring the United States for the cause. Avery was granted the chairman&#x27;s position at the meeting held at Saint Jerome&#x27;s Institute, and over the course of the evening several speeches were made by the guests and others in the Irish community describing the realities of British rule and progress made toward independence, with parallels drawn between the independence of the United States. Some $700, about $20,000 in 2017 US Dollars, was raised by the crowd for the Irish Parliamentary Party by the end of the evening.
* Apremont-la-Forêt, Meuse, France (1919), at the end of World War I, in honor of the fallen of the 104th Infantry, the city provided this village a new waterworks, public bath, and a community center under relief efforts led by Belle Skinner. In honor of these contributions, the village renamed its town square Place d&#x27;Holyoke and its main street Rue Belle Skinner. In 1930 a former supply route built by soldiers of the regiment was dedicated in Massachusetts as the Apremont Highway in a joint ceremony between Holyoke and Westfield.
* San Juan, Puerto Rico (2018), in the wake of Hurricane Maria many Puerto Ricans sought refuge with family in Holyoke, with more than 235 additional students enrolling in Holyoke public schools in the year following the natural disaster; on April 27, 2018, a key to the city was presented to San Juan Mayor Carmen Yulín Cruz by Mayor Alex Morse to honor that &quot;in such a time of despair [she] provided a beacon of hope and opportunity for Puerto Ricans&quot; in the city&#x27;s community, and for her leadership in the wake of Hurricane Maria.

==Notable people==
==See also==
* List of mill towns in Massachusetts

==Notes==
==References==
==Further reading==
* 
* 
* 

==External links==

* City of Holyoke official website
* Greater Holyoke Chamber of Commerce
* Holyoke Innovation District, official site, operated by the Massachusetts Technology Collaborative
* Holyokemass.com – History and genealogy of Holyoke, Massachusetts</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1637790" start="0" end="7" title="Holyoke, Massachusetts" label="Holyoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q54160" start="21" end="50" title="Hampden County, Massachusetts" label="Hampden County, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q379648" start="109" end="126" title="Connecticut River" label="Connecticut River"/>
<link wikidata="Q593487" start="135" end="150" title="Mount Tom Range" label="Mount Tom Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="162" end="173" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q49158" start="229" end="240" title="Springfield, Massachusetts" label="Springfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q7580900" start="265" end="294" title="Springfield metropolitan area, Massachusetts" label="Springfield Metropolitan Area"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="385" end="410" title="Planned community#Industrialization" label="planned industrial cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q48989618" start="458" end="469" title="Holyoke Dam" label="Holyoke Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q18389" start="550" end="561" title="New England" label="New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256511" start="575" end="584" title="grid plan" label="grid plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q54313942" start="717" end="754" title="D. H. &amp;amp; A. B. Tower" label="largest paper mill architectural firm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2839384" start="811" end="822" title="alpaca wool" label="alpaca wool"/>
<link wikidata="Q6784277" start="1091" end="1144" title="Massachusetts Green High Performance Computing Center" label="Massachusetts Green High Performance Computing Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q195754" start="1233" end="1256" title="Volleyball Hall of Fame" label="Volleyball Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q6876" start="1342" end="1355" title="Volleyball at the Summer Olympics" label="Olympic sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q157169" start="1399" end="1403" title="YMCA" label="YMCA"/>
<link wikidata="Q313949" start="1415" end="1432" title="William G. Morgan" label="William G. Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q97956941" start="1462" end="1483" title="Holyoke Testing Flume" label="Holyoke Testing Flume"/>
<link wikidata="Q5131259" start="1517" end="1533" title="Clemens Herschel" label="Clemens Herschel"/>
<link wikidata="Q725699" start="1547" end="1560" title="Venturi meter" label="Venturi meter"/>
<link wikidata="Q14715551" start="1615" end="1635" title="Holyoke Canal System" label="Holyoke Canal System"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061108" start="1779" end="1789" title="waterworks" label="waterworks"/>
<link wikidata="Q165435" start="1794" end="1805" title="carburators" label="carburators"/>
<link wikidata="Q121734997" start="2020" end="2034" title="carbon neutral" label="carbon neutral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1621197" start="2182" end="2200" title="Algonquian peoples" label="Algonquian peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q1789087" start="2261" end="2269" title="Pocomtuc" label="Pocomtuc"/>
<link wikidata="Q4691636" start="2300" end="2306" title="Agawam people" label="Agawam"/>
<link wikidata="Q379648" start="2354" end="2378" title="Connecticut River Valley" label="Connecticut River Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q126195" start="2410" end="2429" title="Plymouth Colony" label="Plymouth Plantation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1787206" start="2452" end="2472" title="Windsor, Connecticut" label="Windsor, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191350" start="2483" end="2507" title="Massachusetts Bay Colony" label="Massachusetts Bay Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q762279" start="2551" end="2566" title="William Pynchon" label="William Pynchon"/>
<link wikidata="Q20138" start="2596" end="2618" title="Roxbury, Massachusetts" label="Roxbury, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5377301" start="2810" end="2823" title="Enfield Falls" label="Enfield Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003303" start="3228" end="3259" title="West Springfield, Massachusetts" label="West Springfield, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7891142" start="3621" end="3632" title="United States Post Office–Holyoke Main" label="post office"/>
<link wikidata="Q762279" start="4031" end="4046" title="William Pynchon" label="William Pynchon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5363927" start="4066" end="4080" title="Elizur Holyoke" label="Elizur Holyoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q49186" start="4355" end="4366" title="Northampton, Massachusetts" label="Northampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q25199147" start="4376" end="4394" title="Smith&amp;#x27;s Ferry, Holyoke, Massachusetts" label="Smith&amp;#x27;s Ferry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1988974" start="4454" end="4465" title="Easthampton, Massachusetts" label="Easthampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q48989618" start="4726" end="4729" title="Holyoke Dam" label="dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q14715551" start="4738" end="4758" title="Holyoke Canal System" label="Holyoke Canal System"/>
<link wikidata="Q918088" start="4836" end="4846" title="paper mill" label="paper mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q60209767" start="4911" end="4932" title="Parsons Paper Company" label="Parsons Paper Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q66459506" start="5002" end="5025" title="Holyoke Machine Company" label="Holyoke Machine Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q56290852" start="5443" end="5465" title="William B. C. Pearsons" label="William B. C. Pearsons"/>
<link wikidata="Q5887105" start="5638" end="5653" title="Hampden Freeman" label="Hampden Freeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5887105" start="5685" end="5712" title="Holyoke Transcript-Telegram" label="Holyoke Transcript-Telegram"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="5892" end="5904" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4748032" start="6139" end="6179" title="Ampad" label="American Pad &amp;amp; Paper Company (AMPAD)"/>
<link wikidata="Q60742125" start="6321" end="6351" title="American Writing Paper Company" label="American Writing Paper Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q8303885" start="6355" end="6368" title="trust company" label="trust company"/>
<link wikidata="Q3738205" start="6412" end="6421" title="rag paper" label="rag paper"/>
<link wikidata="Q5450124" start="6519" end="6529" title="fine paper" label="fine paper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251686" start="6851" end="6877" title="Northeast blackout of 1965" label="Northeast blackout of 1965"/>
<link wikidata="Q97956941" start="7140" end="7161" title="Holyoke Testing Flume" label="Holyoke Testing Flume"/>
<link wikidata="Q5131259" start="7286" end="7302" title="Clemens Herschel" label="Clemens Herschel"/>
<link wikidata="Q725699" start="7310" end="7323" title="Venturi effect" label="Venturi meter"/>
<link wikidata="Q96776367" start="7421" end="7438" title="John B. McCormick" label="John B. McCormick"/>
<link wikidata="Q77748" start="7534" end="7550" title="Hans Goldschmidt" label="Hans Goldschmidt"/>
<link wikidata="Q910714" start="7558" end="7576" title="exothermic welding" label="exothermic welding"/>
<link wikidata="Q60748536" start="7642" end="7664" title="Holyoke Street Railway" label="Holyoke Street Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q25202977" start="7716" end="7725" title="Toll (telecommunications)" label="toll line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897946" start="7853" end="7868" title="Thaddeus Cahill" label="Thaddeus Cahill"/>
<link wikidata="Q133506" start="7954" end="7966" title="Telharmonium" label="Telharmonium"/>
<link wikidata="Q163829" start="8042" end="8053" title="synthesizer" label="synthesizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="8135" end="8162" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1720696" start="8258" end="8269" title="Southampton, MA" label="Southampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1988974" start="8297" end="8308" title="Easthampton, MA" label="Easthampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2423149" start="8331" end="8343" title="South Hadley, MA" label="South Hadley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650454" start="8348" end="8356" title="Chicopee, MA" label="Chicopee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003303" start="8391" end="8407" title="West Springfield, MA" label="West Springfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q3046527" start="8450" end="8463" title="East Mountain (Hampden County, Massachusetts)" label="East Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q593487" start="8469" end="8484" title="Mount Tom Range" label="Mount Tom Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q3322152" start="8490" end="8499" title="Mount Tom (Massachusetts)" label="Mount Tom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7835547" start="8516" end="8524" title="traprock mountain" label="traprock"/>
<link wikidata="Q3307200" start="8537" end="8552" title="Metacomet Ridge" label="Metacomet Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q867460" start="8596" end="8613" title="Long Island Sound" label="Long Island Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q16551" start="8621" end="8628" title="Vermont" label="Vermont"/>
<link wikidata="Q5254105" start="8810" end="8817" title="dell (landform)" label="dingles"/>
<link wikidata="Q215108" start="8913" end="8925" title="microclimate" label="microclimate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1924738" start="8942" end="8967" title="Metacomet-Monadnock Trail" label="Metacomet-Monadnock Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q21446516" start="9160" end="9184" title="Podokesaurus holyokensis" label="Podokesaurus holyokensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2423149" start="9248" end="9260" title="South Hadley" label="South Hadley"/>
<link wikidata="Q55315777" start="9492" end="9502" title="Springdale, Holyoke, Massachusetts" label="Springdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q55627217" start="9507" end="9514" title="Oakdale, Holyoke, Massachusetts" label="Oakdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q7623078" start="9559" end="9576" title="streetcar suburbs" label="streetcar suburbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q55631882" start="9635" end="9646" title="Rock Valley, Holyoke, Massachusetts" label="Rock Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q24299619" start="9651" end="9658" title="Elmwood, Holyoke, Massachusetts" label="Elmwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003303" start="9680" end="9696" title="West Springfield, Massachusetts" label="West Springfield"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9759" end="9769" title="George C. Ewing#Ewingville" label="Ewingville"/>
<link wikidata="Q60538877" start="9924" end="9933" title="Churchill, Holyoke, Massachusetts" label="Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q8027742" start="9945" end="9958" title="Wistariahurst" label="Wistariahurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q5887072" start="10012" end="10021" title="Holyoke City Hall" label="City Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q195754" start="10030" end="10053" title="Volleyball Hall of Fame" label="Volleyball Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q24299619" start="10057" end="10064" title="Elmwood, Holyoke, Massachusetts" label="Elmwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q60765020" start="10180" end="10189" title="The Flats, Holyoke, Massachusetts" label="The Flats"/>
<link wikidata="Q14715551" start="10205" end="10225" title="Holyoke Canal System" label="Holyoke Canal System"/>
<link wikidata="Q58357323" start="10360" end="10369" title="Highlands, Holyoke, Massachusetts" label="Highlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q78677035" start="10372" end="10385" title="Highland Park, Holyoke, Massachusetts" label="Highland Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q30623078" start="10420" end="10436" title="Ashley Reservoir" label="Ashley Reservoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q5887074" start="10438" end="10463" title="Holyoke Community College" label="Holyoke Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q48977272" start="10467" end="10476" title="Ingleside, Holyoke, Massachusetts" label="Ingleside"/>
<link wikidata="Q5887090" start="10492" end="10504" title="Holyoke Mall" label="Holyoke Mall"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10509" end="10524" title="Nuestras Raices" label="Nuestras Raices"/>
<link wikidata="Q55627217" start="10544" end="10551" title="Oakdale, Holyoke, Massachusetts" label="Oakdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q48808926" start="10563" end="10582" title="Forestdale Cemetery" label="Forestdale Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q55757489" start="10604" end="10626" title="Holyoke Medical Center" label="Holyoke Medical Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q55631882" start="10630" end="10641" title="Rock Valley, Holyoke, Massachusetts" label="Rock Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q25199147" start="10644" end="10662" title="Smith&amp;#x27;s Ferry, Holyoke, Massachusetts" label="Smith&amp;#x27;s Ferry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5278630" start="10678" end="10709" title="Dinosaur Footprints Reservation" label="Dinosaur Footprints Reservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q58351333" start="10747" end="10760" title="South Holyoke, Holyoke, Massachusetts" label="South Holyoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q55315777" start="10850" end="10860" title="Springdale, Holyoke, Massachusetts" label="Springdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q2021081" start="10943" end="10959" title="Olmsted Brothers" label="Olmsted Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q65053654" start="10962" end="10975" title="Whiting Farms, Holyoke, Massachusetts" label="Whiting Farms"/>
<link wikidata="Q5637967" start="11278" end="11315" title="Hadley Falls Company Housing District" label="Hadley Falls Company Housing District"/>
<link wikidata="Q615196" start="11621" end="11631" title="Italianate architecture" label="Italianate"/>
<link wikidata="Q186363" start="11633" end="11647" title="Gothic Revival" label="Gothic Revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270218" start="11649" end="11659" title="Queen Anne style architecture in the United States" label="Queen Anne"/>
<link wikidata="Q174419" start="11664" end="11677" title="Second Empire architecture" label="Second Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7851317" start="11689" end="11702" title="Tudor revival" label="Tudor revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q5887072" start="11826" end="11843" title="Holyoke City Hall" label="Holyoke City Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q186363" start="11860" end="11874" title="Gothic Revival" label="Gothic Revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q2958459" start="11884" end="11901" title="Charles B. Atwood" label="Charles B. Atwood"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11923" end="11957" title="Holyoke station#Connecticut River Railroad Station" label="Connecticut River Railroad Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q723234" start="11988" end="12004" title="H. H. Richardson" label="H. H. Richardson"/>
<link wikidata="Q875016" start="12006" end="12028" title="rowhouses" label="Philadelphia rowhouses"/>
<link wikidata="Q5543088" start="12238" end="12259" title="George P. B. Alderman" label="George P. B. Alderman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7891142" start="12310" end="12329" title="Holyoke Post Office" label="Holyoke Post Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q565165" start="12384" end="12393" title="Victorian architecture" label="Victorian"/>
<link wikidata="Q51648748" start="12474" end="12489" title="James A. Clough" label="James A. Clough"/>
<link wikidata="Q53836195" start="12641" end="12657" title="Oscar Beauchemin" label="Oscar Beauchemin"/>
<link wikidata="Q55315777" start="12711" end="12721" title="Springdale, Holyoke, Massachusetts" label="Springdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q502163" start="12835" end="12854" title="Renaissance Revival" label="Renaissance Revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q54313942" start="12975" end="12998" title="D. H. &amp;amp; A. B. Tower" label="D. H. &amp;amp; A. B. Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741634" start="13327" end="13341" title="Kimberly-Clark" label="Kimberly-Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q5181992" start="13346" end="13360" title="Crane Currency" label="Crane Currency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256511" start="13671" end="13695" title="grid plan" label="rectilinear street grids"/>
<link wikidata="Q18389" start="13709" end="13720" title="New England" label="New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050052" start="13913" end="13945" title="Commissioner&amp;#x27;s Plan of 1811" label="Commissioner&amp;#x27;s Plan of 1811"/>
<link wikidata="Q98386981" start="14272" end="14277" title="George W. Lyman" label="Lyman"/>
<link wikidata="Q94406745" start="14279" end="14285" title="Edmund Dwight" label="Dwight"/>
<link wikidata="Q553019" start="14287" end="14295" title="Nathan Appleton" label="Appleton"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14297" end="14302" title="Cabot family#Samuel Cabot" label="Cabot"/>
<link wikidata="Q59955495" start="14304" end="14312" title="Ignatius Sargent" label="Sargeant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2074738" start="14314" end="14321" title="Patrick Tracy Jackson" label="Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q54160" start="14367" end="14374" title="Hampden County, Massachusetts" label="Hampden"/>
<link wikidata="Q54072" start="14376" end="14383" title="Suffolk County, Massachusetts" label="Suffolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q54076" start="14385" end="14390" title="Essex County, Massachusetts" label="Essex"/>
<link wikidata="Q54161" start="14392" end="14401" title="Hampshire County, Massachusetts" label="Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q54163" start="14403" end="14411" title="Franklin County, Massachusetts" label="Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q18389" start="14537" end="14548" title="New England" label="New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q7719448" start="14626" end="14643" title="Boston Associates" label="Boston Associates"/>
<link wikidata="Q49162" start="14676" end="14697" title="Lowell, Massachusetts" label="Lowell, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q28823" start="14704" end="14711" title="textile" label="textile"/>
<link wikidata="Q11472" start="14814" end="14819" title="paper" label="paper"/>
<link wikidata="Q14715551" start="14848" end="14868" title="Holyoke Canal System" label="Holyoke Canal System"/>
<link wikidata="Q7196823" start="15109" end="15132" title="Pioneer Valley Railroad" label="Pioneer Valley Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="15162" end="15168" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q49078" start="15307" end="15312" title="white Americans" label="white"/>
<link wikidata="Q7048763" start="15320" end="15338" title="non-Hispanic whites" label="non-Hispanic white"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="15347" end="15352" title="African Americans" label="black"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="15359" end="15374" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q727928" start="15381" end="15386" title="Asian Americans" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5025138" start="15393" end="15402" title="Cambodian Americans" label="Cambodian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2643509" start="15409" end="15415" title="Indian Americans" label="Indian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146100" start="15422" end="15429" title="Chinese Americans" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q276879" start="15436" end="15442" title="Korean Americans" label="Korean"/>
<link wikidata="Q7125803" start="15449" end="15458" title="Pakistani Americans" label="Pakistani"/>
<link wikidata="Q3349057" start="15466" end="15482" title="Pacific Islander Americans" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q6935055" start="15520" end="15530" title="multiracial Americans" label="mixed race"/>
<link wikidata="Q58669" start="15532" end="15553" title="Hispanic and Latino Americans" label="Hispanics and Latinos"/>
<link wikidata="Q56275617" start="15602" end="15614" title="Puerto Ricans in Holyoke" label="Puerto Rican"/>
<link wikidata="Q5290725" start="15621" end="15630" title="Dominican Americans" label="Dominican"/>
<link wikidata="Q7919819" start="15637" end="15647" title="Venezuelan Americans" label="Venezuelan"/>
<link wikidata="Q581921" start="15654" end="15661" title="Mexican Americans" label="Mexican"/>
<link wikidata="Q5147921" start="15668" end="15677" title="Colombian Americans" label="Colombian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790886" start="15684" end="15689" title="Cuban Americans" label="Cuban"/>
<link wikidata="Q7406487" start="15696" end="15706" title="Salvadoran Americans" label="Salvadoran"/>
<link wikidata="Q4789371" start="15713" end="15722" title="Argentine Americans" label="Argentine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5892930" start="15729" end="15737" title="Honduran Americans" label="Honduran"/>
<link wikidata="Q5614258" start="15744" end="15754" title="Guatemalan Americans" label="Guatemalan"/>
<link wikidata="Q85766808" start="15806" end="15811" title="History of the Irish in Holyoke" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189552" start="15821" end="15827" title="Polish Americans" label="Polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q60523948" start="15836" end="15842" title="History of the French in Holyoke" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q65061662" start="15851" end="15857" title="Germans in Holyoke" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q974693" start="15866" end="15873" title="Italian Americans" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344183" start="15882" end="15889" title="English Americans" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q5501705" start="15898" end="15913" title="French Canadian Americans" label="French-Canadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4745454" start="15922" end="15930" title="American ancestry" label="American"/>
<link wikidata="Q3476361" start="15939" end="15947" title="Scottish Americans" label="Scottish"/>
<link wikidata="Q4690023" start="15960" end="15979" title="African immigration to the United States" label="sub-Saharan African"/>
<link wikidata="Q1309633" start="15988" end="15998" title="Immigration to the United States" label="Immigrants"/>
<link wikidata="Q786" start="16114" end="16132" title="Dominican Republic" label="Dominican Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="16134" end="16140" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="16142" end="16149" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="16151" end="16156" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q792" start="16158" end="16169" title="El Salvador" label="El Salvador"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="16175" end="16189" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q739" start="16191" end="16199" title="Colombia" label="Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q114" start="16201" end="16206" title="Kenya" label="Kenya"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="16212" end="16218" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="16350" end="16365" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="17220" end="17235" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2565203" start="17377" end="17387" title="World Book Encyclopedia" label="World Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="17875" end="17892" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="17986" end="17998" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q556318" start="18122" end="18155" title="Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program" label="Supplemental Nutrition Assistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7899935" start="18509" end="18524" title="Urban Institute" label="Urban Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q649011" start="18834" end="18846" title="working poor" label="working poor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095711" start="19009" end="19020" title="1890 United States census" label="1890 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q49194" start="19192" end="19217" title="Fall River, Massachusetts" label="Fall River, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q485708" start="19222" end="19239" title="Duluth, Minnesota" label="Duluth, Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q170826" start="19598" end="19603" title="Irish people" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q48977272" start="20091" end="20100" title="Ingleside, Holyoke, Massachusetts" label="Ingleside"/>
<link wikidata="Q7251652" start="20146" end="20162" title="Irish Protestant" label="Irish Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q5645960" start="20420" end="20434" title="Irish Catholic" label="Irish Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q25103972" start="20575" end="20604" title="Holyoke Saint Patrick&amp;#x27;s Day Parade" label="St. Patrick&amp;#x27;s Day Parade"/>
<link wikidata="Q857880" start="20650" end="20666" title="French Canadian" label="French-Canadians"/>
<link wikidata="Q178790" start="20713" end="20725" title="labor unions" label="labor unions"/>
<link wikidata="Q142405" start="20921" end="20939" title="Saint-Ours, Quebec" label="Saint-Ours, Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21030" end="21041" title="Lyman Mills (company)" label="Lyman Mills"/>
<link wikidata="Q55315777" start="21087" end="21097" title="Springdale, Holyoke, Massachusetts" label="Springdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="21713" end="21725" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q893594" start="21740" end="21753" title="Puerto Rican people" label="Puerto Ricans"/>
<link wikidata="Q24460" start="21802" end="21825" title="Northeast United States" label="Northeast United States"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21849" end="21867" title="Puerto Rican Farm Labor Program" label="Farm Labor Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q628807" start="21885" end="21907" title="US Department of Labor" label="US Department of Labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q979772" start="21924" end="21939" title="Bracero program" label="Bracero program"/>
<link wikidata="Q7181" start="22663" end="22676" title="globalization" label="globalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q5909102" start="22681" end="22700" title="deindustrialization" label="deindustrialization"/>
<link wikidata="Q24299619" start="23404" end="23419" title="Elmwood, Holyoke, Massachusetts" label="Baptist Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="23786" end="23800" title="Roman Catholic" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23884" end="23894" title="Holy Cross Parish, Holyoke" label="Holy Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q6786512" start="23899" end="23913" title="Mater Dolorosa Parish, Holyoke" label="Mater Dolorosa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24193" end="24200" title="Nun#Distinction between a nun and a religious sister" label="sisters"/>
<link wikidata="Q7531354" start="24215" end="24247" title="Sisters of Providence of Holyoke" label="Sisters of Providence of Holyoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q48977272" start="24251" end="24260" title="Ingleside, Holyoke, Massachusetts" label="Ingleside"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24266" end="24302" title="Sisters of St. Joseph#Sisters of St. Joseph of Springfield (Massachusetts)" label="Sisters of St. Joseph of Springfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q7531365" start="24343" end="24375" title="Sisters of St. Francis of Assisi" label="Sisters of St. Francis of Assisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q78677035" start="24379" end="24392" title="Highland Park, Holyoke, Massachusetts" label="Highland Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="24395" end="24405" title="Protestantism" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2423149" start="24711" end="24723" title="South Hadley, Massachusetts" label="South Hadley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7970362" start="24755" end="24769" title="Greek Orthodox" label="Greek Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q80970" start="25199" end="25208" title="Jewish Orthodoxy" label="Orthodoxy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26003" end="26018" title="Eureka Lab Book, Inc." label="Eureka Lab Book"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26020" end="26033" title="Hampden Paper Company" label="Hampden Paper"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26035" end="26046" title="Hazen Paper Company" label="Hazen Paper"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26048" end="26064" title="United Paper Box" label="United Paper Box"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26070" end="26089" title="University Products" label="University Products"/>
<link wikidata="Q2458461" start="26218" end="26230" title="Tsubakimoto Chain" label="U.S. Tsubaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q55315777" start="26234" end="26244" title="Springdale, Holyoke, Massachusetts" label="Springdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q7562151" start="26252" end="26258" title="Sonoco" label="Sonoco"/>
<link wikidata="Q58351333" start="26288" end="26301" title="South Holyoke, Holyoke, Massachusetts" label="South Holyoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q375905" start="26478" end="26487" title="Deerfield, Massachusetts" label="Deerfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q8048733" start="26489" end="26509" title="Yankee Candle" label="Yankee Candle&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q5468613" start="26624" end="26643" title="Foreign-trade zones of the United States" label="foreign-trade zones"/>
<link wikidata="Q49147" start="26689" end="26708" title="New Bedford, Massachusetts" label="Port of New Bedford"/>
<link wikidata="Q2777980" start="26717" end="26745" title="Massachusetts Port Authority" label="Massachusetts Port Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q54109" start="27439" end="27460" title="U.S. Capitol Building" label="U.S. Capitol Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q6784277" start="28535" end="28588" title="Massachusetts Green High Performance Computing Center" label="Massachusetts Green High Performance Computing Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q173395" start="28712" end="28725" title="Cisco Systems" label="Cisco Systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="28727" end="28745" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q49108" start="28751" end="28788" title="Massachusetts Institute of Technology" label="Massachusetts Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061122" start="28800" end="28827" title="University of Massachusetts" label="University of Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q49110" start="28829" end="28846" title="Boston University" label="Boston University"/>
<link wikidata="Q37548" start="28848" end="28871" title="Northeastern University" label="Northeastern University"/>
<link wikidata="Q877536" start="28873" end="28888" title="EMC Corporation" label="EMC Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q338825" start="28894" end="28907" title="Accenture" label="Accenture PLC"/>
<link wikidata="Q170196" start="28966" end="28976" title="hydropower" label="hydropower"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274577" start="29067" end="29084" title="Popular Mechanics" label="Popular Mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5974452" start="29214" end="29229" title="ISO New England" label="ISO New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q7309246" start="29280" end="29314" title="regional transmission organization" label="regional transmission organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q5887090" start="29539" end="29551" title="Holyoke Mall at Ingleside" label="Holyoke Mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q85779897" start="29557" end="29599" title="List of largest shopping malls in New England" label="third largest shopping mall in New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q25025298" start="29775" end="29786" title="PeoplesBank" label="PeoplesBank"/>
<link wikidata="Q55075385" start="29852" end="29872" title="Holyoke Credit Union" label="Holyoke Credit Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522620" start="30220" end="30234" title="farmers market" label="farmers market"/>
<link wikidata="Q987965" start="30590" end="30603" title="Jersey cattle" label="Jersey cattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506858" start="30770" end="30785" title="William Whiting II" label="William Whiting"/>
<link wikidata="Q5054110" start="30792" end="30805" title="cattle judging" label="prize-winning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148482" start="31091" end="31109" title="market agriculture" label="market agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31246" end="31261" title="Nuestras Raices" label="Nuestras Raices"/>
<link wikidata="Q58351333" start="31333" end="31346" title="South Holyoke, Holyoke, Massachusetts" label="South Holyoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q653953" start="31518" end="31528" title="microloans" label="microloans"/>
<link wikidata="Q4572" start="31624" end="31636" title="permaculture" label="permaculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="32036" end="32054" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="32085" end="32092" title="Harvard" label="Harvard"/>
<link wikidata="Q49112" start="32097" end="32112" title="Yale University" label="Yale University"/>
<link wikidata="Q25022148" start="32288" end="32312" title="Chelsea Green Publishing" label="Chelsea Green Publishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q16205546" start="32382" end="32392" title="Alex Morse" label="Alex Morse"/>
<link wikidata="Q16972174" start="32561" end="32611" title="Cannabis in Massachusetts" label="legalization of recreational weed in Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q456349" start="32751" end="32771" title="cannabis cultivation" label="cannabis cultivation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5887102" start="32939" end="32961" title="Holyoke Public Schools" label="Holyoke Public Schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q5887086" start="32973" end="32992" title="Holyoke High School" label="Holyoke High School"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="33324" end="33345" title="First Lutheran Church and School (Holyoke, MA)" label="First Lutheran School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5887074" start="33408" end="33433" title="Holyoke Community College" label="Holyoke Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q18351067" start="33938" end="33953" title="MGM Springfield" label="MGM Springfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q49109" start="33979" end="33991" title="Bard College" label="Bard College"/>
<link wikidata="Q54111" start="34530" end="34555" title="neoclassical architecture" label="neoclassical architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q51648748" start="34618" end="34633" title="James A. Clough" label="James A. Clough"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506858" start="35153" end="35168" title="William Whiting II" label="William Whiting"/>
<link wikidata="Q6182633" start="36067" end="36080" title="Jerome Connor" label="Jerome Connor"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="36166" end="36182" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q7069912" start="36193" end="36216" title="Nuns of the Battlefield" label="Nuns of the Battlefield"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="36298" end="36316" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q56489382" start="36335" end="36349" title="Clark W. Bryan" label="Clark W. Bryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2276678" start="36388" end="36402" title="The Republican (Springfield, Massachusetts)" label="The Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q174941" start="36425" end="36442" title="Good Housekeeping" label="Good Housekeeping"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065024" start="36760" end="36778" title="Hearst Corporation" label="Hearst Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2706276" start="36823" end="36842" title="John Clellon Holmes" label="John Clellon Holmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5574659" start="36856" end="36858" title="Go (Holmes novel)" label="Go"/>
<link wikidata="Q213457" start="36919" end="36934" title="Beat Generation" label="Beat Generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q160534" start="36974" end="36986" title="Jack Kerouac" label="Jack Kerouac"/>
<link wikidata="Q6711" start="36991" end="37005" title="Allen Ginsberg" label="Allen Ginsberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2134178" start="37077" end="37092" title="Raymond Kennedy (novelist)" label="Raymond Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6100823" start="37252" end="37270" title="Ray D&amp;#x27;Addario" label="Ray D&amp;#x27;Addario"/>
<link wikidata="Q80130" start="37298" end="37314" title="Nuremberg trials" label="Nuremberg trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q567366" start="37316" end="37330" title="William Wegman (photographer)" label="William Wegman"/>
<link wikidata="Q38965" start="37382" end="37393" title="weimaraners" label="weimaraners"/>
<link wikidata="Q1939454" start="37399" end="37412" title="Mitch Epstein" label="Mitch Epstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q7187643" start="37420" end="37431" title="photo essay" label="photo essay"/>
<link wikidata="Q338109" start="37820" end="37832" title="Tracy Kidder" label="Tracy Kidder"/>
<link wikidata="Q186286" start="38046" end="38056" title="Vaudeville" label="Vaudeville"/>
<link wikidata="Q3061289" start="38097" end="38108" title="Eva Tanguay" label="Eva Tanguay"/>
<link wikidata="Q170726" start="38590" end="38603" title="Enrico Caruso" label="Enrico Caruso"/>
<link wikidata="Q131545" start="38608" end="38621" title="Harry Houdini" label="Harry Houdini"/>
<link wikidata="Q434839" start="38623" end="38637" title="Edward Bernays" label="Edward Bernays"/>
<link wikidata="Q152520" start="38903" end="38916" title="Sophie Tucker" label="Sophie Tucker"/>
<link wikidata="Q7777564" start="38934" end="38961" title="Theatrical Syndicate" label="Theatrical Syndicate&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q6758270" start="38962" end="38971" title="Marc Klaw" label="Marc Klaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q235065" start="38994" end="39009" title="Broadway theatre" label="Broadway&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q152521" start="39010" end="39026" title="Ziegfeld Follies" label="Ziegfeld Follies"/>
<link wikidata="Q72984" start="39162" end="39173" title="Bing Crosby" label="Bing Crosby"/>
<link wikidata="Q64450" start="39178" end="39195" title="The Marx Brothers" label="The Marx Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7927557" start="39247" end="39262" title="Victory Theater" label="Victory Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q25004565" start="39284" end="39303" title="B. F. Keith Circuit" label="B. F. Keith Circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q6925145" start="39325" end="39345" title="Mountain Park (Holyoke, Massachusetts)" label="Mountain Park&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q314801" start="39414" end="39426" title="Hal Holbrook" label="Hal Holbrook"/>
<link wikidata="Q55075381" start="39516" end="39536" title="Valley Arena Gardens" label="Valley Arena Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q107008" start="39598" end="39609" title="Count Basie" label="Count Basie"/>
<link wikidata="Q4030" start="39611" end="39625" title="Duke Ellington" label="Duke Ellington"/>
<link wikidata="Q23661714" start="39627" end="39646" title="The Dorsey Brothers" label="The Dorsey Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2446255" start="39648" end="39674" title="The Glenn Miller Orchestra" label="The Glenn Miller Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q463204" start="39676" end="39692" title="Frances Langford" label="Frances Langford"/>
<link wikidata="Q273079" start="39694" end="39706" title="Cab Calloway" label="Cab Calloway"/>
<link wikidata="Q229513" start="39712" end="39724" title="Sarah Vaughn" label="Sarah Vaughn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5887072" start="39790" end="39807" title="Holyoke City Hall" label="Holyoke City Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q471154" start="39917" end="39948" title="New York Philharmonic Orchestra" label="New York Philharmonic Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2347963" start="39993" end="40007" title="Josef Stránský" label="Josef Stránský"/>
<link wikidata="Q336725" start="40025" end="40042" title="Willem Mengelberg" label="Willem Mengelberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q864369" start="40080" end="40105" title="Boston Symphony Orchestra" label="Boston Symphony Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140542" start="40197" end="40218" title="Mount Holyoke College" label="Mount Holyoke College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5887086" start="40287" end="40306" title="Holyoke High School" label="Holyoke High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q614454" start="40336" end="40351" title="Efrem Zimbalist" label="Efrem Zimbalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q15998460" start="40362" end="40380" title="Reinald Werrenrath" label="Reinald Werrenrath"/>
<link wikidata="Q312576" start="40382" end="40400" title="Berlin State Opera" label="Berlin State Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q13562128" start="40411" end="40432" title="Margarethe Arndt-Ober" label="Margarethe Arndt-Ober"/>
<link wikidata="Q275046" start="40456" end="40470" title="Ethel Leginska" label="Ethel Leginska"/>
<link wikidata="Q318354" start="40475" end="40489" title="Percy Grainger" label="Percy Grainger"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="40648" end="40696" title="Massachusetts International Festival of the Arts" label="Massachusetts International Festival of the Arts"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="40943" end="40960" title="Gateway City Arts" label="Gateway City Arts"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="41125" end="41144" title="Holyoke Turner Hall" label="Holyoke Turner Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q125398679" start="41219" end="41241" title="Holyoke Civic Symphony" label="Holyoke Civic Symphony"/>
<link wikidata="Q5887074" start="41271" end="41296" title="Holyoke Community College" label="Holyoke Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q195754" start="41454" end="41477" title="Volleyball Hall of Fame" label="Volleyball Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q8027742" start="41503" end="41516" title="Wistariahurst" label="Wistariahurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q4883692" start="42008" end="42021" title="Belle Skinner" label="Belle Skinner"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047439" start="42104" end="42153" title="Yale University Collection of Musical Instruments" label="Yale University Collection of Musical Instruments"/>
<link wikidata="Q85751972" start="42160" end="42193" title="Children&amp;#x27;s Museum at Holyoke" label="Children&amp;#x27;s Museum at Holyoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q6647504" start="42309" end="42319" title="Lite-Brite" label="Lite-Brite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500277" start="42378" end="42381" title="Pez" label="Pez"/>
<link wikidata="Q181817" start="42455" end="42477" title="St. Patrick&amp;#x27;s Day" label="St. Patrick&amp;#x27;s Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="42529" end="42542" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q18389" start="42685" end="42696" title="New England" label="New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q54869870" start="42921" end="42949" title="Holyoke Caledonian Pipe Band" label="Holyoke Caledonian Pipe Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q3085519" start="42985" end="42994" title="pipe band" label="pipe band"/>
<link wikidata="Q60769752" start="43235" end="43261" title="Holyoke Gas &amp;amp; Electric" label="Holyoke Gas &amp;amp; Electric"/>
<link wikidata="Q48989618" start="43358" end="43369" title="Holyoke Dam" label="Holyoke Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q545697" start="43576" end="43589" title="American shad" label="American shad"/>
<link wikidata="Q16205546" start="43737" end="43747" title="Alex Morse" label="Alex Morse"/>
<link wikidata="Q7676378" start="43777" end="43789" title="rainbow flag" label="rainbow flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q64214281" start="43825" end="43840" title="Gay Pride Month" label="Gay Pride Month"/>
<link wikidata="Q14715552" start="44319" end="44346" title="Holyoke Heritage State Park" label="Holyoke Heritage State Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q58351333" start="44852" end="44865" title="South Holyoke, Holyoke, Massachusetts" label="South Holyoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q11682049" start="44967" end="44987" title="Puerto Rican cuisine" label="Puerto Rican cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q195754" start="45121" end="45158" title="International Volleyball Hall of Fame" label="International Volleyball Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q313949" start="45391" end="45408" title="William G. Morgan" label="William G. Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5278630" start="45676" end="45695" title="Dinosaur Footprints" label="Dinosaur Footprints"/>
<link wikidata="Q379648" start="45749" end="45766" title="Connecticut River" label="Connecticut River"/>
<link wikidata="Q3046527" start="45769" end="45782" title="East Mountain (Hampden County, Massachusetts)" label="East Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q14715551" start="45851" end="45871" title="Holyoke Canal System" label="Holyoke Canal System"/>
<link wikidata="Q14715552" start="45874" end="45901" title="Holyoke Heritage State Park" label="Holyoke Heritage State Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5887090" start="45904" end="45929" title="Holyoke Mall at Ingleside" label="Holyoke Mall at Ingleside"/>
<link wikidata="Q5887093" start="45932" end="45954" title="Holyoke Merry-Go-Round" label="Holyoke Merry-Go-Round"/>
<link wikidata="Q6724403" start="45957" end="45974" title="Mackenzie Stadium" label="Mackenzie Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q5887063" start="45988" end="46003" title="Valley Blue Sox" label="Valley Blue Sox"/>
<link wikidata="Q7007209" start="46011" end="46049" title="New England Collegiate Baseball League" label="New England Collegiate Baseball League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1924738" start="46052" end="46077" title="Metacomet-Monadnock Trail" label="Metacomet-Monadnock Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q3322152" start="46080" end="46089" title="Mount Tom (Massachusetts)" label="Mount Tom"/>
<link wikidata="Q593487" start="46097" end="46112" title="Mount Tom Range" label="Mount Tom Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q48989618" start="46115" end="46140" title="Robert E. Barrett Fishway" label="Robert E. Barrett Fishway"/>
<link wikidata="Q48989618" start="46192" end="46203" title="Holyoke Dam" label="Holyoke Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q125146252" start="46206" end="46217" title="Scott Tower" label="Scott Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q7891142" start="46220" end="46244" title="United States Post Office–Holyoke Main" label="Holyoke U.S. Post Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q19817693" start="46365" end="46377" title="Ross Moffett" label="Ross Moffett"/>
<link wikidata="Q7927557" start="46403" end="46418" title="Victory Theater (Holyoke, Massachusetts)" label="Victory Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q8027742" start="46421" end="46434" title="Wistariahurst" label="Wistariahurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q313949" start="46508" end="46525" title="William G. Morgan" label="William G. Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1734" start="46535" end="46545" title="volleyball" label="volleyball"/>
<link wikidata="Q7291" start="46612" end="46621" title="badminton" label="badminton"/>
<link wikidata="Q157169" start="46638" end="46642" title="YMCA" label="YMCA"/>
<link wikidata="Q195754" start="46802" end="46825" title="Volleyball Hall of Fame" label="Volleyball Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q14715552" start="46837" end="46864" title="Holyoke Heritage State Park" label="Holyoke Heritage State Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="47042" end="47053" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="" start="47077" end="47108" title=":nl:BVC Holyoke" label="Belfeldse Volleybalclub Holyoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q815428" start="47113" end="47120" title="Belfeld" label="Belfeld"/>
<link wikidata="" start="47126" end="47153" title=":nl:VV Holyoke" label="Volleybalvereniging Holyoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1007162" start="47157" end="47162" title="Enter, Netherlands" label="Enter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5887063" start="47184" end="47199" title="Valley Blue Sox" label="Valley Blue Sox"/>
<link wikidata="Q7007209" start="47217" end="47255" title="New England Collegiate Baseball League" label="New England Collegiate Baseball League"/>
<link wikidata="Q6724403" start="47282" end="47299" title="Mackenzie Stadium" label="Mackenzie Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q5887063" start="47316" end="47335" title="Concord Quarry Dogs" label="Concord Quarry Dogs"/>
<link wikidata="Q6610731" start="47362" end="47388" title="collegiate summer baseball" label="collegiate summer baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q84129" start="47512" end="47524" title="minor league baseball" label="minor league"/>
<link wikidata="Q5887099" start="47580" end="47600" title="Holyoke Paperweights" label="Holyoke Paperweights"/>
<link wikidata="Q5161565" start="47608" end="47626" title="Connecticut League" label="Connecticut League"/>
<link wikidata="Q5887096" start="47650" end="47665" title="Holyoke Millers" label="Holyoke Millers"/>
<link wikidata="Q19880336" start="47669" end="47677" title="Double-A (baseball)" label="Double-A"/>
<link wikidata="Q49184" start="47731" end="47741" title="Pittsfield, Massachusetts" label="Pittsfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q4892247" start="47749" end="47766" title="Berkshire Brewers" label="Berkshire Brewers"/>
<link wikidata="Q848103" start="48085" end="48102" title="Milwaukee Brewers" label="Milwaukee Brewers"/>
<link wikidata="Q743309" start="48110" end="48127" title="California Angels" label="California Angels"/>
<link wikidata="Q3478507" start="48155" end="48174" title="Harrisburg Senators" label="Harrisburg Senators"/>
<link wikidata="Q49192" start="48339" end="48362" title="Middletown, Connecticut" label="Middletown, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q7056699" start="48368" end="48382" title="Holyoke Giants" label="Holyoke Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q7056699" start="48471" end="48493" title="North Shore Navigators" label="North Shore Navigators"/>
<link wikidata="Q49188" start="48497" end="48501" title="Lynn, Massachusetts" label="Lynn"/>
<link wikidata="Q3485763" start="48605" end="48618" title="Sixto Escobar" label="Sixto Escobar"/>
<link wikidata="Q948780" start="48748" end="48760" title="bantamweight" label="bantamweight"/>
<link wikidata="Q188362" start="48832" end="48853" title="Rocky Marciano" label="Rocky Marciano&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q55075381" start="48891" end="48911" title="Valley Arena Gardens" label="Valley Arena Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q332351" start="49034" end="49043" title="Beau Jack" label="Beau Jack"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378567" start="49045" end="49058" title="Fritzie Zivic" label="Fritzie Zivic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2393855" start="49064" end="49076" title="Tony DeMarco" label="Tony DeMarco"/>
<link wikidata="Q79031" start="49119" end="49136" title="Mike Tyson" label="Mike Tyson&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q668642" start="49329" end="49338" title="knock-out" label="knock-out"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507719" start="49377" end="49390" title="Golden Gloves" label="Golden Gloves"/>
<link wikidata="Q1528854" start="49494" end="49513" title="Vernon, Connecticut" label="Vernon, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q49158" start="49598" end="49609" title="Springfield, Massachusetts" label="Springfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q60225191" start="49708" end="49727" title="William Skinner and Sons" label="Skinner&amp;#x27;s Silk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2594452" start="49756" end="49764" title="Everlast (boxing)" label="Everlast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048525" start="49830" end="49841" title="golf course" label="golf course"/>
<link wikidata="Q25199147" start="49846" end="49864" title="Smith&amp;#x27;s Ferry, Holyoke, Massachusetts" label="Smith&amp;#x27;s Ferry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3322152" start="49887" end="49896" title="Mount Tom (Massachusetts)" label="Mount Tom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048525" start="50024" end="50045" title="golf course architect" label="golf course architect"/>
<link wikidata="Q364653" start="50046" end="50057" title="Donald Ross (golfer)" label="Donald Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q94961" start="50084" end="50097" title="Interstate 91" label="Interstate 91"/>
<link wikidata="Q3642952" start="50589" end="50616" title="Boston Athletic Association" label="Boston Athletic Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1669737" start="50835" end="50854" title="Oakley Country Club" label="Oakley Country Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q14875145" start="51100" end="51129" title="Essex Golf &amp;amp; Country Club" label="Essex Golf &amp;amp; Country Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q773802" start="51570" end="51583" title="Boston Herald" label="Boston Herald"/>
<link wikidata="Q94961" start="51769" end="51773" title="I-91" label="I-91"/>
<link wikidata="Q6484284" start="51876" end="51886" title="land trust" label="land trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q2021081" start="51928" end="51944" title="Olmsted Brothers" label="Olmsted Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q55315777" start="51970" end="51985" title="Springdale Park" label="Springdale Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q7250794" start="52195" end="52207" title="Pulaski Park (Holyoke, Massachusetts)" label="Pulaski Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q6724403" start="52306" end="52323" title="Mackenzie Stadium" label="Mackenzie Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q809889" start="52470" end="52486" title="baseball diamond" label="baseball diamond"/>
<link wikidata="Q11875349" start="52489" end="52499" title="playground" label="playground"/>
<link wikidata="Q909906" start="52504" end="52513" title="skatepark" label="skatepark"/>
<link wikidata="Q2341939" start="52515" end="52532" title="basketball courts" label="basketball courts"/>
<link wikidata="Q38516" start="52573" end="52581" title="dog park" label="dog park"/>
<link wikidata="Q55613880" start="52587" end="52606" title="Holyoke Water Works" label="Holyoke Water Works"/>
<link wikidata="Q30623078" start="52723" end="52739" title="Ashley Reservoir" label="Ashley Reservoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q97355418" start="52744" end="52768" title="Whiting Street Reservoir" label="Whiting Street Reservoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q3307200" start="52896" end="52911" title="Metacomet Ridge" label="Metacomet Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7007323" start="52944" end="52977" title="New England National Scenic Trail" label="New England National Scenic Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q308439" start="52994" end="53015" title="National Park Service" label="National Park Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761072" start="53032" end="53042" title="state park" label="state park"/>
<link wikidata="Q2543589" start="53093" end="53134" title="Department of Conservation and Recreation" label="Department of Conservation and Recreation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6924148" start="53158" end="53185" title="Mount Tom State Reservation" label="Mount Tom State Reservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q14715552" start="53208" end="53235" title="Holyoke Heritage State Park" label="Holyoke Heritage State Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5887072" start="53309" end="53318" title="Holyoke City Hall" label="City Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7770575" start="53325" end="53349" title="Trustees of Reservations" label="Trustees of Reservations"/>
<link wikidata="Q5278630" start="53404" end="53435" title="Dinosaur Footprints Reservation" label="Dinosaur Footprints Reservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6483925" start="53437" end="53455" title="Land of Providence" label="Land of Providence"/>
<link wikidata="Q6652300" start="53461" end="53480" title="Little Tom Mountain" label="Little Tom Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q14715730" start="53511" end="53529" title="Mount Tom Ski Area" label="Mount Tom Ski Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q674113" start="53662" end="53694" title="U.S. Fish &amp;amp; Wildlife Service" label="U.S. Fish &amp;amp; Wildlife Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q2923055" start="53704" end="53725" title="Boys &amp;amp; Girls Clubs of America" label="Boys &amp;amp; Girls Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q617699" start="53872" end="53882" title="Mount Snow" label="Mount Snow"/>
<link wikidata="Q186222" start="53929" end="53938" title="ski slope" label="ski slope"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308596" start="54118" end="54151" title="Mayor–council government" label="strong mayor – council government"/>
<link wikidata="Q109416284" start="55061" end="55077" title="Joshua A. Garcia" label="Joshua A. Garcia"/>
<link wikidata="Q189445" start="55550" end="55559" title="bicameral" label="bicameral"/>
<link wikidata="Q60769752" start="56311" end="56335" title="Holyoke Gas and Electric" label="Holyoke Gas and Electric"/>
<link wikidata="Q55613880" start="56344" end="56363" title="Holyoke Water Works" label="Holyoke Water Works"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494460" start="56373" end="56411" title="Massachusetts House of Representatives" label="Massachusetts House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q104179046" start="56439" end="56453" title="Patricia Duffy" label="Patricia Duffy"/>
<link wikidata="Q16218893" start="56571" end="56581" title="John Velis" label="John Velis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6784274" start="56651" end="56688" title="Massachusetts Governor&amp;#x27;s Council" label="Massachusetts Governor&amp;#x27;s Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="56734" end="56756" title="United States Congress" label="United States Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464697" start="56784" end="56796" title="Richard Neal" label="Richard Neal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6784134" start="56817" end="56829" title="Massachusetts&amp;#x27;s 1st congressional district" label="1st district"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="56835" end="56843" title="United States Senate" label="senators"/>
<link wikidata="Q434706" start="56844" end="56860" title="Elizabeth Warren" label="Elizabeth Warren"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282411" start="56865" end="56878" title="Edward Markey" label="Edward Markey"/>
<link wikidata="Q11567308" start="56957" end="56975" title="unenrolled voter" label="no political party"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="57048" end="57064" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="57133" end="57145" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q4496" start="57151" end="57162" title="Mitt Romney" label="Mitt Romney"/>
<link wikidata="Q732717" start="57396" end="57418" title="law enforcement agency" label="law enforcement agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q6503190" start="57522" end="57527" title="law enforcement agency powers" label="sworn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2075576" start="57857" end="57869" title="Massachusetts State Police" label="state police"/>
<link wikidata="Q4812273" start="58160" end="58173" title="at-risk youth" label="at-risk youth"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="58504" end="58516" title="Gang#Gang violence" label="turf battles"/>
<link wikidata="Q860447" start="58854" end="58880" title="Emergency Medical Services" label="Emergency Medical Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q180481" start="58901" end="58926" title="Private Ambulance Service" label="private ambulance company"/>
<link wikidata="Q5051238" start="58963" end="58988" title="Cataldo Ambulance Service" label="Cataldo Ambulance Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q2276678" start="59024" end="59038" title="The Republican (Springfield, Massachusetts)" label="The Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q49158" start="59055" end="59066" title="Springfield, Massachusetts" label="Springfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q5209263" start="59082" end="59105" title="Daily Hampshire Gazette" label="Daily Hampshire Gazette"/>
<link wikidata="Q49186" start="59115" end="59126" title="Northampton, Massachusetts" label="Northampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416653" start="59204" end="59223" title="newspaper of record" label="newspaper of record"/>
<link wikidata="Q5887105" start="59235" end="59262" title="Holyoke Transcript-Telegram" label="Holyoke Transcript-Telegram"/>
<link wikidata="Q7855574" start="59527" end="59546" title="Turley Publications" label="Turley Publications"/>
<link wikidata="Q5209263" start="59614" end="59637" title="Daily Hampshire Gazette" label="Daily Hampshire Gazette"/>
<link wikidata="Q55610653" start="59809" end="59822" title="El Sol Latino" label="El Sol Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q49164" start="59861" end="59868" title="Amherst, Massachusetts" label="Amherst"/>
<link wikidata="Q55616408" start="60369" end="60379" title="La Justice" label="La Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q98079048" start="60514" end="60521" title="Gwiazda (Holyoke)" label="Gwiazda"/>
<link wikidata="Q7947655" start="60695" end="60699" title="WCCH" label="WCCH"/>
<link wikidata="Q5887074" start="60701" end="60733" title="Holyoke Community College" label="Holyoke Community College&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140542" start="60749" end="60777" title="Mount Holyoke College" label="Mount Holyoke College&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q7952825" start="60778" end="60782" title="WMHC" label="WMHC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2423149" start="60786" end="60798" title="South Hadley" label="South Hadley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434484" start="60804" end="60808" title="WMUA" label="WMUA"/>
<link wikidata="Q15142" start="60812" end="60825" title="UMass Amherst" label="UMass Amherst"/>
<link wikidata="Q5110370" start="60829" end="60844" title="Christian radio" label="Christian radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7954967" start="60853" end="60857" title="WREA" label="WREA"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="60975" end="61014" title="Springfield, Massachusetts#Television" label="stations serving the Springfield market"/>
<link wikidata="Q119400" start="61058" end="61071" title="Public-access television" label="public-access"/>
<link wikidata="Q2421031" start="61223" end="61231" title="neo-noir" label="neo-noir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1740859" start="61243" end="61249" title="Malice (1993 film)" label="Malice"/>
<link wikidata="Q7760087" start="61294" end="61326" title="The Reincarnation of Peter Proud" label="The Reincarnation of Peter Proud"/>
<link wikidata="Q911699" start="61423" end="61435" title="Pumping Iron" label="Pumping Iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q6925145" start="61446" end="61459" title="Mountain Park (Holyoke, Massachusetts)" label="Mountain Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q7248060" start="61470" end="61482" title="professional bodybuilding" label="bodybuilding"/>
<link wikidata="Q5887093" start="61527" end="61549" title="Holyoke Merry-Go-Round" label="Holyoke Merry-Go-Round"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165223" start="61635" end="61646" title="Young@Heart" label="Young@Heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q55757489" start="61804" end="61826" title="Holyoke Medical Center" label="Holyoke Medical Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q7144999" start="61896" end="61914" title="The Leapfrog Group" label="The Leapfrog Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q6784252" start="62042" end="62083" title="Massachusetts Department of Public Health" label="Massachusetts Department of Public Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q464880" start="62093" end="62119" title="American Heart Association" label="American Heart Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q96400357" start="62137" end="62174" title="Providence Behavioral Health Hospital" label="Providence Behavioral Health Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q7531354" start="62324" end="62356" title="Sisters of Providence of Holyoke" label="Sisters of Providence of Holyoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q60761649" start="62461" end="62491" title="Soldiers&amp;#x27; Home in Holyoke" label="Soldiers&amp;#x27; Home in Holyoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q592576" start="62717" end="62747" title="Department of Veterans Affairs" label="Department of Veterans Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q60769752" start="62931" end="62957" title="Holyoke Gas &amp;amp; Electric" label="Holyoke Gas &amp;amp; Electric"/>
<link wikidata="Q6784277" start="63152" end="63205" title="Massachusetts Green High Performance Computing Center" label="Massachusetts Green High Performance Computing Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q873660" start="63397" end="63406" title="Internet2" label="Internet2"/>
<link wikidata="Q11371" start="63464" end="63489" title="internet service provider" label="internet service provider"/>
<link wikidata="Q6824519" start="63555" end="63567" title="Metro Center, Springfield, Massachusetts" label="Metro Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q49158" start="63568" end="63579" title="Springfield, Massachusetts" label="Springfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530924" start="63585" end="63595" title="Greenfield, Massachusetts" label="Greenfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q2437287" start="63666" end="63674" title="Leverett, Massachusetts" label="Leverett"/>
<link wikidata="Q853467" start="63708" end="63722" title="net neutrality" label="net neutrality"/>
<link wikidata="Q586034" start="63810" end="63827" title="FTTH" label="fiber-to-the-home"/>
<link wikidata="Q94247" start="64225" end="64244" title="Interstate highways" label="Interstate highways"/>
<link wikidata="Q49186" start="64291" end="64302" title="Northampton, Massachusetts" label="Northampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2414217" start="64304" end="64312" title="Hatfield, Massachusetts" label="Hatfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530924" start="64314" end="64324" title="Greenfield, Massachusetts" label="Greenfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q49158" start="64339" end="64350" title="Springfield, Massachusetts" label="Springfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q33486" start="64352" end="64360" title="Hartford" label="Hartford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650454" start="64375" end="64383" title="Chicopee, Massachusetts" label="Chicopee"/>
<link wikidata="Q49158" start="64389" end="64400" title="Springfield, Massachusetts" label="Springfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q731271" start="64439" end="64461" title="Massachusetts Turnpike" label="Massachusetts Turnpike"/>
<link wikidata="Q49179" start="64515" end="64524" title="Worcester, Massachusetts" label="Worcester"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="64529" end="64535" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q222705" start="64549" end="64560" title="Stockbridge, Massachusetts" label="Stockbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q24861" start="64566" end="64572" title="Albany, New York" label="Albany"/>
<link wikidata="Q408192" start="64574" end="64587" title="U.S. Highways" label="U.S. Highways"/>
<link wikidata="Q48977272" start="64638" end="64647" title="Ingleside, Holyoke, Massachusetts" label="Ingleside"/>
<link wikidata="Q25199147" start="64651" end="64669" title="Smith&amp;#x27;s Ferry, Holyoke, Massachusetts" label="Smith&amp;#x27;s Ferry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003303" start="64682" end="64698" title="West Springfield, Massachusetts" label="West Springfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q1988974" start="64702" end="64713" title="Easthampton, Massachusetts" label="Easthampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q49186" start="64718" end="64729" title="Northampton, Massachusetts" label="Northampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2423149" start="64748" end="64760" title="South Hadley, Massachusetts" label="South Hadley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6282819" start="64769" end="64792" title="Joseph E. Muller Bridge" label="Joseph E. Muller Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055854" start="64796" end="64820" title="Westfield, Massachusetts" label="Westfield, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q98582176" start="64823" end="64845" title="List of numbered routes in Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts highways"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650454" start="64926" end="64934" title="Chicopee, Massachusetts" label="Chicopee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2423149" start="64938" end="64950" title="South Hadley, Massachusetts" label="South Hadley"/>
<link wikidata="Q8021947" start="64959" end="64978" title="Willimansett Bridge" label="Willimansett Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7928524" start="64987" end="65010" title="Vietnam Memorial Bridge" label="Vietnam Memorial Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1988974" start="65043" end="65054" title="Easthampton, Massachusetts" label="Easthampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q593487" start="65060" end="65069" title="Mount Tom Range" label="Mount Tom"/>
<link wikidata="Q58351333" start="65127" end="65140" title="South Holyoke, Holyoke, Massachusetts" label="South Holyoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650454" start="65144" end="65152" title="Chicopee, Massachusetts" label="Chicopee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2450934" start="65157" end="65162" title="I-391" label="I-391"/>
<link wikidata="Q7196828" start="65209" end="65241" title="Pioneer Valley Transit Authority" label="Pioneer Valley Transit Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q204807" start="65421" end="65439" title="Peter Pan Buslines" label="Peter Pan Buslines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412872" start="65589" end="65598" title="Vermonter (train)" label="Vermonter"/>
<link wikidata="Q17182866" start="65618" end="65633" title="Holyoke station" label="Holyoke station"/>
<link wikidata="Q85812695" start="65678" end="65690" title="Valley Flyer" label="Valley Flyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7057580" start="65762" end="65773" title="Union Station (Northampton, Massachusetts)" label="Northampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7581099" start="65778" end="65789" title="Springfield Union Station (Massachusetts)" label="Springfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q6262459" start="65807" end="65817" title="John W. Olver Transit Center" label="Greenfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q6119589" start="65831" end="65853" title="New Haven Union Station" label="New Haven, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530924" start="65955" end="65965" title="Greenfield, Massachusetts" label="Greenfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q49145" start="65986" end="66008" title="New Haven, Connecticut" label="New Haven, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="66030" end="66043" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q23239" start="66047" end="66053" title="Amtrak" label="Amtrak"/>
<link wikidata="Q125908" start="66058" end="66078" title="Metro-North Railroad" label="Metro-North Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q55315777" start="66170" end="66180" title="Springdale, Holyoke, Massachusetts" label="Springdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q58351333" start="66182" end="66195" title="South Holyoke, Holyoke, Massachusetts" label="South Holyoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q60765020" start="66201" end="66210" title="The Flats, Holyoke, Massachusetts" label="The Flats"/>
<link wikidata="Q7196823" start="66218" end="66241" title="Pioneer Valley Railroad" label="Pioneer Valley Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q7129579" start="66263" end="66278" title="Pan Am Southern" label="Pan Am Southern"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055854" start="66324" end="66333" title="Westfield, Massachusetts" label="Westfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q1720696" start="66354" end="66365" title="Southampton, Massachusetts" label="Southampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q856783" start="66374" end="66377" title="CSX" label="CSX"/>
<link wikidata="Q14715552" start="66454" end="66481" title="Holyoke Heritage State Park" label="Holyoke Heritage State Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q315796" start="66510" end="66521" title="Santa Claus" label="Santa Train"/>
<link wikidata="Q7989534" start="66594" end="66623" title="Westover Metropolitan Airport" label="Westover Metropolitan Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q7057585" start="66628" end="66647" title="Northampton Airport" label="Northampton Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420233" start="66735" end="66764" title="Bradley International Airport" label="Bradley International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q755206" start="66774" end="66800" title="Windsor Locks, Connecticut" label="Windsor Locks, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q7962040" start="66877" end="66887" title="Walk Score" label="Walk Score"/>
<link wikidata="Q2822691" start="66902" end="66913" title="walkability" label="walkability"/>
<link wikidata="Q55631882" start="67003" end="67014" title="Rock Valley, Holyoke, Massachusetts" label="Rock Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q14715551" start="67242" end="67248" title="Holyoke Canal System" label="canals"/>
<link wikidata="Q60765020" start="67377" end="67386" title="The Flats, Holyoke, Massachusetts" label="The Flats"/>
<link wikidata="Q58351333" start="67391" end="67404" title="South Holyoke, Holyoke, Massachusetts" label="South Holyoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q14715731" start="67564" end="67581" title="Mount Tom Station" label="Mount Tom Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q25199147" start="67599" end="67617" title="Smith&amp;#x27;s Ferry, Holyoke, Massachusetts" label="Smith&amp;#x27;s Ferry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5284524" start="67901" end="67913" title="MassWildlife" label="MassWildlife"/>
<link wikidata="Q55613880" start="68034" end="68053" title="Holyoke Water Works" label="Holyoke Water Works"/>
<link wikidata="Q94961" start="68092" end="68105" title="Interstate 91" label="Interstate 91"/>
<link wikidata="Q3307200" start="68247" end="68262" title="Metacomet Ridge" label="Metacomet Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q593487" start="68267" end="68282" title="Mount Tom Range" label="Mount Tom Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q25241" start="68353" end="68364" title="vertebrates" label="vertebrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q834843" start="68758" end="68784" title="ruby-throated hummingbirds" label="ruby-throated hummingbirds"/>
<link wikidata="Q127216" start="68789" end="68800" title="bald eagles" label="bald eagles"/>
<link wikidata="Q122783" start="68843" end="68854" title="American black bear" label="black bears"/>
<link wikidata="Q35517" start="68859" end="68864" title="moose" label="moose"/>
<link wikidata="Q146551" start="69117" end="69125" title="Svaliava" label="Svaliava"/>
<link wikidata="Q170213" start="69127" end="69145" title="Zakarpattia Oblast" label="Zakarpattia Oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q213358" start="69164" end="69170" title="Tralee" label="Tralee"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="69317" end="69325" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="69327" end="69333" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="69335" end="69341" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="69414" end="69427" title="James E. Delaney" label="Mayor Delaney"/>
<link wikidata="Q6906332" start="69530" end="69544" title="Montreal Snowshoe Club" label="snowshoe clubs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3218980" start="69557" end="69578" title="Laurent-Olivier David" label="Laurent-Olivier David"/>
<link wikidata="Q486839" start="69579" end="69581" title="Member of parliament" label="MP"/>
<link wikidata="Q529612" start="69611" end="69627" title="Honoré Beaugrand" label="Honoré Beaugrand"/>
<link wikidata="Q580971" start="69657" end="69672" title="Louis Fréchette" label="Louis Fréchette"/>
<link wikidata="Q5887072" start="69852" end="69861" title="Holyoke City Hall" label="city hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q3186989" start="69915" end="69941" title="Early Franco-American newspapers" label="Franco-American newspapers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7239435" start="69989" end="70015" title="Precious Blood Church fire" label="Precious Blood Church fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q35171" start="70053" end="70072" title="President Cleveland" label="President Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q956" start="70076" end="70083" title="Beijing" label="Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q8733" start="70085" end="70095" title="Qing Dynasty" label="Qing China"/>
<link wikidata="Q11658415" start="70117" end="70128" title="Chen Jintao" label="Chen Jintao"/>
<link wikidata="Q55613880" start="70505" end="70529" title="Holyoke Water Works" label="Holyoke Reservoir System"/>
<link wikidata="Q950326" start="70562" end="70573" title="Tongmenghui" label="Tongmenghui"/>
<link wikidata="Q8733" start="70633" end="70637" title="Qing Dynasty" label="Qing"/>
<link wikidata="Q13426199" start="70642" end="70659" title="Republic of China (1912–1949)" label="Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="70736" end="70742" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q174193" start="70744" end="70787" title="United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland" label="United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q81091518" start="70851" end="70862" title="Nathan P. Avery" label="Mayor Avery"/>
<link wikidata="Q7326349" start="70864" end="70880" title="Richard Hazleton" label="Richard Hazleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q486839" start="70881" end="70883" title="Member of parliament" label="MP"/>
<link wikidata="Q7816453" start="70889" end="70899" title="Tom Kettle" label="Tom Kettle"/>
<link wikidata="Q486839" start="70900" end="70902" title="Member of parliament" label="MP"/>
<link wikidata="Q2021987" start="70909" end="70926" title="Irish nationalist" label="Irish nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7467819" start="70927" end="70936" title="Irish Home Rule movement" label="home-rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q517372" start="70977" end="70986" title="Irish republicanism" label="the cause"/>
<link wikidata="Q7401414" start="71058" end="71087" title="Saint Jerome High School" label="Saint Jerome&amp;#x27;s Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1311653" start="71424" end="71449" title="Irish Parliamentary Party" label="Irish Parliamentary Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q286407" start="71479" end="71496" title="Apremont-la-Forêt" label="Apremont-la-Forêt"/>
<link wikidata="Q12631" start="71498" end="71503" title="Meuse (department)" label="Meuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="71534" end="71545" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q4546540" start="71577" end="71591" title="104th Infantry" label="104th Infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061108" start="71630" end="71640" title="waterworks" label="waterworks"/>
<link wikidata="Q785952" start="71642" end="71653" title="public bath" label="public bath"/>
<link wikidata="Q4883692" start="71706" end="71719" title="Belle Skinner" label="Belle Skinner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055854" start="72009" end="72018" title="Westfield, Massachusetts" label="Westfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q41211" start="72022" end="72030" title="San Juan, Puerto Rico" label="San Juan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183" start="72032" end="72043" title="Puerto Rico" label="Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q40178187" start="72067" end="72082" title="Hurricane Maria" label="Hurricane Maria"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043617" start="72328" end="72345" title="Carmen Yulín Cruz" label="Carmen Yulín Cruz"/>
<link wikidata="Q16205546" start="72355" end="72365" title="Alex Morse" label="Alex Morse"/>
<link wikidata="Q40178187" start="72552" end="72567" title="Hurricane Maria" label="Hurricane Maria"/>
<link wikidata="Q6628566" start="72604" end="72639" title="List of mill towns in Massachusetts" label="List of mill towns in Massachusetts"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="116800" wikidata="Q2302452" url="?curid=116800" title="Ludlow, Massachusetts">
<text>Ludlow is a New England town in Hampden County, Massachusetts, United States. The population was 21,002 as of the 2020 census, and it is considered part of the Springfield Metropolitan Statistical Area. Located just northeast of Springfield across the Chicopee River, it is one of the city&#x27;s suburbs. It has a sizable and visible Portuguese and Polish community.

==History==
The Indigenous people along the Chicopee River, including modern-day Ludlow, were Algonquian speaking peoples. Though records are incomplete, the first inhabitants were likely the Nipmuc or Pocomtuc tribes. During King Philip’s War (1675–1676), British settlers forced a band of Indigenous people, led by Roaring Thunder, to jump to the water of the Chicopee River to escape their attackers (this place has since been called Indian Leap).

Although plans were drawn up for settlement as early as 1685, within the original boundaries of Springfield, Massachusetts, the British first settled in Ludlow in 1751 as Stony Hill Parish. However, the town was later renamed Ludlow and incorporated as a separate entity in 1774, just before the breakout of the American Revolution. For much of its early history the town was agrarian and today many of Ludlow&#x27;s street names are derived from the names of these farming families (e.g. Chapin Street, Miller Street, Alden Street, Fuller Street). Ludlow was home to many sawmills and gristmills, utilizing the power from several sources of water nearby, the Chicopee River, Broad Brook, Higher Brook, and Stony Brook. Before the Civil War, the town began to develop into a mill town. This included the manufacturing of glass bottles by the many glassware companies, including John Sikes. Then Governor of Massachusetts Bay Colony, Thomas Hutchinson renamed the town from the District of Stony Hill to Ludlow. The town of Ludlow was possibly named after Roger Ludlow, one of the founders of the Connecticut Colony or named after Ludlow, a town in England.

In 1868, the largest mill was opened and operated by the Ludlow Company (The Ludlow Clock Tower is depicted on the town seal), who produced jute yarns, twine, and webbing. This company helped shape the town by providing housing, a library, schools, playgrounds, and even a clubhouse for the increasingly diverse community. In the 20th century, this company moved to India and is now known as Ludlow Jute and Specialties of Mumbai.

In the early 20th century Ludlow developed from a mill town into a streetcar suburb of Springfield, Massachusetts, with a trolley line running over the bridge from Indian Orchard. Ludlow also had two railroads that traversed the town: the Springfield, Athol and North-eastern Railroad and the Hamden Railroad. The Hamden Railroad was closed and Interstate 90 was constructed over its former tracks. The Springfield, Athol, and Northeastern Railroad was reduced in length in the late 1930s as a result of the creation of Quabbin Reservoir. The train station for this line was at the corner of Winsor Street and Sewall Street and was the last station from Boston when the railroad closed in the 1950s. The train station was demolished in 1960. In 1981, the Stony Brook Power Plant was constructed in the town providing 517 Megawatts of electricity to 24 municipalities. In 1983, the plant became the first combined-cycle power plant in Massachusetts.

Ludlow&#x27;s population boomed in the 1950s with the creation of Interstate 90, known in Massachusetts as the Massachusetts Turnpike. John F. Thompson, who was Speaker of the House of Representatives in the Massachusetts General Court at the time, was influential in gaining an exit on the Turnpike for Ludlow (now Exit 54, formerly 7) and subsequently the Turnpike influenced the growth of Ludlow as a suburb of Springfield. Since the 1950s, the development of numerous subdivisions has added to Ludlow&#x27;s growth.

==Geography==
According to the United States Census Bureau, the town has a total area of , of which are land and (3.83%) is water. Ludlow is bordered by Chicopee on the west, Granby on the north, Belchertown on the northeast, Palmer on the east, Wilbraham on the south, and Springfield on the southwest.

==Demographics==

As of the 2000 United States census, there were 21,209 people living in the town. The population density was . The racial makeup of the city was 95.78% White, 2.19% African American, 0.27% Native American, 0.68% Asian, 0.03% Pacific Islander, and 1.09% from other races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 6.47% of the population.

==Culture==

Portuguese-Americans make up 21% of the population of the town. The Portuguese church Our Lady of Fatima puts on an annual Festa, which is one of the most significant cultural events for Portuguese-Americans in the country. Ludlow is also home to many who are of Polish and French Canadian descent. Soccer is an extremely popular sport in Ludlow. The town&#x27;s high school soccer team is the most dominant in Western Mass and has been ranked in the top 20 high school programs nationally by the NSCAA and has won many state championships as well, including the most recent one in 2018. The town is also home to the amateur Gremio Lusitano, and the Western Mass Pioneers and Western Mass Lady Pioneers professional soccer teams. The Pioneers play in the USL Second Division while the Lady Pioneers compete in the USL W-League. Both teams play their home games at Lusitano Stadium in Ludlow. In 1996, the National Soccer Hall of Fame added Ludlow to its soccer history display.

==Government==

Ludlow is governed by a representative town meeting, its legislative body, and an executive body made up of a five-person Board of Selectmen and a town administrator. Fifteen town meeting representatives are elected to three-year terms from each of the town&#x27;s six precincts. An additional twenty representatives at-large come from the Board of Selectmen, moderator, town clerk, treasurer, collector, counsel, highway surveyor, and the chair of any board or commission established in the town. From incorporation until 1930, the town was governed by an open town meeting and Board of Selectmen.

==Education==

The town is served by two public elementary schools, East Street School and Harris Brook Elementary School. Previously students attended elementary school based on their residence, but starting with the 2009–2010 school year a reorganization plan took effect in which preschool, Kindergarten and First Grade attend East Street, and grades 2–5 attend Harris Brook. There is one public middle school, Paul R. Baird Middle School, and Ludlow High School is the town&#x27;s only public high school.

The town also features St. John the Baptist, a private school serving grades K–8 affiliated with St. Elizabeth Parish. The nearest vocational high school is Pathfinder High School in Palmer.

The nearest community colleges are Springfield Technical Community College and Holyoke Community College. The nearest state universities are the University of Massachusetts Amherst and Westfield State University. The nearest private colleges from the center of Ludlow are Western New England University, American International College, and Springfield College, all in Springfield, as well as Our Lady of the Elms College in Chicopee.

==Transportation==

Ludlow is located at exit 54 on I-90, known as the Massachusetts Turnpike. State Highway 21 connects Ludlow to Springfield and Belchertown, and there are local bus routes to Springfield.

Bradley International Airport is 23 miles away and Logan International Airport is 77 miles away in Boston. There are bus stops along Center St., Winsor St. and East St. that connect Ludlow to Springfield.

The town once had a train station and almost featured two railroads. The first railroad was the Springfield, Athol and North-eastern Railroad which connected between Boston and New York. There was a spur of the railroad going to Athol but was cut off by the formation of the Quabbin Reservoir in the late 1930s. Ludlow was the last stop until 1960 when the train station shut down. The train later shut down shortly thereafter. The second railroad was an unopened bypass for the Springfield and Albany Railroad called the Hampden Bypass. It was built in the 1910s but the funding collapsed and never opened. The at grade was later used as the Massachusetts Turnpike from the Chicopee border to the Minnechaog Mountain curve about where Miller and East streets are today and continued onto Palmer. Several of the concrete structures still remain in the less populated areas of Ludlow.
* Chester W. Chapin (1798–1883), businessman and a Massachusetts state representative
* Nicole Fiorentino (born 1979), bass guitarist for the band Smashing Pumpkins
* Gabriel Gonzaga (born 1979), UFC fighter
* Dean Lombardi (born 1958), former general manager of the Los Angeles Kings and the San Jose Sharks of the NHL
* Tom Matera (born 1981), World Wrestling Entertainment star, known as Antonio Thomas
* William D. Mullins (1931–1986), member of the Massachusetts House of Representatives and baseball player
* Mike Mushok (born 1970), guitarist from the rock band Staind
* Gretchen Palmer (born 1961), actress
* Fred Pereira (born 1954), professional soccer player
* Elisha K. Root (1808–1865), industrialist and inventor of the die-casting technique
* John F. Thompson (1920–1965), Massachusetts state representative who served as House Speaker

==See also==
* List of mill towns in Massachusetts

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2302452" start="0" end="6" title="Ludlow, Massachusetts" label="Ludlow"/>
<link wikidata="Q18389" start="12" end="23" title="New England" label="New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q54160" start="32" end="61" title="Hampden County, Massachusetts" label="Hampden County, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="119" end="125" title="2020 United States Census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q7580900" start="172" end="201" title="Springfield metropolitan area, Massachusetts" label="Metropolitan Statistical Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q49158" start="229" end="240" title="Springfield, Massachusetts" label="Springfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q5096490" start="252" end="266" title="Chicopee River" label="Chicopee River"/>
<link wikidata="Q188509" start="297" end="304" title="suburbs" label="suburbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5096490" start="413" end="427" title="Chicopee River" label="Chicopee River"/>
<link wikidata="Q28092" start="463" end="490" title="Algonquin_language" label="Algonquian speaking peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q541788" start="561" end="567" title="Nipmuc" label="Nipmuc"/>
<link wikidata="Q1789087" start="571" end="579" title="Pocomtuc" label="Pocomtuc"/>
<link wikidata="Q862257" start="595" end="612" title="King Philip’s War" label="King Philip’s War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5096490" start="731" end="745" title="Chicopee River" label="Chicopee River"/>
<link wikidata="Q49158" start="917" end="943" title="Springfield, Massachusetts" label="Springfield, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q192769" start="1133" end="1152" title="American Revolution" label="American Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="1552" end="1561" title="American Civil War" label="Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4012861" start="1596" end="1605" title="mill town" label="mill town"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191350" start="1728" end="1752" title="Massachusetts Bay Colony" label="Massachusetts Bay Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1892842" start="1754" end="1771" title="Thomas Hutchinson (governor)" label="Thomas Hutchinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7358553" start="1876" end="1888" title="Roger Ludlow" label="Roger Ludlow"/>
<link wikidata="Q951500" start="1917" end="1935" title="Connecticut Colony" label="Connecticut Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q839811" start="1951" end="1957" title="Ludlow" label="Ludlow"/>
<link wikidata="Q6698844" start="2056" end="2074" title="Ludlow Clock Tower" label="Ludlow Clock Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="2345" end="2350" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q7623078" start="2478" end="2494" title="streetcar suburb" label="streetcar suburb"/>
<link wikidata="Q49158" start="2498" end="2524" title="Springfield, Massachusetts" label="Springfield, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q6021180" start="2575" end="2589" title="Indian Orchard, Massachusetts" label="Indian Orchard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7580889" start="2650" end="2695" title="Springfield, Athol and North-eastern Railroad" label="Springfield, Athol and North-eastern Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124827" start="2931" end="2948" title="Quabbin Reservoir" label="Quabbin Reservoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="3065" end="3071" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q25004603" start="3166" end="3189" title="Stony Brook Power Plant" label="Stony Brook Power Plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q25236" start="3232" end="3241" title="Megawatts" label="Megawatts"/>
<link wikidata="Q900729" start="3315" end="3329" title="combined-cycle" label="combined-cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q731271" start="3472" end="3494" title="Massachusetts Turnpike" label="Massachusetts Turnpike"/>
<link wikidata="Q6232566" start="3496" end="3512" title="John F. Thompson (politician)" label="John F. Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1453540" start="3569" end="3596" title="Massachusetts General Court" label="Massachusetts General Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q188509" start="3765" end="3771" title="suburb" label="suburb"/>
<link wikidata="Q449111" start="3833" end="3845" title="Subdivision (land)" label="subdivisions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650454" start="4035" end="4043" title="Chicopee, MA" label="Chicopee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2416252" start="4057" end="4063" title="Granby, MA" label="Granby"/>
<link wikidata="Q2414308" start="4078" end="4089" title="Belchertown, MA" label="Belchertown"/>
<link wikidata="Q2076150" start="4108" end="4114" title="Palmer, MA" label="Palmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q912750" start="4128" end="4137" title="Wilbraham, Massachusetts" label="Wilbraham"/>
<link wikidata="Q49158" start="4156" end="4167" title="Springfield, MA" label="Springfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q166998" start="4215" end="4240" title="2000 United States census" label="2000 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4357" end="4362" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4370" end="4386" title="African American (U.S. Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4394" end="4409" title="Native American (U.S. Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4417" end="4422" title="Asian (U.S. Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4430" end="4446" title="Pacific Islander (U.S. Census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4463" end="4474" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4476" end="4484" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4488" end="4494" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q3267812" start="4551" end="4570" title="Portuguese-American" label="Portuguese-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="4850" end="4856" title="Soccer" label="Soccer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5607336" start="5176" end="5191" title="Gremio Lusitano" label="Gremio Lusitano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045202" start="5201" end="5222" title="Western Mass Pioneers" label="Western Mass Pioneers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988059" start="5227" end="5253" title="Western Mass Lady Pioneers" label="Western Mass Lady Pioneers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="5267" end="5273" title="soccer" label="soccer"/>
<link wikidata="Q649026" start="5306" end="5325" title="USL Second Division" label="USL Second Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q1574327" start="5365" end="5377" title="USL W-League (1995–2015)" label="USL W-League"/>
<link wikidata="Q14715683" start="5415" end="5431" title="Lusitano Stadium" label="Lusitano Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134590" start="5456" end="5484" title="National Soccer Hall of Fame" label="National Soccer Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314261" start="5570" end="5597" title="representative town meeting" label="representative town meeting"/>
<link wikidata="Q4931397" start="5668" end="5686" title="Board of Selectmen" label="Board of Selectmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q455752" start="6103" end="6120" title="open town meeting" label="open town meeting"/>
<link wikidata="Q126807" start="6440" end="6452" title="Kindergarten" label="Kindergarten"/>
<link wikidata="Q8563383" start="6457" end="6468" title="First Grade" label="First Grade"/>
<link wikidata="Q6698853" start="6593" end="6611" title="Ludlow High School" label="Ludlow High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q322563" start="6788" end="6810" title="vocational school" label="vocational high school"/>
<link wikidata="Q2076150" start="6840" end="6846" title="Palmer, Massachusetts" label="Palmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336920" start="6861" end="6879" title="community colleges" label="community colleges"/>
<link wikidata="Q7581060" start="6884" end="6923" title="Springfield Technical Community College" label="Springfield Technical Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5887074" start="6928" end="6953" title="Holyoke Community College" label="Holyoke Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075106" start="6967" end="6985" title="state universities" label="state universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q15142" start="6994" end="7029" title="University of Massachusetts Amherst" label="University of Massachusetts Amherst"/>
<link wikidata="Q14438080" start="7034" end="7060" title="Westfield State University" label="Westfield State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988102" start="7121" end="7151" title="Western New England University" label="Western New England University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3695722" start="7153" end="7183" title="American International College" label="American International College"/>
<link wikidata="Q2809940" start="7189" end="7208" title="Springfield College" label="Springfield College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5366900" start="7241" end="7269" title="Our Lady of the Elms College" label="Our Lady of the Elms College"/>
<link wikidata="Q2483981" start="7379" end="7395" title="Massachusetts Route 21" label="State Highway 21"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420233" start="7492" end="7521" title="Bradley International Airport" label="Bradley International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q671475" start="7543" end="7570" title="Logan International Airport" label="Logan International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q7580889" start="7794" end="7839" title="Springfield, Athol and North-eastern Railroad" label="Springfield, Athol and North-eastern Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124827" start="7973" end="7990" title="Quabbin Reservoir" label="Quabbin Reservoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q731271" start="8341" end="8363" title="Massachusetts Turnpike" label="Massachusetts Turnpike"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070746" start="8584" end="8601" title="Chester W. Chapin" label="Chester W. Chapin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494460" start="8633" end="8667" title="Massachusetts House of Representatives" label="Massachusetts state representative"/>
<link wikidata="Q980374" start="8670" end="8687" title="Nicole Fiorentino" label="Nicole Fiorentino"/>
<link wikidata="Q184217" start="8729" end="8746" title="Smashing Pumpkins" label="Smashing Pumpkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q2421065" start="8749" end="8764" title="Gabriel Gonzaga" label="Gabriel Gonzaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1181097" start="8792" end="8805" title="Dean Lombardi" label="Dean Lombardi"/>
<link wikidata="Q203008" start="8849" end="8866" title="Los Angeles Kings" label="Los Angeles Kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q206381" start="8875" end="8890" title="San Jose Sharks" label="San Jose Sharks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215892" start="8898" end="8901" title="National Hockey League" label="NHL"/>
<link wikidata="Q2249866" start="8904" end="8914" title="Tom Matera" label="Tom Matera"/>
<link wikidata="Q105269181" start="8990" end="9008" title="William D. Mullins" label="William D. Mullins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494460" start="9036" end="9074" title="Massachusetts House of Representatives" label="Massachusetts House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q9297280" start="9097" end="9108" title="Mike Mushok" label="Mike Mushok"/>
<link wikidata="Q266496" start="9151" end="9157" title="Staind" label="Staind"/>
<link wikidata="Q5607712" start="9160" end="9175" title="Gretchen Palmer" label="Gretchen Palmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5496057" start="9199" end="9211" title="Fred Pereira" label="Fred Pereira"/>
<link wikidata="Q5361779" start="9254" end="9268" title="Elisha K. Root" label="Elisha K. Root"/>
<link wikidata="Q6232566" start="9340" end="9356" title="John F. Thompson (politician)" label="John F. Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494460" start="9370" end="9404" title="Massachusetts House of Representatives" label="Massachusetts state representative"/>
<link wikidata="Q6628566" start="9449" end="9484" title="List of mill towns in Massachusetts" label="List of mill towns in Massachusetts"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="116801" wikidata="Q2415925" url="?curid=116801" title="Monson, Massachusetts">
<text>Monson is a town in Hampden County, Massachusetts, United States. The population was 8,150 at the 2020 census. It is part of the Springfield, Massachusetts Metropolitan Statistical Area.

The census-designated place of Monson Center lies at the center of the town.

== History ==
The first colonist to settle in present-day Monson was Ian Farry, who in 1657 was granted of land by the Massachusetts General Court. He built a tavern along the Bay Path, which was the primary route from Springfield to Boston, and which ran through the northern part of Monson. It was the first house built between Springfield and Brookfield, but the tavern was short-lived; within a year or two, Fellows abandoned it for fear of attacks from local Native Americans.

The first permanent settlers arrived in 1715, and in 1735 the town of Brimfield was incorporated, and included present-day Monson within its boundaries. The western part of the town later separated, and was incorporated as the town of Monson in 1775. The town was named after Sir John Monson, president of the British Board of Trade and a friend of Massachusetts governor Thomas Pownall.

In the 19th century and early 20th century, mills were built along the Chicopee Brook, which runs south to north through the center of the town. One of the most successful industries during this time was the woolen mills, which were operated by industrialists such as Joseph L. Reynolds, Dwight W. Ellis, C. W. Holmes, and S. F. Cushman. In addition, Heiman &amp; Lichten operated a successful straw and felt goods factory on Main Street.

Monson was also known for its granite quarries; the first quarry was opened in 1809, east of present-day Margaret Street. It was used for a short time by the federal government to supply stone for the Springfield Armory, and was later sold to Rufus Flynt, who opened a commercial quarry on the site in 1825 with five employees. By 1900, the quarry was operating under the name of W.N. Flynt Granite Co., and had expanded to almost 500 employees. The quarry continued in operation until about 1935.

On June 1, 2011, an EF3 tornado crossed through the center of the town, causing $11.9 million in property damage, which included 238 damaged buildings, 77 of which were damaged beyond repair. Several town landmarks were damaged or destroyed: the First Church of Monson and the Unitarian Universalist Church buildings each lost their steeple, the historic 1900 Holmes Gymnasium, once part of Monson Academy, was destroyed, and the town office building, built in 1925 as the first Monson High School, was damaged beyond repair and demolished in 2013.

==Geography==
Monson is in eastern Hampden County, crossed by Massachusetts Route 32, which leads north from the center of town to Palmer and south to the Connecticut border. Springfield is to the west, Worcester is to the northeast, and Hartford, Connecticut, is to the southwest.

According to the United States Census Bureau, the town has a total area of , of which are land and , or 1.45%, are water. The majority of the town (the center part) is drained to the north by Chicopee Brook, a tributary of the Quaboag River. Small areas of the northeastern part of town flow to Foskett Mill Stream, a tributary of the Quaboag. The Quaboag flows northwest to the Chicopee River, a west-flowing tributary of the Connecticut River. The northwestern portion of Monson drains to Twelvemile Brook, a tributary of the Chicopee River, and the southwest portion of town is drained by the Scantic River, which flows directly to the Connecticut in the state of Connecticut. The southernmost part of town is outside the Connecticut River watershed, draining south to the Middle River in Connecticut, which flows via the Willimantic and Shetucket rivers to the Thames River, reaching Long Island Sound at New London, Connecticut.

Monson is bordered on the north by Palmer, on the east by Brimfield and Wales, on the south by Stafford, Connecticut, and on the west by Hampden and Wilbraham. The Quaboag River forms the eastern half of the northern border of town, and U.S. Route 20 forms the western half of the northern border.

==Demographics==

As of the census of 2000, there were 8,359 people, 3,095 households, and 2,203 families residing in the town. The population density was . There were 3,213 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the town was 97.69% White, 0.67% African American, 0.23% Native American, 0.31% Asian, 0.01% Pacific Islander, 0.23% from other races, and 0.86% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 1.17% of the population.

There were 3,095 households, out of which 34.2% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 57.9% were married couples living together, 9.4% had a female householder with no husband present, and 28.8% were non-families. 22.8% of all households were made up of individuals, and 9.1% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.63 and the average family size was 3.12.

In the town, the population was spread out, with 25.2% under the age of 18, 6.7% from 18 to 24, 31.3% from 25 to 44, 25.8% from 45 to 64, and 10.9% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 38 years. For every 100 females, there were 97.4 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 95.5 males.

The median income for a household in the town was $52,030, and the median income for a family was $58,607. Males had a median income of $41,373 versus $30,545 for females. The per capita income for the town was $22,519. About 5.2% of families and 5.6% of the population were below the poverty line, including 6.8% of those under age 18 and 3.7% of those age 65 or over.

==Education==

The town of Monson has three public schools: Quarry Hill Community School for preschool and kindergarten; Granite Valley Middle School for grades one through six; and Monson High School for grades seven through twelve. As of the 2017–2018 school year, 929 students collectively are enrolled in the Monson Public Schools. They are a slightly below average school according to state MCAS test scores.`

The town of Monson was formerly the site of Monson Academy, a private school that was founded in 1804 and opened in 1806. In 1847, the academy became the first American school to enroll Chinese students. Among its graduates were abolitionist and suffragist Lucy Stone, and two United States Supreme Court justices: William Strong and Henry Billings Brown. Notable faculty members included US Secretary of Labor Frances Perkins, and Louise Torrey Taft, the mother of President William Howard Taft. In 1971, the academy merged with Wilbraham Academy to form Wilbraham &amp; Monson Academy.

==Transportation==
Two numbered highways pass through Monson: Massachusetts Route 32, which enters Monson from Connecticut, forms Main Street in the downtown area, and is the main north-south thoroughfare in the town. US Route 20 forms part of the northern border with Palmer, and also cuts across the extreme northeastern corner of the town.

The New England Central Railroad passes north-south through the town, roughly parallel to Route 32. No passenger service is available. The Boston &amp; Albany Railroad line, now operated by CSX, travels across the northwestern part of the town.

==Notable people==

* Allan Bérubé (1946–2007), historian, activist, and author
* Samuel Robbins Brown (1810–1880), missionary
* George Stewart Miller (1884–1971), educator
* Effie Maud Aldrich Morrison, instigator for the plan of the first senior housing project 
* Arthur D. Norcross (1848–1916), musician and politician
* Erasmus D. Peck (1808–1876), Congressman
* Albert G. Riddle (1816–1902), Congressman
* Sal Salvador (1928–1999), jazz musician
* James Hayden Tufts (1862-1942), philosopher
* Eliphalet Trask (1806-1890), Lieutenant Governor of Massachusetts
* Henry Martin Tupper (1831–1893), minister and educator
* William L. Utley (1814–1887), military officer and politician
* Brian Burrows (1983-present), professional fisherman

==Notable places and mills==

* Conant Brook Dam
* First Church of Monson
* W.N. Flynt Granite Co.
* Memorial Town Hall
* Monson High School
* Peaked Mountain
* William Norcross House
* Omega Metal Processing
* S. F. Cushman Woolen Mill
* Monson Bellmen
* Monson Developmental Center

==See also==
* List of mill towns in Massachusetts

==References==

==External links==

*Town of Monson official website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2415925" start="0" end="6" title="Monson, Massachusetts" label="Monson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2154459" start="12" end="16" title="New England town" label="town"/>
<link wikidata="Q54160" start="20" end="34" title="Hampden County, Massachusetts" label="Hampden County"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="36" end="49" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="98" end="109" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q49158" start="129" end="155" title="Springfield, Massachusetts" label="Springfield, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7580900" start="156" end="185" title="Springfield metropolitan area, Massachusetts" label="Metropolitan Statistical Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q498162" start="192" end="215" title="census-designated place" label="census-designated place"/>
<link wikidata="Q6902604" start="219" end="232" title="Monson Center, Massachusetts" label="Monson Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1453540" start="385" end="412" title="Massachusetts General Court" label="Massachusetts General Court"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="442" end="450" title="Bay Path" label="Bay Path"/>
<link wikidata="Q49158" start="485" end="496" title="Springfield, Massachusetts" label="Springfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="500" end="506" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q2536826" start="612" end="622" title="Brookfield, Massachusetts" label="Brookfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q2273666" start="819" end="828" title="Brimfield, Massachusetts" label="Brimfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q6249170" start="1025" end="1040" title="John Monson, 1st Baron Monson" label="Sir John Monson"/>
<link wikidata="Q887543" start="1059" end="1081" title="Board of Trade" label="British Board of Trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q887117" start="1098" end="1120" title="Governor of Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q12066351" start="1121" end="1135" title="Thomas Pownall" label="Thomas Pownall"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1209" end="1223" title="Chicopee Brook" label="Chicopee Brook"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193204" start="1779" end="1797" title="Springfield Armory" label="Springfield Armory"/>
<link wikidata="Q8564142" start="1958" end="1980" title="W.N. Flynt Granite Co." label="W.N. Flynt Granite Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q4621984" start="2097" end="2108" title="2011 New England tornado outbreak" label="EF3 tornado"/>
<link wikidata="Q5452729" start="2323" end="2345" title="First Church of Monson" label="First Church of Monson"/>
<link wikidata="Q16970295" start="2689" end="2711" title="Massachusetts Route 32" label="Massachusetts Route 32"/>
<link wikidata="Q2076150" start="2758" end="2764" title="Palmer, Massachusetts" label="Palmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q779" start="2782" end="2793" title="Connecticut" label="Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q49158" start="2802" end="2813" title="Springfield, Massachusetts" label="Springfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q49179" start="2830" end="2839" title="Worcester, Massachusetts" label="Worcester"/>
<link wikidata="Q33486" start="2865" end="2886" title="Hartford, Connecticut" label="Hartford, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="2927" end="2954" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q7268229" start="3137" end="3150" title="Quaboag River" label="Quaboag River"/>
<link wikidata="Q5096490" start="3289" end="3303" title="Chicopee River" label="Chicopee River"/>
<link wikidata="Q379648" start="3337" end="3354" title="Connecticut River" label="Connecticut River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430091" start="3506" end="3519" title="Scantic River" label="Scantic River"/>
<link wikidata="Q8021953" start="3735" end="3746" title="Willimantic River" label="Willimantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7495683" start="3751" end="3760" title="Shetucket River" label="Shetucket"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246856" start="3775" end="3787" title="Thames River (Connecticut)" label="Thames River"/>
<link wikidata="Q867460" start="3798" end="3815" title="Long Island Sound" label="Long Island Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q49146" start="3819" end="3842" title="New London, Connecticut" label="New London, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q2076150" start="3880" end="3886" title="Palmer, Massachusetts" label="Palmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2273666" start="3903" end="3912" title="Brimfield, Massachusetts" label="Brimfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q2316327" start="3917" end="3922" title="Wales, Massachusetts" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q2305713" start="3940" end="3961" title="Stafford, Connecticut" label="Stafford, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q594980" start="3982" end="3989" title="Hampden, Massachusetts" label="Hampden"/>
<link wikidata="Q912750" start="3994" end="4003" title="Wilbraham, Massachusetts" label="Wilbraham"/>
<link wikidata="Q2483980" start="4082" end="4095" title="U.S. Route 20 in Massachusetts" label="U.S. Route 20"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="4172" end="4178" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4400" end="4405" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4413" end="4429" title="African American (U.S. Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4437" end="4452" title="Native American (U.S. Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4460" end="4465" title="Asian (U.S. Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4473" end="4489" title="Pacific Islander (U.S. Census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4502" end="4513" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4549" end="4557" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4561" end="4567" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="4721" end="4736" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="5531" end="5548" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="5640" end="5652" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5786" end="5814" title="Quarry Hill Community School" label="Quarry Hill Community School"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5847" end="5875" title="Granite Valley Middle School" label="Granite Valley Middle School"/>
<link wikidata="Q6902602" start="5908" end="5926" title="Monson High School" label="Monson High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q6784228" start="6122" end="6126" title="Massachusetts Comprehensive Assessment System" label="MCAS"/>
<link wikidata="Q452281" start="6399" end="6409" title="Lucy Stone" label="Lucy Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="6419" end="6446" title="United States Supreme Court" label="United States Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q2580679" start="6457" end="6471" title="William Strong (Pennsylvania judge)" label="William Strong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1606519" start="6476" end="6496" title="Henry Billings Brown" label="Henry Billings Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q967750" start="6531" end="6552" title="US Secretary of Labor" label="US Secretary of Labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q254478" start="6553" end="6568" title="Frances Perkins" label="Frances Perkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1116352" start="6574" end="6592" title="Louise Taft" label="Louise Torrey Taft"/>
<link wikidata="Q35648" start="6618" end="6637" title="William Howard Taft" label="William Howard Taft"/>
<link wikidata="Q8000134" start="6698" end="6728" title="Wilbraham &amp;amp; Monson Academy" label="Wilbraham &amp;amp; Monson Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q16970295" start="6793" end="6815" title="Massachusetts Route 32" label="Massachusetts Route 32"/>
<link wikidata="Q407881" start="6949" end="6960" title="US Route 20" label="US Route 20"/>
<link wikidata="Q833689" start="7079" end="7107" title="New England Central Railroad" label="New England Central Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q12053340" start="7214" end="7242" title="Boston &amp;amp; Albany Railroad" label="Boston &amp;amp; Albany Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q856783" start="7265" end="7268" title="CSX" label="CSX"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518086" start="7343" end="7355" title="Allan Bérubé" label="Allan Bérubé"/>
<link wikidata="Q2565791" start="7403" end="7423" title="Samuel Robbins Brown" label="Samuel Robbins Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q5544856" start="7450" end="7471" title="George Stewart Miller" label="George Stewart Miller"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7496" end="7523" title="Effie Maud Aldrich Morrison" label="Effie Maud Aldrich Morrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q4798402" start="7588" end="7606" title="Arthur D. Norcross" label="Arthur D. Norcross"/>
<link wikidata="Q5384947" start="7646" end="7661" title="Erasmus D. Peck" label="Erasmus D. Peck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418938" start="7689" end="7705" title="Albert G. Riddle" label="Albert G. Riddle"/>
<link wikidata="Q727283" start="7733" end="7745" title="Sal Salvador" label="Sal Salvador"/>
<link wikidata="Q6135759" start="7775" end="7793" title="James Hayden Tufts" label="James Hayden Tufts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5361292" start="7821" end="7836" title="Eliphalet Trask" label="Eliphalet Trask"/>
<link wikidata="Q5725522" start="7889" end="7908" title="Henry Martin Tupper" label="Henry Martin Tupper"/>
<link wikidata="Q8014225" start="7946" end="7962" title="William L. Utley" label="William L. Utley"/>
<link wikidata="Q90796622" start="8010" end="8023" title="Brian Burrows" label="Brian Burrows"/>
<link wikidata="Q14715443" start="8096" end="8112" title="Conant Brook Dam" label="Conant Brook Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q5452729" start="8115" end="8137" title="First Church of Monson" label="First Church of Monson"/>
<link wikidata="Q8564142" start="8140" end="8162" title="W.N. Flynt Granite Co." label="W.N. Flynt Granite Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q6815534" start="8165" end="8183" title="Memorial Town Hall" label="Memorial Town Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q6902602" start="8186" end="8204" title="Monson High School" label="Monson High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7157880" start="8207" end="8222" title="Peaked Mountain (Massachusetts)" label="Peaked Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016166" start="8225" end="8247" title="William Norcross House" label="William Norcross House"/>
<link wikidata="Q7090002" start="8250" end="8272" title="Omega Metal Processing" label="Omega Metal Processing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7387471" start="8275" end="8300" title="S. F. Cushman Woolen Mill" label="S. F. Cushman Woolen Mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q6902598" start="8320" end="8347" title="Monson Developmental Center" label="Monson Developmental Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q6628566" start="8364" end="8399" title="List of mill towns in Massachusetts" label="List of mill towns in Massachusetts"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="116802" wikidata="Q6902604" url="?curid=116802" title="Monson Center, Massachusetts">
<text>Monson Center is a census-designated place (CDP) in the town of Monson in Hampden County, Massachusetts, United States. The population was 2,107 at the 2010 census, out of a total 8,560 people in the town. It is part of the Springfield, Massachusetts Metropolitan Statistical Area.

==Geography==
Monson Center is in the east-central part of the town of Monson, located at (42.097633, -72.314865). The CDP includes the town center (&quot;Monson&quot;), the adjacent village of South Monson, and rural land to the east and west of the villages. The eastern limit of the CDP is King Street and East Hill Road; the southern limit is Munn Street, Maple Street, and Bliss Street; the western limit is Ely Road, High Street, and Margaret Street; and the northern limit is Thompson Street, Chestnut Street, and Brimfield Road. The two villages are in the valley of Chicopee Creek, a north-flowing tributary of the Quaboag River. Massachusetts Route 32 (Main Street) runs through the valley and the two villages, leading north to Palmer and south to Stafford Springs, Connecticut.

According to the United States Census Bureau, the Monson Center CDP has a total area of , of which , or 0.33%, are water.

==Demographics==

As of the census of 2000, there were 2,103 people, 884 households, and 524 families residing in the CDP. The population density was 238.8/km (618.6/mi). There were 931 housing units at an average density of 105.7/km (273.8/mi). The racial makeup of the CDP was 96.43% White, 1.14% African American, 0.19% Native American, 0.57% Asian, 0.05% Pacific Islander, 0.38% from other races, and 1.24% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 1.33% of the population.

There were 884 households, out of which 30.9% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 42.0% were married couples living together, 13.6% had a female householder with no husband present, and 40.7% were non-families. 34.6% of all households were made up of individuals, and 15.3% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.38 and the average family size was 3.10.

In the CDP, the population was spread out, with 26.0% under the age of 18, 7.5% from 18 to 24, 30.2% from 25 to 44, 21.8% from 45 to 64, and 14.5% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 38 years. For every 100 females, there were 89.6 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 86.8 males.

The median income for a household in the CDP was $40,000, and the median income for a family was $45,795. Males had a median income of $34,375 versus $25,244 for females. The per capita income for the CDP was $18,526. About 4.4% of families and 4.2% of the population were below the poverty line, including 1.4% of those under age 18 and 3.3% of those age 65 or over.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6902604" start="0" end="13" title="Monson Center, Massachusetts" label="Monson Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q498162" start="19" end="42" title="census-designated place" label="census-designated place"/>
<link wikidata="Q2415925" start="64" end="70" title="Monson, Massachusetts" label="Monson"/>
<link wikidata="Q54160" start="74" end="88" title="Hampden County, Massachusetts" label="Hampden County"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="90" end="103" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q49158" start="224" end="250" title="Springfield, Massachusetts" label="Springfield, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7580900" start="251" end="280" title="Springfield metropolitan area, Massachusetts" label="Metropolitan Statistical Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q7268229" start="907" end="920" title="Quaboag River" label="Quaboag River"/>
<link wikidata="Q16970295" start="922" end="944" title="Massachusetts Route 32" label="Massachusetts Route 32"/>
<link wikidata="Q2076150" start="1022" end="1028" title="Palmer, Massachusetts" label="Palmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q27989426" start="1042" end="1071" title="Stafford Springs, Connecticut" label="Stafford Springs, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="1091" end="1118" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="1225" end="1231" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="1324" end="1342" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1483" end="1488" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1496" end="1512" title="African American (U.S. Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1520" end="1535" title="Native American (U.S. Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1543" end="1548" title="Asian (U.S. Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1556" end="1572" title="Pacific Islander (U.S. Census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1585" end="1596" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1632" end="1640" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1644" end="1650" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="1802" end="1817" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="2612" end="2629" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="2720" end="2732" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="116803" wikidata="Q2415866" url="?curid=116803" title="Montgomery, Massachusetts">
<text>Montgomery is a town in Hampden County, Massachusetts, United States. The population was 819 at the 2020 census. It is part of the Springfield, Massachusetts Metropolitan Statistical Area.

==History==
Montgomery was first settled in 1767 and was officially incorporated in 1780 during the American Revolutionary War. The town was named after General Richard Montgomery, who died in the Battle of Quebec, part of an American attempt to capture Quebec City and gain Canadien support for the Patriot movement. The town took land from Westfield, Southampton, and unincorporated land that is now Huntington. For two centuries a farming community with a small town center, its population began to increase when Interstate 90 was built in 1957. Montgomery serves as an outer commuter town to Springfield.

==Geography==

According to the United States Census Bureau, the town has a total area of , of which is land and (0.86%) is water. Montgomery is bordered by Southampton to the northeast, Westfield to the southeast, Russell to the southwest, and Huntington to the northwest. Its border with the towns of Huntington and Southampton make up a portion of the Hampden-Hampshire county border. The center of Montgomery lies west-northwest of Springfield and west of Boston. Thus, like most of Western Massachusetts, it is closer to two other states&#x27; capitals—Hartford and Albany—than its own.

The town of Montgomery lies atop a high plain, reaching into neighboring Huntington, framed by Lizzie Mountain to the northeast and Tekoa and Shatterack Mountains to the south and west, respectively. The latter two mountains rise from the banks of the Westfield River, whose banks make up a portion of the town&#x27;s border with Russell. Within the town, the Moose Meadow Brook runs from north to south, with the Westfield Reservoir atop the plain and the smaller Tekoa Reservoir near the bottom of the slope of its namesake mountain. Several other small brooks run through the town.

Other than a short stretch, less than long, of Interstate 90, located at the southern tip of town between Westfield and Russell, the town has no state or federal roads crossing through it. There are only nine roads which enter or exit the town&#x27;s borders, four of which dead-end either just inside or outside of town. Along the banks of the Westfield River lie railroad tracks, which carry CSX and Amtrak trains between Springfield and Pittsfield, on their way westward. There is no other public transportation within town. The nearest general aviation airport is Barnes Municipal Airport in Westfield, the nearest national service can be found at Bradley International Airport in Connecticut, and the nearest full-service international airport is Logan International Airport in Boston.

==Demographics==

As of the census of 2000, there were 654 people, 253 households, and 200 families residing in the town. The population density was . There were 257 housing units at an average density of 17.1 per square mile (6.6/km). The racial makeup of the town was 98.01% White, 0.31% Native American, 0.31% Asian, 0.31% from other races, and 1.07% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 0.76% of the population.

There were 253 households, of which 29.2% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 71.9% were married couples living together, 5.1% had a female householder with no husband present, and 20.6% were non-families. 15.8% of all households were made up of individuals, and 3.6% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.58 and the average family size was 2.84.

In the town, the population was spread out, with 22.9% under the age of 18, 4.4% from 18 to 24, 27.5% from 25 to 44, 34.4% from 45 to 64, and 10.7% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 42 years. For every 100 females, there were 104.4 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 104.0 males.

The median income for a household in the town was $59,063, and the median income for a family was $66,250. Males had a median income of $46,406 versus $37,125 for females. The per capita income for the town was $25,942. About 1.0% of families and 2.9% of the population were below the poverty line, including none of those under age 18 and 11.1% of those age 65 or over.

Montgomery is a town without its own zip code and uses Huntington (01050) and Westfield (01085) for zip codes.

==See also==
*Gateway Regional School District

==References==

==External links==

* Gateway Regional High School
* &quot;MHC Survey Reconnaissance Town Report: Montgomery&quot; Massachusetts Historical Commission, 1982.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2415866" start="0" end="10" title="Montgomery, Massachusetts" label="Montgomery"/>
<link wikidata="Q2154459" start="16" end="20" title="New England town" label="town"/>
<link wikidata="Q54160" start="24" end="38" title="Hampden County, Massachusetts" label="Hampden County"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="40" end="53" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="100" end="111" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q49158" start="131" end="157" title="Springfield, Massachusetts" label="Springfield, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7580900" start="158" end="187" title="Springfield metropolitan area, Massachusetts" label="Metropolitan Statistical Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="290" end="316" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q444947" start="351" end="369" title="Richard Montgomery" label="Richard Montgomery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1840117" start="387" end="403" title="Battle of Quebec (1775)" label="Battle of Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q857880" start="465" end="473" title="French Canadians" label="Canadien"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="832" end="859" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1720696" start="957" end="968" title="Southampton, Massachusetts" label="Southampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055854" start="987" end="996" title="Westfield, Massachusetts" label="Westfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q2415991" start="1015" end="1022" title="Russell, Massachusetts" label="Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2536955" start="1045" end="1055" title="Huntington, Massachusetts" label="Huntington"/>
<link wikidata="Q49158" start="1236" end="1247" title="Springfield, Massachusetts" label="Springfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="1260" end="1266" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q33486" start="1358" end="1366" title="Hartford, Connecticut" label="Hartford"/>
<link wikidata="Q24861" start="1371" end="1377" title="Albany, New York" label="Albany"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567514" start="1645" end="1660" title="Westfield River" label="Westfield River"/>
<link wikidata="Q731271" start="2026" end="2039" title="Massachusetts Turnpike" label="Interstate 90"/>
<link wikidata="Q856783" start="2373" end="2376" title="CSX Transportation" label="CSX"/>
<link wikidata="Q23239" start="2381" end="2387" title="Amtrak" label="Amtrak"/>
<link wikidata="Q2789706" start="2547" end="2571" title="Barnes Municipal Airport" label="Barnes Municipal Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420233" start="2631" end="2660" title="Bradley International Airport" label="Bradley International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q671475" start="2731" end="2758" title="Logan International Airport" label="Logan International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="2799" end="2805" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3048" end="3053" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3061" end="3076" title="Native American (U.S. Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3084" end="3089" title="Asian (U.S. Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3102" end="3113" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3149" end="3157" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3161" end="3167" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="3315" end="3330" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="4127" end="4144" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="4236" end="4248" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q5527285" start="4449" end="4481" title="Gateway Regional School District (Massachusetts)" label="Gateway Regional School District"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="116804" wikidata="Q2415991" url="?curid=116804" title="Russell, Massachusetts">
<text>Russell is a town in Hampden County, Massachusetts, United States. The population was 1,643 at the 2020 census. It is part of the Springfield, Massachusetts Metropolitan Statistical Area.

==History==
Russell was originally part of the Pocumtuc (also called Deerfield) nation, who spoke an Algonquian language. Like most native peoples, they were decimated by smallpox, then their participation in King Philip&#x27;s War 1675–1676 proved their undoing as victory by colonial forces led to the dispersal of remnants of this tribe west into New York and north into Canada.

Although the way was open for settlement beyond the Pioneer Valley lowlands, the thin, rocky soil and hilly topography of uplands to the west delayed settlement until about 1725, when there was no more promising land left to settle in the valley. Because river valleys in the hilly areas were subject to cold air pockets and late frosts—especially during the Little Ice Age that persisted until the late 19th century—most early settlement was in uplands in and near South Quarter. Relatively unproductive soils and small fields were not conducive to growing cash crops, so farming was more of a subsistence nature. Most of what was consumed on these farms was homemade or bartered for.

The upland farm population peaked around 1800, when more productive farmland opened up beyond the Appalachian Mountains in western New York and the Northwest Territory—today&#x27;s Great Lakes states. Employment opportunities became significant by about 1825 as the first (water power-dependent) Industrial Revolution unfolded in New England. The cash income gave farmsteads access to manufactured goods and imported food such as cane sugar from the West Indies in lieu of local maple products. Farming became more of a part-time occupation and a growing number of farms were abandoned, gradually reverting to forest until only stonewalls and cellar holes remain.

The Industrial Revolution led to development in the Westfield River valley, as the water power potential of the three cascades was developed for industrial use. Three villages developed around mills at the cascades, and the easy grades along the valley were utilized for a railroad route across the Berkshires&#x27; of relief.

A small upstream village near the Huntington border was called Crescent Mills. Originally a Chapin and Gould Paper Company mill, Texxon still operates a mill there that makes special fabrics for shoes. The middle settlement and the town&#x27;s administrative center is called Russell Village. Westfield River Paper Company manufactured glassine and other specialty papers there until it was decommissioned and then bought for a proposed biomass electric plant utilizing local cordwood. Russell Village was a virtually self-sufficient community as late as the 1950s, with several stores, a barbershop, and several restaurants; then increasing automobile ownership brought the greater commercial offerings in Westfield and other Pioneer Valley cities within reach.

The lower industrial village was named Woronoco after a local tribe, and the local cascades were once called Salmon Falls, presumably because Atlantic salmon were observed and captured there. Strathmore Paper Company manufactured high-quality bond papers at this location until it was taken over by International Paper and then decommissioned. Strathmore was originally purchased by Horace A. Moses in 1904. Moses, later co-founder of Junior Achievement, was a visionary social engineer as well as an industrialist who developed Woronoco as a model company town with housing of a notably high standard and buildings accommodating a wide variety of community activities. The factory, and the town it created, were based upon his journey to the factory town of Strathmore, Scotland. Moses also developed a estate around Russell Pond in South Quarter, where he raised both award-winning apples and prized hunting dogs. He later sold off sections of the estate to the Hampden Council of the Boy Scouts of America. Today, the Horace A. Moses Scout Reservation contains many buildings original to Moses and his staff, including his summer home, which is known simply as &quot;The Manor House&quot;. The property is thought to be one of the last homes of the rare Scottish thistle, which Moses imported from Scotland in the 1930s.

In 1965 Russell joined with neighboring towns to form Gateway Regional School District that now educates some 1,300 students at an annual cost to taxpayers of about $15,000 per student. With very little industrial and commercial property to share this tax burden, Russell has one of the highest tax rates per unit assessed value in the state.

Westfield River Paper Company shut down operations in 1994, while Strathmore Paper was purchased by International Paper Co. and ceased operations in 1999. This left the town with no industrial tax base other than the small Texxon plant in Crescent Mills. Retail operations are also very limited, with residents mostly commuting to Westfield and West Springfield to shop.

In the 1990s Mennonites moved from western Pennsylvania to Russell where they established a church, a furniture factory/showroom called &quot;Country Woodcraft&quot; and a bakery shop called &quot;Bread Basket&quot;. On September 11 of every year since 2003 the Mennonite Youth Chorus from Russell has offered songs of remembrance for victims of the terrorist attack at the Ground Zero site of the World Trade Center in New York City.

In 2004 a biomass generating plant was proposed to take advantage of the former Westfield River Paper Co. site along the Westfield River with access to water, the former Boston and Albany Railroad line, and supplies of waste wood as a byproduct of real estate development, logging and forestry work. The proposal proved highly controversial. While it would have created a number of jobs and lightened the tax burden, opponents raised concerns of truck traffic through town, air pollution, water withdrawals and thermal pollution of water returned to the river after use for cooling purposes.

As of 2010, political issues in Russell largely revolve around the tax base and economy.

==Geography==
Russell is in western Hampden County, bordered by Granville to the south, Blandford to the west, Huntington to the north, Montgomery to the northeast and Westfield to the southeast. The main village, Russell, is in the northwestern part of town and is a census-designated place. The village of Woronoco is in the eastern part of town. Both villages are along the Westfield River and are connected by U.S. Route 20, which leads southeast to Westfield and northwest to Lee. Interstate 90, the Massachusetts Turnpike, crosses the center of Russell, but has no exits in the town.

According to the United States Census Bureau, the town of Russell has a total area of , of which are land and , or 2.39%, are water.

The town features two very different topographical sections: South Quarter is mainly uplands at elevations from along the rim of a plateau west of the Connecticut River Valley, while the rest of the town is a deep valley along the swift Westfield River.

The South Quarter uplands end at an escarpment near the southeastern border of the town, the edge of a rift valley originating in the Mesozoic Era when Europe and North America separated. The Connecticut River still follows this rift valley, known as the Pioneer Valley for its early settlement by English Puritans. The escarpment between the South Quarter uplands and the valley is forested—too steep to farm—and dissected by streams that have eroded ravines back into the uplands.

Along the Westfield River valley, during the Pleistocene epoch, continental glaciers scraped away soil and steepened cliffs on hills around the valley, particularly on Mounts Tekoa and Shatterack east of the river, and on Turtle Bend Mountain standing in the middle of the valley. Although none of these peaks actually rises much above the surrounding plateau, their precipitous slopes make them appear impressively high from the valley.

As continental glaciers receded northward, a glacial moraine dammed the Connecticut River below Hartford, producing Lake Hitchcock, with an arm extending northwest along the Westfield River. Gravel banks large enough to be commercially valuable were deposited in Russell where the river entered the erstwhile lake.

The river has three widely separated cascades within the town, dropping about in total that figured in the township&#x27;s industrial development, above.

==Demographics==
As of the census of 2010, there were 1,775 people, 656 households, and 498 families residing in the town. The population density was 100.9 people per square mile (39/km). There were 699 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the town was 97.7% White, 0.7% African American, 0.2% Native American, 0.3% Asian, 0.1% from other races, and 1.0% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 2.6% of the population.

There were 656 households, out of which 31.1% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 57.8% were married couples living together, 6.6% had a female householder with no husband present, and 24.1% were non-families. 16.3% of all households were made up of individuals, and 4.8% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.7 and the average family size was 3.0.

In the town, the population was spread out, with 25% under the age of 18 and 9.9% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 40.4 years. The town is 49.2% male and 50.8% female.

The median income for a household in the town was $57,308 and the median income for a family was $58,498. About 7.1% of families and 9.0% of the population were below the poverty line, including 14.7% of those under age 18 and 5.7% of those age 65 or over.

==Education==
There are no schools in town. Students attend Littleville Elementary School, Gateway Regional Middle School, Gateway Regional Junior High School, and Gateway Regional High School in Huntington.

==Politics==
In the 2020 presidential election, the town provided Libertarian Party nominee Jo Jorgensen with her highest percentage of the vote statewide. Out of 919 votes cast in the town, Jorgensen received 28 (3.05 percent) votes. Former President Donald J. Trump won the town with 512 votes (55.71 percent) over then-former Vice President Joe Biden with 366 votes (39.83 percent). Green Party nominee Howie Hawkins obtained six votes (0.65 percent) and there were seven write-ins (0.76 percent).

==Notable people==
* Clarissa Chapman Armstrong, missionary in Hawaii, born in Russell
* Reuben Atwater Chapman, chief justice of the Massachusetts Supreme Court, born in Russell
* Joel Doolittle, justice of the Vermont Supreme Court, born in Russell

==See also==
* List of mill towns in Massachusetts
== References ==
== External links ==

* &quot;MHC Survey Reconnaissance Town Report: Russell&quot; (PDF), Massachusetts Historical Commission, 1982.
* &quot;Town of Russell, Massachusetts Draft Open Space and Recreation Plan&quot; (PDF), Pioneer Valley Planning Commission, 2007.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2415991" start="0" end="7" title="Russell, Massachusetts" label="Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2154459" start="13" end="17" title="New England town" label="town"/>
<link wikidata="Q54160" start="21" end="35" title="Hampden County, Massachusetts" label="Hampden County"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="37" end="50" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="99" end="110" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q49158" start="130" end="156" title="Springfield, Massachusetts" label="Springfield, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7580900" start="157" end="186" title="Springfield metropolitan area, Massachusetts" label="Metropolitan Statistical Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1789087" start="236" end="244" title="Pocumtuc" label="Pocumtuc"/>
<link wikidata="Q33392" start="290" end="309" title="Algonquian languages" label="Algonquian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q12214" start="360" end="368" title="smallpox" label="smallpox"/>
<link wikidata="Q862257" start="398" end="420" title="King Philip&amp;#x27;s War" label="King Philip&amp;#x27;s War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7196817" start="624" end="638" title="Pioneer Valley" label="Pioneer Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q190530" start="931" end="945" title="Little Ice Age" label="Little Ice Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q932139" start="1130" end="1139" title="cash crop" label="cash crop"/>
<link wikidata="Q2787508" start="1167" end="1178" title="subsistence agriculture" label="subsistence"/>
<link wikidata="Q93332" start="1357" end="1378" title="Appalachian Mountains" label="Appalachian Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988104" start="1382" end="1398" title="western New York" label="western New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q669315" start="1407" end="1426" title="Northwest Territory" label="Northwest Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7347" start="1440" end="1451" title="Great Lakes" label="Great Lakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269" start="1555" end="1576" title="Industrial Revolution" label="Industrial Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q12053340" start="2197" end="2205" title="Boston and Albany" label="railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2536955" start="2286" end="2296" title="Huntington, Massachusetts" label="Huntington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515155" start="2588" end="2596" title="glassine" label="glassine"/>
<link wikidata="Q18537" start="2689" end="2696" title="biomass" label="biomass"/>
<link wikidata="Q188879" start="3158" end="3173" title="Atlantic salmon" label="Atlantic salmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5901455" start="3208" end="3232" title="Strathmore Paper Company" label="Strathmore Paper Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q202972" start="3315" end="3334" title="International Paper" label="International Paper"/>
<link wikidata="Q5901455" start="3399" end="3414" title="Horace A. Moses" label="Horace A. Moses"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153045" start="3451" end="3469" title="Junior Achievement" label="Junior Achievement"/>
<link wikidata="Q608132" start="4003" end="4024" title="Boy Scouts of America" label="Boy Scouts of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q30166" start="4273" end="4289" title="Scottish thistle" label="Scottish thistle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5527285" start="4395" end="4427" title="Gateway Regional School District (Massachusetts)" label="Gateway Regional School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003303" start="5030" end="5046" title="West Springfield, Massachusetts" label="West Springfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q110223" start="5070" end="5079" title="Mennonite" label="Mennonite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400" start="5100" end="5112" title="Pennsylvania" label="Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="5407" end="5423" title="September 11 attacks" label="terrorist attack"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5431" end="5447" title="Ground zero#World Trade Center" label="Ground Zero site"/>
<link wikidata="Q11235" start="5455" end="5473" title="World Trade Center (1973–2001)" label="World Trade Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q128991" start="5503" end="5510" title="Biofuel" label="biomass"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567514" start="5614" end="5629" title="Westfield River" label="Westfield River"/>
<link wikidata="Q12053340" start="5663" end="5689" title="Boston and Albany Railroad" label="Boston and Albany Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q845249" start="5766" end="5773" title="logging" label="logging"/>
<link wikidata="Q720362" start="5778" end="5791" title="Silviculture" label="forestry work"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914309" start="6004" end="6021" title="thermal pollution" label="thermal pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2415879" start="6240" end="6249" title="Granville, Massachusetts" label="Granville"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302498" start="6264" end="6273" title="Blandford, Massachusetts" label="Blandford"/>
<link wikidata="Q2536955" start="6287" end="6297" title="Huntington, Massachusetts" label="Huntington"/>
<link wikidata="Q2415866" start="6312" end="6322" title="Montgomery, Massachusetts" label="Montgomery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055854" start="6344" end="6353" title="Westfield, Massachusetts" label="Westfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q38249844" start="6390" end="6397" title="Russell (CDP), Massachusetts" label="Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q498162" start="6444" end="6467" title="census-designated place" label="census-designated place"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567514" start="6553" end="6568" title="Westfield River" label="Westfield River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2483980" start="6590" end="6603" title="U.S. Route 20 in Massachusetts" label="U.S. Route 20"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055854" start="6630" end="6639" title="Westfield, Massachusetts" label="Westfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q2427080" start="6657" end="6660" title="Lee, Massachusetts" label="Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q94958" start="6662" end="6675" title="Interstate 90" label="Interstate 90"/>
<link wikidata="Q731271" start="6681" end="6703" title="Massachusetts Turnpike" label="Massachusetts Turnpike"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="6784" end="6811" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q2366717" start="7259" end="7270" title="rift valley" label="rift valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q83222" start="7290" end="7302" title="Mesozoic Era" label="Mesozoic Era"/>
<link wikidata="Q379648" start="7348" end="7365" title="Connecticut River" label="Connecticut River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7196817" start="7411" end="7425" title="Pioneer Valley" label="Pioneer Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q137073" start="7462" end="7470" title="Puritans" label="Puritans"/>
<link wikidata="Q25546" start="7685" end="7696" title="Pleistocene" label="Pleistocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q7695475" start="7815" end="7820" title="Tekoa Mountain (Massachusetts)" label="Tekoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q33486" start="8175" end="8183" title="Hartford, Connecticut" label="Hartford"/>
<link wikidata="Q3214929" start="8195" end="8209" title="Lake Hitchcock" label="Lake Hitchcock"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="8577" end="8583" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="8677" end="8695" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="8834" end="8839" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="8846" end="8862" title="African American (U.S. Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="8869" end="8884" title="Native American (U.S. Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="8891" end="8896" title="Asian (U.S. Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="8908" end="8919" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="8954" end="8962" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="8966" end="8972" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="9123" end="9138" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="9795" end="9807" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q5527280" start="10046" end="10074" title="Gateway Regional High School (Massachusetts)" label="Gateway Regional High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q22923830" start="10111" end="10137" title="2020 United States presidential election" label="2020 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q558334" start="10157" end="10174" title="Libertarian Party (United States)" label="Libertarian Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q6204319" start="10183" end="10195" title="Jo Jorgensen" label="Jo Jorgensen"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="10333" end="10342" title="President of the United States" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="10343" end="10358" title="Donald J. Trump" label="Donald J. Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q11699" start="10420" end="10434" title="Vice President of the United States" label="Vice President"/>
<link wikidata="Q6279" start="10435" end="10444" title="Joe Biden" label="Joe Biden"/>
<link wikidata="Q849158" start="10477" end="10488" title="Green Party (United States)" label="Green Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q15492464" start="10497" end="10510" title="Howie Hawkins" label="Howie Hawkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q56515764" start="10614" end="10640" title="Clarissa Chapman Armstrong" label="Clarissa Chapman Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q21182758" start="10682" end="10704" title="Reuben Atwater Chapman" label="Reuben Atwater Chapman"/>
<link wikidata="Q32606717" start="10774" end="10788" title="Joel Doolittle" label="Joel Doolittle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3001121" start="10805" end="10826" title="Vermont Supreme Court" label="Vermont Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q6628566" start="10860" end="10895" title="List of mill towns in Massachusetts" label="List of mill towns in Massachusetts"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="116805" wikidata="Q2302156" url="?curid=116805" title="Southwick, Massachusetts">
<text>Southwick is a town in Hampden County, Massachusetts, United States. The population was 9,232 at the 2020 census, down from 9,502 at the 2010 census. It is part of the Springfield, Massachusetts Metropolitan Statistical Area.

== History ==

Southwick was originally inhabited by either the Matitacooke, Mayawaug, or Woronoake Native American tribes.

===Early history===

In the mid-17th century, pioneering English explorers moving up the Connecticut River Valley in search of fertile farmlands and game discovered the area and settled Southwick. It became a farming community, defined as the Southern &quot;(South-)&quot; village &quot;(-wick)&quot; part of the town of Westfield. Early on, it was nicknamed &quot;Poverty Plains&quot; because the land was thought to be infertile. Its first residential home was built by Samuel Fowler and his wife Naomi Noble on what is now College Highway (US 202 and MA 10), approximately one-quarter mile (0.4 km) north of the current town center.

In colonial times, church attendance was mandatory. The 800 Christian residents of Southwick in the 1760–1770s were required to travel to Westfield to congregate. Their envisioned parish could only be established by first building their church community. On November 7, 1770, Southwick was incorporated as a separate district of Westfield. The area of Southwick became somewhat smaller in 1770. The southernmost portion of Southwick joined Suffield, Connecticut, as the result of a simultaneous secession of citizens in that part of the village.

===Independence===

Southwick became a fully independent town in 1770. The town remained divided until 1793 when Massachusetts claimed the area (known as the &quot;jog&quot;). A border dispute continued until 1804 when the current boundary was established through a compromise between Connecticut and Massachusetts. As a result of this border resolution, Southwick is the southernmost town in western Massachusetts.
===Early 1800s===

In the early 19th century, the Farmington Canal and the Hampshire and Hampden Canal were built to link New Haven, Connecticut to Northampton through Southwick. Irish immigrants came to the area to labor on this project. Developers spoke of Southwick&#x27;s potential, calling it the &quot;Port of the World&quot;. Traces of the canal can still be found in the Great Brook and Congamond Lakes area. Due to winter freezing, summer drought, and wildlife impact (beaver dams, etc.), the canal was phased out in favor of a railroad. 

Laflin-Phelps Homestead was built soon after the area was settled and remains the oldest standing structure in Southwick.

Completed in the late 1840s, the New Haven and Northampton Company&#x27;s railroad was built alongside the canal. With the railroad came the ice industry and tourist resorts around the Congamond Lakes (which were named &quot;Wenekeiamaug&quot; by the previous native peoples). Along with the construction of a small amusement park, numerous elaborate hotels and dance halls were constructed. During the Industrial Era, summer vacationers and day-trippers would escape to Southwick from cities connected by the Northeast Railroad Corridor including New York City, Albany, Boston, Worcester, Hartford, and especially Springfield. There was a special stop near the lakes where visitors would disembark to swim and/or pile into canopied pleasure boats.

During WWI and WWII, trains loaded with soldiers would pass through town. It has been noted that local girls would gather letters thrown by the soldiers from the train and forward them to the intended recipients at the post office. The last train to pass along these tracks was &quot;circa&quot; 1976. As of 2022, the old railway was converted into a rail trail leading to Granby, Connecticut, known as the Farmington Canal Rail Trail.

All of Southwick&#x27;s grand hotels and ornate train stations have since been torn down. Babb&#x27;s Roller Skating Rink on the Suffield side of Congamond Lakes is all that remains of the amusement park.

== Industry ==

=== Tobacco farming ===
The farmland of Southwick is well-suited to grow tobacco, which is widely grown as a cash crop.

===Ice harvesting===
Ice collected from the Congamond Lakes was once stored in large ice houses in blocks and delivered via railway for food storage from New York City to Boston, before electric refrigerators were widely available.

==Geography==

Southwick is the southernmost town in western Massachusetts, as a result of the &quot;jog&quot; in the Massachusetts-Connecticut border (see History of Massachusetts: Connecticut border). Southwick is bordered on the north by Westfield, on the east by Agawam, Massachusetts and Suffield, Connecticut, on the south by Suffield and Granby, Connecticut, and on the west by Granby and by Granville, Massachusetts.

U.S. Route 202 (College Highway) crosses the town, leading north from the town center to Westfield and south to Granby, Connecticut. Massachusetts Route 57 crosses Southwick east to west, leading east to downtown Springfield and west into the Berkshires.

According to the United States Census Bureau, the town of Southwick has a total area of , of which are land and , or 2.63%, are water.

The Metacomet-Monadnock Trail (a hiking trail) passes through wetlands near Harts Pond before ascending over Provin Mountain, a trap rock ridge and cliff line that forms the eastern border of Southwick. Provin Mountain is part of the Metacomet Ridge, a mountainous trap rock ridgeline that stretches from Long Island Sound to near the Vermont border.

==Demographics==
As of the census of 2000, there were 8,835 people, 3,318 households, and 2,418 families residing in the town. The population density was . There were 3,533 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the town was 97.41% White, 0.51% African American, 0.20% Native American, 0.37% Asian, 0.01% Pacific Islander, 0.34% from other races, and 1.15% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 1.72% of the population.

There were 3,318 households, out of which 36.6% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 60.0% were married couples living together, 8.3% had a female householder with no husband present, and 27.1% were non-families. Of all households, 21.9% were made up of individuals, and 9.9% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.66 and the average family size was 3.13.

In the town, the population was spread out, with 26.5% under the age of 18, 6.3% from 18 to 24, 32.2% from 25 to 44, 23.2% from 45 to 64, and 11.7% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 38 years. For every 100 females, there were 100.4 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 98.2 males.

The median income for a household in the town was $52,296, and the median income for a family was $64,456. Males had a median income of $41,863 versus $30,889 for females. The per capita income for the town was $21,756. About 3.8% of families and 6.1% of the population were below the poverty line, including 6.3% of those under age 18 and 9.8% of those age 65 or over.

==Education==
Southwick is part of the Southwick-Tolland-Granville Regional School District, along with Granville and Tolland. Students attend Woodland School from grades K to 2, and Powder Mill School from grades 3 to 6. High school students attend Southwick Regional School from grades 7 to 12. A vote in May 2012 in Southwick approved a $62 million school renovation and construction project that was completed in 2015.

===Government===
===Select Board (formerly called Board of Selectmen) ===
* Jason Perron, Chairman
* Diane Gale, Vice-Chair
* Doug Moglin, Clerk

===Library===

The Southwick Free Public Library was established in 1892. In fiscal year 2008, the town of Southwick spent 2.03% ($316,544) of its budget on its public library—approximately $33 per person, per year ($43.49 adjusted for inflation to 2022).

==Notable people==
* Amasa Holcomb, (1787-1875) first telescope fabricator and manufacturer in the United States
* Matthew Laflin, (1803–1897) American businessman, philanthropist, and a founder of Chicago
* Rebecca Lobo, television basketball analyst and former player in the professional Women&#x27;s National Basketball Association (WNBA) for the Connecticut Sun
* Jerri Nielsen, a physician who self-treated her breast cancer while stationed at Amundsen–Scott South Pole Station in Antarctica.

== References ==

==External links==

* Town of Southwick official website
* &quot;MHC Survey Reconnaissance Town Report: Southwick&quot;, Massachusetts Historical Commission, 1982
* The Southwick Jog: Take Back the Notch! – a tongue-in-cheek write-up of this Connecticut–Massachusetts border curiosity</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2302156" start="0" end="9" title="Southwick, Massachusetts" label="Southwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q2154459" start="15" end="19" title="New England town" label="town"/>
<link wikidata="Q54160" start="23" end="37" title="Hampden County, Massachusetts" label="Hampden County"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="39" end="52" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="101" end="112" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="137" end="148" title="2010 United States census" label="2010 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q49158" start="168" end="194" title="Springfield, Massachusetts" label="Springfield, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7580900" start="195" end="224" title="Springfield metropolitan area, Massachusetts" label="Metropolitan Statistical Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="327" end="342" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q379648" start="441" end="465" title="Connecticut River Valley" label="Connecticut River Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055854" start="673" end="682" title="Westfield, Massachusetts" label="Westfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q2218248" start="824" end="837" title="Samuel Fowler (1779–1844)" label="Samuel Fowler"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436504" start="895" end="901" title="U.S. Route 202 in Massachusetts" label="US 202"/>
<link wikidata="Q2483964" start="906" end="911" title="Massachusetts Route 10" label="MA 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q753836" start="1429" end="1450" title="Suffield, Connecticut" label="Suffield, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q779" start="1821" end="1832" title="Connecticut" label="Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q65122136" start="1929" end="1950" title="western Massachusetts" label="western Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5435880" start="2002" end="2018" title="Farmington Canal" label="Farmington Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5646081" start="2027" end="2054" title="Hampshire and Hampden Canal" label="Hampshire and Hampden Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q49145" start="2074" end="2096" title="New Haven, Connecticut" label="New Haven, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q49186" start="2100" end="2111" title="Northampton, Massachusetts" label="Northampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2574155" start="2131" end="2147" title="Irish immigrants" label="Irish immigrants"/>
<link wikidata="Q6471705" start="2501" end="2524" title="Laflin-Phelps Homestead" label="Laflin-Phelps Homestead"/>
<link wikidata="Q7008591" start="2657" end="2690" title="New Haven and Northampton Company" label="New Haven and Northampton Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="3172" end="3185" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q24861" start="3187" end="3193" title="Albany, New York" label="Albany"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="3195" end="3201" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q49179" start="3203" end="3212" title="Worcester, Massachusetts" label="Worcester"/>
<link wikidata="Q33486" start="3214" end="3222" title="Hartford, Connecticut" label="Hartford"/>
<link wikidata="Q49158" start="3239" end="3250" title="Springfield, Massachusetts" label="Springfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="3381" end="3384" title="World War I" label="WWI"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="3389" end="3393" title="World War II" label="WWII"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542460" start="3747" end="3766" title="Granby, Connecticut" label="Granby, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q753836" start="3940" end="3948" title="Suffield, Connecticut" label="Suffield"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566" start="4106" end="4113" title="tobacco" label="tobacco"/>
<link wikidata="Q932139" start="4142" end="4151" title="cash crop" label="cash crop"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986233" start="4175" end="4188" title="Ice trade" label="Ice collected"/>
<link wikidata="Q253893" start="4239" end="4249" title="Ice house (building)" label="ice houses"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="4325" end="4331" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="4448" end="4461" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4543" end="4587" title="History of Massachusetts#Southwick Jog" label="History of Massachusetts: Connecticut border"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055854" start="4628" end="4637" title="Westfield, Massachusetts" label="Westfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q577215" start="4654" end="4675" title="Agawam, Massachusetts" label="Agawam, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q753836" start="4680" end="4701" title="Suffield, Connecticut" label="Suffield, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542460" start="4732" end="4751" title="Granby, Connecticut" label="Granby, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q2415879" start="4786" end="4810" title="Granville, Massachusetts" label="Granville, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436504" start="4813" end="4827" title="U.S. Route 202 in Massachusetts" label="U.S. Route 202"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484036" start="4946" end="4968" title="Massachusetts Route 57" label="Massachusetts Route 57"/>
<link wikidata="Q49158" start="5026" end="5037" title="Springfield, Massachusetts" label="Springfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q820961" start="5052" end="5066" title="the Berkshires" label="the Berkshires"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="5086" end="5113" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1924738" start="5209" end="5234" title="Metacomet-Monadnock Trail" label="Metacomet-Monadnock Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q3408308" start="5314" end="5329" title="Provin Mountain" label="Provin Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7835547" start="5333" end="5342" title="trap rock" label="trap rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q3408308" start="5408" end="5423" title="Provin Mountain" label="Provin Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3307200" start="5439" end="5454" title="Metacomet Ridge" label="Metacomet Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q867460" start="5510" end="5527" title="Long Island Sound" label="Long Island Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q16551" start="5540" end="5547" title="Vermont" label="Vermont"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5812" end="5817" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5825" end="5841" title="African American (U.S. Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5849" end="5864" title="Native American (U.S. Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5872" end="5877" title="Asian (U.S. Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5885" end="5901" title="Pacific Islander (U.S. Census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5914" end="5925" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5961" end="5969" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5973" end="5979" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q2415879" start="7244" end="7253" title="Granville, Massachusetts" label="Granville"/>
<link wikidata="Q2415977" start="7258" end="7265" title="Tolland, Massachusetts" label="Tolland"/>
<link wikidata="Q126807" start="7311" end="7312" title="Kindergarten" label="K"/>
<link wikidata="Q7571463" start="7390" end="7415" title="Southwick Regional School" label="Southwick Regional School"/>
<link wikidata="Q4740382" start="7988" end="8001" title="Amasa Holcomb" label="Amasa Holcomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q6790834" start="8082" end="8096" title="Matthew Laflin" label="Matthew Laflin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="8165" end="8172" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q459371" start="8175" end="8187" title="Rebecca Lobo" label="Rebecca Lobo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2593221" start="8257" end="8301" title="Women&amp;#x27;s National Basketball Association" label="Women&amp;#x27;s National Basketball Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126243" start="8317" end="8332" title="Connecticut Sun" label="Connecticut Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q6183083" start="8335" end="8348" title="Jerri Nielsen" label="Jerri Nielsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q243307" start="8416" end="8449" title="Amundsen–Scott South Pole Station" label="Amundsen–Scott South Pole Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q51" start="8453" end="8463" title="Antarctica" label="Antarctica"/>
<link wikidata="Q3993049" start="8693" end="8708" title="tongue-in-cheek" label="tongue-in-cheek"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="116806" wikidata="Q2490142" url="?curid=116806" title="Rancho Calaveras, California">
<text>Rancho Calaveras is a census-designated place (CDP) in Calaveras County, California, United States. The population was 5,325 at the 2010 census, up from 4,182 at the 2000 census.

==Geography==
According to the United States Census Bureau, the CDP has a total area of , of which 99.65% of it is land, and 0.35% is water.

===Climate===

Rancho Calaveras has a hot-summer Mediterranean climate (Köppen &quot;Csa&quot;) typical of the Sierra Nevada foothills. Winters are cool and wet with mild days, chilly nights, and substantial rainfall. Summers are hot and dry with very hot days, cool nights, and minimal rainfall. Due to the orographic effect, rainfall in all seasons is significantly greater than on the valley floor to the west.

==Demographics==

===2010===
The 2010 United States Census reported that Rancho Calaveras had a population of 5,325. The population density was . The racial makeup of Rancho Calaveras was 4,645 (87.2%) White, 48 (0.9%) African American, 102 (1.9%) Native American, 87 (1.6%) Asian, 13 (0.2%) Pacific Islander, 195 (3.7%) from other races, and 235 (4.4%) from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 670 persons (12.6%).

The Census reported that 5,316 people (99.8% of the population) lived in households, 9 (0.2%) lived in non-institutionalized group quarters, and 0 (0%) were institutionalized.

There were 1,937 households, out of which 680 (35.1%) had children under the age of 18 living in them, 1,275 (65.8%) were opposite-sex married couples living together, 162 (8.4%) had a female householder with no spouse present, 98 (5.1%) had a male householder with no spouse present. There were 110 (5.7%) unmarried opposite-sex partnerships, and 18 (0.9%) same-sex married couples or partnerships. 301 households (15.5%) were made up of individuals, and 107 (5.5%) had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.74. There were 1,535 families (79.2% of all households); the average family size was 3.03.

The population was spread out, with 1,287 people (24.2%) under the age of 18, 337 people (6.3%) aged 18 to 24, 1,148 people (21.6%) aged 25 to 44, 1,845 people (34.6%) aged 45 to 64, and 708 people (13.3%) who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 43.6 years. For every 100 females, there were 101.2 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 100.9 males.

There were 2,147 housing units at an average density of , of which 1,937 were occupied, of which 1,695 (87.5%) were owner-occupied, and 242 (12.5%) were occupied by renters. The homeowner vacancy rate was 3.9%; the rental vacancy rate was 8.2%. 4,519 people (84.9% of the population) lived in owner-occupied housing units and 797 people (15.0%) lived in rental housing units.

===2000===
As of the census of 2000, there were 4,182 people, 1,470 households, and 1,221 families residing in the CDP. The population density was . There were 1,561 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the CDP was 89.02% White, 0.86% Black or African American, 1.24% Native American, 1.48% Asian, 0.12% Pacific Islander, 2.80% from other races, and 4.47% from two or more races. 10.14% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.

There were 1,470 households, out of which 38.6% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 71.4% were married couples living together, 7.0% had a female householder with no spouse present, and 16.9% were non-families. 12.9% of all households were made up of individuals, and 4.0% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.84 and the average family size was 3.09.

In the CDP, the population was spread out, with 28.3% under the age of 18, 5.5% from 18 to 24, 26.9% from 25 to 44, 28.5% from 45 to 64, and 10.9% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 40 years. For every 100 females, there were 98.3 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 101.1 males.

The median income for a household in the CDP was $50,247, and the median income for a family was $53,017. Males had a median income of $50,614 versus $31,280 for females. The per capita income for the CDP was $21,444. About 3.5% of families and 5.8% of the population were below the poverty line, including 8.4% of those under age 18 and 2.2% of those age 65 or over.

==Politics==
In the state legislature, Rancho Calaveras is in , and , Federally, Rancho Calaveras is in .

Locally, Rancho Calaveras is represented by Calaveras County Supervisor Darren Spellman who won election November 2, 2010 with 60.1% of Rancho Calaveras voter approval.

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2490142" start="0" end="16" title="Rancho Calaveras, California" label="Rancho Calaveras"/>
<link wikidata="Q498162" start="22" end="45" title="census-designated place" label="census-designated place"/>
<link wikidata="Q271613" start="55" end="71" title="Calaveras County, California" label="Calaveras County"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="73" end="83" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="211" end="238" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q13996" start="360" end="392" title="hot-summer Mediterranean climate" label="hot-summer Mediterranean climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="394" end="400" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506685" start="630" end="647" title="orographic lift" label="orographic effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="770" end="795" title="2010 United States Census" label="2010 United States Census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="939" end="944" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="956" end="972" title="African American (U.S. Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="985" end="1000" title="Native American (U.S. Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1012" end="1017" title="Asian (U.S. Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1029" end="1045" title="Pacific Islander (U.S. Census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1063" end="1074" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1115" end="1123" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1127" end="1133" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="1472" end="1500" title="marriage" label="opposite-sex married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q7120037" start="1657" end="1692" title="POSSLQ" label="unmarried opposite-sex partnerships"/>
<link wikidata="Q3449014" start="1708" end="1748" title="same-sex partnerships" label="same-sex married couples or partnerships"/>
<link wikidata="Q5433028" start="1930" end="1938" title="family (U.S. Census)" label="families"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="2782" end="2788" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3008" end="3013" title="Race (United States Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3021" end="3026" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3030" end="3046" title="Race (United States Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3054" end="3069" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3077" end="3082" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3090" end="3106" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3119" end="3130" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3196" end="3204" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3208" end="3214" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="3339" end="3354" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="4147" end="4164" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="4255" end="4267" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q3084210" start="4361" end="4378" title="California State Legislature" label="state legislature"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4520" end="4535" title="Darren Spellman" label="Darren Spellman"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="116807" wikidata="Q7797717" url="?curid=116807" title="Three Rivers, Massachusetts">
<text>Three Rivers is a village and former census-designated place (CDP) in the city of Palmer in Hampden County, Massachusetts, United States. It is part of the Springfield, Massachusetts Metropolitan Statistical Area. It is named for the confluence of the Ware and Quaboag rivers, which form the Chicopee River.

==Geography==
Three Rivers is located at (42.179053, -72.363807).

According to the United States Census Bureau, the CDP had a total area of , of which is land and (5.60%) is water.

==Demographics==
As of the census of 2000, there were 2,939 people, 1,203 households, and 795 families residing in the CDP. The population density was . There were 1,309 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the CDP was 97.41% White, 0.34% African American, 0.34% Native American, 0.14% Asian, 0.44% from other races, and 1.33% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 1.05% of the population.

There were 1,203 households, out of which 31.4% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 46.4% were married couples living together, 14.5% had a female householder with no husband present, and 33.9% were non-families. 28.4% of all households were made up of individuals, and 14.0% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.44 and the average family size was 2.97.

In the CDP the population was spread out, with 24.9% under the age of 18, 7.7% from 18 to 24, 31.0% from 25 to 44, 19.2% from 45 to 64, and 17.1% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 37 years. For every 100 females, there were 88.3 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 86.5 males.

The median income for a household in the CDP was $37,528, and the median income for a family was $40,000. Males had a median income of $31,582 versus $22,533 for females. The per capita income for the CDP was $16,810. About 7.7% of families and 8.9% of the population were below the poverty line, including 15.0% of those under age 18 and 5.8% of those age 65 or over.

Three Rivers, MA (01080) is known as &quot;The Polka Capital of New England&quot;, featuring some of the region&#x27;s top polka bands at the well-known Pulaski Park. Many Polish immigrants came to Three Rivers in the late 19th century and early 20th century, and their culture of food and music carries through today. Polish traditions are also continued at Three Rivers&#x27; Catholic parish, Divine Mercy Parish.

==See also==
* List of mill towns in Massachusetts

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7797717" start="0" end="12" title="Three Rivers, Massachusetts" label="Three Rivers"/>
<link wikidata="Q498162" start="37" end="60" title="census-designated place" label="census-designated place"/>
<link wikidata="Q2076150" start="82" end="88" title="Palmer, Massachusetts" label="Palmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q54160" start="92" end="106" title="Hampden County, Massachusetts" label="Hampden County"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="108" end="121" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q49158" start="156" end="182" title="Springfield, Massachusetts" label="Springfield, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7580900" start="183" end="212" title="Springfield metropolitan area, Massachusetts" label="Metropolitan Statistical Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q7969256" start="252" end="256" title="Ware River" label="Ware"/>
<link wikidata="Q7268229" start="261" end="268" title="Quaboag River" label="Quaboag"/>
<link wikidata="Q5096490" start="292" end="306" title="Chicopee River" label="Chicopee River"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="393" end="420" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="519" end="525" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="620" end="638" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="743" end="748" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="756" end="772" title="African American (U.S. Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="780" end="795" title="Native American (U.S. Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="803" end="808" title="Asian (U.S. Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="821" end="832" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="868" end="876" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="880" end="886" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="1040" end="1055" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="1849" end="1866" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="1957" end="1969" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2167" end="2172" title="Polka in the United States#Polish-American" label="polka"/>
<link wikidata="Q7392962" start="2439" end="2458" title="Sts. Peter and Paul Church (Three Rivers)" label="Divine Mercy Parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q6628566" start="2476" end="2511" title="List of mill towns in Massachusetts" label="List of mill towns in Massachusetts"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="116808" wikidata="Q2415977" url="?curid=116808" title="Tolland, Massachusetts">
<text>Tolland is a town in Hampden County, Massachusetts, United States. It is part of the Springfield, Massachusetts Metropolitan Statistical Area. The population was 471 at the 2020 census, making it the smallest town in Hampden County by population. 

== History ==
Tolland was first settled in 1750 when it was part of neighboring Granville. Tolland was officially incorporated in 1810.

==Geography==
Tolland occupies the southwestern corner of Hampden County and is bordered on the north by Otis and Blandford, on the east by Granville, on the south by Hartland and Colebrook, Connecticut, and on the west by Sandisfield. Massachusetts Route 57 crosses the center of the town, leading east to Agawam and west New Marlborough. The West Branch of the Farmington River forms most of the western boundary of the town. The southern end of Otis Reservoir is in the northern part of town. The eastern part of town is drained by tributaries of the Hubbard River, which flows southeast to the East Branch of the Farmington River. The northeast corner of the town is drained by Ripley Brook, which flows east via the Little River to the Westfield River. The entire town is part of the Connecticut River watershed.

According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the town has a total area of , of which are land and , or 3.77%, are water.

Tolland State Forest and Granville State Forest protect a part of the town&#x27;s area.

==Demographics==
As of the census of 2000, there were 426 people, 169 households, and 114 families residing in the town. The population density was 13.5 people per square mile (5.2/km). There were 478 housing units at an average density of 15.1 per square mile (5.8/km). The racial makeup of the town was 97.42% White, 0.94% African American, 1.17% Native American, 0.23% Asian, and 0.23% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 1.17% of the population.

There were 169 households, out of which 26.6% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 66.3% were married couples living together, 1.2% had a female householder with no husband present, and 32.0% were non-families. Of all households 28.4% were made up of individuals, and 13.0% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.52 and the average family size was 3.06.

In the town, the population was spread out, with 23.9% under the age of 18, 3.3% from 18 to 24, 31.0% from 25 to 44, 28.9% from 45 to 64, and 12.9% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 41 years. For every 100 females, there were 114.1 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 118.9 males.

The median income for a household in the town was $53,125, and the median income for a family was $65,417. Males had a median income of $41,094 versus $35,278 for females. The per capita income for the town was $30,126. About 2.3% of families and 4.2% of the population were below the poverty line, including none of those under age 18 and 17.7% of those age 65 or over.

==Education==

Tolland is part of the Southwick-Tolland-Granville Regional School District, along with Granville, and Southwick. Students attend Woodland School from K–2, and Powder Mill School from 3–6. High School students attend Southwick Regional School from 7–12.

==Library==

The Tolland Public Library was established in 1892. In fiscal year 2008, the town of Tolland spent 0.97% ($10,271) of its budget on its public library—approximately $22 per person, per year ($28.99 adjusted for inflation to 2022).

==Notable person==

* John Easton Mills (1796–1847), fifth Mayor of Montréal, Canada (1846–1847)

==References==

== External links ==

* Town of Tolland official website
* &quot;MHC Survey Reconnaissance Town Report: Tolland&quot;—Massachusetts Historical Commission, 1982</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2415977" start="0" end="7" title="Tolland, Massachusetts" label="Tolland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2154459" start="13" end="17" title="New England town" label="town"/>
<link wikidata="Q54160" start="21" end="35" title="Hampden County, Massachusetts" label="Hampden County"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="37" end="50" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q49158" start="85" end="111" title="Springfield, Massachusetts" label="Springfield, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7580900" start="112" end="141" title="Springfield metropolitan area, Massachusetts" label="Metropolitan Statistical Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="173" end="184" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q54160" start="217" end="231" title="Hampden County, Massachusetts" label="Hampden County"/>
<link wikidata="Q2415879" start="329" end="338" title="Granville, Massachusetts" label="Granville"/>
<link wikidata="Q2431273" start="491" end="495" title="Otis, Massachusetts" label="Otis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302498" start="500" end="509" title="Blandford, Massachusetts" label="Blandford"/>
<link wikidata="Q2415879" start="526" end="535" title="Granville, Massachusetts" label="Granville"/>
<link wikidata="Q2572348" start="553" end="561" title="Hartland, Connecticut" label="Hartland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2446187" start="566" end="588" title="Colebrook, Connecticut" label="Colebrook, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q2431850" start="609" end="620" title="Sandisfield, Massachusetts" label="Sandisfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484036" start="622" end="644" title="Massachusetts Route 57" label="Massachusetts Route 57"/>
<link wikidata="Q577215" start="693" end="699" title="Agawam, Massachusetts" label="Agawam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2536854" start="709" end="724" title="New Marlborough, Massachusetts" label="New Marlborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q3066962" start="749" end="765" title="Farmington River" label="Farmington River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7108820" start="834" end="848" title="Otis Reservoir" label="Otis Reservoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q16892505" start="940" end="953" title="Hubbard River" label="Hubbard River"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567514" start="1127" end="1142" title="Westfield River" label="Westfield River"/>
<link wikidata="Q379648" start="1175" end="1192" title="Connecticut River" label="Connecticut River"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="1222" end="1240" title="U.S. Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q7814352" start="1319" end="1339" title="Tolland State Forest" label="Tolland State Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q5596949" start="1344" end="1366" title="Granville State Forest" label="Granville State Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="1435" end="1441" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="1533" end="1551" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1720" end="1725" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1733" end="1749" title="African American (U.S. Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1757" end="1772" title="Native American (U.S. Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1780" end="1785" title="Asian (U.S. Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1821" end="1829" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1833" end="1839" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="1991" end="2006" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="2804" end="2821" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="2913" end="2925" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q2415879" start="3103" end="3112" title="Granville, Massachusetts" label="Granville"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302156" start="3118" end="3127" title="Southwick, Massachusetts" label="Southwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q7571463" start="3232" end="3257" title="Southwick Regional School" label="Southwick Regional School"/>
<link wikidata="Q3181407" start="3537" end="3554" title="John Easton Mills" label="John Easton Mills"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="3583" end="3591" title="Montréal" label="Montréal"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="116809" wikidata="Q2316327" url="?curid=116809" title="Wales, Massachusetts">
<text>Wales is a town in Hampden County, Massachusetts, United States. The population was 1,838 at the 2020 census. It is part of the Springfield, Massachusetts Metropolitan Statistical Area.

== History ==
Wales was first settled by Europeans in 1726 and was officially incorporated on August 23, 1775, as &quot;South Brimfield,&quot; a name it kept until February 20, 1828. The town was renamed after James Lawrence Wales, a local benefactor. Initial settlers included Anthony Needham, John Bullen, and Samuel and Dorothy Munger. The next generation of Mungers became prominent in the town. Samuel (Jr.) served as a selectman and was deacon of the Baptist Church for many years. Nathaniel was one of 12 men of the district appointed as a &quot;court of Justice and Honor to determine all controversies that may hereafter arise in said District,&quot; and was also a deacon of the Baptist Church. The &quot;Meadow District&quot; of Wales was originally known as &quot;Munger&#x27;s Meadow&quot; and includes graves of early pioneers.

==Geography==
By the 2010 census, the population had reached 1,838.

According to the United States Census Bureau, the town has a total area of , of which are land and , or 1.46%, are water. Wales is in southeastern Hampden County and is bounded on the west by Monson; on the south by Stafford and Union, Connecticut; on the east by Holland; and on the north by Brimfield.

Massachusetts Route 19 crosses the town, leading north to the center of Brimfield and south (via Connecticut Route 19) to Stafford Springs, Connecticut.

==Education==
Wales Elementary School, serving grades K–6, has its own school committee, part of School Union 61. Wales students attend Tantasqua Regional Junior High School (grades 7–8) and Tantasqua Regional High School in Sturbridge. Union 61 and the Tantasqua district share administrators, including the superintendent, and both include Brimfield, Brookfield, Holland, Sturbridge and Wales.

==Library==
The Wales Public Library opened in 1897. In fiscal year 2008, the town of Wales spent 1.28% ($45,480) of its budget on its public library—approximately $24 per person, per year ($31.63 adjusted for inflation to 2022).

==Demographics==
As of the census of 2000, there had been 1,737 people, 660 households, and 481 families residing in the town. The population density was . There were 796 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the town was 97.75% White, 0.52% African American, 0.29% Native American, 0.17% Asian, 0.35% from other races, and 0.92% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 0.63% of the population.

There were 660 households, out of which 33.5% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 57.4% were married couples living together, and 11.1% had a female head of household with no husband present.

The median income for a household in the town was $48,906, and the median income for a family was $51,629. Males had a median income of $39,766 versus $27,557 for females. The per capita income for the town was $21,267. About 1.8% of families and 3.5% of the population were below the poverty line, including 3.2% of those under age 18 and 3.9% of those age 65 or over.

==References==

==External links==

* Town of Wales official website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2316327" start="0" end="5" title="Wales, Massachusetts" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q2154459" start="11" end="15" title="New England town" label="town"/>
<link wikidata="Q54160" start="19" end="33" title="Hampden County, Massachusetts" label="Hampden County"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="35" end="48" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="97" end="108" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q49158" start="128" end="154" title="Springfield, Massachusetts" label="Springfield, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7580900" start="155" end="184" title="Springfield metropolitan area, Massachusetts" label="Metropolitan Statistical Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q4931397" start="612" end="621" title="selectman" label="selectman"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="1116" end="1143" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q2415925" start="1291" end="1297" title="Monson, Massachusetts" label="Monson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2305713" start="1315" end="1323" title="Stafford, Connecticut" label="Stafford"/>
<link wikidata="Q2446133" start="1328" end="1346" title="Union, Connecticut" label="Union, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q2416009" start="1363" end="1370" title="Holland, Massachusetts" label="Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2273666" start="1392" end="1401" title="Brimfield, Massachusetts" label="Brimfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q2483979" start="1404" end="1426" title="Massachusetts Route 19" label="Massachusetts Route 19"/>
<link wikidata="Q2113405" start="1501" end="1521" title="Connecticut Route 19" label="Connecticut Route 19"/>
<link wikidata="Q27989426" start="1526" end="1555" title="Stafford Springs, Connecticut" label="Stafford Springs, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q399541" start="1629" end="1645" title="school committee" label="school committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7683826" start="1749" end="1779" title="Tantasqua Regional High School" label="Tantasqua Regional High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q3976365" start="1783" end="1793" title="Sturbridge, Massachusetts" label="Sturbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2536826" start="1911" end="1921" title="Brookfield, Massachusetts" label="Brookfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="2213" end="2219" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2439" end="2444" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2452" end="2468" title="African American (U.S. Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2476" end="2491" title="Native American (U.S. Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2499" end="2504" title="Asian (U.S. Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2517" end="2528" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2564" end="2572" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2576" end="2582" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="2734" end="2749" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="3010" end="3027" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="3119" end="3131" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="116810" wikidata="Q1055854" url="?curid=116810" title="Westfield, Massachusetts">
<text>Westfield is a city in Hampden County, in the Pioneer Valley of western Massachusetts, United States. Westfield was first settled by Europeans in 1660. It is part of the Springfield, Massachusetts Metropolitan Statistical Area. The population was 40,834 at the 2020 census.

== History ==

The area was originally inhabited by the Pocomtuc, and was called &quot;Woronoco&quot; (meaning &quot;the winding land&quot;). Trading houses were built in 1639 to 1640 by European settlers from the Connecticut Colony. Massachusetts asserted jurisdiction, and prevailed after a boundary survey. In 1647, Massachusetts made Woronoco part of Springfield. Land was &quot;incrementally purchased from the Native Americans and granted by the Springfield town meeting to English settlers, beginning in 1658.&quot; The area of Woronoco or &quot;Streamfield&quot; began to be permanently settled in the 1660s. In 1669, &quot;Westfield&quot; was incorporated as an independent town; in 1920, it would be re-incorporated as a city. The name Westfield would be named for being at the time the most westerly settlement. &quot;Streamfield&quot; was considered a name for the town for being settled in between two &quot;streams&quot; that flow downtown, the Westfield River and the Little River.

From its founding until 1725, Westfield was the westernmost settlement in the Massachusetts Colony, and portions of it fell within the Equivalent Lands. Town meetings were held in a church meeting house until 1839, when Town Hall was erected on Broad Street. This building also served as City Hall from 1920 to 1958. Due to its alluvial lands, the inhabitants of the Westfield area were entirely devoted to agricultural pursuits for about 150 years.

Early in the 19th century, the manufacture of bricks, whips, and cigars became economically important. At one point in the 19th century, Westfield was a prominent center of the buggy whip industry, and the city is still known as the &quot;Whip City&quot;. Other firms produced bicycles, paper products, pipe organs, boilers and radiators, textile machinery, abrasives, wood products, and precision tools. Westfield transformed itself from an agricultural town into a thriving industrial city in the 19th century, but in the second half of the 20th century its manufacturing base was eroded by wage competition in the U.S. Southeast, then overseas.

Meanwhile, with cheap land and convenient access to east–west and north–south interstate highways, the north side developed into a warehousing center to C &amp; S Wholesale, Home Depot, Lowes and other corporations. South of the river, the intersecting trends of growth of Westfield State University and declining manufacturing changed the city&#x27;s character. Students comprise some 15% of Westfield&#x27;s population, and the old downtown business district caters increasingly to them while mainstream shopping relocates to a commercial strip called East Main Street, part of U.S. Route 20.

Only four buildings exceed four stories in height. Until a major fire on January 6, 1952, the Westfield Professional Building covered half a downtown city block and was six stories tall. The entire building was consumed with extensive damage to neighboring buildings because the fire department&#x27;s ladder and snorkel vehicles weren&#x27;t tall enough and the building did not have a sprinkler system. Subsequent zoning prohibited virtually all new construction over three stories, even after improvements in fire suppression technologies and vehicles became available. No building is allowed to be taller than the town&#x27;s firetruck ladders.

In the early 20th century, Westfield was at the center of the Pure Food movement, an effort to require stricter standards on the production of food. Louis B. Allyn, a Westfield resident and pure foods expert for &quot;McClure&#x27;s Magazine&quot;, lived in Westfield until his murder. In 1906, Congress passed the Pure Food and Drug Act of 1906. In June 2017, the administration of Massachusetts Governor Charlie Baker announced a $300,000 grant to the city for an industrial park expansion.

In 1939, Westfield became the first city in Massachusetts, as well as all of New England, to elect a female Mayor when Alice Burke defeated incumbent Raymond H. Cowing.

==Geography==
Westfield is located at (42.129492, −72.745986). It is bordered on the north by Southampton, on the northeast by Holyoke, on the east by West Springfield, on the southeast by Agawam, on the south by Southwick, on the southwest by Granville, on the west by Russell, and on the northwest by Montgomery. Westfield is split into the &quot;South Side&quot; and the &quot;North Side&quot; by the Westfield River, and the northwestern section of town is known as Wyben.

According to the United States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of , of which are land and , or 2.24%, are water.

Westfield is situated at the western edge of the downfaulted Connecticut River Valley where the Westfield River emerges from the Berkshire Hills and flows through the center of the city on its way to the Connecticut River some downstream. Because of its large, steep and rocky upstream watershed, the river has a history of severe flood episodes, inundating adjacent parts of Westfield several times. In spite of a complicated system of pumps, dikes, waterways, and upstream dams, Westfield lies in a floodplain zone and is still considered flood-prone.

Westfield is bordered on the east by linear cliffs of volcanic trap rock known as East Mountain and Provin Mountain. They are part of the Metacomet Ridge, a mountainous trap rock ridgeline that stretches from Long Island Sound to nearly the Vermont border. Both mountains are traversed by the Metacomet-Monadnock Trail, that also crosses the Westfield River with an ill-advised fording or a safer road-walk across the bridge at the junction of Routes 187 and 20. The next road obstacle for hikers in Westfield is the Massachusetts Turnpike, beneath which hikers can safely walk.

Westfield is on the fringe of the greater Northeast megalopolis—the most densely populated region of the United States—and has experienced substantial land development for suburban residential and commercial uses for the past six decades. Yet it borders hilltowns to the west that were depopulated of subsistence farmers in the 19th century as land became readily available on the western frontier. With population dipping below ten per square kilometer in some upland townships, forests are reverting almost to pre-settlement conditions with wild turkey, bears, coyotes and even moose returning after absences perhaps measured in centuries. This transition over a few miles from the 21st century urbanization to population densities nearly as low as early colonial times is notable if not unique.

Westfield is located west of Springfield, southeast of Pittsfield, west of Boston, north of Hartford, Connecticut, southeast of Albany, New York, and northeast of New York City.

=== Climate ===

;Notes: 
==Demographics==
At the 2010 census, there were 41,094 people, 15,335 households and 10,041 families residing in the city. The population density was . There were 16,075 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 92.8% White, 1.6% African American, 0.3% Native American, 1.3% Asian, 0.0% Pacific Islander, 2.2% from other races, and 1.8% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 7.5% of the population.

There were 14,797 households, of which 31.5% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 53.0% were married couples living together, 10.6% had a female householder with no husband present, and 32.3% were non-families. Of all households 25.9% were made up of individuals, and 10.9% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.54 and the average family size was 3.07.

Age distribution was 23.8% under the age of 18, 12.6% from 18 to 24, 28.0% from 25 to 44, 21.9% from 45 to 64, and 13.7% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 36 years. For every 100 females, there were 93.7 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 90.8 males.

The median household income was $45,240, and the median family income was $55,327. Males had a median income of $38,316 versus $27,459 for females. The per capita income for the city was $20,600. About 6.9% of families and 11.3% of the population were below the poverty line, including 16.2% of those under age 18 and 9.5% of those age 65 or over.

==Government and politics==
Westfield is governed by a mayor and a city council, elected every two years. The office of the mayor is responsible for a variety of services throughout the city, and the mayor also serves as chairman of the School Committee. The City Council meets the first and third Thursday of every month at 7:30 p.m. in City Hall.

Westfield was involved in a mitigation action regarding water contaminated with per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances.

The current mayor of Westfield is Michael A. McCabe. In the Massachusetts General Court, the current senator, representing the Second Hampden and Hampshire district, is John Velis. The representative for the Fourth Hampden district is Kelly Pease. Westfield is located in the Eighth Massachusetts Governor&#x27;s Council district and is represented by Tara Jacobs

The Westfield City Council is composed of the following members:

The current city council president is Brent Bean II.

===Public safety===
According to NeighborhoodScout in 2020 violent crime in Westfield such as armed robbery, aggravated assault, rape or murder occurs at a rate of 1 in every 375, or 3 in every 1000.

==Arts and culture==

=== Points of interest ===
* Amelia Park Ice Rink and Memorial Garden
* Stanley Park of Westfield
* The Metacomet-Monadnock Trail
* East Mountain
* United States Whip Company Complex
* Columbia Greenway Rail Trail

== Education ==
Westfield&#x27;s public school system consists of one preschool, seven elementary schools, a middle school, and two high schools.

=== Preschools ===
* Fort Meadow Early Childhood Center
* Westfield Area Head Start. Head Start is no longer referenced on the Westfield schools&#x27; website.

=== Elementary schools ===

* Abner Gibbs Elementary School
* Franklin Avenue Elementary School
* Highland Elementary School
* Munger Hill Elementary School
* Paper Mill Elementary School
* Southampton Road Elementary School
* Westfield River Elementary School

=== Intermediate schools ===
* Westfield Intermediate School (formerly North Middle School)

=== Middle schools ===

* Westfield Middle School (formerly South Middle School)

=== High schools ===
* Westfield High School
* Westfield Technical Academy

=== Private schools ===
*St. Mary Preschool and Pre-K
*St. Mary Elementary School
*St. Mary Middle School
*St. Mary High School
*The White Oak School

===Higher education===
The city is home to Westfield State University.

==Library==

The Westfield Athenaeum is a free library that is open to the public. It is located in Westfield, Massachusetts and is part of the CW MARS consortium. The library was incorporated by an act of the Massachusetts Legislature, Chapter 88, in 1864.

The Westfield Athenaeum opened at 26 Main Street on January 1, 1868, with an annual membership fee of $2. In 1895, it became free to Westfield residents. In 1899, the library was moved and a new building was dedicated at 6 Elm Street, the former home of James Fowler.

The Athenaeum is a non-profit organization, governed by a board of directors. Its mission is to &quot;enrich the community of Westfield by providing open access to educational, cultural, recreational and informational resources and programs.&quot;

In fiscal year 2008, the city of Westfield spent 0.87% ($811,000) of its budget on its public library—approximately $19 per person, per year ($25.04 adjusted for inflation to 2022).

== Media ==
* The Westfield News Group LLC., publishers of The Westfield News, PennySaver, The Longmeadow News and The Enfield Press

== Transportation ==

===Major highways===
The Massachusetts Turnpike crosses Westfield just north of Westfield Center. The &quot;Mass Pike&quot; is part of Interstate 90 extending east to Boston and west to Albany and across the United States to Seattle. About east of Westfield, the turnpike intersects Interstate 91 which generally follows the Connecticut River Valley south to Springfield, Hartford and New Haven or north to Canada (Quebec).

Westfield&#x27;s main north–south thoroughfare is U.S. 202/Route 10, which includes parts of Southwick Road, S. Maple Street, W. Silver Street, Pleasant Street, Court Street, Broad Street, Elm Street, and Southampton Road. At the intersection of Southampton Road and North Road, Route 10 continues on Southampton Road toward Southampton while U.S. 202 follows North Road toward Holyoke.

Apart from limited-access I-90, the main east–west thoroughfare is U.S. 20, which includes parts of Russell Road, Franklin Street, Elm Street, Main Street, and Springfield Road. Route 187 also ends in Westfield. Other main roads include Western Avenue, Granville Road, Union Street, and Montgomery Road. East Mountain Road is the longest road in Westfield. In November 2016, Massachusetts Governor Charlie Baker announced a $1.93 million grant to the city for upgrades to its segment of U.S. Route 20.

==== Great River Bridge project ====

A notable choke point for north–south travel is the Great River Bridge, commonly known as the &quot;Green Bridge&quot;, over the Westfield River. This is a three-lane through truss bridge. As of August 2007, there was an active project to create a second bridge just to the east (downstream). The new bridge is a similar through-truss bridge with two spans totaling . After the second bridge was completed, the existing bridge was refurbished; each bridge now carries traffic in one direction. Blessed Sacrament Church on North Elm Street was torn down for this project to start. The church was reconstructed on Holyoke Road and was finished in October 2009. The new bridge opened for traffic and the old one was closed for renovations on August 18, 2009. The old bridge reopened in July 2011, with each bridge carrying traffic in one direction.

===Rail===

Westfield is at the junction of the former east–west Boston and Albany Railroad and a former north–south spur of the New York, New Haven and Hartford Railroad (now a rail trail south of the junction). The town last had eastbound passenger service in 1954, local Albany, New York – Boston, Massachusetts service operated by the New York Central Railroad; and Westfield last had local westbound service in 1953. But Pioneer Valley Railroad, a short line, and CSX, provide freight service. More than 35 motor freight carriers with nearby terminals provide competitive freight service locally and to all distant points. CT&quot;rail&quot;&#x27;s Hartford Line, as well as Amtrak&#x27;s &quot;Lake Shore Limited,&quot; &quot;Vermonter&quot; and &quot;Hartford Line&quot; continue to operate in Springfield, Massachusetts, 9.6 miles to the east.

The proposed East-West Passenger Rail service connecting Boston and Pittsfield via Worcester and Springfield would run through Westfield. As of May 2023, no formal plans exist to establish a station in the city, though local officials have expressed interest in doing so.

===Bus===
The city is presently served by multiple Pioneer Valley Transit Authority (PVTA) bus routes:

* R10: Westfield / Westfield State University / West Springfield via Route 20
** Provides service between Westfield and Springfield via Route 20 and West Springfield.
** Connects with many other public transit services at Springfield Union Station:
*** Most Springfield-area PVTA routes, for service within Springfield and nearby communities.
*** Amtrak &quot;Northeast Regional&quot;, &quot;Lake Shore Limited&quot;, &quot;Hartford Line&quot;, &quot;Valley Flyer&quot;, and &quot;Vermonter&quot; passenger rail service.
*** Peter Pan and Greyhound intercity bus service.
*** Hartford Line, a regional rail service to Hartford and New Haven, CT operated by CT&quot;rail&quot;&quot;.&quot;
* B23: Holyoke / Westfield via Holyoke Community College
** Provides service between Westfield Center and Holyoke Transportation Center via Holyoke Community College.
* WSU Shuttle
** Provides service between Westfield Center and Westfield State University when school is in session. Also provides service to the Horace Mann Center at 333 Western Ave.

===Air===
Westfield-Barnes Regional Airport in Westfield has charter passenger services.

Bradley International Airport at Windsor Locks, Connecticut, to the south, has scheduled flights by most airlines.

==Notable people==

* Edward Bancroft (1744–1821), physician and double-agent spy during the American Revolution
* Lou Barlow (born 1966), American alternative rock musician and songwriter
* Kacey Bellamy (born 1987), Olympian, 2010 Winter Olympics, Women&#x27;s Ice Hockey Silver Medalist
* Sybil Moseley Bingham (1792–1848) teacher, missionary in Hawaiian Islands
* Emma Helen Blair (1851–1911) historian, journalist and editor who attended high school in town
* Asahel Bush (1824–1913), printer and publisher the &quot;Oregon Statesman&quot; newspaper; His estate is now preserved as Bush&#x27;s Pasture Park and his home, Asahel Bush House, is on the National Register of Historic Places
* Joseph Buell Ely (1881–1956), 52nd Governor of Massachusetts
* Richard Falley Jr. (1740–1808) an ensign at the Battle of Bunker Hill and armorer during the American Revolutionary War
* Ray Fitzgerald (1904–1977), Major League Baseball player who died in town
* Frederick H. Gillett (1851–1935), U.S. Congressman, Speaker of the U.S. House of Representatives
* Manuel Gonzales (1913–1993), comics artist
* James H. Gray Sr. (1916–1986), Georgia politician
* Ferdinand Vandeveer Hayden (1829–1887) pioneering geologist
* Thomas Ingersoll (1749–1812), early settler of Ingersoll, Ontario, and for whom that town is named
* Neil Jenney, artist
* William Allen Johnson, organ builder; Johnson Organs
* Jackie French Koller, author and painter
* Walt Kowalczyk (born 1935), professional football player with the Philadelphia Eagles, Dallas Cowboys and Oakland Raiders
* Jesse Leach, rock singer and musician
* Grey Lock (1670–1750), Abenaki warrior chieftain
* Jim Matheos (born 1962), guitarist, best known of Fates Warning 
* Mary L. Moreland (1859–1918), minister, evangelist, suffragist, author
* Gilbert Clifford Noble (1860–1936), Founder of Barnes and Noble Book Stores
* Ralph E. Van Norstrand, minority leader of the Connecticut General Assembly, 1979—1985; Speaker of the Connecticut House of Representatives, 1985—1987
* Don Pardo, longtime Saturday Night Live announcer
* Gorham Parks, U.S. Congressman from Maine and American Consul in Rio de Janeiro
* Rufus Parks, Wisconsin politician
* Dale Quarterley, part-time ARCA Menards Series West racecar driver
* Frederic Rzewski, composer
* William Shepard, Revolutionary War general
* Nettie Stevens, early geneticist who discovered chromosomes determined one&#x27;s sex
* Walter Scott Story (1879–1955), author
* Clara Harrison Stranahan (1831–1905), author; founder of Barnard College
* Rick Sullivan, current Secretary of Energy and Environmental Affairs for the Commonwealth of Massachusetts and the former Mayor of Westfield
* Edward Taylor (–1729) poet, physician, and pastor
* Adonis Terry (1864–1915), former MLB pitcher for four teams
* Alfred Topliff (1799–1879), Wisconsin State Assemblyman and surveyor
* Mark Trafton, U.S. congressman
* Daniel P. Trant, NBA player (Boston Celtics), killed on September 11, 2001 in the World Trade Center attack

===Bands from Westfield===
* Killswitch Engage, metalcore band
* Outpatients, hardcore/metal band
* Sebadoh, indie rock band
* Within the Ruins, deathcore band
* Deep Wound, hardcore punk band
* The Prozacs, pop punk band

==References==

==External links==

* City of Westfield official website
* &quot;A Record of Marriages, Births and Deaths in Westfield, Massachusetts Prior to the Year 1700&quot; – Communicated by the Rev. Emerson Davis of that town, Corresponding Member of the New England Historic-Genealogical Society
* &quot;MHC Reconnaissance Town Survey Report: Westfield&quot;, Massachusetts Historical Commission, 1982.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1055854" start="0" end="9" title="Westfield, Massachusetts" label="Westfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q54160" start="23" end="37" title="Hampden County, Massachusetts" label="Hampden County"/>
<link wikidata="Q7196817" start="46" end="60" title="Pioneer Valley" label="Pioneer Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="72" end="85" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q49158" start="170" end="196" title="Springfield, Massachusetts" label="Springfield, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7580900" start="197" end="226" title="Springfield metropolitan area, Massachusetts" label="Metropolitan Statistical Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="261" end="272" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q1789087" start="331" end="339" title="Pocomtuc" label="Pocomtuc"/>
<link wikidata="Q951500" start="489" end="507" title="Connecticut Colony" label="Connecticut Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q49158" start="630" end="641" title="Springfield, Massachusetts" label="Springfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567514" start="1234" end="1249" title="Westfield River" label="Westfield River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079909" start="1351" end="1371" title="Massachusetts Colony" label="Massachusetts Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q5384712" start="1408" end="1424" title="Equivalent Lands" label="Equivalent Lands"/>
<link wikidata="Q6185405" start="1601" end="1609" title="Alluvium" label="alluvial"/>
<link wikidata="Q152910" start="1901" end="1911" title="buggy whip" label="buggy whip"/>
<link wikidata="Q6268384" start="2027" end="2038" title="Johnson Organs" label="pipe organs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139046" start="2341" end="2355" title="Southeastern United States" label="U.S. Southeast"/>
<link wikidata="Q14438080" start="2646" end="2672" title="Westfield State University" label="Westfield State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q407881" start="2953" end="2966" title="U.S. Route 20" label="U.S. Route 20"/>
<link wikidata="Q4819204" start="3768" end="3782" title="Louis B. Allyn" label="Louis B. Allyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q6800390" start="3837" end="3851" title="McClure&amp;#x27;s" label="McClure&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="3914" end="3922" title="United States Congress" label="Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029367" start="3934" end="3964" title="Pure Food and Drug Act of 1906" label="Pure Food and Drug Act of 1906"/>
<link wikidata="Q887117" start="4002" end="4024" title="Governor of Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts Governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5076629" start="4025" end="4038" title="Charlie Baker" label="Charlie Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q52204145" start="4232" end="4243" title="Alice Burke (politician)" label="Alice Burke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1720696" start="4377" end="4388" title="Southampton, Massachusetts" label="Southampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637790" start="4410" end="4417" title="Holyoke, Massachusetts" label="Holyoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003303" start="4434" end="4450" title="West Springfield, Massachusetts" label="West Springfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q577215" start="4472" end="4478" title="Agawam, Massachusetts" label="Agawam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302156" start="4496" end="4505" title="Southwick, Massachusetts" label="Southwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q2415879" start="4527" end="4536" title="Granville, Massachusetts" label="Granville"/>
<link wikidata="Q2415991" start="4553" end="4560" title="Russell, Massachusetts" label="Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2415866" start="4586" end="4596" title="Montgomery, Massachusetts" label="Montgomery"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567514" start="4687" end="4702" title="Westfield River" label="Westfield River"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="4778" end="4805" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q379648" start="4945" end="4969" title="Connecticut River Valley" label="Connecticut River Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567514" start="4980" end="4995" title="Westfield River" label="Westfield River"/>
<link wikidata="Q820961" start="5013" end="5028" title="Berkshire Hills" label="Berkshire Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q379648" start="5088" end="5105" title="Connecticut River" label="Connecticut River"/>
<link wikidata="Q193110" start="5385" end="5395" title="floodplain" label="floodplain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7835547" start="5502" end="5511" title="trap rock" label="trap rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q3046527" start="5521" end="5534" title="East Mountain (Massachusetts)" label="East Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3408308" start="5539" end="5554" title="Provin Mountain" label="Provin Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3307200" start="5577" end="5592" title="Metacomet Ridge" label="Metacomet Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q867460" start="5648" end="5665" title="Long Island Sound" label="Long Island Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q16551" start="5680" end="5687" title="Vermont" label="Vermont"/>
<link wikidata="Q1924738" start="5732" end="5757" title="Metacomet-Monadnock Trail" label="Metacomet-Monadnock Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q13422082" start="6061" end="6082" title="Northeast megalopolis" label="Northeast megalopolis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6273" end="6282" title="Western Massachusetts#The Hilltowns" label="hilltowns"/>
<link wikidata="Q2787508" start="6320" end="6339" title="subsistence agriculture" label="subsistence farmers"/>
<link wikidata="Q974556" start="6400" end="6416" title="Homestead Act" label="western frontier"/>
<link wikidata="Q815818" start="6511" end="6520" title="reforestation" label="reverting"/>
<link wikidata="Q49158" start="6847" end="6858" title="Springfield, Massachusetts" label="Springfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q49184" start="6873" end="6883" title="Pittsfield, Massachusetts" label="Pittsfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="6893" end="6899" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q33486" start="6910" end="6931" title="Hartford, Connecticut" label="Hartford, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q24861" start="6946" end="6962" title="Albany, New York" label="Albany, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="6981" end="6994" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q49078" start="7274" end="7279" title="White American" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q727928" start="7331" end="7336" title="Asian American" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3349057" start="7343" end="7359" title="Pacific Islander American" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="7371" end="7382" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q58669" start="7417" end="7425" title="Hispanic and Latino Americans" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q58669" start="7429" end="7435" title="Latino American" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940707" start="8198" end="8221" title="median household income" label="median household income"/>
<link wikidata="Q1453540" start="9071" end="9098" title="Massachusetts General Court" label="Massachusetts General Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q88207071" start="9138" end="9175" title="Massachusetts Senate&amp;#x27;s 2nd Hampden and Hampshire district" label="Second Hampden and Hampshire district"/>
<link wikidata="Q16218893" start="9180" end="9190" title="John Velis" label="John Velis"/>
<link wikidata="Q88098540" start="9219" end="9242" title="Massachusetts House of Representatives&amp;#x27; 4th Hampden district" label="Fourth Hampden district"/>
<link wikidata="Q104179045" start="9246" end="9257" title="Kelly Pease" label="Kelly Pease"/>
<link wikidata="Q6784274" start="9294" end="9331" title="Massachusetts Governor&amp;#x27;s Council" label="Massachusetts Governor&amp;#x27;s Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q4742286" start="9748" end="9788" title="Amelia Park Ice Rink and Memorial Garden" label="Amelia Park Ice Rink and Memorial Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q7599852" start="9791" end="9816" title="Stanley Park of Westfield" label="Stanley Park of Westfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q1924738" start="9823" end="9848" title="Metacomet-Monadnock Trail" label="Metacomet-Monadnock Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q3046527" start="9851" end="9864" title="East Mountain (Hampden County, Massachusetts)" label="East Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892298" start="9867" end="9901" title="United States Whip Company Complex" label="United States Whip Company Complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076052" start="10004" end="10013" title="preschool" label="preschool"/>
<link wikidata="Q14438080" start="10949" end="10975" title="Westfield State University" label="Westfield State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q20656936" start="11491" end="11503" title="James Fowler (Massachusetts politician)" label="James Fowler"/>
<link wikidata="Q731271" start="12119" end="12141" title="Massachusetts Turnpike" label="Massachusetts Turnpike"/>
<link wikidata="Q94958" start="12229" end="12242" title="Interstate 90" label="Interstate 90"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="12261" end="12267" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q24861" start="12280" end="12286" title="Albany, New York" label="Albany"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083" start="12319" end="12326" title="Seattle" label="Seattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q94961" start="12377" end="12390" title="Interstate 91" label="Interstate 91"/>
<link wikidata="Q379648" start="12419" end="12436" title="Connecticut River" label="Connecticut River"/>
<link wikidata="Q49158" start="12453" end="12464" title="Springfield, Massachusetts" label="Springfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q33486" start="12466" end="12474" title="Hartford, Connecticut" label="Hartford"/>
<link wikidata="Q49145" start="12479" end="12488" title="New Haven, Connecticut" label="New Haven"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="12509" end="12515" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436504" start="12569" end="12577" title="U.S. Route 202" label="U.S. 202"/>
<link wikidata="Q2483964" start="12578" end="12586" title="Massachusetts Route 10" label="Route 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q1720696" start="12844" end="12855" title="Southampton, Massachusetts" label="Southampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637790" start="12897" end="12904" title="Holyoke, Massachusetts" label="Holyoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q2483980" start="12974" end="12981" title="U.S. Route 20 in Massachusetts" label="U.S. 20"/>
<link wikidata="Q2258763" start="13085" end="13094" title="Massachusetts Route 187" label="Route 187"/>
<link wikidata="Q2483980" start="13394" end="13407" title="U.S. Route 20 in Massachusetts" label="U.S. Route 20"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599874" start="13500" end="13518" title="Great River Bridge (Westfield)" label="Great River Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567514" start="13577" end="13592" title="Westfield River" label="Westfield River"/>
<link wikidata="Q158218" start="13623" end="13635" title="truss bridge" label="truss bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q12053340" start="14360" end="14386" title="Boston and Albany Railroad" label="Boston and Albany Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472738" start="14424" end="14465" title="New York, New Haven and Hartford Railroad" label="New York, New Haven and Hartford Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q24861" start="14569" end="14585" title="Albany, New York" label="Albany, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="14588" end="14609" title="Boston, Massachusetts" label="Boston, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371464" start="14634" end="14659" title="New York Central Railroad" label="New York Central Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q7196823" start="14721" end="14744" title="Pioneer Valley Railroad" label="Pioneer Valley Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q3038271" start="14748" end="14758" title="short line railroad" label="short line"/>
<link wikidata="Q856783" start="14764" end="14767" title="CSX" label="CSX"/>
<link wikidata="Q105960269" start="14923" end="14941" title="CT Rail" label="CT&amp;quot;rail&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7008596" start="14949" end="14962" title="Hartford Line" label="Hartford Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q23239" start="14975" end="14981" title="Amtrak" label="Amtrak"/>
<link wikidata="Q608268" start="14995" end="15013" title="Lake Shore Limited" label="Lake Shore Limited"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412872" start="15027" end="15036" title="Vermonter (train)" label="Vermonter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1217449" start="15053" end="15066" title="Amtrak Hartford Line" label="Hartford Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q49158" start="15096" end="15122" title="Springfield, Massachusetts" label="Springfield, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q115825403" start="15161" end="15193" title="East-West Passenger Rail (Massachusetts)" label="East-West Passenger Rail service"/>
<link wikidata="Q7196828" start="15472" end="15511" title="Pioneer Valley Transit Authority" label="Pioneer Valley Transit Authority (PVTA)"/>
<link wikidata="Q49158" start="15645" end="15656" title="Springfield, Massachusetts" label="Springfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003303" start="15674" end="15690" title="West Springfield, Massachusetts" label="West Springfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q7581099" start="15747" end="15773" title="Springfield Union Station (Massachusetts)" label="Springfield Union Station:"/>
<link wikidata="Q7196828" start="15800" end="15804" title="Pioneer Valley Transit Authority" label="PVTA"/>
<link wikidata="Q23239" start="15872" end="15878" title="Amtrak" label="Amtrak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218597" start="15885" end="15903" title="Northeast Regional" label="Northeast Regional"/>
<link wikidata="Q608268" start="15917" end="15935" title="Lake Shore Limited" label="Lake Shore Limited"/>
<link wikidata="Q1217449" start="15943" end="15968" title="Amtrak Hartford Line" label="&amp;quot;Hartford Line&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q85812695" start="15976" end="15988" title="Valley Flyer" label="Valley Flyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412872" start="16006" end="16015" title="Vermonter (train)" label="Vermonter"/>
<link wikidata="Q204807" start="16050" end="16059" title="Peter Pan Bus Lines" label="Peter Pan"/>
<link wikidata="Q755309" start="16064" end="16073" title="Greyhound Lines" label="Greyhound"/>
<link wikidata="Q7008596" start="16101" end="16114" title="Hartford Line" label="Hartford Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q33486" start="16143" end="16151" title="Hartford, Connecticut" label="Hartford"/>
<link wikidata="Q49145" start="16156" end="16169" title="New Haven, Connecticut" label="New Haven, CT"/>
<link wikidata="Q1652279" start="16182" end="16200" title="Connecticut Transit" label="CT&amp;quot;rail&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5887074" start="16354" end="16379" title="Holyoke Community College" label="Holyoke Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q14438080" start="16444" end="16470" title="Westfield State University" label="Westfield State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2789706" start="16577" end="16610" title="Barnes Municipal Airport" label="Westfield-Barnes Regional Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420233" start="16657" end="16686" title="Bradley International Airport" label="Bradley International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q755206" start="16690" end="16716" title="Windsor Locks, Connecticut" label="Windsor Locks, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q5341743" start="16795" end="16810" title="Edward Bancroft" label="Edward Bancroft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058375" start="16838" end="16850" title="Double agent" label="double-agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q192769" start="16866" end="16885" title="American Revolution" label="American Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q939369" start="16888" end="16898" title="Lou Barlow" label="Lou Barlow"/>
<link wikidata="Q11366" start="16921" end="16937" title="alternative rock" label="alternative rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q6344599" start="16964" end="16977" title="Kacey Bellamy" label="Kacey Bellamy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9674" start="17001" end="17021" title="2010 Winter Olympics" label="2010 Winter Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q55720184" start="17065" end="17086" title="Sybil Moseley Bingham" label="Sybil Moseley Bingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q5372835" start="17141" end="17157" title="Emma Helen Blair" label="Emma Helen Blair"/>
<link wikidata="Q4803330" start="17238" end="17249" title="Asahel Bush" label="Asahel Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q5001352" start="17360" end="17384" title="Bush&amp;#x27;s Pasture Park" label="Bush&amp;#x27;s Pasture Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q441804" start="17467" end="17483" title="Joseph B. Ely" label="Joseph Buell Ely"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325602" start="17530" end="17548" title="Richard Falley Jr." label="Richard Falley Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q334029" start="17578" end="17599" title="Battle of Bunker Hill" label="Battle of Bunker Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="17623" end="17649" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7297479" start="17652" end="17666" title="Ray Fitzgerald (baseball)" label="Ray Fitzgerald"/>
<link wikidata="Q450898" start="17728" end="17748" title="Frederick H. Gillett" label="Frederick H. Gillett"/>
<link wikidata="Q3286838" start="17827" end="17842" title="Manuel Gonzales" label="Manuel Gonzales"/>
<link wikidata="Q18811147" start="17872" end="17889" title="James H. Gray Sr." label="James H. Gray Sr."/>
<link wikidata="Q951629" start="17924" end="17950" title="Ferdinand Vandeveer Hayden" label="Ferdinand Vandeveer Hayden"/>
<link wikidata="Q7790986" start="17986" end="18002" title="Thomas Ingersoll" label="Thomas Ingersoll"/>
<link wikidata="Q594706" start="18033" end="18051" title="Ingersoll, Ontario" label="Ingersoll, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q825963" start="18087" end="18098" title="Neil Jenney" label="Neil Jenney"/>
<link wikidata="Q15452485" start="18109" end="18130" title="William Allen Johnson" label="William Allen Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6268384" start="18147" end="18161" title="Johnson Organs" label="Johnson Organs"/>
<link wikidata="Q6116354" start="18164" end="18184" title="Jackie French Koller" label="Jackie French Koller"/>
<link wikidata="Q7964001" start="18207" end="18221" title="Walt Kowalczyk" label="Walt Kowalczyk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350991" start="18331" end="18342" title="Jesse Leach" label="Jesse Leach"/>
<link wikidata="Q5598201" start="18371" end="18380" title="Grey Lock" label="Grey Lock"/>
<link wikidata="Q585751" start="18422" end="18433" title="Jim Matheos" label="Jim Matheos"/>
<link wikidata="Q754323" start="18472" end="18485" title="Fates Warning" label="Fates Warning"/>
<link wikidata="Q65091199" start="18489" end="18505" title="Mary L. Moreland" label="Mary L. Moreland"/>
<link wikidata="Q795454" start="18562" end="18584" title="Barnes &amp;amp; Noble" label="Gilbert Clifford Noble"/>
<link wikidata="Q110330062" start="18640" end="18662" title="Ralph E. Van Norstrand" label="Ralph E. Van Norstrand"/>
<link wikidata="Q5161534" start="18687" end="18715" title="Connecticut General Assembly" label="Connecticut General Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q24964291" start="18728" end="18779" title="Speaker of the Connecticut House of Representatives" label="Speaker of the Connecticut House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q2704814" start="18793" end="18802" title="Don Pardo" label="Don Pardo"/>
<link wikidata="Q13979" start="18813" end="18832" title="Saturday Night Live" label="Saturday Night Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509483" start="18845" end="18857" title="Gorham Parks" label="Gorham Parks"/>
<link wikidata="Q724" start="18881" end="18886" title="Maine" label="Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q8678" start="18910" end="18924" title="Rio de Janeiro" label="Rio de Janeiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q16063629" start="18927" end="18938" title="Rufus Parks" label="Rufus Parks"/>
<link wikidata="Q55433169" start="18963" end="18978" title="Dale Quarterley" label="Dale Quarterley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1959791" start="18990" end="19014" title="ARCA Menards Series West" label="ARCA Menards Series West"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346849" start="19032" end="19048" title="Frederic Rzewski" label="Frederic Rzewski"/>
<link wikidata="Q2580542" start="19061" end="19076" title="William Shepard" label="William Shepard"/>
<link wikidata="Q433487" start="19106" end="19120" title="Nettie Stevens" label="Nettie Stevens"/>
<link wikidata="Q7966107" start="19194" end="19212" title="Walter Scott Story" label="Walter Scott Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q52581422" start="19235" end="19259" title="Clara Harrison Stranahan" label="Clara Harrison Stranahan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7331791" start="19310" end="19323" title="Rick Sullivan" label="Rick Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1293841" start="19453" end="19466" title="Edward Taylor" label="Edward Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4684544" start="19505" end="19517" title="Adonis Terry" label="Adonis Terry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="19538" end="19541" title="MLB" label="MLB"/>
<link wikidata="Q23900803" start="19567" end="19581" title="Alfred Topliff" label="Alfred Topliff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1900477" start="19638" end="19650" title="Mark Trafton" label="Mark Trafton"/>
<link wikidata="Q19865042" start="19671" end="19686" title="Dan Trant" label="Daniel P. Trant"/>
<link wikidata="Q462709" start="19809" end="19826" title="Killswitch Engage" label="Killswitch Engage"/>
<link wikidata="Q16962280" start="19845" end="19856" title="Outpatients (band)" label="Outpatients"/>
<link wikidata="Q1467927" start="19880" end="19887" title="Sebadoh" label="Sebadoh"/>
<link wikidata="Q8028196" start="19907" end="19923" title="Within the Ruins" label="Within the Ruins"/>
<link wikidata="Q5250362" start="19942" end="19952" title="Deep Wound" label="Deep Wound"/>
<link wikidata="Q7758646" start="19975" end="19986" title="The Prozacs" label="The Prozacs"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="116811" wikidata="Q4746019" url="?curid=116811" title="Amherst Center, Massachusetts">
<text>Amherst Center is a census-designated place (CDP) in the City of Amherst in Hampshire County, Massachusetts, United States. The CDP covers the primary village in town. The population was 19,065 at the 2010 census, out of a total city population of 37,819. It is part of the Springfield, Massachusetts Metropolitan Statistical Area.

==Geography==
Amherst Center is located in the west-central part of the town of Amherst at (42.380392, -72.519821). It is bordered to the north by North Amherst, to the south by South Amherst, and to the west by the town of Hadley. The CDP extends north as far as Eastman Lane and Tilson Farm Road, east to the New England Central Railroad and East Street, and south to Mill Lane and East Hadley Road.

Amherst College is in the center of the CDP, south of College Street and east of Pleasant Street, while the University of Massachusetts Amherst is in the northwestern part of the CDP.

According to the United States Census Bureau, the CDP has a total area of , of which , or 0.41%, are water. The Fort River, a westward-flowing tributary of the Connecticut River, flows through the southeastern part of the CDP.

==Demographics==
As of the census of 2000, there were 17,050 people, 3,055 households, and 1,209 families residing in the CDP. The population density was . There were 3,190 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the CDP was 81.00% White, 5.15% African American, 0.22% Native American, 8.02% Asian, 0.06% Pacific Islander, 2.48% from other races, and 3.07% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 5.37% of the population.

There were 3,055 households, out of which 19.4% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 28.4% were married couples living together, 9.2% had a female householder with no husband present, and 60.4% were non-families. 40.0% of all households were made up of individuals, and 12.1% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.19 and the average family size was 2.82.

In the CDP, the population was spread out, with 6.2% under the age of 18, 68.0% from 18 to 24, 12.3% from 25 to 44, 7.9% from 45 to 64, and 5.6% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 21 years. For every 100 females, there were 89.3 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 88.5 males.

The median income for a household in the CDP was $35,754, and the median income for a family was $57,050. Males had a median income of $38,547 versus $32,219 for females. The per capita income for the CDP was $13,791. About 6.2% of families and 21.6% of the population were below the poverty line, including 11.8% of those under age 18 and 5.6% of those age 65 or over. This makes Amherst Center the poorest community in Massachusetts.

==References==
==External links==
* Property maps and more: Town of Amherst GIS</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4746019" start="0" end="14" title="Amherst Center, Massachusetts" label="Amherst Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q498162" start="20" end="43" title="census-designated place" label="census-designated place"/>
<link wikidata="Q49164" start="65" end="72" title="Amherst, Massachusetts" label="Amherst"/>
<link wikidata="Q54161" start="76" end="92" title="Hampshire County, Massachusetts" label="Hampshire County"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="94" end="107" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q49158" start="274" end="300" title="Springfield, Massachusetts" label="Springfield, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7580900" start="301" end="330" title="Springfield metropolitan area, Massachusetts" label="Metropolitan Statistical Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q9050690" start="480" end="493" title="North Amherst, Massachusetts" label="North Amherst"/>
<link wikidata="Q7565985" start="511" end="524" title="South Amherst, Massachusetts" label="South Amherst"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302147" start="557" end="563" title="Hadley, Massachusetts" label="Hadley"/>
<link wikidata="Q833689" start="644" end="672" title="New England Central Railroad" label="New England Central Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q49165" start="736" end="751" title="Amherst College" label="Amherst College"/>
<link wikidata="Q15142" start="844" end="879" title="University of Massachusetts Amherst" label="University of Massachusetts Amherst"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="938" end="965" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q379648" start="1081" end="1098" title="Connecticut River" label="Connecticut River"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="1176" end="1182" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="1280" end="1298" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1403" end="1408" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1416" end="1432" title="African American (U.S. Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1440" end="1455" title="Native American (U.S. Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1463" end="1468" title="Asian (U.S. Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1476" end="1492" title="Pacific Islander (U.S. Census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1505" end="1516" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1552" end="1560" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1564" end="1570" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="1724" end="1739" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="2531" end="2548" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="2640" end="2652" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="116812" wikidata="Q2414206" url="?curid=116812" title="Chesterfield, Massachusetts">
<text>Chesterfield is a rural hill town in Hampshire County, Massachusetts, United States, east of Pittsfield and west of Boston. The population was 1,186 at the 2020 census. It is part of the Springfield, Massachusetts Metropolitan Statistical Area.

==History==
Chesterfield was first settled in 1760 and was officially incorporated in 1762. It was named after the Earl of Chesterfield. The town center, established after the Revolution, has well-preserved Federal period houses along Main Road. In its early days, the town supported a largely agricultural economy, with wool from Merino sheep as a major product. However, there were sawmills and tanneries in operation as well as cloth dressing mills, and in the early 19th century these superseded farming and brought in a small immigrant population that was mostly Irish. Progress wiped out most of the industry in Chesterfield, and by the start of the 20th century a re-emerging agricultural economy developed alongside the growing trade from summer residents.

==Geography==
According to the United States Census Bureau, the town has a total area of , of which are land and , or 1.27%, are water. Chesterfield&#x27;s location is nearly equidistant from the northern, southern and western state lines of Massachusetts.

Chesterfield is located in the Hilltowns region of Massachusetts, north of Hartford, Connecticut, west of Boston, northwest of Springfield, southeast of Albany, New York, east of Pittsfield, and northeast of New York City.

==Education==

Chesterfield is part of the Hampshire Regional School District along with Goshen, Southampton, Westhampton, and Williamsburg. Students attend K–6 at New Hingham Regional Elementary School along with Goshen, and 7–12 students attend Hampshire Regional High School.

==Points of interest==
*Chesterfield Gorge along the Westfield River, a property of the Trustees of Reservations
*Indian Hollow (Massachusetts)

==Demographics==
At the 2000 census, there were 1,201 people, 447 households and 324 families residing in the town. The population density was . There were 524 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the town was 98.67% White, 0.25% Asian, 0.25% Pacific Islander, 0.08% from other races, and 0.75% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 0.08% of the population.

There were 447 households, of which 34.0% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 60.6% were married couples living together, 7.8% had a female householder with no husband present, and 27.3% were non-families. Of all households, 18.8% were made up of individuals, and 6.5% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.69 and the average family size was 3.09.

Of the population 25.7% were under the age of 18, 6.1% from 18 to 24, 29.8% from 25 to 44, 28.6% from 45 to 64, and 9.7% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 54 years. For every 100 females, there were 99.5 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 96.0 males.

The median household income was $49,063 and the median family income was $57,361. Males had a median income of $35,417 versus $27,788 for females. The per capita income for the town was $19,220. About 3.4% of families and 5.7% of the population were below the poverty line, including 5.7% of those under age 18 and 3.4% of those age 65 or over.

==References==
== External links ==

* Town of Chesterfield official website
* &quot;MHC Survey Reconnaissance Town Report: Chesterfield&quot; Massachusetts Historical Commission, 1982.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2414206" start="0" end="12" title="Chesterfield, Massachusetts" label="Chesterfield"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18" end="28" title="Western Massachusetts#The Hilltowns" label="rural hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2154459" start="29" end="33" title="New England town" label="town"/>
<link wikidata="Q54161" start="37" end="53" title="Hampshire County, Massachusetts" label="Hampshire County"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="55" end="68" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q49184" start="93" end="103" title="Pittsfield, Massachusetts" label="Pittsfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="116" end="122" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="156" end="167" title="2020 United States Census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q49158" start="187" end="213" title="Springfield, Massachusetts" label="Springfield, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7580900" start="214" end="243" title="Springfield metropolitan area, Massachusetts" label="Metropolitan Statistical Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q2778272" start="361" end="381" title="Earl of Chesterfield" label="Earl of Chesterfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q192769" start="422" end="432" title="American Revolution" label="Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400086" start="453" end="467" title="Federal period" label="Federal period"/>
<link wikidata="Q651765" start="577" end="583" title="Merino" label="Merino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075293" start="814" end="819" title="Irish Americans" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="1043" end="1070" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1297" end="1310" title="the Hilltowns" label="the Hilltowns"/>
<link wikidata="Q33486" start="1345" end="1366" title="Hartford, Connecticut" label="Hartford, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="1376" end="1382" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q49158" start="1397" end="1408" title="Springfield, Massachusetts" label="Springfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q24861" start="1423" end="1439" title="Albany, New York" label="Albany, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q49184" start="1449" end="1459" title="Pittsfield, Massachusetts" label="Pittsfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="1478" end="1491" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1537" end="1571" title="Hampshire Regional School District" label="Hampshire Regional School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q392598" start="1583" end="1589" title="Goshen, Massachusetts" label="Goshen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1720696" start="1591" end="1602" title="Southampton, Massachusetts" label="Southampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2536890" start="1604" end="1615" title="Westhampton, Massachusetts" label="Westhampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2414374" start="1621" end="1633" title="Williamsburg, Massachusetts" label="Williamsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q392598" start="1708" end="1714" title="Goshen, Massachusetts" label="Goshen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5646071" start="1741" end="1771" title="Hampshire Regional High School" label="Hampshire Regional High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5093805" start="1798" end="1816" title="Chesterfield Gorge (Massachusetts)" label="Chesterfield Gorge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567514" start="1827" end="1842" title="Westfield River" label="Westfield River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7770575" start="1862" end="1886" title="Trustees of Reservations" label="Trustees of Reservations"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="1948" end="1954" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="2039" end="2057" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2161" end="2166" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2174" end="2179" title="Asian (U.S. Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2187" end="2203" title="Pacific Islander (U.S. Census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2216" end="2227" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2263" end="2271" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2275" end="2281" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="2429" end="2444" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940707" start="3041" end="3064" title="median household income" label="median household income"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="3188" end="3205" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="3297" end="3309" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="116813" wikidata="Q919097" url="?curid=116813" title="Cummington, Massachusetts">
<text>Cummington is a town in Hampshire County, Massachusetts, United States. The population was 829 at the 2020 census, a decline from the figure of 872 tabulated in 2010. It is part of the Springfield, Massachusetts Metropolitan Statistical Area.

== History ==
Cummington was first settled in 1762 and was officially incorporated in 1779. It was named after Colonel John Cumings, the original landholder.

The first Congregational Church minister was Rev. James Briggs of Norton, Massachusetts, and a graduate of Yale College around 1775. Briggs was the son of Deacon James and Damaris (White) Briggs, and the husband of Anna Wiswall.

Although a small town, several Revolutionary War patriots are buried there, including Nathaniel Holbrook, Seth Wilder Sr., and Seth Wilder Jr.

Noted poet and newspaper editor William Cullen Bryant was born in Cummington, and returned for many years to summer in the town. His house is now preserved and open to the public as the William Cullen Bryant Homestead. The town hosts the Cummington Fair every August on the town&#x27;s fairgrounds. The fair features many events, including adult and 4-H exhibition halls, a craft barn, vaudeville stage, antique car parade, oxen pull, and an assortment of fair rides, games, and food stands.

The town was the subject of a 1945 documentary film, &quot;The Cummington Story&quot;, about the welcome given to a group of European refugees.

==Geography==
Cummington is in northwestern Hampshire County. It is bordered to the west by the towns of Peru and Windsor in Berkshire County, to the north by Plainfield in Hampshire County, and to the northeast by Ashfield in Franklin County. To the east is the town of Goshen, to the southeast is Chesterfield, and to the south is Worthington, all in Hampshire County.

According to the United States Census Bureau, the town has a total area of , of which are land and , or 0.56%, are water. The Westfield River (sometimes referred to as the East Branch) flows through Cummington. Massachusetts Route 9 runs through the town, following the Westfield River for most of its way. Route 9 leads southeast to Northampton and west to Pittsfield. Massachusetts Route 112 leads west, then south, to Huntington.

The mineral cummingtonite was first found in this town and was named after it.

==Demographics==

As of the census of 2000, there were 978 people, 382 households, and 239 families residing in the town. The population density was . There were 452 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the town was 96.42% White, 0.61% African American, 0.41% Native American, 0.31% Asian, 0.51% from other races, and 1.74% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 3.27% of the population.

There were 382 households, out of which 24.3% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 54.2% were married couples living together, 5.8% had a female householder with no husband present, and 37.4% were non-families. 28.0% of all households were made up of individuals, and 10.2% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.26 and the average family size was 2.77.

In the town, the population was spread out, with 27.9% under the age of 18, 5.7% from 18 to 24, 30.3% from 25 to 44, 24.8% from 45 to 64, and 11.2% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 38 years. For every 100 females, there were 102.5 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 92.1 males.

The median income for a household in the town was $42,250, and the median income for a family was $48,750. Males had a median income of $31,765 versus $27,279 for females. The per capita income for the town was $21,553. About 4.2% of families and 6.6% of the population were below the poverty line, including 5.7% of those under age 18 and none of those age 65 or over.

==Education==
Cummington is part of the Central Berkshire Regional School District, along with Becket, Dalton, Hinsdale, Peru, Washington, and Windsor. Elementary school students attend Craneville School, middle school students attend Nessacus Regional Middle School, and high school students attend Wahconah Regional High School.

==Government==
The town is part of the First Hampshire District in the Massachusetts House of Representatives, and the Berkshire, Hampden, Franklin, and Hampshire Senate district.

==Points of interest==
* William Cullen Bryant Homestead
* Greenwood Music Camp

==Notable people==
* William Cullen Bryant, poet
* Katherine Frazier, musician and arts administrator
* Sergei Isupov, artist
* Rachel Maddow, MSNBC host
* Zalmon Richards, educator
* William Jay Smith, poet
* Worcester Reed Warner, engineer
* Alan Weisman, author
* Richard Wilbur, poet
* Michael Bono, guitarist

==References==
==External links==

* Official Site
* &quot;MHC Survey Reconnaissance Town Report: Cummington&quot; Massachusetts Historical Commission, 1982.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q919097" start="0" end="10" title="Cummington, Massachusetts" label="Cummington"/>
<link wikidata="Q2154459" start="16" end="20" title="New England town" label="town"/>
<link wikidata="Q54161" start="24" end="55" title="Hampshire County, Massachusetts" label="Hampshire County, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="102" end="113" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q49158" start="185" end="211" title="Springfield, Massachusetts" label="Springfield, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7580900" start="212" end="241" title="Springfield metropolitan area, Massachusetts" label="Metropolitan Statistical Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062789" start="413" end="434" title="Congregational church" label="Congregational Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q2282049" start="469" end="490" title="Norton, Massachusetts" label="Norton, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599077" start="510" end="522" title="Yale College" label="Yale College"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="664" end="681" title="American Revolutionary War" label="Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q454840" start="809" end="830" title="William Cullen Bryant" label="William Cullen Bryant"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007358" start="963" end="994" title="William Cullen Bryant Homestead" label="William Cullen Bryant Homestead"/>
<link wikidata="Q238139" start="1127" end="1130" title="4-H" label="4-H"/>
<link wikidata="Q186286" start="1163" end="1173" title="vaudeville" label="vaudeville"/>
<link wikidata="Q614143" start="1520" end="1524" title="Peru, Massachusetts" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q4020379" start="1529" end="1536" title="Windsor, Massachusetts" label="Windsor"/>
<link wikidata="Q54165" start="1540" end="1556" title="Berkshire County, Massachusetts" label="Berkshire County"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302467" start="1574" end="1584" title="Plainfield, Massachusetts" label="Plainfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q2536103" start="1630" end="1638" title="Ashfield, Massachusetts" label="Ashfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q54163" start="1642" end="1657" title="Franklin County, Massachusetts" label="Franklin County"/>
<link wikidata="Q392598" start="1686" end="1692" title="Goshen, Massachusetts" label="Goshen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2414206" start="1714" end="1726" title="Chesterfield, Massachusetts" label="Chesterfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q2549311" start="1748" end="1759" title="Worthington, Massachusetts" label="Worthington"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="1804" end="1831" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567514" start="1913" end="1928" title="Westfield River" label="Westfield River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2483962" start="1998" end="2019" title="Massachusetts Route 9" label="Massachusetts Route 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q49186" start="2121" end="2132" title="Northampton, Massachusetts" label="Northampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q49184" start="2145" end="2155" title="Pittsfield, Massachusetts" label="Pittsfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484109" start="2157" end="2180" title="Massachusetts Route 112" label="Massachusetts Route 112"/>
<link wikidata="Q2536955" start="2208" end="2218" title="Huntington, Massachusetts" label="Huntington"/>
<link wikidata="Q418873" start="2233" end="2246" title="cummingtonite" label="cummingtonite"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="2329" end="2335" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2549" end="2554" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2562" end="2578" title="African American (U.S. Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2586" end="2601" title="Native American (U.S. Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2609" end="2614" title="Asian (U.S. Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2627" end="2638" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2674" end="2682" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2686" end="2692" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="2844" end="2859" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="3656" end="3673" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="3765" end="3777" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q5060446" start="3891" end="3933" title="Central Berkshire Regional School District" label="Central Berkshire Regional School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q2431830" start="3946" end="3952" title="Becket, Massachusetts" label="Becket"/>
<link wikidata="Q2318577" start="3954" end="3960" title="Dalton, Massachusetts" label="Dalton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2318167" start="3962" end="3970" title="Hinsdale, Massachusetts" label="Hinsdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q614143" start="3972" end="3976" title="Peru, Massachusetts" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q2431532" start="3978" end="3988" title="Washington, Massachusetts" label="Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q4020379" start="3994" end="4001" title="Windsor, Massachusetts" label="Windsor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7959748" start="4151" end="4180" title="Wahconah Regional High School" label="Wahconah Regional High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007358" start="4389" end="4420" title="William Cullen Bryant Homestead" label="William Cullen Bryant Homestead"/>
<link wikidata="Q5605050" start="4423" end="4443" title="Greenwood Music Camp" label="Greenwood Music Camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q454840" start="4466" end="4487" title="William Cullen Bryant" label="William Cullen Bryant"/>
<link wikidata="Q119736416" start="4496" end="4513" title="Katherine Frazier" label="Katherine Frazier"/>
<link wikidata="Q7453562" start="4549" end="4562" title="Sergei Isupov" label="Sergei Isupov"/>
<link wikidata="Q555" start="4573" end="4586" title="Rachel Maddow" label="Rachel Maddow"/>
<link wikidata="Q18390730" start="4601" end="4616" title="Zalmon Richards" label="Zalmon Richards"/>
<link wikidata="Q4355736" start="4629" end="4646" title="William Jay Smith" label="William Jay Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q2440297" start="4655" end="4676" title="Worcester Reed Warner" label="Worcester Reed Warner"/>
<link wikidata="Q720561" start="4689" end="4701" title="Alan Weisman" label="Alan Weisman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333582" start="4712" end="4726" title="Richard Wilbur" label="Richard Wilbur"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4735" end="4747" title="Michael Bono" label="Michael Bono"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="116814" wikidata="Q1988974" url="?curid=116814" title="Easthampton, Massachusetts">
<text>Easthampton is a city in Hampshire County, Massachusetts, United States. The city is in the Pioneer Valley, near the five colleges in the college towns of Northampton and Amherst. The population was 16,211 at the 2020 census.

== History ==

Easthampton was first settled by European immigrants beginning in 1664 as the village of Pascommuck and was originally part of Northampton. On 24 May 1704 during Queen Anne&#x27;s War, a party of 72 Native Americans attacked the village, killing 19 of 38 residents. The village was soon resettled, and by 1785, Easthampton was established as a &quot;district&quot; by Massachusetts (a former type of political entity with less independence than a town), and in 1809, it was incorporated as a town. Easthampton is the youngest municipality in Hampshire County by date of incorporation. (It was not, however, the last incorporated; two of the three disincorporated towns of the Quabbin Reservoir in Hampshire County, Enfield and Prescott, were incorporated afterwards.)

The town grew primarily around the Manhan River, both through its phase as a strictly agricultural community and later, through the Industrial Revolution, when mills and factories were first built in Easthampton, mainly in connection with textile manufacturing and its offshoots. The first of these, the Williston-Knight Button Company, was established in 1847 by Samuel Williston, son of the town&#x27;s first minister, a Congregationalist named Payson Williston. The company specialized in cloth-covered buttons—a coveted item at the time—and to facilitate the operation of the machinery, a local brook was dammed, creating Nashawannuck Pond. Other mills soon opened nearby, a number of them specializing in elastic and rubber thread manufacturing.

Following this spurt of industrial development, the town&#x27;s first high school and first national bank opened in 1864, and a town hall was built in 1869. Constables were replaced by the town&#x27;s first police officer in 1871, the same year that Easthampton became a regular stop on the railroad. The town&#x27;s public library opened in 1881, and fourteen years later in 1895 the community was introduced to two new innovations, telephones and streetcars. With the influx of new residents came a number of new churches, founded for Catholic, Episcopalian, Lutheran, and Methodist parishioners, as well as a second Congregational church. In 1899, the West Boylston Manufacturing Company and the Hampton Company, both specializing in cloth production, moved to Easthampton, recruiting a larger immigrant labor force, particularly from Poland and Canada.

During World War I, the town&#x27;s mills all obtained federal wartime contracts and did well financially, but long before the Great Depression hit, many factories owners were already laying off employees, seeking mergers with other companies, or looking for buyers for their facilities. One of the few successes during this time was the American Character Doll Company, also known as Paragon Rubber, whose cofounder, Edward Schaeffer, was credited with inventing the first rubber doll mass-marketed in the United States.

World War II provided some relief for the Easthampton economy, as several of the older textile companies as well as newer heavy manufacturing corporations received another round of federal contracts. However, beginning in the early 1960s a number of critical closures hit the town hard. Revitalization attempts began with the opening of a new industrial park and continued with a joint government-private industrial mall which has failed to solve significantly higher rates of unemployment and poverty compared to Hampshire County as a whole.

Small farms and well-established small businesses remain the economic core of Easthampton. Easthampton changed its charter in 1996 to become a city. Since 1996 the downtown area has attracted a small community of artists and young people migrating due to Easthampton&#x27;s lower cost of living compared to nearby Northampton, a hub of the bohemian community regionally. Small stores around Main Street, Union Street, and Cottage Street have changed business due to the influx of this new demographic. This growth has produced new arts and cultural events such as the monthly Art Walk Easthampton in which visual, music and performance artists showcase their talents at venues around the city. In November 2018, the administration of Massachusetts Governor Charlie Baker announced a $3.5 million grant through the MassWorks program to the Ferry Street Mill redevelopment project in the city.

==Geography==

Easthampton is just south of the geographic center of Hampshire County. It is bordered by Southampton and Westhampton to its west, by Holyoke in Hampden County to its east and south, and by Northampton to its north. It also has a river boundary with Hadley to its northeast across the Connecticut River. The western flanks of Mount Tom and Mount Nonotuck form its eastern boundary.

Massachusetts Route 10 passes through the center of Easthampton as Main Street and Northampton Street, leading northeast to the center of Northampton and southwest to Southampton. Massachusetts Route 141 (Union Street, Cottage Street, and Holyoke Street) leads southeast from the center of Easthampton past Mount Tom to Holyoke. Interstate 91 and U.S. Route 5 cross the northeastern tip of Easthampton near the Connecticut River, leading north to Northampton and south to Holyoke.

According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the city of Easthampton has a total area of , of which are land and , or 2.02%, are water. The Manhan River crosses Easthampton north of the city center, flowing into The Oxbow, a former channel of the Connecticut River, at the northeastern end of the city.

==Education==

In 1797, the town was divided into four school districts. By the middle of the 19th century, the town offered over twelve small schools. Over the following century, the town began to reduce the number of small schools and to build schools suited for higher volume. In 1897, an eight-room school was constructed on Maple Street. The Maple Street School was later enlarged to 16 rooms. The junior high school was consolidated here from 1950 to 1962. After 1962, this school was used for elementary classes.

Mount Holyoke College graduate Sarah Chapin, the last principal of girls at Williston Seminary, became the town&#x27;s first high school principal in 1864. Chapin designed the initial curriculum, and served as principal until ill health in 1891. She retired with the class of 1901 and died that summer. In 1864, Williston Seminary decided to stop offering classes for girls. The town constructed a two-story school for use as the town&#x27;s first high school. In 1912, the school district constructed a new high school and enlarged this building (then called Park Primary School) using brick salvaged from the Center Union School. It was used as an elementary school until 1939 and again from the 1950s to the 1970s. This building, now called the Memorial Building, is currently being used as municipal offices.

In 1902, the town responded to the population increase resulting from the growth of the West Boylston and Hampton Companies. The Center Street School, an eight-room school, replaced the Center Union School. In 1920, the interior of this building was reconfigured as a 12-room school. It has served as a middle school, high school, and grade school. Replacing the Lovefield Street School in 1902, the Parsons Street School was built to serve children in the New City section of town.

In 1912, a new high school was built. An eight-room school was expanded in 1934, adding a gymnasium and an auditorium. After a new high school was built in 1962, this building was used for a junior high school and middle school. In 1975, it was converted for use as a grade school and renamed the Neil A. Pepin School.

As of March 2023, the city&#x27;s public school district includes a single PK-8 school, Mountain View School, and a high school (Easthampton High School), which was built in 2013. In addition, Hilltown Cooperative Charter Public School (K–8), and the Williston Northampton School (7–12), a private preparatory school are based out of Easthampton.

==Demographics==
As of the census of 2010, there were 16,053 people, 7,224 households, and 4,066 families residing in the city. The population density was . There were 7,615 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 93.6% White, 3.7% Hispanic, 1.1% African American, 0.2% Native American, 2.4% Asian, &lt;0.1% Pacific Islander, 1.1% from other races, and 1.6% from two or more races.

There were 7,224 households, out of which 21.6% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 42.2% were married couples living together, 10.4% had a female householder with no husband present, and 43.7% were non-families. 33.9% of all households were made up of individuals, and 25.1% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.21 and the average family size was 2.85.

In the city, the population was spread out, with 18.0% under the age of 18, 7.5% from 18 to 24, 32.4% from 25 to 44, 24.8% from 45 to 64, and 14.1% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 43 years. For every 100 women and girls, there were 92.5 men and boys. For every 100 women age 18 and over, there were 89.7 men.

The median income for a household in the city was $45,185, and the median income for a family was $54,312. Men had a median income of $36,446 versus $28,756 for women. The per capita income for the city was $21,922. About 5.9% of families and 8.9% of the population were below the poverty line, including 15.0% of those under age 18 and 9.9% of those age 65 or over.

==Government==

Easthampton was first established in 1785 as a town, with a board of selectmen acting as the executive. It had a town meeting form of legislature. Local voters enacted their newest charter in July 1996, establishing a city form of governance while retaining the name &quot;Town&quot; in its official name. Michael Tautznik was elected the first mayor of Easthampton in September 1996, after a charter was passed making the mayor the chief executive officer. The town council replaced town meeting as the legislative branch and consists of four at-large members and five district councilors. In 1999 the mayor and council petitioned the General Court to remove the word &quot;town&quot; from its name and to replace the word town with &quot;city&quot;. Mayor Tautznik was elected to an eighth term in November 2010. In November 2013, Karen Cadieux was elected mayor after Mayor Tautznik did not seek reelection. In 2017, lawyer Nicole LaChapelle defeated long-time district councilor Joy Winnie to become the city&#x27;s next mayor. 

In 2019, the city voted by referendum to adopt single-winner ranked-choice voting to elect the mayor as well as city council members from single-winner districts, while retaining plurality first-past-the-post elections for the four at-large council seats. The reform took effect for the 2021 city elections. In 2023, the city voted by referendum to adopt proportional multi-winner ranked-choice voting for the four at-large districts.

At the state level, Easthampton is in the Hampshire &amp; Hampden district of the Massachusetts Senate, represented by John Velis (D-Westfield), and the 2nd Hampshire district of the Massachusetts House of Representatives, represented by Daniel R. Carey (D-Easthampton). Easthampton is located in the Eighth Massachusetts Governor&#x27;s Council district and is represented by Tara Jacobs (D-North Adams).

==Notable people==

* Lloyd Cole, musician
* Amy Gardiner, animator
* Andrew Hussie, webcomic artist
* Jeph Jacques, webcomic artist
* Kelly Link, author
* John D. Ludden, businessman and politician
* Thomas Lux, poet, nonfiction writer, teacher
* Lauren D. Lyman, journalist
* Jeff Mason, professional ice hockey defenseman and coach, Belfast Giants
* Jeremy Powers, cyclist (2012, 2014, 2015, &amp; 2016 US Cyclocross national champion)
* Jeffrey Rowland, webcomic artist

==Points of interest==
Easthampton has a number of points of interest.

The Mount Tom State Reservation extends into the eastern part the city, and many local residents hike up to enjoy the view of the Pioneer Valley from the rock ledges. Mount Tom, with a summit elevation of , is the highest traprock peak on the Metacomet Ridge, a linear mountain range that extends from Long Island Sound to the Vermont border. Mount Tom is characterized by its high cliffs, sweeping vistas, and microclimate ecosystems. The Metacomet-Monadnock Trail traverses the mountain.

The Arcadia Wildlife Sanctuary, part of the Massachusetts Audubon Society, is split between Easthampton and neighboring Northampton. Recently, the Manhan Rail Trail bicycle path was built over an old railroad line, and there are plans to connect the path to others in the area. Near the rail trail and wildlife sanctuary are three conservation areas owned by the local non-profit land trust, Pascommuck Conservation Trust, part of the trust&#x27;s of holdings in Easthampton.
The Old Town Hall is a historic building located in the Main Street Historic District in Easthampton, Massachusetts. The High Victorian Gothic town hall was built in 1869 by Boston architect Charles Edward Parker. In 1987, it was listed on the National Register of Historic Places. Old Town Hall is managed by the nonprofit CitySpace, Inc. as a center for the arts.

In and around downtown Easthampton, attractions include:
* The Cottage Street Cultural District, named by the Massachusetts Cultural Council and the Commonwealth of Massachusetts in 2013.
* The Emily Williston Memorial Library, listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1987, provides a collection of over 45,000 books, movies, and other media for Easthampton and the surrounding towns. Designed by Peabody &amp; Stearns.
* The Williston Northampton School, a private secondary prep school
* One Cottage Street, an old factory building, renovated in the late 1970s to make workshops and studios for artists and craftspeople
* Riverside Industries, also at One Cottage Street, a human service organization offering a variety of innovative programs for people with disabilities
* Eastworks, the old Stanley Home Products factory building, recently converted into artists&#x27; studios, offices, and restaurant space
* The historic old fire station, recently made into a workshop by local furniture maker Silas Kopf

==Events==
Easthampton has many events throughout the year. Every February the Friends of the Nashawannuck Pond host WinterFest to raise funds for Nashawannuck Pond and develop public awareness about ongoing efforts to keep the pond healthy. 

Thunder in the Valley is a summer music concert featuring fireworks. All proceeds are donated to the Children&#x27;s Miracle Network. 

Every summer, MillPond.Live brings a festival series designed to unite people from all walks of life to Easthampton&#x27;s Millside Park, with local and international music, food, art, and community. This festival sees thousands of attendees. 

Easthampton City Arts (ECA) is a city organization that creates positive, innovative and accessible arts programming and cultural events. Some of the events that ECA organizes include:
Art Walk (a free and family-friendly event held throughout the city every second Thursday of the month); Cultural Chaos (a street festival that celebrates the Cottage Street Cultural District); and Porchfest (Easthampton&#x27;s very first Porchfest was held in September 2023 and will return in 2024). 

Easthampton also features several Open Studios throughout the year, hosted by various artists and studios located in some of the city&#x27;s many converted mill buildings. Cottage Street Open Studios will take place in May, and Eastworks Open Studios will take place in November.

== References ==

==Further reading==

==External links==
* Official Easthampton website
* Easthampton Chamber of Commerce</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1988974" start="0" end="11" title="Easthampton, Massachusetts" label="Easthampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q54161" start="25" end="41" title="Hampshire County, Massachusetts" label="Hampshire County"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="43" end="56" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7196817" start="92" end="106" title="Pioneer Valley" label="Pioneer Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331248" start="117" end="130" title="Five College Consortium" label="five colleges"/>
<link wikidata="Q49186" start="155" end="166" title="Northampton, Massachusetts" label="Northampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q49164" start="171" end="178" title="Amherst, Massachusetts" label="Amherst"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="213" end="224" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q869045" start="404" end="425" title="Queen Anne&amp;#x27;s War" label="Queen Anne&amp;#x27;s War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2154459" start="689" end="693" title="New England town" label="town"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124827" start="918" end="935" title="Quabbin Reservoir" label="Quabbin Reservoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q5377276" start="957" end="964" title="Enfield, Massachusetts" label="Enfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q7240836" start="969" end="977" title="Prescott, Massachusetts" label="Prescott"/>
<link wikidata="Q16894588" start="1046" end="1058" title="Manhan River" label="Manhan River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269" start="1143" end="1164" title="Industrial Revolution" label="Industrial Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1505660" start="1250" end="1271" title="textile manufacturing" label="textile manufacturing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062789" start="1434" end="1451" title="Congregational church" label="Congregationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q105038092" start="1833" end="1844" title="High school (North America)" label="high school"/>
<link wikidata="Q25550691" start="1891" end="1900" title="town hall" label="town hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565868" start="2054" end="2062" title="railroad" label="railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q7075" start="2087" end="2094" title="library" label="library"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="2300" end="2308" title="Roman Catholic Church" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q682443" start="2310" end="2322" title="Episcopal Church (United States)" label="Episcopalian"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="2324" end="2332" title="Lutheran" label="Lutheran"/>
<link wikidata="Q33203" start="2338" end="2347" title="Methodist" label="Methodist"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="2601" end="2607" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q857880" start="2612" end="2618" title="French Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="2628" end="2639" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q696482" start="2748" end="2764" title="Great Depression in the United States" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q731112" start="2835" end="2841" title="merger" label="merger"/>
<link wikidata="Q28206659" start="2959" end="2990" title="American Character Doll Company" label="American Character Doll Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="3144" end="3156" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1662100" start="3487" end="3502" title="industrial park" label="industrial park"/>
<link wikidata="Q575619" start="3968" end="3982" title="cost of living" label="cost of living"/>
<link wikidata="Q207175" start="4028" end="4036" title="Bohemianism" label="bohemian"/>
<link wikidata="Q887117" start="4422" end="4444" title="Governor of Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts Governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5076629" start="4445" end="4458" title="Charlie Baker" label="Charlie Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1720696" start="4686" end="4697" title="Southampton, Massachusetts" label="Southampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2536890" start="4702" end="4713" title="Westhampton, Massachusetts" label="Westhampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637790" start="4730" end="4737" title="Holyoke, Massachusetts" label="Holyoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q54160" start="4741" end="4755" title="Hampden County, Massachusetts" label="Hampden County"/>
<link wikidata="Q49186" start="4786" end="4797" title="Northampton, Massachusetts" label="Northampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302147" start="4846" end="4852" title="Hadley, Massachusetts" label="Hadley"/>
<link wikidata="Q379648" start="4881" end="4898" title="Connecticut River" label="Connecticut River"/>
<link wikidata="Q3322152" start="4922" end="4931" title="Mount Tom (Massachusetts)" label="Mount Tom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3321987" start="4936" end="4950" title="Mount Nonotuck" label="Mount Nonotuck"/>
<link wikidata="Q2483964" start="4979" end="5001" title="Massachusetts Route 10" label="Massachusetts Route 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484175" start="5159" end="5182" title="Massachusetts Route 141" label="Massachusetts Route 141"/>
<link wikidata="Q94961" start="5308" end="5321" title="Interstate 91" label="Interstate 91"/>
<link wikidata="Q16970336" start="5326" end="5338" title="U.S. Route 5 in Massachusetts" label="U.S. Route 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="5478" end="5496" title="U.S. Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q16894588" start="5593" end="5605" title="Manhan River" label="Manhan River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7755777" start="5665" end="5674" title="The Oxbow (Connecticut River)" label="The Oxbow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140542" start="6278" end="6299" title="Mount Holyoke College" label="Mount Holyoke College"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7873" end="7893" title="Neil A. Pepin School" label="Neil A. Pepin School"/>
<link wikidata="Q107657623" start="7930" end="7952" title="Easthampton Public Schools" label="public school district"/>
<link wikidata="Q96903962" start="8025" end="8048" title="Easthampton High School" label="Easthampton High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="8271" end="8277" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="8499" end="8504" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="8511" end="8519" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="8526" end="8542" title="African American (U.S. Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="8549" end="8564" title="Native American (U.S. Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="8571" end="8576" title="Asian (U.S. Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="8587" end="8603" title="Pacific Islander (U.S. Census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="8615" end="8626" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="8772" end="8787" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="9591" end="9608" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="9700" end="9712" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q4931397" start="9863" end="9881" title="board of selectmen" label="board of selectmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q455752" start="9916" end="9928" title="town meeting" label="town meeting"/>
<link wikidata="Q3507268" start="10265" end="10277" title="town council" label="town council"/>
<link wikidata="Q6038705" start="10898" end="10918" title="Ranked-choice voting in the United States" label="ranked-choice voting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211577" start="11016" end="11025" title="Plurality voting" label="plurality"/>
<link wikidata="Q205759" start="11026" end="11045" title="First-past-the-post voting" label="first-past-the-post"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494665" start="11355" end="11375" title="Massachusetts Senate" label="Massachusetts Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q16218893" start="11392" end="11402" title="John Velis" label="John Velis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494460" start="11456" end="11494" title="Massachusetts House of Representatives" label="Massachusetts House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q63391748" start="11511" end="11526" title="Daniel R. Carey" label="Daniel R. Carey"/>
<link wikidata="Q6784274" start="11581" end="11618" title="Massachusetts Governor&amp;#x27;s Council" label="Massachusetts Governor&amp;#x27;s Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370493" start="11702" end="11712" title="Lloyd Cole" label="Lloyd Cole"/>
<link wikidata="Q4749201" start="11725" end="11737" title="Amy Gardiner" label="Amy Gardiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q14907982" start="11750" end="11763" title="Andrew Hussie" label="Andrew Hussie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3177244" start="11783" end="11795" title="Jeph Jacques" label="Jeph Jacques"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190926" start="11815" end="11825" title="Kelly Link" label="Kelly Link"/>
<link wikidata="Q16031459" start="11836" end="11850" title="John D. Ludden" label="John D. Ludden"/>
<link wikidata="Q7791985" start="11881" end="11891" title="Thomas Lux" label="Thomas Lux"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500106" start="11928" end="11943" title="Lauren D. Lyman" label="Lauren D. Lyman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6174444" start="11958" end="11968" title="Jeff Mason" label="Jeff Mason"/>
<link wikidata="Q815427" start="12016" end="12030" title="Belfast Giants" label="Belfast Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q1687618" start="12033" end="12046" title="Jeremy Powers" label="Jeremy Powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6176245" start="12121" end="12136" title="Jeffrey Rowland" label="Jeffrey Rowland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3322152" start="12231" end="12240" title="Mount Tom (Massachusetts)" label="Mount Tom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7196817" start="12357" end="12371" title="Pioneer Valley" label="Pioneer Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3307200" start="12470" end="12485" title="Metacomet Ridge" label="Metacomet Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q867460" start="12529" end="12546" title="Long Island Sound" label="Long Island Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q16551" start="12554" end="12561" title="Vermont" label="Vermont"/>
<link wikidata="Q215108" start="12638" end="12650" title="microclimate" label="microclimate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1924738" start="12667" end="12692" title="Metacomet-Monadnock Trail" label="Metacomet-Monadnock Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q6784185" start="12762" end="12791" title="Massachusetts Audubon Society" label="Massachusetts Audubon Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q16894590" start="12865" end="12882" title="Manhan Rail Trail" label="Manhan Rail Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q6736136" start="13250" end="13279" title="Main Street Historic District (Easthampton, Massachusetts)" label="Main Street Historic District"/>
<link wikidata="Q16956008" start="13385" end="13406" title="Charles Edward Parker" label="Charles Edward Parker"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13755" end="13787" title="Emily Williston Memorial Library" label="Emily Williston Memorial Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q7157269" start="13972" end="13993" title="Peabody &amp;amp; Stearns" label="Peabody &amp;amp; Stearns"/>
<link wikidata="Q8022149" start="14001" end="14029" title="Williston Northampton School" label="Williston Northampton School"/>
<link wikidata="Q423208" start="14033" end="14040" title="private school" label="private"/>
<link wikidata="Q159334" start="14041" end="14050" title="secondary school" label="secondary"/>
<link wikidata="Q428602" start="14051" end="14062" title="University-preparatory school" label="prep school"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14065" end="14083" title="One Cottage Street" label="One Cottage Street"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14199" end="14219" title="Riverside Industries" label="Riverside Industries"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14351" end="14360" title="Eastworks" label="Eastworks"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14370" end="14391" title="Stanley Home Products" label="Stanley Home Products"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049923" start="14559" end="14574" title="marquetry" label="furniture maker"/>
<link wikidata="Q7514176" start="14575" end="14585" title="Silas Kopf" label="Silas Kopf"/>
<link wikidata="Q17141503" start="15636" end="15645" title="Porchfest" label="Porchfest"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="116815" wikidata="Q392598" url="?curid=116815" title="Goshen, Massachusetts">
<text>Goshen is a town in Hampshire County, Massachusetts, United States. The population was 960 at the 2020 census. It is part of the Springfield, Massachusetts Metropolitan Statistical Area. The town has a rural atmosphere, with one general store, a post office, a fire station, a regional elementary school in nearby Chesterfield, and a town hall. The town encompasses both the Upper and Lower Highland lakes, Upper being a part of the D.A.R. State Forest. The Lower Highland Lake is privately held by a homeowners&#x27; association for families who own yearlong and summer properties on the lake.

== History ==
Goshen was first settled in 1761 and was officially incorporated on May 14, 1781.

Home to natural beryl deposits, colorless beryl was first discovered in Goshen, leading it to be called goshenite by the gem industry.

Parent Town: Chesterfield, Massachusetts.

===Historic sites and societies===
* Goshen Historical Commission Museum

==Demographics==

As of the census of 2000, there were 921 people, 365 households, and 247 families residing in the town. The population density was . There were 536 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the town was 99.02% White, 0.11% Native American, 0.22% Asian, and 0.65% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 1.09% of the population.

There were 365 households, out of which 29.9% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 56.2% were married couples living together, 6.8% had a female householder with no husband present, and 32.3% were non-families. Of all households, 18.4% were made up of individuals, and 5.8% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.52 and the average family size was 2.94.

In the town, the population was spread out, with 21.9% under the age of 18, 4.3% from 18 to 24, 32.0% from 25 to 44, 31.1% from 45 to 64, and 10.6% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 41 years. For every 100 females, there were 88.0 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 90.2 males.

The median income for a household in the town was $49,583, and the median income for a family was $58,750. Males had a median income of $37,159 versus $27,500 for females. The per capita income for the town was $22,221. About 4.3% of families and 7.9% of the population were below the poverty line, including 7.3% of those under age 18 and 9.5% of those age 65 or over.

==Geography==
According to the United States Census Bureau, the town has a total area of , of which is land and (1.98%) is water.
Coordinates are .

Goshen and Baker, Missouri, are the only two towns or villages in the United States within 29 miles of four different states. Goshen is 28.5 miles from New York, 28 miles from Connecticut, 26 miles from New Hampshire, and 20 miles from Vermont.

==Education==

Goshen is part of the Hampshire Regional School district along with Chesterfield, Southampton, Westhampton, and Williamsburg. Students in Goshen attend New Hingham Regional Elementary School in Chesterfield from K–6. High School students attend Hampshire Regional High School.

==Points of interest==
* D.A.R. State Forest A property of the Massachusetts Department of Conservation and Recreation.
* Camp Howe
* The Institute for the Musical Arts
*Three Sisters Sanctuary Arts &amp; Performance space

==References==

== External links ==

* &quot;MHC Survey Reconnaissance Town Report: Goshen&quot; Massachusetts Historical Commission, 1982.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q392598" start="0" end="6" title="Goshen, Massachusetts" label="Goshen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2154459" start="12" end="16" title="New England town" label="town"/>
<link wikidata="Q54161" start="20" end="36" title="Hampshire County, Massachusetts" label="Hampshire County"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="38" end="51" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="98" end="109" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q49158" start="129" end="155" title="Springfield, Massachusetts" label="Springfield, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7580900" start="156" end="185" title="Springfield metropolitan area, Massachusetts" label="Metropolitan Statistical Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q2414206" start="314" end="326" title="Chesterfield, Massachusetts" label="Chesterfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q5203349" start="433" end="452" title="D.A.R. State Forest (Massachusetts)" label="D.A.R. State Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q103480" start="709" end="714" title="beryl" label="beryl"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="797" end="806" title="Beryl#Goshenite" label="goshenite"/>
<link wikidata="Q2414206" start="842" end="854" title="Chesterfield, Massachusetts" label="Chesterfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="856" end="869" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="974" end="980" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1194" end="1199" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1207" end="1222" title="Native American (U.S. Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1230" end="1235" title="Asian (U.S. Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1271" end="1279" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1283" end="1289" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="1441" end="1456" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="2252" end="2269" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="2361" end="2373" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="2478" end="2505" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q392548" start="2607" end="2622" title="Baker, Missouri" label="Baker, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="2748" end="2756" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q779" start="2772" end="2783" title="Connecticut" label="Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q759" start="2799" end="2812" title="New Hampshire" label="New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q16551" start="2832" end="2839" title="Vermont" label="Vermont"/>
<link wikidata="Q2414206" start="2925" end="2937" title="Chesterfield, Massachusetts" label="Chesterfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q1720696" start="2939" end="2950" title="Southampton, Massachusetts" label="Southampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2536890" start="2952" end="2963" title="Westhampton, Massachusetts" label="Westhampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2414374" start="2969" end="2981" title="Williamsburg, Massachusetts" label="Williamsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2414206" start="3051" end="3063" title="Chesterfield, Massachusetts" label="Chesterfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q5646071" start="3102" end="3132" title="Hampshire Regional High School" label="Hampshire Regional High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5203349" start="3160" end="3179" title="D.A.R. State Forest (Massachusetts)" label="D.A.R. State Forest"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="116816" wikidata="Q2302147" url="?curid=116816" title="Hadley, Massachusetts">
<text>Hadley (, ) is a town in Hampshire County, Massachusetts, United States. The population was 5,325 at the 2020 census. It is part of the Springfield, Massachusetts Metropolitan Statistical Area. The area around the Hampshire and Mountain Farms Malls along Route 9 is a major shopping destination for the surrounding communities.

== History ==

===Early===
Hadley was first settled in 1659 and was officially incorporated in 1661. The former Norwottuck was renamed for Hadleigh, Suffolk. Its settlers were primarily a discontented group of families from the Puritan colonies of Hartford and Wethersfield, Connecticut, who petitioned to start a new colony up north after some controversy over doctrine in the local church. The settlement was led by John Russell. The first settler inside of Hadley was Nathaniel Dickinson, who surveyed the streets of what is now Hadley, Hatfield, and Amherst. At the time, Hadley encompassed a wide radius of land on both sides of the Connecticut River (but mostly on the eastern shore) including much of what would become known as the Equivalent Lands. In the following century, these were broken off into precincts and eventually the separate towns of Hatfield, Amherst, South Hadley, Granby and Belchertown. The early histories of these towns are, as a result, filed under the history of Hadley.

Lt. Gen. Edward Whalley and Maj. Gen. William Goffe, two Puritan generals hunted for their role in the execution (or &quot;regicide&quot;) of Charles I of England, were hidden in the home of the town&#x27;s minister, John Russell. During King Philip&#x27;s War, an attack by Native Americans was, by some accounts, thwarted with the aid of General Goffe. This event, compounded by the reluctance of the townsfolk to betray Goffe&#x27;s location, developed into the legend of the Angel of Hadley, which came to be included in the historical manuscript &quot;History of Hadley&quot; by Sylvester Judd.

In 1683, eleven years before the Salem witch trials, Mary Webster, wife to William Webster son of the former governor of Connecticut and a founder of the very town of Hadley (John Webster), was accused and acquitted of witchcraft. She was unsuccessfully hanged by rowdy town folk. A description is given in Cotton Mather&#x27;s &quot;Magnalia Christi Americana&quot;.

The Civil War general Joseph Hooker was a longtime resident of Hadley. Levi Stockbridge, one of the founders of the Massachusetts Agricultural College (now the University of Massachusetts Amherst), was also from Hadley where he was a farmer.

=== Recent ===
Hadley&#x27;s transformation from an old agricultural order to the new form is the direct result of expansion of the nearby University of Massachusetts Amherst during the 1960s. Much of its former farmland was swallowed in the housing market stimulated by incoming faculty and off-campus students. Route 116 was redirected in an attempt to solve traffic congestion. Route 9, which runs east–west through the town to connect Amherst and Northampton, became a hotpoint for commercial development due to Amherst not wanting development on its land while large corporations opened stores along the strip. Today, the Hadley economy is a mixture of agriculture and commercial development, including big-box stores and the Hampshire Mall. 

In 2003, an organization called Hadley Neighbors for Sensible Development was formed that opposed continued large-scale commercial development in Hadley by emphasizing the downside of such growth. However, many local residents support commercial development, and about 1,000 people signed a petition asking for a new Wal-Mart, saying it would save them money on their groceries. In 2008, Wal-Mart pulled its plans to build the Supercenter after the Conservation Commission ruled that the plan did not comply with wetlands regulations. The developer of the site (Hampshire Mall) filed and lost numerous appeals but continued its legal challenges of the commission&#x27;s findings. Many residents also opposed rezoning to accommodate a new Lowe&#x27;s store because they said it would be too big and would require more filling of wetlands than allowed by state law. However, the rezoning passed in 2004 and the store was built in 2009. Lowe&#x27;s then sued the town because it didn&#x27;t want to pay the required sewer hookup fees. And, in 2010, the Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection found that Lowe&#x27;s had illegally filled large areas of wetlands on that site and fined the developer more than $15,000.

The World Monuments Fund listed the &quot;Cultural Landscape of Hadley, Massachusetts&quot; on the 2010 World Monuments Watch List of Most Endangered Sites.

The landscape of Hadley is largely open-field farming, which was only used in the earliest New England settlements and had mostly disappeared by the 18th century; its survival in Hadley on such a large scale is unusual. According to the World Monument Fund are zoned for residential and commercial use, providing no long-term protection for the historic landscape.

==Economy==
Hadley&#x27;s economy can be in large part characterized by agriculture and retail services, having the thoroughfare Massachusetts Route 9 traversing it east to west with abundant stores, and a wide variety of farms which benefit from the area&#x27;s Hadley loam. Due to its climate and soils, one of its staple crops for the last two centuries has consistently been its asparagus, which has been described as competing in Boston markets despite local availability of the crop from other nearby regions, as well as in restaurants in France and Germany, and Queen Elizabeth II&#x27;s own annual spring feast in England. Its ubiquity and reputation in Hadley agriculture has lent it the nickname &quot;Hadley grass&quot;.

==Education==

Hadley is home to Hadley Elementary School serving children in kindergarten through sixth grade, and Hopkins Academy, serving grades seven through twelve. Hopkins Academy was founded in 1664 through money that was donated by Edward Hopkins, a wealthy Connecticut merchant, and it is the fourth oldest public high school in the United States. Hadley is also home to the Pioneer Valley Chinese Immersion Charter School.

==Geography==
According to the United States Census Bureau, the town has a total area of , of which is land and , or 6.18%, is water. The land boundaries of Hadley are Sunderland to the north, Amherst to the east, and South Hadley to the south. Across the Connecticut River, Hadley borders Hatfield to the northwest, Northampton to the west, and Easthampton and Holyoke along a short length of river to the southwest. The Mount Holyoke Range forms the boundary with South Hadley and is where the highest point of Hadley is found. This is on Mount Hitchcock at an elevation of . The Metacomet-Monadnock Trail traverses the Holyoke Range with panoramic vistas from several locations.

==Climate==

In a typical year, Hadley, Massachusetts temperatures fall below for 205 days per year. Annual precipitation is typically 44.7 inches per year (high in the US) and snow covers the ground 66 days per year or 18.1% of the year (high in the US). It may be helpful to understand the yearly precipitation by imagining nine straight days of moderate rain per year. The humidity is below 60% for approximately 18.4 days, or 5% of the year.

==Demographics==

As of the census of 2000, there were 4,793 people, 1,895 households, and 1,248 families residing in the town. The population density was . There were 1,953 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the town was 95.91% White, 0.75% African American, 0.6% Native American, 1.56% Asian, 0.58% from other races, and 1.13% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 1.67% of the population.

There were 1,895 households, out of which 26.6% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 53.1% were married couples living together, 9.8% had a female householder with no husband present, and 34.1% were non-families. 24.7% of all households were made up of individuals, and 12.2% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.45 and the average family size was 2.90.

The population was spread out, with 20.0% under the age of 18, 7.0% from 18 to 24, 27.7% from 25 to 44, 25.7% from 45 to 64, and 19.5% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 42 years. For every 100 females, there were 88.5 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 87.4 males.

The median income for a household in the town was $51,851, and the median income for a family was $61,897. Males had a median income of $44,773 versus $34,189 for females. The per capita income for the town was $24,945. About 4.8% of families and 6.9% of the population were below the poverty line, including 6.6% of those under age 18 and 3.2% of those age 65 or over.

== Government ==
Hadley is governed by open Town Meeting, a Select Board, and a Town Administrator.

=== Select Board ===
*Molly Keegan, Chair – Term Expires 2024

*Randall Izer, Clerk – Term Expires 2025

*Jane Nevinsmith, Member – Term Expires 2026

*Amy Parsons, Member – Term Expires 2027

*David J. Fill II, Member – Term Expires 2027

*Crystal Jackson, Chair of the CDEI- Term Expires 2028

=== Town Administrator ===
* Carolyn Brennan 2019 – September 2024
* Michael Mason (Police Chief/Acting Town Administrator) September 2024 – present

==Points of interest==

* Porter-Phelps-Huntington Museum
* Skinner State Park and Historic Summit House
* Hopkins Academy (fourth oldest school in the United States; currently Hadley&#x27;s public middle and high school)
* Hadley Farm Museum
* Hadley Town Common 
* Regicides monument commemorating the site where Rev. John Russell sheltered Edward Whalley and William Goffe in his home
* Warren McGuirk Alumni Stadium, the University of Massachusetts Amherst football stadium
*Norwottuck Branch Rail Trail (bike path which can be traveled from Northampton, MA to Belchertown, MA; the path runs through Hadley) 
*Connecticut River (the longest river in New England) 
*Silvio O. Conte National Fish and Wildlife Refuge (the only refuge of its kind to encompass an entire watershed). The Fort River Birding and Nature Trail, Fort River Division in Hadley, MA features a storybook trail along a 1.1 mile fully accessible loop that can be enjoyed by walkers, parents with strollers or people who use wheelchairs.

==Notable people==
* William Goffe, English parliamentarian and regicide
* Lisa Green, Distinguished University Professor of Linguistics at the University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Thomas Hannum, band director at UMass Amherst with the Minuteman Marching Band. Percussion instructor and director with Boston Crusaders Drum and Bugle Corps. Member of the Drum Corps International Hall of Fame.
* Sara Northrup Hollister, occultist
* Joseph Hooker, Civil War general
* Clifton Johnson, American writer, illustrator and photographer 
* Elizabeth Porter Phelps, early American diarist
* Levi Stockbridge, Farmer and Scientist. Helped found Massachusetts Agricultural College (now known as the University of Massachusetts Amherst) and served as first Professor of Agricultural at the school. Also served as Farm Superintendent and President
* John Webster, governor of the Colony of Connecticut (1656–1657)
* Mary Webster, accused of witchcraft, later survived an attempted lynching
* Edward Whalley, English parliamentarian and regicide

==See also==
* Tofu Curtain

== References ==

==Further reading==

==External links==

*Town of Hadley Official website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2302147" start="0" end="6" title="Hadley, Massachusetts" label="Hadley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2154459" start="17" end="21" title="New England town" label="town"/>
<link wikidata="Q54161" start="25" end="56" title="Hampshire County, Massachusetts" label="Hampshire County, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="105" end="116" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q49158" start="136" end="162" title="Springfield, Massachusetts" label="Springfield, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7580900" start="163" end="192" title="Springfield metropolitan area, Massachusetts" label="Metropolitan Statistical Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q5646064" start="214" end="223" title="Hampshire Mall" label="Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6924943" start="228" end="247" title="Mountain Farms Mall" label="Mountain Farms Mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2483962" start="255" end="262" title="Massachusetts Route 9" label="Route 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013608" start="468" end="485" title="Hadleigh, Suffolk" label="Hadleigh, Suffolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q137073" start="557" end="564" title="Puritan" label="Puritan"/>
<link wikidata="Q33486" start="577" end="585" title="Hartford, Connecticut" label="Hartford"/>
<link wikidata="Q755202" start="590" end="602" title="Wethersfield, Connecticut" label="Wethersfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q779" start="604" end="615" title="Connecticut" label="Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q6255988" start="747" end="759" title="John Russell (clergyman)" label="John Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q19288283" start="800" end="819" title="Nathaniel Dickinson (pioneer)" label="Nathaniel Dickinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2414217" start="869" end="877" title="Hatfield, Massachusetts" label="Hatfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q49164" start="883" end="890" title="Amherst, Massachusetts" label="Amherst"/>
<link wikidata="Q379648" start="967" end="984" title="Connecticut River" label="Connecticut River"/>
<link wikidata="Q5384712" start="1068" end="1084" title="Equivalent Lands" label="Equivalent Lands"/>
<link wikidata="Q2423149" start="1205" end="1217" title="South Hadley, Massachusetts" label="South Hadley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2416252" start="1219" end="1225" title="Granby, Massachusetts" label="Granby"/>
<link wikidata="Q2414308" start="1230" end="1241" title="Belchertown, Massachusetts" label="Belchertown"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048719" start="1341" end="1355" title="Edward Whalley" label="Edward Whalley"/>
<link wikidata="Q547865" start="1370" end="1383" title="William Goffe" label="William Goffe"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1455" end="1463" title="Regicide#Execution of Charles I of England" label="regicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q81506" start="1474" end="1494" title="Charles I of England" label="Charles I of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q862257" start="1570" end="1592" title="King Philip&amp;#x27;s War" label="King Philip&amp;#x27;s War"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="1607" end="1623" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="Native Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q4762329" start="1811" end="1826" title="Angel of Hadley" label="Angel of Hadley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7660802" start="1916" end="1930" title="Sylvester Judd" label="Sylvester Judd"/>
<link wikidata="Q219698" start="1966" end="1984" title="Salem witch trials" label="Salem witch trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q6780938" start="1986" end="1998" title="Mary Webster (alleged witch)" label="Mary Webster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1701495" start="2108" end="2120" title="John Webster (governor)" label="John Webster"/>
<link wikidata="Q3376357" start="2267" end="2293" title="Magnalia Christi Americana" label="Magnalia Christi Americana"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="2306" end="2315" title="American Civil War" label="Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q315597" start="2324" end="2337" title="Joseph Hooker" label="Joseph Hooker"/>
<link wikidata="Q6535530" start="2373" end="2389" title="Levi Stockbridge" label="Levi Stockbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q15142" start="2418" end="2452" title="Massachusetts Agricultural College" label="Massachusetts Agricultural College"/>
<link wikidata="Q15142" start="2462" end="2497" title="University of Massachusetts Amherst" label="University of Massachusetts Amherst"/>
<link wikidata="Q15142" start="2684" end="2719" title="University of Massachusetts Amherst" label="University of Massachusetts Amherst"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484117" start="2858" end="2867" title="Massachusetts Route 116" label="Route 116"/>
<link wikidata="Q2483962" start="2926" end="2933" title="Massachusetts Route 9" label="Route 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q49186" start="2996" end="3007" title="Northampton, Massachusetts" label="Northampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5646064" start="3276" end="3290" title="Hampshire Mall" label="Hampshire Mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q170321" start="4122" end="4129" title="wetland" label="wetland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6784250" start="4344" end="4396" title="Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection" label="Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297150" start="4526" end="4546" title="World Monuments Fund" label="World Monuments Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q3244120" start="4621" end="4677" title="2010 World Monuments Watch List of Most Endangered Sites" label="2010 World Monuments Watch List of Most Endangered Sites"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142845" start="4715" end="4733" title="open field system" label="open-field farming"/>
<link wikidata="Q18389" start="4771" end="4782" title="New England" label="New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q2483962" start="5175" end="5196" title="Massachusetts Route 9" label="Massachusetts Route 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q28367" start="5429" end="5438" title="asparagus" label="asparagus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5900624" start="5895" end="5910" title="Hopkins Academy" label="Hopkins Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292576" start="6019" end="6033" title="Edward Hopkins" label="Edward Hopkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q6643189" start="6088" end="6134" title="List of the oldest public high schools in the United States" label="oldest public high school in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q7196816" start="6163" end="6210" title="Pioneer Valley Chinese Immersion Charter School" label="Pioneer Valley Chinese Immersion Charter School"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="6244" end="6271" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q2416483" start="6381" end="6391" title="Sunderland, Massachusetts" label="Sunderland"/>
<link wikidata="Q49164" start="6406" end="6413" title="Amherst, Massachusetts" label="Amherst"/>
<link wikidata="Q2423149" start="6431" end="6443" title="South Hadley, Massachusetts" label="South Hadley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2414217" start="6503" end="6511" title="Hatfield, Massachusetts" label="Hatfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q49186" start="6530" end="6541" title="Northampton, Massachusetts" label="Northampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1988974" start="6559" end="6570" title="Easthampton, Massachusetts" label="Easthampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637790" start="6575" end="6582" title="Holyoke, Massachusetts" label="Holyoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q2961776" start="6635" end="6654" title="Holyoke Range" label="Mount Holyoke Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q1924738" start="6795" end="6820" title="Metacomet-Monadnock Trail" label="Metacomet-Monadnock Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="7371" end="7377" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="7599" end="7604" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="7612" end="7628" title="African American (U.S. Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="7635" end="7650" title="Native American (U.S. Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="7658" end="7663" title="Asian (U.S. Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="7676" end="7687" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="7723" end="7731" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="7735" end="7741" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="7895" end="7910" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="8693" end="8710" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="8802" end="8814" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q455752" start="8932" end="8944" title="Town Meeting" label="Town Meeting"/>
<link wikidata="Q4931397" start="8948" end="8960" title="Select Board" label="Select Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q696776" start="8968" end="8986" title="City manager" label="Town Administrator"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231583" start="9461" end="9492" title="Porter-Phelps-Huntington House" label="Porter-Phelps-Huntington Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3363983" start="9495" end="9539" title="J. A. Skinner State Park" label="Skinner State Park and Historic Summit House"/>
<link wikidata="Q5900624" start="9542" end="9557" title="Hopkins Academy" label="Hopkins Academy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9659" end="9677" title="Hadley Farm Museum" label="Hadley Farm Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475448" start="9702" end="9710" title="Regicide" label="Regicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q6255988" start="9750" end="9767" title="John Russell (clergyman)" label="Rev. John Russell"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9778" end="9792" title="Edward Whalley#Legacy" label="Edward Whalley"/>
<link wikidata="Q547865" start="9797" end="9810" title="William Goffe" label="William Goffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6588293" start="9825" end="9854" title="Warren McGuirk Alumni Stadium" label="Warren McGuirk Alumni Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q15142" start="9860" end="9895" title="University of Massachusetts Amherst" label="University of Massachusetts Amherst"/>
<link wikidata="Q14715791" start="9914" end="9942" title="Norwottuck Branch Rail Trail" label="Norwottuck Branch Rail Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q379648" start="10049" end="10066" title="Connecticut River" label="Connecticut River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7517138" start="10104" end="10153" title="Silvio O. Conte National Fish and Wildlife Refuge" label="Silvio O. Conte National Fish and Wildlife Refuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q547865" start="10467" end="10480" title="William Goffe" label="William Goffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q28457911" start="10521" end="10531" title="Lisa Green (linguist)" label="Lisa Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q15142" start="10590" end="10625" title="University of Massachusetts Amherst" label="University of Massachusetts Amherst"/>
<link wikidata="Q7790395" start="10628" end="10641" title="Thomas Hannum" label="Thomas Hannum"/>
<link wikidata="Q15142" start="10660" end="10673" title="UMass Amherst" label="UMass Amherst"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895714" start="10683" end="10706" title="Minuteman Marching Band" label="Minuteman Marching Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q4947870" start="10748" end="10785" title="Boston Crusaders Drum and Bugle Corps" label="Boston Crusaders Drum and Bugle Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q5309050" start="10801" end="10825" title="Drum Corps International" label="Drum Corps International"/>
<link wikidata="Q7421728" start="10842" end="10865" title="Sara Northrup Hollister" label="Sara Northrup Hollister"/>
<link wikidata="Q315597" start="10879" end="10892" title="Joseph Hooker" label="Joseph Hooker"/>
<link wikidata="Q21552483" start="10914" end="10929" title="Clifton Johnson (author)" label="Clifton Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5363368" start="10980" end="11003" title="Elizabeth Porter Phelps" label="Elizabeth Porter Phelps"/>
<link wikidata="Q6535530" start="11030" end="11046" title="Levi Stockbridge" label="Levi Stockbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q15142" start="11136" end="11171" title="University of Massachusetts Amherst" label="University of Massachusetts Amherst"/>
<link wikidata="Q1701495" start="11285" end="11297" title="John Webster (governor)" label="John Webster"/>
<link wikidata="Q6780938" start="11351" end="11363" title="Mary Webster (alleged witch)" label="Mary Webster"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048719" start="11427" end="11441" title="Edward Whalley" label="Edward Whalley"/>
<link wikidata="Q29791510" start="11496" end="11508" title="Tofu Curtain" label="Tofu Curtain"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="116817" wikidata="Q2536955" url="?curid=116817" title="Huntington, Massachusetts">
<text>Huntington is a town in Hampshire County, Massachusetts, United States. The population was 2,094 at the 2020 census. It is part of the Springfield, Massachusetts Metropolitan Statistical Area.

The main village of Huntington is in the south of the town, with the villages of Norwich and Norwich Bridge in the center. (The villages are unofficial neighborhoods representing clusters of buildings in an otherwise rural town.)

The villages of Knightville (or Knightsville) and Indian Hollow toward the north were removed by the construction of the Knightville Dam from 1939 to 1941.

== History ==
What is now Huntington was first settled by Europeans in 1760, mostly migrants from Norwich, Connecticut who logged the land&#x27;s valuable timber. Settlers were mainly subsistence farmers, who also raised animals, caught fish, tapped maple trees, and manufactured their own domestic goods. Most of what is now the towns of Huntington and Chester were sold at auction (along with other parcels) on June 2, 1762, as Plantation Number 9, to William Williams for £1,500. It was resold, and the three new proprietors allowed the 19 existing settlers to remain on the condition they build houses, clear land, and hire a Protestant minister.

On June 29, 1773, the eastern portion of the town of Murrayfield (renamed Chester in 1783) was split off to form the district of Norwich, with most of the powers of a town. It shared a colonial representative with Chester until 1786, when it became a full town.

Early industry grew slowly. Just before 1800, Daniel and Richard Falley opened a tavern (which also functioned as a hotel) and store near the three-way boundary of Norwich, Blandford, and Chester, which was also the boundary between Hampshire and Hampden Counties. A post office opened nearby, on the Boston-Springfield-Albany stagecoach line; the neighborhood and the post office were named &quot;Falleys&#x27; Cross road&quot; or &quot;Falley&#x27;s X Roads&quot;. In 1841, the Western Railroad (later part of the Boston and Albany Railroad) was constructed, drawing settlers and enabling profitable manufacturing to the vicinity of the stop, known as Chester Village to distinguish from the Chester Factories stop. The post office and the neighborhood soon became known as Chester Village.

Jurisdictional boundaries split streets and in some cases houses, causing problems with transportation of school children and law enforcement. The nearby parts of Blandford and Chester were annexed to Norwich in 1853. In 1855, the Massachusetts General Court changed the name of the town to Huntington, in honor of Charles P. Huntington of Northampton, who had helped secure the annexation. Chester Village then became known as &quot;the village&quot; of Huntington. Charles Huntington donated $100 for the establishment of a library in his namesake town.

In the Colonial Massachusetts tradition, Norwich initially functioned as both a secular town government and a church parish. Its town meetings were held at the town church (&quot;meeting-hall&quot;) until 1841; a town hall was constructed in Knightville in 1842. Town meetings were held at a private Union Hall above a schoolhouse in Huntington village in the 1860s; the building burned in 1863 but was replaced and the new building served as the town hall until 1954.

Springfield Street Railway was extended to the town in 1905, and another trolley line operated to the town of Lee for a time. U.S. Route 20 was constructed through the town in 1920.

The Huntington Textile Company supplied cloth to the U.S. military during the World Wars, but closed in 1952.

==Geography==
Huntington is in southwestern Hampshire County, bordered to the south and west by towns in Hampden County. The Westfield River runs through the town, joined by its West Branch at the village of Huntington in the southern part of the town. U.S. Route 20 follows the lower Westfield River and its West Branch through the town, leading southeast to the city of Westfield and northwest to Lee.

According to the United States Census Bureau, the town of Huntington has a total area of , of which are land and , or 1.78%, are water.

==Demographics==
As of the census of 2000, there were 2,174 people, 809 households, and 597 families residing in the town. The population density was . There were 935 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the town was 97.56% White, 0.41% African American, 0.18% Native American, 0.41% Asian, 0.28% from other races, and 1.15% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 1.84% of the population.

There were 809 households, out of which 35.0% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 60.4% were married couples living together, 8.9% had a female householder with no husband present, and 26.2% were non-families. Of all households, 19.2% were made up of individuals, and 6.8% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.69 and the average family size was 3.10.

In the town, the population was spread out, with 27.7% under the age of 18, 6.4% from 18 to 24, 30.0% from 25 to 44, 26.1% from 45 to 64, and 9.7% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 37 years. For every 100 females, there were 98.5 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 98.2 males.

The median income for a household in the town was $18,958, and the median income for a family was $12,308. Males had a median income of $16,893 versus $17,414 for females. The per capita income for the town was $19,385. About 74.4% of families and 75.8% of the population were below the poverty line, including 36.2% of those under age 18 and 40.7% of those age 65 or over.

==See also==

* Gateway Regional High School
* Gateway Regional School District

==References==
==External links==

* Town of Huntington official website
* Huntington Police Department
* Huntington Historical Society
* Huntington Public Library
* Gateway Regional School District
* &quot;MHC Survey Reconnaissance Town Report: Huntington&quot;—Massachusetts Historical Commission, 1982.
* &quot;Huntington Vision: Huntington Community Development Plan&quot;—Pioneer Valley Planning Commission, 2003.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2536955" start="0" end="10" title="Huntington, Massachusetts" label="Huntington"/>
<link wikidata="Q2154459" start="16" end="20" title="New England town" label="town"/>
<link wikidata="Q54161" start="24" end="40" title="Hampshire County, Massachusetts" label="Hampshire County"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="42" end="55" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="104" end="115" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q49158" start="135" end="161" title="Springfield, Massachusetts" label="Springfield, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7580900" start="162" end="191" title="Springfield metropolitan area, Massachusetts" label="Metropolitan Statistical Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q38249845" start="203" end="224" title="Huntington (CDP), Massachusetts" label="village of Huntington"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567514" start="546" end="561" title="Knightville Dam" label="Knightville Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q631402" start="680" end="700" title="Norwich, Connecticut" label="Norwich, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302434" start="936" end="943" title="Chester, Massachusetts" label="Chester"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302434" start="1308" end="1315" title="Chester, Massachusetts" label="Chester"/>
<link wikidata="Q54161" start="1730" end="1739" title="Hampshire County, Massachusetts" label="Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q54160" start="1744" end="1751" title="Hampden County, Massachusetts" label="Hampden"/>
<link wikidata="Q339249" start="1824" end="1834" title="stagecoach" label="stagecoach"/>
<link wikidata="Q12053340" start="2013" end="2039" title="Boston and Albany Railroad" label="Boston and Albany Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q49186" start="2631" end="2642" title="Northampton, Massachusetts" label="Northampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q108704395" start="3318" end="3344" title="Springfield Street Railway" label="Springfield Street Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2427080" start="3428" end="3431" title="Lee, Massachusetts" label="Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2483980" start="3444" end="3457" title="U.S. Route 20 in Massachusetts" label="U.S. Route 20"/>
<link wikidata="Q54160" start="3717" end="3731" title="Hampden County, Massachusetts" label="Hampden County"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567514" start="3737" end="3752" title="Westfield River" label="Westfield River"/>
<link wikidata="Q38249845" start="3820" end="3830" title="Huntington (CDP), Massachusetts" label="Huntington"/>
<link wikidata="Q407881" start="3865" end="3878" title="U.S. Route 20" label="U.S. Route 20"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055854" start="3984" end="3993" title="Westfield, Massachusetts" label="Westfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q2427080" start="4011" end="4014" title="Lee, Massachusetts" label="Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="4034" end="4061" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="4181" end="4187" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4403" end="4408" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4416" end="4432" title="African American (U.S. Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4440" end="4455" title="Native American (U.S. Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4463" end="4468" title="Asian (U.S. Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4481" end="4492" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4528" end="4536" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4540" end="4546" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="4698" end="4713" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="5508" end="5525" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="5619" end="5631" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q5527280" start="5723" end="5751" title="Gateway Regional High School (Massachusetts)" label="Gateway Regional High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5527285" start="5754" end="5786" title="Gateway Regional School District (Massachusetts)" label="Gateway Regional School District"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="116818" wikidata="Q2536964" url="?curid=116818" title="Middlefield, Massachusetts">
<text>Middlefield is a town in Hampshire County, Massachusetts, United States. The population was 385 at the 2020 census. It is part of the Springfield, Massachusetts Metropolitan Statistical Area.

== History ==
Middlefield was first settled in 1780 and was officially incorporated in 1783.

==Geography==
According to the United States Census Bureau, the town has a total area of , of which is land and 0.04% is water.

==Demographics==

As of the census of 2000, there were 542 people, 213 households, and 161 families residing in the town. The population density was 22.4 people per square mile (8.7/km). There were 263 housing units at an average density of 10.9 per square mile (4.2/km). The racial makeup of the town was 98.89% White, 0.18% African American, 0.18% Native American, 0.18% from other races, and 0.55% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 0.55% of the population.

There were 213 households, out of which 28.6% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 66.7% were married couples living together, 5.2% had a female householder with no husband present, and 24.4% were non-families. Of all households 17.4% were made up of individuals, and 6.1% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.54 and the average family size was 2.86.

In the town, the population was spread out, with 23.1% under the age of 18, 5.9% from 18 to 24, 31.2% from 25 to 44, 30.3% from 45 to 64, and 9.6% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 40 years. For every 100 females, there were 103.8 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 101.4 males.

The median income for a household in the town was $50,938, and the median income for a family was $53,889. Males had a median income of $35,208 versus $30,375 for females. The per capita income for the town was $24,137. About 7.3% of families and 8.6% of the population were below the poverty line, including 9.2% of those under age 18 and none of those age 65 or over.

==Government==
The town is part of the First Franklin District in the Massachusetts House of Representatives, represented by Natalie Blais, and the Berkshire, Franklin, Hampshire and Hampsen Senate district, represented by Adam Hinds.

==Notable people==

* Israel Bissell, Patriot post rider
* Elijah Churchill, Revolutionary War hero, recipient of one of the three Purple Hearts Washington presented
* Ebenezer Emmons, geologist
* Martha Stewart, businesswoman and television hostess

==Sites of interest==
* Glendale Falls 
Glendale Brook provides one of Massachusetts&#x27; most impressive waterfalls. The brook eventually feeds into the Westfield River, which has been federally designated as a Wild and Scenic River. The Glendale Falls site itself is part of the Glendale Falls Reservation.
* Middlefield Fair
The Middlefield Fair, a small country-style fair, established in 1855, is hosted annually by the Highland Agricultural Society, and is held in August over three days. The 2013 event was the 158th occurrence. There are many events for attendees of all ages, including tractor pulls, pie eating contests, and agricultural contests.

==See also==
*Gateway Regional School District

==References==

== External links ==

* &quot;MHC Survey Reconnaissance Town Report: Middlefield&quot;, Massachusetts Historical Commission, 1982.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2536964" start="0" end="11" title="Middlefield, Massachusetts" label="Middlefield"/>
<link wikidata="Q2154459" start="17" end="21" title="New England town" label="town"/>
<link wikidata="Q54161" start="25" end="41" title="Hampshire County, Massachusetts" label="Hampshire County"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="43" end="56" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="103" end="114" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q49158" start="134" end="160" title="Springfield, Massachusetts" label="Springfield, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7580900" start="161" end="190" title="Springfield metropolitan area, Massachusetts" label="Metropolitan Statistical Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="318" end="345" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="444" end="450" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="542" end="560" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="729" end="734" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="742" end="758" title="African American (U.S. Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="766" end="781" title="Native American (U.S. Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="794" end="805" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="841" end="849" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="853" end="859" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="1011" end="1026" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="1822" end="1839" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="1931" end="1943" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q125545381" start="2275" end="2289" title="Israel Bissell" label="Israel Bissell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5360899" start="2312" end="2328" title="Elijah Churchill" label="Elijah Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q5331679" start="2421" end="2436" title="Ebenezer Emmons" label="Ebenezer Emmons"/>
<link wikidata="Q234606" start="2450" end="2464" title="Martha Stewart" label="Martha Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q5568358" start="2528" end="2542" title="Glendale Falls (Massachusetts)" label="Glendale Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q977576" start="3100" end="3112" title="tractor pull" label="tractor pull"/>
<link wikidata="Q5527285" start="3178" end="3210" title="Gateway Regional School District (Massachusetts)" label="Gateway Regional School District"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="116819" wikidata="Q9050690" url="?curid=116819" title="North Amherst, Massachusetts">
<text>North Amherst is a census-designated place (CDP) in the city of Amherst in Hampshire County, Massachusetts, United States. The population was 6,819 at the 2010 census, up from 6,019 at the 2000 census. It is part of the Springfield, Massachusetts Metropolitan Statistical Area.

herst is located in the northern part of the city of Amherst at (42.406192, -72.521217). It is bordered to the south by the Amherst Center CDP and to the southwest by the town of Hadley. The CDP border follows the Mill River north from the Hadley town line, then east across Massachusetts Route 116 as far as Massachusetts Route 63. The border then follows Pulpit Hill Road, Mill Street, Sand Hill Road, and Pine Street east to the New England Central Railroad line, which it follows south to Tilson Farm Road. The CDP boundary then proceeds west along Tilson Farm Road and Eastman Lane to North Pleasant Street, which it follows north to a brook near the Hadley town line.

According to the United States Census Bureau, the CDP has a total area of , of which , or 0.07%, are water.

There are several large apartment complexes in North Amherst, housing mostly students of the University of Massachusetts Amherst along with low-income families (a plurality of whom are graduate students). Apart from these housing developments, North Amherst also sports many beautiful old houses, and North Amherst Center Historic District is on the National Register of Historic Places. The village is said to be an excellently-preserved example of a 19th-century farm community.

North Amherst is home to a large majority of Amherst middle income families, as the main street (North Pleasant Street) has many housing developments built off it. This includes &quot;Grantwood&quot;, which is the largest neighborhood/development in Amherst. North Amherst is also home to two cohousing communities: Pioneer Valley and Pine Street Cohousing.

Cushman Village is located just east of North Amherst. This small area is unique, as the roads turn back into each other unlike the square roads off East Pleasant Street. Cushman Village has many historical homes, as well as the Cushman Common and the Cushman Store.

North Amhearst is also known for its amphibian tunnels. The Henry Street salamander tunnels are tunnels which run under Henry Street in North Amherst. The tunnels help spotted salamanders cross Henry Street to get to vernal pools that the salamanders use for breeding. They are the first amphibian tunnels in the United States.

==Demographics==
As of the census of 2000, there were 6,019 people, 1,915 households, and 813 families residing in the CDP. The population density was 1,101.4/km (2,856.1/mi). There were 1,947 housing units at an average density of 356.3/km (923.9/mi). The racial makeup of the CDP was 75.76% White, 4.44% African American, 0.25% Native American, 13.09% Asian, 0.22% Pacific Islander, 3.11% from other races, and 3.14% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 6.43% of the population.

There were 1,915 households, out of which 25.4% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 30.9% were married couples living together, 9.3% had a female householder with no husband present, and 57.5% were non-families. 22.3% of all households were made up of individuals, and 4.5% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.60 and the average family size was 2.99.

In the CDP, the population was spread out, with 14.2% under the age of 18, 50.4% from 18 to 24, 19.7% from 25 to 44, 10.8% from 45 to 64, and 4.9% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 22 years. For every 100 females, there were 105.6 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 103.3 males.

The median income for a household in the CDP was $28,063, and the median income for a family was $43,423. Males had a median income of $37,202 versus $29,079 for females. The per capita income for the CDP was $14,336. About 12.8% of families and 33.6% of the population were below the poverty line, including 19.5% of those under age 18 and 2.2% of those age 65 or over.

==References==
==External links==
* Amherst Geographic Information Systems (GIS)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q9050690" start="0" end="13" title="North Amherst, Massachusetts" label="North Amherst"/>
<link wikidata="Q498162" start="19" end="42" title="census-designated place" label="census-designated place"/>
<link wikidata="Q49164" start="64" end="71" title="Amherst, Massachusetts" label="Amherst"/>
<link wikidata="Q54161" start="75" end="91" title="Hampshire County, Massachusetts" label="Hampshire County"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="93" end="106" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="155" end="166" title="2010 United States Census" label="2010 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q49158" start="220" end="246" title="Springfield, Massachusetts" label="Springfield, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7580900" start="247" end="276" title="Springfield metropolitan area, Massachusetts" label="Metropolitan Statistical Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q4746019" start="403" end="417" title="Amherst Center, Massachusetts" label="Amherst Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302147" start="458" end="464" title="Hadley, Massachusetts" label="Hadley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484117" start="554" end="577" title="Massachusetts Route 116" label="Massachusetts Route 116"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484044" start="588" end="610" title="Massachusetts Route 63" label="Massachusetts Route 63"/>
<link wikidata="Q833689" start="711" end="739" title="New England Central Railroad" label="New England Central Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="971" end="998" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q15142" start="1156" end="1191" title="University of Massachusetts Amherst" label="University of Massachusetts Amherst"/>
<link wikidata="Q141212" start="1248" end="1264" title="graduate student" label="graduate student"/>
<link wikidata="Q7053937" start="1364" end="1402" title="North Amherst Center Historic District" label="North Amherst Center Historic District"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719" start="1413" end="1449" title="National Register of Historic Places" label="National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q5196219" start="1904" end="1919" title="Cushman Village" label="Cushman Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q126362467" start="2232" end="2263" title="Henry Street salamander tunnels" label="Henry Street salamander tunnels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1103796" start="2389" end="2401" title="vernal pools" label="vernal pools"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="2528" end="2534" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="2629" end="2647" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2794" end="2799" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2807" end="2823" title="African American (U.S. Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2831" end="2846" title="Native American (U.S. Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2855" end="2860" title="Asian (U.S. Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2868" end="2884" title="Pacific Islander (U.S. Census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2897" end="2908" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2944" end="2952" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2956" end="2962" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="3116" end="3131" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="3926" end="3943" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="4036" end="4048" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="116820" wikidata="Q49186" url="?curid=116820" title="Northampton, Massachusetts">
<text>The city of Northampton is the county seat of Hampshire County, Massachusetts, United States. As of the 2020 census, the population of Northampton (including its outer villages, Florence and Leeds) was 29,571.

Northampton is known as an academic, artistic, musical, and countercultural hub. It features a large politically liberal community along with numerous alternative health and intellectual organizations. Based on U.S. Census demographics, election returns, and other criteria, the website Epodunk rates Northampton as the most politically liberal medium-size city (population 25,000–99,000) in the United States. The city has a high proportion of residents who identify as gay and lesbian and a high number of same-sex households and is a popular destination for the LGBT community.

Northampton is part of the Pioneer Valley and is one of the northernmost cities in the Knowledge Corridor—a cross-state cultural and economic partnership with other Connecticut River Valley cities and towns. Northampton is part of the Springfield Metropolitan Area, one of western Massachusetts&#x27;s two separate metropolitan areas. It sits approximately north of the city of Springfield.

Northampton is home to Smith College, the Hotel Northampton, Northampton High School, Smith Vocational and Agricultural High School, and the Clarke Schools for Hearing and Speech.

==History==
=== Early settlement ===
Northampton was known as &quot;Norwottuck&quot;, or &quot;Nonotuck&quot;, meaning &quot;the midst of the river&quot;, named by its original Pocumtuc inhabitants. According to various accounts, Northampton was given its present name by John A. King (1629–1703), one of the first white settlers in Northampton, or possibly in King&#x27;s honor, since it is supposed that he came to Massachusetts from Northampton, England, his birthplace.

The Pocumtuc confederacy occupied the Connecticut River Valley from what is now southern Vermont and New Hampshire into northern Connecticut. The Pocumtuc tribes were Algonquian and traditionally allied with the Mahican confederacy to the west. By 1606 an ongoing struggle between the Mahican and Iroquois confederacies led to direct attacks on the Pocumtuc by the Iroquoian Mohawk nation. The Mahican confederacy had been defeated by 1628, limiting Pocumtuc access to trade routes to the west. The area suffered a major smallpox epidemic in the 1630s following the arrival of Dutch traders in the Hudson Valley and New England settlers in the Massachusetts Bay Colony during the previous two decades. It was in this context that the land making up the bulk of modern Northampton was sold to settlers from Springfield in 1653.

On May 18, 1653, a petition for township was approved by the general court of Springfield. While some settlers visited the land in the fall of 1653, they waited till early spring 1654 to arrive and establish a permanent settlement. The situation in the region further deteriorated when the Mohawk people escalated hostilities against the Pocumtuc confederacy and other Algonquian tribes after 1655, forcing many of the plague-devastated Algonquian groups into defensive mergers. This coincided with a souring of relations between the Wampanoag and the Massachusetts Bay colonists, eventually leading to the expanded Algonquian alliance, which took part in King Philip&#x27;s War.

=== Partition ===
Northampton was part of the Equivalent Lands compromise. Its territory was enlarged beyond the original settlement, but later portions would be carved up into separate cities, towns, and municipalities. Southampton, for example, was incorporated in 1775 and included parts of the territories of modern Montgomery (incorporated in 1780) and Easthampton. Westhampton was incorporated in 1778 and Easthampton in 1809. A hamlet of Northampton, called Smith&#x27;s Ferry, became separated from the rest of the city with the drawing of boundaries for Easthampton. Because the village was separated by Mount Tom, the shortest path to from the downtown to this area was a road near the Connecticut River oxbow, which was frequently subject to flooding. This led to many services such as fire and police being provided by the city of Holyoke rather than Northampton&#x27;s own municipal departments, and after a number of negotiations between the two cities, Smith&#x27;s Ferry was ceded to Holyoke in 1909 for a sum of $62,000.

=== The Great Awakening ===
Congregational preacher, theologian and philosopher Jonathan Edwards was a leading figure in a 1734 Christian revival in Northampton. In the winter of 1734 and the following spring it reached such intensity that it threatened the town&#x27;s businesses. In the spring of 1735 the movement began to subside and a reaction set in. But the relapse was brief, and the Northampton revival, which had spread through the Connecticut River Valley and whose fame had reached England and Scotland, was followed in 1739–1740 by the Great Awakening, under the leadership of Edwards.

For this achievement, Edwards is considered one of the founders of evangelical Christianity.
Northampton hosted its own witch trials in the 1700s, although no alleged witches were executed.

=== After the Revolution ===
Members of the Northampton community were present at the Constitutional Convention in Philadelphia.

On August 29, 1786, Daniel Shays and a group of Revolutionary War veterans (who called themselves Shaysites) stopped the civil court from sitting in Northampton, in an uprising known as Shays&#x27; Rebellion.

In 1805 a crowd of 15,000 gathered in Northampton to watch the executions of two Irishmen convicted of murder: Dominic Daley, 34, and James Halligan, 27. The crowd, composed largely of New England White Anglo-Saxon Protestants, lit bonfires and expressed virulently anti-Irish and anti-Catholic sentiments. The trial evidence against Daley and Halligan was sparse, circumstantial, contrived, and perjurious. The men were hanged on June 5, 1806, on Pancake Plain. Their bodies were denied a burial; they were destroyed in the local slaughterhouse. This trial &quot;later came to be seen as epitomizing the anti-Irish sentiment that was widespread in New England in the early 19th century.&quot; Daley and Halligan were exonerated of all crimes by governor Michael Dukakis in 1984. Today a simple stone landmark stands marking the site of Daley and Halligan&#x27;s executions.

In 1835 Northampton was linked to the ocean by the New Haven and Northampton Canal, but the canal enterprise foundered and after about a decade was replaced by a railroad running along the same route. A flood on the Mill River on May 16, 1874, obliterated almost the entire Northampton neighborhood of Leeds, killing 139 people in Leeds and areas of neighboring towns.

=== The &quot;Paradise of America&quot; ===

From 1842 until 1846 Northampton was home to a transcendentalist utopian community of abolitionists. Called the Northampton Association of Education and Industry, the community believed that the rights of all people should be &quot;equal without distinction of sex, color or condition, sect or religion&quot;. It supported itself by producing mulberry trees and silk. Sojourner Truth, a former slave who became a national advocate for equality and justice, lived in this community until its dissolution (and later in a house on Park Street until 1857).
In 1851 opera singer Jenny Lind, the &quot;Swedish Nightingale&quot;, declared Northampton to be the &quot;Paradise of America&quot;, from which Northampton took its nickname &quot;The Paradise City&quot;.

Clarke Schools for Hearing and Speech (formerly the Clarke School for the Deaf) was founded in Northampton in 1867. It was the United States&#x27; first permanent oral school for the deaf. Alexander Graham Bell and Grace Coolidge have served as heads of school.

Smith College for women was founded in Northampton in 1871. Today Smith is the largest of the Seven Sisters colleges. Well-known Smith alumnae include Sylvia Plath, Barbara Bush, Nancy Reagan, Tammy Baldwin, Gloria Steinem, Madeleine L&#x27;Engle, and Julia Child. The first game of women&#x27;s basketball was played at Smith College in 1892.

A theft of $1.6 million ($46.5 million in 2023) from the Northampton Bank took place on January 27, 1876.

Northampton officially became a city on September 5, 1883, when voters accepted the city charter, &quot;The act to establish the city of Northampton. 1883-Chapter 250,&quot; as passed and approved.

Immigrant groups that settled Northampton in large numbers included Irish, Polish, and French-Canadians. In 1890 a small number of German-Jewish families arrived in Northampton, most of them coming from New York or Boston. By 1905 there were almost 5000 foreign-born residents among the 20,000 people of the city.

=== Decline ===
During the mid-20th century, Northampton experienced several decades of economic decline, bottoming in the 1970s, related to the emergence of the Rust Belt phenomenon. Though western Massachusetts lies outside of the Rust Belt geographically, the centrality of commerce and the arts to Northampton&#x27;s economy left it economically vulnerable, in particular when compounded with the decline of Springfield&#x27;s manufacturing sector, Holyoke&#x27;s paper industry, and massive plant closures in the New York Capital District.

=== Cultural renaissance ===
Northampton has a thriving cultural center and is a popular tourist destination. The city has many eclectic restaurants and a lively arts and music scene. Three Northampton farmers markets, held weekly, sell fresh produce from local farms.

Since 1982, Northampton has been host to an annual LGBT Parade and Pride event held the first Saturday in May.

Since 1995 Northampton has been home to the twice-yearly Paradise City Arts Festival, held at the Three County Fairgrounds on Memorial Day weekend and Columbus Day weekend. The festival is a national juried showcase for contemporary craft and fine art.

Since 2004, Northampton has been the site of Django in June, a week-long gypsy jazz music camp held annually on the campus of Smith College.

In recent years, downtown Northampton has seen a decline, with nearly one out of five storefronts being vacant as of September 2022.

==Geography==
Northampton sits on the west side of the Connecticut River in the Pioneer Valley of western Massachusetts. It is located at .

According to the United States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of , of which are land and , or 4.22%, are water. A total of 21% of the city is permanently protected open space.

Within Northampton&#x27;s city limits are the villages of Florence and Leeds.

Northampton is bordered to the north by the towns of Hatfield and Williamsburg, to the west by Westhampton, to the east by Hadley (across the Connecticut River), and to the south by Easthampton.

The art deco Calvin Coolidge Bridge connects Northampton with Hadley across the Connecticut River. The college town of Amherst is located east of Northampton, next to Hadley. Springfield, the Connecticut River Valley&#x27;s most populous Massachusetts city, is located southeast of Northampton. Boston is by highway east of Northampton. New York City is southwest of Northampton.

The Connecticut River&#x27;s Oxbow is within Northampton&#x27;s city limits, at the northern base of Mount Nonotuck.

==Climate==
Northampton has a humid continental climate (Köppen &quot;Dfb&quot;), typical of western Massachusetts. Winters are cold and snowy, and summers are warm and humid. Precipitation is evenly distributed year-around, with an annual average of .

==Demographics==

As of the census of 2010, there were 28,549 people, 12,000 households, and 5,895 families residing in the city. Northampton has the most lesbian couples per capita of any city in the US. The population density was . There were 12,728 housing units (12,000 occupied) at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 87.7% White, 2.7% African American, 0.3% Native American, 4.1% Asian, 0.1% Pacific Islander, 2.4% from other races, and 2.7% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 6.8% of the population.

There were 12,000 households, out of which 21.5% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 34.6% were characterized as &quot;husband-wife&quot; married couples living together, 11.3% had a female householder with no husband present, and 50.9% were non-families. Of all households 37.2% were made up of individuals, and 10.2% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.12 and the average family size was 2.81.

In the city, the population was spread out, with 20.7% age 19 and under, 9.8% from 20 to 24, 25.7% from 25 to 44, 30.2% from 45 to 64, and 13.5% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 40 years. For every 100 females, there were 75.8 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 71.9 males.

The median income for a household in the city was $56,999, and the median income for a family was $80,179. Males had a median income of $40,470 versus $32,003 for females. The per capita income for the city was $33,440. About 7.8% of families and 13.5% of the population were below the poverty line, including 15.1% of those under age 18 and 7.2% of those age 65 or over.

Northampton&#x27;s public schools include four elementary schools (kindergarten through 5th grade), one middle school (6th to 8th grade), one high school (9th to 12th grade), and one vocational-agricultural high school (9th to 12th grade). There are several private schools in Northampton and a number of charter schools in surrounding towns.

According to the website ePodunk&#x27;s Gay Index, which is based on figures from the 2000 US Census, Northampton has a score of 535, vs. a national average score of 100 (i.e., Northampton&#x27;s population includes 5.35 times the national average of same-sex unmarried households). According to the Human Rights Campaign, Northampton scored a 100 out of 100 on its Municipality Equality Index.

==Government==
Gina-Louise Sciarra is the mayor of Northampton. Previous mayors have included future President of the United States Calvin Coolidge (1910–1911) and James &quot;Big Jim&quot; Cahillane, who served from 1954 to 1960. Well-known Judge Sean M. Dunphy was the youngest elected mayor in its history, at age 28.

The city also has a nine-member city council, composed of seven ward representatives and two at-large members. Councilors are elected to two-year terms and the council meets twice monthly for 10 months out of the year. The three other elected city-wide bodies are the School Committee, the Trustees of Smith Vocational and Agricultural High School and the Trustees of Forbes Library.

Northampton is represented in the 1st Hampshire District of the Massachusetts House of Representatives by Democrat Lindsay Sabadosa, in the Hampshire, Franklin and Worcester District of the Massachusetts Senate by Democrat Jo Comerford, and on the Eighth Massachusetts Governor&#x27;s Council District by Democrat Tara Jacobs.

==Education==

===Public schools===
===Colleges and universities===
Northampton is home to Smith College, founded in 1871, A women&#x27;s college (one of the Seven Sisters), it is also one of the Five Colleges Consortium. Smith students (along with those of the associated Five Colleges) contribute to Northampton&#x27;s college town atmosphere.

===Clarke Schools for Hearing and Speech===
Clarke Schools for Hearing and Speech (formerly the Clarke School for the Deaf) specializes in oral education (speech and lip-reading, as opposed to signing) and holds an annual summer camp, the theme varying from summer to summer. Clarke is the oldest oral school for the deaf in the country, established in 1867 on Round Hill Road overlooking the Connecticut River Valley.

==Media==
&quot;The Daily Hampshire Gazette&quot;, a six-day a week morning newspaper and the oldest surviving newspaper in Massachusetts, is based in Northampton, covering Hampshire and Franklin counties.

Northampton is the city of license for three commercial radio stations: WLZX-FM, WEIB, and WHMP. Northampton is also home to WXOJ-LP, a low-power community radio station owned and operated by Valley Free Radio. The station was built by more than 400 volunteers from Northampton and around the country in August 2005 at the eighth Prometheus Radio Project barnraising, in conjunction with the tenth annual Grassroots Radio Coalition conference. Valley Free Radio broadcasts music, news, public affairs, and locally produced radio content to listeners at 103.3 FM.

In addition, Northampton is home to Northampton Open Media (NOM), formally Northampton Community Television, which has existed in numerous forms since the mid-1980s but experienced a radical change in 2006 when it became an independently run nonprofit community media center. After a new public unveiling in November 2007, NOM grew to over 200 active members in less than 18 months and had already attracted statewide and national attention in the community media landscape. In 2012, 2013 and 2014 NOM won awards for best web sites (for two different sites) in the United States for community media organizations with budgets under $300,000.

==Transportation==

===Roads===
Northampton is served by four exits of Interstate 91, which passes to the east of downtown along the Connecticut River. U.S. Route 5, Massachusetts Route 9, and Massachusetts Route 10 all intersect in the city&#x27;s downtown area. Massachusetts Route 66 also is partially in Northampton.

The city of Northampton faces daily traffic congestion in the downtown area and connector roads, often resulting in long delays and traffic buildup. The limitation of one bridge across the Connecticut River (the only route to the nearby college town of Amherst) and a busy main street results in unsafe driving behavior and danger to pedestrians. The City of Northampton is attempting to solve this long-time problem by redesigning problematic intersections and installing traffic cameras.

===Rail===
Northampton enjoys a moderate amount of passenger rail service via Amtrak’s &quot;Vermonter&quot; and &quot;Valley Flyer&quot; lines, with three daily round trips operating between Springfield, Northampton, and Greenfield, Massachusetts. These trains serve intermediate and connecting points that include New York City, Boston, New Haven, and other destinations along the Northeast Corridor. Additional and more frequent service is located a 25-minute drive south at Springfield Union Station, which also houses the Peter Pan bus terminal.

In addition to passenger service, rail freight is offered by Pan Am Southern LLC via the Berkshire and Eastern Railroad, which is owned, in turn, by the Genesee &amp; Wyoming.

The rail route through Northampton was historically known as the Connecticut River Line. Although passenger service through the area lapsed in the later part of the twentieth century, service resumed in 2014 following decades of local advocacy and government investment.

===Bus===
The Pioneer Valley Transit Authority operates several local passenger buses that originate in Northampton, with service to local towns such as Amherst, Williamsburg, Hadley, South Hadley, and Holyoke as well as the nearby universities and colleges: Mount Holyoke College, Amherst College, University of Massachusetts Amherst, and Hampshire College. The Franklin Regional Transit Authority operates a bus to Greenfield, Massachusetts, with seven round trips per day. There is a Peter Pan Bus stop with services to Springfield, Amherst, and other locations in New England.

===Airports===
Northampton Airport is a small general aviation airport located one mile northeast of the Northampton central business district. The closest major airport is Bradley International Airport, located roughly 27 miles to the south in Windsor Locks, Connecticut, near the CT-MA state line.

===Bicycle===
Northampton serves as the hub of a growing rail trail network. The north-south Manhan Rail Trail extends from the downtown into neighboring Easthampton, and as part of the Farmington Canal Trail is planned eventually to reach New Haven, Connecticut. The Norwottuck Rail Trail runs eastward from Woodmont Road through Hadley, Amherst, and into Belchertown, with planned future integration into the Central Mass Rail Trail to Boston. To the west, the Northampton Bikeway provides access to the city&#x27;s Florence and Leeds neighborhoods, with a route through historic Look Park, which continues into Haydenville, where it ends. While downtown, the bikeway runs alongside the train tracks, and provides an alternative route to King and Main Streets.

==Points of interest==
* First Church on Main Street was the home church of Jonathan Edwards, 18th century theologian, philosopher, and leader of the First Great Awakening.
*The Elm Street/Round Hill Historic District runs from the commencement of Elm at State Street almost one mile westerly to Woodlawn Avenue and includes a section of Round Hill Road. A local historic district, it includes examples of a range of architectural styles from 18th century colonial to contemporary, with an abundance of Queen Anne and Colonial Revival homes and other styles.
* The Sojourner Truth Memorial at the intersection of Pine and Park Streets in Florence commemorates abolitionist, orator, and Florence resident Sojourner Truth.
* The Connecticut River and The Oxbow are popular areas for boaters.
* 21% of Northampton is protected open space; this includes the Broad Brook/Fitzgerald Lake Conservation Area, Connecticut River Greenway (Elwell and Rainbow Beach), Mill River Greenway, Mineral Hills Conservation Area, and Saw Mill Hills/Roberts Hill Conservation Area.
* Look Park is a recreational park covering over , founded in 1930. The park is free for visitors arriving by foot or bicycle, consistent with the will of Frank Newhall Look, who left the property to the city and requested that the park would always have free admission for the public. A day-use fee or annual membership fee provides for parking. Musicians such as Bob Dylan have played at the park&#x27;s amphitheater.
* Childs Park is a serene city park near Cooley Dickinson Hospital. It features two ponds, formal gardens and rose gardens, and an Italian-style garden house.
* The Botanic Garden of Smith College is a diverse, outdoor collection of trees, shrubs, and plants as well as a fine collection of plant conservatories for the tropics, semitropics, and desert regions. It also includes an indoor greenhouse.
* The Mill River Greenway is a walking path on Smith College and adjacent land along the Mill River in the Bay State Village neighborhood of Northampton. The path is sometimes also called the Paradise Pond Trail based on a misleadingly named portion of the river near Smith College&#x27;s boathouse and pier.
* Northampton is a rail trail hub. Currently, the Norwottuck Rail Trail extends from Leeds, Florence, and the downtown sections of Northampton to Amherst and Belchertown. The Manhan Rail Trail extends from the Norwottuck Rail Trail through Northampton and Easthampton to Southampton. Four other rail trail extensions are in the planning process.
* The Three County Fair is the &quot;longest consecutive running agricultural fair in the country&quot;, having been established and incorporated in 1818.
* The Calvin Theater, Iron Horse Music Hall, and Pearl Street Nightclub are among the many venues that play host to Northampton&#x27;s music scene.
* The Academy of Music, built in 1890 by Edward H. R. Lyman, is the earliest known municipally owned theater in the United States. Boris Karloff and Harry Houdini (who installed a trap door in the stage) performed there. Today it serves as a music venue, cinema, and performance space.
* The Northampton Independent Film Festival (NIFF) is held each fall. Founded as the Northampton Film Festival in 1995 by Howard Polonsky and Dee DeGeiso, it has continued to grow under a variety of directors. It is now one of the largest in New England.
* Forbes Library, built in 1894, is Northampton&#x27;s public library. The second floor houses the Calvin Coolidge Presidential Library and Museum. Charles Ammi Cutter, an important figure in American library science, was the library&#x27;s first director, and the library is one of few in the world that use the Cutter Expansive Classification system, rather than Dewey Decimal or Library of Congress.
* Mirage Studios, creators of the Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles franchise, was based in Northampton. 
* As part of an annual Springfest celebration, students from the Northampton Community Music Center (NCMC) fill the streets with music on the third Saturday of May.
* LGBT Pride, on the first Saturday of May, is an annual lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender pride march and rally, with a colorful parade down Main Street that ends with an all-day festival at a designated location in town.
* Thornes Marketplace in downtown Northampton has many shops and eateries.
* Northampton State Hospital was a large psychiatric hospital constructed in 1856. All of the site has been redeveloped.
* On a small hill overlooking the city, near the site of the former Northampton State Hospital, a simple stone monument marks the spot of the hangings of Domenic Daley and James Halligan, two Irishmen wrongfully convicted of murder in 1806.
* Pioneer Valley Roller Derby, the first co-ed flat track roller derby league, trains in the village of Florence.

== Notable people ==
U.S. President Calvin Coolidge worked as a lawyer in Northampton and served as the city&#x27;s mayor from 1910 to 1911. He went on to be a Massachusetts state senator, lieutenant governor, and governor before becoming vice-president and president of the United States. After retiring from the U.S. presidency in 1929, Coolidge moved back to Northampton. He died in the city on January 5, 1933.

Preah Maha Ghosananda, a Cambodian Monk and the Supreme Patriarch of Cambodia died in Northampton on March 12, 2007. 

==In popular culture==
Films shot in Northampton include &quot;Who&#x27;s Afraid of Virginia Woolf?&quot; (1966), &quot;Malice&quot; (1993), &quot;In Dreams&quot; (1999), &quot;The Cider House Rules&quot; (1999), &quot;Sylvia&quot; (2003), and &quot;Edge of Darkness&quot; (2010). Other cultural references include:

* Northampton is the birthplace of the eponymous protagonist in Henry James&#x27;s 1875 novel &quot;Roderick Hudson&quot;.
* Northampton is the setting for several stories throughout various Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles media, especially the original Mirage comics (1984–2014) as well as the 2003 animated series. While not specifically referred to by name, the city is featured in the 1990 live-action movie. It was also the real-life headquarters for Mirage Studios, the original owners of the franchise.
* Writer Tracy Kidder documented the many layers of Northampton society at the end of the 20th century in his 1999 nonfiction book &quot;Home Town&quot;.
* Augusten Burroughs&#x27; 2002 memoir &quot;Running with Scissors&quot; takes place in Northampton 
* A 2011 episode of &quot;Saturday Night Live&quot; (season 37, episode 8) featured a sketch titled &quot;Massachusetts Afternoon&quot; set in Northampton.
* Northampton is the principal setting for the webcomic &quot;Questionable Content&quot;, by Jeph Jacques.

==See also==
* USS &quot;Northampton&quot;, three ships

==References==
==Further reading==
* Kerry W. Buckley, ed. &quot;A Place Called Paradise: Culture and Community in Northampton, Massachusetts, 1654–2004&quot;. Northampton: Historic Northampton Museum and Education Center, in association with University of Massachusetts Press, 2004. ix + 523 pp. . reprints 20 essays by scholars
* Kidder, Tracy, &quot;Home Town&quot;. Washington Square Press, 2000. 464 pp. . 
* 

== External links ==
* Historic Northampton
* Northampton Chamber of Commerce 
* VisitNorthampton.net</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q49186" start="12" end="23" title="Northampton, Massachusetts" label="Northampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="31" end="42" title="county seat" label="county seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q54161" start="46" end="77" title="Hampshire County, Massachusetts" label="Hampshire County, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="104" end="115" title="2020 United States Census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q5460527" start="178" end="186" title="Florence, Massachusetts" label="Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q6515805" start="191" end="196" title="Leeds, Massachusetts" label="Leeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q188976" start="271" end="286" title="countercultural" label="countercultural"/>
<link wikidata="Q5323973" start="498" end="505" title="Epodunk" label="Epodunk"/>
<link wikidata="Q17884" start="776" end="780" title="LGBT" label="LGBT"/>
<link wikidata="Q7196817" start="820" end="834" title="Pioneer Valley" label="Pioneer Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423286" start="880" end="898" title="Knowledge Corridor" label="Knowledge Corridor"/>
<link wikidata="Q379648" start="958" end="982" title="Connecticut River Valley" label="Connecticut River Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7580900" start="1028" end="1057" title="Springfield metropolitan area, Massachusetts" label="Springfield Metropolitan Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q65122136" start="1066" end="1087" title="western Massachusetts" label="western Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q49158" start="1171" end="1182" title="Springfield, Massachusetts" label="Springfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q49204" start="1208" end="1221" title="Smith College" label="Smith College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7057621" start="1246" end="1269" title="Northampton High School (Massachusetts)" label="Northampton High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q21016192" start="1271" end="1316" title="Smith Vocational and Agricultural High School" label="Smith Vocational and Agricultural High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5127501" start="1326" end="1363" title="Clarke Schools for Hearing and Speech" label="Clarke Schools for Hearing and Speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q1789087" start="1543" end="1551" title="Pocumtuc" label="Pocumtuc"/>
<link wikidata="Q192240" start="1802" end="1822" title="Northampton" label="Northampton, England"/>
<link wikidata="Q379648" start="1879" end="1896" title="Connecticut River" label="Connecticut River"/>
<link wikidata="Q759" start="1942" end="1955" title="New Hampshire" label="New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q779" start="1970" end="1981" title="Connecticut" label="Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q1621197" start="2008" end="2018" title="Algonquian peoples" label="Algonquian"/>
<link wikidata="Q776280" start="2053" end="2060" title="Mahican" label="Mahican"/>
<link wikidata="Q68518" start="2138" end="2146" title="Iroquois" label="Iroquois"/>
<link wikidata="Q116971" start="2216" end="2229" title="Mohawk nation" label="Mohawk nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q12214" start="2362" end="2370" title="smallpox" label="smallpox"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140235" start="2439" end="2452" title="Hudson Valley" label="Hudson Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191350" start="2485" end="2509" title="Massachusetts Bay Colony" label="Massachusetts Bay Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q49158" start="2647" end="2658" title="Springfield, Massachusetts" label="Springfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q116971" start="2959" end="2972" title="Mohawk people" label="Mohawk people"/>
<link wikidata="Q1789087" start="3007" end="3015" title="Pocumtuc" label="Pocumtuc"/>
<link wikidata="Q1621197" start="3038" end="3048" title="Algonquian peoples" label="Algonquian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047264" start="3203" end="3212" title="Wampanoag people" label="Wampanoag"/>
<link wikidata="Q862257" start="3325" end="3347" title="King Philip&amp;#x27;s War" label="King Philip&amp;#x27;s War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5384712" start="3396" end="3412" title="Equivalent Lands" label="Equivalent Lands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1720696" start="3571" end="3582" title="Southampton, Massachusetts" label="Southampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2415866" start="3670" end="3680" title="Montgomery, Massachusetts" label="Montgomery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1988974" start="3708" end="3719" title="Easthampton, Massachusetts" label="Easthampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2536890" start="3721" end="3732" title="Westhampton, Massachusetts" label="Westhampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q25199147" start="3815" end="3833" title="Smith&amp;#x27;s Ferry, Holyoke, Massachusetts" label="Smith&amp;#x27;s Ferry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3322152" start="3963" end="3972" title="Mount Tom (Massachusetts)" label="Mount Tom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7755777" start="4064" end="4069" title="The Oxbow (Connecticut river)" label="oxbow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637790" start="4193" end="4200" title="Holyoke" label="Holyoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637790" start="4350" end="4357" title="Holyoke, Massachusetts" label="Holyoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q313073" start="4469" end="4485" title="Jonathan Edwards (theologian)" label="Jonathan Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q16146522" start="4517" end="4534" title="Christian revival" label="Christian revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q835439" start="4938" end="4953" title="Great Awakening" label="Great Awakening"/>
<link wikidata="Q194253" start="5056" end="5080" title="evangelical Christianity" label="evangelical Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q219698" start="5109" end="5121" title="Salem witch trials" label="witch trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q405475" start="5266" end="5291" title="Constitutional Convention (United States)" label="Constitutional Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="5295" end="5307" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162700" start="5330" end="5342" title="Daniel Shays" label="Daniel Shays"/>
<link wikidata="Q392601" start="5496" end="5517" title="Shays&amp;#x27; Rebellion" label="Shays&amp;#x27; Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5290513" start="5631" end="5644" title="Dominic Daley" label="Dominic Daley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6135411" start="5654" end="5668" title="James Halligan (1778–1806)" label="James Halligan"/>
<link wikidata="Q256898" start="5717" end="5746" title="White Anglo-Saxon Protestants" label="White Anglo-Saxon Protestants"/>
<link wikidata="Q116646" start="6028" end="6037" title="dissection" label="destroyed"/>
<link wikidata="Q319099" start="6275" end="6290" title="Michael Dukakis" label="Michael Dukakis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5646081" start="6447" end="6478" title="Hampshire and Hampden Canal" label="New Haven and Northampton Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q991922" start="6612" end="6622" title="Mill River (Northampton, Massachusetts)" label="Mill River"/>
<link wikidata="Q6515805" start="6682" end="6703" title="Leeds, Massachusetts" label="neighborhood of Leeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q331563" start="6858" end="6875" title="transcendentalist" label="transcendentalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2373919" start="6876" end="6893" title="utopian community" label="utopian community"/>
<link wikidata="Q2853205" start="6897" end="6910" title="Abolitionism in the United States" label="abolitionists"/>
<link wikidata="Q7369319" start="6923" end="6972" title="Northampton Association of Education and Industry" label="Northampton Association of Education and Industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q37681" start="7173" end="7177" title="silk" label="silk"/>
<link wikidata="Q105180" start="7179" end="7194" title="Sojourner Truth" label="Sojourner Truth"/>
<link wikidata="Q231345" start="7385" end="7395" title="Jenny Lind" label="Jenny Lind"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="7407" end="7414" title="Sweden" label="Swedish"/>
<link wikidata="Q5127501" start="7571" end="7608" title="Clarke Schools for Hearing and Speech" label="Clarke Schools for Hearing and Speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q34286" start="7760" end="7781" title="Alexander Graham Bell" label="Alexander Graham Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q234287" start="7786" end="7800" title="Grace Coolidge" label="Grace Coolidge"/>
<link wikidata="Q49204" start="7834" end="7847" title="Smith College" label="Smith College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1886223" start="7928" end="7950" title="Seven Sisters colleges" label="Seven Sisters colleges"/>
<link wikidata="Q133054" start="7985" end="7997" title="Sylvia Plath" label="Sylvia Plath"/>
<link wikidata="Q190628" start="7999" end="8011" title="Barbara Bush" label="Barbara Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q193426" start="8013" end="8025" title="Nancy Reagan" label="Nancy Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q40628" start="8027" end="8040" title="Tammy Baldwin" label="Tammy Baldwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q231178" start="8042" end="8056" title="Gloria Steinem" label="Gloria Steinem"/>
<link wikidata="Q257261" start="8058" end="8080" title="Madeleine L&amp;#x27;Engle" label="Madeleine L&amp;#x27;Engle"/>
<link wikidata="Q214477" start="8086" end="8097" title="Julia Child" label="Julia Child"/>
<link wikidata="Q2887217" start="8117" end="8140" title="women&amp;#x27;s basketball" label="women&amp;#x27;s basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q124323280" start="8181" end="8202" title="Northampton Bank robbery" label="theft of $1.6 million"/>
<link wikidata="Q131288" start="8485" end="8494" title="Immigration" label="Immigrant"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="8553" end="8558" title="Ireland" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="8560" end="8566" title="Poland" label="Polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q857880" start="8572" end="8588" title="French-Canadians" label="French-Canadians"/>
<link wikidata="Q781973" start="8962" end="8971" title="Rust Belt" label="Rust Belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3320597" start="9318" end="9343" title="Capital District, New York" label="New York Capital District"/>
<link wikidata="Q371781" start="9854" end="9866" title="Memorial Day" label="Memorial Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q367523" start="9879" end="9891" title="Columbus Day" label="Columbus Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q844245" start="10055" end="10065" title="gypsy jazz" label="gypsy jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7196817" start="10338" end="10352" title="Pioneer Valley" label="Pioneer Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q65122136" start="10356" end="10377" title="western Massachusetts" label="western Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="10416" end="10443" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q5460527" start="10644" end="10652" title="Florence, Massachusetts" label="Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2414217" start="10718" end="10726" title="Hatfield, Massachusetts" label="Hatfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q2414374" start="10731" end="10743" title="Williamsburg, Massachusetts" label="Williamsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302147" start="10788" end="10794" title="Hadley, Massachusetts" label="Hadley"/>
<link wikidata="Q173782" start="10865" end="10873" title="art deco" label="art deco"/>
<link wikidata="Q5024364" start="10874" end="10896" title="Calvin Coolidge Bridge" label="Calvin Coolidge Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q49164" start="10980" end="10987" title="Amherst, Massachusetts" label="Amherst"/>
<link wikidata="Q379648" start="11053" end="11077" title="Connecticut River Valley" label="Connecticut River Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="11156" end="11162" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q7755777" start="11271" end="11276" title="The Oxbow (Connecticut River)" label="Oxbow"/>
<link wikidata="Q3321987" start="11343" end="11357" title="Mount Nonotuck" label="Mount Nonotuck"/>
<link wikidata="Q10856115" start="11390" end="11415" title="humid continental climate" label="humid continental climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="11417" end="11423" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="11642" end="11648" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="11965" end="11970" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="11977" end="11993" title="African American (U.S. Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="12000" end="12015" title="Native American (U.S. Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="12022" end="12027" title="Asian (U.S. Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="12034" end="12050" title="Pacific Islander (U.S. Census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="12062" end="12073" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="12108" end="12116" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="12120" end="12126" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="13131" end="13148" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="13241" end="13253" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q9842" start="13375" end="13392" title="elementary school" label="elementary school"/>
<link wikidata="Q149566" start="13432" end="13445" title="middle school" label="middle school"/>
<link wikidata="Q105038092" start="13470" end="13481" title="High school (North America)" label="high school"/>
<link wikidata="Q322563" start="13511" end="13546" title="vocational school" label="vocational-agricultural high school"/>
<link wikidata="Q36023" start="14200" end="14215" title="Calvin Coolidge" label="Calvin Coolidge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494460" start="14839" end="14877" title="Massachusetts House of Representatives" label="Massachusetts House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494665" start="14965" end="14985" title="Massachusetts Senate" label="Massachusetts Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q6784274" start="15030" end="15067" title="Massachusetts Governor&amp;#x27;s Council" label="Massachusetts Governor&amp;#x27;s Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q49204" start="15194" end="15207" title="Smith College" label="Smith College"/>
<link wikidata="Q3660535" start="15228" end="15248" title="women&amp;#x27;s college" label="women&amp;#x27;s college"/>
<link wikidata="Q1886223" start="15261" end="15274" title="Seven Sisters (colleges)" label="Seven Sisters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331248" start="15299" end="15323" title="Five Colleges Consortium" label="Five Colleges Consortium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331248" start="15376" end="15389" title="Five Colleges (Massachusetts)" label="Five Colleges"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187811" start="15424" end="15436" title="college town" label="college town"/>
<link wikidata="Q5127501" start="15494" end="15531" title="Clarke Schools for Hearing and Speech" label="Clarke Schools for Hearing and Speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069953" start="15616" end="15627" title="lip-reading" label="lip-reading"/>
<link wikidata="Q14759" start="15643" end="15650" title="American Sign Language" label="signing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5209263" start="15886" end="15913" title="The Daily Hampshire Gazette" label="The Daily Hampshire Gazette"/>
<link wikidata="Q3545675" start="16096" end="16111" title="city of license" label="city of license"/>
<link wikidata="Q7952609" start="16149" end="16156" title="WLZX-FM" label="WLZX-FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q7948874" start="16158" end="16162" title="WEIB" label="WEIB"/>
<link wikidata="Q7950302" start="16168" end="16172" title="WHMP" label="WHMP"/>
<link wikidata="Q2015033" start="16213" end="16222" title="LPFM" label="low-power"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179112" start="16223" end="16238" title="community radio" label="community radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7957814" start="16269" end="16286" title="WXOJ-LP" label="Valley Free Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7249732" start="16407" end="16431" title="Prometheus Radio Project" label="Prometheus Radio Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q5597587" start="16482" end="16508" title="Grassroots Radio Coalition" label="Grassroots Radio Coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q94961" start="17355" end="17368" title="Interstate 91" label="Interstate 91"/>
<link wikidata="Q16970336" start="17436" end="17448" title="U.S. Route 5 in Massachusetts" label="U.S. Route 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q2483962" start="17450" end="17471" title="Massachusetts Route 9" label="Massachusetts Route 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q2483964" start="17477" end="17499" title="Massachusetts Route 10" label="Massachusetts Route 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484047" start="17548" end="17570" title="Massachusetts Route 66" label="Massachusetts Route 66"/>
<link wikidata="Q23239" start="18175" end="18181" title="Amtrak" label="Amtrak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412872" start="18190" end="18199" title="Vermonter (train)" label="Vermonter"/>
<link wikidata="Q85812695" start="18216" end="18228" title="Valley Flyer" label="Valley Flyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7581099" start="18289" end="18300" title="Springfield Union Station (Springfield, Massachusetts)" label="Springfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530924" start="18319" end="18329" title="Greenfield, Massachusetts" label="Greenfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="18413" end="18426" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="18428" end="18434" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q49145" start="18436" end="18445" title="New Haven" label="New Haven"/>
<link wikidata="Q678233" start="18480" end="18498" title="Northeast Corridor" label="Northeast Corridor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7581099" start="18575" end="18600" title="Springfield Union Station (Springfield, Massachusetts)" label="Springfield Union Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q204807" start="18624" end="18633" title="Peter Pan Bus Lines" label="Peter Pan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7129579" start="18710" end="18729" title="Pan Am Southern" label="Pan Am Southern LLC"/>
<link wikidata="Q105952427" start="18738" end="18768" title="Berkshire and Eastern Railroad" label="Berkshire and Eastern Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230295" start="18802" end="18823" title="Genesee &amp;amp; Wyoming" label="Genesee &amp;amp; Wyoming"/>
<link wikidata="Q19865933" start="18891" end="18913" title="Connecticut River Line" label="Connecticut River Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q7196828" start="19112" end="19144" title="Pioneer Valley Transit Authority" label="Pioneer Valley Transit Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140542" start="19357" end="19378" title="Mount Holyoke College" label="Mount Holyoke College"/>
<link wikidata="Q49165" start="19380" end="19395" title="Amherst College" label="Amherst College"/>
<link wikidata="Q15142" start="19397" end="19432" title="University of Massachusetts Amherst" label="University of Massachusetts Amherst"/>
<link wikidata="Q1706859" start="19438" end="19455" title="Hampshire College" label="Hampshire College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5491773" start="19461" end="19496" title="Franklin Regional Transit Authority" label="Franklin Regional Transit Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530924" start="19515" end="19540" title="Greenfield, Massachusetts" label="Greenfield, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q204807" start="19585" end="19598" title="Peter Pan Bus" label="Peter Pan Bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q49164" start="19634" end="19641" title="Amherst, Massachusetts" label="Amherst"/>
<link wikidata="Q7057585" start="19695" end="19714" title="Northampton Airport" label="Northampton Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571929" start="19726" end="19742" title="general aviation" label="general aviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420233" start="19853" end="19882" title="Bradley International Airport" label="Bradley International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q755206" start="19925" end="19951" title="Windsor Locks, Connecticut" label="Windsor Locks, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q2116321" start="20038" end="20048" title="rail trail" label="rail trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q16894590" start="20074" end="20091" title="Manhan Rail Trail" label="Manhan Rail Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q5435883" start="20167" end="20189" title="Farmington Canal Trail" label="Farmington Canal Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q14715791" start="20249" end="20270" title="Norwottuck Rail Trail" label="Norwottuck Rail Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q2414308" start="20338" end="20349" title="Belchertown, Massachusetts" label="Belchertown"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20392" end="20415" title="Central Massachusetts Railroad#Rail trail plan" label="Central Mass Rail Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q6675045" start="20563" end="20572" title="Look Park" label="Look Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q2414374" start="20595" end="20606" title="Haydenville, Massachusetts" label="Haydenville"/>
<link wikidata="Q132645338" start="20770" end="20782" title="First Church of Christ (Northampton, Massachusetts)" label="First Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q313073" start="20821" end="20837" title="Jonathan Edwards (theologian)" label="Jonathan Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q2344888" start="20895" end="20916" title="First Great Awakening" label="First Great Awakening"/>
<link wikidata="Q5366337" start="20923" end="20962" title="Elm Street Historic District (Northampton, Massachusetts)" label="Elm Street/Round Hill Historic District"/>
<link wikidata="Q105180" start="21310" end="21325" title="Sojourner Truth" label="Sojourner Truth"/>
<link wikidata="Q379648" start="21472" end="21489" title="Connecticut River" label="Connecticut River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7755777" start="21494" end="21503" title="The Oxbow (Connecticut river)" label="The Oxbow"/>
<link wikidata="Q6675045" start="21808" end="21817" title="Look Park" label="Look Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q392" start="22171" end="22180" title="Bob Dylan" label="Bob Dylan"/>
<link wikidata="Q65120528" start="22267" end="22292" title="Cooley Dickinson Hospital" label="Cooley Dickinson Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q7719467" start="22387" end="22422" title="The Botanic Garden of Smith College" label="The Botanic Garden of Smith College"/>
<link wikidata="Q165044" start="22615" end="22625" title="greenhouse" label="greenhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2116321" start="22955" end="22965" title="rail trail" label="rail trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q14715791" start="22986" end="23007" title="Norwottuck Rail Trail" label="Norwottuck Rail Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q5460527" start="23028" end="23036" title="Florence, Massachusetts" label="Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q49164" start="23082" end="23089" title="Amherst, Massachusetts" label="Amherst"/>
<link wikidata="Q2414308" start="23094" end="23105" title="Belchertown, Massachusetts" label="Belchertown"/>
<link wikidata="Q16894590" start="23111" end="23128" title="Manhan Rail Trail" label="Manhan Rail Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q3918368" start="23347" end="23364" title="agricultural show" label="agricultural fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q6072603" start="23459" end="23480" title="Iron Horse Music Hall" label="Iron Horse Music Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q4671500" start="23591" end="23607" title="Academy of Music Theatre" label="Academy of Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q24354" start="23686" end="23693" title="theater (structure)" label="theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q203219" start="23716" end="23729" title="Boris Karloff" label="Boris Karloff"/>
<link wikidata="Q131545" start="23734" end="23747" title="Harry Houdini" label="Harry Houdini"/>
<link wikidata="Q28564" start="24181" end="24195" title="public library" label="public library"/>
<link wikidata="Q5024376" start="24225" end="24272" title="Calvin Coolidge Presidential Library and Museum" label="Calvin Coolidge Presidential Library and Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064010" start="24274" end="24293" title="Charles Ammi Cutter" label="Charles Ammi Cutter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5196943" start="24439" end="24470" title="Cutter Expansive Classification" label="Cutter Expansive Classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q2623393" start="24531" end="24545" title="Mirage Studios" label="Mirage Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q1381762" start="24563" end="24591" title="Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles" label="Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles"/>
<link wikidata="Q51406" start="24797" end="24807" title="LGBT Pride" label="LGBT Pride"/>
<link wikidata="Q7057643" start="25100" end="25126" title="Northampton State Hospital" label="Northampton State Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q210999" start="25139" end="25159" title="psychiatric hospital" label="psychiatric hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q7196826" start="25462" end="25489" title="Pioneer Valley Roller Derby" label="Pioneer Valley Roller Derby"/>
<link wikidata="Q5460527" start="25564" end="25572" title="Florence, Massachusetts" label="Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q36023" start="25611" end="25626" title="Calvin Coolidge" label="Calvin Coolidge"/>
<link wikidata="Q201790" start="25991" end="26012" title="Preah Maha Ghosananda" label="Preah Maha Ghosananda"/>
<link wikidata="Q7645077" start="26039" end="26068" title="Supreme Patriarch of Cambodia" label="Supreme Patriarch of Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q325643" start="26173" end="26209" title="Who&amp;#x27;s Afraid of Virginia Woolf? (film)" label="Who&amp;#x27;s Afraid of Virginia Woolf?"/>
<link wikidata="Q1740859" start="26230" end="26236" title="Malice (1993 film)" label="Malice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1687420" start="26257" end="26266" title="In Dreams (film)" label="In Dreams"/>
<link wikidata="Q648977" start="26287" end="26308" title="The Cider House Rules (film)" label="The Cider House Rules"/>
<link wikidata="Q1169717" start="26329" end="26335" title="Sylvia (2003 film)" label="Sylvia"/>
<link wikidata="Q760093" start="26360" end="26376" title="Edge of Darkness (2010 film)" label="Edge of Darkness"/>
<link wikidata="Q215972" start="26476" end="26487" title="protagonist" label="protagonist"/>
<link wikidata="Q170509" start="26491" end="26502" title="Henry James" label="Henry James"/>
<link wikidata="Q3079804" start="26527" end="26542" title="Roderick Hudson" label="Roderick Hudson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1381762" start="26618" end="26646" title="Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles" label="Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2594023" start="26678" end="26691" title="Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles (Mirage Studios)" label="Mirage comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q158869" start="26719" end="26739" title="Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles (2003 TV series)" label="2003 animated series"/>
<link wikidata="Q58439" start="26813" end="26835" title="Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles (1990 film)" label="1990 live-action movie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2623393" start="26880" end="26894" title="Mirage Studios" label="Mirage Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q338109" start="26943" end="26955" title="Tracy Kidder" label="Tracy Kidder"/>
<link wikidata="Q767439" start="27090" end="27114" title="Augusten Burroughs" label="Augusten Burroughs&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q4353727" start="27133" end="27154" title="Running with Scissors (memoir)" label="Running with Scissors"/>
<link wikidata="Q13979" start="27215" end="27234" title="Saturday Night Live" label="Saturday Night Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q474749" start="27407" end="27427" title="Questionable Content" label="Questionable Content"/>
<link wikidata="Q3177244" start="27438" end="27450" title="Jeph Jacques" label="Jeph Jacques"/>
<link wikidata="Q2470541" start="27468" end="27495" title="USS Northampton" label="USS &amp;quot;Northampton&amp;quot;"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="116821" wikidata="Q2536864" url="?curid=116821" title="Pelham, Massachusetts">
<text>Pelham is a town in Hampshire County, Massachusetts, United States. The population was 1,280 at the 2020 census. Its ZIP Code is shared with Amherst.

Pelham is part of the Springfield, Massachusetts Metropolitan Statistical Area.

== History ==

Pelham ( ; the &quot;h&quot; is silent) was part of the Equivalent Lands compromise, and was first settled in 1738 by mostly Presbyterian Scotch-Irish immigrants. It was officially incorporated in 1743. The town is named for the Pelham family; Henry Pelham was Prime Minister of the United Kingdom at the time of the town&#x27;s incorporation. The town is best known as being home to Daniel Shays, leader of Shays&#x27; Rebellion, a series of protests against crushing austerity measures in Massachusetts during 1786 and 1787. The rebellion, planned in Conkey&#x27;s Tavern in town, drew support from many towns in central and western Massachusetts, but it met its practical end when the angry farmers&#x27; force refused to fight Governor Bowdoin&#x27;s army and they were dispersed in a rout in nearby Petersham. Pelham also holds the distinction of having the oldest town hall in continuous use in the United States. A town meeting is held there for that primary purpose each year.

Pelham&#x27;s boundaries have changed twice in its history. Originally a much larger town, rectangular in shape (except for a small extension southward taking up part of the modern area of Knight&#x27;s Corner) and extending eastward to the top of Prescott Hill (where Daniel Shays once lived), the land east of the West Branch of the Swift River was annexed by the town of Prescott in the latter half of the nineteenth centuries (maps made in 1855 and 1862 both show this land still belonging to Pelham). The landscape would change once again, however, when the Quabbin Reservoir was formed along the branches of the Swift River. The reservoir filled along the river, and protected lands along its edge became part of the Quabbin Reservation. It was at this time as well that the towns of the valley were dis-incorporated, and a portion of Enfield which now constitutes the town&#x27;s southeast corner (roughly east of Caldwell Brook and Knight&#x27;s Corner) was given to the town. Because the reservoir divided the town from its old lands in Prescott, however, that portion of land was not returned to the town, but given to New Salem instead.

On March 23, 1860, a young man named Warren Gibbs, who lived in the town, died after eating some oysters prepared for him by his wife, Mary Felton. His brother had a tombstone produced that claimed that Felton poisoned him. After that, the tombstone was repeatedly destroyed, and the brother had to hire guards to protect it.

==Geography==
According to the United States Census Bureau, the town has a total area of , of which is land and (5.40%) is water. The town lies along the western edge of the Quabbin Reservoir, its town line following the former path of the West Branch of the Swift River, which once flowed through the town. The town lies along the hills which divide the Pioneer Valley along the Connecticut River to the west from the Quabbin Valley to the east. The brooks in town also flow in both these directions; those in the eastern third of town drain towards the Quabbin, with the western brooks draining towards the Connecticut. The town is fairly forested, some of which are protected; these include Cadwell Memorial Forest, Buffam Falls Conservation Area and the Quabbin lands.

Pelham is the northeasternmost town in Hampshire County, bordering Franklin County to the north and east. (Prior to the formation of the Quabbin Reservoir, the town of Prescott was the northeast corner of the county, but its lands were absorbed by New Salem.) Pelham is bordered by Shutesbury to the north, New Salem to the east, Belchertown to the south and Amherst to the west. (Because of the reservoir, there is no direct connection between Pelham and New Salem.) The historical center of town is located east of the county seat of Northampton, north-northeast of Springfield, northwest of Worcester, and west of Boston (though the latter two distances are hampered by not having direct routes across the Quabbin).

==Transportation==

U.S. Route 202, which was rerouted due to the Quabbin Reservoir project along the Daniel Shays Highway, runs through the eastern side of town. Other than a small portion of Route 9 which clips the town&#x27;s southwestern corner, Route 202 is the only highway through town. The town is roughly equidistant from Interstate 90, Interstate 91 and Route 2 to the south, west, and north, respectively.

The nearest rail service is the Amtrak Vermonter service in Northampton. Several general aviation airports are located in nearby towns, but the nearest national air service can be reached at Bradley International Airport in Connecticut.

== Education ==
The town is part of the Amherst Regional School District along with Amherst, Leverett, and Shutesbury. Pelham has one elementary school, the Pelham Elementary School, which serves K–5. Students in Pelham then attend Amherst Regional Middle School for grades six through eight, followed by Amherst Regional High School for grades nine through twelve..

==Demographics==

As of 2000, the US census records there were 1,403 people, 545 households, and 382 families residing in the town. The population density was . There were 556 housing units at an average density of 22.2 per square mile (8.6/km). The racial makeup of the town was 95.08% White, 1.43% African American, 1.07% Asian, 0.64% from other races, and 1.78% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 1.85% of the population.

There were 545 households, out of which 32.5% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 58.2% were married couples living together, 8.6% had a female householder with no husband present, and 29.9% were non-families. Of all households, 19.8% were made up of individuals, and 6.2% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.57 and the average family size was 2.95.

In the town, the population was spread out, with 23.2% under the age of 18, 7.7% from 18 to 24, 24.4% from 25 to 44, 32.1% from 45 to 64, and 12.5% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 42 years. For every 100 females, there were 99.9 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 94.1 males.

The median income for a household in the town was $61,339, and the median income for a family was $71,667. Males had a median income of $50,435 versus $33,500 for females. The per capita income for the town was $29,821. About 2.6% of families and 4.9% of the population were below the poverty line, including 3.1% of those under age 18 and 5.8% of those age 65 or over.

==Notable people==
* Daniel Shays (1747–1825), rebellion leader
* Lettie S. Bigelow (1848/49–1906), author
* Deb Talan (born 1968), singer-songwriter
* H. W. Harkness (1821–1901), mycologist and natural historian

==References==

==External links==

* Official site</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2536864" start="0" end="6" title="Pelham, Massachusetts" label="Pelham"/>
<link wikidata="Q2154459" start="12" end="16" title="New England town" label="town"/>
<link wikidata="Q54161" start="20" end="36" title="Hampshire County, Massachusetts" label="Hampshire County"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="38" end="51" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="100" end="111" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q49164" start="141" end="148" title="Amherst, Massachusetts" label="Amherst"/>
<link wikidata="Q49158" start="173" end="199" title="Springfield, Massachusetts" label="Springfield, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7580900" start="200" end="229" title="Springfield metropolitan area, Massachusetts" label="Metropolitan Statistical Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q5384712" start="303" end="319" title="Equivalent Lands" label="Equivalent Lands"/>
<link wikidata="Q244766" start="491" end="503" title="Henry Pelham" label="Henry Pelham"/>
<link wikidata="Q14211" start="508" end="544" title="Prime Minister of the United Kingdom" label="Prime Minister of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162700" start="631" end="643" title="Daniel Shays" label="Daniel Shays"/>
<link wikidata="Q392601" start="655" end="676" title="Shays&amp;#x27; Rebellion" label="Shays&amp;#x27; Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="738" end="751" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2426756" start="1051" end="1060" title="Petersham, Massachusetts" label="Petersham"/>
<link wikidata="Q7161365" start="1117" end="1126" title="Pelham Town Hall Historic District" label="town hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q455752" start="1169" end="1181" title="town meeting" label="town meeting"/>
<link wikidata="Q7240836" start="1607" end="1615" title="Prescott, Massachusetts" label="Prescott"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124827" start="1796" end="1813" title="Quabbin Reservoir" label="Quabbin Reservoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q5377276" start="2074" end="2081" title="Enfield, Massachusetts" label="Enfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="2740" end="2767" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q7196817" start="3064" end="3078" title="Pioneer Valley" label="Pioneer Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q379648" start="3089" end="3106" title="Connecticut River" label="Connecticut River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7268225" start="3128" end="3142" title="Quabbin Valley" label="Quabbin Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6921842" start="3403" end="3426" title="Cadwell Memorial Forest" label="Cadwell Memorial Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q54163" start="3550" end="3565" title="Franklin County, Massachusetts" label="Franklin County"/>
<link wikidata="Q2416688" start="3765" end="3775" title="Shutesbury, Massachusetts" label="Shutesbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q2416465" start="3790" end="3799" title="New Salem, Massachusetts" label="New Salem"/>
<link wikidata="Q2414308" start="3813" end="3824" title="Belchertown, Massachusetts" label="Belchertown"/>
<link wikidata="Q49164" start="3842" end="3849" title="Amherst, Massachusetts" label="Amherst"/>
<link wikidata="Q49186" start="4019" end="4030" title="Northampton, Massachusetts" label="Northampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q49158" start="4051" end="4062" title="Springfield, Massachusetts" label="Springfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q49179" start="4077" end="4086" title="Worcester, Massachusetts" label="Worcester"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="4100" end="4106" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436504" start="4223" end="4237" title="U.S. Route 202 in Massachusetts" label="U.S. Route 202"/>
<link wikidata="Q2483962" start="4396" end="4403" title="Massachusetts Route 9" label="Route 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q731271" start="4534" end="4547" title="Massachusetts Turnpike" label="Interstate 90"/>
<link wikidata="Q94961" start="4549" end="4562" title="Interstate 91" label="Interstate 91"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033220" start="4567" end="4574" title="Massachusetts Route 2" label="Route 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q23239" start="4653" end="4659" title="Amtrak" label="Amtrak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412872" start="4660" end="4669" title="Vermonter (train)" label="Vermonter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420233" start="4812" end="4841" title="Bradley International Airport" label="Bradley International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4899" end="4931" title="Amherst Regional School District" label="Amherst Regional School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q49164" start="4943" end="4950" title="Amherst, Massachusetts" label="Amherst"/>
<link wikidata="Q2437287" start="4952" end="4960" title="Leverett, Massachusetts" label="Leverett"/>
<link wikidata="Q2416688" start="4966" end="4976" title="Shutesbury, Massachusetts" label="Shutesbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q4746038" start="5164" end="5192" title="Amherst Regional High School (Massachusetts)" label="Amherst Regional High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q166998" start="5261" end="5270" title="United States Census 2000" label="US census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5514" end="5519" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5527" end="5543" title="African American (U.S. Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5551" end="5556" title="Asian (U.S. Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5569" end="5580" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5616" end="5624" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5628" end="5634" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="5786" end="5801" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="6597" end="6614" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="6706" end="6718" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162700" start="6813" end="6825" title="Daniel Shays" label="Daniel Shays"/>
<link wikidata="Q63969273" start="6858" end="6875" title="Lettie S. Bigelow" label="Lettie S. Bigelow"/>
<link wikidata="Q5247795" start="6901" end="6910" title="Deb Talan" label="Deb Talan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4495965" start="6944" end="6958" title="H. W. Harkness" label="H. W. Harkness"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="116822" wikidata="Q2302467" url="?curid=116822" title="Plainfield, Massachusetts">
<text>Plainfield is a town on the northwestern edge of Hampshire County, Massachusetts, United States, about 25 miles east of Pittsfield and 30 miles northwest of Northampton. The population was 633 at the 2020 census. It is part of the Springfield, Massachusetts Metropolitan Statistical Area.

== History ==
Plainfield was first settled in 1770, primarily by settlers from the town of Bridgewater, and was officially incorporated as a district within the Town of Cummington in 1785, and as a town on June 15, 1807. Plainfield is the youngest town in Hampshire County.

In the 1800s, Plainfield was a thriving agricultural community, primarily producing sheep and leather for tanning. With the widespread adoption of the steamship, and the resultant globalization in the 1870s, the expense of importing both mutton and leather from Australia and New Zealand was greatly reduced. Consequently, the agricultural industries in Plainfield became less profitable, and the population declined substantially over the following decades.

Sixty-one men from Plainfield joined the Union Army late in the Civil War. Six were killed in battle, or died as a consequence of their service, including resident Michael Bashaw, who died of dysentery at the battle of Wilson&#x27;s Creek. Of those who survived, many settled elsewhere after the war.

After over a century of population decline, modern Plainfield has experienced population growth since 1950.

==Geography==
The Town of Plainfield is situated in the scenic Berkshire Highlands where Hampshire County merges into neighboring Franklin and Berkshire Counties. Plainfield is part of the Hilltowns of Western Massachusetts.

Plainfield sits 1620′ above sea level, and the peaks of West Mountain (at 2125′) are the highest elevation in Hampshire County.

According to the United States Census Bureau, the town has a total area of , of which is land and (0.99%) is water.

Plainfield&#x27;s waterways serve as the headwaters of the Westfield and Deerfield rivers.

Plainfield is bordered by the towns of Cummington, Ashfield, Hawley, Savoy, and Windsor.

==Demographics==

As of the census of 2000, there were 589 people, 243 households, and 166 families residing in the town. The population density was . There were 311 housing units at an average density of 14.8 per square mile (5.7/km). The racial makeup of the town was 98.13% White, 0.34% Native American, 0.17% Asian, and 1.36% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 0.68% of the population.

There were 243 households, out of which 31.3% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 60.9% were married couples living together, 4.5% had a female householder with no husband present, and 31.3% were non-families. Of all households, 25.9% were made up of individuals, and 10.3% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.42 and the average family size was 2.92.

In the town, the population was spread out, with 24.8% under the age of 18, 4.2% from 18 to 24, 26.1% from 25 to 44, 31.9% from 45 to 64, and 12.9% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 42 years. For every 100 females, there were 94.4 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 99.5 males.

The median income for a household in the town was $37,250, and the median income for a family was $46,042. Males had a median income of $31,625 versus $26,875 for females. The per capita income for the town was $20,785. About 4.8% of families and 8.0% of the population were below the poverty line, including 4.9% of those under age 18 and none of those age 65 or over.

==Government==
Plainfield is governed by a Town Meeting open to all registered voters in the town. Ongoing town matters are managed by an elected Board of Selectmen and other Boards and Commissions. The town is part of the First Hampshire District in the Massachusetts House of Representatives, represented by Lindsay Sabadosa, and the Berkshire, Franklin, and Hampshire Senate district, represented by Adam G. Hinds.

==Notable people==

* Erastus Newton Bates, Illinois and Minnesota legislator
* John Brown (1800–1859), abolitionist who played a role in starting the Civil War
* William Cullen Bryant (1794–1878), poet, philosopher
* Ralph Ellison, novelist, essayist. African-American novelist, literary critic, scholar and writer
* Martha J. Lamb, author, historian
* Charles McCarry (born 1930), author of more than ten novels and numerous works of non-fiction
* James Naismith, inventor of basketball
* Talcott Seelye, former United States Ambassador to Tunisia and Syria, Arabist
* Charles Dudley Warner, born in Plainfield on September 12, 1829, author, editor &quot;Hartford Courant&quot;
* Marcus Whitman (1802–1847), missionary physician

==Points of interest==
* Plainfield Pond
* Deer Hill State Reservation
* Dubuque Memorial State Forest
* Shaw Hudson House; museum and historical home of note
* Old Millers site; one of eight mills on the Old Mill stream; Plainfield Historical Society.

==References==
==External links==

* Town of Plainfield official website
* Plainfield Volunteer Fire Department
* Plainfield Historical Society</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2302467" start="0" end="10" title="Plainfield, Massachusetts" label="Plainfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q2154459" start="16" end="20" title="New England town" label="town"/>
<link wikidata="Q54161" start="49" end="80" title="Hampshire County, Massachusetts" label="Hampshire County, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q49184" start="120" end="130" title="Pittsfield, Massachusetts" label="Pittsfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q49186" start="157" end="168" title="Northampton, Massachusetts" label="Northampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="200" end="211" title="United States Census, 2020" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q49158" start="231" end="257" title="Springfield, Massachusetts" label="Springfield, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7580900" start="258" end="287" title="Springfield metropolitan area, Massachusetts" label="Metropolitan Statistical Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086280" start="381" end="392" title="Bridgewater, Massachusetts" label="Bridgewater"/>
<link wikidata="Q919097" start="459" end="469" title="Cummington, Massachusetts" label="Cummington"/>
<link wikidata="Q286" start="659" end="666" title="leather" label="leather"/>
<link wikidata="Q211578" start="671" end="678" title="leather tanning" label="tanning"/>
<link wikidata="Q12859788" start="716" end="725" title="steamship" label="steamship"/>
<link wikidata="Q7181" start="745" end="758" title="globalization" label="globalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q123122627" start="803" end="809" title="Lamb (food)" label="mutton"/>
<link wikidata="Q286" start="814" end="821" title="leather" label="leather"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752901" start="1066" end="1076" title="Union Army" label="Union Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="1089" end="1098" title="American Civil War" label="Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q8023294" start="1244" end="1263" title="Wilsons Creek (Missouri)" label="Wilson&amp;#x27;s Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q820961" start="1499" end="1518" title="The Berkshires" label="Berkshire Highlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q54163" start="1566" end="1574" title="Franklin County, Massachusetts" label="Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q54165" start="1579" end="1588" title="Berkshire County, Massachusetts" label="Berkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q65122136" start="1638" end="1659" title="Western Massachusetts" label="Western Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="1808" end="1835" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q7376362" start="1949" end="1959" title="headwaters" label="headwaters"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567514" start="1967" end="1976" title="Westfield River" label="Westfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q5250907" start="1981" end="1990" title="Deerfield River (Massachusetts)" label="Deerfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q919097" start="2039" end="2049" title="Cummington, Massachusetts" label="Cummington"/>
<link wikidata="Q2536103" start="2051" end="2059" title="Ashfield, Massachusetts" label="Ashfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302294" start="2061" end="2067" title="Hawley, Massachusetts" label="Hawley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2431405" start="2069" end="2074" title="Savoy, Massachusetts" label="Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4020379" start="2080" end="2087" title="Windsor, Massachusetts" label="Windsor"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="2118" end="2124" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2367" end="2372" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2380" end="2395" title="Native American (U.S. Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2403" end="2408" title="Asian (U.S. Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2444" end="2452" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2456" end="2462" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="3426" end="3443" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="3535" end="3547" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q455752" start="3664" end="3676" title="Town Meeting" label="Town Meeting"/>
<link wikidata="Q4931397" start="3767" end="3785" title="Board of Selectmen" label="Board of Selectmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q17985771" start="4062" end="4082" title="Erastus Newton Bates" label="Erastus Newton Bates"/>
<link wikidata="Q189366" start="4120" end="4130" title="John Brown (abolitionist)" label="John Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q454840" start="4203" end="4224" title="William Cullen Bryant" label="William Cullen Bryant"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891" start="4244" end="4255" title="philosopher" label="philosopher"/>
<link wikidata="Q299965" start="4258" end="4271" title="Ralph Ellison" label="Ralph Ellison"/>
<link wikidata="Q6774434" start="4358" end="4372" title="Martha J. Lamb" label="Martha J. Lamb"/>
<link wikidata="Q2489779" start="4394" end="4409" title="Charles McCarry" label="Charles McCarry"/>
<link wikidata="Q188962" start="4490" end="4504" title="James Naismith" label="James Naismith"/>
<link wikidata="Q5372" start="4518" end="4528" title="basketball" label="basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q7679086" start="4531" end="4545" title="Talcott Williams Seelye" label="Talcott Seelye"/>
<link wikidata="Q15726790" start="4554" end="4578" title="U.S. Ambassador" label="United States Ambassador"/>
<link wikidata="Q948" start="4582" end="4589" title="Tunisia" label="Tunisia"/>
<link wikidata="Q858" start="4594" end="4599" title="Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q4783473" start="4601" end="4608" title="Arabist (political)" label="Arabist"/>
<link wikidata="Q952614" start="4611" end="4632" title="Charles Dudley Warner" label="Charles Dudley Warner"/>
<link wikidata="Q979972" start="4722" end="4736" title="Marcus Whitman" label="Marcus Whitman"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="116823" wikidata="Q7565985" url="?curid=116823" title="South Amherst, Massachusetts">
<text>South Amherst is a census-designated place (CDP) in the town of Amherst in Hampshire County, Massachusetts, United States. The population was 4,994 at the 2010 census. The CDP includes the village of South Amherst and residential subdivisions south of the Amherst town center.

South Amherst is part of the Springfield, Massachusetts Metropolitan Statistical Area.

==Geography==
South Amherst is located in the southwest part of the town of Amherst at (42.339586, -72.522426). It is bordered to the north by Amherst Center and to the west by the Hadley town line. The CDP extends south to Bay Road.

According to the United States Census Bureau, the CDP has a total area of , of which , or 0.58%, are water.

The original village of South Amherst is near the eastern edge of the CDP, at the junction of Shays Street, South East Street, and Station Road. The village has a town common area between South East and Middle streets, known as the South Amherst Common or Fiddlers Green, which, together with several of the surrounding houses, constitutes the South Amherst Common Historic District.

==Demographics==
At the 2000 census, there were 5,039 people, 1,500 households and 870 families residing in the CDP. The population density was 458.9/km (1,187.2/mi). There were 1,530 housing units at an average density of 139.3/km (360.5/mi). The racial makeup of the CDP was 71.66% White, 7.01% African American, 0.22% Native American, 10.82% Asian, 0.12% Pacific Islander, 5.40% from other races, and 4.78% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino were 9.82% of the population.

There were 1,500 households, of which 34.5% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 37.5% were married couples living together, 17.0% had a female householder with no husband present, and 42.0% were non-families. 18.3% of all households were made up of individuals, and 4.3% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.68 and the average family size was 3.12.

19.8% of the population were under the age of 18, 37.4% from 18 to 24, 21.6% from 25 to 44, 15.4% from 45 to 64, and 5.7% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 23 years. For every 100 females, there were 90.8 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 88.1 males.

The median household income was $44,628 and the median family income was $58,438. Males had a median income of $43,793 compared with $35,288 for females. The per capita income for the CDP was $17,191. About 8.3% of families and 17.4% of the population were below the poverty line, including 3.1% of those under age 18 and none of those age 65 or over.

==References==
==External links==
* Amherst Geographic Information Systems (GIS)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7565985" start="0" end="13" title="South Amherst, Massachusetts" label="South Amherst"/>
<link wikidata="Q498162" start="19" end="42" title="census-designated place" label="census-designated place"/>
<link wikidata="Q49164" start="64" end="71" title="Amherst, Massachusetts" label="Amherst"/>
<link wikidata="Q54161" start="75" end="91" title="Hampshire County, Massachusetts" label="Hampshire County"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="93" end="106" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="155" end="166" title="2010 United States Census" label="2010 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q49158" start="307" end="333" title="Springfield, Massachusetts" label="Springfield, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7580900" start="334" end="363" title="Springfield metropolitan area, Massachusetts" label="Metropolitan Statistical Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q4746019" start="509" end="523" title="Amherst Center, Massachusetts" label="Amherst Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302147" start="547" end="553" title="Hadley, Massachusetts" label="Hadley"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="618" end="645" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q2259176" start="873" end="884" title="town common" label="town common"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="1124" end="1130" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="1216" end="1234" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1379" end="1384" title="Race and ethnicity in the United States Census" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1392" end="1408" title="Race and ethnicity in the United States Census" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1416" end="1431" title="Race and ethnicity in the United States Census" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1440" end="1445" title="Race and ethnicity in the United States Census" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1453" end="1469" title="Race and ethnicity in the United States Census" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1482" end="1493" title="Race and ethnicity in the United States Census" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1529" end="1537" title="Race and ethnicity in the United States Census" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1541" end="1547" title="Race and ethnicity in the United States Census" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="1685" end="1700" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940707" start="2298" end="2321" title="median household income" label="median household income"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="2452" end="2469" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="2561" end="2573" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="116824" wikidata="Q2423149" url="?curid=116824" title="South Hadley, Massachusetts">
<text>South Hadley (, ) is a town in Hampshire County, Massachusetts, United States. The population was 18,150 at the 2020 census. It is part of the Springfield, Massachusetts Metropolitan Statistical Area.

South Hadley is home to Mount Holyoke College, South Hadley High School, Pioneer Valley Performing Arts Charter Public School, and the Berkshire Hills Music Academy.

== History ==

South Hadley was an unsettled area of Hadley from 1659 until 1721, when English settlers moved in from Hadley. A separate town meeting was held in 1753, and the town was officially split and incorporated in 1775.

The town is the home of the nation&#x27;s first successful navigable canal as well as the oldest continuing institution of higher education for women (Mount Holyoke College).

The Civil War Monument (believed to be by Jerome Connor) in the center of the Commons was given to South Hadley by William H. Gaylord in the 1900s. The Gaylords also donated the Gaylord Memorial Library, located near the center of town.

==Geography==
South Hadley is located in the western part of Massachusetts, specifically in the Pioneer Valley. It is bordered on the north by Hadley and Amherst, on the east by Granby, and on the south by Chicopee. The Connecticut River defines the town&#x27;s western border and separates it from the cities of Holyoke and Easthampton. South Hadley is south of Brattleboro, Vermont, west of Boston, and from New York City.

Although no interstate highways cross South Hadley&#x27;s borders, U.S. Route 202 and Massachusetts Highways 33, 47, and 116 provide primary routes of transportation. Interstate 91 can be accessed in Holyoke while Interstate 90 is accessible through Chicopee. Westover Metropolitan Airport is located in neighboring Chicopee and offers air services throughout the region. Bradley International Airport, serving the greater Hartford–Springfield area, is located to the south. The closest Amtrak station is the Holyoke station.
The Village Commons, a center for dining, shopping, and leisure, is located at the juncture of Massachusetts Routes 116 and 47, in the area commonly called South Hadley Center. Additional commercial centers are located on Massachusetts Route 33 and farther south on Route 116, including South Hadley Falls, which is across the river from Holyoke. South Hadley is also the home of Mount Holyoke College, the oldest continuously operating institution of higher education for women, founded in 1837.

According to the United States Census Bureau, the town has a total area of , of which is land and (3.70%) is water. The mountain range called the Holyoke Range or Mount Holyoke Range passes through the north of the town and separates it from Hadley and Amherst. There are 12 reservoirs in the town fed by eight distinct streams and six natural ponds.

===Geology===
The first confirmed evidence of a dinosaur to be found in North America was unearthed in South Hadley by Pliny Moody while plowing in 1802, 40 years before dinosaurs were identified as a fossil group. The sandstone slab bearing large, mysterious footprints was later purchased by Elihu Dwight, who gave the prints the name of &quot;Noah&#x27;s Raven&quot;. Professor Edward Hitchcock then obtained the slab, which is now on prominent display in the Beneski Museum of Natural History at Amherst College. Hitchcock believed the fossils were made by gigantic ancient birds, long before scientists accepted that modern birds and dinosaurs are related.

==Demographics==

As of the census of 2000, there were 17,196 people, 6,586 households, and 4,208 families residing in the town. The population density was . There were 6,784 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the town was 94.05% White, 1.20% African American, 0.12% Native American, 2.53% Asian, 0.06% Pacific Islander, 0.77% from other races, and 1.28% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 2.36% of the population.

There were 6,586 households, out of which 26.5% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 51.6% were married couples living together, 9.3% had a female householder with no husband present, and 36.1% were non-families. Of all households, 30.4% were made up of individuals, and 13.7% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.33 and the average family size was 2.93.

In the town, the population was spread out, with 19.6% under the age of 18, 14.9% from 18 to 24, 25.6% from 25 to 44, 22.4% from 45 to 64, and 17.4% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 38 years. For every 100 females, there were 72.1 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 65.8 males.

The median income for a household in the town was $46,678, and the median income for a family was $58,693. Males had a median income of $42,256 versus $31,219 for females. The per capita income for the town was $22,732. About 4.1% of families and 5.9% of the population were below the poverty line, including 5.8% of those under age 18 and 7.2% of those age 65 or over.

==Economy==
Although South Hadley&#x27;s economy has changed greatly in the last two centuries, reflecting the trends of the Commonwealth and country, today it still retains businesses in agriculture, education, and manufacturing. With Mount Holyoke College being by far the largest employer in the area, a number of other contractors, service providers, and businesses support the college. Additionally the area maintains a small agricultural sector with several farms, and is home to several small machine shops and manufacturing firms, including a research and manufacturing facility of the E Ink Corporation.

==Education==

Mount Holyoke College, a member of the Five College Consortium, and the oldest of the Seven Sisters colleges, is located in South Hadley.

South Hadley High School is home of the 2004 state champion lacrosse team that won Division II with the smallest high school enrollment of all 81 teams. It is also home of the 2022 Division IV Boys Soccer State Champions, as well as the 2019 Division III Girls Soccer State Champions. It also won the 2005 Division IA Super Bowl in football. The 2008 boys&#x27; golf team won the Division 1 state championship. The Tigers Hockey team, composed of students from Holyoke, Granby, and South Hadley High Schools, has won WMass Championships in 1989,2009,2010,2011,2012, and 2017 as well as the 2009 and 2011 Massachusetts Division IIIA Ice Hockey State Championship. The South Hadley football team won the Division II Super Bowl vs. Putnum in 2010 after completing a season with only one loss to Division I for Longmeadow. The baseball team won the Division II Massachusetts&#x27; state championship in 2012.

The South Hadley High School Marching Band has competed in the state and/or New England USSBA Championship each year. In 2005 they placed second nationally and won Best Percussion. In 2006 they won the United States Marine Corps Esprit De corps award, second place in USSBA, and Best Percussion. In 2007 they took the best percussion for the third year in a row, Massachusetts USSBA championship, New England Championship, and seventh place in the Northern States championship. In 2008 they repeated as best percussion (for the fourth straight year) and seventh place in the Northern States championship. South Hadley continues to have one of the only competitive marching band programs in all of Western Massachusetts.

Pioneer Valley Performing Arts Charter Public School is a public charter school located in South Hadley, focusing in the performing arts.

Berkshire Hills Music Academy (BHMA), founded in 1999 and opened in 2001, is a private post-secondary residential school for young adults with learning or developmental disabilities. The school is located on at the former Joseph Skinner estate.

==Notable people==

* Daniel T. Barry, retired NASA astronaut; contestant on the CBS reality television program &quot;&quot;
* Gerald Warner Brace (1901–1978), American writer, educator, sailor and boat builder
* Joseph Brodsky (1940–1996), Russian poet and essayist, who began teaching at Mount Holyoke in 1974. For the last fifteen years of his life until his death in 1996, he was Andrew W. Mellow Professor of Literature at the college. He died at the age of fifty-five. He was a recipient of the Nobel Prize for Literature in 1987 and was appointed United States poet laureate in 1991
* Joseph Goodhue Chandler (1813–1884), portrait painter
* Alfred C. Chapin (1848–1936), lawyer, Congressman, and mayor of Brooklyn, New York 1888–1891
* Donald R. Dwight (born 1931), Lieutenant Governor of Massachusetts from 1971 to 1975
* A. Bartlett Giamatti (1938–1989), the seventh commissioner of Major League Baseball and former president of Yale University
* Mary Lyon (1797–1849), educator, founder of the female seminaries which became Mount Holyoke College and Wheaton College
* George Herbert Mead (1863–1931), American philosopher, sociologist and psychologist, primarily affiliated with the University of Chicago, where he was one of several distinguished pragmatists. He is regarded as one of the founders of social psychology
* Phoebe Prince (1994–2010), teenage girl who was bullied and committed suicide as a result
* Erastus G. Smith (1855–1937), member of the Wisconsin State Assembly and Dean of Beloit College
* Peter Viereck (1916–2006), American poet, political thinker, and professor of history at Mount Holyoke College
* Lesley Visser (born 1953), the first woman to be recognized by the Pro Football Hall of Fame as the 2006 recipient of the Pete Rozelle Radio-Television Award. During her 40-year career in sports journalism she has worked for &quot;The Boston Globe&quot;, ESPN, ABC Sports, and CBS Sports
* Edwin White (1817–1877), American painter
* Phineas White (1770–1847), United States Representative from Vermont
* Benjamin Ruggles Woodbridge (1739–1819), doctor, colonel of the Massachusetts militia during the American Revolutionary War, and a member of the Massachusetts legislature

==See also==
* United States Post Office—South Hadley Main
* Woodbridge Street Historic District

==References==
==External links==
* South Hadley Historical Society</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2423149" start="0" end="12" title="South Hadley, Massachusetts" label="South Hadley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2154459" start="23" end="27" title="New England town" label="town"/>
<link wikidata="Q54161" start="31" end="47" title="Hampshire County, Massachusetts" label="Hampshire County"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="49" end="62" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="112" end="123" title="2020 United States Census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q49158" start="143" end="169" title="Springfield, Massachusetts" label="Springfield, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7580900" start="170" end="199" title="Springfield metropolitan area, Massachusetts" label="Metropolitan Statistical Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140542" start="226" end="247" title="Mount Holyoke College" label="Mount Holyoke College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7567401" start="249" end="273" title="South Hadley High School" label="South Hadley High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7196822" start="275" end="327" title="Pioneer Valley Performing Arts Charter Public School" label="Pioneer Valley Performing Arts Charter Public School"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302147" start="422" end="428" title="Hadley, Massachusetts" label="Hadley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7567402" start="640" end="672" title="South Hadley Canal" label="first successful navigable canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7806475" start="684" end="747" title="Timeline of women&amp;#x27;s colleges in the United States" label="the oldest continuing institution of higher education for women"/>
<link wikidata="Q6182633" start="816" end="829" title="Jerome Connor" label="Jerome Connor"/>
<link wikidata="Q65122136" start="1057" end="1064" title="Western Massachusetts" label="western"/>
<link wikidata="Q7196817" start="1108" end="1122" title="Pioneer Valley" label="Pioneer Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302147" start="1155" end="1161" title="Hadley, Massachusetts" label="Hadley"/>
<link wikidata="Q49164" start="1166" end="1173" title="Amherst, Massachusetts" label="Amherst"/>
<link wikidata="Q2416252" start="1190" end="1196" title="Granby, Massachusetts" label="Granby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650454" start="1218" end="1226" title="Chicopee, Massachusetts" label="Chicopee"/>
<link wikidata="Q379648" start="1232" end="1249" title="Connecticut River" label="Connecticut River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637790" start="1325" end="1332" title="Holyoke, Massachusetts" label="Holyoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q899813" start="1375" end="1395" title="Brattleboro, Vermont" label="Brattleboro, Vermont"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="1405" end="1411" title="Boston, Massachusetts" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q94247" start="1450" end="1468" title="interstate highway" label="interstate highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436504" start="1505" end="1519" title="U.S. Route 202 in Massachusetts" label="U.S. Route 202"/>
<link wikidata="Q98582176" start="1524" end="1546" title="List of Massachusetts State Highways" label="Massachusetts Highways"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484008" start="1547" end="1549" title="Massachusetts Route 33" label="33"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484027" start="1551" end="1553" title="Massachusetts Route 47" label="47"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484117" start="1559" end="1562" title="Massachusetts Route 116" label="116"/>
<link wikidata="Q94961" start="1605" end="1618" title="Interstate 91" label="Interstate 91"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637790" start="1638" end="1645" title="Holyoke, Massachusetts" label="Holyoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q94958" start="1652" end="1665" title="Interstate 90" label="Interstate 90"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650454" start="1688" end="1696" title="Chicopee, Massachusetts" label="Chicopee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420233" start="1810" end="1839" title="Bradley International Airport" label="Bradley International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q33486" start="1861" end="1869" title="Hartford, Connecticut" label="Hartford"/>
<link wikidata="Q49158" start="1870" end="1881" title="Springfield, Massachusetts" label="Springfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q23239" start="1925" end="1931" title="Amtrak" label="Amtrak"/>
<link wikidata="Q17182866" start="1947" end="1962" title="Holyoke station" label="Holyoke station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140542" start="2344" end="2365" title="Mount Holyoke College" label="Mount Holyoke College"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="2479" end="2506" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q2961776" start="2608" end="2621" title="Holyoke Range" label="Holyoke Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q430" start="2862" end="2870" title="dinosaur" label="dinosaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q322185" start="3195" end="3211" title="Edward Hitchcock" label="Edward Hitchcock"/>
<link wikidata="Q4887514" start="3277" end="3310" title="Beneski Museum of Natural History" label="Beneski Museum of Natural History"/>
<link wikidata="Q49165" start="3314" end="3329" title="Amherst College" label="Amherst College"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="3505" end="3511" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3734" end="3739" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3747" end="3763" title="African American (U.S. Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3771" end="3786" title="Native American (U.S. Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3794" end="3799" title="Asian (U.S. Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3807" end="3823" title="Pacific Islander (U.S. Census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3836" end="3847" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3883" end="3891" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3895" end="3901" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="4868" end="4885" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="4977" end="4989" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140542" start="5299" end="5320" title="Mount Holyoke College" label="Mount Holyoke College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195844" start="5657" end="5674" title="E Ink Corporation" label="E Ink Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140542" start="5692" end="5713" title="Mount Holyoke College" label="Mount Holyoke College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331248" start="5731" end="5754" title="Five College Consortium" label="Five College Consortium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1886223" start="5778" end="5791" title="Seven Sisters (colleges)" label="Seven Sisters"/>
<link wikidata="Q7567401" start="5831" end="5855" title="South Hadley High School" label="South Hadley High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q185851" start="5891" end="5899" title="lacrosse" label="lacrosse"/>
<link wikidata="Q7567401" start="5944" end="5955" title="South Hadley High School" label="high school"/>
<link wikidata="Q41323" start="6163" end="6171" title="American football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q5377" start="6193" end="6197" title="golf" label="golf"/>
<link wikidata="Q7196822" start="7458" end="7510" title="Pioneer Valley Performing Arts Charter Public School" label="Pioneer Valley Performing Arts Charter Public School"/>
<link wikidata="Q12241709" start="7523" end="7537" title="charter school" label="charter school"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7597" end="7626" title="Berkshire Hills Music Academy" label="Berkshire Hills Music Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162918" start="7865" end="7880" title="Daniel T. Barry" label="Daniel T. Barry"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="7890" end="7894" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q11631" start="7895" end="7904" title="astronaut" label="astronaut"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="7924" end="7927" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q182415" start="7928" end="7946" title="reality television" label="reality television"/>
<link wikidata="Q5549668" start="7970" end="7989" title="Gerald Warner Brace" label="Gerald Warner Brace"/>
<link wikidata="Q862" start="8056" end="8070" title="Joseph Brodsky" label="Joseph Brodsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140542" start="8133" end="8146" title="Mount Holyoke College" label="Mount Holyoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q37922" start="8344" end="8370" title="Nobel Prize for Literature" label="Nobel Prize for Literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q981258" start="8397" end="8424" title="Poet laureate of the United States" label="United States poet laureate"/>
<link wikidata="Q21010227" start="8435" end="8458" title="Joseph Goodhue Chandler" label="Joseph Goodhue Chandler"/>
<link wikidata="Q250486" start="8491" end="8507" title="Alfred C. Chapin" label="Alfred C. Chapin"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="8529" end="8540" title="United States House of Representatives" label="Congressman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5295017" start="8586" end="8602" title="Donald R. Dwight" label="Donald R. Dwight"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274366" start="8616" end="8652" title="Lieutenant Governor of Massachusetts" label="Lieutenant Governor of Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q278559" start="8673" end="8693" title="A. Bartlett Giamatti" label="A. Bartlett Giamatti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="8735" end="8756" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q49112" start="8781" end="8796" title="Yale University" label="Yale University"/>
<link wikidata="Q431645" start="8799" end="8808" title="Mary Lyon" label="Mary Lyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q924318" start="8904" end="8919" title="Wheaton College (Massachusetts)" label="Wheaton College"/>
<link wikidata="Q295978" start="8922" end="8941" title="George Herbert Mead" label="George Herbert Mead"/>
<link wikidata="Q131252" start="9037" end="9058" title="University of Chicago" label="University of Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q51717532" start="9176" end="9189" title="Phoebe Prince" label="Phoebe Prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q21069772" start="9268" end="9284" title="Erastus G. Smith" label="Erastus G. Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1236853" start="9312" end="9336" title="Wisconsin State Assembly" label="Wisconsin State Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2904557" start="9349" end="9363" title="Beloit College" label="Beloit College"/>
<link wikidata="Q559567" start="9366" end="9379" title="Peter Viereck" label="Peter Viereck"/>
<link wikidata="Q6530550" start="9479" end="9492" title="Lesley Visser" label="Lesley Visser"/>
<link wikidata="Q778412" start="9546" end="9571" title="Pro Football Hall of Fame" label="Pro Football Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q7172230" start="9601" end="9636" title="Pete Rozelle Radio-Television Award" label="Pete Rozelle Radio-Television Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q824451" start="9710" end="9726" title="The Boston Globe" label="The Boston Globe"/>
<link wikidata="Q217776" start="9734" end="9738" title="ESPN" label="ESPN"/>
<link wikidata="Q903850" start="9740" end="9750" title="ABC Sports" label="ABC Sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q2931052" start="9756" end="9766" title="CBS Sports" label="CBS Sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q5346912" start="9769" end="9780" title="Edwin White" label="Edwin White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2088366" start="9813" end="9826" title="Phineas White" label="Phineas White"/>
<link wikidata="Q4889185" start="9884" end="9911" title="Benjamin Ruggles Woodbridge" label="Benjamin Ruggles Woodbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q6784449" start="9948" end="9969" title="Massachusetts militia" label="Massachusetts militia"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="9981" end="10007" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7891174" start="10071" end="10114" title="United States Post Office—South Hadley Main" label="United States Post Office—South Hadley Main"/>
<link wikidata="Q8032424" start="10117" end="10152" title="Woodbridge Street Historic District" label="Woodbridge Street Historic District"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="116825" wikidata="Q1720696" url="?curid=116825" title="Southampton, Massachusetts">
<text>Southampton () is a town in Hampshire County, Massachusetts, United States. It was established first as a district of Northampton in 1732. It was incorporated in 1775. The name Southampton was given to it during its first town meeting in 1773. Its ZIP code is 01073. Southampton is part of the Springfield, Massachusetts Metropolitan Statistical Area. The town had a population of 6,224 at the 2020 census.

Southampton was rated having the best tasting tap water in the country in 2008 by the National Rural Water Association.

In 1964, U.S. Senator Ted Kennedy was involved in a plane crash in the town.

==Geography==
According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the town has a total area of , of which is land and (3.20%) is water. Southampton is bordered by Easthampton to the northeast, Holyoke to the southeast, Westfield to the south, Montgomery to the southwest, Huntington for a very short length on the west, and Westhampton to the northwest. Southampton is located 17 miles northwest of Springfield and 100 miles west of Boston.

==Climate==
In a typical year, Southampton temperatures fall below for 205 days per year. Annual precipitation is typically 45.9 inches per year (high in the US) and snow covers the ground 66 days per year or 18.1% of the year (high in the US). It may be helpful to understand the yearly precipitation by imagining nine straight days of moderate rain per year. The humidity is below 60% for approximately 18.4 days, or 5% of the year.

==Demographics==

As of the 2000 census there were 5,387 people, 1,985 households, and 1,556 families residing in the town. The population density was . There were 2,025 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the town was 98.29% White, 0.20% African American, 0.13% Native American, 0.63% Asian, 0.20% from other races, and 0.54% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 0.87% of the population.

There were 1,985 households, out of which 36.6% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 66.9% were married couples living together, 8.4% had a female householder with no husband present, and 21.6% were non-families. Of all households 16.8% were made up of individuals, and 6.8% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.71 and the average family size was 3.07.

In the town, the population was spread out, with 25.5% under the age of 18, 6.3% from 18 to 24, 29.1% from 25 to 44, 29.2% from 45 to 64, and 9.9% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 39 years. For every 100 females, there were 94.3 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 95.0 males.

The median income for a household in the town was $61,831, and the median income for a family was $64,960. Males had a median income of $41,544 versus $31,250 for females. The per capita income for the town was $26,205. About 1.8% of families and 2.4% of the population were below the poverty line, including 2.8% of those under age 18 and 6.5% of those age 65 or over.

== Notable people ==
* Lewis Strong Clarke (1873–1906), Louisiana sugarcane planter and 19th century Republican politician
* Nancy Conz (1957–2017), marathoner

==References==
==External links==

* Official Site</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1720696" start="0" end="11" title="Southampton, Massachusetts" label="Southampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2154459" start="20" end="24" title="New England town" label="town"/>
<link wikidata="Q54161" start="28" end="44" title="Hampshire County, Massachusetts" label="Hampshire County"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="46" end="59" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q49186" start="118" end="129" title="Northampton, Massachusetts" label="Northampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q136208" start="248" end="256" title="ZIP code" label="ZIP code"/>
<link wikidata="Q49158" start="294" end="320" title="Springfield, Massachusetts" label="Springfield, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7580900" start="321" end="350" title="Springfield metropolitan area, Massachusetts" label="Metropolitan Statistical Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="394" end="405" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="538" end="550" title="United States Senate" label="U.S. Senator"/>
<link wikidata="Q134549" start="551" end="562" title="Ted Kennedy" label="Ted Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="638" end="656" title="United States Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1988974" start="755" end="766" title="Easthampton, MA" label="Easthampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637790" start="785" end="792" title="Holyoke, MA" label="Holyoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055854" start="811" end="820" title="Westfield, MA" label="Westfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q2415866" start="835" end="845" title="Montgomery, MA" label="Montgomery"/>
<link wikidata="Q2536955" start="864" end="874" title="Huntington, MA" label="Huntington"/>
<link wikidata="Q2536890" start="916" end="927" title="Westhampton, MA" label="Westhampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q49158" start="991" end="1002" title="Springfield, MA" label="Springfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="1025" end="1031" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1722" end="1727" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1735" end="1751" title="African American (U.S. Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1759" end="1774" title="Native American (U.S. Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1782" end="1787" title="Asian (U.S. Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1800" end="1811" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1847" end="1855" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1859" end="1865" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="2019" end="2034" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="2828" end="2845" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="2937" end="2949" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3046" end="3065" title="Lewis Strong Clarke" label="Lewis Strong Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588" start="3079" end="3088" title="Louisiana" label="Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q36940" start="3089" end="3098" title="sugarcane" label="sugarcane"/>
<link wikidata="Q7201620" start="3099" end="3106" title="Plantations in the American South" label="planter"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="3124" end="3134" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q82955" start="3135" end="3145" title="politician" label="politician"/>
<link wikidata="Q55350881" start="3148" end="3158" title="Nancy Conz" label="Nancy Conz"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="116826" wikidata="Q2536890" url="?curid=116826" title="Westhampton, Massachusetts">
<text>Westhampton is a town in Hampshire County, Massachusetts, United States. The population was 1,622 at the 2020 census. It is part of the Springfield, Massachusetts Metropolitan Statistical Area.

== History ==
Westhampton was first settled in 1762. Originally part of Northampton, Westhampton was officially incorporated on September 29, 1778. The first town meeting was held on November 19, 1778, at which the Reverend Enoch Hale, brother of American spy Nathan Hale, was chosen to be the town&#x27;s first minister.

Westhampton is one of eight &quot;dry&quot; towns in the Commonwealth, meaning that the sale of alcoholic beverages is prohibited within its boundaries.

The town is home to the five-town Hampshire Regional High School, which serves the towns of Westhampton, Southampton, Williamsburg, Goshen, and Chesterfield.

==Geography==
According to the United States Census Bureau the town has a total area of , of which are land and , or 0.68%, are water. Westhampton is bordered by Southampton to the south, Huntington to the west, Chesterfield to the northwest, Williamsburg to the northeast, Northampton to the east, and Easthampton to the southeast.

Massachusetts Route 66 is the sole state highway through the town, leading east to Northampton and west to Knightville in the town of Huntington.

==Demographics==

As of the census of 2000, there were 1,468 people, 542 households, and 422 families residing in the town. The population density was . There were 623 housing units at an average density of 23.0 per square mile (8.9/km). The racial makeup of the town was 98.50% White, 0.34% Native American, 0.14% Asian, 0.27% from other races, and 0.75% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 0.54% of the population.

There were 542 households, out of which 34.3% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 69.0% were married couples living together, 5.9% had a female householder with no husband present, and 22.1% were non-families. 15.9% of all households were made up of individuals, and 5.2% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.71 and the average family size was 3.07.

In the town, the population was spread out, with 25.4% under the age of 18, 5.0% from 18 to 24, 31.0% from 25 to 44, 29.4% from 45 to 64, and 9.2% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 40 years. For every 100 females, there were 98.4 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 97.3 males.

The median income for a household in the town was $60,089, and the median income for a family was $66,625. Males had a median income of $42,200 versus $35,809 for females. The per capita income for the town was $25,360. About 1.9% of families and 3.5% of the population were below the poverty line, including 4.0% of those under age 18 and 4.3% of those age 65 or over.

Voting in the 2008 presidential election was held at the Westhampton Town Hall. Of the 1,095 votes cast, 62% were for Sen. Barack Obama, in contrast to the 37% of votes that were cast for Sen. John McCain.

==Notable people==

* Otis Clapp, politician (Massachusetts state representative and member of the old Boston City Council), homeopath, pharmacist, publisher, bookseller, and U.S. Internal Revenue Bureau collector
* Adam Dutkiewicz, guitarist of metalcore band Killswitch Engage
* Mordicai Gerstein, children&#x27;s book illustrator
* Sylvester Judd, Transcendentalist author of 1845&#x27;s &quot;Margaret&quot;, friend of Ralph Waldo Emerson and Margaret Fuller

==Notes==
== External links ==
* Town of Westhampton official website
* &quot;MHC Survey Reconnaissance Town Report: Westhampton&quot; Massachusetts Historical Commission, 1982.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2536890" start="0" end="11" title="Westhampton, Massachusetts" label="Westhampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2154459" start="17" end="21" title="New England town" label="town"/>
<link wikidata="Q54161" start="25" end="41" title="Hampshire County, Massachusetts" label="Hampshire County"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="43" end="56" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="105" end="116" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q49158" start="136" end="162" title="Springfield, Massachusetts" label="Springfield, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7580900" start="163" end="192" title="Springfield metropolitan area, Massachusetts" label="Metropolitan Statistical Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q49186" start="267" end="278" title="Northampton, Massachusetts" label="Northampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q465574" start="455" end="466" title="Nathan Hale" label="Nathan Hale"/>
<link wikidata="Q5646071" start="706" end="736" title="Hampshire Regional High School" label="Hampshire Regional High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="862" end="889" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1720696" start="993" end="1004" title="Southampton, Massachusetts" label="Southampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2536955" start="1019" end="1029" title="Huntington, Massachusetts" label="Huntington"/>
<link wikidata="Q2414206" start="1043" end="1055" title="Chesterfield, Massachusetts" label="Chesterfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q2414374" start="1074" end="1086" title="Williamsburg, Massachusetts" label="Williamsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q49186" start="1105" end="1116" title="Northampton, Massachusetts" label="Northampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1988974" start="1134" end="1145" title="Easthampton, Massachusetts" label="Easthampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484047" start="1165" end="1187" title="Massachusetts Route 66" label="Massachusetts Route 66"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="1340" end="1346" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1591" end="1596" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1604" end="1619" title="Native American (U.S. Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1627" end="1632" title="Asian (U.S. Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1645" end="1656" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1692" end="1700" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1704" end="1710" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="1862" end="1877" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="2671" end="2688" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="2780" end="2792" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="2989" end="3001" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q10390" start="3059" end="3070" title="John McCain" label="John McCain"/>
<link wikidata="Q125781292" start="3095" end="3105" title="Otis Clapp" label="Otis Clapp"/>
<link wikidata="Q118905301" start="3172" end="3195" title="Boston City Council (1822–1909)" label="old Boston City Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q973587" start="3248" end="3276" title="Internal Revenue Service" label="U.S. Internal Revenue Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q349223" start="3289" end="3304" title="Adam Dutkiewicz" label="Adam Dutkiewicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q462709" start="3334" end="3351" title="Killswitch Engage" label="Killswitch Engage"/>
<link wikidata="Q6910826" start="3354" end="3371" title="Mordicai Gerstein" label="Mordicai Gerstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q7660802" start="3408" end="3422" title="Sylvester Judd" label="Sylvester Judd"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="116827" wikidata="Q2414374" url="?curid=116827" title="Williamsburg, Massachusetts">
<text>Williamsburg is a town in Hampshire County, Massachusetts, United States. The population was 2,504 at the 2020 census. It is part of the Springfield, Massachusetts Metropolitan Statistical Area.

== History ==
The area was first settled in 1735 and was officially incorporated in 1771. In addition to the main village of Williamsburg near the center of town, the town includes the villages of Haydenville and Searsville. Haydenville is now recognized by the Haydenville Historic District. The Mill River flows southeast from Williamsburg village, where the East and West branches join, through Haydenville and into Northampton, on its way to the Connecticut River.

Searsville (+42° 24&#x27; 00.00&quot;, −72° 43&#x27; 58.00) is referenced three times in the 1904 book &quot;Hampshire County History&quot; on the highway between Williamsburg and Goshen approximately one mile above the center of the village, is the settlement of Searsville. In 1795, Rufus Hyde moved his blacksmith shop down from Meetinghouse Hill to the banks of the stream in what was soon to become the industrial community of Searsville. Shortly after the turn of the 18th century, three or four small shops were established in Wmsbg and Searsville to specialize in the final processing of these [woolen] goods. the fulling, dying [sic] and dressing operations. It was not until 1813 that spinning and weaving moved from household to factory. In 1819 Nathaniel Sears (1796–1886) son of Rufus Sears and Priscilla Sears built a small shop for the dressing of woolen cloth in this community which became known as Searsville.

Massachusetts Route 9 is the main highway through the town, leading southeast to the center of Northampton and west to Pittsfield. Massachusetts Route 143 leads west from Williamsburg village to Chesterfield and Worthington.

===The Mill River flood===
On the morning of May 16, 1874, a flood along Williamsburg&#x27;s Mill River claimed 139 lives and left nearly 800 victims homeless throughout Hampshire County. The deluge occurred when the Williamsburg Reservoir Dam unexpectedly burst, sending a twenty-foot wall of water surging into the valley below. Every town and village along the river&#x27;s normally placid flow was soon devastated by the great rush of water. Much of the flood&#x27;s force was abated in Northampton, at the Mill River&#x27;s confluence with the Connecticut River. Located over twelve miles from the breached dam in Williamsburg, Northampton was the last town to experience the flood&#x27;s fury, with four additional victims swept away in the swell.

==Geography==
According to the United States Census Bureau, the town has a total area of , of which are land and , or 0.53%, are water.

==Demographics==

As of the census of 2000, there were 2,427 people, 1,027 households, and 658 families residing in the town. The population density was . There were 1,073 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the town was 97.94% White, 0.25% African American, 0.08% Native American, 0.49% Asian, 0.16% from other races, and 1.07% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 0.66% of the population.

There were 1,027 households, out of which 29.4% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 51.7% were married couples living together, 8.8% had a female householder with no husband present, and 35.9% were non-families. 25.1% of all households were made up of individuals, and 9.1% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.36 and the average family size was 2.88.

In the town, the population was spread out, with 21.3% under the age of 18, 5.0% from 18 to 24, 29.4% from 25 to 44, 31.4% from 45 to 64, and 12.9% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 42 years. For every 100 females, there were 89.3 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 89.2 males.

The median income for a household in the town was $47,250, and the median income for a family was $55,833. Males had a median income of $36,977 versus $28,906 for females. The per capita income for the town was $25,813. About 1.2% of families and 5.5% of the population were below the poverty line, including 2.9% of those under age 18 and 10.7% of those age 65 or over.

Williamsburg is known in the region for its quaint town center which includes the Williamsburg General Store, the Williamsburg Market, the Meekins Library and the town Post Office.

==Notable people==

* Chris Collingwood, lead singer of pop-punk band Fountains of Wayne
* Alice Hall Farnsworth, astronomer
* Ruth V. Hemenway, Christian medical missionary
* Fay Jones, American artist
* Tracy Kidder, author and Pulitzer Prize winner
* Frederick A. Lyon, soldier in the Union Army and a Medal of Honor recipient for his actions in the American Civil War.
* Patricia MacLachlan, author of best-selling books such as &quot;Sarah, Plain and Tall&quot;
* Argalus Starks, Wisconsin state legislator
* Sarah Thomas, Vice President for Libraries, Harvard University
* Edward Thorndike, prominent educational psychologist and eugenicist
* Bob Toski, golfer and teaching professional, winner of 11 professional golf tournaments

==References==

==External links==

* Town of Williamsburg official website
* Williamsburg Public Libraries</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2414374" start="0" end="12" title="Williamsburg, Massachusetts" label="Williamsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2154459" start="18" end="22" title="New England town" label="town"/>
<link wikidata="Q54161" start="26" end="42" title="Hampshire County, Massachusetts" label="Hampshire County"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="44" end="57" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="106" end="117" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q49158" start="137" end="163" title="Springfield, Massachusetts" label="Springfield, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7580900" start="164" end="193" title="Springfield metropolitan area, Massachusetts" label="Metropolitan Statistical Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q5686421" start="458" end="487" title="Haydenville Historic District" label="Haydenville Historic District"/>
<link wikidata="Q2483962" start="1595" end="1616" title="Massachusetts Route 9" label="Massachusetts Route 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q49184" start="1714" end="1724" title="Pittsfield, Massachusetts" label="Pittsfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484179" start="1726" end="1749" title="Massachusetts Route 143" label="Massachusetts Route 143"/>
<link wikidata="Q2414206" start="1790" end="1802" title="Chesterfield, Massachusetts" label="Chesterfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q2549311" start="1807" end="1818" title="Worthington, Massachusetts" label="Worthington"/>
<link wikidata="Q991922" start="1914" end="1924" title="Mill River (Northampton, Massachusetts)" label="Mill River"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2038" end="2064" title="Williamsburg Reservoir Dam" label="Williamsburg Reservoir Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q49186" start="2312" end="2323" title="Northampton, Massachusetts" label="Northampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q379648" start="2370" end="2387" title="Connecticut River" label="Connecticut River"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="2607" end="2634" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="2741" end="2747" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2967" end="2972" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2980" end="2996" title="African American (U.S. Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3004" end="3019" title="Native American (U.S. Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3027" end="3032" title="Asian (U.S. Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3045" end="3056" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3092" end="3100" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3104" end="3110" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="3264" end="3279" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="4074" end="4091" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="4183" end="4195" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q5106216" start="4474" end="4491" title="Chris Collingwood" label="Chris Collingwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q733863" start="4522" end="4540" title="Fountains of Wayne" label="Fountains of Wayne"/>
<link wikidata="Q41449064" start="4543" end="4564" title="Alice Hall Farnsworth" label="Alice Hall Farnsworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q18715760" start="4579" end="4595" title="Ruth V. Hemenway" label="Ruth V. Hemenway"/>
<link wikidata="Q16104471" start="4628" end="4637" title="Fay Jones (artist)" label="Fay Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q338109" start="4657" end="4669" title="Tracy Kidder" label="Tracy Kidder"/>
<link wikidata="Q5497214" start="4706" end="4723" title="Frederick A. Lyon" label="Frederick A. Lyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752901" start="4740" end="4750" title="Union Army" label="Union Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q203535" start="4757" end="4771" title="Medal of Honor" label="Medal of Honor"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="4805" end="4823" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3754645" start="4827" end="4846" title="Patricia MacLachlan" label="Patricia MacLachlan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7422004" start="4891" end="4912" title="Sarah, Plain and Tall" label="Sarah, Plain and Tall"/>
<link wikidata="Q16065676" start="4921" end="4935" title="Argalus Starks" label="Argalus Starks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7422827" start="4966" end="4978" title="Sarah Thomas (librarian)" label="Sarah Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="5010" end="5028" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q309765" start="5031" end="5047" title="Edward Thorndike" label="Edward Thorndike"/>
<link wikidata="Q4934219" start="5101" end="5110" title="Bob Toski" label="Bob Toski"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="116828" wikidata="Q2549311" url="?curid=116828" title="Worthington, Massachusetts">
<text>Worthington is a town in Hampshire County, Massachusetts, United States. The population was 1,193 at the 2020 census, up from 1,156 at the 2010 census. It is part of the Springfield, Massachusetts Metropolitan Statistical Area.

Worthington is discussed by name in the Aaron Lewis song &quot;Massachusetts&quot; and referenced by the population size in &quot;Country Boy&quot;. Both songs are on the album &quot;Town Line&quot;, released in 2011.

== History ==

Worthington was first settled in 1764 and was officially incorporated in 1768. The town&#x27;s officials had settled for new land after the settling of Northampton in 1654. In the 1760s, the wilderness that became Worthington was largely unpopulated. The 1840s and 1850s saw the arrival of a new form of transportation: railways. An effort to bring a line through Worthington failed. Although a train station was built in Huntington, many Worthington families began selling their farms and moving to western New York State, Ohio and further west in search of cheap land . By the 1860s, Worthington&#x27;s population had declined to 925. These were years marked by deep conflict and rapid technological change.

The population continued to decline—818 in 1875, 763 in 1885, 569 in 1910—yet in these same decades, many present-day town institutions were established. In 1887, the second Congregational Church burned down. The third and current church, including a steeple, bells, organ, and new stained glass windows, was built on the same site and dedicated in 1888. While the permanent population of farmers and small manufacturers declined steadily, Worthington gradually gained a reputation as a summer resort. A casino on Buffington Hill Road, a hotel, several boarding houses, and many summer homes brought many visitors as well as income to the town. The maple sugaring industry expanded into a commercial enterprise during this period. Worthington&#x27;s population sagged during the 1930s and 40s, reaching its low point of 363 in 1945. With fewer people, Worthington&#x27;s one-room schools closed, post offices were consolidated, and The Grange was forced to merge with its neighbors. During the winter of 1931, the Lafayette Inn burned to the ground and was never rebuilt.

During the 1950s and 1960s, the town began to grow again, a reflection of improved roads. In August 1949, a special town meeting appropriated $6,800 to build a new fire house, which was completed the following year. The Palettes and Trowels Club met for the first time in 1950 and became a haven for several Worthington artists. The town&#x27;s bicentennial celebration in 1968 was held from June 29 to July 6; events included a parade, an antique fair, an exhibit of photographs, a tour of Worthington homes, a play entitled &quot;Bicentennial Quilting Party&quot;, and a beard-growing contest. The late 1960s and early 1970s saw more population growth. During the 1980s, the Hilltown Artisans Guild was established.

==Geography==
Worthington is in western Hampshire County, bordering the Berkshires. It is bordered by Cummington to the north, Chesterfield to the east, Huntington to the southeast, Chester in Hampden County to the south, Middlefield to the southwest, and Peru in Berkshire County to the west. Worthington Center and Worthington Corners are two neighboring villages near the center of the town, while Ringville and South Worthington are in the southeast and West Worthington is in the northwest.

Massachusetts Route 112 crosses the town, leading north to Cummington and south to Huntington. Massachusetts Route 143 follows Route 112 briefly northeast from Worthington Corners but leads east to Chesterfield and Williamsburg, and west to Peru and Hinsdale.

According to the United States Census Bureau, Worthington has a total area of , of which are land and , or 0.46%, are water. The town is within the Westfield River watershed, with the Middle Branch of the Westfield River flowing through the western side of the town.

===Climate===
==Demographics==

At the 2000 census, there were 1,270 people, 503 households and 363 families living in the town. The population density was . There were 582 housing units at an average density of 18.2 per square mile (7.0/km). The racial makeup of the town was 98.27% White, 0.31% African American, 0.08% Native American, 0.24% Asian, and 1.10% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 1.02% of the population.

There were 503 households, of which 31.8% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 60.8% were married couples living together, 7.6% had a female householder with no husband present, and 27.8% were non-families. 21.3% of all households were made up of individuals, and 8.0% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.52 and the average family size was 2.96.

24.5% of the population were under the age of 18, 6.3% from 18 to 24, 26.8% from 25 to 44, 31.4% from 45 to 64, and 11.0% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 42 years. For every 100 females, there were 98.1 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 92.6 males.

The median household income was $53,047 and the median family income was $60,132. Males had a median income of $42,500 compared with $26,438 for females. The per capita income for the town was $24,190. About 1.5% of families and 3.5% of the population were below the poverty line, including 2.0% of those under age 18 and 1.4% of those age 65 or over.

== In popular culture ==
Worthington is discussed by name in the Aaron Lewis song &quot;Massachusetts&quot; and referenced by the population size in &quot;Country Boy&quot;. Both songs are on the album &quot;Town Line&quot;, released in 2011.

The song references the fact that the town of Worthington pre-existed the United States, being settled some twelve years before the end of the Revolutionary War.

Composer Rolande Maxwell Young wrote the &quot;Worthington Bicentennial March&quot; in honor of the town&#x27;s bicentennial in the 1960s.

== Maple syrup and sugar houses ==
Worthington is home to many agricultural endeavors, including the manufacturing of maple syrup, with three sugar houses open nearly year-round.

==Notable people==

* Russell Conwell (1843–1925), founder of Temple University
* Aaron Lewis, lead singer of Staind and current country music singer
* Alfred P. Stone (1813–1865), US congressman from Ohio

==See also==
*Hampshire Regional High School

==References==

==External links==

*Town of Worthington official website
*Worthington Historical Society
*&quot;MHC Survey Reconnaissance Town Report: Worthington&quot; Massachusetts Historical Commission, 1982.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2549311" start="0" end="11" title="Worthington, Massachusetts" label="Worthington"/>
<link wikidata="Q2154459" start="17" end="21" title="New England town" label="town"/>
<link wikidata="Q54161" start="25" end="41" title="Hampshire County, Massachusetts" label="Hampshire County"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="43" end="56" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="105" end="116" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q49158" start="170" end="196" title="Springfield, Massachusetts" label="Springfield, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7580900" start="197" end="226" title="Springfield metropolitan area, Massachusetts" label="Metropolitan Statistical Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q302280" start="269" end="280" title="Aaron Lewis (musician)" label="Aaron Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7829985" start="412" end="421" title="Town Line (EP)" label="Town Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q49186" start="615" end="626" title="Northampton, Massachusetts" label="Northampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q820961" start="3034" end="3048" title="the Berkshires" label="the Berkshires"/>
<link wikidata="Q919097" start="3068" end="3078" title="Cummington, Massachusetts" label="Cummington"/>
<link wikidata="Q2414206" start="3093" end="3105" title="Chesterfield, Massachusetts" label="Chesterfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q2536955" start="3119" end="3129" title="Huntington, Massachusetts" label="Huntington"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302434" start="3148" end="3155" title="Chester, Massachusetts" label="Chester"/>
<link wikidata="Q54160" start="3159" end="3173" title="Hampden County, Massachusetts" label="Hampden County"/>
<link wikidata="Q614143" start="3222" end="3226" title="Peru, Massachusetts" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q54165" start="3230" end="3246" title="Berkshire County, Massachusetts" label="Berkshire County"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484109" start="3463" end="3486" title="Massachusetts Route 112" label="Massachusetts Route 112"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484179" start="3558" end="3581" title="Massachusetts Route 143" label="Massachusetts Route 143"/>
<link wikidata="Q2414374" start="3678" end="3690" title="Williamsburg, Massachusetts" label="Williamsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2318167" start="3713" end="3721" title="Hinsdale, Massachusetts" label="Hinsdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="3741" end="3768" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567514" start="3872" end="3887" title="Westfield River" label="Westfield River"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="4036" end="4042" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4276" end="4281" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4289" end="4305" title="African American (U.S. Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4313" end="4328" title="Native American (U.S. Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4336" end="4341" title="Asian (U.S. Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4377" end="4385" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4389" end="4395" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="4543" end="4558" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940707" start="5155" end="5178" title="median household income" label="median household income"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="5309" end="5326" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="5418" end="5430" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q302280" start="5569" end="5580" title="Aaron Lewis (musician)" label="Aaron Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7829985" start="5712" end="5721" title="Town Line (EP)" label="Town Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q96186816" start="5920" end="5941" title="Rolande Maxwell Young" label="Rolande Maxwell Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q7381427" start="6253" end="6268" title="Russell Conwell" label="Russell Conwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420239" start="6293" end="6310" title="Temple University" label="Temple University"/>
<link wikidata="Q302280" start="6313" end="6324" title="Aaron Lewis (musician)" label="Aaron Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q266496" start="6341" end="6347" title="Staind" label="Staind"/>
<link wikidata="Q4723257" start="6383" end="6398" title="Alfred P. Stone" label="Alfred P. Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q5646071" start="6452" end="6482" title="Hampshire Regional High School" label="Hampshire Regional High School"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="116829" wikidata="Q344431" url="?curid=116829" title="Acton, Massachusetts">
<text>Acton is a town in Middlesex County, Massachusetts, United States, approximately west-northwest of Boston along Massachusetts Route 2 west of Concord and about southwest of Lowell. The population was 24,021 in April 2020, according to the United States Census Bureau. It is bordered by Westford and Littleton to the north, Concord and Carlisle to the east, Stow, Maynard, and Sudbury to the south and Boxborough to the west. Acton became an incorporated town in 1735. The town employs the Open Town Meeting form of government with a town manager and an elected, five-member select board. Acton was named the 11th Best Place To Live among small towns in the country by Money Magazine in 2015, and the 16th best in 2009 and in 2011. The local high school, Acton-Boxborough Regional High School, was named a Blue Ribbon School by the U.S. Department of Education in 2009.

==Geography==
Acton is located at . According to the United States Census Bureau, the town has a total area of , of which is land and , or 1.53 percent, is water. Almost all of Acton is forested, except for where it has been cleared for residential or agricultural use. Some forested areas have been put aside for special use by corporations.

The current geography of Acton was created when the last wave of glaciers retreated approximately ten thousand years ago. Acton has nine drumlins—hills which are composed of glacial till. In addition, Wills Hole and Grassy Pond are kettle ponds which were formed in depressions in the till formed by large blocks of ice.

Acton has two primary stream systems: the Nashoba Brook system including the incoming streams Butter Brook, Wills Hole Brook and Conant Brook and the Fort Pond Brook system including the incoming streams Guggins Brook, Inch Brook, Grassy Pond Brook, Pratt&#x27;s Brook and Coles Brook. Both stream systems empty into the Assabet River, which passes briefly through the town at its southern corner. Nagog Pond in the north, forms Acton&#x27;s border with the Town of Littleton and provides drinking water to the Town of Concord. A small artificial pond is at NARA Park in North Acton.
===The five village centers===

While Acton Center has been the civic center of the town since the revolution, the four other village centers earned their nomenclature from the names of their corresponding railroad station.
*Acton Center is the civic center of the town and is the site of the town hall, the main public library (Acton Memorial Library), a children&#x27;s playground, an obelisk monument commemorating Acton deaths in &quot;the Concord Fight&quot; of the Revolutionary War, a fire station, the Acton Congregational Church, a arboretum and conservation area, and the former post office. The modern post office and the police station are each located about one-half mile away in opposite directions along Main Street. Otherwise, Acton Center is generally a residential area.
*West Acton is an important commercial area of town, consisting of several commercial developments centered along Route 111. It developed in response to the growth of the Fitchburg Railroad in the 19th century. 

*South Acton used to be the most industrialized area of the town of Acton. In the 18th century, this area held many mills and other small industrial developments that used water power generated by Fort Pond Brook. The area includes the Faulkner Homestead (&#x27;Faulkner House&#x27;), the oldest home still standing in Acton (dating back to 1707). The Faulkner Homestead was owned by the Faulkner family who also owned and ran a mill across the street. Jones Tavern is another still-standing revolutionary-era structure in South Acton that is listed on the National Register of Historic Places. The South Acton (MBTA station) is the only rail station on the Fitchburg line still active in Acton.
*East Acton was originally a small commercial area that grew up around the East Acton train station in the 19th century. With the advent of the automobile, and the demise of this branch of the railroad, East Acton became a largely residential area with a commercial base that is situated along the Route 2A corridor.
*North Acton has had major growth in the period since 1975–1980. With the growth of the Route 2A/119 corridor, North Acton has developed many commercial complexes and condominium buildings. The Nathaniel Allen Recreation Area (also called NARA Park and originally North Acton Recreation Area) contains a small swimming pond, an open-air auditorium, playing fields, and paved walking trail. North Acton also includes the Village of Nagog Woods, a housing development accessible from Route 2A/119 which is large enough to merit its own ZIP code: 01718.

The current Master Plan for the town encourages development in the village centers in an attempt to prevent further sprawl and preserve open space in the rest of the town.

==Demographics==
According to the 2020 census, there were 24,021 residents, a 9.6% increase from 2010. The population density was , up from 1103.6. There were 8,931 households, up from 8,187.

In the 2010 Census of 8,187 households, 42.7% had children under the age of eighteen living with them, 63.5% were husband-wife married couples living together. 23.0% of all households were occupied by individuals 65 years of age or older living alone. The age distribution of the population was 29.5% under the age of 18, 4.3% from 18 to 24, 31.5% from 25 to 44, 26.4% from 45 to 64, and 8.4% 65 years of age or older. The median age was 38 years. For every 100 females, there were 97.2 males. For every 100 females age eighteen and over, there were 94.2 males. For those age 25 years or older in Acton during the 2000 census, 97.2% had a high school degree or higher, 72.0% had a bachelor&#x27;s degree or higher, and 40.5% had a graduate degree or higher. Also, 98.0% were employed with a mean commute time of 31.0 minutes.

The 2020 median income for a household in the town was $138,163, up from $133,532. In 2010 males had a median income of $109,371 versus $48,113 for females. The 2020 per capita income for the town was $65,952. About 3.3% of the population were below the poverty line, up from 2.9% in 2010.
===Chinese and foreign-born populations===

Acton had 2,041 Chinese Americans in 2010, a 151% increase from 2000 and the ninth largest Chinese population in Massachusetts.

In 2014, 25% of the residents of Acton were born outside of the United States. In 2000 this percentage was 14%.

===Income===

Data is from the 2009–2013 American Community Survey 5-Year Estimates.
==History==
Acton&#x27;s history reflects the history of Massachusetts, New England, and the United States. It was first settled by Native Americans who used the Assabet, Sudbury and Concord rivers for transportation and the fields for farming seasonal crops. There is evidence of Native American settlements in Acton which go back 7,000 years. When the colonists arrived in this area, the Native American population dropped dramatically due to European diseases for which they had no immunity.

===Colonization Era through Revolutionary Era===


Concord was the first inland colonial town established in the Massachusetts Bay Colony. The original boundaries of Concord included all of Acton and residents used the Acton land as grazing fields for their animals. In 1639, the first homestead was built within the modern day boundaries of the town.

Acton was established as an independent town on July 3, 1735. Acton has held annual town meetings since 1735, the records of which are held at Acton&#x27;s Memorial Library.

Acton residents participated in the growing hostility with Great Britain by sending a list of grievances to King George III on October 3, 1774. The anniversary of this day is celebrated in Acton as Crown Resistance Day.

At the beginning of the Revolutionary War, on April 19, 1775, a company of minutemen from Acton responded to the call to arms initiated by Paul Revere (who rode with other riders, William Dawes and Samuel Prescott, with Prescott the only one of the three who was able reach Acton itself) and fought at the North Bridge in Concord as part of the Battle of Lexington and Concord. The Acton minutemen were led by Captain Isaac Davis. When a company was needed to lead the advance on the bridge which was defended by the British regulars, Captain Davis was heard to reply, &quot;I haven&#x27;t a man who is afraid to go.&quot; It has been said that the Acton men led because they alone were equipped with bayonets.
The colonists advanced on the bridge; in the exchange of musket fire that followed, Captain Isaac Davis and Private Abner Hosmer of Acton were killed. Davis was the first officer to die in the American Revolutionary War. In local terms, the events of the day were characterized as &quot;the battle of Lexington, fought in Concord, by men of Acton.&quot;

===Industrialization and Civil War===

During the 19th century, Acton participated in the growing Industrial Revolution. By the mid-19th century, Acton was an industrial center for the production of barrels (cooperage). There were also a powder mill, three gristmills and four sawmills in town. The American Powder Mills complex extended downstream along the Assabet River and manufactured gunpowder from 1835 to 1940.

On October 1, 1844, the railroad came to Acton. The Fitchburg Railroad was routed through South and West Acton so that it could serve the mills. South Acton became a busy rail center and was the division point for the Marlborough Branch Railroad. With the railroad came increasing development in those areas. In addition to the Fitchburg Railroad, two others crossed the town: the Nashua and Acton, and the Framingham and Lowell. These two railroads shared a double track right-of-way that ran from West Concord (aka Concord Junction) through East Acton and then splitting in North Acton in the vicinity of Route 27 and Ledge Rock Way.

In 1874, the population of the town was almost 1700. The town established its first newspaper, &quot;The Acton Patriot&quot;, and the residents of West Acton formed the first library, The Citizen&#x27;s Library. In 1890, the Memorial Library was completed and given to the town by William A. Wilde as a memorial to the Acton soldiers who fought in the Civil War.

==Government==
Acton uses the Open Town Meeting form of town government. The town charter specifies that the annual town meeting must begin on the first Monday in April. The Select Board may also call a special town meeting at other times of the year to consider other business. Citizens may force a special town meeting by submitting a petition signed by 200 registered voters to the town clerk. Anyone may attend Town Meeting but only registered voters may vote. Acton also has a water district, which is run separately from town government, as a public utility.

Acton&#x27;s elected officials include the following: the Select Board (five members, three-year terms), the Town Moderator (one person, one-year term), Acton members of the Acton-Boxborough Regional School Committee (seven members, three-year terms), the Housing Authority (four members, five-year terms) and Memorial Library Trustees (three members, three-year terms). In addition, the town moderator appoints a finance committee (nine members, three-year terms) which issues an opinion on each of the warrant articles presented to Town Meeting. In addition, a separate and independent branch of government, the Acton Water District, was established in 1912 and consists of three elected commissioners, an elected moderator, an elected clerk, an appointed district counsel, finance committee, Water Land Management Advisory Committee, and paid professional staff.

The town services are primarily funded through the residential property tax, which is subject to the limitations imposed by state statute known as Proposition 2½. The Water District is funded through water rates, connection fees and property rental. The Water District revenues, however, are not subject to Proposition .

===State and federal government===
On the state level, Acton is represented in the Massachusetts Senate by James &quot;Jamie&quot; Eldridge, and in the Massachusetts House of Representatives by Danillo Sena and Tami Gouveia. On the federal level, Acton is part of Massachusetts&#x27;s 3rd congressional district, represented by Lori Trahan. The state&#x27;s senior (Class I) member of the United States Senate is Elizabeth Warren. The junior (Class II) senator is Ed Markey.

===Civic infrastructure===
The civic infrastructure grew to accommodate the increasing population. A Water District was established in 1912 and a town-wide Fire Department was established in 1913. Acton was the first town in the area to have water-bound macadam highways.

In 2005 a new Public Safety Facility was built that expanded space for the Police Department and provided for a Joint Dispatch area with the Fire Department.

====Water district====
The Acton Water District is a community public water supply that delivers drinking water to the majority (about 90 percent) of the residents of the town of Acton, Massachusetts. All of the water provided from the district comes from seven wells located within the town of Acton. The district&#x27;s system consists of of water main, four storage tanks, and water treatment facilities including aeration, activated granulated carbon (GAC), an advanced Zenon(R) filtration facility, plus fluoridation and state mandated chlorination.

Separate from the Water District, residents of Great Road (Route 2A) obtain their water from the mains running down their street, that connect Nagog Pond to the Concord water system. They are billed by Concord. The pond is both in North Acton and Littleton, but Concord apparently has the water rights.

====Sewers====
Most homes and businesses in Acton (approximately 80%) use private on-site sewage systems (i.e. septic tanks). Higher density developments such as condominiums and apartment buildings (approximately 10% of the town) use private sewers which go to small-scale private treatment plants.

In 2001, Acton completed its first public sewer system, which serves approximately 10% of the town, primarily in South Acton. A betterment fee is charged to property owners whose property is sited proximate to the sewage lines, whether or not they connect to the system.

==Town recreation areas==
===Conservation lands===
Acton has a total of over of town-owned conservation lands.

*Acton Arboretum: A park in the center of Acton which consists of of woods, meadows, swamp, ponds, old apple orchards, a glacial esker, and a bog. The land was purchased by the town in 1976 and was designated an Arboretum in 1986. It now includes a 19th-century herb garden, a hosta garden, a wildflower garden, a butterfly garden and a rhododendron garden. A fragrance garden is being constructed.
*Pratt&#x27;s Brook: A property located in South Acton.
*Great Hill. A property located in South Acton behind the School Street fire station, which includes picnic tables. In addition there is a skating pond and two sets of playing fields.
*Grassy Pond and Nagog Hill. Two adjoining conservation areas located in North Acton which total of land.
*Wills Hole Conservation Area and Town Forest. A property located in North Acton off of Quarry Road, adjacent to the North Acton Recreation Area (NARA Park), includes a Bog and abuts an inactive granite quarry (private property).
*Nashoba Brook, Spring Hill, Camp Acton, Canterbury Hill. Four adjoining conservation areas in North Acton that total over . The trails in this area are Acton&#x27;s portion of the Bay Circuit Trail and Greenway which is a hiking path that encircles Boston—starting in Ipswich and ending in Duxbury. A historical trail, named the Trail Through Time, also overlays the trail system and provides interpretive plaques at various locations on the loop that include Wheeler Lane, the Potato Cave, The Pencil Factory, and other sites. The trails through the Canterbury Hill section connect to the town of Carlisle conservation trail network.
*Bulette Land/Town Forest consists of , mainly of wetlands and forest.
*Heath Hen Meadow consists of of land.
*Jenks Land consists of of land. It is home to over 170 species of birds that one man had recorded one year.
*Morrison Farm &amp; Ice House Pond: Located off of Concord Rd, these includes a house, a stable and corral, and various open fields and water.

These town conservation areas, and some smaller ones, are described and mapped in a website maintained by the town&#x27;s volunteer Land Stewardship Committee.

===Playing fields &amp; playgrounds===
*Leary Field: Located on the central school campus between the junior high and high school, it contains an all purpose turf field and running track. It is home to Acton-Boxborough Regional High School athletics.
*High School Complex Contains one grass playing field, two contiguous lighted multi-sport turf fields, five tennis courts, a softball diamond and two baseball diamonds (one lighted).
*Elm Street Complex: Contains two tennis courts, a small sided playing field, and a lighted softball diamonds, primarily used by the Adult &amp; Youth Softball Leagues. It is adjacent to the Douglas School yard which contains a baseball diamond and two basketball courts.
*Gates Fields Contains two softball diamond located at the Gates School and a large grass area used for ABRSD Field Hockey teams.
*Nathaniel Allen Recreation Area (NARA): Originally named the North Acton Recreation Area, NARA&#x27;s name was changed in 2012 to honor Nathaniel M. Allen, an Acton resident who was awarded the Medal of Honor for his actions in the Civil War. It contains a softball diamond, a large configurable field used for multiple sports, a swimming pond, playground, a performance stage with amphitheater, and a handicap accessible softball diamond with a synthetic surface- The Joseph Lalli Miracle Field. NARA is also used for the town&#x27;s Fourth of July Fireworks Celebration.
*Veterans Field: Contains two baseball diamonds and a playground.
* MacPherson &amp; Hart Fields: A baseball diamonds located at Conant School.
* TJ O&#x27;Grady Skate Park: Located at 66 Hayward Road offers various surfaces for skateboarding and rollerblading.
*Jones Field: It contains a single baseball diamond and a playground.
*Great Hill: Contains a large configurable field, a smaller single soccer field, and a playground. This is located in the front portion of the conservation area.
*School Street Fields: Located off School Street near Route 2 is a large grass surface configurable to several multi-dimension playing fields.
*Concord Road: Located next to Morrison Farm on Woodlawn Cemetery land is used primarily for soccer.
* Gardner Field: Located on 111 in West Acton, the area consists of a playground, basketball hoop, and field area.
* Goward Playground: Located behind the Acton Memorial Library

===Bike paths===
* Bruce Freeman Rail Trail. The Acton section of the BFRT officially opened April 3, 2018, and runs north through the communities of Carlisle, Westford, Chelmsford and Lowell. It has been extended south into Concord; when complete, the BFRT will run 25 miles along the former rail bed of the Framingham and Lowell Railroad, continuing south through Sudbury and Framingham.
* Assabet River Rail Trail. Running along the rail bed of Boston &amp; Maine Railroad&#x27;s former Marlborough Branch, the Acton portion of the trail starts at MBTA&#x27;s South Acton Train Station and runs 3.4 miles south through Maynard to the Maynard:Stow border, where it then continues another 1.8 miles as a dirt road on private property with allowed public access.

==Education==

Acton is part of Minuteman Technical High School District along with Arlington, Bolton, Concord, Dover, Lancaster, Lexington, Needham, and Stow.

Acton is part of the Acton Boxborough Regional School District (ABRSD) along with Boxborough. The town has five elementary schools serving K–6: CT Douglas, Gates, Luther Conant, McCarthy-Towne and Merriam. The town has one public middle school serving 7–8, the R.J. Grey Junior High School. High school students then attend Acton-Boxborough Regional High School from grades 9–12.

ABRSD has an uncommon method of assigning students to elementary schools, called &quot;Open Enrollment&quot;. First-time incoming kindergarten parents participate in a lottery-based selection process where the parents &quot;choose&quot; the school by listing their preferences in ranked order. Boxborough students have priority for attendance in the school in their own town, but participate in the lottery if they wish to attend an Acton school. Any remaining spaces at Blanchard become available in the lottery.

This method of school choice has a large impact on the nature of the town. Acton is less oriented around neighborhoods than towns which have neighborhood based schools. This carries over into the recreational youth sport organizations whose teams are not organized around specific elementary schools. As a result, students and families are likely to have broad social connections in all parts of the town rather than being limited to neighborhoods. School Choice also benefits the towns real estate market since home valuations are not impacted by the perceived desirability of given neighborhood&#x27;s school.

While the curriculum in the district is fairly standardized, each of the elementary schools has a different teaching philosophy. The schools and their philosophy of education are:
*Conant School. Named for Luther Conant who taught for 17 years in the school district, served on the School Committee, and was Town Moderator for 40 years. 
*Douglas School. Named for Carolyn T. Douglas who was a teacher and principal in the Acton schools from 1940 to 1967.
*Gates School. Named for Paul P. Gates who was the school physician from 1948 to 1968. 
*McCarthy-Towne School. Named for Julia McCarthy who taught at the South Acton School from 1906 to 1952 and Marion Towne who was a teacher in the primary and secondary schools in Acton from 1921 to 1959. McCarthy-Towne School is housed in the Parker Damon Building (named for McCarthy-Towne&#x27;s first principal, J. Parker Damon), which it shares with the Merriam School. At McCarthy-Towne, students generally call their teachers by their first names, a practice shared by Merriam.
*Merriam School. Named for Florence A. Merriam who taught for 35 years in Acton. Merriam offers a project-based curriculum. At Merriam, teachers teach the same group of students for two years (i.e., a teacher will teach first grade one year, second grade the next and then wrap back to first). This practice is called &quot;looping&quot;. Merriam School is housed in the Parker Damon Building which it shares with the McCarthy-Towne school. At Merriam as well as at McCarthy-Towne, students call their teachers by their first names.

===Acton-Boxborough Junior High and High School===
The Acton-Boxborough Regional School has a single Junior High School (Raymond J. Grey Junior High School) for grades 7 &amp; 8 and a single High School (Acton-Boxborough Regional High School) for grades 9 through 12. Both the junior high and high school were enlarged and renovated in 2000–2005. Both buildings are located at the school district campus in Acton.

Current enrollment at the junior high is approximately 1,000 students, while the high school has roughly 2,000 students. The high school consistently ranks highly among rankings of the best public high schools in the Greater Boston area (defined as within I-495); Most recently, the school was placed 1st in by Boston Magazine in 2020 and 2021.

==Cultural institutions==
===Libraries===
Acton has two public libraries: the Acton Memorial Library and the West Acton Citizens&#x27; Library. The Acton Memorial Library was given to the town of Acton by William Allan Wilde as a memorial to its Civil War veterans in 1890. The building was expanded in 1967, and a second major expansion was completed in 1999. There are also libraries in each of the elementary schools, the junior high, and the high school. The Acton Historical Society owns the Jenks Library which contains historical maps, documents, photographs and drawings.

===Museums===
* Discovery Museum is a hands-on museum for families.
*Iron Work Farm: Settlement of South Acton; &#x27;Iron Work Farm in Acton, Inc.&#x27; is a non-profit, historical corporation chartered in Massachusetts since 1964, that operates two historic houses: Jones Tavern and Faulkner House. Each house is open to the public on the last Sunday of the month from May to October. The facilities are also open as part of the local Patriots&#x27; Day holiday observance each April.
*Hosmer House: This Revolutionary War-era home, which is owned and maintained by the Acton Historical Society, is typically open to the public on Patriots&#x27; Day, September 27 (&#x27;Crown Resistance Day&#x27;), as well as May 27 and June 24, from 2 to 4 o&#x27;clock.

===Theater===
Though there are several theater groups in Acton, the two eldest are Theatre III and Open Door Theater. Theatre III was founded in 1956 when three organizations (a local chorus, dance group, and dramatic troupe) combined to present a show. It produces several plays and musicals each season in the historical old church building on Central Street.

Open Door Theater is a community theater group which was founded to provide an inclusive theater experience. Open Door produces one large musical each year which features a large number of performers ranging in age from nine to adult, including people with special needs. They perform and rehearse in the Dragonfly Theatre, located inside the R. J. Grey Junior High School.

===Traditions===

* Each year on Patriots&#x27; Day (traditionally April 19; since 1969, observed on the third Monday in April as part of a three-day Patriots&#x27; Day weekend), the Acton Minutemen lead a march from Acton Center to the Old North Bridge in Concord. This route is known as &#x27;The Isaac Davis Trail&#x27; and is listed on the National Register of Historic Places. Since 1957, Acton&#x27;s Troop 1 of the Boy Scouts of America have organized an annual march along the Isaac Davis line of march, and since 1976 the &quot;Scouters of the Isaac Davis Trail&quot; have organized the annual Isaac Davis Camporee.

==Points of interest==
* Jones Tavern. The main part of the tavern, originally home to the Jones family of South Acton, was built in 1732 as a house for Samuel Jones, Jr. By 1750 it had become a tavern and general store. It is speculated to be the first store in Acton and holds the distinction of being the town&#x27;s longest established business, merging into James Tuttle&#x27;s store in 1845 and operating under various names until 1950.
* The Faulkner House and Mills. The house was built for Ephraim Jones (1679–1710), founder in 1702 of an early textile business and other mills that formed the nucleus of the present town of Acton. Ammi Ruhamah Faulkner rented the mills in 1738 and then purchased them in 1742. Six generations of Faulkners lived in the house over a 202-year period. The largest and most central house of this settlement, it served as the local garrison house for protection from Indian raids made along the Massachusetts frontier during Queen Anne&#x27;s War of 1702–1713. The Faulkner homestead served as a garrison for South Acton Militia during the Revolutionary War.
* Town Center: The civic center of town is marked by the Acton Monument which is the final resting place of Captain Isaac Davis, James Hayward and Abner Hosmer. The stone on which Captain Davis mortally fell is situated between the west side of the monument and Main Street. The main entrance to the Town Hall, around the rear of the building, contains Isaac Davis&#x27;s plow which was used by Daniel Chester French for the statue he cast for North Bridge.

==Transportation==

Acton is from I-495 and from I-95/Route 128. Routes 2, 2A, 27, 62, 111, and 119 run through town.

The MBTA Commuter Rail Fitchburg Line train stops at the South Acton station. Railroad service provided to Fitchburg, Leominster, Shirley, Ayer, Littleton, Concord, Lincoln, Weston, Waltham, Belmont, Cambridge, and Boston.

Yankee Lines provides a commuter bus service to Copley Square in Boston from the &quot;77 Great Road Mall&quot; in Acton on MA-2A and MA-119.

The Bruce Freeman Rail Trail provides a paved bicycle commuter option north to Westford, Chelmsford and Lowell. The Assabet River Rail Trail provides a connection south to Maynard. The trails do not have lighting and are not snowplowed.

==In media==

*Acton is the setting of the poem &quot;The Vanishing Red,&quot; by New England poet Robert Frost (&quot;Mountain Interval&quot;, 1920), but there is no information to confirm this refers to Acton, Massachusetts, or Acton, Maine, or a fictional Acton. Frost never lived in or near Acton, Massachusetts.
*Acton is a setting in &quot;The Cure&quot; an episode of the TV series &quot;Fringe&quot;, however the actual filming was not done in Acton.
*Acton is a film location in the Hollywood adaption of &quot;Labor Day&quot; by Joyce Maynard
*Acton features prominently in the TNT series Falling Skies about an alien invasion. The main character is a former Boston University professor who is now second-in-command of the Second Massachusetts, a group of fighter and civilians fleeing an overrun Boston. The group heads to Acton to set up a new base of operations and raid the Acton Armory.
*Acton is the setting of the novel One True Loves by Taylor Jenkins Reid which was later turned into a film. 

==Radio stations==
*WAEM-LP (, 21 watts): a town-operated low power community radio station (LPFM) that airs a music variety format
*WHAB (, 8 watts): a high school radio station operated by the Acton-Boxborough Regional High School that airs a student radio format

==Notable people==

* Bob Adams, electrical engineer, Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Fellow
* Tom Barrasso, NHL hockey player
* Bob Brooke, NHL hockey player
* James Brown, co-founder of Little, Brown and Company publisher
* Steve Carell, comedic actor
* Howie Carr, talk-radio personality
* Robert Creeley, poet
* Isaac Davis, captain of the Acton Minutemen, first officer to die in the American Revolution
* Dan Duquette, general manager of the Boston Red Sox and Baltimore Orioles
* Henry Durant, Congregational clergyman, first president of College of California, two-term mayor of Oakland, California
* Christian Finnegan, comedian
* Alice Haskins, government botanist and professor
* Drew Houston, founder of Dropbox
* Shin Lim, close-up magician and winner of &quot;Americas&#x27; Got Talent&quot;
* Jesse Lauriston Livermore, early 20th century stock trader
* Selina Maitreya, international photography consultant and author
* Thomas B. Marsh, early leader in the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints
* Julie Mason, newspaper and radio journalist
* Ian Moran, NHL hockey player
* Bill Morrissey, Folk music singer/songwriter
* Dr. John &quot;Dropkick&quot; Murphy, wrestler, operator of Bellows Farm Sanatorium in Acton, and namesake of the Boston-based band Dropkick Murphys
* Jeff Norton, NHL hockey player
* Taylor Jenkins Reid, author of popular novels such as Seven Husbands of Evelyn Hugo and Daisy Jones &amp; the Six
* Mallory Souliotis, NWHL hockey player
* Caroll Spinney, puppeteer who created the &quot;Sesame Street&quot; characters Big Bird and Oscar the Grouch
* Evelyn Stevens, professional road cyclist
* Madeline Amy Sweeney, American Airlines Flight 11 flight attendant killed during the September 11 attacks
* Frederick Heyliger, officer with Easy Company, 2nd Battalion, 506th Parachute Infantry Regiment, in the 101st Airborne Division of the United States Army during World War II.

==Notes and references==
;Notes 

;References
==Bibliography==
*
*
*

==External links==

*Acton Memorial Library</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q344431" start="0" end="5" title="Acton, Massachusetts" label="Acton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2154459" start="11" end="15" title="New England town" label="town"/>
<link wikidata="Q54073" start="19" end="50" title="Middlesex County, Massachusetts" label="Middlesex County, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="99" end="105" title="Boston, Massachusetts" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033220" start="112" end="133" title="Massachusetts Route 2" label="Massachusetts Route 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q523240" start="142" end="149" title="Concord, Massachusetts" label="Concord"/>
<link wikidata="Q49162" start="173" end="179" title="Lowell, Massachusetts" label="Lowell"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="239" end="266" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q542640" start="286" end="294" title="Westford, Massachusetts" label="Westford"/>
<link wikidata="Q2433090" start="299" end="308" title="Littleton, Massachusetts" label="Littleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q523240" start="323" end="330" title="Concord, Massachusetts" label="Concord"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041805" start="335" end="343" title="Carlisle, Massachusetts" label="Carlisle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3974584" start="357" end="361" title="Stow, Massachusetts" label="Stow"/>
<link wikidata="Q684535" start="363" end="370" title="Maynard, Massachusetts" label="Maynard"/>
<link wikidata="Q591591" start="376" end="383" title="Sudbury, Massachusetts" label="Sudbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q3643258" start="401" end="411" title="Boxborough, Massachusetts" label="Boxborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q455752" start="489" end="506" title="Open Town Meeting" label="Open Town Meeting"/>
<link wikidata="Q825316" start="668" end="682" title="Money (magazine)" label="Money Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4677656" start="754" end="791" title="Acton-Boxborough Regional High School" label="Acton-Boxborough Regional High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q6971043" start="805" end="823" title="Blue Ribbon Schools Program" label="Blue Ribbon School"/>
<link wikidata="Q861556" start="831" end="859" title="U.S. Department of Education" label="U.S. Department of Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="923" end="950" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q35666" start="1279" end="1286" title="glacier" label="glacier"/>
<link wikidata="Q192701" start="1351" end="1358" title="drumlin" label="drumlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q427711" start="1396" end="1400" title="till" label="till"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424609" start="1446" end="1452" title="kettle (landform)" label="kettle"/>
<link wikidata="Q738547" start="1857" end="1870" title="Assabet River" label="Assabet River"/>
<link wikidata="Q25550691" start="2413" end="2422" title="town hall" label="town hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q28564" start="2433" end="2447" title="public library" label="public library"/>
<link wikidata="Q69862572" start="2449" end="2471" title="Acton Memorial Library" label="Acton Memorial Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q11875349" start="2492" end="2502" title="playground" label="playground"/>
<link wikidata="Q170980" start="2507" end="2514" title="obelisk" label="obelisk"/>
<link wikidata="Q778010" start="2560" end="2577" title="Battles of Lexington and Concord" label="the Concord Fight"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="2591" end="2608" title="American Revolutionary War" label="Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q55075311" start="2630" end="2657" title="Acton Congregational Church" label="Acton Congregational Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q272231" start="2661" end="2670" title="arboretum" label="arboretum"/>
<link wikidata="Q473972" start="2675" end="2692" title="conservation area" label="conservation area"/>
<link wikidata="Q35054" start="2709" end="2720" title="post office" label="post office"/>
<link wikidata="Q861951" start="2753" end="2767" title="police station" label="police station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421154" start="3080" end="3098" title="Fitchburg Railroad" label="Fitchburg Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q202398" start="3155" end="3169" title="Industrialization" label="industrialized"/>
<link wikidata="Q170196" start="3294" end="3305" title="hydropower" label="water power"/>
<link wikidata="Q5438127" start="3384" end="3398" title="Faulkner House" label="Faulkner House"/>
<link wikidata="Q6275307" start="3575" end="3587" title="Jones Tavern" label="Jones Tavern"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719" start="3679" end="3715" title="National Register of Historic Places" label="National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q7565352" start="3721" end="3747" title="South Acton (MBTA station)" label="South Acton (MBTA station)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2483939" start="4116" end="4124" title="Massachusetts Route 2A" label="Route 2A"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484124" start="4232" end="4235" title="Massachusetts Route 119" label="119"/>
<link wikidata="Q161851" start="4302" end="4313" title="Condominium (living space)" label="condominium"/>
<link wikidata="Q136208" start="4669" end="4677" title="ZIP code" label="ZIP code"/>
<link wikidata="Q192042" start="4803" end="4809" title="urban sprawl" label="sprawl"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="4899" end="4905" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="5180" end="5195" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="6046" end="6063" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="6134" end="6146" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146100" start="6230" end="6247" title="Chinese Americans" label="Chinese Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q18389" start="6613" end="6624" title="New England" label="New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="6673" end="6689" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="Native Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q2363043" start="6712" end="6719" title="Sudbury River" label="Sudbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124056" start="6724" end="6731" title="Concord River" label="Concord"/>
<link wikidata="Q182581" start="7026" end="7034" title="immunity (medical)" label="immunity"/>
<link wikidata="Q523240" start="7088" end="7095" title="Concord, Massachusetts" label="Concord"/>
<link wikidata="Q3239189" start="7270" end="7277" title="grazing" label="grazing"/>
<link wikidata="Q455752" start="7474" end="7486" title="town meeting" label="town meeting"/>
<link wikidata="Q23666" start="7624" end="7637" title="Great Britain" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q127318" start="7673" end="7688" title="George III of the United Kingdom" label="King George III"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="7810" end="7827" title="American Revolutionary War" label="Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2336248" start="7861" end="7870" title="Minutemen (militia)" label="minutemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q327071" start="7925" end="7936" title="Paul Revere" label="Paul Revere"/>
<link wikidata="Q2700750" start="7966" end="7979" title="William Dawes" label="William Dawes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2799341" start="7984" end="7999" title="Samuel Prescott" label="Samuel Prescott"/>
<link wikidata="Q729007" start="8092" end="8104" title="Old North Bridge, Concord, Massachusetts" label="North Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q778010" start="8131" end="8162" title="Battle of Lexington and Concord" label="Battle of Lexington and Concord"/>
<link wikidata="Q6076228" start="8204" end="8215" title="Isaac Davis (soldier)" label="Isaac Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q173366" start="8487" end="8494" title="bayonet" label="bayonet"/>
<link wikidata="Q178243" start="8554" end="8560" title="musket" label="musket"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269" start="8950" end="8971" title="Industrial Revolution" label="Industrial Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q10289" start="9051" end="9057" title="barrel" label="barrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q385422" start="9090" end="9101" title="powder mill" label="powder mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q623605" start="9109" end="9118" title="gristmill" label="gristmill"/>
<link wikidata="Q505213" start="9129" end="9136" title="sawmill" label="sawmill"/>
<link wikidata="Q25245177" start="9151" end="9172" title="American Powder Mills" label="American Powder Mills"/>
<link wikidata="Q12861" start="9242" end="9251" title="gunpowder" label="gunpowder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421154" start="9324" end="9342" title="Fitchburg Railroad" label="Fitchburg Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9490" end="9508" title="Marlborough Branch" label="Marlborough Branch"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9653" end="9669" title="Nashua and Acton" label="Nashua and Acton"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9679" end="9700" title="Framingham and Lowell" label="Framingham and Lowell"/>
<link wikidata="Q962977" start="9731" end="9743" title="double track" label="double track"/>
<link wikidata="Q7984865" start="9771" end="9783" title="West Concord, Massachusetts" label="West Concord"/>
<link wikidata="Q2483993" start="9879" end="9887" title="Massachusetts Route 27" label="Route 27"/>
<link wikidata="Q455752" start="10303" end="10320" title="Open Town Meeting" label="Open Town Meeting"/>
<link wikidata="Q2940451" start="10350" end="10362" title="town charter" label="town charter"/>
<link wikidata="Q4931397" start="10447" end="10459" title="Select Board" label="Select Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q4931397" start="10897" end="10909" title="Select Board" label="Select Board"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10948" end="10962" title="Town Moderator" label="Town Moderator"/>
<link wikidata="Q7250404" start="11853" end="11867" title="Proposition 2½" label="Proposition 2½"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494665" start="12111" end="12131" title="Massachusetts Senate" label="Massachusetts Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494460" start="12180" end="12218" title="Massachusetts House of Representatives" label="Massachusetts House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q96361410" start="12222" end="12234" title="Danillo Sena" label="Danillo Sena"/>
<link wikidata="Q6784144" start="12292" end="12339" title="Massachusetts&amp;#x27;s 3rd congressional district" label="Massachusetts&amp;#x27;s 3rd congressional district"/>
<link wikidata="Q56486676" start="12356" end="12367" title="Lori Trahan" label="Lori Trahan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12394" end="12401" title="Classes of United States Senators#Class I" label="Class I"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="12417" end="12437" title="United States Senate" label="United States Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q434706" start="12441" end="12457" title="Elizabeth Warren" label="Elizabeth Warren"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12471" end="12479" title="Classes of United States Senators#Class II" label="Class II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282411" start="12492" end="12501" title="Ed Markey" label="Ed Markey"/>
<link wikidata="Q301766" start="12758" end="12765" title="macadam" label="macadam"/>
<link wikidata="Q43483" start="13198" end="13203" title="water well" label="wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125466" start="13445" end="13457" title="fluoridation" label="fluoridation"/>
<link wikidata="Q386300" start="13907" end="13918" title="septic tank" label="septic tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q332784" start="14610" end="14615" title="esker" label="esker"/>
<link wikidata="Q623347" start="14758" end="14763" title="hosta" label="hosta"/>
<link wikidata="Q189393" start="14818" end="14830" title="rhododendron" label="rhododendron"/>
<link wikidata="Q111914222" start="14937" end="14947" title="Great Hill (Acton, Massachusetts)" label="Great Hill"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15395" end="15398" title="Quaking Bog" label="Bog"/>
<link wikidata="Q4873950" start="15637" end="15667" title="Bay Circuit Trail and Greenway" label="Bay Circuit Trail and Greenway"/>
<link wikidata="Q12014035" start="15679" end="15685" title="hiking" label="hiking"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="15706" end="15712" title="Boston, Massachusetts" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q376786" start="15725" end="15732" title="Ipswich, Massachusetts" label="Ipswich"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429627" start="15747" end="15754" title="Duxbury, Massachusetts" label="Duxbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q14715745" start="15935" end="15946" title="Nashoba Brook Stone Chamber" label="Potato Cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q6966874" start="15948" end="15966" title="Nashoba Brook Pencil Factory Site" label="The Pencil Factory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041805" start="16055" end="16063" title="Carlisle, Massachusetts" label="Carlisle"/>
<link wikidata="Q16030251" start="17590" end="17608" title="Nathaniel M. Allen" label="Nathaniel M. Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q203535" start="17648" end="17662" title="Medal of Honor" label="Medal of Honor"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="17686" end="17695" title="American Civil War" label="Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4977508" start="18963" end="18987" title="Bruce Freeman Rail Trail" label="Bruce Freeman Rail Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q4808311" start="19336" end="19360" title="Assabet River Rail Trail" label="Assabet River Rail Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q14715713" start="19740" end="19771" title="Minuteman Career and Technical High School" label="Minuteman Technical High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q22059487" start="19890" end="19931" title="Acton Boxborough Regional School District" label="Acton Boxborough Regional School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q3643258" start="19951" end="19961" title="Boxborough, Massachusetts" label="Boxborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q4677656" start="20193" end="20230" title="Acton-Boxborough Regional High School" label="Acton-Boxborough Regional High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q344431" start="23061" end="23095" title="Raymond J. Grey Junior High School" label="Raymond J. Grey Junior High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q4677656" start="23144" end="23181" title="Acton-Boxborough Regional High School" label="Acton-Boxborough Regional High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7075" start="23764" end="23773" title="library" label="libraries"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="23947" end="23956" title="American Civil War" label="Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7730314" start="24298" end="24314" title="Discovery Museum (Acton, Massachusetts)" label="Discovery Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q6275307" start="24550" end="24562" title="Jones Tavern" label="Jones Tavern"/>
<link wikidata="Q5438127" start="24567" end="24581" title="Faulkner House" label="Faulkner House"/>
<link wikidata="Q3244522" start="24719" end="24737" title="Patriots&amp;#x27; Day" label="Patriots&amp;#x27; Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="24789" end="24806" title="American Revolutionary War" label="Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3244522" start="24915" end="24933" title="Patriots&amp;#x27; Day" label="Patriots&amp;#x27; Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q11635" start="25081" end="25088" title="theater" label="theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q1800684" start="25428" end="25445" title="community theater" label="community theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q3244522" start="25813" end="25831" title="Patriots&amp;#x27; Day" label="Patriots&amp;#x27; Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719" start="26124" end="26160" title="National Register of Historic Places" label="National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q608132" start="26202" end="26223" title="Boy Scouts of America" label="Boy Scouts of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q154250" start="26466" end="26472" title="tavern" label="tavern"/>
<link wikidata="Q1244860" start="26612" end="26625" title="general store" label="general store"/>
<link wikidata="Q28823" start="26960" end="26967" title="textile" label="textile"/>
<link wikidata="Q869045" start="27370" end="27391" title="Queen Anne&amp;#x27;s War" label="Queen Anne&amp;#x27;s War"/>
<link wikidata="Q88556" start="27441" end="27449" title="garrison" label="garrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q1671364" start="27997" end="28002" title="Interstate 495 (Massachusetts)" label="I-495"/>
<link wikidata="Q1671381" start="28012" end="28016" title="Interstate 95 in Massachusetts" label="I-95"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638847" start="28017" end="28026" title="Route 128 (Massachusetts)" label="Route 128"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033220" start="28035" end="28036" title="Route 2 (Massachusetts)" label="2"/>
<link wikidata="Q2483939" start="28038" end="28040" title="Route 2A (Massachusetts)" label="2A"/>
<link wikidata="Q2483993" start="28042" end="28044" title="Route 27 (Massachusetts)" label="27"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484043" start="28046" end="28048" title="Route 62 (Massachusetts)" label="62"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484107" start="28050" end="28053" title="Route 111 (Massachusetts)" label="111"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484124" start="28059" end="28062" title="Route 119 (Massachusetts)" label="119"/>
<link wikidata="Q172457" start="28086" end="28104" title="MBTA Commuter Rail" label="MBTA Commuter Rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q172548" start="28105" end="28119" title="Fitchburg Line" label="Fitchburg Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q7565352" start="28139" end="28158" title="South Acton (MBTA station)" label="South Acton station"/>
<link wikidata="Q54182" start="28189" end="28198" title="Fitchburg, Massachusetts" label="Fitchburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q54185" start="28200" end="28210" title="Leominster, Massachusetts" label="Leominster"/>
<link wikidata="Q2318103" start="28212" end="28219" title="Shirley, Massachusetts" label="Shirley"/>
<link wikidata="Q945957" start="28221" end="28225" title="Ayer, Massachusetts" label="Ayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2433090" start="28227" end="28236" title="Littleton, Massachusetts" label="Littleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q523240" start="28238" end="28245" title="Concord, Massachusetts" label="Concord"/>
<link wikidata="Q663035" start="28247" end="28254" title="Lincoln, Massachusetts" label="Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q2565620" start="28256" end="28262" title="Weston, Massachusetts" label="Weston"/>
<link wikidata="Q49190" start="28264" end="28271" title="Waltham, Massachusetts" label="Waltham"/>
<link wikidata="Q816096" start="28273" end="28280" title="Belmont, Massachusetts" label="Belmont"/>
<link wikidata="Q49111" start="28282" end="28291" title="Cambridge, Massachusetts" label="Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="28297" end="28303" title="Boston, Massachusetts" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28306" end="28318" title="Yankee Lines" label="Yankee Lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q901479" start="28354" end="28367" title="Copley Square" label="Copley Square"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28393" end="28411" title="77 Great Road Mall" label="77 Great Road Mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2483939" start="28430" end="28435" title="Massachusetts Route 2A" label="MA-2A"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484124" start="28440" end="28446" title="Massachusetts Route 119" label="MA-119"/>
<link wikidata="Q4977508" start="28453" end="28477" title="Bruce Freeman Rail Trail" label="Bruce Freeman Rail Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q4808311" start="28565" end="28589" title="Assabet River Rail Trail" label="Assabet River Rail Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q168728" start="28786" end="28798" title="Robert Frost" label="Robert Frost"/>
<link wikidata="Q3187233" start="29226" end="29239" title="Joyce Maynard" label="Joyce Maynard"/>
<link wikidata="Q928429" start="29286" end="29299" title="Falling Skies" label="Falling Skies"/>
<link wikidata="Q49110" start="29356" end="29373" title="Boston University" label="Boston University"/>
<link wikidata="Q50568231" start="29642" end="29661" title="Taylor Jenkins Reid" label="Taylor Jenkins Reid"/>
<link wikidata="Q25236" start="29734" end="29738" title="watt" label="watt"/>
<link wikidata="Q15284" start="29744" end="29748" title="Municipality" label="town"/>
<link wikidata="Q2015033" start="29758" end="29767" title="Low-power broadcasting" label="low power"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179112" start="29768" end="29777" title="Community radio" label="community"/>
<link wikidata="Q273623" start="29778" end="29791" title="radio station" label="radio station"/>
<link wikidata="Q7915876" start="29811" end="29824" title="Variety (radio)" label="music variety"/>
<link wikidata="Q7950031" start="29833" end="29837" title="WHAB" label="WHAB"/>
<link wikidata="Q25236" start="29843" end="29847" title="watt" label="watt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5757715" start="29853" end="29870" title="high school radio" label="high school radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q4677656" start="29895" end="29932" title="Acton-Boxborough Regional High School" label="Acton-Boxborough Regional High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436229" start="29945" end="29958" title="Campus radio" label="student radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q18921293" start="29989" end="29998" title="Bob Adams (electrical engineer)" label="Bob Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q608435" start="30080" end="30092" title="Tom Barrasso" label="Tom Barrasso"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215892" start="30094" end="30097" title="NHL" label="NHL"/>
<link wikidata="Q41466" start="30098" end="30104" title="ice hockey" label="hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q832601" start="30114" end="30124" title="Bob Brooke" label="Bob Brooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q6130342" start="30146" end="30157" title="James Brown (publisher)" label="James Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q552959" start="30173" end="30198" title="Little, Brown and Company" label="Little, Brown and Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q216221" start="30211" end="30223" title="Steve Carell" label="Steve Carell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5921979" start="30241" end="30251" title="Howie Carr" label="Howie Carr"/>
<link wikidata="Q918620" start="30278" end="30292" title="Robert Creeley" label="Robert Creeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6076228" start="30301" end="30312" title="Isaac Davis (soldier)" label="Isaac Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q192769" start="30374" end="30393" title="American Revolution" label="American Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q3013058" start="30396" end="30408" title="Dan Duquette" label="Dan Duquette"/>
<link wikidata="Q213959" start="30433" end="30447" title="Boston Red Sox" label="Boston Red Sox"/>
<link wikidata="Q650816" start="30452" end="30469" title="Baltimore Orioles" label="Baltimore Orioles"/>
<link wikidata="Q520617" start="30472" end="30484" title="Henry Durant" label="Henry Durant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062789" start="30486" end="30500" title="Congregational church" label="Congregational"/>
<link wikidata="Q177826" start="30501" end="30510" title="clergyman" label="clergyman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146658" start="30531" end="30552" title="College of California" label="College of California"/>
<link wikidata="Q17042" start="30572" end="30591" title="Oakland, California" label="Oakland, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q3238414" start="30594" end="30612" title="Christian Finnegan" label="Christian Finnegan"/>
<link wikidata="Q15814093" start="30625" end="30638" title="Alice Haskins" label="Alice Haskins"/>
<link wikidata="Q441" start="30651" end="30659" title="botany" label="botanist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5307199" start="30676" end="30688" title="Drew Houston" label="Drew Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q142539" start="30701" end="30708" title="Dropbox (service)" label="Dropbox"/>
<link wikidata="Q56223451" start="30711" end="30719" title="Shin Lim" label="Shin Lim"/>
<link wikidata="Q54896994" start="30759" end="30784" title="America&amp;#x27;s Got Talent (season 13)" label="Americas&amp;#x27; Got Talent"/>
<link wikidata="Q724153" start="30793" end="30818" title="Jesse Lauriston Livermore" label="Jesse Lauriston Livermore"/>
<link wikidata="Q7448463" start="30854" end="30869" title="Selina Maitreya" label="Selina Maitreya"/>
<link wikidata="Q7787262" start="30921" end="30936" title="Thomas B. Marsh" label="Thomas B. Marsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q42504" start="30958" end="31001" title="Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints" label="Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q27618917" start="31004" end="31015" title="Julie Mason" label="Julie Mason"/>
<link wikidata="Q527638" start="31050" end="31059" title="Ian Moran" label="Ian Moran"/>
<link wikidata="Q4910263" start="31081" end="31095" title="Bill Morrissey" label="Bill Morrissey"/>
<link wikidata="Q15229674" start="31128" end="31164" title="John Murphy (sanatorium operator)" label="Dr. John &amp;quot;Dropkick&amp;quot; Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q938630" start="31260" end="31276" title="Dropkick Murphys" label="Dropkick Murphys"/>
<link wikidata="Q1529178" start="31279" end="31290" title="Jeff Norton" label="Jeff Norton"/>
<link wikidata="Q50568231" start="31312" end="31331" title="Taylor Jenkins Reid" label="Taylor Jenkins Reid"/>
<link wikidata="Q54488337" start="31366" end="31395" title="Seven Husbands of Evelyn Hugo" label="Seven Husbands of Evelyn Hugo"/>
<link wikidata="Q115683368" start="31400" end="31425" title="Daisy Jones &amp;amp; the Six (novel)" label="Daisy Jones &amp;amp; the Six"/>
<link wikidata="Q91886175" start="31428" end="31445" title="Mallory Souliotis" label="Mallory Souliotis"/>
<link wikidata="Q561765" start="31468" end="31482" title="Caroll Spinney" label="Caroll Spinney"/>
<link wikidata="Q155629" start="31516" end="31529" title="Sesame Street" label="Sesame Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q242562" start="31547" end="31555" title="Big Bird" label="Big Bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663574" start="31560" end="31576" title="Oscar the Grouch" label="Oscar the Grouch"/>
<link wikidata="Q288780" start="31579" end="31593" title="Evelyn Stevens (cyclist)" label="Evelyn Stevens"/>
<link wikidata="Q3275797" start="31623" end="31643" title="Madeline Amy Sweeney" label="Madeline Amy Sweeney"/>
<link wikidata="Q11694" start="31645" end="31672" title="American Airlines Flight 11" label="American Airlines Flight 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="31708" end="31728" title="September 11 attacks" label="September 11 attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q5498028" start="31731" end="31749" title="Frederick Heyliger" label="Frederick Heyliger"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="116830" wikidata="Q2577594" url="?curid=116830" title="Ashby, Massachusetts">
<text>Ashby is a town in Middlesex County, Massachusetts, United States. The population was 3,193 at the 2020 census, which makes it the least populous municipality in Middlesex County. Ashby is primarily a bedroom community, consisting almost entirely of single family homes and a limited number of businesses.

Ashby is also host to a large portion of the Willard Brook State Forest, including Damon Pond, Trap Falls, and numerous miles of hiking trails.

==Geography==
According to the United States Census Bureau, the town has a total area of , of which is land and (1.53%) is water.

Ashby is bordered by New Ipswich, New Hampshire and Mason, New Hampshire to the north, Townsend to the east, Lunenburg to the southeast, Fitchburg to the south, and Ashburnham to the west. Situated at the northwestern corner of Middlesex County, Ashby is the only town in Middlesex County that does not border more than one other town in the same county.

==Transportation==

Route 31 runs north–south through Ashby, and Route 119 runs east–west. The two routes have a short overlap to the east of the town center.

Ashby is a member of the Montachusett Regional Transit Authority (MART), but there is no direct public transportation to the town beyond paratransit services; the nearest service is in the city of Fitchburg, to the south.

==Demographics==
At the 2010 census, there were 3,074 people, 1,105 households and 862 families residing in the town. The population density was . There were 1,191 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the town was 97.1% White, 0.4% African American, 0.2% Native American, 0.3% Asian, 0.4% from other races, and 1.6% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 1.9% of the population.

There were 1,060 households, of which 34.1% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 66.5% were married couples living together, 0.9% had a male householder with no wife present, 6.7% had a female householder with no husband present, and 25.8% were non-families. 12.8% of all households were made up of individuals, and 5.9% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.86 and the average family size was 3.20.

Of the 3,074 people in the population, 24.5% were under the age of 18, 8.0% were 15 to 19 years of age, 4.6% were 20 to 24 years of age, 22.7% were 25 to 44 years of age, 35.6% were 45 to 64 years of age, and 10.5% were 65 years and over. The median age was 42.6 years. For every 100 females, there was 101.0 males. For every 100 females 18 years and over there were 102.0 males.
The median household income was $82,614, and the median family income was $84,655. The median income of individuals working full-time was $62,355 for males versus $44,511 for females. The per capita income for the town was $32,434. About 0.9% of families and 4.0% of the population were below the poverty line, including 0.0% of those under age 18 and 5.0% of those age 65 or over.

==History==

=== Background ===
Ashby was first settled in 1676 and was officially incorporated in 1767. The town was formed from portions of Townsend, Lunenburg, Fitchburg, and Dorchester-Canada (a portion of Ashburnham). One of the earliest settlers of the town was John Fitch. Fitch was kidnapped by Native Americans in 1748 and was held hostage for six months. Fitch died in 1795 with his surviving children remaining in the community. The John Fitch Monument, known to most at the &quot;monument&quot;, is located at the intersection of South and Richardson roads, stands to this day and was recently cleaned up by volunteers in 2021. Though some mills existed in the town, the community remained primarily an agricultural one with the majority of land being used for farming in the 1700s and 1900s. Ashby was at one time home to numerous apple orchards, the remnants of which can be found in the woods behind present day houses.

=== Places of Interest ===

==== Historical Society ====
The Ashby Historical Society was formed in 1900 with a goal of preserving Ashby&#x27;s history for future generations. The group maintains and curates a small museum in the old engine house, located in the center of town that was originally constructed &quot;circa&quot; 1899. The society maintains a collection of artifacts from the town&#x27;s history and continues to add donations and found artifacts to its collections. This collection of artifacts includes maps, books, letters, furniture, farm implements, firefighting apparatus, and much more. Hand pumped fire apparatus are on display at the historical society, along with fire related tools.

==== &quot;The Town Pump&quot; ====
The Town Pump, a newsletter published during the final two years of World War II, had its first edition published in June 1944 and last in September 1945. The Town Pump circulated as a means of keeping residents temporarily out of town supporting the war effort informed on that which was happening at home. The news letter circulated during 1944 and 1945, until publication ceased with the end of the war. Scanned digital copies of &quot;The Town Pump&quot; can be found online.

==== The Ashby Stock Farm ====
The Ashby Stock Farm, also known as the Middlesex Stock Farm, is situated on the largest parcel of contiguous open space remaining in town today. The farm consists of 238 acres of hay fields and forestland. The farm once stretched all of the way into downtown and up to the New Hampshire border. The farm has had several owners and was once a large dairy operation. The farm is currently privately owned and has horses and active hay production on the property.

==== Gazebo and Town Common ====
The Ashby town common is a familiar sight for anyone traveling through town on Route 119. The common is a moderately sized triangular parcel of land in the center of town, just at the crest of the hill in front of one of two remaining historic churches. The common was once shaded by several maple trees, many of which have since died and been removed. The gazebo stands where it has since the 19th century and was restored in the 2000s.
==== South Village (Mill Village) ====
The South Village area, also referred to on some historic maps as the &quot;Mill Village&quot;, is the area surrounding the outlet of the Ashby Reservoir. This small section of town was home to a gristmill and some limited mill housing that was constructed by Ephraim Hayward &quot;circa&quot; 1800. There are two buildings that still exist to this day on the property now owned by Middlesex County Foundation. The property remains in operation by Camp Middlesex as a seasonal 4-H camp. The mill buildings, dam and bridge have been maintained over the years with the bridge over the spillway being replaced in the 2000s. The mills changed hands multiple times during their operation, eventually being operated by William O. Loveland, who continued to run the sawmill and retrofitted the gristmill to produce electricity. Loveland is believed to have been the person to convince the Board of Selectmen to construct poles and run electric power to light the center of town around 1902. The mills were eventually closed in the 1920s.

==== Cemeteries ====
Ashby contains three historic cemeteries located through the town.

The First Parish Burial Ground, also referred to as the &quot;Old Burial Ground&quot;, was established on the common in 1767.

Glenwood cemetery is newer than all of the towns other cemeteries and was constructed in 1867.

West cemetery, originally a family burial ground started during the Revolutionary War, was later used in the 20th century by many Finnish families. This cemetery, as are the others, is now owned and maintained by the town.

==== Watatic Ski Area ====
Mount Watatic, located in the towns of Ashburnham and Ashby, was once home to a small ski area that operated from the 1930s until its closure in 1984. The ski area started with a small rope tow and expanded to the summit some time later, thought to be in the 1960s. At its height, the ski area had snow making and night skiing, impressive features at the time. The area also included multiple rope tows, two T-bars and double chairs that eventually replaced the old rope tows and one T-bar. In 1984, the ski area eventually succumbed to competition and its poor location in relation to major roads. There was one attempt to reopen the ski area in 1988, under the name Ski Adventure that was ultimately unsuccessful. The land of the former ski area is currently held in conservation and is accessible to the public for hiking. Hikers can find the old, grown-in trails and remnants of the area&#x27;s structures still visible on the back side of the mountain.

Mount Watatic was also once home to state fire tower #31 that looked out over central Massachusetts at an elevation above sea level of 1590 feet. Phone lines to the tower ran up the Ashby and Ashburnham sides of the mountain over the years.

=== Recent History ===

==== 250th Parade and Celebration ====
The Ashby 250th celebration in 2017 featured a year long schedule of events including a parade, tour of the historical society, ecumenical camp meeting, horse demonstrations, old fashion baseball game, bonfire, and several other events.

=== Other ===
The majority European-American town gained national attention in 1973 when the Ashby Town Meeting voted 148 to 79 against inviting non-white people to live there.

==Ashby Free Public Library==
The library is a public library, founded in 1874 &quot;largely through the efforts of Rev. George S. Shaw.&quot; In the 1890s it was &quot;kept in a private house&quot; open to the public Tuesday and Friday afternoons. Around 1890 the Ashby library had &quot;1,584 volumes, with which its inhabitants have a pleasant and profitable acquaintance.&quot;

In 1901 businessman and Civil War veteran Edwin Chapman donated a new building, which opened in 1902.

In the early 2000s, Ashby&#x27;s historic library received a large expansion and interior renovation, utilizing a &quot;passive solar&quot; building technique, and serving as a model library to Massachusetts Board of Library Commissioners (MBLC) on the same.

==Education==
Ashby is a member town of North Middlesex Regional School District, along with Pepperell, and Townsend. It has its own elementary school, Ashby Elementary School. Middle School students attend Hawthorne Brook Middle School, and high school students attend North Middlesex Regional High School.

== State Forest ==
The Town of Ashby is home to a large portion of the Willard Brook State Forest managed by the Massachusetts Department of Conservation and Recreation. Willard Brook contains 2,597 acres of land of varied terrain. The state forest property has facilities for camping, cooking, swimming and picnicking available. Info about the forests operating hours and amenities can be found on the Commonwealth of MA Website.

=== Damon Pond ===
Damon Pond is a man-made swimming pond that was constructed, along with several other features of the state forest property, by the CCC sometime between 1933 and 1940. The pond was created by an area of Willard Brook that is impounded by a dam.

=== Hiking Trails ===
The forest contains several hiking trails, horseback riding, and mountain biking. In the winter, the forest plays host to cross country skiing and snowmobiling. Many trails are groomed and maintained by local snowmobile groups in the winter to ensure safe and easy access to the trails.

The Friends and Family Loop Trail, a walking trail suitable for all ages, is four miles long and connects to the Pearl Hill State Forest.
=== Trap Falls ===
A waterfall located in the Willard Brook State Forest with a height of between 10 and 12 ft. The ferocity of the falls is dependent on the time of year, with the highest flows being in the spring and early summer.

The falls is supplied by Trap Fall Brook, that starts near the New Hampshire boarder and runs southeast and eventually joins Willard Brook after crossing under Route 119.

The falls is a short walk from the parking area located along Route 119. A walking bridge is located at the base of the falls, providing access to the opposite side.
== Local events ==
The small town of Ashby hosts several community events each year.
* Ashby July 3 Bonfire
* Summer Night Band Concerts on The Common (July – August) 
* 911 Ceremony
* Winter Holiday Band Concert
* Farmers Markets on The Common
* Annual Car Show For Veterans
* Pumpkin Festival and Tractor Parade
* Memorial Day Parade
* Halloween Downtown Trick or Treat

== Fire Department ==
The Ashby Fire Department located at 1093 Main Street, Ashby, MA provides fire protection, rescue and EMS (Emergency Medical Services) to the town. The department is made up of a combination of paid, on-call, and volunteer personnel that serve the community. Other services include permitting, inspections, community service, and CPR classes. The department&#x27;s fire apparatus consist of three fire engines, one tanker, one forestry, a chief&#x27;s car, utility pickup and two UTV&#x27;s. The department has two ambulances, at 2018 Dodge PL Custom and a 1999 Ford F450 Road Rescue that operate at the BLS level.

== Police Department ==
The Ashby Police Department (APD) is responsible for law enforcement and criminal investigations in Ashby, Massachusetts. The department consists of a Chief of Police, a Sergeant, and five full-time Patrolmen.

Both the Ashby Police Department and the Ashby Fire Department are housed in the new Public Safety complex at 1093 Main Street. This state-of-the-art facility was approved by town voters and constructed in 2018/2019. We are very grateful to the voters for this incredible new complex.

Additionally, the town has merged our dispatch services with Patriot Dispatch, resulting in cost savings and a successful integration.

==Notable person==
* Lisa Anne Fletcher (1844–1905), poet, artist and correspondent

==References==

==External links==
* 
* Ashby Free Public Library
* https://ashbypolice.org/</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2577594" start="0" end="5" title="Ashby, Massachusetts" label="Ashby"/>
<link wikidata="Q2154459" start="11" end="15" title="New England town" label="town"/>
<link wikidata="Q54073" start="19" end="35" title="Middlesex County, Massachusetts" label="Middlesex County"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="37" end="50" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="99" end="110" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q8003379" start="352" end="378" title="Willard Brook State Forest" label="Willard Brook State Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="483" end="510" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q2417215" start="604" end="615" title="New Ipswich, New Hampshire" label="New Ipswich"/>
<link wikidata="Q759" start="617" end="630" title="New Hampshire" label="New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2418283" start="635" end="640" title="Mason, New Hampshire" label="Mason"/>
<link wikidata="Q759" start="642" end="655" title="New Hampshire" label="New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1900880" start="670" end="678" title="Townsend, Massachusetts" label="Townsend"/>
<link wikidata="Q3840692" start="692" end="701" title="Lunenburg, Massachusetts" label="Lunenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q54182" start="720" end="729" title="Fitchburg, Massachusetts" label="Fitchburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q672025" start="748" end="758" title="Ashburnham, Massachusetts" label="Ashburnham"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484002" start="959" end="967" title="Massachusetts Route 31" label="Route 31"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484124" start="1004" end="1013" title="Massachusetts Route 119" label="Route 119"/>
<link wikidata="Q6903133" start="1124" end="1163" title="Montachusett Regional Transit Authority" label="Montachusett Regional Transit Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q54182" start="1296" end="1305" title="Fitchburg, Massachusetts" label="Fitchburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="1351" end="1357" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="1444" end="1462" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1567" end="1572" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1579" end="1595" title="African American (U.S. Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1602" end="1617" title="Native American (U.S. Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1624" end="1629" title="Asian (U.S. Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1641" end="1652" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1687" end="1695" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1699" end="1705" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="1854" end="1869" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940707" start="2601" end="2624" title="median household income" label="median household income"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="2785" end="2802" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="2894" end="2906" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="4730" end="4742" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q759" start="5448" end="5461" title="New Hampshire" label="New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q238139" start="6624" end="6627" title="4-H" label="4-H"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="7559" end="7576" title="American Revolutionary War" label="Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q8521571" start="7742" end="7755" title="Mount Watatic" label="Mount Watatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q28564" start="9469" end="9483" title="public library" label="public library"/>
<link wikidata="Q385817" start="10028" end="10041" title="Passive solar building design" label="passive solar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6784204" start="10102" end="10146" title="Massachusetts Board of Library Commissioners" label="Massachusetts Board of Library Commissioners"/>
<link wikidata="Q7056106" start="10208" end="10248" title="North Middlesex Regional School District" label="North Middlesex Regional School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q2432951" start="10261" end="10270" title="Pepperell, Massachusetts" label="Pepperell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1900880" start="10276" end="10284" title="Townsend, Massachusetts" label="Townsend"/>
<link wikidata="Q7056106" start="10320" end="10343" title="Ashby Elementary School" label="Ashby Elementary School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7056105" start="10438" end="10474" title="North Middlesex Regional High School" label="North Middlesex Regional High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q8003379" start="10548" end="10574" title="Willard Brook State Forest" label="Willard Brook State Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q2543589" start="10604" end="10645" title="Department of Conservation and Recreation" label="Department of Conservation and Recreation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094508" start="11060" end="11063" title="Civilian Conservation Corps" label="CCC"/>
<link wikidata="Q64211932" start="13883" end="13901" title="Lisa Anne Fletcher" label="Lisa Anne Fletcher"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="116831" wikidata="Q1362736" url="?curid=116831" title="Ashland, Massachusetts">
<text>Ashland is a town in Middlesex County, Massachusetts, United States. It is part of the MetroWest region. The population was 18,832 at the 2020 United States census.

==History==
The area now known as Ashland was settled in the early 18th century and inhabited prior to that by the Megunko Native Americans, to which Megunko Hill owes its name. Previously known as &quot;Unionville&quot;, Ashland was incorporated in 1846, bearing the name of statesman Henry Clay&#x27;s Kentucky estate. It is considerably younger than many of the surrounding towns, as Ashland&#x27;s territory was taken in near-equal parts from the previously established towns of Hopkinton, Holliston (previously of colonial era Sherborn&#x27;s territory), and Framingham.

The construction of the Boston &amp; Worcester Railroad, later the Boston &amp; Albany, in the 1830s was key to the early development of the town. Decades later, two other rail lines opened stations in Ashland. Along with the Sudbury River, the railroad helped to attract numerous mills to develop a bustling boot and shoe industry. However, by constructing three reservoirs along the river in 1878, the Boston Water Board inadvertently stymied further growth, most notably by halting the construction of the Dwight Printing Company&#x27;s granite mills. Although the mills closed, starting in the 1890s the Hopkinton Railroad Company, providing a connection to Milford, and the Natick Street Railway, which operated streetcars between the towns of Sherborn, Framingham, and Natick, offered service in Ashland. These rail lines were gone by the 1920s, rendered obsolete by automobiles.

Around the same time that the local rail lines were in decline, the inventor Henry E. Warren developed the Warren Synchronizing Timer in 1916, which made synchronous electric clocks possible by keeping alternating current flowing from power plants at a consistent sixty cycles per second. Warren founded Telechron, which, in partnership with General Electric. At its height in the 1950s, Telechron employed 2,000 people, or roughly one-third of Ashland. GE manufactured electric clocks in Ashland until 1979, when it sold to Timex. Thirteen years later, the Telechron plant was closed for good. A Warren Synchronizing Timer is on display at the Smithsonian&#x27;s Museum of American History in Washington D.C., and the high school sports teams are called &quot;The Clockers&quot;.

For most of the 20th century, Ashland&#x27;s population remained slow in growth, until the post-war boom beginning in the 1950s. During that period, Ashland grew from a far-removed rural town west of Boston to a primarily residential suburb by the 1980s. Over time, many farms and open spaces have given way to housing, although some untouched land still remains, including the Ashland Town Forest, Ashland State Park, Warren Woods, and land comprising the beach and dam portions of Hopkinton State Park.

Two major routes, 135 and 126, pass through Ashland. Route 135 is dominated by older residential development of varying density and is also part of the route for the Boston Marathon, which began in Ashland on Pleasant Street until the start was moved to Hopkinton&#x27;s Main Street in 1924. Route 126 has developed rapidly since the 1980s, as farms have given way to shopping centers and condominiums. A part of the draw of Ashland, and one that has been publicized in recent years, is its &quot;ideal&quot; location about halfway between the cities of Boston and Worcester. Travel is easy, with its own stop on the Framingham/Worcester Commuter Rail Line and nearby access to both I-90 and I-495. Ashland is considered part of MetroWest, which also consists of the towns of Framingham, Holliston, and Hopkinton.

Even though Ashland has left its humble roots as a rural area, it still retains the look and feel of a typical residential Boston-area New England town. Traditions like Ashland Day and small-town favorites like the ice cream shop Murphy&#x27;s and breakfast joint Sunnyside Cafe maintain the feeling of a close-knit community. Ashland&#x27;s longstanding rival for the Thanksgiving Day football game is Hopkinton, a rivalry with roots in the formation of the town and the resulting 1846 dispute concerning Ashland&#x27;s fire engine &quot;Megunko 1.&quot;

==Geography==
According to the United States Census Bureau, the town has a total area of , of which is land and (3.72%) is water.

===Adjacent towns===
Ashland is located in eastern Massachusetts, bordered by:
*Framingham on the northeast
*Sherborn on the east
*Holliston on the south
*Hopkinton on the southwest
*Southborough on the northwest

===Climate===
Ashland&#x27;s climate is typical for New England. Winters are variably cold, with frequent Nor&#x27;easters and occasional blizzards. Snowfall ranges widely from season to season, although the average is about . In the recent past, there has been as little as of snow (in the 1988–89 winter season) to 148 inches (in 1995–1996). The amount decreases dramatically eastward towards Boston because of the influence of the Atlantic Ocean. Snowfall amounts can also decrease rapidly south of Ashland. Low temperatures below zero are not uncommon in winter, and the lowest recent temperatures have been 17 below in January 1994, 14 below in January 2011 and 16 below in February 2016. Average January high temperatures are in the low 30s. Average January low temperatures are in the upper teens. Snow depth can reach two feet or more during the winter season. The winter of 2010–2011 was notable for snow depths of nearly 40 inches during January and February. Nearly 60 inches of snowfall was recorded in Ashland in January 2011 alone. The winter of 2014–2015 saw a very cold February and March. Snow cover lasted from late January until the first week of April. February 2015 was one of the coldest months on record. Snowfall for Ashland was 107.6&quot; for the season. Snow depth reached 45&quot;. Spring temperatures can be mitigated by penetrating cold fronts originating from the Canadian Maritimes, known as &quot;backdoor cold fronts&quot;. Typically, high temperatures consistently above 70 degrees do not set in until late May. The last frost is usually in mid-May. Summers are generally comfortable, with periods of high humidity. Prolonged heat waves of three or more days with highs of 90 or above are uncommon but can occur. In July 2011 an unusually high temperature of 101 was reached. Average July high temperatures are in the low 80s and average lows are around 60. Severe summer weather is not as common as in areas to the west in Central Massachusetts. However, on July 10, 1989, high winds occurred, causing widespread tree damage through most of Ashland with several homes damaged. This storm was part of a complex of severe storms that spawned several EF0 and EF1 tornadoes in towns in some neighboring counties. Fall is pleasant with the first frost usually around October 1, and the peak of the fall foliage season averages around October 12. Ashland can expect a &quot;white&quot; Christmas slightly over 50 percent of the time.

==Demographics==
At the 2010 census, there were 16,593 people, 6,385 households and 4,531 families residing in the town. The population density was . There were 6,609 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the town was 84.2% White, 2.4% African American, 0.1% Native American, 8.8% Asian, 2.6% from other races, and 1.9% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino people of any race were 4.5% of the population.

There were 6,484 households, of which 36.7% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 59.0% were married couples living together, 2.7% had a male householder with no wife present, 8.5% had a female householder with no husband present, and 29.8% were non-families. 24.9% of all households were made up of individuals, and 9.1% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.51 and the average family size was 3.04.

Of the 16,593 people in the population, 24.9% were under the age of 18, 5.5% were 15 to 19 years of age, 4.1% were 20 to 24 years of age, 27.9% were 25 to 44 years of age, 30.7% were 45 to 64 years of age, and 10.9% were 65 years and over. The median age was 40.1 years. For every 100 females, there was 94.6 males. For every 100 females 18 years and over there were 92.0 males.
The median household income was $93,770, and the median family income was $116,799. The median income of individuals working full-time was $79,485 for males versus $60,720 for females. The per capita income for the town was $46,626. About 2.2% of families and 4.0% of the population were below the poverty line, including 3.7% of those under age 18 and 9.6% of those age 65 or over.

==Education==
In 2005, the town completed the new Ashland High School and revised the division of grades. These changes include the 6th grade being moved to join the 7th and 8th grades in the former high school to form what is now Ashland Middle School and moving the 3rd grade from the Henry E. Warren Elementary School into the Mindess Elementary School to join the 4th and 5th grades. The 8th grade students have an annual short field trip to Washington D.C., but since 2020, it has been cancelled. The kindergarten, 1st and 2nd grades are in the Henry E. Warren Elementary School and preschool is in the William Pittaway School. The graduating class of 2007 was the first class to complete a full year in the new high school. In 2009, a new program at Ashland High School encouraged teachers to &quot;bridge the gap between subjects like math and history to the art world and visually engage students with traditional subject matter.&quot; This allowed students to make a connection between the material they were learning in the classroom and the knowledge of the arts and culture.

==Points of interest==
===Ashland Farmers Market===
This local farmers market has been operating on Saturdays 9am–1pm June–October each year since 2012. Around two dozen vendors sell fresh fruit, vegetables, meat, fish, bread, deserts, local wines, and crafts along with ready to eat food and coffee. There is also a rotating menu of live music and children&#x27;s activities.

===Ashland Day===
Ashland Day is typically held on the third Saturday in September, each year. The festivities occur near the center of town at Stone Park from morning until late afternoon, and include a number of booths and various carnival-like rides. Many of the school system&#x27;s athletic clubs and organizations use the day as an annual fundraising event, but it serves primarily as a day for residents to enjoy numerous activities and foods. Traditionally, there are fireworks atop the dam at Hopkinton State Park (the dam is in Ashland), but budget cuts have canceled several recent displays. Ashland Day has only been canceled once, due to inclement weather, in 2004. The 25th anniversary of the event was held in 2010. For the first time in several years, fireworks were launched from atop the dam at Hopkinton State Park.

===Stone&#x27;s Public House===
Built in 1832 by Captain John Stone to capitalize on the new Boston and Worcester Railroad, The Railroad House, later renamed John Stone&#x27;s Inn, and now known as Stone&#x27;s Public House, is located in the center of Ashland.

Stone&#x27;s is reportedly the site of multiple hauntings. According to legend, the Inn was the site of a murder. Captain Stone is said to have killed a New York salesman named Mike McPherson accidentally after hitting him over the head with a pistol when he suspected McPherson of cheating at poker. It is said that Stone and three friends with whom he had been playing swore to keep the event secret and buried the salesman&#x27;s body in the Inn&#x27;s basement. The legend contends that the ghosts of the salesman and the three other players involved all roam the inn. No body has ever been found.

It is rumored that a ten-year-old girl, Mary J. Smith, was struck by a train while playing on the railroad tracks just outside the inn, on June 11, 1862. Onlookers rushed her inside the inn, where she would later succumb to her wounds. A number of employees, patrons, and passersby have reported seeing the apparition of a young girl in a dress, with most reports detailing her looking out various windows that overlook the rear of the building.

The inn was purchased from Herve Beaudoin in 1976 by Leonard &quot;Cappy&quot; Fournier and renovated. During renovations, a hidden chamber was discovered in the basement, and it is speculated that this was used to house runaway slaves who made their way to freedom in the North along the Underground Railroad.

One notable guest of the hotel, Daniel Webster, gave a speech from the balcony on the day the first train arrived in 1834. Joining him for the inaugural train were Governor John Davis and former Governor Levi Lincoln Jr.

===Marathon history===
Ashland was the original start line for the Boston Marathon from 1897 to 1923. As traditional marathon distances grew, the start line needed to be pushed back to Hopkinton in 1924. There is a small park on Pleasant Street in Ashland to remember this history, featuring a sign that reads &quot;It all started here&quot;. 
===Open space===
Ashland State Park, Ashland Town Forest, Hopkinton State Park, and Warren Woods are each partially or completely located within town lines. Both state parks include a lake with hiking, fishing, biking and swimming. Hopkinton State Park also has boat rentals and horseback riding trails.

Ashland State Park is including a reservoir. A hiking loop around it passes a boat launch, beach, dam and spillway. The latter two elements are listed on the National Register of Historic Places as Ashland Dam and Spillway.

Ashland Town Forest is with hiking trails around rock outcroppings, small caves, and the rumored ending of some women who escaped the Salem witch trials. The town also owns over of land, known as Warren Woods, on the south side of town with hiking trails across land once owned by inventor Henry E. Warren.

===Nyanza===
US Color and Chemical Company, later named New England Aniline Works, Inc., and finally The Nyanza Color and Chemical Company, had a dye-manufacturing plant in Ashland. The plant opened in 1917 when American entry into World War I cut off the supply of dyes from Germany, then the world&#x27;s principal source. In 1971, the factory was identified as a hazard when pollution was discovered in the nearby Sudbury River. The site was placed on the Superfund National Priority List in 1982 when heavy metals and organochlorides were discovered in the soil and water near the site. It was also deemed probable that particles of mercuric sulfate were blown into the air. In 1998, Trustees settled NRD claims with the responsible parties at the Nyanza Chemical Waste Dump Superfund Site for $3 million. $230,769 of the settlement is for groundwater resources. Cleaning up the contaminated site cost residents $55 million, and is still not complete as of 2013. The estates of the Nyanza executives were charged for the cleanup.

In 2006, the Massachusetts State Department of Public Health released a study that found that people who grew up in Ashland between the late 1960s and early 1980s and swam in the waters near Nyanza had a 200-300% higher incidence of cancer than those who were not exposed to the chemicals.

In 2011, the Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection&#x27;s Bureau of Waste Site Cleanup&#x27;s Natural Resource Damages (NRD) program settled with the slowly-going-bankrupt Nyanza for $3 million, which with interest has grown to almost $4 million. The Nyanza case had previously been at the NRD program of the Massachusetts Executive Office of Energy and Environmental Affairs.

In 2016, proposed housing near Nyanza site raised alarm in Ashland.

In 2020, the EPA proposed a remedy to cleanup groundwater near the site, the final operable unit (phase) of the site cleanup.

===Sri Lakshmi Temple===
Opened September 6, 1986, Sri Lakshmi Temple is a large regional Hindu temple located on Waverly Street and is the largest such temple in New England. Sri Lakshmi temple hosts several Hindu functions throughout the year. First housed in a Knights of Columbus Hall in Melrose in 1978 and later in the Needham Village Club, the congregation purchased about of land from Ashland in 1981.

==Transportation==
Commuter rail service from Boston&#x27;s South Station is provided by the MBTA with the Ashland station on its Framingham/Worcester Line. The station is accessible from either Pleasant Street or Memorial Drive (which runs behind Ashland Middle School).

==Notable people==

* Dave Blass, film and television art director of &quot;Cold Case&quot;, &quot;ER&quot;, &quot;Justified&quot;, &quot;Biggest Loser&quot;, &quot;Beauty and the Geek&quot;
* Douglas R. Green, scientist at St. Jude Children&#x27;s Research Hospital
* William McCarthy, baseball player for the 1906 Boston Beaneaters
* Lou Perini, principal owner of the Boston/Milwaukee Braves from 1945 to 1961
* Henry E. Warren, inventor of the first synchronous electric clock as well as numerous other inventions

==References==
==External links==
*Ashland official website
*Ashland Historical Society</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1362736" start="0" end="7" title="Ashland, Massachusetts" label="Ashland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2154459" start="13" end="17" title="New England town" label="town"/>
<link wikidata="Q54073" start="21" end="37" title="Middlesex County, Massachusetts" label="Middlesex County"/>
<link wikidata="Q6824442" start="87" end="96" title="MetroWest" label="MetroWest"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="138" end="163" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="281" end="288" title="Megunko" label="Megunko"/>
<link wikidata="Q319630" start="452" end="469" title="Henry Clay" label="Henry Clay&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q5720662" start="1707" end="1722" title="Henry E. Warren" label="Henry E. Warren"/>
<link wikidata="Q17109570" start="1934" end="1943" title="Telechron" label="Telechron"/>
<link wikidata="Q54173" start="1972" end="1988" title="General Electric" label="General Electric"/>
<link wikidata="Q10959578" start="2155" end="2160" title="Timex Group" label="Timex"/>
<link wikidata="Q4805274" start="2811" end="2829" title="Ashland State Park" label="Ashland State Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1627677" start="2895" end="2915" title="Hopkinton State Park" label="Hopkinton State Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q826038" start="3084" end="3099" title="Boston Marathon" label="Boston Marathon"/>
<link wikidata="Q731271" start="3601" end="3605" title="Interstate 90 in Massachusetts" label="I-90"/>
<link wikidata="Q1671364" start="3610" end="3615" title="Interstate 495 (Massachusetts)" label="I-495"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="4321" end="4348" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q988568" start="4501" end="4511" title="Framingham, Massachusetts" label="Framingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q591912" start="4530" end="4538" title="Sherborn, Massachusetts" label="Sherborn"/>
<link wikidata="Q596394" start="4552" end="4561" title="Holliston, Massachusetts" label="Holliston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009192" start="4576" end="4585" title="Hopkinton, Massachusetts" label="Hopkinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2560012" start="4604" end="4616" title="Southborough, Massachusetts" label="Southborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001587" start="4741" end="4756" title="Nor&amp;#x27;easter" label="Nor&amp;#x27;easter"/>
<link wikidata="Q16000807" start="5210" end="5271" title="1994 North American cold wave" label="lowest recent temperatures have been 17 below in January 1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q111948982" start="6065" end="6084" title="backdoor cold front" label="backdoor cold front"/>
<link wikidata="Q4585335" start="6629" end="6642" title="July 1989 Northeastern United States tornado outbreak" label="July 10, 1989"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156320" start="6964" end="6976" title="Autumn leaf color" label="fall foliage"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="7124" end="7135" title="2010 United States census" label="2010 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="7348" end="7353" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="7360" end="7376" title="African American (U.S. Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="7383" end="7398" title="Native American (U.S. Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="7405" end="7410" title="Asian (U.S. Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="7422" end="7433" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="7468" end="7476" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="7480" end="7486" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="7642" end="7657" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940707" start="8388" end="8411" title="median household income" label="median household income"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="8573" end="8590" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="8682" end="8694" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q4805249" start="8818" end="8837" title="Ashland High School (Massachusetts)" label="Ashland High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q12053340" start="11163" end="11192" title="Boston and Worcester Railroad" label="Boston and Worcester Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q868393" start="12672" end="12692" title="Underground Railroad" label="Underground Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q106231" start="12727" end="12741" title="Daniel Webster" label="Daniel Webster"/>
<link wikidata="Q880346" start="12868" end="12878" title="John Davis (Massachusetts governor)" label="John Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q736772" start="12899" end="12915" title="Levi Lincoln Jr." label="Levi Lincoln Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q826038" start="12984" end="12999" title="Boston Marathon" label="Boston Marathon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4805274" start="13278" end="13296" title="Ashland State Park" label="Ashland State Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1627677" start="13319" end="13339" title="Hopkinton State Park" label="Hopkinton State Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719" start="13724" end="13760" title="National Register of Historic Places" label="National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q4805243" start="13764" end="13788" title="Ashland Dam and Spillway" label="Ashland Dam and Spillway"/>
<link wikidata="Q219698" start="13925" end="13943" title="Salem witch trials" label="Salem witch trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q5720662" start="14081" end="14096" title="Henry E. Warren" label="Henry E. Warren"/>
<link wikidata="Q4745451" start="14311" end="14342" title="American entry into World War I" label="American entry into World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q2363043" start="14516" end="14529" title="Sudbury River" label="Sudbury River"/>
<link wikidata="Q3504641" start="14558" end="14567" title="Superfund" label="Superfund"/>
<link wikidata="Q105789" start="14604" end="14616" title="heavy metals" label="heavy metals"/>
<link wikidata="Q426809" start="14621" end="14635" title="organochloride" label="organochloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q261261" start="14736" end="14752" title="Mercury(II) sulfate" label="mercuric sulfate"/>
<link wikidata="Q106610823" start="16065" end="16083" title="Sri Lakshmi Temple, Ashland, Massachusetts" label="Sri Lakshmi Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q842402" start="16104" end="16116" title="Hindu temple" label="Hindu temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q106610823" start="16190" end="16208" title="Sri Lakshmi Temple, Ashland, Massachusetts" label="Sri Lakshmi temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q54143" start="16306" end="16313" title="Melrose, Massachusetts" label="Melrose"/>
<link wikidata="Q1664345" start="16339" end="16346" title="Needham, Massachusetts" label="Needham"/>
<link wikidata="Q14626453" start="16444" end="16457" title="Regional rail" label="Commuter rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="16471" end="16484" title="Boston Massachusetts" label="Boston&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q54453" start="16485" end="16498" title="South Station" label="South Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q171985" start="16518" end="16522" title="MBTA" label="MBTA"/>
<link wikidata="Q4805219" start="16532" end="16547" title="Ashland (MBTA station)" label="Ashland station"/>
<link wikidata="Q801994" start="16555" end="16580" title="Framingham/Worcester Line" label="Framingham/Worcester Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q5228371" start="16720" end="16730" title="Dave Blass" label="Dave Blass"/>
<link wikidata="Q733960" start="16774" end="16783" title="Cold Case" label="Cold Case"/>
<link wikidata="Q207375" start="16791" end="16805" title="ER (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;ER&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535208" start="16807" end="16828" title="Justified (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Justified&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q694243" start="16830" end="16855" title="The Biggest Loser (U.S. TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Biggest Loser&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q117210076" start="16863" end="16882" title="Beauty and the Geek" label="Beauty and the Geek"/>
<link wikidata="Q19667788" start="16891" end="16907" title="Douglas R. Green" label="Douglas R. Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164246" start="16922" end="16964" title="St. Jude Children&amp;#x27;s Research Hospital" label="St. Jude Children&amp;#x27;s Research Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q8015326" start="16967" end="16983" title="William McCarthy (baseball)" label="William McCarthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4558494" start="17009" end="17031" title="1906 Boston Beaneaters season" label="1906 Boston Beaneaters"/>
<link wikidata="Q6685685" start="17034" end="17044" title="Lou Perini" label="Lou Perini"/>
<link wikidata="Q5869139" start="17069" end="17075" title="Boston Braves (baseball)" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q127777377" start="17076" end="17092" title="Milwaukee Braves" label="Milwaukee Braves"/>
<link wikidata="Q5720662" start="17113" end="17128" title="Henry E. Warren" label="Henry E. Warren"/>
<link wikidata="Q2607895" start="17164" end="17178" title="electric clock" label="electric clock"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="116832" wikidata="Q665011" url="?curid=116832" title="Bedford, Massachusetts">
<text>Bedford is a town in Middlesex County, Massachusetts, United States. The population of Bedford was 14,161 at the 2022 United States census.

== History ==
&quot;The following compilation comes from Ellen Abrams (1999) based on information from Abram English Brown&#x27;s &quot;History of the Town of Bedford&quot; (1891), as well as other sources such as &quot;The Bedford Sampler Bicentennial Edition&quot; containing Daisy Pickman Oakley&#x27;s articles, Bedford Vital Records, New England Historical and Genealogical Register, Town Directories, and other publications from the Bedford Historical Society.&quot;

The land now within the boundaries of Bedford was first settled by Europeans around 1640. In 1729 it was incorporated from a portion of Concord (about 2/5 of Bedford) and a portion of Billerica (about 3/5 of Bedford).
In 1630, John Winthrop and Thomas Dudley of the Massachusetts Bay Company arrived aboard the &quot;Arabella&quot; from Yarmouth, England. After a difficult ten-week voyage, they landed on the shores of the New World, with Salem and Boston Harbor being the Arabella&#x27;s earliest destinations. In 1637, the General Court of Massachusetts granted some 2,200 acres (9 km2) of land, including Huckins Farm land to the first governor, John Winthrop, and to Deputy Governor Thomas Dudley. The following year, the two men agreed to divide the land so that the parcel south of the two large boulders by the Concord River (Brothers Rocks) belonged to Governor Winthrop and north of the Rocks was to belong to Deputy Governor Dudley. Later, Dudley became governor. Dudley&#x27;s son Rev. Samuel Dudley and Winthrop&#x27;s daughter Mary were married; thus Brothers Rocks were so named because of this marriage of families.

===Huckins Farm and Job Lane House===

Governor Winthrop&#x27;s grandson, Fitz John Winthrop, in 1664, sold 1,200 acres (5 km2) of this land (including what is present-day Huckins Farm) to Job Lane (1), a skilled artisan and house builder, in exchange for a house that Lane built for him in Connecticut. (Note: The numbers appended to the names of Lane family members indicate the generation number beginning with Job Lane (1), who immigrated from Mill End, Rickmansworth, England.) Upon his death, he passed all of this land to his son, John Lane (2), who left it to his three sons, John Lane (3), Job Lane (3), and James Lane (3). John Lane and his wife, Catherine (Whiting), lived on the site, and after she died, he married Hannah Abbott. Upon his death in 1763, their son, Samuel Lane, inherited the land now known as Huckins Farm. Some time after Samuel Lane died in 1802, the house was removed and Peter Farmer built the present farmhouse in the 1840s. It is known that Peter and Dorcas Farmer had two children in the late 1820s and 1830s. Later, Banfield succeeded Farmer as the owner.

Samuel W. Huckins, born in 1817, settled on the land about 1870. Huckins was respected for his good judgment and was honored with various offices in town. Maps indicate that what is now known as Dudley Road was once called Huckins Street. Samuel Huckins lived there until his death in 1892. He had a son, Henry, who was born in 1849, and was living in Bedford in 1910.

In the late 19th century, Dudley Leavitt Pickman, descendant of an old Salem merchant family, and his wife Ellen fell in love with the land. They bought a substantial parcel (mostly Winthrop&#x27;s land and a portion of Dudley&#x27;s grant). Huckins Farm was a part of this purchase. A direct descendant of both Winthrop and Dudley, Pickman bought the land without knowledge of the Winthrop-Dudley grant. He discovered later that he had purchased his ancestors&#x27; lands. About 1889, he had the Two Brothers Rocks inscribed with the names &quot;Dudley&quot; and &quot;Winthrop&quot; as well as the year 1638, as noted in the Bedford Town Report in 1889.

The land was used as a dairy farm and apple orchard, in addition to the fields, pasture land, bog garden, and ponds. Chestnut trees lined the old road between the fields. A portion of Dudley Road was named Chestnut Avenue around that time. Today&#x27;s Dudley Road and Winthrop Avenue in Bedford, as well as Pickman Drive, are named for these families.

A large portion of the Pickman land, Huckins Farm, was sold to a developer for condominium development in 1987, and other parcels including the large Pickman house (Stearns Farm) were sold to private parties.

== Historical sites ==



===Bedford Flag===

The Bedford flag on display at the Bedford Free Public Library is the oldest known surviving intact battle flag in the United States. It is celebrated for having been the first U.S. flag flown during the American Revolutionary War, as it is believed to have been carried by Nathaniel Page&#x27;s outfit of Minutemen to the Old North Bridge in Concord for the Battle of Concord on April 19, 1775.

Though the flag previously had a border of silver tassels, the tassels were cut from it to adorn the dress of Page&#x27;s daughter.

The Latin motto on the flag, &quot;Vince Aut Morire&quot;, means &quot;Conquer or Die.&quot;

===Two Brothers Rocks===

When Governor Winthrop and his Deputy Thomas Dudley viewed their lands in early 1638, they decided to use two great stones on the eastern bank of the Concord River to divide the property. Winthrop claimed the land to one side of one rock; Dudley claimed the land on the other side of the other rock. They named the rocks &quot;The Two Brothers&quot;. Over the years, the two men had many differences; however, they learned to work together and even considered themselves &quot;brothers&quot; by their children&#x27;s marriage. The rocks have come to symbolize the men&#x27;s spirit of cooperation and democracy. The Two Brothers Rocks can still be seen near the banks of the Concord River in the Great Meadows National Wildlife Refuge. In 2009 the site was restored for an Eagle Scout project in collaboration with the U.S. Fish and Wildlife service, and the Bedford Historic Preservation Commission. The area around the site was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 2010 as the Two Brothers Rocks–Dudley Road Historic District.

Access to the site is possible through the Altmann Conservation Area, named after Madeleine Altmann and source of much of her video art.

===Great Meadows National Wildlife Refuge===

The early settlers called this area along the Concord River the &quot;Great River Meadow&quot; because they could harvest hay along the grass banks when the water retreated each summer. Today, this stretch of freshwater wetlands is a sanctuary for migratory birds and wildlife. Deer, cottontail rabbit, fox, raccoon, muskrat, beaver, weasel and over 200 species of birds may be seen here.

===Job Lane House===

This traditional saltbox-style home at 295 North Road dates back to the early 18th century and was built by Job Lane (3), the grandson of one of Bedford&#x27;s earliest settlers, Job Lane (1), a master carpenter. Job Lane (3) was a church deacon and also a town officer. His son Job Lane (4) was a Minuteman; he was wounded in the battle of Concord. The house and grounds, not far from Huckins Farm, has been restored and is open to the public from 2–4 pm on the second and fourth Sunday of the month, May through October.

===Fitch Tavern===
Early on the morning of April 19, 1775, an alarm sounded warning the people of Bedford that British soldiers were marching from Boston to Concord. Their captain, Jonathan Willson, told them, &quot;It is a cold breakfast boys, but we&#x27;ll give them a hot dinner.&quot; The Fitch Tavern is located in Bedford center, a little over a mile from Huckins Farm.

===John Wilson Corne Mill===

The ruins of this old mill over Vine Brook (on Wilson and Old Burlington Road) were added to the national historical register in 2003 (see photo). A 1972 &quot;Bedford Landmark Tour&quot; says, &quot;Site of the Wilson mills dating from about 1685; mills, dam, and pond passed from the Wilson family about 1770 to Oliver Bacon, then bought by Jonas Gleason (1782) and by Simeon Blodgett (1816); through the years, the site was operated as a grist mill, a saw mill, and later a cider mill.&quot;

===Elijah Stearns Mansion===

The Elijah Stearns Mansion is located in the heart of Bedford&#x27;s Historic District and across from Wilson Park at 4 Great Road. Built by Stearns around 1800, it is a fine example of Federal architecture, which features brick ends, four chimneys and a doorway arched in glass and wrought iron. A carriage house is attached to the main house, and, until 1895, a structure which was known as The Boston Cash Store also resided on the property. It was the first store in the village at the time. It also became the first post office for the town when Elijah Stearns was appointed postmaster in 1825. Later, in 1867, the building became the Bedford Public Library. The building which housed the store, post office, and library has since been moved to 22 Loomis Street. The home is part of the Bedford Center Historic District which was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1977.

==Geography==
According to the United States Census Bureau, the town has a total area of , of which is land and , or 0.94%, is water. Bedford is approximately from the coast.

Bedford is a relatively circular town. Its neighbors, clockwise, starting from 12 o&#x27;clock, are Billerica, Burlington, Lexington, Lincoln, Concord and Carlisle.

In addition to the Concord River which forms part of the town&#x27;s borders, the Shawsheen River flows through town. Vine Brook flows from Lexington through Burlington and into the Shawsheen in Bedford. In the 1840s, a large paper mill was built on Vine Brook that supplied many of the jobs in town.

===Climate===
Bedford has a hot-summer humid continental climate (&quot;Dfa&quot; under the Köppen climate classification system), with high humidity and precipitation year-round.

==Demographics==
At the 2022 census, there were 14,161 people, 5,540 (2017 -2021) households with 2.51 persons per household. The population density was . There were 4,708 housing units in 2020 at an average density of . The racial makeup of the town was 72.3% White, 3.2% African American, 0.2% Native American, 18.5% Asian, 0.% from other races, and 3.6% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 3.5% of the population.

There were 5,540 (2017 -2021) households, of which 34.1% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 64.4% were married couples living together, 7.3% had a female householder with no husband present, and 26.0% were non-families. 21.8% of all households were made up of individuals, and 10.2% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.60 and the average family size was 3.04.

23.6% of the population were under the age of 18, 3.9% from 18 to 24, 27.8% from 25 to 44, 26.3% from 45 to 64, and 18.3% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 42 years. For every 100 females, there were 99.3 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 96.3 males.

The median household income was $87,962 and the median family income was $101,081. Males had a median income of $65,697 and females $45,181. The per capita income was $39,212. About 1.4% of families and 2.5% of the population were below the poverty line, including 3.1% of those under age 18 and 4.0% of those age 65 or over.

==Government==
The town uses an open town meeting as its legislature. The executive branch consists of a Select Board who oversee a Town Manager.

Bedford was the home of a Consolidated Mail Outpatient Pharmacy (CMOP). It was the part of an initiative by the Department of Veterans Affairs to provide mail order prescriptions to veterans using computerization at strategic locations throughout the United States. It has moved to the Lowell area as a result of the Veterans Administrations Cares Mission and is no longer in Bedford.

As part of the Middlesex 21st District, Bedford is represented by Ken Gordon in the Massachusetts House of Representatives.

==Education==
Bedford Public Schools operate Bedford&#x27;s public school system. It consists of four buildings: Lt. Eleazer Davis Elementary (K–2), Lt. Job Lane Elementary (3–5), John Glenn Middle School (6–8), and Bedford High School (9–12).

The on-post K-8 school of Hanscom Air Force Base, a base which is partially located in Bedford, is operated the Lincoln School District. Dependents of active duty military living on the base are sent to Bedford High. High school students living on the base who are not dependents of active duty military personnel are sent to Lincoln-Sudbury Regional High School of the Lincoln-Sudbury Regional School District.

There is a METCO program, where students from Boston come to the Bedford schools, starting in kindergarten and staying with the class until graduation. Bedford is also part of the school district of Shawsheen Valley Technical High School which is in nearby Billerica.

The former Center School was deactivated in the 1970s, and is today the Town Center and Recreation Department Nathaniel Page School was similarly deactivated in about 1982 and today is a condominium community. Davis, Lane and Page elementary schools were all k–6 at one time.

John Glenn Middle School (originally called Bedford Junior High School) is named for John Glenn, formerly the Superintendent of Schools in Bedford, not for the U.S. Senator and astronaut. The Davis and Lane (and former Page) schools are named for local officers who took part in the Battle of Concord on April 19, 1775.

== Transportation==
=== Road ===
Bedford is slightly northwest of the intersection of I-95 (also known as MA-128) and MA-4/MA-225 (which cross in Lexington). Important roads through town include US-3 (an expressway) and MA-62.

===Bus===
The town is served by the 62 and 62/76 lines of the MBTA&#x27;s bus service. The MBTA operates the Route 351 express bus service, from Alewife; the bus terminates at Oak Park Drive, Bedford Woods, and EMD Serono; this service operates only on the morning and evening weekday rush-hour times and connects to the Red Line at Alewife.

=== Air ===
Bedford is served by Hanscom Field , a civilian airport, adjacent to Hanscom Air Force Base.

=== Rail (defunct) ===
A snowstorm on January 10, 1977, prompted the end of passenger service on the Lexington Branch of the Boston &amp; Maine Railroad (see additional notes under Boston and Lowell Railroad). The line was embargoed four years later. In 1991, the branch was railbanked by the Interstate Commerce Commission. It is now used for the Minuteman Bikeway. In the early 20th century, the Middlesex &amp; Boston Street Railway line ran generally down Great Road (Routes 4 and 225), with lines from as far west as Hudson running into Lexington and beyond.

Other historic transportation systems through Bedford included the narrow-gauge Billerica and Bedford Railroad and the Middlesex Turnpike.

== Notable people ==

* Doug Ardito, rock musician
* Joe Bellino, Heisman Trophy 1960 (U. S. Naval Academy)
* Doug Coombs, professional skier
* Jimmy Fowlie, actor and writer with The Groundlings in Los Angeles and writer on SNL
* Ernst Mayr (1904–2005), German-born evolutionary biologist, died in Bedford at the age of 100
* Lydia O&#x27;Leary, inventor
* Helen Ramsay, singer
* James Stavridis, retired United States Navy Admiral (Originally from West Palm Beach, Florida)
* Taecyeon, member of the South Korean pop group 2PM, went to middle and high school in Bedford (Originally from Irwon-dong, Gangnam-gu, Seoul, South Korea)
* Neera Tanden, president of the Center for American Progress and confidant to the Clintons
* Lawrence Watt-Evans, science fiction and fantasy author; went to high school in Bedford

== References ==

==Further reading==
* Boston.com profile of Bedford
* &quot;1871 Atlas of Massachusetts&quot; by Wall &amp; Gray. Map of Massachusetts. Map of Middlesex County.
* &quot;History of Middlesex County, Massachusetts&quot;, Volume 1 (A-H), Volume 2 (L–W) compiled by Samuel Adams Drake, published 1879 and 1880. 572 and 505 pages. Section on Bedford in Volume 2, page 241, by Josiah A. Stearns.
* &quot;History of the Town of Bedford, Middlesex County, Massachusetts&quot;, by Abram English Brown, published 1891, 158 pages.
* &quot;Bedford and Billerica: A tale of two towns&quot;, &quot;The Boston Phoenix&quot;, January 12, 1982

==External links==

* Town of Bedford official website
* Bedford Chamber of Commerce
* Bedford is Business Commercial Economic Development Resource Center 
* The Rotary Club of Bedford
* Bedford Historical Society</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q665011" start="0" end="7" title="Bedford, Massachusetts" label="Bedford"/>
<link wikidata="Q54073" start="21" end="52" title="Middlesex County, Massachusetts" label="Middlesex County, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q523240" start="751" end="758" title="Concord, Massachusetts" label="Concord"/>
<link wikidata="Q403428" start="799" end="808" title="Billerica, Massachusetts" label="Billerica"/>
<link wikidata="Q720766" start="842" end="855" title="John Winthrop" label="John Winthrop"/>
<link wikidata="Q375657" start="860" end="873" title="Thomas Dudley" label="Thomas Dudley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191350" start="881" end="906" title="Massachusetts Bay Company" label="Massachusetts Bay Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q921984" start="952" end="969" title="Yarmouth, Isle of Wight" label="Yarmouth, England"/>
<link wikidata="Q127834" start="1039" end="1048" title="New World" label="New World"/>
<link wikidata="Q54140" start="1055" end="1060" title="Salem, Massachusetts" label="Salem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567768" start="1065" end="1078" title="Port of Boston" label="Boston Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1453540" start="1141" end="1171" title="General Court of Massachusetts" label="General Court of Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124056" start="1434" end="1447" title="Concord River" label="Concord River"/>
<link wikidata="Q15253399" start="1937" end="1949" title="Job Lane" label="Job Lane (1)"/>
<link wikidata="Q15253399" start="2196" end="2204" title="Mill End, Rickmansworth" label="Mill End"/>
<link wikidata="Q5311909" start="3284" end="3305" title="Dudley Leavitt Pickman" label="Salem merchant family"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3710" end="3728" title="#Two_Brothers_Rocks" label="Two Brothers Rocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q4879145" start="4484" end="4496" title="Bedford Flag" label="Bedford flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="4684" end="4710" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4754" end="4768" title="Nathaniel Page (minuteman)" label="Nathaniel Page"/>
<link wikidata="Q2336248" start="4786" end="4795" title="Minutemen" label="Minutemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q729007" start="4803" end="4819" title="Old North Bridge, Concord, Massachusetts" label="Old North Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q523240" start="4823" end="4830" title="Concord, Massachusetts" label="Concord"/>
<link wikidata="Q778010" start="4839" end="4856" title="Battle of Concord" label="Battle of Concord"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="5014" end="5019" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5325254" start="5903" end="5922" title="Eagle Scout project" label="Eagle Scout project"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5949" end="5971" title="U.S. Fish and Wildlife" label="U.S. Fish and Wildlife"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719" start="6074" end="6110" title="National Register of Historic Places" label="National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q16902194" start="6126" end="6174" title="Two Brothers Rocks–Dudley Road Historic District" label="Two Brothers Rocks–Dudley Road Historic District"/>
<link wikidata="Q26465398" start="6259" end="6276" title="Madeleine Altmann" label="Madeleine Altmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q682010" start="6303" end="6312" title="video art" label="video art"/>
<link wikidata="Q7080212" start="6790" end="6803" title="Saltbox house" label="saltbox-style"/>
<link wikidata="Q8023145" start="7840" end="7849" title="Wilson Mill-Old Burlington Road District" label="see photo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400086" start="8417" end="8437" title="Federal architecture" label="Federal architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q860451" start="8514" end="8526" title="wrought iron" label="wrought iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q517820" start="8530" end="8544" title="carriage house" label="carriage house"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="9158" end="9185" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q403428" start="9403" end="9412" title="Billerica, Massachusetts" label="Billerica"/>
<link wikidata="Q995255" start="9414" end="9424" title="Burlington, Massachusetts" label="Burlington"/>
<link wikidata="Q929667" start="9426" end="9435" title="Lexington, Massachusetts" label="Lexington"/>
<link wikidata="Q663035" start="9437" end="9444" title="Lincoln, Massachusetts" label="Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q523240" start="9446" end="9453" title="Concord, Massachusetts" label="Concord"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041805" start="9458" end="9466" title="Carlisle, Massachusetts" label="Carlisle"/>
<link wikidata="Q511333" start="9551" end="9566" title="Shawsheen River" label="Shawsheen River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7932370" start="9587" end="9597" title="Vine Brook" label="Vine Brook"/>
<link wikidata="Q929667" start="9609" end="9618" title="Lexington, Massachusetts" label="Lexington"/>
<link wikidata="Q995255" start="9627" end="9637" title="Burlington, Massachusetts" label="Burlington"/>
<link wikidata="Q918088" start="9695" end="9705" title="paper mill" label="paper mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q10856115" start="9799" end="9835" title="hot-summer humid continental climate" label="hot-summer humid continental climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="9863" end="9892" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen climate classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q180600" start="9912" end="9920" title="humidity" label="humidity"/>
<link wikidata="Q25257" start="9925" end="9938" title="precipitation" label="precipitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="10082" end="10100" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="10213" end="10218" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="10225" end="10241" title="African American (U.S. Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="10248" end="10263" title="Native American (U.S. Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="10271" end="10276" title="Asian (U.S. Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="10287" end="10298" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="10333" end="10341" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="10345" end="10351" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="10513" end="10528" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940707" start="11126" end="11149" title="median household income" label="median household income"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="11267" end="11284" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="11363" end="11375" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q455752" start="11486" end="11498" title="town meeting" label="town meeting"/>
<link wikidata="Q11204" start="11506" end="11517" title="legislature" label="legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q35798" start="11523" end="11539" title="executive branch" label="executive branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q4931397" start="11554" end="11566" title="Select Board" label="Select Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163284" start="11622" end="11666" title="Consolidated Mail Outpatient Pharmacy (CMOP)" label="Consolidated Mail Outpatient Pharmacy (CMOP)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16193123" start="12048" end="12058" title="Ken Gordon (American politician)" label="Ken Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494460" start="12066" end="12104" title="Massachusetts House of Representatives" label="Massachusetts House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q4879185" start="12121" end="12143" title="Bedford Public Schools (Massachusetts)" label="Bedford Public Schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q4879152" start="12323" end="12342" title="Bedford High School (Bedford, Massachusetts)" label="Bedford High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5358885" start="12364" end="12374" title="K-8 school" label="K-8 school"/>
<link wikidata="Q3498988" start="12378" end="12400" title="Hanscom Air Force Base" label="Hanscom Air Force Base"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12464" end="12487" title="Lincoln School District (Massachusetts)" label="Lincoln School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241293" start="12678" end="12714" title="Lincoln-Sudbury Regional High School" label="Lincoln-Sudbury Regional High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241293" start="12722" end="12762" title="Lincoln-Sudbury Regional School District" label="Lincoln-Sudbury Regional School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q11231430" start="12776" end="12781" title="METCO" label="METCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q7491592" start="12964" end="13002" title="Shawsheen Valley Technical High School" label="Shawsheen Valley Technical High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q403428" start="13022" end="13031" title="Billerica, Massachusetts" label="Billerica"/>
<link wikidata="Q778010" start="13594" end="13611" title="Battle of Concord" label="Battle of Concord"/>
<link wikidata="Q1671381" start="13718" end="13722" title="Interstate 95 in Massachusetts" label="I-95"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638847" start="13738" end="13744" title="Route 128 (Massachusetts)" label="MA-128"/>
<link wikidata="Q2483949" start="13750" end="13754" title="Route 4 (Massachusetts)" label="MA-4"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484226" start="13755" end="13761" title="Route 225 (Massachusetts)" label="MA-225"/>
<link wikidata="Q929667" start="13778" end="13787" title="Lexington, Massachusetts" label="Lexington"/>
<link wikidata="Q406241" start="13827" end="13831" title="U.S. Route 3" label="US-3"/>
<link wikidata="Q14875255" start="13836" end="13846" title="limited access road" label="expressway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484043" start="13852" end="13857" title="Route 62 (Massachusetts)" label="MA-62"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13896" end="13898" title="62 (MBTA Bus)" label="62"/>
<link wikidata="Q171985" start="13922" end="13926" title="Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority" label="MBTA"/>
<link wikidata="Q6714772" start="13934" end="13937" title="MBTA bus" label="bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2779401" start="14071" end="14081" title="EMD Serono" label="EMD Serono"/>
<link wikidata="Q3888255" start="14236" end="14249" title="Hanscom Field" label="Hanscom Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248784" start="14263" end="14270" title="airport" label="airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q3498988" start="14284" end="14306" title="Hanscom Air Force Base" label="Hanscom Air Force Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q638715" start="14434" end="14461" title="Boston &amp;amp; Maine Railroad" label="Boston &amp;amp; Maine Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q732467" start="14490" end="14516" title="Boston and Lowell Railroad" label="Boston and Lowell Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q96377185" start="14532" end="14541" title="Embargo (rail)" label="embargoed"/>
<link wikidata="Q106610695" start="14584" end="14594" title="Rail Bank" label="railbanked"/>
<link wikidata="Q12061865" start="14657" end="14674" title="Minuteman Bikeway" label="Minuteman Bikeway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931918" start="14707" end="14744" title="Middlesex &amp;amp; Boston Street Railway" label="Middlesex &amp;amp; Boston Street Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2483949" start="14788" end="14789" title="Massachusetts Route 4" label="4"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484226" start="14794" end="14797" title="Massachusetts Route 225" label="225"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023503" start="14831" end="14837" title="Hudson, Massachusetts" label="Hudson"/>
<link wikidata="Q77329615" start="14954" end="14984" title="Billerica and Bedford Railroad" label="Billerica and Bedford Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q4707657" start="14993" end="15011" title="Middlesex Turnpike (Massachusetts)" label="Middlesex Turnpike"/>
<link wikidata="Q3714583" start="15038" end="15049" title="Doug Ardito" label="Doug Ardito"/>
<link wikidata="Q1691335" start="15067" end="15078" title="Joe Bellino" label="Joe Bellino"/>
<link wikidata="Q3714591" start="15124" end="15135" title="Doug Coombs" label="Doug Coombs"/>
<link wikidata="Q18392741" start="15158" end="15170" title="Jimmy Fowlie" label="Jimmy Fowlie"/>
<link wikidata="Q16000351" start="15194" end="15209" title="The Groundlings" label="The Groundlings"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="15213" end="15224" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q5354" start="15245" end="15255" title="Ernst Mayr" label="Ernst Mayr"/>
<link wikidata="Q117356977" start="15341" end="15359" title="Lydia O&amp;#x27;Leary" label="Lydia O&amp;#x27;Leary"/>
<link wikidata="Q21066165" start="15372" end="15384" title="Helen Ramsay" label="Helen Ramsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q116464" start="15395" end="15410" title="James Stavridis" label="James Stavridis"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="15420" end="15438" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4057849" start="15439" end="15446" title="Admiral (United States)" label="Admiral"/>
<link wikidata="Q163749" start="15464" end="15488" title="West Palm Beach, Florida" label="West Palm Beach, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q483363" start="15492" end="15500" title="Taecyeon" label="Taecyeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q222760" start="15539" end="15542" title="2PM" label="2PM"/>
<link wikidata="Q2647295" start="15603" end="15613" title="Irwon-dong" label="Irwon-dong"/>
<link wikidata="Q20398" start="15615" end="15625" title="Gangnam-gu" label="Gangnam-gu"/>
<link wikidata="Q8684" start="15627" end="15645" title="Seoul, South Korea" label="Seoul, South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q6986921" start="15649" end="15661" title="Neera Tanden" label="Neera Tanden"/>
<link wikidata="Q368035" start="15680" end="15708" title="Center for American Progress" label="Center for American Progress"/>
<link wikidata="Q21026250" start="15726" end="15738" title="Clinton family" label="the Clintons"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095351" start="15741" end="15760" title="Lawrence Watt-Evans" label="Lawrence Watt-Evans"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="116833" wikidata="Q403428" url="?curid=116833" title="Billerica, Massachusetts">
<text>Billerica () is a town in Middlesex County, Massachusetts, United States. The population was 42,119 according to the 2020 census. It takes its name from the town of Billericay in Essex, England.

== History ==

In the early 1630s, a Praying Indian village named Shawshin was at the current site of Billerica, commonly spelled Shawsheen today, as in the Shawsheen River. In 1638, Massachusetts Bay Governor John Winthrop and Lt. Governor Thomas Dudley were granted land along the Concord River in the area, and roughly a dozen families from Cambridge and Charlestown Village had begun to occupy Shawshin by 1652. The settlers chose the name Billerica because some of the families originally came from the town of Billericay in Essex, England. The town was incorporated as Billerica in 1655, on the same day as neighboring Chelmsford and nearby Groton. The original plantation of Billerica was divided during the colonial period into the towns of Billerica, Bedford, Wilmington, and Tewksbury.

The oldest remaining homestead in the town is the Manning Manse built in 1696, which was also the residence of William Manning (1747–1814), the author of &quot;The Key of Liberty,&quot; a critique of Federalist policies. Other notable Revolutionary War–era residents included Asa Pollard, the first soldier killed at the Battle of Bunker Hill, and Thomas Ditson, who was tarred and feathered in 1775 while on a visit to Boston after attempting to illegally purchase a musket from a soldier of the 47th Regiment of Foot. The song &quot;Yankee Doodle&quot; supposedly became a term of national pride instead of an insult because of this event. The town now celebrates &quot;Yankee Doodle Weekend&quot; every September.

== Geography ==
According to the United States Census Bureau, the town has a total area of , of which are land and (1.90%) is water.

Billerica is located north-northwest of Boston along the Northwest Expressway portion of U.S. Route 3, positioning it as the border between Boston’s inner suburbs to the south and the Merrimack Valley region to the north. The town is also situated less than from the Massachusetts Route 128/Interstate 95 High-Technology belt to the south and less than from the Interstate 495 (Massachusetts) outer belt highway to the north.

Billerica has several small neighborhoods that form villages (or sections) of town. Those villages are Billerica Center, East Billerica, North Billerica, Nutting Lake, Pinehurst, West Billerica, River Pines, Riverdale, and South Billerica.

Billerica borders the following towns: Chelmsford, Lowell, Tewksbury, Wilmington, Burlington, Bedford, and Carlisle. The border with Lowell is at a point in the middle of the Concord River where Billerica, Chelmsford, Lowell and Tewksbury all meet.

===Environment===
The Shawsheen River and Concord River are the two major waterways within the town. Nuttings Lake offers a public beach and other recreational water activities including canoeing and sailing.

== Demographics ==

As of the census of 2000, there were 38,981 people, 12,919 households, and 10,244 families residing in the town. The population density was . There were 13,071 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the town was 94.68% European American, 1.11% African American, 0.10% Native American, 2.76% Asian, 0.04% Pacific Islander, 0.33% from other races, and 0.99% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 1.54% of the population.

There were 12,919 households, out of which 37.4% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 66.1% were married couples living together, 9.4% had a female householder with no husband present, and 20.7% were non-families. 16.4% of all households were made up of individuals, and 5.3% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.92 and the average family size was 3.30.

In the town, the population was spread out, with 25.7% under the age of 18, 7.3% from 18 to 24, 34.6% from 25 to 44, 24.0% from 45 to 64, and 8.4% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 36 years. For every 100 females, there were 103.5 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 102.2 males.

As of the 2010 census, the median income for a household in the town was $87,073, and the median income for a family was $95,128. The per capita income for the town was $32,517. About 2.8% of families and 3.8% of the population were below the poverty line, including 4.5% of those under age 18 and 4.3% of those age 65 or over.

Billerica was a contender for CNN Money&#x27;s &quot;Best Places to Live&quot; in 2009 but did not make the top 100 list for the nation.

In 2016, Billerica was on the NeighborhoodScout&#x27;s &quot;America&#x27;s Top 100 Safest Cities&quot; list.

== Education ==

=== Public schools ===
Billerica Public Schools operate primary and secondary schools. The Billerica public school system consists of five elementary schools, two middle schools, and one high school. A sixth elementary school, Eugene C. Vining Elementary, closed permanently at the end of the 2019 school year. In addition, the town is home to a regional technical high school. Shawsheen Valley Technical Highschool.

====Elementary schools====
*Thomas Ditson Elementary School 
*Frederick J. Dutile Elementary School 
*S. G. Hajjar Elementary School 
*John F. Kennedy Elementary School 
*Parker Elementary School

====Middle schools====
*Orland S.Marshall Middle School
*Cyril D. Locke Middle School

====High school====
*Billerica Memorial High School

====Vocational school====
*Shawsheen Valley Technical High School
:Shawsheen Tech serves Billerica and four of its neighboring towns: Bedford, Burlington, Tewksbury, and Wilmington.

===Parochial and private schools===
There are no parochial or private schools in the town of Billerica. However, there are several in neighboring towns including:

====Catholic schools====

* Academy of Notre Dame, Tyngsboro; grades Pre-K–12
* Arlington Catholic High School, Arlington; grades 9–12
* St. Agnes School, Arlington; grades K–8
* Lowell Catholic High School, Lowell; grades 9–12
* Austin Preparatory School, Reading; grades 6–12

==Sports and recreation==
In celebrating &quot;Sports Illustrated&quot; 50th anniversary, the magazine named Billerica one of the nation&#x27;s top fifty towns for sports and recreation and the &quot;Sportstown for the Bay State.&quot;

== Transportation ==

MBTA Commuter Rail provides service from Boston&#x27;s North Station with the North Billerica station on its Lowell Line. The southern portions of the town are also geographically close to the Wilmington (MBTA station) and the Anderson Regional Transportation Center in Woburn. The Lowell Regional Transit Authority provides bus service in parts of Billerica. Route #3 (South Lowell) services the North Billerica MBTA station and the North Billerica Business Center. Route #13 (Billerica via Edson) services Boston Road (Massachusetts Route 3A) from North Billerica to Pinehurst. Stops along the way include the North Billerica MBTA Station, Pollard Street, High Street, Billerica Center and Town Hall, the Billerica Mall, and Towne Plaza, and a shopping center located in Riverdale. Route #14 (Burlington Mall/Lahey Hospital &amp; Medical Center) services Route 3A until Billerica Center, where it continues onto Concord Road and the Middlesex Turnpike.

The Middlesex Canal, which flowed through Billerica between 1795 and 1852, was used to transport goods between Lowell and Boston.

In the 1840s, the Boston and Lowell Railroad&#x27;s main line was built and passed through the town&#x27;s villages of North Billerica and East Billerica. Stations were built in both locations and North Billerica station is still an active station on the MBTA Commuter Rail. Trains stopped taking passengers at East Billerica in 1965 and the station was remodeled and is now a private home.

==Economy==

*E Ink Corporation, a privately held manufacturer of electrophoretic displays (EPDs) that powers tablets such as the Amazon Kindle and Barnes &amp; Noble Nook.
*Raytheon Company, a major American defense contractor and industrial corporation with core manufacturing concentrations in weapons and military and commercial electronics, has two large offices in Billerica.
*EMD Serono, Inc, the US biopharmaceutical division of Merck Group, Darmstadt, Germany, a global pharmaceutical and chemical group, is undergoing a $75-million expansion of their Billerica facility, naming it the EMD Serono Research &amp; Development Institute.
*GE Measurement &amp; Control, a $5 billion energy technology unit of General Electric, recently moved its headquarters to Billerica.
*Cabot Corporation, a $3.3 billion specialty chemicals and performance materials company, has its primary Research and Development facility in Billerica.
*Avaya Inc, a privately held $8 billion global provider of business communications and collaboration systems, has its New England headquarters in Billerica.
*L3 Technologies, a $15 billion American company that supplies command and control, communications, intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance (C3ISR) systems and products, avionics, ocean products, training devices and services, instrumentation, space, and navigation products. They have a Billerica office on Concord Road.
*Pan Am Railways, New England&#x27;s largest railroad, is headquartered in North Billerica, Massachusetts.
*American Science &amp; Engineering, based in Billerica, &quot;said it received a $6.7 million order for its X-ray detection technology that will be used by the US government for counterterrorism missions.&quot;
*Lantheus Medical Imaging Inc., the Billerica-based medical imaging company, &quot;sealed a new purchasing deal with Ottawa-based MDS Nordion for a rare imaging isotope, molybdenum-99.&quot;
* Seahorse Bioscience, a labware products manufacturer, is also headquartered in North Billerica.
* Entegris, a provider of semiconductor handling solutions.
* Bruker, a manufacturer of scientific instruments for molecular and materials research.
* FLIR Systems has a large facility in Billerica.

==Government==

Billerica has been governed through a representative town meeting since 1956, after citizens approved its adoption in 1955. In this system, 240 representatives are elected from 12 precincts to attend the town meeting, the town&#x27;s legislative branch. The executive branch is headed by a Town Manager, appointed by a five-person Select Board.

Since the 2020 United States Census and the redistricting process following it, the town of Billerica has been split between the 3rd and 6th Massachusetts Congressional Districts. With the northern part of the town in the 3rd Congressional District and the southern half in the 6th Congressional District. 

The Middlesex House of Correction and Jail is under the jurisdiction of the Middlesex County Sheriff&#x27;s Office.

==Notable people==
*Gary DiSarcina, former professional baseball player, AL All-Star (1995)
*Tom Fitzgerald, former professional hockey player
*Tom Glavine, former professional baseball player, elected to the Baseball Hall of Fame (2014)
*Dean Jenkins, former collegiate and professional hockey player
*Marc McLaughlin, professional hockey player
*Bob Miller, former professional hockey player
*Julius Sumner Miller, science teacher and popularizer
*Paul Miller, former professional hockey player
*Giuseppina Morlacchi, ballerina, dancer, and actress who introduced the can-can to the American stage
*Azel W. Patten, Wisconsin politician and businessman
*Asa Pollard, first man killed at the Battle of Bunker Hill (1775)
*Johnny Stearns, actor and producer
*Ian Wilcox, artist at The Simpsons 
==Historic places==

*Abraham Jaquith House
*Bennett Public Library
*Billerica Town Common District
*Billerica Mills Historic District
*Dutton–Holden Homestead
*Deacon Samuel Hill House
*Billerica Memorial High School
*Manning Manse
*Middlesex Canal
*Thomas Ditson Elementary School – Pinehurst is the original location of its namesake&#x27;s home.

== Sister city ==
Billerica is a sister city of Billericay, England.

==See also==
*Billerica and Bedford Railroad

== Footnotes ==
==Further reading==
* Henry Allen Hazen, &quot;History of Billerica, Massachusetts, with a Genealogical Register.&quot; Boston: A. Williams and Co., 1883.

== External links ==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q403428" start="0" end="9" title="Billerica, Massachusetts" label="Billerica"/>
<link wikidata="Q54073" start="26" end="57" title="Middlesex County, Massachusetts" label="Middlesex County, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q862832" start="165" end="175" title="Billericay" label="Billericay"/>
<link wikidata="Q23240" start="179" end="184" title="Essex" label="Essex"/>
<link wikidata="Q212152" start="233" end="247" title="Praying Indian" label="Praying Indian"/>
<link wikidata="Q511333" start="353" end="368" title="Shawsheen River" label="Shawsheen River"/>
<link wikidata="Q720766" start="406" end="419" title="John Winthrop" label="John Winthrop"/>
<link wikidata="Q375657" start="437" end="450" title="Thomas Dudley" label="Thomas Dudley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124056" start="479" end="492" title="Concord River" label="Concord River"/>
<link wikidata="Q49111" start="540" end="549" title="Cambridge, Massachusetts" label="Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q54174" start="554" end="573" title="Woburn, Massachusetts" label="Charlestown Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q862832" start="712" end="722" title="Billericay" label="Billericay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2318398" start="821" end="831" title="Chelmsford, Massachusetts" label="Chelmsford"/>
<link wikidata="Q3776991" start="843" end="849" title="Groton, Massachusetts" label="Groton"/>
<link wikidata="Q665011" start="956" end="963" title="Bedford, Massachusetts" label="Bedford"/>
<link wikidata="Q951858" start="965" end="975" title="Wilmington, Massachusetts" label="Wilmington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021588" start="981" end="990" title="Tewksbury, Massachusetts" label="Tewksbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q6750872" start="1043" end="1056" title="Manning Manse" label="Manning Manse"/>
<link wikidata="Q16204654" start="1104" end="1119" title="William Manning (author)" label="William Manning"/>
<link wikidata="Q4803149" start="1269" end="1280" title="Asa Pollard" label="Asa Pollard"/>
<link wikidata="Q334029" start="1314" end="1335" title="Battle of Bunker Hill" label="Battle of Bunker Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2163931" start="1364" end="1384" title="Tarring and feathering" label="tarred and feathered"/>
<link wikidata="Q4638516" start="1490" end="1511" title="47th (Lancashire) Regiment of Foot" label="47th Regiment of Foot"/>
<link wikidata="Q733940" start="1528" end="1541" title="Yankee Doodle" label="Yankee Doodle"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="1744" end="1771" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q406241" start="1902" end="1922" title="Northwest Expressway (Massachusetts)" label="Northwest Expressway"/>
<link wikidata="Q406241" start="1934" end="1946" title="U.S. Route 3 in Massachusetts" label="U.S. Route 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q4242054" start="2029" end="2045" title="Merrimack Valley" label="Merrimack Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638847" start="2112" end="2135" title="Massachusetts Route 128" label="Massachusetts Route 128"/>
<link wikidata="Q1671364" start="2207" end="2237" title="Interstate 495 (Massachusetts)" label="Interstate 495 (Massachusetts)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7054191" start="2409" end="2424" title="North Billerica, Massachusetts" label="North Billerica"/>
<link wikidata="Q7195495" start="2440" end="2449" title="Pinehurst, Massachusetts" label="Pinehurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q2318398" start="2552" end="2562" title="Chelmsford, Massachusetts" label="Chelmsford"/>
<link wikidata="Q49162" start="2564" end="2570" title="Lowell, Massachusetts" label="Lowell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021588" start="2572" end="2581" title="Tewksbury, Massachusetts" label="Tewksbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q951858" start="2583" end="2593" title="Wilmington, Massachusetts" label="Wilmington"/>
<link wikidata="Q995255" start="2595" end="2605" title="Burlington, Massachusetts" label="Burlington"/>
<link wikidata="Q665011" start="2607" end="2614" title="Bedford, Massachusetts" label="Bedford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041805" start="2620" end="2628" title="Carlisle, Massachusetts" label="Carlisle"/>
<link wikidata="Q15664" start="2752" end="2760" title="quadripoint" label="all meet"/>
<link wikidata="Q511333" start="2785" end="2800" title="Shawsheen River" label="Shawsheen River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124056" start="2805" end="2818" title="Concord River" label="Concord River"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="3003" end="3009" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q49078" start="3235" end="3252" title="White American" label="European American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3260" end="3276" title="African American (U.S. Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3284" end="3299" title="Native American (U.S. Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3307" end="3312" title="Asian (U.S. Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3320" end="3336" title="Pacific Islander (U.S. Census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3349" end="3360" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3396" end="3404" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3408" end="3414" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="3569" end="3584" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="4338" end="4355" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="4447" end="4459" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q2931769" start="4563" end="4579" title="CNNMoney.com" label="CNN Money&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q22907234" start="4701" end="4718" title="NeighborhoodScout" label="NeighborhoodScout"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4822" end="4846" title="Billerica Public Schools" label="Billerica Public Schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q4911790" start="5522" end="5552" title="Billerica Memorial High School" label="Billerica Memorial High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7491592" start="5581" end="5619" title="Shawsheen Valley Technical High School" label="Shawsheen Valley Technical High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q665011" start="5688" end="5695" title="Bedford, Massachusetts" label="Bedford"/>
<link wikidata="Q995255" start="5697" end="5707" title="Burlington, Massachusetts" label="Burlington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021588" start="5709" end="5718" title="Tewksbury, Massachusetts" label="Tewksbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q951858" start="5724" end="5734" title="Wilmington, Massachusetts" label="Wilmington"/>
<link wikidata="Q4792292" start="5981" end="6011" title="Arlington Catholic High School" label="Arlington Catholic High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q2077099" start="6080" end="6107" title="Lowell Catholic High School" label="Lowell Catholic High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q4823244" start="6131" end="6156" title="Austin Preparatory School" label="Austin Preparatory School"/>
<link wikidata="Q275837" start="6227" end="6245" title="Sports Illustrated" label="Sports Illustrated"/>
<link wikidata="Q172457" start="6439" end="6457" title="MBTA Commuter Rail" label="MBTA Commuter Rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="6480" end="6486" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q54454" start="6494" end="6507" title="North Station" label="North Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q14715782" start="6517" end="6540" title="North Billerica (MBTA station)" label="North Billerica station"/>
<link wikidata="Q172536" start="6548" end="6559" title="Lowell Line" label="Lowell Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q8022735" start="6632" end="6657" title="Wilmington (MBTA station)" label="Wilmington (MBTA station)"/>
<link wikidata="Q800386" start="6666" end="6705" title="Anderson Regional Transportation Center" label="Anderson Regional Transportation Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q2078562" start="6721" end="6754" title="Lowell Regional Transit Authority" label="Lowell Regional Transit Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q2078264" start="6960" end="6982" title="Massachusetts Route 3A" label="Massachusetts Route 3A"/>
<link wikidata="Q7195495" start="7008" end="7017" title="Pinehurst, Massachusetts" label="Pinehurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q4999258" start="7234" end="7249" title="Burlington Mall (Massachusetts)" label="Burlington Mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q6473221" start="7250" end="7285" title="Lahey Hospital &amp;amp; Medical Center" label="Lahey Hospital &amp;amp; Medical Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q4707657" start="7374" end="7392" title="Middlesex Turnpike (Massachusetts)" label="Middlesex Turnpike"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931907" start="7399" end="7414" title="Middlesex Canal" label="Middlesex Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q49162" start="7506" end="7512" title="Lowell, Massachusetts" label="Lowell"/>
<link wikidata="Q732467" start="7544" end="7570" title="Boston and Lowell Railroad" label="Boston and Lowell Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195844" start="7932" end="7949" title="E Ink Corporation" label="E Ink Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q156644" start="8092" end="8100" title="Raytheon" label="Raytheon"/>
<link wikidata="Q156959" start="8355" end="8366" title="Merck Group" label="Merck Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q5513289" start="8563" end="8591" title="GE Measurement &amp;amp; Control" label="GE Measurement &amp;amp; Control"/>
<link wikidata="Q54173" start="8632" end="8648" title="General Electric" label="General Electric"/>
<link wikidata="Q750124" start="8697" end="8714" title="Cabot Corporation" label="Cabot Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q212433" start="8851" end="8856" title="Avaya" label="Avaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781428" start="9008" end="9023" title="L3 Technologies" label="L3 Technologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2048811" start="9336" end="9351" title="Pan Am Railways" label="Pan Am Railways"/>
<link wikidata="Q7054191" start="9410" end="9440" title="North Billerica, Massachusetts" label="North Billerica, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7440492" start="9847" end="9866" title="Seahorse Bioscience" label="Seahorse Bioscience"/>
<link wikidata="Q5380128" start="9945" end="9953" title="Entegris" label="Entegris"/>
<link wikidata="Q431454" start="10005" end="10011" title="Bruker" label="Bruker"/>
<link wikidata="Q5426537" start="10094" end="10106" title="FLIR Systems" label="FLIR Systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314261" start="10197" end="10224" title="representative town meeting" label="representative town meeting"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="10515" end="10540" title="2020 United States Census" label="2020 United States Census"/>
<link wikidata="Q6784144" start="10727" end="10753" title="Massachusetts&amp;#x27;s 3rd congressional district" label="3rd Congressional District"/>
<link wikidata="Q13858951" start="10783" end="10809" title="Massachusetts&amp;#x27;s 6th congressional district" label="6th Congressional District"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10889" end="10927" title="Middlesex County Sheriff&amp;#x27;s Office (Massachusetts)" label="Middlesex County Sheriff&amp;#x27;s Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q5524975" start="10950" end="10964" title="Gary DiSarcina" label="Gary DiSarcina"/>
<link wikidata="Q3530723" start="11023" end="11037" title="Tom Fitzgerald (ice hockey)" label="Tom Fitzgerald"/>
<link wikidata="Q943668" start="11074" end="11085" title="Tom Glavine" label="Tom Glavine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5246247" start="11169" end="11181" title="Dean Jenkins" label="Dean Jenkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q110983828" start="11233" end="11248" title="Marc McLaughlin" label="Marc McLaughlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4933416" start="11278" end="11288" title="Bob Miller (ice hockey)" label="Bob Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q6310097" start="11325" end="11345" title="Julius Sumner Miller" label="Julius Sumner Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q632296" start="11380" end="11391" title="Paul Miller (ice hockey)" label="Paul Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q4302801" start="11428" end="11448" title="Giuseppina Morlacchi" label="Giuseppina Morlacchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q805221" start="11450" end="11459" title="ballerina" label="ballerina"/>
<link wikidata="Q11639" start="11461" end="11467" title="dancer" label="dancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q333009" start="11500" end="11507" title="can-can" label="can-can"/>
<link wikidata="Q21258094" start="11531" end="11545" title="Azel W. Patten" label="Azel W. Patten"/>
<link wikidata="Q4803149" start="11585" end="11596" title="Asa Pollard" label="Asa Pollard"/>
<link wikidata="Q334029" start="11622" end="11643" title="Battle of Bunker Hill" label="Battle of Bunker Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q19668235" start="11652" end="11666" title="Johnny Stearns" label="Johnny Stearns"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11688" end="11698" title="Ian Wilcox" label="Ian Wilcox"/>
<link wikidata="Q4668934" start="11746" end="11767" title="Abraham Jaquith House" label="Abraham Jaquith House"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11769" end="11791" title="Bennett Public Library" label="Bennett Public Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q4911791" start="11793" end="11823" title="Billerica Town Common District" label="Billerica Town Common District"/>
<link wikidata="Q4911789" start="11825" end="11858" title="Billerica Mills Historic District" label="Billerica Mills Historic District"/>
<link wikidata="Q5317547" start="11860" end="11883" title="Dutton–Holden Homestead" label="Dutton–Holden Homestead"/>
<link wikidata="Q5245039" start="11885" end="11909" title="Deacon Samuel Hill House" label="Deacon Samuel Hill House"/>
<link wikidata="Q4911790" start="11911" end="11941" title="Billerica Memorial High School" label="Billerica Memorial High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q6750872" start="11943" end="11956" title="Manning Manse" label="Manning Manse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931907" start="11958" end="11973" title="Middlesex Canal" label="Middlesex Canal"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11975" end="12006" title="Thomas Ditson Elementary School" label="Thomas Ditson Elementary School"/>
<link wikidata="Q184711" start="12107" end="12118" title="twin towns and sister cities" label="sister city"/>
<link wikidata="Q862832" start="12122" end="12132" title="Billericay" label="Billericay"/>
<link wikidata="Q77329615" start="12158" end="12188" title="Billerica and Bedford Railroad" label="Billerica and Bedford Railroad"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="116834" wikidata="Q3643258" url="?curid=116834" title="Boxborough, Massachusetts">
<text>Boxborough is a town in Middlesex County, Massachusetts, United States. The population was 5,506 at the 2020 census. The town name is often simplified to &quot;Boxboro&quot; on highway signs and official documents.

==Geography==
According to the United States Census Bureau, the town has a total area of , of which is land and , or 0.48%, is water.

Boxborough is bordered by Littleton to the north, Acton to the east, Stow to the south, and Harvard to the west. Prior to incorporation in 1783, the area that is now Boxborough was part of Stow, Harvard, and Littleton.

==Demographics==


As of the census of 2000, there were 4,868 people, 1,853 households, and 1,271 families residing in the town. The population density was . There were 1,906 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the town was 88.82% White, 0.33% African American, 0.02% Native American, 8.48% Asian, 0.37% from other races, and 1.97% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 1.13% of the population.

There were 1,853 households, out of which 42.8% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 60.2% were married couples living together, 5.9% had a female householder with no husband present, and 31.4% were non-families. Of all households, 25.9% were made up of individuals, and 3.2% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.63 and the average family size was 3.25.

In the town, the population was spread out, with 30.5% under the age of 18, 5.1% from 18 to 24, 34.3% from 25 to 44, 25.3% from 45 to 64, and 4.7% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 37 years. For every 100 females, there were 104.1 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 102.0 males.

According to the 2010 Census, the median income for a household in the town was $115,639 and the average income for a household was $147,625. The per capita income for the town was $59,551. About 1.5% of families and 2.8% of the population were below the poverty line, including 3.8% of those under age 18 and none of those age 65 or over.

==Education==

Boxborough is part of the Acton Boxborough Regional School District (ABRSD) along with Acton. The town has one elementary school serving K–6, the Blanchard Memorial School. Middle school students then attend the R.J. Grey Junior High School from grades 7–8. High school students then attend Acton-Boxborough Regional High School from grades 9–12.

Acton-Boxborough Regional High School (ABRHS) is highly ranked within Massachusetts and nationwide. The U.S. Department of Education designated the institution as a Blue Ribbon School in 2009. In 2008, Newsweek magazine ranked ABRHS as one of the best high schools in the country. Also, the school has ranked in the top ten for the National Academic Decathlon.

== History ==

=== Early history ===

The area which became the town of Boxborough was first inhabited by the Native Americans of the Nipmuc and Pennacook tribes. It was probably visited by colonists as early as the mid seventeenth century, before the neighboring towns of Stow (1683) and Acton (1735) were founded. However, the land in Boxborough was not settled until the beginning of the eighteenth century by farmers looking for fertile land to establish farms. Over the next decades, this area would become one of the most productive agricultural farming areas in the county. Several men from the area served in the Seven Years&#x27; War.

=== Revolutionary War ===

On April 19, 1775, 21 men from Boxborough met at the Boaz Brown house on Hill road before marching with the companies of Littleton and Acton to the Battles of Lexington and Concord. Most of these men, previously farmers, would go on to serve the colonial militia for the remainder of the war.

Sons of Simon Blanchard, descendant of some of the earliest settlers of Boxborough (and killed during the Battle of the Plains of Abraham in 1759 during the Seven Years&#x27; War), Calvin and Luther Blanchard, are two prominent revolutionary veterans. Luther marched with Captain Isaac Davis&#x27;s company of Acton to the Battle of Concord, serving as a fifer. At the North Bridge, several minute-men companies engaged with the British troops in a conflict remembered as the shot heard round the world, eventually forcing the redcoats to retreat. Blanchard is remembered by some historians as the first man wounded, but it is hard to confirm considering the nature of the battle. He received a musket-shot to the chest. Historian Lucie Hager documents Luther&#x27;s witty interaction with a Concord woman who was tending his wound:

&quot;Nurse:&quot; &quot;A little more and you&#x27;ve been killed.&quot;
&quot;Luther:&quot; Yes, and a little more and it would not have touched me.&quot;

Luther died three days later, ostensibly of the wounds he received in these battles. He is buried at the Old Burial Ground in Littleton, Massachusetts. A picture of Luther is featured on the Boxborough seal. Calvin survived the war and went on to be involved in early Boxborough politics. It is after descendants of this same Blanchard family that Blanchard Memorial School was named.

=== Founding ===

A closer church served as the motivation for establishing a new district; those who lived in the extreme parts of this area found it difficult to travel all the way to church every week (the community had been built on Puritan ideals, attending church was required at this time). Perhaps the key players in this movement, fresh from fighting in the Revolutionary War, were pursuing further independence.

Boxborough was formed from Harvard, Littleton, and Stow. A member of Middlesex County, Boxborough established a new county line between Middlesex and Worcester. On January 31, 1775, men of this area formed a &quot;Sartain Society&quot; which agreed to purchase the Harvard Old meeting-house to act as a town hall and a church.

The people of Boxborough were denied registration to be an independent district three times before being accepted in 1782, then incorporated on February 25, 1783. At first, Boxborough didn&#x27;t send a representative to the General Court, instead continuing to help elect a representative from Stow.

Besides the Blanchard family, several other early settlers of Boxborough were instrumental in its establishment as an independent district. John Wetherbee and his family built houses in what would become Boxborough as early as 1717, and some historians consider John the first settler of the area. Silas Wetherbee, born a generation later, fought for a Stow company during the Revolution, and gave the land on which the new meeting-house and church was built after the war. Silas was not just a veteran and financial backer, but was also elected as an original selectman. The Wetherbee Family continues to influence Boxborough politics for a century to come.

The Taylor brothers were also some of the first settlers in the area. Silas Taylor served as a captain in the Revolutionary War before serving as the first clerk of the district of Boxborough, as well as an original selectman and assessor. Phinehas Taylor Jr. also served as a captain in the War, going on to serve as the original treasurer and deer-reeve of the district.

Other old Boxborough families include the Hager Family, the Wood Family, and the Stone family, each of which settled in the area before its incorporation and had men serve during the Revolutionary War. Bennet Wood and Joseph Stone served as the first official Boxborough government, serving as the committee for the Sartain Society, along with moderator Henry Cooledge. Joseph Stone, originally from Harvard, was deeply involved in the area, serving as justice of the peace and a deacon of the congregational church until his death. The Wood Family was also influential in the early politics of Littleton; Bennet&#x27;s father, Jeremiah, served as collector, selectman, and eventually treasurer. 

Most of these influential Boxborians were buried in the Old North Cemetery, which has graves dating back to the eighteenth century.

==Attractions==
On October 16, 2005, the Boxborough Historical Society opened the Boxborough Museum. The museum is located at 575 Middle Road and is open several Sundays a year. Boxborough is also known for Steele Farm, a popular location for sledding and hikes, with dog-friendly conservation trails.

There is a good example of a glacial esker, over one mile in length, located in the Beaver Valley Preserve.

An annual Harvest Fair is held in September, celebrating Boxborough&#x27;s agricultural legacy.

Boxborough is home to several historical landmarks and sites on the Freedom Trail. The Silas Taylor Farm can be found on Flagg Hill. The Silas Wethebee House (est. 1770), or Walnut Farm, can be seen today on Hill Road as part of the &quot;Path of the Patriots.&quot;

=== Conservation areas and playing fields ===

Boxborough has fourteen distinct state, non-profit, conservation or municipal tracts of lands with trails suitable for a number of non-motorized activities. These are maintained by town volunteers and the town employees (mostly where mowing is required).

Flerra Meadows provides soccer fields, as well as a small playground and pond. Liberty Fields has a baseball diamond, multiple soccer fields and a conservation trail in the woods.

The Boxborough Mamils, a cycling group, meets regularly at Flerra Meadows for community bike rides in Boxborough and neighboring towns.

== Reenactments and commemorations ==

=== Boxborough Minutemen Company ===

The Boxborough Minutemen Company is a historical society founded in Boxborough in 1967 with the goal of preserving the memory of the town&#x27;s role in the American Revolution, as well as serving the community. The Minutemen sponsor local activities and businesses, give out scholarships, and participate in historical reenactments.

The legacy of the revolution has lived on through several groups similar to the Minutemen Company dating back to the end of the eighteenth century. Following the Revolutionary War, the &quot;Slam Bang Company&quot; was founded by patriotic men of Boxborough, eventually dissolving into the &quot;Boxborough Light Infantry Company.&quot; The goals of these groups seem purely honorary, though it is recorded that they met three times a year for annual military training through the nineteenth century.

=== Fifer&#x27;s Day ===
Boxborough is known for its annual Fifer&#x27;s Day celebration, put on by the Minutemen, which commemorates Luther Blanchard. Fifer&#x27;s Day is held every June at Flerra Meadows in Boxborough. It begins with a road race, followed by a parade and many different festivities. Booths with hamburgers, hot dogs, snow cones etc. line the field and games, bands and volleyball tournaments complete the afternoon. Other Fifer&#x27;s Day activities typically include pony rides, air balloon rides, and fire engine demonstrations.

==Notable people==
* Allen Bourbeau, Harvard University, played with Team USA at the 1988 Winter Olympics
* Callahan Burke, professional ice hockey player for the Colorado Avalanche
* Ted Crowley, NHL professional hockey player; grew up on Guggins Lane
* Lucie Caroline Hager (1853–1903), author
* Adil Najam, member of the United Nations&#x27; Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) which was awarded the 2007 Nobel Prize for Peace
* Bill Rodgers, runner, winner of the Boston Marathon and New York City Marathon
* Isadore Singer, mathematician, recipient of the Abel Prize
* Bob Sweeney, NHL professional hockey player and brother-in-law of Madeline Amy Sweeney
* Fred Wesley Wentworth (1864–1943), architect known for his many buildings in Downtown Paterson, New Jersey
* Jessamyn West, librarian, grew up in Boxborough

==References==

==External links==

*Town of Boxborough official website
*Boxborough Historical Society
*State government data for Boxborough</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3643258" start="0" end="10" title="Boxborough, Massachusetts" label="Boxborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q54073" start="24" end="40" title="Middlesex County, Massachusetts" label="Middlesex County"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="42" end="55" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="104" end="115" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="247" end="274" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q2433090" start="377" end="386" title="Littleton, Massachusetts" label="Littleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q344431" start="401" end="406" title="Acton, Massachusetts" label="Acton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3974584" start="420" end="424" title="Stow, Massachusetts" label="Stow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587876" start="443" end="450" title="Harvard, Massachusetts" label="Harvard"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="600" end="606" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="828" end="833" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="841" end="857" title="African American (U.S. Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="865" end="880" title="Native American (U.S. Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="888" end="893" title="Asian (U.S. Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="906" end="917" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="953" end="961" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="965" end="971" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="1125" end="1140" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="2016" end="2028" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q22059487" start="2143" end="2184" title="Acton Boxborough Regional School District" label="Acton Boxborough Regional School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q344431" start="2204" end="2209" title="Acton, Massachusetts" label="Acton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4677656" start="2408" end="2445" title="Acton-Boxborough Regional High School" label="Acton-Boxborough Regional High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q4677656" start="2465" end="2502" title="Acton-Boxborough Regional High School" label="Acton-Boxborough Regional High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q541788" start="2961" end="2967" title="Nipmuc" label="Nipmuc"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761546" start="2972" end="2981" title="Pennacook" label="Pennacook"/>
<link wikidata="Q3974584" start="3100" end="3104" title="Stow, Massachusetts" label="Stow"/>
<link wikidata="Q344431" start="3116" end="3121" title="Acton, Massachusetts" label="Acton"/>
<link wikidata="Q33143" start="3448" end="3469" title="Seven Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Seven Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q778010" start="3647" end="3679" title="Battles of Lexington and Concord" label="Battles of Lexington and Concord"/>
<link wikidata="Q311726" start="3899" end="3930" title="Battle of the Plains of Abraham" label="Battle of the Plains of Abraham"/>
<link wikidata="Q6076228" start="4073" end="4091" title="Isaac Davis (soldier)" label="Isaac Davis&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q428586" start="4269" end="4295" title="shot heard round the world" label="shot heard round the world"/>
<link wikidata="Q64348981" start="4524" end="4535" title="Lucie Caroline Hager" label="Lucie Hager"/>
<link wikidata="Q2433090" start="4911" end="4935" title="Littleton, Massachusetts" label="Littleton, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q137073" start="5408" end="5415" title="Puritans" label="Puritan"/>
<link wikidata="Q54073" start="5663" end="5679" title="Middlesex County, Massachusetts" label="Middlesex County"/>
<link wikidata="Q332784" start="8421" end="8434" title="esker" label="glacial esker"/>
<link wikidata="Q17145175" start="9365" end="9370" title="Mamil" label="Mamil"/>
<link wikidata="Q4731541" start="10973" end="10987" title="Allen Bourbeau" label="Allen Bourbeau"/>
<link wikidata="Q913651" start="11021" end="11029" title="United States men&amp;#x27;s national ice hockey team" label="Team USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q838378" start="11037" end="11057" title="Ice hockey at the 1988 Winter Olympics" label="1988 Winter Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q115632269" start="11060" end="11074" title="Callahan Burke" label="Callahan Burke"/>
<link wikidata="Q206297" start="11115" end="11133" title="Colorado Avalanche" label="Colorado Avalanche"/>
<link wikidata="Q6381313" start="11136" end="11147" title="Ted Crowley" label="Ted Crowley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215892" start="11149" end="11152" title="National Hockey League" label="NHL"/>
<link wikidata="Q41466" start="11166" end="11172" title="ice hockey" label="hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q64348981" start="11207" end="11227" title="Lucie Caroline Hager" label="Lucie Caroline Hager"/>
<link wikidata="Q357166" start="11250" end="11260" title="Adil Najam" label="Adil Najam"/>
<link wikidata="Q171183" start="11297" end="11338" title="Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change" label="Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change"/>
<link wikidata="Q614859" start="11397" end="11409" title="Bill Rodgers (athlete)" label="Bill Rodgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q826038" start="11433" end="11448" title="Boston Marathon" label="Boston Marathon"/>
<link wikidata="Q752138" start="11453" end="11475" title="New York City Marathon" label="New York City Marathon"/>
<link wikidata="Q353407" start="11478" end="11492" title="Isadore Singer" label="Isadore Singer"/>
<link wikidata="Q188184" start="11526" end="11536" title="Abel Prize" label="Abel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q327437" start="11539" end="11550" title="Bob Sweeney (ice hockey)" label="Bob Sweeney"/>
<link wikidata="Q3275797" start="11605" end="11625" title="Madeline Amy Sweeney" label="Madeline Amy Sweeney"/>
<link wikidata="Q18356304" start="11628" end="11649" title="Fred Wesley Wentworth" label="Fred Wesley Wentworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5303540" start="11705" end="11713" title="Downtown Paterson" label="Downtown"/>
<link wikidata="Q138391" start="11714" end="11734" title="Paterson, New Jersey" label="Paterson, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186067" start="11737" end="11750" title="Jessamyn West (librarian)" label="Jessamyn West"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="116835" wikidata="Q1041805" url="?curid=116835" title="Carlisle, Massachusetts">
<text>Carlisle is a town located northwest of Boston in Middlesex County, Massachusetts, United States. As of the 2020 U.S. Census, the town had a population of 5,237.

==History==
English colonists first settled the area now incorporated as 
the town of Carlisle in 1651 on parcels of land of the neighboring towns of Acton, Billerica, Chelmsford and Concord. Carlisle became a district of Concord in 1780 and was incorporated as a town by an act of the legislature in 1805.

== Activities ==
Carlisle contains a library, a country store, a book store, a dentist&#x27;s office, a school (Carlisle Public School), and many residential homes. There are two ice cream stores: one of the four branches of Kimball Farms, and Great Brook Farm State Park which is home to the first robotic milking system in Massachusetts and serves ice cream made from the farm&#x27;s milk. Great Brook Farm is also the site of one of the premiere cross-country ski touring centers in New England. On the east end of town there is an auto body shop and the former (closed in 2012) Blue Jay Recording Studio, where artists such as the Platters, Aerosmith, Aimee Mann, Amy Grant, Alice Cooper, Boston, John Williams and the Boston Pops, Buckwheat Zydeco, Billy Joel, Lauryn Hill, Rihanna, Roy Orbison, k. d. lang, Pat Metheny, Yo Yo Ma, Carly Simon, the Pussycat Dolls, Genesis and Lady Gaga have recorded.

The town newspaper, the &quot;Carlisle Mosquito&quot;, has appeared as the weekly independent newspaper of the town since 1972. It is a non-profit publication distributed free to all town residents. The paper includes local news, announcements, and logs.

The Gleason Public Library is one of the 36 libraries in the Merrimack Valley Library Consortium. Gleason Public Library also contains a seismograph.

Cultural organizations include the Carlisle Chamber Orchestra, the Carlisle Community Chorus, and the Savoyard Light Opera Company.

Carlisle Old Home Day has been held for over 100 years on the weekend prior to the Fourth of July as a free public event with family-friendly games and activities.

==Geography==
Carlisle is located about south-southwest of Lowell and northwest of Boston. It borders the towns of Concord, Acton, Westford, Chelmsford, Billerica, and Bedford.

According to the United States Census Bureau, the town has a total area of , of which is land and (1.09%) is water.

Conservation land makes up about a quarter of the town&#x27;s area. Besides town-owned land overseen by the town&#x27;s Conservation Committee, Carlisle is home to the Carlisle Conservation Foundation, Great Brook Farm State Park, and a portion of the Great Meadows National Wildlife Refuge neighboring the Concord River.

== Demographics ==
As of the census of 2000, there were 4,717 people, 1,618 households, and 1,372 families residing in the town. The population density was . There were 1,655 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the town was 93.47% White, 0.17% African American, 0.06% Native American, 4.69% Asian, 0.04% Pacific Islander, 0.13% from other races, and 1.29% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 1.19% of the population.

There were 1,618 households, out of which 46.4% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 78.6% were married couples living together, 4.7% had a female householder with no husband present, and 15.2% were non-families. 11.4% of all households were made up of individuals, and 4.9% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.92 and the average family size was 3.18.

In the town, the population was spread out, with 30.6% under the age of 18, 3.4% from 18 to 24, 23.3% from 25 to 44, 34.3% from 45 to 64, and 8.4% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 42 years. For every 100 females, there were 98.3 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 96.4 males.

The median income for a household in the town $176,228 (Average household income is $244,544). The per capita income for the town was $87,470.

Carlisle maintains a minimum zoning law on new development.

==Climate==

In a typical year, Carlisle, Massachusetts temperatures fall below 50 °F (10 °C) for 195 days per year. Annual precipitation is typically 45.6 inches (115.8 centimeters) per year (high for the US) and snow covers the ground 62 days per year, or 17.0% of the year (high in the US). It may be helpful to understand the yearly precipitation by imagining nine straight days of moderate rain per year. The humidity is below 60% for approximately 25.4 days, or 7.0% of the year.

==Notable people==
* John Berman, journalist and CNN anchor
* Clairo, musician and recording artist

==Notes==

==External links==
*&quot;The Carlisle Mosquito&quot;, town newspaper
*Carlisle Conservation Foundation
*History of Middlesex County, Massachusetts, compiled by Samuel Adams Drake, published 1879. Volume 1, page 359 Carlisle by B.F.Heald.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1041805" start="0" end="8" title="Carlisle, Massachusetts" label="Carlisle"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="40" end="46" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q54073" start="50" end="66" title="Middlesex County, Massachusetts" label="Middlesex County"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="68" end="81" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="108" end="124" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 U.S. Census"/>
<link wikidata="Q344431" start="313" end="318" title="Acton, Massachusetts" label="Acton"/>
<link wikidata="Q403428" start="320" end="329" title="Billerica, Massachusetts" label="Billerica"/>
<link wikidata="Q2318398" start="331" end="341" title="Chelmsford, Massachusetts" label="Chelmsford"/>
<link wikidata="Q523240" start="346" end="353" title="Concord, Massachusetts" label="Concord"/>
<link wikidata="Q753905" start="1102" end="1114" title="the Platters" label="the Platters"/>
<link wikidata="Q126826" start="1116" end="1125" title="Aerosmith" label="Aerosmith"/>
<link wikidata="Q239587" start="1127" end="1137" title="Aimee Mann" label="Aimee Mann"/>
<link wikidata="Q464213" start="1139" end="1148" title="Amy Grant" label="Amy Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q332032" start="1150" end="1162" title="Alice Cooper" label="Alice Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q204289" start="1164" end="1170" title="Boston (band)" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q131285" start="1172" end="1185" title="John Williams" label="John Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q2263983" start="1190" end="1205" title="the Boston Pops" label="the Boston Pops"/>
<link wikidata="Q999968" start="1207" end="1223" title="Buckwheat Zydeco" label="Buckwheat Zydeco"/>
<link wikidata="Q194333" start="1225" end="1235" title="Billy Joel" label="Billy Joel"/>
<link wikidata="Q214226" start="1237" end="1248" title="Lauryn Hill" label="Lauryn Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q36844" start="1250" end="1257" title="Rihanna" label="Rihanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q188426" start="1259" end="1270" title="Roy Orbison" label="Roy Orbison"/>
<link wikidata="Q230454" start="1272" end="1282" title="k. d. lang" label="k. d. lang"/>
<link wikidata="Q213887" start="1284" end="1295" title="Pat Metheny" label="Pat Metheny"/>
<link wikidata="Q234891" start="1297" end="1305" title="Yo Yo Ma" label="Yo Yo Ma"/>
<link wikidata="Q181683" start="1307" end="1318" title="Carly Simon" label="Carly Simon"/>
<link wikidata="Q102385" start="1320" end="1338" title="the Pussycat Dolls" label="the Pussycat Dolls"/>
<link wikidata="Q151012" start="1340" end="1347" title="Genesis (band)" label="Genesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q19848" start="1352" end="1361" title="Lady Gaga" label="Lady Gaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q6820289" start="1695" end="1730" title="Merrimack Valley Library Consortium" label="Merrimack Valley Library Consortium"/>
<link wikidata="Q160567" start="1771" end="1782" title="Seismometer" label="seismograph"/>
<link wikidata="Q49162" start="2142" end="2148" title="Lowell, Massachusetts" label="Lowell"/>
<link wikidata="Q523240" start="2198" end="2205" title="Concord, Massachusetts" label="Concord"/>
<link wikidata="Q344431" start="2207" end="2212" title="Acton, Massachusetts" label="Acton"/>
<link wikidata="Q542640" start="2214" end="2222" title="Westford, Massachusetts" label="Westford"/>
<link wikidata="Q2318398" start="2224" end="2234" title="Chelmsford, Massachusetts" label="Chelmsford"/>
<link wikidata="Q403428" start="2236" end="2245" title="Billerica, Massachusetts" label="Billerica"/>
<link wikidata="Q665011" start="2251" end="2258" title="Bedford, Massachusetts" label="Bedford"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="2278" end="2305" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q16891861" start="2580" end="2607" title="Great Brook Farm State Park" label="Great Brook Farm State Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599556" start="2630" end="2668" title="Great Meadows National Wildlife Refuge" label="Great Meadows National Wildlife Refuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124056" start="2685" end="2698" title="Concord River" label="Concord River"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="2730" end="2736" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2958" end="2963" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2971" end="2987" title="African American (U.S. Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2995" end="3010" title="Native American (U.S. Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3018" end="3023" title="Asian (U.S. Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3031" end="3047" title="Pacific Islander (U.S. Census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3060" end="3071" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3107" end="3115" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3119" end="3125" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="3279" end="3294" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="4011" end="4028" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q21170450" start="4625" end="4636" title="John Berman" label="John Berman"/>
<link wikidata="Q52433533" start="4666" end="4672" title="Clairo" label="Clairo"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="116836" wikidata="Q2318398" url="?curid=116836" title="Chelmsford, Massachusetts">
<text>Chelmsford () is a town in Middlesex County, Massachusetts, United States. 

Chelmsford was incorporated in May 1655 by an act of the Massachusetts General Court. When Chelmsford was incorporated, its local economy was fueled by lumber mills, limestone quarries, kilns. In the 1700s, the Chelmsford militia played a role in the American Revolution at the Battle of Lexington and Concord and the Battle of Bunker Hill. The farming community of East Chelmsford was incorporated as Lowell in the 1820s; over the next decades it would go on to become one of the first large-scale factory towns in the United States because of its early role in the country&#x27;s Industrial Revolution. Chelmsford experienced a drastic increase in population between 1950 and 1970, coinciding with the connection of U.S. Route 3 in Lowell to Massachusetts Route 128 in the 1950s and the extension of U.S. Route 3 from Chelmsford to New Hampshire in the 1960s.

Chelmsford has a representative town meeting form of government. The town has one public high school—Chelmsford High School, which was ranked among the top 500 schools in the nation in 2015—as well as two middle schools, and four elementary schools. The charter middle school started in Chelmsford became a regional charter school (Innovation Academy Charter School) covering grades 5 through 12, now located in Tyngsborough. Chelmsford high school age students also have the option of attending the Nashoba Valley Technical High School, located in Westford. In 2011, Chelmsford was declared the 28th best place to live in the United States by &quot;Money&quot; magazine.

==History==
=== Early colonization ===
The Pennacook inhabited the area for thousands of years prior to European colonization. Settler-colonizers from the adjacent communities of Woburn and Concord founded Chelmsford in 1652. An act of the Massachusetts General Court in the last week of May 1655 incorporated Chelmsford as a town; it was named after Chelmsford, England. The nearby communities of Groton and Billerica were incorporated at the same time. Chelmsford originally contained the neighboring town of Westford, as well as parts of Carlisle, Tyngsborough and a large part of Lowell (formerly known as East Chelmsford). 

Successive Pennacook leaders Passaconaway and Wonalancet strove to maintain a friendship with the European settler-colonizers who founded Chelmsford within their territory. Despite this determinedly pro-peace stance, Chelmsford settlers became increasingly violent towards the tribe, often forcing the Pennacook to flee north temporarily or permanently. On one notable occasion, a handful of Pennacook who were too sick or elderly to flee with their kin remained behind and Chelmsford settlers burnt them alive in their dwelling. Eventually most Pennacook refugees permanently moved north to join relations in Odanak, but their descendants among the Abenaki First Nation and other tribes of the Wabanaki Confederacy continue to view Chelmsford as part of their ancestral and unceded homeland.

Several women of Chelmsford were suspected of being witches, such as Sarah (Hildreth) Byam and Martha Sparks. In 1691, Martha was held in the Boston Gaol for witchcraft, appeared in court, but was eventually set free after about a month. Some relate her freedom to the influence of the Chelmsford minister. 
In 1722 Chelmsford had imposed a fine for keeping strangers in town for more than 30 days. This was used for racial, religious, and political discrimination, as well as to keep out witchcraft. This practice and similar ones occurred until the Act of Settlement of 1793. Sarah (Hildreth) Byam was accused of being a witch under these circumstances.

The Chelmsford militia played a role in the American Revolution at the Battle of Lexington and Concord and the Battle of Bunker Hill. The town&#x27;s own Lieutenant Colonel Moses Parker fought on the hill. He was wounded and captured, and died from his wounds on July 4, 1775. The Lieutenant Colonel Moses Parker Middle School honors his name, and the lobby displays a representation of the man. He is depicted in the John Trumbull painting The Death of General Warren at the Battle of Bunker&#x27;s Hill, June 17, 1775 and in a painting in the Bunker Hill Museum. Captain Benjamin Walker of this town was also killed in this battle.

=== Later history ===
Ralph Waldo Emerson opened a school in Chelmsford in 1825, closing it after a few months to take over his brother&#x27;s school in Roxbury.

Chelmsford&#x27;s first school for the deaf was established in 1866, with a focus in oralism. There was a maximum capacity of eight students at a time. This pioneer school was eventually closed in order to make way for the formation of a larger deaf school in Rowley known as Clark School.

Both the Middlesex Canal and Middlesex Turnpike, major transportation routes, were built through Chelmsford in the first part of the 19th century.

Chelmsford was the birthplace of the Chelmsford Spring Co. in 1901, which later became the Chelmsford Ginger Ale Company, acquired by Canada Dry in 1928. The ginger ale plant, rebuilt in 1912 after a disastrous fire consumed the original plant, stood on Route 110 until its demolition in 1994. The Chelmsford brand of golden ginger ale continued to be manufactured by Canada Dry for decades. It is currently manufactured by Polar Beverages for DeMoulas/Market Basket supermarkets, based out of neighboring Tewksbury.

==Geography==

Chelmsford is in northern Middlesex County, bordered by the city of Lowell to the northeast. It is northwest of downtown Boston and southeast of Nashua, New Hampshire. The town is bordered by two sizable rivers: the Merrimack River to the northeast, and the Concord River at the town&#x27;s easternmost boundary.

According to the United States Census Bureau, the town has a total area of , of which are land and , or 3.04%, are water.

Chelmsford consists of several neighborhoods. In addition to the town center, smaller areas include South Chelmsford, West Chelmsford, East Chelmsford, North Chelmsford and the Westlands. North Chelmsford, an industrial village, is distinct from the rest of the town to the extent that it has many of its own town services. 

==Climate==

Like much of the rest of Massachusetts, Chelmsford has a humid continental climate according to the Köppen climate classification. Summers are typically warm and humid, while winters tend to be cold, windy, and snowy. The level of precipitation is roughly consistent throughout the year.

In a typical year, Chelmsford, Massachusetts temperatures fall below 50°F for 195 days per year. Annual precipitation is typically 44.1 inches per year (high for the US) and snow covers the ground 62 days per year, or 17.0% of the year (high in the US). It may be helpful to understand the yearly precipitation by imagining nine straight days of moderate rain per year. The humidity is below 60% for approximately 25.4 days, or 7.0% of the year.

==Demographics==
As of the US census of 2010, there were 33,802 people, 13,313 households, and 9,328 families residing in the town. The racial makeup of the town was 88.6% White, 1.1% African American, 0.1% Native American, 8.4% Asian, 0.4% from other races, and 1.4% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 2% of the population.

===Crime===

As of 2008, Chelmsford had a violent crime rate of 132 incidents per 100,000 people, compared to a rate of 449 in Massachusetts as a whole and 455 nationwide. The town had a property crime rate of 1,904 incidents per 100,000 people in 2008, compared to a rate of 2,400 for the state and 3,213 nationwide. Chelmsford has one police station located near McCarthy Middle School. The , $7.19-million dollar structure began operation in 2003.

==Government==
The town uses a representative town meeting model with a Select Board overseeing the operation of the town. From its incorporation until 1989, the town was governed by an open town meeting. Reporting to the Select Board are the town manager, town counsel, and town accountant. The town manager oversees the public employees and serves as Chief Executive Officer. The current town manager is Paul Cohen. Other elected boards include the Planning Board, School Committee, Library Trustees, Cemetery Commission, Board of Health, Sewer Commission and the Zoning Board of Appeals.

 Chelmsford is represented in the Massachusetts Senate by Michael J. Barrett. The town sends four delegates to the Massachusetts House of Representatives, each of whom represent one or more of Chelmsford&#x27;s nine precincts. Tami Gouveia is the state representative for precincts one and nine; Thomas Golden Jr., precincts two, three, and eight; James Arciero, precincts eight, five and seven; and Vanna Howard, precinct four.

The Fay A. Rotenberg School, a juvenile correctional facility for girls operated by the Robert F. Kennedy Children&#x27;s Action Corps, Inc. on behalf of the Massachusetts Department of Youth Services, first opened in North Chelmsford in 1982; this facility had 16 beds. In 2006 the school moved to its current location in Westborough.

==Education==

The Chelmsford Public Schools district serves students in pre-Kindergarten through twelfth grade. Data below are from Massachusetts Department of Elementary and Secondary Education (ESE); class sizes are for 2008–2009 school year.

All expenditures considered, the Chelmsford public schools district spent $10,070 per pupil as of 2008, which was lower than the state average of $12,449. This was an increase of almost $400 from Chelmsford per-pupil spending in 2007. As of 2008 per-pupil allocation, $3,937 went to classroom and specialist teachers, $333 to administration, and $185 to instructional materials, equipment and technology.

In 2009, Chelmsford High School ranked 66th out of 150 public high schools considered by &quot;Boston Magazine&quot;. The ranking took into account many statistics associated with quality of education and academic performance, including the school&#x27;s 14.5:1 student–teacher ratio. In the 2006–2007 school year, the average SAT scores for Chelmsford High School were 527 in the reading section, 519 in writing, and 535 in math. Chelmsford High School performed significantly better than the state average in the English, math and science portions of the 2009 Grade 10 MCAS tests, scoring 89, 87 and 77 out of 100, respectively.

==Historic places in Chelmsford==
*Chelmsford Center Historic District
*Fiske House (1798)
*Hildreth-Robbins House (1742)
*Middlesex Canal (1802)
*Old Chelmsford Garrison House (1691), now a museum
*Oliver Hutchins House (1820)
*Barrett-Byam Homestead (1663)-home of the Chelmsford Historical Society
*North Town Hall (1853)

==Transportation==

Chelmsford is located at the intersection of the major US highways of I-495 and U.S. 3. Also found in Chelmsford are state routes 3A, 4, 27, 40, 110, and 129, making it a significant junction of roadways. The heart of the town center is Central Square - the junction of routes 4, 110, the end of 129, and Westford Street.

Chelmsford is home to the former Drum Hill Rotary. This rotary was the cause of many accidents that occurred due to its small overall size and ability for vehicles to gain speed. It formed the intersection of U.S. Route 3 (exit 32), Route 4, Drum Hill Road, and Westford Road. The rotary was demolished in 2003. It was replaced with a four intersection square with traffic lights, and is now called Drum Hill Square. This was part of a widening project for U.S. Route 3 between Interstate 95 (Route 128) and the New Hampshire state line.

Freight travels daily through Chelmsford over the tracks of the historic Stony Brook Railroad. The line currently serves as a major corridor of Pan Am Railways&#x27; District 3 which connects New Hampshire and Maine with western Massachusetts, Vermont, and New York.

The Bruce Freeman Rail Trail runs through Chelmsford, including the Central Square intersection.

The LRTA bus routes 15, 16 and 17 connect Chelmsford to the Lowell train station on the MBTA Commuter Rail Lowell Line.

==Notable people==

* Josiah Gardner Abbott (1814–1891), born in Chelmsford, politician
* Keith Aucoin (born 1978), former NHL player
* Jeff Bauman (born 1986), author and Boston Marathon bombing survivor
* Phil Bourque (born 1962), former NHL player
* Gerry Callahan, sports columnist and radio host
* Dawn Clements (1958–2018), artist
* George Condo (born 1957), painter
* Bill Cooke (born 1951), former NFL player
* Dan Curran (born 1976), former NFL player
* John Call Dalton (1825–1889) physiologist, born in Chelmsford
* Edward DeSaulnier (1921–1989), state legislator and judge
* Gururaj Deshpande, venture capitalist and entrepreneur
* Jack Eichel (born 1996), NHL player
* Bridget Richardson Fletcher (1726–1770), hymnwriter and poet
* Steve Hunt (born 1958), jazz pianist and composer
* Ulysses John &quot;Tony&quot; Lupien (1917–2004), Major League Baseball player and college baseball coach
* Jon Morris (born 1966), former NHL player
* Colleen Mullen (born 1980), college basketball coach and former player
* Sandra Newman (born 1965), writer
* Benjamin Pierce (1757–1839), born in Chelmsford, Governor of New Hampshire and the father of U.S. president Franklin Pierce
* Jeffrey Snover, Microsoft Technical Fellow and inventor of PowerShell
* Peter Torkildsen (born 1958), former chairman of the Massachusetts Republican Party and former congressman
* John Traphagan (born 1961), author and professor of religious studies and anthropology
* Kristen Wilson (born 1969), actress

==See also==
* Islamic Society of Greater Lowell

==References==

==Further reading==
*&quot;1871 Atlas of Massachusetts&quot;. by Wall &amp; Gray. Map of Massachusetts. Map of Middlesex County.
*&quot;History of Chelmsford, Massachusetts&quot;, by Wilson Waters, Henry Spaulding Perham, published 1917, 893 pages.&lt;br&gt;Two versions of &quot;History of Chelmsford, Massachusetts&quot; are online: Page images and HTML
* &quot;History of Middlesex County, Massachusetts&quot;, Volume 1 (A-H), Volume 2 (L-W) compiled by Samuel Adams Drake, published 1879–1880. 572 and 505 pages. Chelmsford article by Frederick P. Hill in volume 1 page 367–380.
* Money Magazine – Top 100 Places to Live

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2318398" start="0" end="10" title="Chelmsford, Massachusetts" label="Chelmsford"/>
<link wikidata="Q54073" start="27" end="58" title="Middlesex County, Massachusetts" label="Middlesex County, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1453540" start="134" end="161" title="Massachusetts General Court" label="Massachusetts General Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q505213" start="229" end="240" title="lumber mill" label="lumber mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q23757" start="243" end="252" title="limestone" label="limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q188040" start="253" end="261" title="Quarry" label="quarries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1724341" start="263" end="267" title="kiln" label="kiln"/>
<link wikidata="Q192769" start="328" end="347" title="American Revolution" label="American Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q778010" start="355" end="386" title="Battle of Lexington and Concord" label="Battle of Lexington and Concord"/>
<link wikidata="Q334029" start="395" end="416" title="Battle of Bunker Hill" label="Battle of Bunker Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q4012861" start="576" end="588" title="mill town" label="factory town"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269" start="659" end="680" title="Industrial Revolution" label="Industrial Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q406241" start="795" end="807" title="U.S. Route 3 in Massachusetts" label="U.S. Route 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638847" start="821" end="844" title="Massachusetts Route 128" label="Massachusetts Route 128"/>
<link wikidata="Q759" start="911" end="924" title="New Hampshire" label="New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314261" start="957" end="984" title="representative town meeting" label="representative town meeting"/>
<link wikidata="Q5089961" start="1041" end="1063" title="Chelmsford High School" label="Chelmsford High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q6036161" start="1272" end="1290" title="Innovation Academy" label="Innovation Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q825316" start="1590" end="1595" title="Money (magazine)" label="Money"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761546" start="1656" end="1665" title="Pennacook" label="Pennacook"/>
<link wikidata="Q54174" start="1792" end="1798" title="Woburn, Massachusetts" label="Woburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q523240" start="1803" end="1810" title="Concord, Massachusetts" label="Concord"/>
<link wikidata="Q210985" start="1964" end="1974" title="Chelmsford" label="Chelmsford"/>
<link wikidata="Q3776991" start="2011" end="2017" title="Groton, Massachusetts" label="Groton"/>
<link wikidata="Q403428" start="2022" end="2031" title="Billerica, Massachusetts" label="Billerica"/>
<link wikidata="Q542640" start="2124" end="2132" title="Westford, Massachusetts" label="Westford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041805" start="2154" end="2162" title="Carlisle, Massachusetts" label="Carlisle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577621" start="2164" end="2176" title="Tyngsborough, Massachusetts" label="Tyngsborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q49162" start="2197" end="2203" title="Lowell, Massachusetts" label="Lowell"/>
<link wikidata="Q259745" start="3089" end="3096" title="Witchcraft" label="witches"/>
<link wikidata="Q4947917" start="3179" end="3190" title="Boston Gaol (Massachusetts)" label="Boston Gaol"/>
<link wikidata="Q192769" start="3738" end="3757" title="American Revolution" label="American Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q778010" start="3765" end="3796" title="Battle of Lexington and Concord" label="Battle of Lexington and Concord"/>
<link wikidata="Q334029" start="3805" end="3826" title="Battle of Bunker Hill" label="Battle of Bunker Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q369263" start="4112" end="4125" title="John Trumbull" label="John Trumbull"/>
<link wikidata="Q7729430" start="4135" end="4213" title="The Death of General Warren at the Battle of Bunker&amp;#x27;s Hill, June 17, 1775" label="The Death of General Warren at the Battle of Bunker&amp;#x27;s Hill, June 17, 1775"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009561" start="4239" end="4257" title="Bunker Hill Monument" label="Bunker Hill Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q48226" start="4351" end="4370" title="Ralph Waldo Emerson" label="Ralph Waldo Emerson"/>
<link wikidata="Q20138" start="4482" end="4489" title="Roxbury, Massachusetts" label="Roxbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411862" start="4577" end="4584" title="oralism" label="oralism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302509" start="4752" end="4758" title="Rowley, Massachusetts" label="Rowley"/>
<link wikidata="Q28457890" start="4768" end="4780" title="Clark School (Rowley, Massachusetts)" label="Clark School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931907" start="4792" end="4807" title="Middlesex Canal" label="Middlesex Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4707657" start="4812" end="4830" title="Middlesex Turnpike (Massachusetts)" label="Middlesex Turnpike"/>
<link wikidata="Q584215" start="5065" end="5075" title="Canada Dry" label="Canada Dry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162763" start="5089" end="5099" title="ginger ale" label="ginger ale"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209020" start="5355" end="5370" title="Polar Beverages" label="Polar Beverages"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079198" start="5375" end="5397" title="DeMoulas/Market Basket" label="DeMoulas/Market Basket"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021588" start="5437" end="5446" title="Tewksbury, Massachusetts" label="Tewksbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q49162" start="5532" end="5538" title="Lowell, Massachusetts" label="Lowell"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="5585" end="5591" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q48274" start="5609" end="5630" title="Nashua, New Hampshire" label="Nashua, New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q517787" start="5680" end="5695" title="Merrimack River" label="Merrimack River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124056" start="5722" end="5735" title="Concord River" label="Concord River"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="5795" end="5822" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q7054793" start="6053" end="6069" title="North Chelmsford, Massachusetts" label="North Chelmsford"/>
<link wikidata="Q10856115" start="6297" end="6322" title="humid continental climate" label="humid continental climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="6340" end="6369" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen climate classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="7003" end="7020" title="2010 United States Census" label="US census of 2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="7148" end="7153" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="7160" end="7176" title="African American (U.S. Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="7183" end="7198" title="Native American (U.S. Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="7205" end="7210" title="Asian (U.S. Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="7222" end="7233" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="7268" end="7276" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="7280" end="7286" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q861951" start="7664" end="7678" title="police station" label="police station"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314261" start="7810" end="7837" title="representative town meeting" label="representative town meeting"/>
<link wikidata="Q455752" start="7965" end="7982" title="open town meeting" label="open town meeting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494665" start="8405" end="8425" title="Massachusetts Senate" label="Massachusetts Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q6831364" start="8429" end="8447" title="Michael J. Barrett" label="Michael J. Barrett"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494460" start="8486" end="8524" title="Massachusetts House of Representatives" label="Massachusetts House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q3301455" start="8587" end="8596" title="electoral precinct" label="precincts"/>
<link wikidata="Q63449505" start="8598" end="8610" title="Tami Gouveia" label="Tami Gouveia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7790087" start="8667" end="8684" title="Thomas Golden Jr." label="Thomas Golden Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q6128817" start="8719" end="8732" title="James Arciero" label="James Arciero"/>
<link wikidata="Q104179049" start="8771" end="8783" title="Vanna Howard" label="Vanna Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q6784255" start="8959" end="9001" title="Massachusetts Department of Youth Services" label="Massachusetts Department of Youth Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q7054793" start="9019" end="9035" title="North Chelmsford, Massachusetts" label="North Chelmsford"/>
<link wikidata="Q386170" start="9124" end="9135" title="Westborough, Massachusetts" label="Westborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q4947713" start="9886" end="9901" title="Boston Magazine" label="Boston Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595370" start="10053" end="10074" title="student–teacher ratio" label="student–teacher ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q334113" start="10118" end="10121" title="SAT" label="SAT"/>
<link wikidata="Q6784228" start="10362" end="10366" title="Massachusetts Comprehensive Assessment System" label="MCAS"/>
<link wikidata="Q5089953" start="10458" end="10493" title="Chelmsford Center Historic District" label="Chelmsford Center Historic District"/>
<link wikidata="Q5455185" start="10495" end="10506" title="Fiske House" label="Fiske House"/>
<link wikidata="Q5761729" start="10515" end="10537" title="Hildreth-Robbins House" label="Hildreth-Robbins House"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931907" start="10546" end="10561" title="Middlesex Canal" label="Middlesex Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7083645" start="10570" end="10599" title="Old Chelmsford Garrison House" label="Old Chelmsford Garrison House"/>
<link wikidata="Q7087612" start="10622" end="10643" title="Oliver Hutchins House" label="Oliver Hutchins House"/>
<link wikidata="Q4863414" start="10652" end="10674" title="Barrett-Byam Homestead" label="Barrett-Byam Homestead"/>
<link wikidata="Q22073862" start="10725" end="10740" title="North Town Hall" label="North Town Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1671364" start="10839" end="10844" title="Interstate 495 (Massachusetts)" label="I-495"/>
<link wikidata="Q406241" start="10849" end="10855" title="U.S. Route 3" label="U.S. 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q2078264" start="10899" end="10901" title="Route 3A (northeastern Massachusetts)" label="3A"/>
<link wikidata="Q2483949" start="10903" end="10904" title="Route 4 (Massachusetts)" label="4"/>
<link wikidata="Q2483993" start="10906" end="10908" title="Massachusetts Route 27" label="27"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484019" start="10910" end="10912" title="Route 40 (Massachusetts)" label="40"/>
<link wikidata="Q2078373" start="10914" end="10917" title="Route 110 (Massachusetts)" label="110"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484148" start="10923" end="10926" title="Route 129 (Massachusetts)" label="129"/>
<link wikidata="Q1671381" start="11570" end="11583" title="Interstate 95 in Massachusetts" label="Interstate 95"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638847" start="11585" end="11594" title="Route 128 (Massachusetts)" label="Route 128"/>
<link wikidata="Q759" start="11604" end="11617" title="New Hampshire" label="New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q954927" start="11631" end="11638" title="Freight train" label="Freight"/>
<link wikidata="Q7619505" start="11704" end="11724" title="Stony Brook Railroad" label="Stony Brook Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q7834916" start="11763" end="11771" title="Transport corridor" label="corridor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2048811" start="11775" end="11790" title="Pan Am Railways" label="Pan Am Railways"/>
<link wikidata="Q724" start="11841" end="11846" title="Maine" label="Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="11860" end="11873" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q16551" start="11875" end="11882" title="Vermont" label="Vermont"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="11888" end="11896" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q4977508" start="11903" end="11927" title="Bruce Freeman Rail Trail" label="Bruce Freeman Rail Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q2078562" start="12001" end="12005" title="Lowell Regional Transit Authority" label="LRTA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2078610" start="12057" end="12077" title="Lowell (MBTA station)" label="Lowell train station"/>
<link wikidata="Q172457" start="12085" end="12103" title="MBTA Commuter Rail" label="MBTA Commuter Rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q172536" start="12104" end="12115" title="Lowell Line" label="Lowell Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q6869444" start="12140" end="12161" title="Josiah Gardner Abbott" label="Josiah Gardner Abbott"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661349" start="12208" end="12220" title="Keith Aucoin" label="Keith Aucoin"/>
<link wikidata="Q32999532" start="12254" end="12265" title="Jeff Bauman" label="Jeff Bauman"/>
<link wikidata="Q704304" start="12325" end="12337" title="Phil Bourque" label="Phil Bourque"/>
<link wikidata="Q5552673" start="12371" end="12385" title="Gerry Callahan" label="Gerry Callahan"/>
<link wikidata="Q19957026" start="12421" end="12434" title="Dawn Clements" label="Dawn Clements"/>
<link wikidata="Q705880" start="12457" end="12469" title="George Condo" label="George Condo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4908551" start="12493" end="12503" title="Bill Cooke (defensive end)" label="Bill Cooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q5213329" start="12537" end="12547" title="Dan Curran" label="Dan Curran"/>
<link wikidata="Q1699523" start="12581" end="12597" title="John Call Dalton" label="John Call Dalton"/>
<link wikidata="Q89873750" start="12645" end="12662" title="Edward DeSaulnier" label="Edward DeSaulnier"/>
<link wikidata="Q5620543" start="12705" end="12722" title="Gururaj Deshpande" label="Gururaj Deshpande"/>
<link wikidata="Q17285387" start="12762" end="12773" title="Jack Eichel" label="Jack Eichel"/>
<link wikidata="Q55720326" start="12800" end="12827" title="Bridget Richardson Fletcher" label="Bridget Richardson Fletcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q7612898" start="12863" end="12873" title="Steve Hunt" label="Steve Hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7822832" start="12915" end="12951" title="Tony Lupien" label="Ulysses John &amp;quot;Tony&amp;quot; Lupien"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="12965" end="12986" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1702811" start="13023" end="13033" title="Jon Morris (ice hockey)" label="Jon Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q54627279" start="13067" end="13081" title="Colleen Mullen" label="Colleen Mullen"/>
<link wikidata="Q16210295" start="13140" end="13153" title="Sandra Newman" label="Sandra Newman"/>
<link wikidata="Q817649" start="13176" end="13191" title="Benjamin Pierce (governor)" label="Benjamin Pierce"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589687" start="13225" end="13250" title="Governor of New Hampshire" label="Governor of New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q12312" start="13284" end="13299" title="Franklin Pierce" label="Franklin Pierce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1686491" start="13302" end="13316" title="Jeffrey Snover" label="Jeffrey Snover"/>
<link wikidata="Q840410" start="13361" end="13371" title="PowerShell" label="PowerShell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1605716" start="13374" end="13390" title="Peter Torkildsen" label="Peter Torkildsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6784337" start="13427" end="13457" title="Massachusetts Republican Party" label="Massachusetts Republican Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q6261136" start="13483" end="13497" title="John Traphagan" label="John Traphagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q432979" start="13572" end="13586" title="Kristen Wilson" label="Kristen Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6082624" start="13624" end="13657" title="Islamic Society of Greater Lowell" label="Islamic Society of Greater Lowell"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="116837" wikidata="Q5139342" url="?curid=116837" title="Cochituate, Massachusetts">
<text>Cochituate (; ) is a census-designated place (CDP) in the town of Wayland in Middlesex County, Massachusetts, United States. The population was 6,927 at the 2020 census, out of 13,943 in the entire town of Wayland.

==Geography==
Cochituate is located in southwestern Middlesex County at , in the southern part of the town of Wayland. The southern border of the community is the Natick town line, except at Cochituate&#x27;s southeastern corner, which extends into the northeastern corner of Natick. Cochituate is bordered to the west by the city of Framingham.

Massachusetts Route 27 passes through Cochituate as its Main Street, leading north to Wayland Center and south the same distance to Natick Center. Massachusetts Route 30 (Commonwealth Road) passes through the southern part of Cochituate, leading east to Newton and west to the center of Framingham. Interstate 90, the Massachusetts Turnpike crosses the southern part of Cochituate in two places; the closest access is Exit 117, to the west in Framingham.

According to the United States Census Bureau, the Cochituate CDP has a total area of , of which are land and , or 8.57%, are water. It is home to Lake Cochituate and Dudley Pond. Both are used by residents year round; in the summer for boating and fishing, and in the winter for ice fishing. There is a beach where Waylanders can pay for a membership. Lake Cochituate, which consists of four ponds connected by shallow, narrow waterways, is located in the towns of Natick, Framingham, and Wayland, west of Boston. Lake Cochituate lies in the Sudbury River Basin; &quot;Cochituate&quot; means &quot;swift river&quot; in the Algonquin language (Wilbur, 1978) and refers to Cochituate Brook (Schaller and Prescott, 1998), which connects the lake to the Sudbury River. The Sudbury River, via the Concord River, is part of the larger Merrimack River watershed.

==Demographics==
As of the census of 2000, there were 6,768 people, 2,449 households, and 1,851 families residing in the CDP. The population density was . There were 2,516 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the CDP was 90.90% White, 0.93% Black or African American, 0.09% Native American, 6.24% Asian, 0.06% Pacific Islander, 0.24% from other races, and 1.55% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 1.00% of the population.

There were 2,449 households, out of which 38.5% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 64.9% were married couples living together, 8.5% had a female householder with no husband present, and 24.4% were non-families. 19.7% of all households were made up of individuals, and 9.0% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.70 and the average family size was 3.14.

In the CDP, the population was spread out, with 27.2% under the age of 18, 3.5% from 18 to 24, 25.5% from 25 to 44, 27.8% from 45 to 64, and 16.0% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 42 years. For every 100 females, there were 91.3 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 85.8 males.

The median income for a household in the CDP was $89,012, and the median income for a family was $101,362. Males had a median income of $71,500 versus $50,223 for females. The per capita income for the CDP was $42,752. About 1.8% of families and 2.2% of the population were below the poverty line, including 1.1% of those under age 18 and 4.3% of those age 65 or over.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5139342" start="0" end="10" title="Cochituate, Massachusetts" label="Cochituate"/>
<link wikidata="Q498162" start="21" end="44" title="census-designated place" label="census-designated place"/>
<link wikidata="Q2049231" start="66" end="73" title="Wayland, Massachusetts" label="Wayland"/>
<link wikidata="Q54073" start="77" end="93" title="Middlesex County, Massachusetts" label="Middlesex County"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="95" end="108" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="157" end="168" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q367070" start="379" end="385" title="Natick, Massachusetts" label="Natick"/>
<link wikidata="Q988568" start="550" end="560" title="Framingham, Massachusetts" label="Framingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q2483993" start="563" end="585" title="Massachusetts Route 27" label="Massachusetts Route 27"/>
<link wikidata="Q7975916" start="649" end="663" title="Wayland Center Historic District" label="Wayland Center"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="695" end="708" title="Natick, Massachusetts#Natick Center" label="Natick Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q2483999" start="710" end="732" title="Massachusetts Route 30" label="Massachusetts Route 30"/>
<link wikidata="Q49196" start="817" end="823" title="Newton, Massachusetts" label="Newton"/>
<link wikidata="Q94958" start="862" end="875" title="Interstate 90" label="Interstate 90"/>
<link wikidata="Q731271" start="881" end="903" title="Massachusetts Turnpike" label="Massachusetts Turnpike"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="1036" end="1063" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q6475418" start="1165" end="1180" title="Lake Cochituate" label="Lake Cochituate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5311948" start="1185" end="1196" title="Dudley Pond, Cochituate Massachusetts" label="Dudley Pond"/>
<link wikidata="Q1313678" start="1298" end="1309" title="ice fishing" label="ice fishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="1525" end="1531" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q2363043" start="1561" end="1574" title="Sudbury River" label="Sudbury River"/>
<link wikidata="Q28092" start="1642" end="1660" title="Algonquin language" label="Algonquin language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124056" start="1811" end="1824" title="Concord River" label="Concord River"/>
<link wikidata="Q517787" start="1848" end="1863" title="Merrimack River" label="Merrimack River"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="1903" end="1909" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="2006" end="2024" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2129" end="2134" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2142" end="2147" title="African American (U.S. Census)" label="Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2151" end="2167" title="Race (United States Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2175" end="2190" title="Native American (U.S. Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2198" end="2203" title="Asian (U.S. Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2211" end="2227" title="Pacific Islander (U.S. Census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2240" end="2251" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2287" end="2295" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2299" end="2305" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="2459" end="2474" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="3268" end="3285" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="3376" end="3388" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="116838" wikidata="Q523240" url="?curid=116838" title="Concord, Massachusetts">
<text>Concord () is a town in Middlesex County, Massachusetts, United States. In the 2020 census, the town population was 18,491. The United States Census Bureau considers Concord part of Greater Boston. The town center is near where the Sudbury and Assabet rivers join to form the Concord River.

The area that became the town of Concord was originally known as Musketaquid, an Algonquian word for &quot;grassy plain.&quot; Concord was established in 1635 by a group of English settlers; by 1775, the population had grown to 1,400. As dissension between colonists in North America and the British crown intensified, 700 troops were sent to confiscate militia ordnance stored at Concord on April 19, 1775. The ensuing conflict, the battles of Lexington and Concord, were the incidents (including the shot heard round the world) that triggered the American Revolutionary War.

A rich literary community developed in Concord during the mid-19th century, centered around Ralph Waldo Emerson. Emerson&#x27;s circle included Nathaniel Hawthorne, Louisa May Alcott and Henry David Thoreau. Major works written in Concord during this period include Alcott&#x27;s novel &quot;Little Women&quot;, Emerson&#x27;s essay &quot;Self-Reliance&quot;, and Thoreau&#x27;s &quot;Walden&quot; and &quot;Civil Disobedience&quot;. In this era, the now-ubiquitous Concord grape was developed in Concord by Ephraim Wales Bull. Major grape juice producer Welch&#x27;s is still headquartered there to this day.

In the 20th century, Concord developed into an affluent Boston suburb and tourist destination, drawing visitors to the Old North Bridge, Orchard House and Walden Pond. The town retains its literary culture and is home to notable authors, including Doris Kearns Goodwin, Alan Lightman and Gregory Maguire. Concord is also notable for its progressive and environmentalist politics, becoming in 2012 the first community in the United States to ban single-serving PET bottles.

==History==
===Prehistory and founding===

The area which became the town of Concord was originally known as &quot;Musketaquid&quot;, situated at the confluence of the Sudbury and Assabet rivers. The name was an Algonquian word for &quot;grassy plain&quot;, fitting the area&#x27;s low-lying marshes and kettle holes. Native Americans had cultivated corn crops there; the rivers were rich with fish and the land was lush and arable. The area was largely depopulated in 1633 by an epidemic of smallpox, a disease likely to have been introduced to the New World by European explorers and settlers.

In 1635, a group of English settlers led by Rev. Peter Bulkley and Major Simon Willard received a land grant from the General Court and negotiated a land purchase with the local indigenous tribes. Bulkeley was an influential religious leader who &quot;carried a good number of planters with him into the woods&quot;; Willard was a canny trader who spoke the Algonquian language and had gained the trust of Native Americans. They exchanged wampum, hatchets, knives, cloth, and other useful items for the purchase from Squaw Sachem of Mistick, which formed the basis of the new town, called &quot;Concord&quot; in appreciation of the peaceful acquisition.

===Battles of Lexington and Concord===
The battles of Lexington and Concord were the first military engagements of the American Revolutionary War. On April 19, 1775, 700 British Army troops led by Lieutenant-Colonel Francis Smith marched from Boston to Concord to confiscate a cache of arms stored in the town. Unbeknownst to them, Patriot leaders had moved most of the cache elsewhere. 150 Patriot minutemen from local towns, who had been forewarned of the Army&#x27;s march by Samuel Prescott on April 18, quickly mustered and confronted the British in Lexington. Though who fired the first shot is unknown, a firefight broke out and the British fired a volley at the Americans before dispersing them with a bayonet charge, killing eight. The British proceeded into Concord and dispersed into company-sized formations to search for the cache. At 11:00am, 400 minutemen engaged 100 British troops at the Old North Bridge, leading to a number of casualties on both sides and forcing them to fall back and rejoin the Army&#x27;s main force.

After the British completed their search for the cache in Concord, they marched back to Boston, but were constantly attacked by minutemen in hit-and-run attacks, suffering more casualties before reaching Charlestown, Boston. The minutemen then blockaded the narrow land accesses to Charlestown, initiating the siege of Boston. Poet Ralph Waldo Emerson subsequently described the shot fired by the minutemen at the Old North Bridge in his 1837 poem &quot;Concord Hymn&quot; as the &quot;shot heard round the world&quot;. In 1894, the Lexington Historical Society petitioned the Massachusetts State Legislature to proclaim April 19 &quot;Lexington Day&quot;; Concord countered with &quot;Concord Day&quot;. Governor Frederic T. Greenhalge opted for a compromise, proclaiming the day as Patriots&#x27; Day. In April 1975, Concord hosted a bicentennial celebration of the battle, featuring an address at the Old North Bridge by President Gerald Ford.

===Literary history===

Concord has a remarkably rich literary history centered in the 19th century around Ralph Waldo Emerson (1803–1882), who moved there in 1835 and quickly became its most prominent citizen. A successful lecturer and philosopher, Emerson had deep roots in the town: his father, Rev. William Emerson (1769–1811), grew up in Concord before becoming an eminent Boston minister, and his grandfather, William Emerson Sr., witnessed the battle at the North Bridge from his house, and later became a chaplain in the Continental Army. Emerson was at the center of a group of like-minded Transcendentalists living in Concord. Among them were the author Nathaniel Hawthorne (1804–1864) and the philosopher Amos Bronson Alcott (1799–1888), the father of Louisa May Alcott (1832–1888). A native Concordian, Henry David Thoreau (1817–1862) was another notable member of Emerson&#x27;s circle. This substantial collection of literary talent in one small town led Henry James to dub Concord &quot;the biggest little place in America.&quot;

Among the products of this intellectually stimulating environment were Emerson&#x27;s many essays, including &quot;Self-Reliance&quot; (1841), Louisa May Alcott&#x27;s novel &quot;Little Women&quot; (1868), and Hawthorne&#x27;s story collection &quot;Mosses from an Old Manse&quot; (1846). Thoreau famously lived in a small cabin near Walden Pond, where he wrote &quot;Walden&quot; (1854). After being imprisoned in the Concord jail for refusing to pay taxes in political protest against slavery and the Mexican–American War, Thoreau penned the influential essay &quot;Resistance to Civil Government&quot;, popularly known as &quot;Civil Disobedience&quot; (1849). Evidencing their strong political beliefs through actions, Thoreau and many of his neighbors served as station masters and agents on the Underground Railroad.

The Wayside, a house on Lexington Road, has been home to several authors. It was occupied by scientist John Winthrop (1714–1779) when Harvard College was temporarily moved to Concord during the Revolutionary War. The Wayside was later the home of the Alcott family (who referred to it as &quot;Hillside&quot;); the Alcotts sold it to Hawthorne in 1852, and the family moved into the adjacent Orchard House in 1858. Hawthorne dubbed the house &quot;The Wayside&quot; and lived there until his death. The house was purchased in 1883 by Boston publisher Daniel Lothrop and his wife, Harriett, who wrote the Five Little Peppers series and other children&#x27;s books under the pen name Margaret Sidney. Today, The Wayside and the Orchard House are both museums. Emerson, Thoreau, Hawthorne, and the Alcotts are buried on Authors&#x27; Ridge in Concord&#x27;s Sleepy Hollow Cemetery.

The 20th-century composer Charles Ives wrote his &quot;Concord Sonata&quot; () as a series of impressionistic portraits of literary figures associated with the town. Concord maintains a lively literary culture to this day; notable authors who have called the town home in recent years include Doris Kearns Goodwin, Alan Lightman, Robert B. Parker, and Gregory Maguire.

===Concord grape===
In 1849, Ephraim Wales Bull developed the now-ubiquitous Concord grape at his home on Lexington Road, where the original vine still grows. Welch&#x27;s, the first company to sell grape juice, maintains a headquarters in Concord. The Boston-born Bull developed the Concord grape by experimenting with seeds from some of the native species. On his farm outside Concord, down the road from the Emerson, Thoreau, Hawthorne and Alcott homesteads, he planted some 22,000 seedlings before producing the ideal grape. Early ripening, to escape the killing northern frosts, but with a rich, full-bodied flavor, the hardy Concord grape thrives where European cuttings had failed to survive. In 1853, Bull felt ready to put the first bunches of Concord grapes before the public and won a prize at the Boston Horticultural Society Exhibition. From these early arbors, the fame of Bull&#x27;s (&quot;the father of the Concord grape&quot;) Concord grape spread worldwide, bringing him up to $1,000 a cutting, but he died a relatively poor man. The inscription on his tombstone reads, &quot;He sowed—others reaped.&quot;

===Plastic bottle ban===
On September 5, 2012, Concord became the first community in the United States to approve a ban on the sale of water in single-serving plastic bottles. The law banned the sale of PET bottles of or less starting January 1, 2013. The ban provoked national controversy. An editorial in the &quot;Los Angeles Times&quot; characterized the ban as &quot;born of convoluted reasoning&quot; and &quot;wrongheaded.&quot; Some residents believed the ban would do little to affect the sales of bottled water, which was still highly accessible in the surrounding areas, and that it restricted consumers&#x27; freedom of choice. Opponents also considered the ban to unfairly target one product in particular, when other, less healthy alternatives such as soda and fruit juice were still readily available in bottled form. Nonetheless, subsequent efforts to repeal the ban have failed in open town meetings. An effort to repeal Concord&#x27;s ban on the sale of plastic water bottles was resoundingly defeated at a Town Meeting. Resident Jean Hill, who led the initial fight for the ban, said, &quot;I really feel at the age of 86 that I&#x27;ve really accomplished something.&quot; Town Moderator Eric Van Loon didn&#x27;t even bother taking an official tally because opposition to repeal was so overwhelming. It appeared that upwards of 80 to 90 percent of the 1,127 voters in attendance raised their ballots against the repeal measure. The issue had been bubbling in Concord for several years. In 2010, a ban approved in a town meeting, which wasn&#x27;t written as a bylaw, was rejected by the state attorney general&#x27;s office. In 2011, a new version of the ban narrowly failed at a town meeting by a vote of 265 to 272. The ban on selling water in polyethylene terephthalate (PET) bottles of one liter or less passed in 2012 by a vote of 403 to 364, and a repeal effort in April failed by a vote of 621 to 687.

==Geography==
According to the United States Census Bureau, the town has a total area of , of which is land and , or 3.75%, is water. The city of Lowell is to the north, Boston is to the east, and Nashua, New Hampshire, is to the north.

Massachusetts state routes 2, 2A, 62, 126, 119, 111, and 117 pass through Concord. The town center is near the confluence of the Sudbury and Assabet rivers, forming the Concord River, which flows north to the Merrimack River in Lowell. Gunpowder was manufactured from 1835 to 1940 in the American Powder Mills complex extending upstream along the Assabet River.


==Government==
Local government consists of a five-member executive Select Board and a legislature utilizing open town meeting.

===State and federal government===
On the federal level, Concord is part of Massachusetts&#x27;s 3rd congressional district, represented by Lori Trahan. The state&#x27;s senior (Class I) member of the United States Senate is Elizabeth Warren. The junior (Class II) senator is Ed Markey.

==Demographics==
At the 2020 census, there were 18,491 people, 7,295 housing units and 6,439 families residing in the town. The population density was . The average density of housing units was . The racial makeup of the town was 82.94% White, 2.61% African American, 6.18% Asian, 4.55% Hispanic or Latino (of any race), 0.02% Native American, 0.02% Pacific Islander, 1.02% from other races, and 6.86% from two or more races. 

There were 6,439 families, of which 35.98% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 62.98% were married couples living together, 22.4% had a female householder with no spouse present, 12.4% had a male householder with no spouse present, and 28.42% were non-families, and 24.59% of all households were made up of individuals. The average family size was 3.18.

25.1% of the population were under the age of 18, 4.2% from 18 to 24, 25.8% from 25 to 44, 28.4% from 45 to 64, and 16.5% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 42 years. For every 100 females, there were 100.3 males. For every 100 women aged 18 and over, there were 101.8 men.

At the time of the 2020 census, the median household income was $184,086. About 2.5% of the population was below the poverty line, including 1.7% of those under age 18 and 1.1% of those aged 65 or over.

==Pronunciation==
The town&#x27;s name is pronounced by its residents as , in a manner indistinguishable from the American pronunciation of the word &quot;conquered.&quot; In the local dialect of Greater Boston, it is frequently heard with the in the second syllable replaced by ().

==Economy==
===Principal employers===
According to Concord&#x27;s 2016 Comprehensive Annual Financial Report, the principal employers in the town are:

==Transportation==

Concord and West Concord stations are served by the MBTA&#x27;s Fitchburg Line. Yankee Line provides commuter bus service between Concord and Boston.

==Sister cities==
Concord&#x27;s sister cities are:
*Nanae, Japan
*Saint-Mandé, France

==Points of interest==

* Barrett&#x27;s Farm
* Reuben Brown House, home of notable revolutionist
* Concord Art Association
* Concord Free Public Library
* Concord Museum
* Concord Scout House, popular venue for contra dancing and other events
* Concord&#x27;s Colonial Inn
* Corinthian Lodge
* Egg Rock, where the Concord River forms at the confluence of the Sudbury and Assabet rivers
* Emerson Hospital
* Ralph Waldo Emerson House
* Estabrook Woods
* Fairyland Pond
* First Parish in Concord
* Great Meadows National Wildlife Refuge
* Massachusetts Correctional Institution – Concord
* Minute Man National Historical Park
**&quot;The Minute Man&quot; statue
* Northeastern Correctional Center
* The Old Manse, home of Emerson and Hawthorne
* Old North Bridge
* Orchard House
* Punkatasset Hill
* Sleepy Hollow Cemetery 
* Walden Pond
* The Wayside, home of Louisa May Alcott, Hawthorne, and Margaret Sidney
* Wheeler-Minot Farmhouse, also known as Thoreau Farm, birthplace of Henry David Thoreau
* Wright&#x27;s Tavern

==Education==
* Concord-Carlisle Regional High School, the local public high school
* Concord Middle School (Sanborn and Peabody, unified under the new Ellen Garrison building)
* Alcott School, Willard School, and Thoreau School, the local public elementary schools
* Concord Academy and Middlesex School, private preparatory schools
* The Fenn School is a 4-9 boys&#x27; school.
* The Nashoba Brooks School is co-ed PK-3 and a girls&#x27; school 4-8.

==Notable people==
==In popular culture==
Concord is featured in the 2012 video game &quot;Assassin&#x27;s Creed 3&quot;, the 2020 video game &quot;Assassin&#x27;s Creed Valhalla&quot; and the 2015 video game &quot;Fallout 4&quot;. The video game &quot;Walden, a game&quot;, based on Henry David Thoreau&#x27;s Walden, is set in the town.

Scenes from the 2017 comedy film &quot;Daddy&#x27;s Home 2&quot; were filmed at Concord scout house. Parts of the 2019 film &quot;Little Women&quot; were shot on the Concord River.

Jane Langton&#x27;s Homer Kelly murder mystery novels are largely set in Concord. Her 1964 novel &#x27;The Transcendental Murder&#x27; was described in the Boston Globe in 1975 as &#x27;a hymn to Concord, its history, its houses, its hallowed ground, its people and patriots, and its ghosts (Emerson and Thoreau)&#x27;.

Italian director Lucio Fulci&#x27;s 1981 horror film &quot;The House by the Cemetery&quot; was partly filmed in Concord - notably the Holy Family Church, a Main Street realty and the Concord Free Public Library.

&quot;The Mother-Daughter Book Club&quot; series of children&#x27;s novels is set in Concord.

==Gallery==
==See also==
* National Register of Historic Places listings in Concord, Massachusetts
* USS &quot;Concord&quot;, name of five ships

==References==

==Further reading==
*&quot;1871 Atlas of Massachusetts&quot;. by Wall &amp; Gray. of Massachusetts. of Middlesex County.
* &quot;History of Middlesex County, Massachusetts&quot;, Volume 1 (A–H), Volume 2 (L–W) compiled by Samuel Adams Drake, published 1879–1880. 572 and 505 pages. Concord article by Rev. Grindall Reynolds in volume 1, pages 380-405.
* Rorabaugh, William J. &quot;Who Fought for the North in the Civil War? Concord, Massachusetts, Enlistments,&quot; &quot;Journal of American History&quot; 73 (December 1986): 695–701 online
* Wilson, Thomas. &quot;Concord&#x27;s Wright Tavern&quot;. Arcadia Publishing, 2024.

==External links==

* Town of Concord official website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q523240" start="0" end="7" title="Concord, Massachusetts" label="Concord"/>
<link wikidata="Q54073" start="24" end="55" title="Middlesex County, Massachusetts" label="Middlesex County, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="79" end="90" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="128" end="155" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190137" start="182" end="196" title="Greater Boston" label="Greater Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q2363043" start="232" end="239" title="Sudbury River" label="Sudbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q738547" start="244" end="251" title="Assabet River" label="Assabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124056" start="276" end="289" title="Concord River" label="Concord River"/>
<link wikidata="Q523240" start="357" end="368" title="Concord, Massachusetts" label="Musketaquid"/>
<link wikidata="Q33392" start="373" end="383" title="Algonquian languages" label="Algonquian"/>
<link wikidata="Q778010" start="726" end="758" title="battles of Lexington and Concord" label="battles of Lexington and Concord"/>
<link wikidata="Q428586" start="794" end="820" title="shot heard round the world" label="shot heard round the world"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="841" end="867" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q48226" start="962" end="981" title="Ralph Waldo Emerson" label="Ralph Waldo Emerson"/>
<link wikidata="Q69339" start="1014" end="1033" title="Nathaniel Hawthorne" label="Nathaniel Hawthorne"/>
<link wikidata="Q185696" start="1035" end="1052" title="Louisa May Alcott" label="Louisa May Alcott"/>
<link wikidata="Q131149" start="1057" end="1076" title="Henry David Thoreau" label="Henry David Thoreau"/>
<link wikidata="Q523076" start="1162" end="1174" title="Little Women" label="Little Women"/>
<link wikidata="Q7447995" start="1209" end="1222" title="Self-Reliance" label="Self-Reliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q863534" start="1255" end="1261" title="Walden" label="Walden"/>
<link wikidata="Q331092" start="1278" end="1296" title="Civil Disobedience (Thoreau)" label="Civil Disobedience"/>
<link wikidata="Q393047" start="1336" end="1349" title="Concord grape" label="Concord grape"/>
<link wikidata="Q5382344" start="1378" end="1396" title="Ephraim Wales Bull" label="Ephraim Wales Bull"/>
<link wikidata="Q7980538" start="1425" end="1437" title="Welch&amp;#x27;s" label="Welch&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q729007" start="1600" end="1616" title="Old North Bridge" label="Old North Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7100190" start="1618" end="1631" title="Orchard House" label="Orchard House"/>
<link wikidata="Q2023853" start="1636" end="1647" title="Walden Pond" label="Walden Pond"/>
<link wikidata="Q442008" start="1729" end="1749" title="Doris Kearns Goodwin" label="Doris Kearns Goodwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2664403" start="1751" end="1764" title="Alan Lightman" label="Alan Lightman"/>
<link wikidata="Q736137" start="1769" end="1784" title="Gregory Maguire" label="Gregory Maguire"/>
<link wikidata="Q145863" start="1941" end="1944" title="Polyethylene terephthalate" label="PET"/>
<link wikidata="Q2363043" start="2123" end="2130" title="Sudbury River" label="Sudbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q738547" start="2135" end="2142" title="Assabet River" label="Assabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q33392" start="2167" end="2177" title="Algonquian languages" label="Algonquian"/>
<link wikidata="Q30198" start="2247" end="2252" title="marsh" label="marsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424609" start="2259" end="2271" title="Kettle (landform)" label="kettle holes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6784453" start="2435" end="2455" title="Massachusetts smallpox epidemic" label="epidemic of smallpox"/>
<link wikidata="Q7173048" start="2601" end="2614" title="Peter Bulkley" label="Peter Bulkley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7520047" start="2625" end="2638" title="Simon Willard (Massachusetts colonist)" label="Simon Willard"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="2730" end="2747" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="indigenous tribes"/>
<link wikidata="Q943899" start="2991" end="2997" title="wampum" label="wampum"/>
<link wikidata="Q64755297" start="3069" end="3092" title="Squaw Sachem of Mistick" label="Squaw Sachem of Mistick"/>
<link wikidata="Q778010" start="3250" end="3282" title="battles of Lexington and Concord" label="battles of Lexington and Concord"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="3326" end="3352" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q16824430" start="3377" end="3389" title="British Army during the American Revolutionary War" label="British Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q13580939" start="3423" end="3436" title="Francis Smith (British Army officer)" label="Francis Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="3450" end="3456" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q2336248" start="3606" end="3615" title="minutemen" label="minutemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2799341" start="3686" end="3701" title="Samuel Prescott" label="Samuel Prescott"/>
<link wikidata="Q929667" start="3762" end="3771" title="Lexington, Massachusetts" label="Lexington"/>
<link wikidata="Q173366" start="3917" end="3931" title="Bayonet" label="bayonet charge"/>
<link wikidata="Q729007" start="4112" end="4128" title="Old North Bridge" label="Old North Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756813" start="4452" end="4471" title="Charlestown, Boston" label="Charlestown, Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q815128" start="4558" end="4573" title="siege of Boston" label="siege of Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q48226" start="4580" end="4599" title="Ralph Waldo Emerson" label="Ralph Waldo Emerson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5158815" start="4702" end="4714" title="Concord Hymn" label="Concord Hymn"/>
<link wikidata="Q428586" start="4734" end="4760" title="shot heard round the world" label="shot heard round the world"/>
<link wikidata="Q1453540" start="4825" end="4856" title="Massachusetts State Legislature" label="Massachusetts State Legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q441827" start="4962" end="4984" title="Frederic T. Greenhalge" label="Frederic T. Greenhalge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3244522" start="5032" end="5050" title="Patriots&amp;#x27; Day" label="Patriots&amp;#x27; Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q9582" start="5182" end="5193" title="Gerald Ford" label="Gerald Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q48226" start="5303" end="5322" title="Ralph Waldo Emerson" label="Ralph Waldo Emerson"/>
<link wikidata="Q8008600" start="5494" end="5514" title="William Emerson (minister)" label="Rev. William Emerson"/>
<link wikidata="Q16198499" start="5612" end="5631" title="William Emerson Sr." label="William Emerson Sr."/>
<link wikidata="Q331563" start="5795" end="5813" title="Transcendentalism" label="Transcendentalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q69339" start="5860" end="5879" title="Nathaniel Hawthorne" label="Nathaniel Hawthorne"/>
<link wikidata="Q474235" start="5912" end="5931" title="Amos Bronson Alcott" label="Amos Bronson Alcott"/>
<link wikidata="Q185696" start="5959" end="5976" title="Louisa May Alcott" label="Louisa May Alcott"/>
<link wikidata="Q131149" start="6011" end="6030" title="Henry David Thoreau" label="Henry David Thoreau"/>
<link wikidata="Q170509" start="6165" end="6176" title="Henry James" label="Henry James"/>
<link wikidata="Q7447995" start="6357" end="6370" title="Self-Reliance" label="Self-Reliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q523076" start="6422" end="6434" title="Little Women" label="Little Women"/>
<link wikidata="Q6916648" start="6493" end="6517" title="Mosses from an Old Manse" label="Mosses from an Old Manse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2023853" start="6577" end="6588" title="Walden Pond" label="Walden Pond"/>
<link wikidata="Q863534" start="6611" end="6617" title="Walden" label="Walden"/>
<link wikidata="Q118382" start="6730" end="6737" title="Slavery in the United States" label="slavery"/>
<link wikidata="Q6683" start="6746" end="6766" title="Mexican–American War" label="Mexican–American War"/>
<link wikidata="Q331092" start="6874" end="6892" title="Civil Disobedience (Thoreau)" label="Civil Disobedience"/>
<link wikidata="Q868393" start="7044" end="7064" title="Underground Railroad" label="Underground Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q3523325" start="7067" end="7078" title="The Wayside" label="The Wayside"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182777" start="7170" end="7183" title="John Winthrop (1714-1779)" label="John Winthrop"/>
<link wikidata="Q49123" start="7201" end="7216" title="Harvard College" label="Harvard College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7100190" start="7459" end="7472" title="Orchard House" label="Orchard House"/>
<link wikidata="Q5217965" start="7618" end="7632" title="Daniel Lothrop" label="Daniel Lothrop"/>
<link wikidata="Q5455992" start="7671" end="7690" title="Five Little Peppers" label="Five Little Peppers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6759892" start="7749" end="7764" title="Margaret Sidney" label="Margaret Sidney"/>
<link wikidata="Q2972565" start="7922" end="7944" title="Sleepy Hollow Cemetery (Concord, Massachusetts)" label="Sleepy Hollow Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q309648" start="7973" end="7985" title="Charles Ives" label="Charles Ives"/>
<link wikidata="Q2992072" start="8002" end="8016" title="Concord Sonata" label="Concord Sonata"/>
<link wikidata="Q442008" start="8240" end="8260" title="Doris Kearns Goodwin" label="Doris Kearns Goodwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2664403" start="8262" end="8275" title="Alan Lightman" label="Alan Lightman"/>
<link wikidata="Q550819" start="8277" end="8293" title="Robert B. Parker" label="Robert B. Parker"/>
<link wikidata="Q736137" start="8299" end="8314" title="Gregory Maguire" label="Gregory Maguire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5382344" start="8346" end="8364" title="Ephraim Wales Bull" label="Ephraim Wales Bull"/>
<link wikidata="Q393047" start="8394" end="8407" title="Concord grape" label="Concord grape"/>
<link wikidata="Q7980538" start="8476" end="8488" title="Welch&amp;#x27;s" label="Welch&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q6784291" start="9126" end="9154" title="Massachusetts Horticultural Society" label="Boston Horticultural Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q145863" start="9646" end="9649" title="Polyethylene terephthalate" label="PET"/>
<link wikidata="Q188515" start="9760" end="9777" title="Los Angeles Times" label="Los Angeles Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q455752" start="10341" end="10358" title="open town meeting" label="open town meeting"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="11405" end="11432" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q49162" start="11520" end="11526" title="Lowell, Massachusetts" label="Lowell"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="11544" end="11550" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q48274" start="11571" end="11592" title="Nashua, New Hampshire" label="Nashua, New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033220" start="11639" end="11640" title="Massachusetts Route 2" label="2"/>
<link wikidata="Q2483939" start="11642" end="11644" title="Massachusetts Route 2A" label="2A"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484043" start="11646" end="11648" title="Massachusetts Route 62" label="62"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484139" start="11650" end="11653" title="Massachusetts Route 126" label="126"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484124" start="11655" end="11658" title="Massachusetts Route 119" label="119"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484107" start="11660" end="11663" title="Massachusetts Route 111" label="111"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484119" start="11669" end="11672" title="Massachusetts Route 117" label="117"/>
<link wikidata="Q723748" start="11723" end="11733" title="confluence" label="confluence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2363043" start="11741" end="11748" title="Sudbury River" label="Sudbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q738547" start="11753" end="11760" title="Assabet River" label="Assabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124056" start="11781" end="11794" title="Concord River" label="Concord River"/>
<link wikidata="Q517787" start="11821" end="11836" title="Merrimack River" label="Merrimack River"/>
<link wikidata="Q12861" start="11848" end="11857" title="Gunpowder" label="Gunpowder"/>
<link wikidata="Q25245177" start="11900" end="11921" title="American Powder Mills" label="American Powder Mills"/>
<link wikidata="Q455752" start="12085" end="12102" title="open town meeting" label="open town meeting"/>
<link wikidata="Q6784144" start="12181" end="12228" title="Massachusetts&amp;#x27;s 3rd congressional district" label="Massachusetts&amp;#x27;s 3rd congressional district"/>
<link wikidata="Q56486676" start="12245" end="12256" title="Lori Trahan" label="Lori Trahan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12283" end="12290" title="Classes of United States Senators#Class I" label="Class I"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="12306" end="12326" title="United States Senate" label="United States Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q434706" start="12330" end="12346" title="Elizabeth Warren" label="Elizabeth Warren"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12360" end="12368" title="Classes of United States Senators#Class II" label="Class II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282411" start="12381" end="12390" title="Ed Markey" label="Ed Markey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="12630" end="12635" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="12643" end="12659" title="African American (U.S. Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="12667" end="12672" title="Asian (U.S. Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="12680" end="12688" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="12692" end="12698" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="12720" end="12735" title="Native American (U.S. Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="12743" end="12759" title="Pacific Islander (U.S. Census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="12772" end="12783" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="13504" end="13515" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940707" start="13521" end="13544" title="median household income" label="median household income"/>
<link wikidata="Q2849609" start="13868" end="13881" title="Boston accent" label="local dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190137" start="13885" end="13899" title="Greater Boston" label="Greater Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q5158762" start="14145" end="14152" title="Concord (MBTA station)" label="Concord"/>
<link wikidata="Q7984863" start="14157" end="14169" title="West Concord station" label="West Concord"/>
<link wikidata="Q171985" start="14197" end="14201" title="Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority" label="MBTA"/>
<link wikidata="Q172548" start="14209" end="14223" title="Fitchburg Line" label="Fitchburg Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q184711" start="14329" end="14342" title="Sister city" label="sister cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354276" start="14349" end="14354" title="Nanae, Hokkaido" label="Nanae"/>
<link wikidata="Q18102" start="14363" end="14374" title="Saint-Mandé" label="Saint-Mandé"/>
<link wikidata="Q5141768" start="14410" end="14429" title="Col. James Barrett Farm" label="Barrett&amp;#x27;s Farm"/>
<link wikidata="Q7317418" start="14432" end="14450" title="Reuben Brown House" label="Reuben Brown House"/>
<link wikidata="Q19865828" start="14484" end="14507" title="Concord Art Association" label="Concord Art Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q5158795" start="14510" end="14537" title="Concord Free Public Library" label="Concord Free Public Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q5158830" start="14540" end="14554" title="Concord Museum" label="Concord Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q747339" start="14596" end="14610" title="contra dancing" label="contra dancing"/>
<link wikidata="Q56427359" start="14630" end="14657" title="Concord&amp;#x27;s Colonial Inn" label="Concord&amp;#x27;s Colonial Inn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5347824" start="14679" end="14687" title="Egg Rock" label="Egg Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124056" start="14699" end="14712" title="Concord River" label="Concord River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2363043" start="14744" end="14751" title="Sudbury River" label="Sudbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q738547" start="14756" end="14763" title="Assabet River" label="Assabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5370890" start="14773" end="14789" title="Emerson Hospital" label="Emerson Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q7288218" start="14792" end="14817" title="Ralph Waldo Emerson House" label="Ralph Waldo Emerson House"/>
<link wikidata="Q5400006" start="14820" end="14835" title="Estabrook Woods" label="Estabrook Woods"/>
<link wikidata="Q5431015" start="14838" end="14852" title="Fairyland Pond (Concord, MA)" label="Fairyland Pond"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599556" start="14881" end="14919" title="Great Meadows National Wildlife Refuge" label="Great Meadows National Wildlife Refuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q6784240" start="14922" end="14970" title="Massachusetts Correctional Institution – Concord" label="Massachusetts Correctional Institution – Concord"/>
<link wikidata="Q6871146" start="14973" end="15008" title="Minute Man National Historical Park" label="Minute Man National Historical Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q16509688" start="15017" end="15031" title="The Minute Man" label="The Minute Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q7058012" start="15047" end="15079" title="Northeastern Correctional Center" label="Northeastern Correctional Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q4439852" start="15082" end="15095" title="The Old Manse" label="The Old Manse"/>
<link wikidata="Q729007" start="15129" end="15145" title="Old North Bridge" label="Old North Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7100190" start="15148" end="15161" title="Orchard House" label="Orchard House"/>
<link wikidata="Q7260416" start="15164" end="15180" title="Punkatasset Hill" label="Punkatasset Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2972565" start="15183" end="15205" title="Sleepy Hollow Cemetery (Concord, Massachusetts)" label="Sleepy Hollow Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q2023853" start="15209" end="15220" title="Walden Pond" label="Walden Pond"/>
<link wikidata="Q3523325" start="15223" end="15234" title="The Wayside" label="The Wayside"/>
<link wikidata="Q6948294" start="15296" end="15319" title="Wheeler-Minot Farmhouse" label="Wheeler-Minot Farmhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q8038155" start="15385" end="15405" title="Wright&amp;#x27;s Tavern" label="Wright&amp;#x27;s Tavern"/>
<link wikidata="Q5158760" start="15423" end="15460" title="Concord-Carlisle High School" label="Concord-Carlisle Regional High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5158770" start="15675" end="15690" title="Concord Academy" label="Concord Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6841942" start="15695" end="15711" title="Middlesex School" label="Middlesex School"/>
<link wikidata="Q40166" start="15951" end="15974" title="Assassin&amp;#x27;s Creed 3" label="Assassin&amp;#x27;s Creed 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q92464687" start="16008" end="16038" title="Assassin&amp;#x27;s Creed Valhalla" label="Assassin&amp;#x27;s Creed Valhalla"/>
<link wikidata="Q10493813" start="16075" end="16084" title="Fallout 4" label="Fallout 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q46993159" start="16113" end="16127" title="Walden, a game" label="Walden, a game"/>
<link wikidata="Q28975643" start="16239" end="16258" title="Daddy&amp;#x27;s Home 2" label="Daddy&amp;#x27;s Home 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q56881140" start="16330" end="16342" title="Little Women (2019 film)" label="Little Women"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124056" start="16366" end="16379" title="Concord River" label="Concord River"/>
<link wikidata="Q6152472" start="16382" end="16394" title="Jane Langton" label="Jane Langton"/>
<link wikidata="Q345217" start="16720" end="16731" title="Lucio Fulci" label="Lucio Fulci"/>
<link wikidata="Q1168778" start="16762" end="16787" title="The House by the Cemetery" label="The House by the Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q5158795" start="16886" end="16913" title="Concord Free Public Library" label="Concord Free Public Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q7752414" start="16922" end="16951" title="The Mother-Daughter Book Club" label="The Mother-Daughter Book Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q6975802" start="17038" end="17109" title="National Register of Historic Places listings in Concord, Massachusetts" label="National Register of Historic Places listings in Concord, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2469008" start="17112" end="17135" title="USS Concord" label="USS &amp;quot;Concord&amp;quot;"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="116839" wikidata="Q782882" url="?curid=116839" title="Dracut, Massachusetts">
<text>Dracut is a town in Middlesex County, Massachusetts, United States. At the 2020 census, the town&#x27;s population was 32,617, making it the second most populous town in Massachusetts with an open town meeting system of governance. The town covers a total area of 21.36 square miles, 0.5 square miles of which are water.

==History==
Before Europeans arrived in the mid-17th century, Dracut and the surrounding area were known as Augumtoocooke. Important Pennacook Indian settlements were served by fishing at Pawtucket Falls on the Merrimack River and abundant game in the surrounding marsh areas. From the late 16th to mid-17th centuries, the powerful Sachem, Passaconaway and his family spent much of their lives on this land.

Europeans began to settle in the area around 1653, and established the town of Chelmsford, incorporated in 1655, on the opposite side of the Merrimack River from modern Dracut. In October 1665, Bess, wife of Nobb How and daughter of Passaconaway, sold the Augumtoocooke land to Captain John Evered, also known as Webb of Draucutt of Norfolk County (the Webb family is associated closely with the town of Dreycot Foliat in Wiltshire, England) for four yards of duffill and one pound of tobacco. Webb had months earlier sold of the land — which he did not then own — to Samuel Varnum for 400 pounds; the deed for &quot;Drawcutt upon Mirrimack&quot; was dated 1664. Webb also sold land to Richard Shatswell, who traded it to Edward Colburn (also spelled &quot;Coburn&quot; or &quot;Colborne&quot;) for his home and land in Ipswich, Massachusetts. Colburn and his family were probably the first settlers in Dracut who owned land with the intention of permanently living on it. (Samuel Varnum lived on the Chelmsford side of the Merrimack River.)

Even though this area, now known to the new settlers as Dracut (Draucutt), was across the Merrimack River from the Chelmsford town center, they agreed to pay taxes and relied on Chelmsford for protection, according to 1667 Middlesex Court documents. By summer 1669, however, protection became too costly and difficult, so the Chelmsford Mayor Henchman declared:

Wherefore, Honorable and Worshipful, I judge it highly needful and necessary that we have relief, and that speedily of about twenty men or more for the repulsing of the enemy and guarding some outplaces, which are considerable on each side of the Merrimac, as Messrs. Howard, Varnum, Coburn &amp; company who must otherwise come in to us, and leave what they have to the enemy, or be exposed to the merciless cruelty of bloody and barbarous men.

On the morning of March 18, 1676, the Wamesit Indians burned down four of Edward Colburne&#x27;s buildings, then attacked Samuel Varnum and family as they crossed the river to milk the cows grazing in the Dracut pastures. The Indians fired upon their boat, killing Samuel&#x27;s two sons, and one died in his daughter&#x27;s arms as she sat behind him. The accompanying soldiers and Samuel fired back, but the Indians fled.

By the late 17th century the Varnum, Coburn, Richardson, and other families of the Dracut section of Chelmsford, dissatisfied with the protection provided, began to petition to the General Court to lay out their own township.

To the Hon. Council &amp; Representatives of his Majesty&#x27;s Province of the Massachusetts Bay in New England in General Court assembled February 1701.

The petition of Samuel Sewall Esq., Benjamin Walker, John Hunt &amp; Jonathan Belcher, proprietors of part of the Tract of Land called Dracut beyond Chelmsford in the County of Middlesex on the North Side of Merrimack River and of Samuel Varnum, ..., Thomas Colburne, ..., James Richardson, ..., Ezra Colburn... Inhabitants and Proprietors of the said Tract of Land called Dracut, ... lyes very commodious for a Township &amp; hath about twenty families already settled thereupon in which are about Eighty Souls &amp; Forasmuch as the making said place a Township will not only be a great Encouragement to the Inhabitants thereof &amp; be the means for a settlement of the Ministry among them (for the benefit of which they are now obliged to go to Chelmsford, which is a great difficulty &amp; eamiot be attended by their children &amp; several others by reason of the distance thereof) but will also be of considerable benefit to the Publick, and be a great strengthening of the Frontier parts by reason of the people which will be desirous to settle at said place when made a Township because of the convenient positionship thereof.

Your Petitioners humbly pray that by the grant of this Honorable Court, the Tract of land aforesaid may be made a Township, and that the Inhabitants, which are or shall settle thereupon, may have and enjoy all Libertys, Privileges &amp; Immunities as the Inhabitants of other Towns within this Province have &amp; do enjoy. And ... the Tract of Land therein described be made a Township &amp; called by the name of Dracut, ...

Sent up by concurrence Nehemiah Jewett, Speaker.

Dracut was granted separation from Chelmsford, and was officially incorporated as a town on February 26, 1701.

Parts of the community were part of the Wamiset Praying Town, one of the preserves set aside by the colonists for Christianized Indians. The town has several large ponds, bogs and swamps, and numerous brooks (most notably Beaver Brook). Dracut&#x27;s early economy relied on fishing, lumbering and milling, which led in turn to the 19th century industries of paper making and cotton textile manufacturing, including the Beaver Brook Mill. These mills attracted Irish and French-Canadian immigrants.

There has been intense modern development in Dracut with suburban residential pressures from Lowell. Twice in the 19th century, Lowell annexed large sections of Dracut into its borders. However, some rural landscapes remain intact, as do some handsome historic houses. One of the better known is the 290-year-old Colburn/Cutter House, with its massive beams, huge center chimney and fireplaces. The building, dating back from about 1717, has served as the site of the annual Dracut Craft Fair. In addition, Dracut holds an annual Old Home Day every September starting in 2001 . As of 2020, Dracut remains the only town in the world with its exact name and spelling. Other municipalities do exist with similar names but different spellings.

==Geography==
According to the United States Census Bureau, the town has a total area of , of which is land and (2.15%) is water.

Dracut is located in the Merrimack Valley of Massachusetts, zip code 01826, northwest of the state capital, Boston.

The southern end of Dracut is on the Merrimack River, and the town is bisected by Beaver Brook.

As part of a plan titled &#x27;Make It Dracut&#x27;, the town&#x27;s Economic Development Committee designated nine Business Districts. With a couple exceptions, district names mirror those of historic neighborhoods within the town. Each district is visually identified by strategically placed street signage bearing the district name and a stylized symbol incorporating the initial letter of the name.

The districts are titled: Bridge Street, Broadway, Collinsville, Dracut Center, East Dracut, Hovey Square, Kenwood, Lakeview, and Navy Yard Districts.

===Adjacent towns===
Dracut is bordered by Tyngsboro to the west and the city of Lowell to the south and west in Middlesex County, Methuen to the east in Essex County, and Pelham, New Hampshire, to the north in Hillsborough County, New Hampshire. Tewksbury (Middlesex County) and Andover (Essex County) border the town to the south over the Merrimack River. There are no bridges connecting Dracut to Tewksbury or Andover directly, forcing travel through Lowell via several crossings or I-93 in Methuen.

==Demographics==

The earliest census data shows the town of Dracut having a population of 1,173 residents in 1765.

As of the census of 2010, there were 29,457 people, 10,451 households, and 7,733 families residing in the town. The population density was . There were 10,643 housing units at an average density of .

The racial makeup of the town was:
* 88.1% White (U.S. Average: 75.1%)
* 4.0% Asian (U.S. Average: 3.6%)
* 2.3% African American (U.S. Average: 12.3%)
* 0.09% Native American (U.S. Average: 0.1%)
* 0.03% Pacific Islander (U.S. Average: 0.1%)
* 0.43% from other races (U.S. Average: 5.5%)
* 0.96% from two or more races (U.S. Average: 2.4%)

Hispanic or Latino of any race were 1.55% of the population (U.S. Average: 12.5%).

There were 10,939 households with the average household size was 2.69 and the average family size was 3.17.
* 35.3% had children under the age of 18 living with them (U.S. Average: 32.8%).
* 55.4% were married couples living together (U.S. Average: 51.7%).
* 12.9% had a female householder with no husband present (U.S. Average: 12.2%).
* 28.2% were non-families (U.S. Average: 31.9%).
* 20.9% of all households were made up of individuals (U.S. Average: 25.8%).
* 8.0% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older (U.S. Average: 9.2%).

In the town, the population had a median age of 41.1 years (U.S. Average: 35.3).
* 25.5% under the age of 18
* 7.3% from 18 to 24
* 33.5% from 25 to 44
* 22.2% from 45 to 64
* 11.6% who were 65 years of age or older.

For every 100 females, there were 96.2 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 92.4 males.

The median income for a household in the town was $57,676 (U.S. Average: $41,994), and the median income for a family was $65,633 (U.S. Average: $50,046). Males had a median income of $41,873 versus $31,396 for females. The per capita income for the town was $23,750. About 2.7% (U.S. Average: 9.2%) of families and 3.7% (U.S. Average: 12.4%) of the population were below the poverty line, including 3.2% of those under age 18 and 8.3% of those age 65 or over.

==Government==

Dracut is one of the largest towns in Massachusetts to still be governed by an open town meeting, whereby every registered voter is entitled to gather at stated times to conduct the business of the Town. There is an elected board of selectmen and school committee with five members each elected for three-year staggered terms. The voters also elect a town moderator, library trustees, and some members of the housing authority. Those who live in the Dracut Water Supply District also elect a district moderator and water commissioners. The board of selectmen, school committee, and library trustees hire a town manager, superintendent of schools, and library director respectively to execute their various duties.

==Public safety==

===Police department===
The town of Dracut has its own full-time police department, the Dracut Police Department, which employs 39 police officers who utilize 15 various types of police vehicles to perform their duties. As of January 2014, the Department has a K-9 unit. The Department&#x27;s headquarters is located at 110 Loon Hill Road in the Parker Village section of the town. The town of Dracut is also secondarily protected by the Massachusetts State Police and is periodically patrolled by troopers from the A-1 barracks in Andover.

=== Fire department ===
The Dracut Fire Department is a 24/7 career fire department of approximately 40 firefighters. It responds from three fire stations located throughout the town.

Station 1 – Headquarters: 488 Pleasant Street
:*Engine 1 (In service)
:*Engine 5
:*Engine 4
:*squad 1
:*Forestry 1
:*Ladder 1
:*tower (on order jun)
:*Car 2 (Deputy Chief)
:*Car 3
:*Car 4 (Shift commander)
:*Utility 1

Station 2: 15 Jones Avenue
:*Engine 2
:*Forestry 2
:*Engine 6 ( antique)

Station 3: 539 Nashua Road
:*Engine 3
:*Squad 3
:*UTV trailer
:*Boat
:*State Hazmat ORU 62

==Education==

===Public schools===
The Dracut School Department consists of six public schools: one high school, one middle school (grades 6–8), and four elementary schools (grades K–5). They are, with enrollment figures from the 2020–2021 school year:
* Dracut Senior High School (889 students)
* Richardson Middle School (920 students)
* Englesby Elementary School (544 students)
* Brookside Elementary School (444 students)
* Campbell Elementary School (579 students)
* Greenmont Elementary School (283 students)

The school department also uses the former Parker Elementary School for a small portion of its special education activities. There are about 45 public school students attending out of district SPED programs and approximately 120 public school students attending out of town charter schools, as of FY14. In addition, about 440 Dracut students attend the Greater Lowell Technical High School.

==Transportation==
Dracut is in proximity to many major area highways. Interstate 93, Interstate 495, and U.S. Route 3 are among the most traveled. Interstate 95 is not far from Dracut either (roughly to the south), and the Massachusetts Turnpike (Interstate 90) is only to the southeast, in Boston. Massachusetts Route 38, Route 110 and Route 113 run directly through the town.

The LRTA 10 bus connects to the Lowell train station on the MBTA Commuter Rail Lowell Line.

The Maritimes &amp; Northeast Pipeline terminates in Dracut, connecting to the North American natural gas pipeline grid. The Portland Natural Gas Transmission System (PNGTS)), Tennessee Gas and the TransQuebec interconnect here.

==Notable people==
* Luis Ansart, (1742–1804), military officer
* Wendell Corey, actor
* Scott Grimes, actor
* Harry Lew, pro basketball player
* Lucy Lew, early African American rights leader
* Roger Morin, Bishop of Biloxi
* John Ogonowski (1951–2001), airline pilot who was piloting American Airlines Flight 11 on 9/11 before it was hijacked
* James Mitchell Varnum, lawyer and general during the American Revolution
* Joseph Bradley Varnum, politician

==See also==
* Beaver Brook
* Greater Boston
* Greater Lowell
* Merrimack Valley

==References==

==Further reading==
* &quot;1871 Atlas of Massachusetts&quot;. by Wall &amp; Gray. Map of Massachusetts. Map of Middlesex County.
* &quot;History of Middlesex County, Massachusetts&quot;, Volume 1 (A–H), Volume 2 (L–W) compiled by Samuel Adams Drake, published 1879–1880. 572 and 505 pages. Dracut article by Rev. Elias Nason in volume 1 pages 406–416.
* Dracut School Data from 2005

==External links==
* Dracut Public Library (Moses Greeley Parker Memorial Library)
* Dracut Public Schools</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q782882" start="0" end="6" title="Dracut, Massachusetts" label="Dracut"/>
<link wikidata="Q2154459" start="12" end="16" title="New England town" label="town"/>
<link wikidata="Q54073" start="20" end="36" title="Middlesex County, Massachusetts" label="Middlesex County"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="38" end="51" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="75" end="86" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q455752" start="192" end="209" title="open town meeting" label="open town meeting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761546" start="455" end="464" title="Pennacook" label="Pennacook"/>
<link wikidata="Q486972" start="472" end="483" title="Human settlement" label="settlements"/>
<link wikidata="Q2075314" start="510" end="525" title="Pawtucket Falls (Massachusetts)" label="Pawtucket Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q517787" start="533" end="548" title="Merrimack River" label="Merrimack River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2075451" start="574" end="597" title="Lowell-Dracut-Tyngsboro State Forest" label="surrounding marsh areas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433209" start="654" end="660" title="Sachem" label="Sachem"/>
<link wikidata="Q7142446" start="662" end="674" title="Passaconaway" label="Passaconaway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2318398" start="810" end="820" title="Chelmsford, Massachusetts" label="Chelmsford"/>
<link wikidata="Q517787" start="872" end="887" title="Merrimack River" label="Merrimack River"/>
<link wikidata="Q6232062" start="1009" end="1028" title="Captain John Evered" label="Captain John Evered"/>
<link wikidata="Q5306082" start="1135" end="1149" title="Draycot Foliat" label="Dreycot Foliat"/>
<link wikidata="Q118673" start="1191" end="1198" title="Duffle coat" label="duffill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566" start="1216" end="1223" title="tobacco" label="tobacco"/>
<link wikidata="Q339180" start="1321" end="1327" title="Pound (currency)" label="pounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q376786" start="1551" end="1573" title="Ipswich, Massachusetts" label="Ipswich, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q177053" start="2397" end="2404" title="Messrs." label="Messrs."/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2622" end="2637" title="Wamesit Indians" label="Wamesit Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q212152" start="5233" end="5254" title="Praying Indians" label="Christianized Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q4086407" start="5341" end="5353" title="Beaver Brook (Merrimack River)" label="Beaver Brook"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5539" end="5556" title="Beaver Brook Mill" label="Beaver Brook Mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q49162" start="5712" end="5718" title="Lowell, Massachusetts" label="Lowell"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="6391" end="6418" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q4242054" start="6516" end="6532" title="Merrimack Valley" label="Merrimack Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="6536" end="6549" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="6599" end="6605" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q517787" start="6645" end="6660" title="Merrimack River" label="Merrimack River"/>
<link wikidata="Q4086407" start="6690" end="6702" title="Beaver Brook (Merrimack River)" label="Beaver Brook"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577621" start="7304" end="7313" title="Tyngsborough, Massachusetts" label="Tyngsboro"/>
<link wikidata="Q49162" start="7342" end="7348" title="Lowell, Massachusetts" label="Lowell"/>
<link wikidata="Q54179" start="7392" end="7399" title="Methuen, Massachusetts" label="Methuen"/>
<link wikidata="Q54076" start="7415" end="7427" title="Essex County, Massachusetts" label="Essex County"/>
<link wikidata="Q2418224" start="7433" end="7439" title="Pelham, New Hampshire" label="Pelham"/>
<link wikidata="Q759" start="7441" end="7454" title="New Hampshire" label="New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q54439" start="7472" end="7506" title="Hillsborough County, New Hampshire" label="Hillsborough County, New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021588" start="7508" end="7517" title="Tewksbury, Massachusetts" label="Tewksbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q370619" start="7541" end="7548" title="Andover, Massachusetts" label="Andover"/>
<link wikidata="Q517787" start="7602" end="7617" title="Merrimack River" label="Merrimack River"/>
<link wikidata="Q94963" start="7747" end="7751" title="I-93" label="I-93"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="7892" end="7898" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="7998" end="8016" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="8126" end="8131" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="8161" end="8166" title="Asian (U.S. Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="8195" end="8211" title="African American (U.S. Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="8242" end="8257" title="Native American (U.S. Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="8287" end="8303" title="Pacific Islander (U.S. Census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="8338" end="8349" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="8424" end="8432" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="8436" end="8442" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="8710" end="8725" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="9610" end="9627" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="9762" end="9774" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q39235" start="10859" end="10867" title="Police dog" label="K-9 unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2075576" start="11036" end="11062" title="Massachusetts State Police" label="Massachusetts State Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q5304745" start="11966" end="11991" title="Dracut High School" label="Dracut Senior High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q94963" start="12691" end="12704" title="Interstate 93" label="Interstate 93"/>
<link wikidata="Q1671364" start="12706" end="12720" title="Interstate 495 (Massachusetts)" label="Interstate 495"/>
<link wikidata="Q406241" start="12726" end="12738" title="U.S. Route 3 in Massachusetts" label="U.S. Route 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q1671381" start="12768" end="12781" title="Interstate 95 in Massachusetts" label="Interstate 95"/>
<link wikidata="Q731271" start="12844" end="12866" title="Massachusetts Turnpike" label="Massachusetts Turnpike"/>
<link wikidata="Q2078327" start="12934" end="12942" title="Massachusetts Route 38" label="Route 38"/>
<link wikidata="Q2078373" start="12944" end="12953" title="Massachusetts Route 110" label="Route 110"/>
<link wikidata="Q2078463" start="12958" end="12967" title="Massachusetts Route 113" label="Route 113"/>
<link wikidata="Q2078562" start="13004" end="13008" title="Lowell Regional Transit Authority" label="LRTA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2078610" start="13032" end="13052" title="Lowell (MBTA station)" label="Lowell train station"/>
<link wikidata="Q172457" start="13060" end="13078" title="MBTA Commuter Rail" label="MBTA Commuter Rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q172536" start="13079" end="13090" title="Lowell Line" label="Lowell Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q16981726" start="13097" end="13131" title="Maritimes &amp;amp; Northeast Pipeline" label="Maritimes &amp;amp; Northeast Pipeline"/>
<link wikidata="Q40858" start="13187" end="13198" title="natural gas" label="natural gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q16199128" start="13344" end="13355" title="Marie Louis Amand Ansart, Marquis de Marisquelles" label="Luis Ansart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340156" start="13389" end="13402" title="Wendell Corey" label="Wendell Corey"/>
<link wikidata="Q316231" start="13412" end="13424" title="Scott Grimes" label="Scott Grimes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5670581" start="13434" end="13443" title="Harry Lew" label="Harry Lew"/>
<link wikidata="Q7788824" start="13469" end="13477" title="Thomas Dalton (abolitionist)" label="Lucy Lew"/>
<link wikidata="Q2161834" start="13518" end="13529" title="Roger Morin" label="Roger Morin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6251158" start="13550" end="13564" title="John Ogonowski" label="John Ogonowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q11694" start="13609" end="13636" title="American Airlines Flight 11" label="American Airlines Flight 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="13640" end="13644" title="September 11 attacks" label="9/11"/>
<link wikidata="Q280539" start="13670" end="13691" title="James Mitchell Varnum" label="James Mitchell Varnum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1706673" start="13745" end="13766" title="Joseph Bradley Varnum" label="Joseph Bradley Varnum"/>
<link wikidata="Q4086407" start="13795" end="13807" title="Beaver Brook (Merrimack River)" label="Beaver Brook"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190137" start="13810" end="13824" title="Greater Boston" label="Greater Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q2077623" start="13827" end="13841" title="Greater Lowell" label="Greater Lowell"/>
<link wikidata="Q4242054" start="13844" end="13860" title="Merrimack Valley" label="Merrimack Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5360567" start="14192" end="14203" title="Elias Nason" label="Elias Nason"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="116840" wikidata="Q2427167" url="?curid=116840" title="Dunstable, Massachusetts">
<text>Dunstable ( ) is a town in Middlesex County, Massachusetts, United States. The population was 3,358 at the 2020 census.

==Etymology==
Dunstable was named after its sister town Dunstable, England. There are several theories concerning its modern name. In one version, legend tells that the lawlessness of the time was personified in a thief called Dun. Wishing to capture Dun, the King stapled his ring to a post daring the robber to steal it. It was, and was subsequently traced to the house of the widow Dun. Her son, the robber, was taken and hanged to the final satisfaction that the new community bore his name. Another theory is that it comes from the Anglo-Saxon for &quot;the boundary post of Duna&quot;. A third version is that the name is derived from &quot;Dunum&quot;, or Dun, a hill, and &quot;Staple&quot;, a marketplace.

== History ==

Dunstable was first settled by Europeans in 1656 and was officially incorporated in 1673. It is likely named after the town of Dunstable in Bedfordshire, England, home of Edward Tyng, the town&#x27;s first settler. The original township of Dunstable, granted in 1661, consisted of two hundred square miles, including the Massachusetts towns of Dunstable, Pepperell, Townsend and Tyngsborough, the New Hampshire towns of Hudson, Nashua and Hollis, and parts of other towns as well. Increases in population leading to subsections becoming independent towns and the delineation of the northern boundary of Massachusetts in 1740 placed the northern part of Dunstable (present day Nashua) in New Hampshire, so the southern part remains the Dunstable of today.

Today, Dunstable, in the face of urban sprawl, has held onto a largely rural character.

==Geography==
According to the United States Census Bureau, the town has a total area of , of which is land and (1.13%) is water. Dunstable is bordered by Pepperell to the west, Groton to the south, Tyngsborough to the east, and Nashua and Hollis, New Hampshire, to the north.

The main road and only numbered route through Dunstable is Route 113; the nearest limited-access highway is US 3, two miles to the east. Dunstable does not have any public transportation in the form of trains or buses.

==Demographics==
As of the census of 2000, there were 2,826 people, 923 households, and 798 families residing in the town. The population density was . There were 944 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the town was 97.49% White, 0.11% African American, 0.04% Native American, 1.52% Asian, 0.07% from other races, and 0.78% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 0.53% of the population.

There were 923 households, out of which 47.5% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 76.7% were married couples living together, 7.2% had a female householder with no husband present, and 13.5% were non-families. 10.3% of all households were made up of individuals, and 3.7% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 3.07 and the average family size was 3.31.

In the town, the population was spread out, with 31.1% under the age of 18, 4.4% from 18 to 24, 31.4% from 25 to 44, 26.2% from 45 to 64, and 6.8% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 37 years. For every 100 females, there were 97.7 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 93.3 males.

The median income for a household in the town was $86,633, and the median income for a family was $92,270. Males had a median income of $61,425 versus $39,946 for females. The per capita income for the town was $30,608. About 2.1% of families and 1.9% of the population were below the poverty line, including 2.4% of those under age 18 and 2.1% of those age 65 or over.

==Climate==

In a typical year, Dunstable, Massachusetts temperatures fall below for 195 days per year. Annual precipitation is typically 44.2 inches per year (high in the US) and snow covers the ground 68 days per year, or 18.6% of the year (high for the US). It may be helpful to understand the yearly precipitation by imagining nine straight days of moderate rain per year. The humidity is below 60% for approximately 25.4 days, or 7% of the year.

==Education==

=== District schools ===
* Boutwell School
* Swallow Union Elementary School
* Florence Roche Elementary School
* Groton-Dunstable Regional Middle School
* Groton-Dunstable Regional High School
* Prescott Elementary School (Closed after the 2007–2008 school year due to budget cuts)

=== Other public schools ===

* Greater Lowell Technical High School – Public Regional Technical High School in Tyngsborough

==Points of interest==

*&quot;The Little Red Schoolhouse&quot; is a historical building located on route 113 near the Tyngsborough border. This school house originally came from Tyngsborough. Local students take field trips there to historically re-enact a school day. An annual Strawberry Festival is also held there. Boy Scout Troop 28 of Dunstable holds a Mother&#x27;s Day pancake breakfast there every year.
*The &quot;Sarah R. S. Roby&quot; Town Hall in located at 511 Main Street (Rt. 113) was built in 1909 and renovated in 2003. Most town offices are located here as well as meeting rooms for various meetings and events.
*The Town Commons across from the Dunstable Town Hall on Rt. 113 is the site of many town events including the summer &quot;Concerts on the Common&quot; live performance series and the Grange Fair in August. This is also the site for the annual auto in Dunstable.
*The Dunstable Evangelical Congregational Church (DECC) is located at 518 Main Street, adjacent to the Town Commons and directly across from Town Hall. While the congregation was established in that location in 1831, the current building dates from the early 1900s. Because it is the only church in town, it is often called simply &quot;the Dunstable Church&quot;.
*The Dunstable Free Library is located at 588 Main Street. In addition to the collection of books, periodicals, movies, children&#x27;s activities and historic items (which include a collection of typewriters and miscellaneous Girl Scouting materials), it is the site of many community activities as well as the site for town elections.
*Blanchard Hill is a conservation area and the site of a former ski resort.

==Notable people==
* Isaac Fletcher (1784–1842), United States Representative from Vermont
* Colleen Green (born 1984), independent musician
* Amos Kendall (1789–1869), United States Postmaster General during the administration of Andrew Jackson
* Amos Lawrence (1786–1852), merchant and philanthropist
* John Lovewell (1691–1725), Colonial militia captain who fought in Father Rale&#x27;s War
* Samuel Parris (1653–1720), Puritan minister during the Salem witch trials
* Ellen Swallow Richards (1842–1911), chemist, first woman admitted to MIT

==References==

==Further reading==

*Nason, Elias and George Bailey Loring. A History of the Town of Dunstable, Massachusetts. A. Mudge: 1877.
*&quot;1871 Atlas of Massachusetts&quot;. by Wall &amp; Gray. Map of Massachusetts. Map of Middlesex County.
* &quot;History of Middlesex County, Massachusetts&quot;, Volume 1 (A-H), Volume 2 (L-W) compiled by Samuel Adams Drake, published 1879–1880. 572 and 505 pages. Dunstable article by Rev. Elias Nason in volume 1 pages 416–427.

==External links==

*Town of Dunstable official website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2427167" start="0" end="9" title="Dunstable, Massachusetts" label="Dunstable"/>
<link wikidata="Q54073" start="27" end="58" title="Middlesex County, Massachusetts" label="Middlesex County, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="107" end="118" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q919778" start="177" end="186" title="Dunstable" label="Dunstable"/>
<link wikidata="Q919778" start="979" end="988" title="Dunstable" label="Dunstable"/>
<link wikidata="Q23143" start="992" end="1004" title="Bedfordshire" label="Bedfordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2432951" start="1207" end="1216" title="Pepperell, Massachusetts" label="Pepperell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1900880" start="1218" end="1226" title="Townsend, Massachusetts" label="Townsend"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577621" start="1231" end="1243" title="Tyngsborough, Massachusetts" label="Tyngsborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q2417176" start="1272" end="1278" title="Hudson, New Hampshire" label="Hudson"/>
<link wikidata="Q48274" start="1280" end="1286" title="Nashua, New Hampshire" label="Nashua"/>
<link wikidata="Q2417466" start="1291" end="1297" title="Hollis, New Hampshire" label="Hollis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7059178" start="1434" end="1468" title="northern boundary of Massachusetts" label="northern boundary of Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q192042" start="1641" end="1653" title="urban sprawl" label="urban sprawl"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="1728" end="1755" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q2432951" start="1852" end="1861" title="Pepperell, Massachusetts" label="Pepperell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3776991" start="1875" end="1881" title="Groton, Massachusetts" label="Groton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577621" start="1896" end="1908" title="Tyngsborough, Massachusetts" label="Tyngsborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q48274" start="1926" end="1932" title="Nashua, New Hampshire" label="Nashua"/>
<link wikidata="Q2417466" start="1937" end="1943" title="Hollis, New Hampshire" label="Hollis"/>
<link wikidata="Q759" start="1945" end="1958" title="New Hampshire" label="New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2078463" start="2034" end="2043" title="Massachusetts Route 113" label="Route 113"/>
<link wikidata="Q406241" start="2083" end="2087" title="U.S. Route 3 in Massachusetts" label="US 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="2222" end="2228" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2444" end="2449" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2457" end="2473" title="African American (U.S. Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2481" end="2496" title="Native American (U.S. Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2504" end="2509" title="Asian (U.S. Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2522" end="2533" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2569" end="2577" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2581" end="2587" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="2739" end="2754" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="3548" end="3565" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="3657" end="3669" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q5610754" start="4366" end="4403" title="Groton-Dunstable Regional High School" label="Groton-Dunstable Regional High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q2077144" start="4526" end="4562" title="Greater Lowell Technical High School" label="Greater Lowell Technical High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577621" start="4606" end="4618" title="Tyngsborough, Massachusetts" label="Tyngsborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q19460569" start="6219" end="6233" title="Blanchard Hill (Massachusetts)" label="Blanchard Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1673387" start="6316" end="6330" title="Isaac Fletcher (American politician)" label="Isaac Fletcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="6344" end="6372" title="United States Representative" label="United States Representative"/>
<link wikidata="Q16551" start="6378" end="6385" title="Vermont" label="Vermont"/>
<link wikidata="Q18718990" start="6388" end="6401" title="Colleen Green" label="Colleen Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q474264" start="6438" end="6450" title="Amos Kendall" label="Amos Kendall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753094" start="6464" end="6496" title="United States Postmaster General" label="United States Postmaster General"/>
<link wikidata="Q11817" start="6526" end="6540" title="Andrew Jackson" label="Andrew Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4747903" start="6543" end="6556" title="Amos Lawrence" label="Amos Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q6245390" start="6600" end="6613" title="John Lovewell" label="John Lovewell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265114" start="6666" end="6688" title="Dummer&amp;#x27;s War" label="Father Rale&amp;#x27;s War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3471206" start="6691" end="6704" title="Samuel Parris" label="Samuel Parris"/>
<link wikidata="Q219698" start="6746" end="6764" title="Salem witch trials" label="Salem witch trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q7273" start="6767" end="6789" title="Ellen Swallow Richards" label="Ellen Swallow Richards"/>
<link wikidata="Q49108" start="6836" end="6839" title="MIT" label="MIT"/>
<link wikidata="Q5360567" start="6879" end="6891" title="Elias Nason" label="Nason, Elias"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="116841" wikidata="Q5329136" url="?curid=116841" title="East Pepperell, Massachusetts">
<text>East Pepperell is a village and census-designated place (CDP) in the town of Pepperell in Middlesex County, Massachusetts, United States. The population was 2,120 at the 2020 census.

==History==

Like the town of Pepperell, East Pepperell is named for Sir William Pepperrell, a Massachusetts colonial soldier who led the Siege of Louisbourg during King George&#x27;s War.

==Geography==
East Pepperell is located in northern Middlesex County at (42.666956, -71.564063), in the eastern section of the town of Pepperell. It is separated from the main village of Pepperell to the west by the Nashua River. East Pepperell is bordered to the northeast by the town of Dunstable and to the south by the town of Groton.

Massachusetts Route 113 passes through the village, leading west into Pepperell village and east to Lowell.

According to the United States Census Bureau, the East Pepperell CDP has a total area of , of which , or 2.55%, are water.

==Demographics==
As of the census of 2000, there were 2,034 people, 714 households, and 566 families residing in the CDP. The population density was 557.0/km (1,437.7/mi2). There were 722 housing units at an average density of 197.7/km (510.3/mi2). The racial makeup of the CDP was 96.21% White, 0.84% African American, 0.20% Native American, 0.39% Asian, 0.69% from other races, and 1.67% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 1.18% of the population.

There were 714 households, out of which 43.4% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 58.5% were married couples living together, 17.4% had a female householder with no husband present, and 20.6% were non-families. 16.1% of all households were made up of individuals, and 4.1% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.85 and the average family size was 3.18.

In the CDP, the age distribution of the population shows 29.7% under the age of 18, 8.6% from 18 to 24, 31.1% from 25 to 44, 23.4% from 45 to 64, and 7.2% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 34 years. For every 100 females, there were 95.8 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 90.0 males.

The median income for a household in the CDP was $55,272, and the median income for a family was $57,391. Males had a median income of $38,897 versus $31,129 for females. The per capita income for the CDP was $20,759. None of the families and 1.8% of the population were living below the poverty line, including no under eighteens and 25.6% of those over 64.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5329136" start="0" end="14" title="East Pepperell, Massachusetts" label="East Pepperell"/>
<link wikidata="Q498162" start="32" end="55" title="census-designated place" label="census-designated place"/>
<link wikidata="Q2432951" start="77" end="86" title="Pepperell, Massachusetts" label="Pepperell"/>
<link wikidata="Q54073" start="90" end="121" title="Middlesex County, Massachusetts" label="Middlesex County, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="170" end="181" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153790" start="257" end="275" title="William Pepperrell" label="William Pepperrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152894" start="322" end="341" title="Siege of Louisbourg (1745)" label="Siege of Louisbourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q517578" start="349" end="371" title="King George&amp;#x27;s War" label="King George&amp;#x27;s War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7166410" start="561" end="570" title="Pepperell (CDP), Massachusetts" label="Pepperell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6966914" start="590" end="602" title="Nashua River" label="Nashua River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2427167" start="663" end="672" title="Dunstable, Massachusetts" label="Dunstable"/>
<link wikidata="Q3776991" start="705" end="711" title="Groton, Massachusetts" label="Groton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2078463" start="714" end="737" title="Massachusetts Route 113" label="Massachusetts Route 113"/>
<link wikidata="Q49162" start="814" end="820" title="Lowell, Massachusetts" label="Lowell"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="840" end="867" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="974" end="980" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1236" end="1241" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1249" end="1265" title="African American (U.S. Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1273" end="1288" title="Native American (U.S. Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1296" end="1301" title="Asian (U.S. Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1314" end="1325" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1361" end="1369" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1373" end="1379" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="2461" end="2473" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="116842" wikidata="Q54151" url="?curid=116842" title="Everett, Massachusetts">
<text>Everett is a city in Middlesex County, Massachusetts, United States, directly north of Boston, bordering the neighborhood of Charlestown. The population was 49,075 at the time of the 2020 United States Census.

Everett was the last city in the United States to have a bicameral legislature, which was composed of a seven-member Board of Aldermen and an eighteen-member Common Council. On November 8, 2011, the voters approved a new City Charter that changed the City Council to a unicameral body with eleven members – six ward councilors and five councilors-at-large. The new City Council was elected during the 2013 City Election.

==History==
Everett was originally part of Charlestown, and later Malden. It separated from Malden in 1870. The community was named after Edward Everett, who served as U.S. Representative, U.S. Senator, the 15th Governor of Massachusetts, Minister to Great Britain, and United States Secretary of State. He also served as President of Harvard University.

In 1892, Everett was upgraded from a town to a city. On December 13, 1892, Alonzo H. Evans defeated George E. Smith to become Everett&#x27;s first mayor. Landfill has expanded the Everett shoreline over the centuries. At some point between 1905 and 1912, it connected the mainland to what was formerly White Island in the Mystic River. The bridge of the Grand Junction Railroad was originally built using this island for part of the crossing.

In 1919, Beacon Oil began construction of an oil refinery and storage yard near the Mystic River, opening in 1920. In its first decade, the facility experienced five major explosions or fires. In 1929, Beacon Oil was purchased by Standard Oil of New Jersey, also known as Esso and now known as ExxonMobil. The refinery shut down in 1965 due to lack of profitability, but the tank storage remained.

In 1971, Distrigas of Massachusetts began importing liquefied natural gas (LNG) at its Everett Marine Terminal in the Island End section of Everett. This terminal was the first of its kind in the country. It was purchased by GDF Suez North America, and as of 2013, supplied 20% of New England&#x27;s natural gas demand from its two tanks with a combined capacity of , equal to approximately one day of Massachusetts gas demand. In 2019, it was purchased by Constellation Energy, at the time a subsidiary of Exelon. , it receives 99% of LNG imports into the United States, mostly from Algeria and Trinidad. LNG is trucked to other storage sites around the state or heated to gas form and transferred by pipeline.

On September 16, 2014, the Massachusetts Gaming Commission voted to approve Wynn Resorts&#x27; proposal for a $1.6 billion casino to be located on a 33-acre site on the Mystic River in Everett. The casino, named Encore Boston Harbor, opened on June 23, 2019. After a remediation process to clean the site, Wynn Resorts constructed Encore Boston as an integrated resort with a hotel, a harborwalk, restaurants, a casino, spa, retail outlets, and meeting and convention space. Public amenities along the year-round harborwalk include a picnic park, paths for bikers and pedestrians, viewing decks, waterfront dining and retail, a performance lawn, floral displays, and boat docks. Wynn Resorts described the $2.6 billion development as &quot;the largest private single-phase construction project in the history of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.&quot;

Most of the remaining land south of the Newburyport/Rockport Line and Massachusetts Route 99 in Everett is taken up by a tank farm and oil terminal on the Mystic River. In December 2023, the Conservation Law Foundation announced it had settled a federal pollution lawsuit with Exxon. The company sold the site for cleanup and redevelopment starting with raising the land to avoid climate change-related flooding and adding apartment buildings near Route 16. Exxon also agreed to a deed restriction which prevents the land from ever being used for fossil fuel storage in the future.

Everett has an increasing population as people are seeking new households near downtown Boston while not wanting to pay the higher prices of living now associated with surrounding municipalities, such as those in neighborhoods of Boston, Cambridge, or Somerville.

==Geography==
Everett is bordered by Malden on the north, Revere on the east, Chelsea on the southeast, Somerville and Medford on the west, and Boston and the Mystic River on the south at Charlestown. Island End River flows through the city, though it was contained in a culvert and invisible to residents until being partly unearthed in 2021. Everett is a major part of the Port of Boston.

Some of Everett&#x27;s neighborhoods are Glendale, Woodlawn, the Village, and the Line. Glendale Park is the city&#x27;s largest park.

According to the United States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of , of which is land and (7.63%) is water.

==Climate==

In a typical year, Everett, Massachusetts temperatures fall below for 195 days per year. Annual precipitation is typically 44.2 inches per year (high in the US) and snow covers the ground 52 days per year, or 14.2% of the year (high in the US). It may be helpful to understand the yearly precipitation by imagining nine straight days of moderate rain per year. The humidity is below 60% for approximately 25.4 days, or 7% of the year.

==Demographics==
As of the 2020 United States census, there were 49,075 people, 15,435 households, and 9,554 families residing in the city. The population density was . There were 15,908 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 53.6% Non-Hispanic Whites, 14.3% African American, 4.8% Asian, 0.4% Pacific Islander, 2% from other races, and 3.8% were multiracial. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 21.1% of the population (9.3% Salvadoran, 3.0% Puerto Rican, 1.1% Colombian, 1.1% Dominican, 1.0% Guatemalan, 0.8% Mexican). The city also has a large number of people of Brazilian and Italian descent. In 2010, 33% of the residents of Everett were born outside the United States. This percentage was around 11% in 1990.

There were 15,435 households, out of which 27.6% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 41.8% were married couples living together, 15.2% had a female householder with no husband present, and 38.1% were non-families. 31.3% of all households were made up of individuals, and 11.8% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.45 and the average family size was 3.11.

The population was spread out, with 21.6% under the age of 18, 8.9% from 18 to 24, 34.8% from 25 to 44, 19.9% from 45 to 64, and 14.7% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 36 years. For every 100 females, there were 91 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 87.4 males.

The median income for a household in the city was $49,737. The median income for a family is $49,876. Males had a median income of $36,047 versus $30,764 for females. The per capita income for the city was $23,876. About 9.2% of families and 11.9% of the population were below the poverty line, including 16.9% of those under age 18 and 10.0% of those age 65 or over.

==Government==

===Local===
Everett has a mayor-council form of government, where the mayor serves a four-year term. The Everett city council was the last existing bicameral legislature in any American city, consisting of a Board of Aldermen and a Common Council. As of November 8, 2011, it became a unicameral City Council.

;Board of Aldermen
The Board of Aldermen consisted of seven members one from each of the city&#x27;s six wards and one Alderman-at-Large. All Aldermen were elected citywide for a term of two years.

In addition to the duties they shared with the Common Council, the Board of Aldermen was the licensing authority in the city and approved licenses for motor dealers, second-hand dealers, awnings, lodging houses, junk dealers, pool tables, open-air parking lots, coin-operated devices, Lord&#x27;s Day licenses, antique and precious metal dealers.

;Common Council
The Common Council consisted of three members elected per ward for a total of eighteen members. The Common Council shared equal responsibility for most legislative actions with the exception of licensing and confirmation of most Mayoral appointees.

===State===
Everett is represented in the state legislature by officials elected from the following districts:
* Massachusetts Senate&#x27;s Middlesex and Suffolk district
* Massachusetts House of Representatives&#x27; 28th Middlesex district

===Voter party enrollment===

==Education==

Everett has ten public schools, which include elementary schools, K–8 schools, and Everett High School. The city also has one Private K–8 school and had a private Catholic high school, Pope John XXIII High School, which was forced, due to financial difficulties, to close on May 31, 2019. Everett High School moved to its new location at 100 Elm Street beginning in the 2007–2008 school year.

==Landmarks==
Part of the historic Revere Beach Parkway, listed on the National Register of Historic Places, lies in Everett.

==Economy==

The Mystic Generating Station has been producing electricity since the early twentieth century. It was built by Boston Edison and is now operated by Exelon. It has the largest capacity of any electrical plant in the state.

The Leavitt Corporation has been manufacturing its trademark Teddie Peanut Butter in the city since 1924.

Besides Everett Square, Gateway Center just off Route 16 in Everett is a major retail shopping district with big box stores.

==Transportation==

Everett&#x27;s business district is focused on Broadway (part of Route 99), with many businesses and restaurants along the route. The Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority (MBTA) operates public buses through the city, which includes several routes that converge at a hub at Everett Square. A bus lane exists on Broadway, from Glendale Square (Ferry Street), to Sweetser Circle. MBTA also operates a subway system that includes Wellington (on the Orange Line), which lies just west of the Everett city limits in nearby Medford, and a commuter rail system with a stop in Chelsea to the southeast. Route 16 traverses the southern area of the city, providing access to U.S. Route 1 and Interstate 93. Both highways run just outside of the city limits and provide connections to Boston.

==Notable people==
See also :Category:People from Everett, Massachusetts

* Belden Bly, member of the Massachusetts House of Representatives
* Pat Bradley, Arkansas basketball player and sports commentator
* Matthew W. Bullock, Everett High School sports star, Dartmouth and Harvard Law School graduate, pioneering football coach, state government appointed service and national leader in the Urban League and the Bahá&#x27;í Faith
* Vannevar Bush, engineer and head of the United States Office of Scientific Research and Development
* George Russell Callender, military official and author
* Walter Tenney Carleton, founding director of the NEC Corporation
* Walter Carrington, US Ambassador to Nigeria &amp; Senegal
* Benjamin Castleman, pathologist and namesake of Castleman&#x27;s disease
* Lewis Cine, football player for the Minnesota Vikings
* Patricia Courtney, All-American Girls Professional Baseball League player
* Arthur Dearborn, Olympic track and field athlete
* Johnny Dell Isola, former National Football League player
* Louis DeLuca, member of the Connecticut Senate
* Omar Easy, NFL football player
* Maddy English, All-American Girls Professional Baseball League player
* Diamond Ferri, CFL &amp; NFL player
* Hub Hart, MLB catcher
* Pat Hughes, NFL player
* Brian Kelly, LSU head football coach
* John P. Kennedy, Member of the Massachusetts House of Representatives 
* George Keverian, Speaker of the Massachusetts House of Representatives
* Torbert Macdonald, member of the United States House of Representatives
* Hermon Atkins MacNeil, sculptor
* Mary Eliza Mahoney, first African American to study and work as a professionally trained nurse in the United States (not from Everett but is buried there)
* A. David Mazzone, judge and attorney
* George J. Mead, aircraft engineer
* Gertrude Nason, artist
* Nerlens Noel, Oklahoma City Thunder center
* Andrew &quot;Swede&quot; Oberlander, College Football Hall of Famer
* Al Pierotti, football, baseball, pro wrestling
* Ellen Pompeo, actress
* Dan Ross, NFL player 
* Danny Silva, MLB player, Boston Celtics assistant coach, WWI and WWII veteran, longtime Everett teacher and coach
* Paul L. Smith, actor
* E. Leroy Sweetser, U.S. Army brigadier general, resided in Everett
* Jim Tozzi, member of the PFFR art collective responsible for Adult Swim shows like Wonder Showzen, , and The Shivering Truth
* Joseph Frank Wehner, fighter pilot during World War I

==In popular culture==
* Everett was home to the set of the 2012 ABC series Boston&#x27;s Finest.
* The 2007 Ben Affleck film Gone Baby Gone was partially filmed and set in Everett.
* The old Everett High School was used for the filming of scenes for the Adam Sandler movie That&#x27;s My Boy, the Kevin James movie Here Comes the Boom, and most recently Ghostbusters (2016 film) starring Melissa McCarthy, Kristen Wiig, Kate McKinnon, and Leslie Jones.

==References==
==Further reading==
* &quot;1871 Atlas of Massachusetts&quot;. by Wall &amp; Gray. Map of Massachusetts. Map of Middlesex County.
* Dutton, E.P. Chart of Boston Harbor and Massachusetts Bay with Map of Adjacent Country. Published 1867. A good map of roads and rail lines around Everett/South Malden.
* Old USGS maps of Everett.
* &quot;History of Middlesex County, Massachusetts&quot;, Volume 1 (A-H), Volume 2 (L-W) compiled by Samuel Adams Drake, published 1879–1880. 572 and 505 pages. Everett article by Dudley P. Bailey in volume 1 pages 428–435.
* The &quot;History of Malden, Massachusetts, 1633–1785&quot;. By Deloraine Pendre Corey, published 1898, 870 pages. Note, Everett was originally South Malden.
* Births, marriages onin Everett Mass 4 Everett deaths and Deaths in the Town of en49DelorPendre Corey, published 1903.

==External links==

* Official website
* Everett Public Libraries 
* Everett Independent newspaper
* Profile at City Data
* Everett Leader Herald</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q54151" start="0" end="7" title="Everett, Massachusetts" label="Everett"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761265" start="13" end="17" title="List of municipalities in Massachusetts" label="city"/>
<link wikidata="Q54073" start="21" end="52" title="Middlesex County, Massachusetts" label="Middlesex County, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="87" end="93" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756813" start="125" end="136" title="Charlestown, Boston" label="Charlestown"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="183" end="208" title="2020 United States Census" label="2020 United States Census"/>
<link wikidata="Q189445" start="268" end="289" title="bicameral legislature" label="bicameral legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q3364526" start="328" end="345" title="Alderman" label="Board of Aldermen"/>
<link wikidata="Q701632" start="462" end="474" title="City Council" label="City Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q140247" start="480" end="490" title="unicameralism" label="unicameral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756813" start="676" end="687" title="Charlestown, Massachusetts" label="Charlestown"/>
<link wikidata="Q54149" start="699" end="705" title="Malden, Massachusetts" label="Malden"/>
<link wikidata="Q434905" start="771" end="785" title="Edward Everett" label="Edward Everett"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="801" end="820" title="United States House of Representatives" label="U.S. Representative"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="822" end="834" title="United States Senate" label="U.S. Senator"/>
<link wikidata="Q887117" start="840" end="844" title="List of Governors of Massachusetts" label="15th"/>
<link wikidata="Q887117" start="845" end="870" title="Governor of Massachusetts" label="Governor of Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q23666" start="884" end="897" title="Great Britain" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q14213" start="903" end="935" title="United States Secretary of State" label="United States Secretary of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="968" end="986" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3957" start="1026" end="1030" title="town" label="town"/>
<link wikidata="Q4734560" start="1064" end="1079" title="Alonzo H. Evans" label="Alonzo H. Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q6627511" start="1136" end="1141" title="List of mayors of Everett, Massachusetts" label="mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758000" start="1311" end="1323" title="Mystic River" label="Mystic River"/>
<link wikidata="Q802221" start="1343" end="1366" title="Grand Junction Railroad" label="Grand Junction Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q111669218" start="1442" end="1452" title="Beacon Oil" label="Beacon Oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q12353044" start="1478" end="1490" title="oil refinery" label="oil refinery"/>
<link wikidata="Q867662" start="1705" end="1709" title="Esso" label="Esso"/>
<link wikidata="Q156238" start="1727" end="1737" title="ExxonMobil" label="ExxonMobil"/>
<link wikidata="Q358333" start="1884" end="1905" title="liquefied natural gas" label="liquefied natural gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q13416787" start="2057" end="2065" title="GDF Suez" label="GDF Suez"/>
<link wikidata="Q259195" start="2289" end="2309" title="Constellation Energy" label="Constellation Energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1383669" start="2339" end="2345" title="Exelon" label="Exelon"/>
<link wikidata="Q262" start="2416" end="2423" title="Algeria" label="Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q128323" start="2428" end="2436" title="Trinidad" label="Trinidad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2274089" start="2621" end="2633" title="Wynn Resorts" label="Wynn Resorts"/>
<link wikidata="Q19564500" start="2757" end="2777" title="Encore Boston Harbor" label="Encore Boston Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2019586" start="2812" end="2823" title="Environmental remediation" label="remediation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11111030" start="2930" end="2940" title="Boardwalk" label="harborwalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="3361" end="3390" title="Commonwealth of Massachusetts" label="Commonwealth of Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q172516" start="3439" end="3464" title="Newburyport/Rockport Line" label="Newburyport/Rockport Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484085" start="3469" end="3491" title="Massachusetts Route 99" label="Massachusetts Route 99"/>
<link wikidata="Q592856" start="3534" end="3546" title="oil terminal" label="oil terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758000" start="3554" end="3566" title="Mystic River" label="Mystic River"/>
<link wikidata="Q5162928" start="3590" end="3617" title="Conservation Law Foundation" label="Conservation Law Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q156238" start="3676" end="3681" title="Exxon" label="Exxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="3779" end="3793" title="climate change" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="4212" end="4218" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q49111" start="4220" end="4229" title="Cambridge, Massachusetts" label="Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q49199" start="4234" end="4244" title="Somerville, Massachusetts" label="Somerville"/>
<link wikidata="Q54149" start="4284" end="4290" title="Malden, Massachusetts" label="Malden"/>
<link wikidata="Q54154" start="4305" end="4311" title="Revere, Massachusetts" label="Revere"/>
<link wikidata="Q54156" start="4325" end="4332" title="Chelsea, Massachusetts" label="Chelsea"/>
<link wikidata="Q49199" start="4351" end="4361" title="Somerville, Massachusetts" label="Somerville"/>
<link wikidata="Q54145" start="4366" end="4373" title="Medford, Massachusetts" label="Medford"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="4391" end="4397" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758000" start="4406" end="4418" title="Mystic River" label="Mystic River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756813" start="4435" end="4446" title="Charlestown, Boston, Massachusetts" label="Charlestown"/>
<link wikidata="Q49380476" start="4448" end="4464" title="Island End River" label="Island End River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567768" start="4622" end="4636" title="Port of Boston" label="Port of Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="4792" end="4819" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="5368" end="5393" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q7048763" start="5609" end="5628" title="Non-Hispanic Whites" label="Non-Hispanic Whites"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5636" end="5652" title="African American (U.S. Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5659" end="5664" title="Asian (U.S. Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5671" end="5687" title="Pacific Islander (U.S. Census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5697" end="5708" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378555" start="5724" end="5735" title="multiracial" label="multiracial"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5737" end="5745" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5749" end="5755" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q7406487" start="5803" end="5813" title="Salvadoran American" label="Salvadoran"/>
<link wikidata="Q7258666" start="5820" end="5832" title="Puerto Ricans in the United States" label="Puerto Rican"/>
<link wikidata="Q5147921" start="5839" end="5848" title="Colombian American" label="Colombian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5290725" start="5855" end="5864" title="Dominican American" label="Dominican"/>
<link wikidata="Q5614258" start="5871" end="5881" title="Guatemalan American" label="Guatemalan"/>
<link wikidata="Q581921" start="5888" end="5895" title="Mexican American" label="Mexican"/>
<link wikidata="Q873625" start="5944" end="5953" title="Brazilian people" label="Brazilian"/>
<link wikidata="Q50001" start="5958" end="5965" title="Italians" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="6205" end="6220" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="6997" end="7014" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="7107" end="7119" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308596" start="7237" end="7250" title="mayor-council" label="mayor-council"/>
<link wikidata="Q30185" start="7281" end="7286" title="mayor" label="mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q701632" start="7324" end="7336" title="city council" label="city council"/>
<link wikidata="Q3364526" start="7419" end="7436" title="Alderman" label="Board of Aldermen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3566274" start="7626" end="7630" title="Wards of the United States" label="ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q1453540" start="8376" end="8393" title="Massachusetts General Court" label="state legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q88207029" start="8447" end="8505" title="Massachusetts Senate&amp;#x27;s Middlesex and Suffolk district" label="Massachusetts Senate&amp;#x27;s Middlesex and Suffolk district"/>
<link wikidata="Q88098290" start="8508" end="8576" title="Massachusetts House of Representatives&amp;#x27; 28th Middlesex district" label="Massachusetts House of Representatives&amp;#x27; 28th Middlesex district"/>
<link wikidata="Q5417018" start="8706" end="8725" title="Everett High School (Massachusetts)" label="Everett High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7229203" start="8808" end="8835" title="Pope John XXIII High School (Everett, Massachusetts)" label="Pope John XXIII High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153520" start="9052" end="9072" title="Revere Beach Parkway" label="Revere Beach Parkway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719" start="9088" end="9124" title="National Register of Historic Places" label="National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q11990356" start="9161" end="9186" title="Mystic Generating Station" label="Mystic Generating Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q19866912" start="9269" end="9282" title="NSTAR (company)" label="Boston Edison"/>
<link wikidata="Q1383669" start="9306" end="9312" title="Exelon" label="Exelon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7746581" start="9381" end="9404" title="The Leavitt Corporation" label="The Leavitt Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9442" end="9462" title="Teddie (peanut butter)" label="Teddie Peanut Butter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484085" start="9699" end="9707" title="Massachusetts Route 99" label="Route 99"/>
<link wikidata="Q171985" start="9768" end="9810" title="Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority" label="Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q3539511" start="10067" end="10077" title="Wellington (MBTA station)" label="Wellington"/>
<link wikidata="Q152029" start="10086" end="10097" title="Orange Line (MBTA)" label="Orange Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q54145" start="10158" end="10165" title="Medford, Massachusetts" label="Medford"/>
<link wikidata="Q172457" start="10173" end="10193" title="MBTA Commuter Rail" label="commuter rail system"/>
<link wikidata="Q50825014" start="10209" end="10216" title="Chelsea station (MBTA)" label="Chelsea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2483972" start="10235" end="10243" title="Massachusetts Route 16" label="Route 16"/>
<link wikidata="Q2466309" start="10305" end="10317" title="U.S. Route 1 in Massachusetts" label="U.S. Route 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q94963" start="10322" end="10335" title="Interstate 93 in Massachusetts" label="Interstate 93"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="10414" end="10420" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="" start="10451" end="10495" title=":Category:People from Everett, Massachusetts" label=":Category:People from Everett, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q4882117" start="10499" end="10509" title="Belden Bly" label="Belden Bly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494460" start="10525" end="10563" title="Massachusetts House of Representatives" label="Massachusetts House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q7143233" start="10566" end="10577" title="Pat Bradley (basketball)" label="Pat Bradley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6790238" start="10631" end="10649" title="Matthew W. Bullock" label="Matthew W. Bullock"/>
<link wikidata="Q49116" start="10684" end="10693" title="Dartmouth College" label="Dartmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q49122" start="10698" end="10716" title="Harvard Law School" label="Harvard Law School"/>
<link wikidata="Q777636" start="10816" end="10828" title="Urban League" label="Urban League"/>
<link wikidata="Q22679" start="10837" end="10854" title="Bahá&amp;#x27;í Faith" label="Bahá&amp;#x27;í Faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q299595" start="10857" end="10870" title="Vannevar Bush" label="Vannevar Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q81096" start="10872" end="10880" title="engineer" label="engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q501416" start="10897" end="10956" title="Office of Scientific Research and Development" label="United States Office of Scientific Research and Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q5544116" start="10959" end="10983" title="George Russell Callender" label="George Russell Callender"/>
<link wikidata="Q482980" start="11007" end="11013" title="author" label="author"/>
<link wikidata="Q7966275" start="11016" end="11038" title="Walter Tenney Carleton" label="Walter Tenney Carleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q219203" start="11065" end="11080" title="NEC Corporation" label="NEC Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7964520" start="11083" end="11100" title="Walter Carrington" label="Walter Carrington"/>
<link wikidata="Q4888384" start="11143" end="11161" title="Benjamin Castleman" label="Benjamin Castleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7208" start="11163" end="11174" title="pathologist" label="pathologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1947302" start="11191" end="11215" title="Castleman&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Castleman&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q108742153" start="11218" end="11228" title="Lewis Cine" label="Lewis Cine"/>
<link wikidata="Q221150" start="11254" end="11271" title="Minnesota Vikings" label="Minnesota Vikings"/>
<link wikidata="Q7145531" start="11274" end="11291" title="Patricia Courtney" label="Patricia Courtney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052634" start="11293" end="11340" title="All-American Girls Professional Baseball League" label="All-American Girls Professional Baseball League"/>
<link wikidata="Q709096" start="11350" end="11365" title="Arthur Dearborn" label="Arthur Dearborn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5389" start="11367" end="11374" title="Olympic Games" label="Olympic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3312129" start="11375" end="11390" title="track and field" label="track and field"/>
<link wikidata="Q6266569" start="11401" end="11418" title="Johnny Dell Isola" label="Johnny Dell Isola"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="11427" end="11451" title="National Football League" label="National Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q6686987" start="11461" end="11473" title="Louis DeLuca" label="Louis DeLuca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494554" start="11489" end="11507" title="Connecticut Senate" label="Connecticut Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7089678" start="11510" end="11519" title="Omar Easy" label="Omar Easy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6726672" start="11543" end="11556" title="Maddy English" label="Maddy English"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052634" start="11558" end="11605" title="All-American Girls Professional Baseball League" label="All-American Girls Professional Baseball League"/>
<link wikidata="Q5270788" start="11615" end="11628" title="Diamond Ferri" label="Diamond Ferri"/>
<link wikidata="Q15999457" start="11653" end="11661" title="Hub Hart" label="Hub Hart"/>
<link wikidata="Q7143579" start="11677" end="11687" title="Pat Hughes (American football)" label="Pat Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4964312" start="11702" end="11713" title="Brian Kelly (American football coach)" label="Brian Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q938005" start="11741" end="11756" title="John P. Kennedy" label="John P. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5541324" start="11814" end="11829" title="George Keverian" label="George Keverian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6597942" start="11831" end="11884" title="List of Speakers of the Massachusetts House of Representatives" label="Speaker of the Massachusetts House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q2443745" start="11887" end="11904" title="Torbert Macdonald" label="Torbert Macdonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="11920" end="11958" title="United States House of Representatives" label="United States House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q610214" start="11961" end="11982" title="Hermon Atkins MacNeil" label="Hermon Atkins MacNeil"/>
<link wikidata="Q6779398" start="11995" end="12013" title="Mary Eliza Mahoney" label="Mary Eliza Mahoney"/>
<link wikidata="Q4647690" start="12152" end="12168" title="A. David Mazzone" label="A. David Mazzone"/>
<link wikidata="Q16533" start="12170" end="12175" title="judge" label="judge"/>
<link wikidata="Q40348" start="12180" end="12188" title="Lawyer" label="attorney"/>
<link wikidata="Q5541013" start="12191" end="12205" title="George J. Mead" label="George J. Mead"/>
<link wikidata="Q81096" start="12216" end="12224" title="engineer" label="engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q28563419" start="12227" end="12241" title="Gertrude Nason" label="Gertrude Nason"/>
<link wikidata="Q4667056" start="12252" end="12264" title="Nerlens Noel" label="Nerlens Noel"/>
<link wikidata="Q180950" start="12266" end="12287" title="Oklahoma City Thunder" label="Oklahoma City Thunder"/>
<link wikidata="Q222052" start="12288" end="12294" title="center (basketball)" label="center"/>
<link wikidata="Q4761109" start="12297" end="12332" title="Andy Oberlander" label="Andrew &amp;quot;Swede&amp;quot; Oberlander"/>
<link wikidata="Q4704603" start="12367" end="12378" title="Al Pierotti" label="Al Pierotti"/>
<link wikidata="Q215849" start="12416" end="12428" title="Ellen Pompeo" label="Ellen Pompeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159152" start="12440" end="12448" title="Dan Ross (American football)" label="Dan Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="12450" end="12453" title="National Football League" label="NFL"/>
<link wikidata="Q5220830" start="12464" end="12475" title="Danny Silva (baseball)" label="Danny Silva"/>
<link wikidata="Q131371" start="12489" end="12503" title="Boston Celtics" label="Boston Celtics"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="12521" end="12524" title="WWI" label="WWI"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="12529" end="12533" title="WWII" label="WWII"/>
<link wikidata="Q949387" start="12580" end="12593" title="Paul L. Smith" label="Paul L. Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q124159919" start="12603" end="12620" title="E. Leroy Sweetser" label="E. Leroy Sweetser"/>
<link wikidata="Q6198555" start="12672" end="12681" title="Jim Tozzi (PFFR)" label="Jim Tozzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7119088" start="12697" end="12701" title="PFFR" label="PFFR"/>
<link wikidata="Q379052" start="12733" end="12743" title="Adult Swim" label="Adult Swim"/>
<link wikidata="Q3736647" start="12755" end="12769" title="Wonder Showzen" label="Wonder Showzen"/>
<link wikidata="Q59635240" start="12777" end="12796" title="The Shivering Truth" label="The Shivering Truth"/>
<link wikidata="Q6283211" start="12799" end="12818" title="Joseph Frank Wehner" label="Joseph Frank Wehner"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="12841" end="12852" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q169889" start="12919" end="12922" title="American Broadcasting Company" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q16952951" start="12930" end="12950" title="Boston&amp;#x27;s Finest" label="Boston&amp;#x27;s Finest"/>
<link wikidata="Q483118" start="12963" end="12974" title="Ben Affleck" label="Ben Affleck"/>
<link wikidata="Q247182" start="12980" end="12994" title="Gone Baby Gone" label="Gone Baby Gone"/>
<link wikidata="Q132952" start="13109" end="13121" title="Adam Sandler" label="Adam Sandler"/>
<link wikidata="Q32535" start="13128" end="13146" title="That&amp;#x27;s My Boy (2012 film)" label="That&amp;#x27;s My Boy"/>
<link wikidata="Q44561" start="13152" end="13163" title="Kevin James" label="Kevin James"/>
<link wikidata="Q1170347" start="13170" end="13189" title="Here Comes the Boom" label="Here Comes the Boom"/>
<link wikidata="Q20120108" start="13209" end="13233" title="Ghostbusters (2016 film)" label="Ghostbusters (2016 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q229048" start="13243" end="13259" title="Melissa McCarthy" label="Melissa McCarthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q231382" start="13261" end="13273" title="Kristen Wiig" label="Kristen Wiig"/>
<link wikidata="Q723057" start="13275" end="13288" title="Kate McKinnon" label="Kate McKinnon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6530936" start="13294" end="13306" title="Leslie Jones (comedian)" label="Leslie Jones"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="116843" wikidata="Q596394" url="?curid=116843" title="Holliston, Massachusetts">
<text>Holliston is a New England town in Middlesex County, Massachusetts, United States in the Greater Boston area. The population was 15,221 at the 2020 census. It is located in MetroWest, a Massachusetts region that is west of Boston. Holliston is the only town in Middlesex County that borders both Norfolk and Worcester counties.

==History==

At the time of the earliest European settlements, where Holliston exists now was part of the territory of the Awassamog family of Natick (the first Nipmuc Praying Town), who also held authority over land near Waushakum Pond at Framingham and land near Annamasset at Mendon. In 1701, a large tract of land that included the west half of Holliston, eastern Milford and parts of Hopkinton and Ashland was given to the local Nipmucs in a land exchange with Sherborn. Their ownership of the tract was brief, as settlers purchased tracts of land there until all traces of Nipmuc presence disappeared.
The Nipmuc village of Mucksquit (translation – &quot;place of much grass&quot;), located on the shore of Wennakeening (translation – &quot;smile of the great spirit&quot;) was near the site of the Morse family farm, today known as Lake Winthrop.
The Morses, Sheffields, Marshalls and Bullards and many others followed Pout Lane (an old Native American foot-path, now partly modern day Rte 16 and Highland St., respectively) out to the new territory and settled along the path, thus forming a cluster of farms that would eventually become Holliston. John Eliot and Daniel Gookin (Christian missionaries) also followed the path in search of converts to Christianity and encouraged the Nipmucs to gather into villages, which made their task of finding them easier. Though not as famous as the Bay Path or the Old Connecticut Path, Pout Lane played a major role in the settlement of Holliston and other points southwest of Boston.
Holliston, then part of Sherborn, was first settled by Europeans in 1659 by Massachusetts Bay Puritans. The town of Holliston was incorporated on December 3, 1724, by virtue of approval by the General Court petition requesting that &quot;the western part of Sherborn be a Town.&quot; The name was taken in honor of Thomas Hollis of London, a benefactor of Harvard College. The first town meeting was held at the house of Timothy Leland on December 23, 1724, &quot;at which five selectmen and all other required officers were chosen.&quot; The town has grown from a community of a few hundred residents setting aside ten pounds per year for public education to a community of over 13,000 with an annual budget of over $40 million including more than $23 million for a nationally recognized school system.

In &quot;Holliston&quot; by Images of America and the Holliston Historical Society, it is written: An article in a local newspaper in 1894 heralded the charms of Holliston as the quintessential New England village, which, the story said, sprang into existence solely due to the talent of its people. Perhaps this is so, for there was no great moment in history to mark the founding of this town. Holliston has become a reflection of the accomplishments of the inhabitants of this place for more than three hundred years, and although the town had to admit to no magnitude of greatness to rival Boston, Lexington, or Concord, Holliston did define itself as a home to heroes of the commonplace. The feature story of 1894 said:

&quot;Many cities have sprung into existence because of their advantageous situations. The prosperity of Holliston is solely due to the genius of its people. A visit to such places stirs the blood, quickens the pulse and produces an enthusiastic desire to have a share in the developing good times. Massachusetts may be Whittier&#x27;s land, and the region from Marblehead to Amesbury may be full of legendary and spectral armies, and witchdom, and Buddha knows what, but the imaginative and the poetical must submit to the rights of the commonplace. The commonplace is honeycombed with the uncommon heroisms of the patient, everyday existence that make up the life of such plucky towns as Holliston. These are the things the average man is most interested in. Average life is but a portfolio of views of struggles with the commonplaces of everyday existence&quot; (Holliston 1997).
The town was once the largest producer of shoes in the United States. Although many of the shoe factories have been lost by fires and other problems, the largest company, the Goodwill Shoe Company, still has remaining empty factories on Water Street, many of which are now used as artists&#x27; studios. Competition from overseas factories is largely to blame for the loss of the industry.

Holliston&#x27;s Mudville neighborhood claims to be the location of the 1888 Ernest Lawrence Thayer poem, &quot;Casey at the Bat&quot;, and maintains an ongoing rivalry with Stockton, California, which makes the same claim regarding the poem&#x27;s setting.

===The Legend of Balancing Rock===
On the north side of Route 16 heading into Milford sits a large rock, some in length, in width, thick, and weighing easily over 5 tons (4.5 metric tons). The rock appears to be balanced precariously on an outcrop of granite ledge. On November 6, 1789, General George Washington led his entourage from Boston to New York via this route. He recalled in his diary the road in Holliston that would eventually be honored with his name, &quot;an indifferent road, diversified by good and bad land, cultivated and in woods, some high barren, others low, wet and piney.&quot; Legend has it that, as they came across this &quot;Balancing Rock,&quot; they took the opportunity to have some fun and tried their best to tip over the rock. It is said that the General himself, quite amused at the spectacle, added his muscle in an attempt to push the rock off its natural pedestal. Their efforts—and those of many others over the years—were to no avail. On September 22, 2020, Balancing Rock appears to have finally fallen. The rock is on the property of the Balancing Rock development, a community for &quot;active&quot; adults over the age of 55.

==Geography==
According to the United States Census Bureau, the town has a total area of , of which is land and is water. Water covers 1.73% of the town&#x27;s total area. The Charles River passes near the southern region of town.

It is located west of Boston and is within short driving distance of Interstate 495 and the Massachusetts Turnpike (part of Interstate 90). Massachusetts Route 16 and Massachusetts Route 126 pass through the town.

===Historic districts===

With a history spanning nearly three centuries, Holliston has many smaller divisions within its borders with names tied to a host of historic and cultural origins. Although the town is only served by one post-office today, several of its historic villages originated from previous post offices as well as train stops on the Boston and Albany Railroad&#x27;s Milford line. Today the town retains two official historic districts, both of which contain smaller landmark areas of historic significance. There are several additional residential developments and other areas of Holliston which retain their own colloquial names, however at this time the following are the only areas officially recognized as historic by the town and the U.S. Geologic Survey.

* Braggville
* East Holliston
* Gooch Corners
* Metcalf
*Thomas Hollis Historic District
**Mudville
* Brentwood
* Lakeside

===Adjacent towns===
Holliston is located in eastern Massachusetts, bordered by:

*Sherborn on the east
*Millis on the southeast
*Medway on the south
*Milford on the southwest
*Hopkinton on the northwest
*Ashland on the north

==Demographics==

As of the census of 2000, there were 13,801 people, 4,795 households, and 3,842 families residing in the town. The population density was . There were 4,868 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the town was 96.7% White, 0.9% African American, 0.9% Native American, 1.2% Asian, 0.3% from other races, and 0.8% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 1.4% of the population. Ancestries of Holliston residents are reported to be Irish (29.4%), Italian (18.3%), English (17.8%), German (9.7%), French (5.6%), and Polish (5.6%).

There were 4,795 households, out of which 44.2% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 70.2% were married couples living together, 7.5% had a female householder with no husband present, and 19.9% were non-families. Of all households, 16.4% were made up of individuals, and 6.0% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.87 and the average family size was 3.25.

In the town, the population was spread out, with 30.0% under the age of 18, 4.8% from 18 to 24, 29.4% from 25 to 44, 26.9% from 45 to 64, and 8.9% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 38.2 years. For every 100 females, there were 96.3 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 91.8 males.

In 2000, the median income for a household in the town was $78,092, and the median income for a family was $84,878. Males had a median income of $48,473 versus $36,405 for females. The per capita income for the town was $32,116. As of the census of 2000, about 1.5% of families and 2.4% of the population were below the poverty line, including 2.9% of those under age 18 and 9.5% of those age 65 or over.

In 2009, 79% of Holliston residents age 25 and over held bachelor&#x27;s degrees or higher and 35.8% held graduate or professional degrees.

==Government==

Holliston retains its original open town meeting form of government, in which registered voters act as the town&#x27;s legislature. The town&#x27;s day-to-day affairs are overseen by an elected Board of Selectmen with a Town Administrator.

==Education==

The Town of Holliston has a public school system which serves students from kindergarten through twelfth grade. Schools in the district include two elementary schools, a middle school and a high school. Public schools include: Sam Placentino Elementary School, Fred W. Miller Elementary School, Robert H. Adams Middle School, and Holliston High School.

Holliston High School was ranked among the top 150 best public high schools in Greater Boston.

The Holliston public school system also maintains a Montessori and French Immersion program that students can enroll in upon entering kindergarten.

== Environment ==
Within Holliston there are five registered Superfund sites. Three of these sites are still monitored by CERCLIS (Comprehensive
Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Information System).

An archived status indicates that the site has been cleaned, requires no further investigation, and poses little to no threat. A Non-NPL status indicates the sites are not considered to be the most hazardous by the EPA and are therefore not included in the NPL, but the clean-up of the site has not been completed. Non-NPL sites are still monitored by CERCLIS and are considered open or active sites. An NPL status indicates that the EPA considers the site to pose serious health and environmental risks. NPL sites are considered to be the most hazardous sites in the nation.

=== Axton Cross Corp ===
Established in 1967, &quot;the site was an Industrial Chemical Distributor for the textile, paper, rubber, metals and plastics industries.&quot; In the early 1990s the company filed for bankruptcy and the facility closed. The site is 8.6 acres of developed and undeveloped land which consist of two buildings. The
buildings are being considered for demolition.

According to the Mass DEP Axton Cross is considered to be a Disposal Site. The chemicals recorded by the Mass DEP were oil and other unknown hazardous materials. According to locals, &quot;Axton-Cross polluted the property it owned and the land surrounding it and the wildlife with toxic chemicals.&quot; According to the EPA&#x27;s last inspection (August 8, 1995), the water was not impaired, but the Ozone is considered to be a Non-Attainment Area. No further data was recorded.

=== Bird Property (Prentice Street Property) ===
In 1966 a gravel mining permit for the property was granted to a Charles Bird. Mining of the land continued into the late 1970s. Through the late 1960s to early 1980s the mined areas were filled with building debris and commercial solid waste. The property was also used for tire stockpiling. The site is approximately 53 acres. The land is being considered for the construction of residential housing.

Since then the Mass DEP and EPA have ordered remedial activities which included the removal of: potential contaminants, solid waste, construction debris, tires, and over 70 tons of impacted soils. The groundwater plume from the site contains low levels of a chemical called TCE. Due to the low and naturally declining levels (due to the removal of the source) the Mass DEP to conclude that no further water clean-up is required. Other chemicals recorded by the Mass DEP were VOCs. According to the EPA&#x27;s inspection the Ozone is considered to be a Non-Attainment Area. No further data was recorded.

=== Photofabrication Engineering Inc. ===
Founded in 1968, Photofabrication Engineering, Inc. (PEI) manufactures precision metal parts for computers and semiconductors. The company moved from Holliston to Milford, MA in 1984. The newer
facility has helped PEI become an environmentally cleaner manufacturer.

Chemicals recorded by the Mass DEP were chlorinated solvents, metals, and wastewater discharge. The Mass DEP considers the site to be in phase IV of V. In this phase a cleanup plan is implemented. According to the EPA&#x27;s inspection, the water was not impaired, but the Ozone is
considered to be a Non-Attainment Area. No further data was recorded.

==Points of interest==
* Bogastow Brook Viaduct, also known as the Arch Bridge, off Woodland Street, named as one of the 1,000 places to visit in Massachusetts
*Bullard Farm, the preserved homestead of the Bullard family, some of the first settlers of the town. Established in 1652, it served as the family&#x27;s farm until 1916.
* Fatima Shrine, a restful haven in a peaceful rustic setting, Fatima Shrine is an oasis for prayer, reflection, and meditation. The rosary walk at Fatima Shrine is believed to be the world&#x27;s largest rosary.
* Fiske&#x27;s General Store, founded in 1863, is the oldest retail business in town. Known for its catchphrase, &quot;&#x27;most everything&quot;.
* First Congregational Church of Holliston, built on the site of Holliston&#x27;s original meeting house, is the holding institution of the King James Bible donated by Thomas Hollis in 1724.
* Holliston Police Station is host to one of the American sycamore trees which flew as seeds to the moon on Apollo 14.
* Lake Winthrop is nearly in diameter and covers approximately . It was originally called &quot;Dean Winthrop&#x27;s Pond.&quot; and used as a boundary marker for his land. Dean was the son of John Winthrop. The town history states that the Nipmuck tribe, a clan of the Algonquian Indians, lived on the lake&#x27;s southwestern shore in the village of Musquit near present-day Lake Grove Cemetery. The lake was then called Wennakeening, meaning &quot;smile of the great spirit&quot; or &quot;pleasant smile&quot;. Today, Lake Winthrop offers fishing, kayaking, and swimming. In season 5 episode 4 of the sitcom &quot;Cheers&quot; Woody, Norm and Cliff go on a fishing outing to Lake Winthrop.
* Mount Hollis Lodge A.F. &amp; A.M., founded in Holliston on February 14, 1865. This Masonic Lodge resides in a historic building that was once the Methodist Church in Holliston.
* Upper Charles River Trail, a scenic, recreational path for bicycling, walking, cross-country skiing, roller-blading, and other non-motorized uses. When completed, the trail will connect Holliston to Ashland, Hopkinton, Milford, and Sherborn.

===Golf courses===
* Pinecrest Golf Club, 18-hole golf course

===Parks and playing fields===
* Goodwill Park, playground for children, tennis courts, baseball and soccer fields
* Patoma Park, Stoddard Park&#x27;s sister park offers woodland trails for hiking and recreational activities
* Pleasure Point, located on Lake Winthrop with a beach, picnic area, playground, and boat launch
* Stoddard Park, located on Lake Winthrop with a beach, picnic area, and recreational area (two youth baseball/softball diamonds)
* Weston Pond, multi-sport practice and soccer playing fields.
* Damigella Field, large baseball diamond and softball fields, part of the elementary and middle school complex.
* Kamitian Field, multi-sport artificial turf surface, part of the high school complex.
* Marshall Street Soccer Fields (Private, managed by Holliston Youth Soccer)

==Notable people==
* Arthur Judson Brown, clergyman, missionary, author
* Lyndon Byers, retired NHL right-wing, formerly a radio personality for &quot;The Hill-man Morning Show&quot;
* Mike Condon, goalie for the Ottawa Senators, played for the Montreal Canadiens and briefly for the Pittsburgh Penguins
* McKay Coppins, journalist, political personality
* Joseph Fish, first Major League Baseball player from Holliston, signed by the Boston Red Sox in 1957. Played in the Red Sox minor league system for one year.
* Adam Green, director, writer and or actor for movies &quot;Hatchet&quot; and &quot;Frozen&quot; among other horror films
* Mike Grier, forward for Edmonton Oilers, Washington Capitols, Buffalo Sabres and San Jose Sharks
* Michael Mantenuto, actor (Jack O&#x27;Callahan in &quot;Miracle&quot;)
* Greg Mauldin, center for Austrian Hockey League&#x27;s KHL Medveščak Zagreb, previously played for the NHL&#x27;s Columbus Blue Jackets, New York Islanders, and Colorado Avalanche
* Jo Dee Messina, popular country music singer
* Andrew Natsios, director, United States Agency for International Development
* Shirley Nelson, award-winning author
* Albert P. Rockwood, early Latter Day Saint leader
* John Sencio, national television personality – HGTV, NBC, MTV
* Ken Stone, UFC bantamweight fighter
* Mark Sweeney, first baseman, pinch hitter for San Diego Padres, Milwaukee Brewers, Colorado Rockies and Los Angeles Dodgers
* Kevin Systrom, co-founder of Instagram
* Jeff Taylor, founder of Monster.com, University of Massachusetts graduate
* Amy Townsend-Small, director of the Environmental Studies Program at the University of Cincinnati
* Kara Wolters, professional basketball player and Olympic medal winner
* Ron LaPointe, NFL player

==References==

==Further reading==
* Bragg, Ernest A. &quot;The Origin and Growth of the Boot and Shoe Industry in Holliston and Milford, Massachusetts 1793–1950&quot;. 1st ed. Boston, 1950.
*&quot;1871 Atlas of Massachusetts&quot;. Wall &amp; Gray. Map of Massachusetts. Map of Middlesex County.
* &quot;History of Middlesex County, Massachusetts&quot;, Volume 1 (A–H), Volume 2 (L–W); compiled by Samuel Adams Drake, published 1879–1880. 572 and 505 pages. Holliston article by Rev. George F. Walker, pp. 470–483.

==External links==

* Town of Holliston official website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q596394" start="0" end="9" title="Holliston, Massachusetts" label="Holliston"/>
<link wikidata="Q2154459" start="15" end="31" title="New England town" label="New England town"/>
<link wikidata="Q54073" start="35" end="51" title="Middlesex County, Massachusetts" label="Middlesex County"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="53" end="66" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190137" start="89" end="103" title="Greater Boston" label="Greater Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="143" end="154" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q6824442" start="173" end="182" title="MetroWest" label="MetroWest"/>
<link wikidata="Q541788" start="490" end="496" title="Nipmuc" label="Nipmuc"/>
<link wikidata="Q7239081" start="497" end="509" title="Praying town" label="Praying Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q591912" start="1888" end="1896" title="Sherborn, Massachusetts" label="Sherborn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191350" start="1940" end="1957" title="Massachusetts Bay Colony" label="Massachusetts Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q137073" start="1958" end="1965" title="Puritan" label="Puritan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4499113" start="2179" end="2192" title="Thomas Hollis (1659–1731)" label="Thomas Hollis"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="2196" end="2202" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q49123" start="2220" end="2235" title="Harvard College" label="Harvard College"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="3263" end="3269" title="Boston, Massachusetts" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q929667" start="3271" end="3280" title="Lexington, Massachusetts" label="Lexington"/>
<link wikidata="Q523240" start="3285" end="3292" title="Concord, Massachusetts" label="Concord"/>
<link wikidata="Q5583661" start="4453" end="4474" title="Goodwill Shoe Company" label="Goodwill Shoe Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q288369" start="4746" end="4768" title="Ernest Lawrence Thayer" label="Ernest Lawrence Thayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2735619" start="4781" end="4797" title="Casey at the Bat" label="Casey at the Bat"/>
<link wikidata="Q49240" start="4843" end="4851" title="Stockton, California" label="Stockton"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="4853" end="4863" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q2483972" start="4984" end="4992" title="Massachusetts Route 16" label="Route 16"/>
<link wikidata="Q3857885" start="5006" end="5013" title="Milford, Massachusetts" label="Milford"/>
<link wikidata="Q23" start="5223" end="5240" title="George Washington" label="George Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="6131" end="6158" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q794927" start="6276" end="6289" title="Charles River" label="Charles River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1671364" start="6401" end="6415" title="Interstate 495 (Massachusetts)" label="Interstate 495"/>
<link wikidata="Q731271" start="6424" end="6446" title="Massachusetts Turnpike" label="Massachusetts Turnpike"/>
<link wikidata="Q94958" start="6456" end="6469" title="Interstate 90" label="Interstate 90"/>
<link wikidata="Q2483972" start="6472" end="6494" title="Massachusetts Route 16" label="Massachusetts Route 16"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484139" start="6499" end="6522" title="Massachusetts Route 126" label="Massachusetts Route 126"/>
<link wikidata="Q12053340" start="6897" end="6930" title="Boston and Albany Railroad" label="Boston and Albany Railroad&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q4955427" start="7329" end="7339" title="Braggville, Holliston, Massachusetts" label="Braggville"/>
<link wikidata="Q5328619" start="7342" end="7356" title="East Holliston Historic District" label="East Holliston"/>
<link wikidata="Q22073854" start="7375" end="7382" title="Metcalf, Holliston, Massachusetts" label="Metcalf"/>
<link wikidata="Q7790760" start="7384" end="7415" title="Thomas Hollis Historic District" label="Thomas Hollis Historic District"/>
<link wikidata="Q596394" start="7418" end="7426" title="Mudville, Holliston, Massachusetts" label="Mudville"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7429" end="7438" title="Brentwood, Massachusetts" label="Brentwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q591912" start="7534" end="7542" title="Sherborn, Massachusetts" label="Sherborn"/>
<link wikidata="Q610589" start="7556" end="7562" title="Millis, Massachusetts" label="Millis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2536948" start="7581" end="7587" title="Medway, Massachusetts" label="Medway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3857885" start="7602" end="7609" title="Milford, Massachusetts" label="Milford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009192" start="7628" end="7637" title="Hopkinton, Massachusetts" label="Hopkinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362736" start="7656" end="7663" title="Ashland, Massachusetts" label="Ashland"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="7706" end="7712" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="7934" end="7939" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="7946" end="7962" title="African American (U.S. Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="7969" end="7984" title="Native American (U.S. Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="7991" end="7996" title="Asian (U.S. Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="8008" end="8019" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="8054" end="8062" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="8066" end="8072" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="8376" end="8391" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="9197" end="9214" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="9332" end="9344" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q455752" start="9606" end="9623" title="open town meeting" label="open town meeting"/>
<link wikidata="Q4931397" start="9769" end="9787" title="Board of Selectmen" label="Board of Selectmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q16995672" start="10161" end="10182" title="Holliston High School" label="Holliston High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q3504641" start="10491" end="10500" title="Superfund" label="Superfund"/>
<link wikidata="Q3504641" start="10552" end="10559" title="Superfund" label="CERCLIS"/>
<link wikidata="Q460173" start="10864" end="10867" title="United States Environmental Protection Agency" label="EPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q6784250" start="11630" end="11638" title="Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection" label="Mass DEP"/>
<link wikidata="Q152810" start="11673" end="11686" title="Landfill" label="Disposal Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q7048842" start="12044" end="12063" title="Non-attainment area" label="Non-Attainment Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q18538" start="12376" end="12387" title="solid waste" label="solid waste"/>
<link wikidata="Q811861" start="12682" end="12701" title="construction waste" label="construction debris"/>
<link wikidata="Q407936" start="12823" end="12826" title="Trichloroethylene" label="TCE"/>
<link wikidata="Q910267" start="13024" end="13028" title="Volatile organic compound" label="VOCs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3857885" start="13358" end="13369" title="Milford, Massachusetts" label="Milford, MA"/>
<link wikidata="Q426809" start="13502" end="13522" title="Organochloride" label="chlorinated solvents"/>
<link wikidata="Q157739" start="14747" end="14764" title="American sycamore" label="American sycamore"/>
<link wikidata="Q178871" start="14806" end="14815" title="Apollo 14" label="Apollo 14"/>
<link wikidata="Q541788" start="15058" end="15065" title="Nipmuck" label="Nipmuck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1621197" start="15087" end="15097" title="Algonquian peoples" label="Algonquian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4799299" start="16814" end="16833" title="Arthur Judson Brown" label="Arthur Judson Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1878812" start="16867" end="16879" title="Lyndon Byers" label="Lyndon Byers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215892" start="16889" end="16892" title="National Hockey League" label="NHL"/>
<link wikidata="Q7946254" start="16944" end="16969" title="WKVB (FM)" label="The Hill-man Morning Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q21091155" start="16978" end="16989" title="Mike Condon (ice hockey)" label="Mike Condon"/>
<link wikidata="Q203013" start="17006" end="17021" title="Ottawa Senators" label="Ottawa Senators"/>
<link wikidata="Q188143" start="17038" end="17056" title="Montreal Canadiens" label="Montreal Canadiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q193643" start="17077" end="17096" title="Pittsburgh Penguins" label="Pittsburgh Penguins"/>
<link wikidata="Q23018219" start="17099" end="17112" title="McKay Coppins" label="McKay Coppins"/>
<link wikidata="Q808769" start="17310" end="17320" title="Adam Green (filmmaker)" label="Adam Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367316" start="17433" end="17443" title="Mike Grier" label="Mike Grier"/>
<link wikidata="Q205973" start="17457" end="17472" title="Edmonton Oilers" label="Edmonton Oilers"/>
<link wikidata="Q957952" start="17474" end="17493" title="Washington Capitols" label="Washington Capitols"/>
<link wikidata="Q131206" start="17495" end="17509" title="Buffalo Sabres" label="Buffalo Sabres"/>
<link wikidata="Q206381" start="17514" end="17529" title="San Jose Sharks" label="San Jose Sharks"/>
<link wikidata="Q29584344" start="17532" end="17549" title="Michael Mantenuto" label="Michael Mantenuto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544963" start="17605" end="17617" title="Greg Mauldin" label="Greg Mauldin"/>
<link wikidata="Q301660" start="17630" end="17652" title="Austrian Hockey League" label="Austrian Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464091" start="17660" end="17680" title="KHL Medveščak Zagreb" label="KHL Medveščak Zagreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q207507" start="17719" end="17740" title="Columbus Blue Jackets" label="Columbus Blue Jackets"/>
<link wikidata="Q194369" start="17742" end="17760" title="New York Islanders" label="New York Islanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q206297" start="17766" end="17784" title="Colorado Avalanche" label="Colorado Avalanche"/>
<link wikidata="Q464225" start="17787" end="17801" title="Jo Dee Messina" label="Jo Dee Messina"/>
<link wikidata="Q4758104" start="17834" end="17848" title="Andrew Natsios" label="Andrew Natsios"/>
<link wikidata="Q110360153" start="17913" end="17927" title="Shirley Nelson" label="Shirley Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4710946" start="17952" end="17970" title="Albert P. Rockwood" label="Albert P. Rockwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097673" start="17978" end="17994" title="Latter Day Saint" label="Latter Day Saint"/>
<link wikidata="Q6257294" start="18004" end="18015" title="John Sencio" label="John Sencio"/>
<link wikidata="Q3124856" start="18051" end="18055" title="HGTV" label="HGTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="18057" end="18060" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q43359" start="18062" end="18065" title="MTV" label="MTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q6388558" start="18068" end="18077" title="Ken Stone (fighter)" label="Ken Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3294249" start="18106" end="18118" title="Mark Sweeney" label="Mark Sweeney"/>
<link wikidata="Q721134" start="18152" end="18168" title="San Diego Padres" label="San Diego Padres"/>
<link wikidata="Q848103" start="18170" end="18187" title="Milwaukee Brewers" label="Milwaukee Brewers"/>
<link wikidata="Q388858" start="18189" end="18205" title="Colorado Rockies" label="Colorado Rockies"/>
<link wikidata="Q334634" start="18210" end="18229" title="Los Angeles Dodgers" label="Los Angeles Dodgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q10314243" start="18232" end="18245" title="Kevin Systrom" label="Kevin Systrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q209330" start="18261" end="18270" title="Instagram" label="Instagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q6175126" start="18273" end="18284" title="Jeff Taylor (entrepreneur)" label="Jeff Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q56616440" start="18349" end="18367" title="Amy Townsend-Small" label="Amy Townsend-Small"/>
<link wikidata="Q153265" start="18422" end="18446" title="University of Cincinnati" label="University of Cincinnati"/>
<link wikidata="Q585199" start="18449" end="18461" title="Kara Wolters" label="Kara Wolters"/>
<link wikidata="Q159821" start="18498" end="18505" title="Summer Olympics" label="Olympic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7364050" start="18521" end="18533" title="Ron LaPointe" label="Ron LaPointe"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="116844" wikidata="Q983602" url="?curid=116844" title="South Lake Tahoe, California">
<text>South Lake Tahoe is the most populous incorporated city in El Dorado County, California, United States, in the Sierra Nevada mountains. The city&#x27;s population was 21,330 at the 2020 census, down from 21,403 at the 2010 census. The city, along the southern edge of Lake Tahoe, extends about west-southwest along U.S. Route 50, also known as Lake Tahoe Boulevard. The east end of the city, on the California–Nevada state line right next to the town of Stateline, Nevada, is mainly geared towards tourism, restaurants, hotels, and Heavenly Mountain Resort with the Nevada casinos just across the state line in Stateline. The western end of town is mainly residential, and clusters around &quot;The Y&quot;, the intersection of US 50, State Route 89, and the continuation of Lake Tahoe Boulevard after it loses its federal highway designation.

==Geography==
According to the United States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of , of which is land and , or 38.80%, is water. Its elevation is about above sea level.

==Demographics==

The 2010 United States Census reported that South Lake Tahoe had a population of 21,403. The population density was . The racial makeup of South Lake Tahoe was 15,733 (73.5%) White, 182 (0.9%) African American, 232 (1.1%) Native American, 1,186 (5.5%) Asian, 39 (0.2%) Pacific Islander, 3,230 (15.1%) from other races, and 801 (3.7%) from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 6,665 persons (31.1%).

The Census reported that 21,034 people (98.3% of the population) lived in households, 181 (0.8%) lived in non-institutionalized group quarters, and 188 (0.9%) were institutionalized.

There were 8,918 households, out of which 2,421 (27.1%) had children under the age of 18 living in them, 3,100 (34.8%) were opposite-sex married couples living together, 983 (11.0%) had a female householder with no husband present, 594 (6.7%) had a male householder with no wife present. There were 857 (9.6%) unmarried opposite-sex partnerships, and 67 (0.8%) same-sex married couples or partnerships. 2,918 households (32.7%) were made up of individuals, and 652 (7.3%) had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.36. There were 4,677 families (52.4% of all households); the average family size was 3.06.

The population was spread out, with 4,400 people (20.6%) under the age of 18, 2,478 people (11.6%) aged 18 to 24, 6,416 people (30.0%) aged 25 to 44, 6,013 people (28.1%) aged 45 to 64, and 2,096 people (9.8%) who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 35.6 years. For every 100 females, there were 113.6 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 115.7 males.

There were 15,087 housing units at an average density of , of which 8,918 were occupied, of which 3,473 (38.9%) were owner-occupied, and 5,445 (61.1%) were occupied by renters. The homeowner vacancy rate was 4.5%; the rental vacancy rate was 14.6%. 7,684 people (35.9% of the population) lived in owner-occupied housing units and 13,350 people (62.4%) lived in rental housing units.

There was a difference in population based on the 2020 United States Census, which reported that South Lake Tahoe had a decrease in population from 21,403 in 2010 to the most recent census, of July 2020 to 21,175 inhabitants.

South Lake Tahoe education rate from 2017-2021, high school graduates or higher, 87.0% of persons age 25 years+.

==Education==
South Lake Tahoe and the surrounding unincorporated communities are serviced by Lake Tahoe Unified School District, which is composed of four elementary schools (Bijou Community School, Sierra House Elementary School, Tahoe Valley Elementary School, and the Lake Tahoe Environmental Science Magnet School) a middle school (South Tahoe Middle School) and a high school (South Tahoe High School).

Due to budget cuts, Al Tahoe Elementary School and Meyers Elementary School closed in 2004; however, Meyers Elementary School reopened as Lake Tahoe Environmental Science Magnet School after a year&#x27;s absence.

South Lake Tahoe also houses a community college, Lake Tahoe Community College.

South Lake Tahoe is the home of Tahoe Prep Hockey Academy.

==Politics==
The city council of South Lake Tahoe is composed of five elected members: three council members, a Mayor, and a Mayor Pro Tem. The Mayor changes every year and is elected by the City Council.

In the state legislature, South Lake Tahoe is in , and .

Federally, South Lake Tahoe is in .

==History==

The city incorporated in 1965 by combining the previously unincorporated communities of Al Tahoe, Bijou, Bijou Park, Stateline, Tahoe Valley, and Tallac Village. A post office was established in 1967.

Gambling arrived at the Lake in 1944, when Harvey&#x27;s Wagon Wheel Saloon and Gambling Hall opened in Nevada as one of the area&#x27;s first gaming establishments. Competition soon sprang up and so did the need for more permanent accommodations. By the 1950s, roads began to be plowed year-round, enabling access to permanent residences. When the 1960 Winter Olympics came to what is now Olympic Valley, Lake Tahoe was put firmly on the map as the skiing center of the western United States.

In 2012, the Lakeview Commons Park was renamed. As reported in the local media, &quot;The Washoe Tribe has presented the name &quot;Tahnu Leweh&quot; (Pronounced Tah-New Lay-Way) which, in native language, means &#x27;all the people&#x27;s place.&#x27; It is a name the Tribe would like to gift to El Dorado County and South Lake Tahoe as a symbol of peace, prosperity and goodness.&quot;

In August 2021, the entire city was forced to evacuate due to the Caldor Fire.

==Crime==
Some notable crimes have taken place in, or been linked to, South Lake Tahoe.

On December 8, 1963, Frank Sinatra Jr. was kidnapped by Barry Keenan, Johnny Irwin, and Joe Amsler. Sinatra was released, unharmed, soon after.

The disappearance of Donna Lass on September 6, 1970, has been linked to the Zodiac Killer.

The bombing of Harvey&#x27;s Lake Tahoe in 1980, took place just outside the city limits in Stateline, Nevada.

On May 18, 1987, Herbert James Coddington was arrested for the murder of two women and the kidnapping of two teenagers. He was found guilty of these crimes and sentenced to death in 1988.

In 1991, Jaycee Lee Dugard (age 11) was abducted from a bus stop in South Lake Tahoe; she was found alive in Antioch, California, in 2009.

==Transportation==

South Lake Tahoe is served by a major east–west highway, U.S. 50, which links the area with Sacramento, California, and Carson City, Nevada. Highway 50 often faces closures during winter due to bad weather conditions. 

The Lake Tahoe Airport serves general aviation, while the closest scheduled passenger airline service is available via the Reno–Tahoe International Airport in Reno, Nevada. 

Local bus service is operated by the Tahoe Transportation District. El Dorado Transit operates service between South Lake Tahoe, Placerville, and Sacramento.

Amtrak Thruway 20C provides a daily connection to/from Sacramento Valley Station to the west, with a few stops in between.

In 2024, The City of South Lake Tahoe began the process of starting a Joint Powers Agreement with El Dorado County, called South Tahoe Area Rapid Transit, which would compliment transit services provided by Tahoe Transportation District.

The South Tahoe airporter serves as an airport shuttle option from the Reno airport to the casinos at Stateline.

==Landscape==
==Climate==

South Lake Tahoe has a snowy highland climate featuring chilly winters with regular snowfall, and summers that feature warm to hot days and cool nights with very low humidity. The climate is either classified as a warm-summer Mediterranean climate (Köppen &quot;Csb&quot;), using the isotherm of the original Köppen scheme, or a dry-summer humid continental climate (Köppen &quot;Dsb&quot;), using the isotherm preferred by some climatologists. Summertime is also the dry season, with August averaging only of precipitation, in contrast to February&#x27;s . Depending on the year, snowfall can be extremely heavy in winter, with an average of , while the wettest “rain year” has been from July 2005 to June 2006 with and the driest from July 2002 to June 2003 with . December 2005 has been the wettest month with of total water-equivalent precipitation.

South Lake Tahoe averages 1 day per year that reaches or higher, most commonly occurring in July and August. Every month of the year averages at least 1 night with a low temperature of or lower and overall there are 223 mornings in an average year that fall below freezing, although only 5 fall to . High temperatures below occur on average on 12 days per year. The all-time record high is , set on July 22, 1988, and the all-time record low is , set on December 29, 1972, and subsequently tied on February 7, 1989.

==Angora Fire==


On June 24, 2007, a wildfire broke out at the Seneca Pond recreation area near Meyers, three miles south of South Lake Tahoe. The Angora Fire, so named for its proximity to Angora Ridge, stands as the worst forest fire in recorded Lake Tahoe history.

The fire spread throughout the Angora region rapidly, destroying dozens of homes and large tracts of forest. Highway closures followed by evacuations put the residents in the direct line of the fire. Hotels in the area responded by opening their doors to the hundreds of evacuees who needed shelter.

On June 25, 2007, a state of emergency was announced by Lt. Gov. John Garamendi acting on behalf of the absent Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger, who was traveling in Europe. There were no deaths, but over were burned, while more than 275 structures, including 254 homes and 26 other buildings, were damaged or destroyed. On June 27, 2007, Schwarznegger toured the area after he returned to California.

Full containment of the fire was announced on July 2.

==Caldor Fire==
==See also==
*Tahoe Keys, California
*Blacklist Festival
*Susie Lake

==References==
==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q983602" start="0" end="16" title="South Lake Tahoe, California" label="South Lake Tahoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q108093" start="59" end="75" title="El Dorado County, California" label="El Dorado County"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="77" end="87" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q26777" start="111" end="124" title="Sierra Nevada" label="Sierra Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q169962" start="268" end="278" title="Lake Tahoe" label="Lake Tahoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q400404" start="315" end="328" title="U.S. Route 50 in California" label="U.S. Route 50"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227" start="410" end="416" title="Nevada" label="Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020993" start="454" end="471" title="Stateline, Nevada" label="Stateline, Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548153" start="532" end="556" title="Heavenly Mountain Resort" label="Heavenly Mountain Resort"/>
<link wikidata="Q757988" start="735" end="749" title="California State Route 89" label="State Route 89"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="876" end="903" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="1043" end="1068" title="2010 United States Census" label="2010 United States Census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1214" end="1219" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1232" end="1248" title="African American (U.S. Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1261" end="1276" title="Native American (U.S. Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1291" end="1296" title="Asian (U.S. Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1308" end="1324" title="Pacific Islander (U.S. Census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1345" end="1356" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1397" end="1405" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1409" end="1415" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="1765" end="1793" title="marriage" label="opposite-sex married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q7120037" start="1951" end="1986" title="POSSLQ" label="unmarried opposite-sex partnerships"/>
<link wikidata="Q3449014" start="2002" end="2042" title="same-sex partnerships" label="same-sex married couples or partnerships"/>
<link wikidata="Q5433028" start="2226" end="2234" title="family (U.S. Census)" label="families"/>
<link wikidata="Q7568610" start="3792" end="3815" title="South Tahoe High School" label="South Tahoe High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q6477941" start="4084" end="4112" title="Lake Tahoe Community College" label="Lake Tahoe Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q30595955" start="4147" end="4172" title="Tahoe Prep Hockey Academy" label="Tahoe Prep Hockey Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q30185" start="4287" end="4292" title="Mayor" label="Mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1727855" start="4300" end="4313" title="Mayor Pro Tem" label="Mayor Pro Tem"/>
<link wikidata="Q3084210" start="4388" end="4405" title="California State Legislature" label="state legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q4704861" start="4577" end="4585" title="Al Tahoe, California" label="Al Tahoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4907245" start="4587" end="4592" title="Bijou, California" label="Bijou"/>
<link wikidata="Q4907251" start="4594" end="4604" title="Bijou Park, California" label="Bijou Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603937" start="4606" end="4615" title="Stateline, California" label="Stateline"/>
<link wikidata="Q7675625" start="4617" end="4629" title="Tahoe Valley, California" label="Tahoe Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5677761" start="4734" end="4784" title="Harveys Lake Tahoe" label="Harvey&amp;#x27;s Wagon Wheel Saloon and Gambling Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7567762" start="4816" end="4827" title="South Lake Tahoe (Nevada gaming area)" label="area&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q9634" start="5040" end="5060" title="1960 Winter Olympics" label="1960 Winter Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q822230" start="5081" end="5095" title="Olympic Valley, California" label="Olympic Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456583" start="5276" end="5288" title="Washoe people" label="Washoe Tribe"/>
<link wikidata="Q34198" start="5375" end="5390" title="Washoe language" label="native language"/>
<link wikidata="Q108372106" start="5642" end="5653" title="Caldor Fire" label="Caldor Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349639" start="5766" end="5783" title="Frank Sinatra Jr." label="Frank Sinatra Jr."/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5788" end="5797" title="Frank Sinatra Jr.#Kidnapping" label="kidnapped"/>
<link wikidata="Q4864374" start="5801" end="5813" title="Barry Keenan" label="Barry Keenan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5894" end="5921" title="Zodiac Killer#Donna Lass" label="disappearance of Donna Lass"/>
<link wikidata="Q5676938" start="5987" end="6022" title="Harvey&amp;#x27;s Resort Hotel bombing" label="bombing of Harvey&amp;#x27;s Lake Tahoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020993" start="6075" end="6092" title="Stateline, Nevada" label="Stateline, Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344861" start="6293" end="6310" title="Jaycee Lee Dugard" label="Jaycee Lee Dugard"/>
<link wikidata="Q495357" start="6393" end="6412" title="Antioch, California" label="Antioch, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q409726" start="6501" end="6508" title="U.S. 50" label="U.S. 50"/>
<link wikidata="Q18013" start="6536" end="6558" title="Sacramento, California" label="Sacramento, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q40881" start="6564" end="6583" title="Carson City" label="Carson City, Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q6477937" start="6668" end="6686" title="Lake Tahoe Airport" label="Lake Tahoe Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q597139" start="6787" end="6819" title="Reno–Tahoe International Airport" label="Reno–Tahoe International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q49225" start="6823" end="6835" title="Reno, Nevada" label="Reno, Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q7568609" start="6876" end="6905" title="Tahoe Transportation District" label="Tahoe Transportation District"/>
<link wikidata="Q5351201" start="6907" end="6924" title="El Dorado Transit" label="El Dorado Transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q927485" start="6968" end="6979" title="Placerville, California" label="Placerville"/>
<link wikidata="Q18013" start="6985" end="6995" title="Sacramento, California" label="Sacramento"/>
<link wikidata="Q4748907" start="6998" end="7012" title="Amtrak Thruway" label="Amtrak Thruway"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7013" end="7016" title="Amtrak Thruway#20C" label="20C"/>
<link wikidata="Q3097479" start="7053" end="7078" title="Sacramento Valley Station" label="Sacramento Valley Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q859654" start="7531" end="7547" title="highland climate" label="highland climate"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7716" end="7727" title="Mediterranean climate#Warm-summer Mediterranean climate" label="warm-summer"/>
<link wikidata="Q13996" start="7728" end="7749" title="Mediterranean climate" label="Mediterranean climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="7751" end="7757" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen"/>
<link wikidata="Q10856115" start="7842" end="7867" title="humid continental climate" label="humid continental climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="7869" end="7875" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen"/>
<link wikidata="Q169950" start="8912" end="8920" title="wildfire" label="wildfire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6826467" start="8971" end="8977" title="Meyers, California" label="Meyers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340268" start="9510" end="9524" title="John Garamendi" label="John Garamendi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2685" start="9565" end="9586" title="Arnold Schwarzenegger" label="Arnold Schwarzenegger"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="9609" end="9615" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7675616" start="9931" end="9953" title="Tahoe Keys, California" label="Tahoe Keys, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q4923118" start="9955" end="9973" title="Blacklist Festival" label="Blacklist Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q85804362" start="9975" end="9985" title="Susie Lake" label="Susie Lake"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="116845" wikidata="Q663035" url="?curid=116845" title="Lincoln, Massachusetts">
<text>Lincoln is a town in Middlesex County, Massachusetts, United States. The population was 7,014 according to the 2020 United States Census, including residents of Hanscom Air Force Base who live within town limits. The town, located in the MetroWest region of Boston&#x27;s suburbs, has a large amount of colonial history and a sizeable amount of public conservation land.

== History ==
Lincoln was settled by Europeans in 1654, as a part of Concord. The majority of Lincoln was formed by splitting off a substantial piece of southeast Concord and incorporated as a separate town in 1754. Due to their &quot;difficulties and inconveniences by reason of their distance from the places of Public Worship in their respective Towns,&quot; local inhabitants petitioned the General Court to be set apart as a separate town. Because the new town was composed of parts &quot;nipped&quot; off from the adjacent towns of Concord, Weston (which itself had been part of Watertown) and Lexington (which itself had been part of Cambridge), it was sometimes referred to as &quot;Niptown.&quot;

Chambers Russell, a Representative in the Court in Boston, was influential in the town&#x27;s creation. In gratitude, Russell was asked to name the new town. He chose Lincoln, after his family home in Lincolnshire, England. His homestead in Lincoln was later known as the Codman House property, which was occupied after his death by his relatives, the Codman family.

Lincoln is reportedly the only town in America named after Lincoln, England (and not the Revolutionary War Major General, Benjamin Lincoln or President Abraham Lincoln), although Lincoln, New Hampshire, was named for the 9th Earl of Lincoln, an English nobleman and incorporated in 1764, 45 years before Abraham Lincoln&#x27;s birth.

Paul Revere was captured by British soldiers in Lincoln on the night of April 18, 1775. Minutemen from Lincoln were the first to arrive to reinforce the colonists protecting American stores of ammunition and arms in Concord. Colonel Abijah Pierce of Lincoln led his troops, armed with a cane. He upgraded his weapon to a British musket after the battle. Five British soldiers who fell in Lincoln are buried in the town cemetery. A substantial portion of the first battle of the Revolutionary War, the Battle of Lexington and Concord, was fought in Lincoln.

Reverend Charles Stearns (1753–1826), a Harvard-trained minister, served the Congregational Church in Lincoln from late 1781 until his death. Only a handful of his sermons were printed, most in the early 19th century. In addition, Stearns was principal of the Liberal School, a relatively progressive and coeducational institution that opened in early 1793. While at the school, Stearns wrote and published a number of education-related works, including &quot;Dramatic Dialogues for Use in Schools&quot; (1798), a collection of 30 original plays that were performed by the students. After the school closed in 1808, Stearns continued to tutor students privately. Among his pupils were Nathan Brooks, a Concord lawyer, and George Russell, a Lincoln physician. Stearns&#x27;s published works can be accessed at Early American Imprints, a microform and digital collection produced by the American Antiquarian Society. A summary article that surveys Stearns as a producer of children&#x27;s drama is &quot;The Dramatic Dialogues of Charles Stearns: An Appreciation&quot; by Jonathan Levy, in &quot;Spotlight on the Child: Studies in the History of American Children&#x27;s Theatre&quot;, ed. Roger L. Bedard and C. John Tolch (New York: Greenwood, 1989): 5–24.

==Education==
The Lincoln School District operates elementary and middle schools, while the zoned high school is Lincoln-Sudbury Regional High School, in Sudbury, of the school district of that name.

Lincoln&#x27;s non-base area is home to one public K–8 school, the Lincoln School. In December 2018, voters in Lincoln approved the construction of a new K–8 school building and a Proposition property tax override to pay for the school. To date $80 million financing has been raised via bond issuance for a $93.9 million renovation project at Lincoln School.

The on-post K-8 school Hanscom School of Hanscom Air Force Base, a base which is partially in Lincoln, is operated the Lincoln School District. Dependents of active duty military living on the base are sent to Bedford High School of the Bedford School District. High school students living on the base who are not dependents of active duty military personnel are sent to Lincoln-Sudbury Regional High.

The private school The Carroll School maintains its middle school in Lincoln.

==Geography==
Lincoln has a total area of , of which is land and is water, representing 4.26% of the town&#x27;s total area. (Source: United States Census Bureau.)

==Demographics==
At the 2000 census, there were 8,056 people, 2,790 households and 2,254 families residing in the town. The population density was . There were 2,911 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the town was 87.16% White, 4.84% African American, 0.38% Native American, 4.17% Asian, 0.02% Pacific Islander, 1.33% from other races, and 2.09% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 2.97% of the population. The 21.03% drop in population between the 2010 and 2000 censuses was the largest of any municipality in Massachusetts. Diversity in the public schools is higher due to the METCO program.

There were 2,790 households, of which 45.6% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 73.4% were married couples living together, 5.4% had a female householder with no husband present, and 19.2% were non-families. Of all households 15.8% were made up of individuals, and 7.0% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.83 and the average family size was 3.18.

Age distribution was 30.7% under the age of 18, 5.4% from 18 to 24, 31.2% from 25 to 44, 21.7% from 45 to 64, and 11.0% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 35 years. For every 100 females, there were 94.5 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 90.7 males.

The median household income was $120,844, and median family income was $202,704. Males had a median income of $142,788 versus $61,786 for females. The per capita income for the town was $74,402. About 0.3% of families and 0.8% of the population were below the poverty line, including 0.2% of those under age 18 and 2.4% of those age 65 or over.

The majority of the land in the town is zoned for residential and agricultural use.

==Points of interest==
* Arborvitae Cemetery
* Bemis Hall
* Codman House
* DeCordova Sculpture Park and Museum
* Drumlin Farm
* The Food Project
* Gropius House
* Hanscom Field and Hanscom Air Force Base
* Hartwell Tavern
* Lincoln Center Historic District
* Lincoln Public Library
* Massachusetts Audubon Society Headquarters
* Mount Misery
* Virginia Road

==Transportation==
Commuter rail service from Boston&#x27;s North Station is provided by the MBTA with a stop in Lincoln on its Fitchburg Line. Lincoln was previously home to a second railroad station, Baker Bridge station, which was the site of a deadly 1905 train wreck.

==In popular culture==
* The 1988 They Might Be Giants album &quot;Lincoln&quot; is named after the town, as it is the band&#x27;s hometown.
* Lincoln is featured in the 2013 video game &quot;The Last of Us&quot;, as well as the 2023 HBO television adaption, although the game indicates that Lincoln is part of Amherst County, which does not exist; the real Amherst is a town approximately west of Lincoln.

==Notable people==
*Bradford Cannon, pioneer in reconstructive surgery
*David Herbert Donald, professor and Pulitzer Prize-winning Author
*Susan Fargo, Massachusetts state senator
*John Farrar, Harvard scientist
*John Flansburgh, musician, co-founder of the alternative rock group They Might Be Giants
*Miriam Sophie Freud, Austrian American psychosociologist, educator, and author, the granddaughter of Sigmund Freud
*Julia Glass, author
*Diana Golden, ski racer
*Alita Guillen, former television news anchor and reporter.
*Harriet Louise Hardy, first woman professor at Harvard Medical School
*Mary Hartwell, who played a prominent role in the battles of Lexington and Concord
*Maggie Hassan, Senator, New Hampshire Governor
*Greg Hawkes, keyboardist for The Cars
*Charles Kindleberger, economic historian and author
*John Linnell, musician, co-founder of the alternative rock group They Might Be Giants
*Nicholi Rogatkin, professional cyclist
*Joseph M. Sussman, MIT professor
*Ray Tomlinson, computer programming pioneer, inventor of e-mail
*Lester Thurow, Dean of MIT Sloan School, author
*Patricia Warner, spy for OSS during World War II
*Charles Stearns Wheeler, Transcendentalism pioneer
*Frank Wood, actor
*Robert Coldwell Wood, political scientist

==See also==
* Beaver Pond

==References==

==Further reading==
* &quot;1871 Atlas of Massachusetts&quot;. by Wall &amp; Gray.Map of Massachusetts. Map of Middlesex County.
* &quot;History of Middlesex County, Massachusetts&quot;, Volume 1 (A-H), Volume 2 (L-W) compiled by Samuel Adams Drake, published 1879 and 1880. 572 and 505 pages. Lincoln section by William F. Wheeler in volume 2 pages 34–43.
* 1940 US Census: enumeration districts 9-207 and 9-208

==External links==

* Town of Lincoln official website
* Lincoln Public Schools</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q663035" start="0" end="7" title="Lincoln, Massachusetts" label="Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q54073" start="21" end="37" title="Middlesex County, Massachusetts" label="Middlesex County"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="39" end="52" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="111" end="136" title="2020 United States Census" label="2020 United States Census"/>
<link wikidata="Q3498988" start="161" end="183" title="Hanscom Air Force Base" label="Hanscom Air Force Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q6824442" start="238" end="247" title="MetroWest" label="MetroWest"/>
<link wikidata="Q523240" start="441" end="448" title="Concord, Massachusetts" label="Concord"/>
<link wikidata="Q523240" start="910" end="917" title="Concord, Massachusetts" label="Concord"/>
<link wikidata="Q2565620" start="919" end="925" title="Weston, Massachusetts" label="Weston"/>
<link wikidata="Q54172" start="957" end="966" title="Watertown, Massachusetts" label="Watertown"/>
<link wikidata="Q929667" start="972" end="981" title="Lexington, Massachusetts" label="Lexington"/>
<link wikidata="Q49111" start="1013" end="1022" title="Cambridge, Massachusetts" label="Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q23090" start="1280" end="1301" title="Lincolnshire, England" label="Lincolnshire, England"/>
<link wikidata="Q5140311" start="1351" end="1363" title="Codman House" label="Codman House"/>
<link wikidata="Q180057" start="1506" end="1513" title="Lincoln, England" label="Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q817605" start="1569" end="1585" title="Benjamin Lincoln" label="Benjamin Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q91" start="1599" end="1614" title="Abraham Lincoln" label="Abraham Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q922740" start="1626" end="1648" title="Lincoln, New Hampshire" label="Lincoln, New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277346" start="1672" end="1687" title="Earl of Lincoln" label="Earl of Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q327071" start="1782" end="1793" title="Paul Revere" label="Paul Revere"/>
<link wikidata="Q118896213" start="1798" end="1826" title="Paul Revere Capture Site" label="captured by British soldiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062789" start="2417" end="2438" title="Congregational church" label="Congregational Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326583" start="3149" end="3172" title="Early American Imprints" label="Early American Imprints"/>
<link wikidata="Q4742987" start="3225" end="3253" title="American Antiquarian Society" label="American Antiquarian Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241293" start="3711" end="3747" title="Lincoln-Sudbury Regional High School" label="Lincoln-Sudbury Regional High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q591591" start="3752" end="3759" title="Sudbury, Massachusetts" label="Sudbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q5358885" start="4171" end="4181" title="K-8 school" label="K-8 school"/>
<link wikidata="Q3498988" start="4200" end="4222" title="Hanscom Air Force Base" label="Hanscom Air Force Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q4879152" start="4369" end="4388" title="Bedford High School (Massachusetts)" label="Bedford High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7721443" start="4581" end="4599" title="The Carroll School" label="The Carroll School"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="4775" end="4802" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="4835" end="4841" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="4930" end="4948" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5054" end="5059" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5067" end="5083" title="African American (U.S. Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5091" end="5106" title="Native American (U.S. Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5114" end="5119" title="Asian (U.S. Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5127" end="5143" title="Pacific Islander (U.S. Census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5156" end="5167" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5203" end="5211" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5215" end="5221" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="5558" end="5573" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940707" start="6168" end="6191" title="median household income" label="median household income"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="6315" end="6332" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="6424" end="6436" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q117562287" start="6620" end="6639" title="Arborvitae Cemetery" label="Arborvitae Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q4885125" start="6642" end="6652" title="Bemis Hall (Lincoln, Massachusetts)" label="Bemis Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q5140311" start="6655" end="6667" title="Codman House" label="Codman House"/>
<link wikidata="Q2019741" start="6670" end="6705" title="DeCordova Sculpture Park and Museum" label="DeCordova Sculpture Park and Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q17606892" start="6708" end="6720" title="Drumlin Farm" label="Drumlin Farm"/>
<link wikidata="Q16981121" start="6723" end="6739" title="The Food Project" label="The Food Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q4179781" start="6742" end="6755" title="Gropius House" label="Gropius House"/>
<link wikidata="Q3888255" start="6758" end="6771" title="Hanscom Field" label="Hanscom Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q3498988" start="6776" end="6798" title="Hanscom Air Force Base" label="Hanscom Air Force Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q85765861" start="6801" end="6816" title="Hartwell Tavern" label="Hartwell Tavern"/>
<link wikidata="Q6550523" start="6819" end="6851" title="Lincoln Center Historic District" label="Lincoln Center Historic District"/>
<link wikidata="Q30258105" start="6854" end="6876" title="Lincoln Public Library (Lincoln, Massachusetts)" label="Lincoln Public Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q6784185" start="6879" end="6908" title="Massachusetts Audubon Society" label="Massachusetts Audubon Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q49053646" start="6924" end="6936" title="Mount Misery (Lincoln, Massachusetts)" label="Mount Misery"/>
<link wikidata="Q110996150" start="6939" end="6952" title="Virginia Road" label="Virginia Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q14626453" start="6973" end="6986" title="Regional rail" label="Commuter rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="7000" end="7013" title="Boston, Massachusetts" label="Boston&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q54454" start="7014" end="7027" title="North Station" label="North Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q172457" start="7047" end="7051" title="MBTA Commuter Rail" label="MBTA"/>
<link wikidata="Q6550448" start="7057" end="7074" title="Lincoln (MBTA station)" label="a stop in Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q172548" start="7082" end="7096" title="Fitchburg Line" label="Fitchburg Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q111181425" start="7202" end="7225" title="Baker Bridge train wreck" label="deadly 1905 train wreck"/>
<link wikidata="Q420880" start="7262" end="7282" title="They Might Be Giants" label="They Might Be Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421879" start="7289" end="7308" title="Lincoln (album)" label="&amp;quot;Lincoln&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1986744" start="7420" end="7434" title="The Last of Us" label="The Last of Us"/>
<link wikidata="Q23633" start="7462" end="7465" title="HBO" label="HBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q87131973" start="7466" end="7485" title="The Last of Us (TV series)" label="television adaption"/>
<link wikidata="Q49164" start="7586" end="7593" title="Amherst, Massachusetts" label="Amherst"/>
<link wikidata="Q4954620" start="7656" end="7671" title="Bradford Cannon" label="Bradford Cannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5234936" start="7708" end="7728" title="David Herbert Donald" label="David Herbert Donald"/>
<link wikidata="Q7647812" start="7775" end="7786" title="Susan Fargo" label="Susan Fargo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6232764" start="7817" end="7828" title="John Farrar (scientist)" label="John Farrar"/>
<link wikidata="Q323653" start="7849" end="7864" title="John Flansburgh" label="John Flansburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q420880" start="7917" end="7937" title="They Might Be Giants" label="They Might Be Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302773" start="7939" end="7958" title="Miriam Sophie Freud" label="Miriam Sophie Freud"/>
<link wikidata="Q9215" start="8040" end="8053" title="Sigmund Freud" label="Sigmund Freud"/>
<link wikidata="Q6306433" start="8055" end="8066" title="Julia Glass" label="Julia Glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q3547943" start="8076" end="8088" title="Diana Golden (skier)" label="Diana Golden"/>
<link wikidata="Q4727360" start="8101" end="8114" title="Alita Guillen" label="Alita Guillen"/>
<link wikidata="Q16012995" start="8161" end="8181" title="Harriet Louise Hardy" label="Harriet Louise Hardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q49121" start="8208" end="8230" title="Harvard Medical School" label="Harvard Medical School"/>
<link wikidata="Q94690126" start="8232" end="8245" title="Mary Hartwell" label="Mary Hartwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q24053" start="8316" end="8329" title="Maggie Hassan" label="Maggie Hassan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3433399" start="8364" end="8375" title="Greg Hawkes" label="Greg Hawkes"/>
<link wikidata="Q858388" start="8393" end="8401" title="The Cars" label="The Cars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065713" start="8403" end="8423" title="Charles Kindleberger" label="Charles Kindleberger"/>
<link wikidata="Q707352" start="8456" end="8468" title="John Linnell" label="John Linnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q19666702" start="8543" end="8559" title="Nicholi Rogatkin" label="Nicholi Rogatkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q30069796" start="8583" end="8600" title="Joseph M. Sussman" label="Joseph M. Sussman"/>
<link wikidata="Q92631" start="8617" end="8630" title="Ray Tomlinson" label="Ray Tomlinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q326571" start="8682" end="8695" title="Lester Thurow" label="Lester Thurow"/>
<link wikidata="Q64206507" start="8731" end="8746" title="Patricia Warner" label="Patricia Warner"/>
<link wikidata="Q658626" start="8756" end="8759" title="Office of Strategic Services" label="OSS"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="8767" end="8779" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q94514882" start="8781" end="8804" title="Charles Stearns Wheeler" label="Charles Stearns Wheeler"/>
<link wikidata="Q331563" start="8806" end="8823" title="Transcendentalism" label="Transcendentalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3082862" start="8833" end="8843" title="Frank Wood (actor)" label="Frank Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q932181" start="8852" end="8872" title="Robert Coldwell Wood" label="Robert Coldwell Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q126203835" start="8910" end="8921" title="Beaver Pond (Massachusetts)" label="Beaver Pond"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="116846" wikidata="Q2433090" url="?curid=116846" title="Littleton, Massachusetts">
<text>Littleton (historically &quot;Nashoba&quot;) is a town in Middlesex County, Massachusetts, United States. The population was 10,141 at the 2020 census.

For geographic and demographic information on the neighborhood of Littleton Common, please see the article Littleton Common, Massachusetts.

==History==

===17th century===

Littleton was the site of the sixth Praying Indian village established by John Eliot in 1645 consisting of mainly Native Americans of the Massachusett tribes. It was called Nashoba Plantation, on the land between Lake Nagog and Fort Pond. The term &quot;Praying Indian&quot; referred to Native Americans who had been converted to Christianity. Daniel Gookin, in his &quot;Historical Collections of the Indians in New England&quot;, (1674) chapter vii. says:

Nashobah is the sixth praying Indian town. This village is situated, in a manner, in the centre, between Chelmsford, Lancaster, Groton and Concord. It lieth from Boston about twenty-five miles west north west. The inhabitants are about ten families, and consequently about fifty souls.

At the time of King Philip&#x27;s War between the English and Native Americans, the General Court ordered the Indians at Nashoba to be interned in Concord. A short while later, some Concord residents who were hostile to the Nashoba solicited some militia to remove them to Deer Island. Around this time, fourteen armed men of Chelmsford went to the outlying camp at Wameset (near Forge Pond) and opened fire on the unsuspecting Nashoba, wounding five women and children, and killing outright a boy twelve years old, the only son of John Tahattawan. For much of the war, the English colonists rounded up the Praying Indians and sent them to Deer Island. When increasing numbers of Massachusetts Bay officers began successfully using Praying Indians as scouts in the war, the sentiment of the white settlers turned. In May 1676, the Massachusetts General Court ordered that Praying Indians be removed from Deer Island. Still, many died of starvation and disease. Upon their release, most survivors moved to Natick and sold their land to white settlers.

The town was settled by Anglo-European settlers in 1686 and was officially incorporated by act of the Massachusetts General Court on November 2, 1715. It was part of the Puritan and later Congregational culture and religion of New England.

In his book, &quot;An Historical Sketch Town of Littleton&quot; (1890), Herbert Joseph Harwood wrote:

It is said that the name Littleton was given as a compliment to Hon. George Lyttleton, M.P., one of the commissioners of the treasury [one time Chancellor of the Exchequer], and that in acknowledgment he sent from England a church-bell as a present to the town but on account of the error in spelling by substituting &quot;i &quot; for &quot;y,&quot; the present was withheld by the person having it in charge, who gave the excuse that no such town as Lyttleton could be found, and sold the bell.&quot;

===18th century===

The few survivors of Nashobah Plantation had extreme difficulty in reviving the village. The few that returned intermarried with some of the English settlers who had bought land from them and quickly outnumbered the natives. The new community petitioned the legislature and incorporated as a town in 1714 with its limits (including modern Boxborough) bounded by the existing towns of The Plantation of Groton to the west, Chelmsford to the north, Stow to the south and west, and Concord to the south and east. The meetinghouse of the town moved from the area of Newtown to eastern triangle of the Town Common in 1717. Sarah Doublet, the last Praying Indian, passed on in 1736.

New neighboring towns formed from larger towns abutting Littleton. West Chelmsford soon grew large enough to sustain its own governance, and was officially incorporated as Westford on September 23, 1729, A new town including parts of Lancaster, Groton, and Stow was incorporated in 1732 as Harvard. A large section of West Concord won approval of the General Court and incorporated as Acton on July 3, 1735.

Through the 1700s, new towns Littleton like most towns was served by several taverns, which were a fixture of small New England towns through to the early twentieth century:
* The Long Store which was on Great Road across from the new Littleton Police Station was built around 1700.
* The Fox Tavern, 35 Foster Street, was also built around 1700.
* The Lawrence Tavern, also known as the Hartwell Tavern, was built on Crane Rd off Liberty Square in 1768.

In 1742, the Meetinghouse was moved to a new building (the present site of the Unitarian Church) at a cost of £900. This would be the community&#x27;s only house of worship for the remainder of the 1700s.

Construction of Warren&#x27;s Grist Mill (abutting 495 at the junction of Grist Mill Rd and Warren St) began in 1750. This mill processed the crops produced by the town residents through the eighteenth century.

Residents of Littleton contributed men to the militia system that was set up by the Crown to serve as self-defense against hostile First Nations peoples as well as the French in Canada. Men from Littleton served in the primarily Provincial Army that captured Louisbourg in 1745. This militia system evolved into the organization that confronted the British Regulars on April 18, 1775.

The minutemen and militia of Littleton marched and fought at Concord and the Battle Road on April 19, 1775. The militia company and the minutemen squads mustered at Liberty Square located on the southwest side of town on the Boxborough line (then part of Littleton). They marched from there through what is now Boxborough Depot and over Littleton Rd/Boxborough Rd to Newtown Road (Littleton), up over Fort Pond Hill (stopping briefly at the Choate Farm) and along Newtown Rd (Acton) to Acton Center. From there they marched the Isaac Davis Trail to Old North Bridge. Some writing suggests that the minutemen sped ahead to join the other minutemen at the bridge.

In 1782, the third request to incorporate as a separate town by the residents of present day Boxborough was granted by the General Court and incorporated on February 25, 1783, taking away almost a quarter of Littleton&#x27;s area on the south abutting Stow and Harvard.

In 1795, the town built its first public schools which served the children of Littleton until 1870:
* North School House, Old Great Road
* East Schoolhouse 540 Newtown Road
* South School House, 279 Foster Street
* West Schoolhouse, Sanderson Road

According to local lore, the town had a contingent of Loyalists who remained after the revolution and thwarted attempts to rename King Street as Main, Washington, or Adams streets. This has been the source of ribbing from neighboring towns, who call Littleton a Tory town.

===19th century===

During the 1800s, Littleton grew at a slow pace. It became known for its apple orchards and the cider produced in town. The Warren Gristmill changed over to operating as a sawmill in the second decade.

In 1822, Baptists in town decided to create their own society and build a church at the corner of King Street and Goldsmith Street. This was influenced by Unitarianism beginning to take hold in New England.

The lyceum movement, a Scottish and English means of spreading education; especially in the sciences to the masses came to Littleton when, following the example of Millbury, Salem, and Concord, Littletonians on December 21, 1829, decided, in their words, &quot;to promote mutual improvement&quot; through the formation of the Littleton Lyceum. By the time of its 25th anniversary, the Littleton Lyceum took the form and operation it would have for almost a century of lectures followed by questions and debate. During the Civil War or shortly thereafter, most lyceums petered out, but not in Littleton. Besides bringing about a brief return to public debating, the War was also long a subject for Lyceum, a venue where veterans lectured about their experiences and travel.

In 1840, the community fractured on sectarian lines. As a result the remaining members of the town meetinghouse, now Unitarians, realized that they needed a larger building and funded it by selling pews to the members. The Orthodox Congregational Society funded their building in the same manner the same year, 1841. The two churches have occupied their locations on Foster and King Streets to the present day.

The industrial revolution continued in Littleton with the arrival of the Fitchburg Railroad in 1844. The original station was built in 1845. A new train station was erected in 1879 and was used until it closed in 1970. This line served to be influential in the development of the town. Commuter service into North Station along this line began in the 1880s.

The Fitchburg was not the only railroad to arrive and serve Littleton in the Nineteenth Century. The Stony Brook Railroad line running from present day Ayer to Chelmsford maintained a station in North Littleton by Forge Pond. Just over the line in North Acton, there was also a passenger station with service on the Framingham and Lowell Railroad beginning in 1871.

With the railroads, local farmers grew in response to the availability of transport for their produce to markets in Boston. Some of the local farmers located along the rail line began to diversify their crops for sale in Haymarket, a few farms began to concentrate on dairy production, but Littleton became known for the number of orchards producing apples.

Abolitionism and Transcendentalism became popular movements in Littleton during the 1800s and were much discussed at Littleton Lyceum. Several Littleton men served in the Federal forces during the Civil War and are memorialized on a plaque on either side of the Houghton Memorial Building.

Further development of stores, shops, and business centered on the Common and the now growing Depot. By the common, the Conant Houghton Co. Mill was erected in 1880. Initially, it processed apple products, but moved into the production of clothing and military equipment in the late 1890s. In 1885, the quarantine station for the Port of Boston moved from Waltham to a farm on the Fitchburg railway line on the south west side of Mill Pond. Used to clear wild and domestic animals and made Littleton a center for horse-dealing and training.

In 1894-95, the Houghton Memorial Building was designed by Perkins &amp; Betton and built to house the municipal library. It was a gift from Elizabeth and Clement S. Houghton, he was the son of one of Boston&#x27;s wealthiest merchants, William S. Houghton. The elder Houghton, a Littleton native, had in 1884 made a bequest to the town for the establishment of a library collection in honor of Reuben Hoar, who had financially assisted his father in a difficult time.

===20th century===

Littleton continued to grow through the twentieth century. Prior to World War I, the mill at the common moved into the manufacturing of military webbing to supply the US Armed Forces. The advent of the war drew more people to town to work in the mill. Young men from Littleton also left to serve during the war. Upon their return, they founded the two veterans&#x27; posts, American Legion Post 249 and VFW Post 6556.

With the advent of the automobile, Littleton saw two more expansions of agri-business. The existing dairy farms grew larger and became commercial. Cloverdale Farm/Dell Dale Farm, on Mannion Place off Great Road edging up to the shores of Lake Nagog, became a well-known local dairy operating until 1986, first by John Mannion and then Thomas and William Byrne from Hopedale. Herbert Whitcomb also ran a commercial dairy, which he sold in 1942 to J. Fred Herpy, a dairyman who had moved to Littleton from Rome, New York. Herpy relocated the pasteurizing business to Great Road in 1952. Business was good in the post-war years, and Herpy&#x27;s Dairy thrived.

On the site of the Great Road plant, Herpy built two large swimming pools, and added a bathhouse, grill and ice cream stand. The pools provided swimming lessons to the residents of Littleton and surrounding towns. By the last year the pools were open, 1968, over a thousand children learned to swim at Herpy&#x27;s. It closed a year later, in response to Littleton&#x27;s expansion of alcohol sales.

Like many towns along the state roads radiating from Boston, the advent of motor transport saw the arrival of truck farms which sprang up along Route 119/2A. These were market gardens that were operated on a large scale to supply produce for Haymarket in Boston. While earlier commercial market gardens had sprung up along the railways, motor transport allowed the formation of produce wholesalers in outlying cities such as Fitchburg and Lowell which signed contracts with local farmers to provide goods on a daily basis for sale in Haymarket. The trucks would leave the yards and drive down the state roads buying produce from the farms for resale in town. Almost all truck farms kept a portion of their produce for sale at their roadside stands. The farms in Littleton were operated by a mix of older Yankee residents and newer Irish, Italian, Quebecois, and Greek families who had bought the farms as a commercial venture. One can see what most of Route 2A looked like running in through Acton, Concord, Lexington, and Arlington during the first two-thirds of the century by looking at present day, Route 119 moving northwest from Beaver Brook Road.

Arthur Rowse bought Standard Vinegar Co. in Somerville, in 1865 in 1900, changed the name to New England Vinegar Works in 1907. In 1919, he added the Veryfine brand name for pasteurized apple juice. He moved the company to Littleton, Massachusetts, in 1930 to be closer to Massachusetts&#x27; apple orchards, setting up his plant at the Depot. While in Somerville, Arthur Rowse, known for integrity and honesty, had refused to do business with bootleggers in a state where Prohibition was overwhelmingly unpopular. He continued his refusal after moving to Littleton.

Due to the Yankee character of the town, it was notably dry during Prohibition. Although Prohibition was repealed in 1933, Littleton did not permit the sale of alcohol again until 1960, and then in just two locations, the Johnson&#x27;s store at the Depot and the Nashoba Package store at Donelan&#x27;s shopping center. Only in the late 1980s, with the building of DEC&#x27;s King Street facility, was a bar allowed to open in town (this later became Ken&#x27;s American Cafe, which closed in December 2008. It was followed by what is now the Chip Shot on Ayer Road). For years, residents could go to establishments just over the town line that served alcohol, in the surrounding Acton, Westford, Groton, Ayer, and Boxborough.

Littleton has remained a predominantly Yankee town, with the bulk of the population belonging to the Congregational Church of Littleton, The First Baptist Church, and First Church Unitarian churches. In the post-World War II era, Roman Catholic immigrants from Ireland, Quebec, Canada, and Italy moved into Middlesex County and Littleton. The Roman Catholic parish of St. Anne&#x27;s was established in 1947 and is currently the largest congregation in town. The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints established a chapel in 1979. In 1956, the Church of Christ was built on Harwood Avenue. It disbanded in 1985 due to the closing of Ft. Devens and the resultant dwindling membership.

Many of the early families are represented by descendants in the town to the present day: Blanchard, Bulkeley, Crane, Hartwell, Hathaway, Kimball, and Whitcomb. The neighborhoods around Mill Pond (also known as Lake Warren): Long Lake, Forge Village, and Spectacle Pond, include numerous summer cottages or &quot;camps&quot; that have been converted into year-round residences. Many ethnic Irish, Italian, Québécois, and Finnish families moved here in the 1950s and 1960s in a kind of suburbanization after leaving their more dense, first and second-generation neighborhoods in Arlington, East Boston, Cambridge, Lowell, and Somerville.

Due to its location between Fort Devens and Hanscom AFB, Littleton has been a popular location for military retirees from the 1960s to the present day.

Author John Hanson Mitchell wrote a book titled &quot;Ceremonial Time&quot; (1984), which details a history of fifteen thousand years over one square mile located within the town.

The arrival of Digital Equipment Corporation (DEC, later part of Hewlett-Packard) in the 1970s connected the town to other businesses in the Boston-area high-tech corridor. Digital built a very large facility on King Street near the Common, as well as offices on Porter Road and Foster Street.

===21st century===

In 2007, IBM purchased the King Street facility from Hewlett-Packard and announced that it would become its main New England location.

In 2014, Littleton embarked on a year of celebration for its 300th anniversary.

In 2022, the Boston Globe reported that the Littleton mill had the highest concentration of federally-licensed firearms dealers in the United States.

==Geography==

According to the United States Census Bureau, the town has a total area of , of which is land and (5.30%) is water.

Littleton borders the following towns: Groton, Westford, Acton, Boxborough, Harvard, and Ayer.

==Demographics==

At the 2020 census, there were 10,141 people, 3,657 households and 2,218 families residing in the town. The population density was . There were 3,889 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the town was 80.71% White, 1.34% African American, 0.15% Native American, 8.17% Asian, 0.02% Pacific Islander, 1.33% from other races, and 5.03% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 3.25% of the population.

There were 3,657 households, of which 23.2% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 64.0% were married couples living together, 22.1% had a female householder with no spouse present, 10.3% had a male householder with no spouse present, and 3.6% were non-families. Of all households 19.6% were made up of individuals, and 8.2% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.72 and the average family size was 3.16.

Of the population 23.2% were under the age of 18, 5.5% from 18 to 24, 30.3% from 25 to 44, 25.7% from 45 to 64, and 15.3% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 44.7 years. For every 100 females, there were 96.7 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 94.3 males.

The median household income was $123,413 and the median family income was $143,233. About 2.4% of families and 3.6% of the population were below the poverty line, including 1.9% of those under age 18 and 5.2% of those age 65 or over.

==Education==

===Littleton public schools===
* Littleton High School
* Littleton Middle School—new building 2006
* Russell Street Elementary
* Shaker Lane Elementary

===Other public schools===
* Nashoba Valley Technical High School: public regional vocational technical high school located in Westford.
* Francis W. Parker Charter Essential School: a public charter school in Devens that serves students in grades 7 to 12.

===Local private or parochial schools===
* Academy of Notre Dame: co-educational Roman Catholic elementary school, K1 through 8th grade, in Tyngsborough, and an all-girls Roman Catholic preparatory school for grades 9–12 run by the Sisters of Notre Dame de Namur
* Applewild School: established in 1957, a private, independent co-educational day school for grades preschool – 8th grade located in Fitchburg.
* Concord Academy: a private, co-educational, independent, college preparatory school for grades 9–12, located in Concord.
* Country Day School of the Holy Union: coeducational Roman Catholic elementary school, Pre-K through 8th grade, in Groton run by the Sisters of the Holy Union.
* The Fenn School: an all-boys private school in Concord, serving grades 4–9.
* Groton School: a private, Episcopal, college preparatory boarding school for grades 9–12 located in Groton.
* Lawrence Academy at Groton: a private, co-educational preparatory school for grades 9–12 located in Groton.
* Middlesex School: a private, independent preparatory school for grades 9–12 located in Concord.
* Nashoba Brooks School: an independent co-educational school for Pre-K (age 3) through 3rd grade and all-female from grade 4th through 8th grade.
* Oak Meadow School: a private, independent Montessori school serving Pre-K (18 months through 8th grade) is the only private school located within Littleton.

=== Library ===
The public Reuben Hoar Library first opened in 1887. In 1895, the Houghton Memorial Building was constructed, and the Reuben Hoar Library moved into it. The library, still named in honor of Reuben Hoar, moved to 41 Shattuck Street in 1991, and the Houghton Memorial Building then housed the Littleton Historical Society. In November 2021, the Ruben Hoar Library moved to 35 Shattuck Street. In fiscal year 2008, the town of Littleton spent 1.5% ($432,744) of its budget on its public library—approximately $49 per person, per year ($60.01 adjusted for inflation in 2021).

==Media==
The local newspaper is called the &quot;Littleton Independent&quot;.

Littleton Community Television (LCTV) has a new and improved studio at 37 Shattuck Street behind the town offices at the Littleton Town Hall.

==Historical, civic and cultural organizations==
Littleton like other small towns has many local charities and organizations that are active in the town. Non-profit town specific groups include the Littleton Conservation Trust, the Littleton Country Gardeners, and Littleton Historical Society (a non-profit partner to the town&#x27;s Historical Commission). The Littleton Lyceum and the Indian Hill Music Center are two of the local cultural organizations. The Littleton Rotary Club is active in Community development/service. Local Fraternal organizations that serve the town of Littleton are the Tahattawan Masonic Lodge, the Bishop Ruocco Council 9275 Knights of Columbus, the Acton Lions Club, and the Chelmsford and Maynard Elks. Charity groups serving Littleton are the Loaves and Fishes Food Pantry at Devens, the Acton Community Food Pantry, Habitat for Humanity, and the St Vincent De Paul Society. Finally, local veterans have two posts, American Legion Post 249 and Veterans of Foreign Wars Post 6556 co-located at the Post in the Depot.

== Houses of Worship ==
Littleton was, like most small colonial New England towns formed around a congregation of a house of worship. Following the horrific demise of the Praying Indian village of Nashoba, Anglo settlers and immigrants bought land from the surviving members of the Nashoba congregation and built their meetinghouse in 1715 on the site of what is now the First Church Unitarian, at 19 Foster St. The First Baptist Church Littleton, at 461 King St, was the second congregation in Littleton built in spring of 1822 because &quot;Prayer meetings on weekdays, itinerant preaching, and all efforts for the conversion of the heathen, were stigmatized as the doings of fanatics.&quot; In 1841, more Calvinists following the Congregational doctrine decided that the main congregation had moved too far away from Calvinism but did noit agree with the Baptists split off and built what is now the Congregational Church of Littleton, UCC, at 330 King St.
Littleton Protestant schurches remained the only ones in town until the twentieth century.
The next creed to establish itself in Littleton was Roman Catholicism driven by the influx of Irish, Italian, Quebecois, Polish, Norwegian, and Portuguese immigrants. The first Mass offered in Littleton at the Town Hall Christmas Day 1911. Littleton&#x27;s first Catholic Church was established in 1916, with its patron Saint Anne. At that time, forty Catholic families resided in Littleton. Serving as a mission to St Mary&#x27;s in Ayer, it became its own parish in 1945. By the late fifties, the congregation had grown larger so they built the present building at 75 King St and relocated there in 1960.
During the Cold War, an increasing number of Mormons moved into the area. With evangelization and this influx, the local Mormon community built the Littleton Ward of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints at 616 Reat Road in the 1980s.
The town has an ecummenical group, The Greater Littleton Interfaith Council that cooperates on various charity, faith, and relief activities. As well as the resident congregations it works with congregations in surrounding towns. Other religions in Littleton are served by Wat Buddhabhavana (Buddhist) in Westford, Church of the Good Shepherd (Episcopalian) in Acton, Congregation Beth Elohim (Judaism) in Acton, Shirdi Sai Temple (Hinduism) in Groton, Islamic Community Center in Acton, Mt Calvary Lutheran Church in Acton, and St Matthews United Methodist Church in Acton.

==Transportation==
Commuter rail service from Boston&#x27;s North Station is provided by the MBTA with a stop in Littleton on its Fitchburg Line. The LRTA 15 bus line ends in the IBM parking lot. Other transportation services in Littleton are provided by the regional transit authority MART.

Freight travels daily through Littleton over the tracks of the historic Stony Brook Railroad. The line currently serves as a major corridor of Pan Am Railway&#x27;s District 3 which connects New Hampshire and Maine with western Massachusetts, Vermont, and New York.

Littleton has I-495, Route 2, Route 2A, Route 110, and Route 119.

==Notable people==
* Shawn Andrews, actor
* Ron Borges, sports writer for the &quot;Boston Herald&quot;
* Jeanne Munn Bracken, author and journalist
* Steve Carell, worked as a mail carrier in the town before going to The Second City
* Levi L. Conant, mathematician and developer of the &quot;Number Concept&quot; in 1896
* Ed Fletcher, politician who served as California State Senator until 1947
* Lucie Caroline Hager (1853–1903), author
* Alonzo Hartwell, engraver and portrait painter; father of Henry W. Hartwell
* Henry W. Hartwell, architect with Hartwell and Richardson
* Margaret Harwood, astronomer
* Greg Hawkes, keyboard player for the 1970s–1980s New Wave group, The Cars, lived in Littleton during the band&#x27;s early years before moving to Lincoln
* Jim Hollister, historian and National Park Service ranger
* Erik P. Kraft, author and illustrator
* Sean McAdam, sports writer for ESPN and &quot;The Providence Journal&quot;
* John Hanson Mitchell, author
* Tom Nepanet, husband of Sarah Doublet and emissary during King Philip&#x27;s War
* Jonathan Prescott, a British officer
* Harrison Reed, governor of Florida until 1899
* Peleg Sprague, New Hampshire politician who served as a U.S. Senator until 1835 and a US District Court Judge until 1865

==Economy and business==

==Notes==
==Bibliography==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==External links==

* Town of Littleton official website
* &quot;Littleton Independent&quot;
* Littleton public schools 
* Reuben Hoar Library
* &quot;The Enduring Orchard&quot;, early Littleton Indian history</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2433090" start="0" end="9" title="Littleton, Massachusetts" label="Littleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q54073" start="58" end="74" title="Middlesex County, Massachusetts" label="Middlesex County"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="76" end="89" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2883938" start="260" end="276" title="Littleton Common, Massachusetts" label="Littleton Common"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="278" end="291" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q212152" start="363" end="377" title="Praying Indian" label="Praying Indian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3379852" start="671" end="684" title="Daniel Gookin" label="Daniel Gookin"/>
<link wikidata="Q862257" start="1088" end="1110" title="King Philip&amp;#x27;s War" label="King Philip&amp;#x27;s War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5250761" start="1346" end="1357" title="Deer Island (Massachusetts)" label="Deer Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q336899" start="2533" end="2560" title="George Lyttelton, 1st Baron Lyttelton" label="Hon. George Lyttleton, M.P."/>
<link wikidata="Q531471" start="2613" end="2640" title="Chancellor of the Exchequer" label="Chancellor of the Exchequer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3643258" start="3332" end="3342" title="Boxborough, Massachusetts" label="Boxborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q3776991" start="3377" end="3401" title="Groton, Massachusetts" label="The Plantation of Groton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2318398" start="3415" end="3425" title="Chelmsford, Massachusetts" label="Chelmsford"/>
<link wikidata="Q3974584" start="3440" end="3444" title="Stow, Massachusetts" label="Stow"/>
<link wikidata="Q523240" start="3472" end="3479" title="Concord, Massachusetts" label="Concord"/>
<link wikidata="Q542640" start="3738" end="3753" title="Westford, Massachusetts" label="West Chelmsford"/>
<link wikidata="Q2427213" start="3905" end="3914" title="Lancaster, Massachusetts" label="Lancaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587876" start="3961" end="3968" title="Harvard, Massachusetts" label="Harvard"/>
<link wikidata="Q523240" start="3989" end="4001" title="Concord, Massachusetts" label="West Concord"/>
<link wikidata="Q1453540" start="4022" end="4035" title="Massachusetts General Court" label="General Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q344431" start="4056" end="4061" title="Acton, Massachusetts" label="Acton"/>
<link wikidata="Q540062" start="5213" end="5223" title="Fortress of Louisbourg" label="Louisbourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2336248" start="5344" end="5353" title="minutemen" label="minutemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q153936" start="5358" end="5365" title="militia" label="militia"/>
<link wikidata="Q729007" start="5889" end="5905" title="Old North Bridge" label="Old North Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3643258" start="6096" end="6106" title="Boxborough, Massachusetts" label="Boxborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q1453540" start="6126" end="6139" title="Massachusetts General Court" label="General Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q6707256" start="7232" end="7247" title="lyceum movement" label="lyceum movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q6653094" start="8528" end="8535" title="Littleton/Route 495" label="station"/>
<link wikidata="Q7619505" start="8874" end="8894" title="Stony Brook Railroad" label="Stony Brook Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q5478023" start="9089" end="9119" title="Framingham and Lowell Railroad" label="Framingham and Lowell Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q169390" start="9499" end="9511" title="Abolitionism" label="Abolitionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q331563" start="9516" end="9533" title="Transcendentalism" label="Transcendentalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q117455441" start="9910" end="9934" title="Conant Houghton Co. Mill" label="Conant Houghton Co. Mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="10890" end="10901" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q6586" start="11745" end="11759" title="Rome, New York" label="Rome, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q143970" start="12411" end="12422" title="Market garden" label="truck farms"/>
<link wikidata="Q49199" start="13500" end="13510" title="Somerville, Massachusetts" label="Somerville"/>
<link wikidata="Q7923104" start="13606" end="13614" title="Veryfine" label="Veryfine"/>
<link wikidata="Q46388" start="13929" end="13940" title="Prohibition" label="Prohibition"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="14965" end="14977" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413867" start="16110" end="16121" title="Fort Devens, Massachusetts" label="Fort Devens"/>
<link wikidata="Q3498988" start="16126" end="16137" title="Hanscom Air Force Base" label="Hanscom AFB"/>
<link wikidata="Q19874704" start="16242" end="16262" title="John Hanson Mitchell" label="John Hanson Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16289" end="16304" title="Ceremonial Time" label="Ceremonial Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q80978" start="16481" end="16496" title="Hewlett-Packard" label="Hewlett-Packard"/>
<link wikidata="Q37156" start="16740" end="16743" title="IBM" label="IBM"/>
<link wikidata="Q824451" start="16961" end="16973" title="Boston Globe" label="Boston Globe"/>
<link wikidata="Q117455441" start="16992" end="17006" title="Littleton mill" label="Littleton mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="17131" end="17158" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q3776991" start="17270" end="17276" title="Groton, Massachusetts" label="Groton"/>
<link wikidata="Q542640" start="17278" end="17286" title="Westford, Massachusetts" label="Westford"/>
<link wikidata="Q344431" start="17288" end="17293" title="Acton, Massachusetts" label="Acton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3643258" start="17295" end="17305" title="Boxborough, Massachusetts" label="Boxborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587876" start="17307" end="17314" title="Harvard, Massachusetts" label="Harvard"/>
<link wikidata="Q945957" start="17320" end="17324" title="Ayer, Massachusetts" label="Ayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="17357" end="17363" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="17453" end="17471" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="17577" end="17582" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="17590" end="17606" title="African American (U.S. Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="17614" end="17629" title="Native American (U.S. Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="17637" end="17642" title="Asian (U.S. Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="17650" end="17666" title="Pacific Islander (U.S. Census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="17679" end="17690" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="17726" end="17734" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="17738" end="17744" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="17894" end="17909" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940707" start="18560" end="18583" title="median household income" label="median household income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="18705" end="18717" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q6653118" start="18839" end="18860" title="Littleton High School (Massachusetts)" label="Littleton High School"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18935" end="18957" title="Shaker Lane Elementary" label="Shaker Lane Elementary"/>
<link wikidata="Q14715746" start="18988" end="19024" title="Nashoba Valley Technical High School" label="Nashoba Valley Technical High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q542640" start="19086" end="19094" title="Westford, Massachusetts" label="Westford"/>
<link wikidata="Q5482675" start="19098" end="19140" title="Francis W. Parker Charter Essential School" label="Francis W. Parker Charter Essential School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5266877" start="19169" end="19175" title="Devens, Massachusetts" label="Devens"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577621" start="19357" end="19369" title="Tyngsborough, Massachusetts" label="Tyngsborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362697" start="19449" end="19479" title="Sisters of Notre Dame de Namur" label="Sisters of Notre Dame de Namur"/>
<link wikidata="Q4781432" start="19482" end="19498" title="Applewild School" label="Applewild School"/>
<link wikidata="Q54182" start="19614" end="19623" title="Fitchburg, Massachusetts" label="Fitchburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5158770" start="19627" end="19642" title="Concord Academy" label="Concord Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q523240" start="19739" end="19746" title="Concord, Massachusetts" label="Concord"/>
<link wikidata="Q3776991" start="19864" end="19870" title="Groton, Massachusetts" label="Groton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3977445" start="19882" end="19907" title="Holy Union Sisters" label="Sisters of the Holy Union"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19911" end="19926" title="The Fenn School" label="The Fenn School"/>
<link wikidata="Q872541" start="19989" end="20002" title="Groton School" label="Groton School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462611" start="20099" end="20125" title="Lawrence Academy at Groton" label="Lawrence Academy at Groton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6841942" start="20209" end="20225" title="Middlesex School" label="Middlesex School"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20639" end="20658" title="Reuben Hoar Library" label="Reuben Hoar Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q5912976" start="20694" end="20720" title="Houghton Memorial Building" label="Houghton Memorial Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q14626453" start="24973" end="24986" title="Regional rail" label="Commuter rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="25000" end="25013" title="Boston Massachusetts" label="Boston&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q54454" start="25014" end="25027" title="North Station" label="North Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q171985" start="25047" end="25051" title="MBTA" label="MBTA"/>
<link wikidata="Q6653094" start="25059" end="25076" title="Littleton/Route 495 (MBTA station)" label="stop in Littleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q172548" start="25084" end="25098" title="Fitchburg Line" label="Fitchburg Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q6903133" start="25240" end="25244" title="Montachusett Regional Transit Authority" label="MART"/>
<link wikidata="Q954927" start="25247" end="25254" title="Freight train" label="Freight"/>
<link wikidata="Q7619505" start="25319" end="25339" title="Stony Brook Railroad" label="Stony Brook Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q7834916" start="25378" end="25386" title="Transport corridor" label="corridor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2048811" start="25390" end="25411" title="Pan Am Railways" label="Pan Am Railway&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q759" start="25438" end="25451" title="New Hampshire" label="New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q724" start="25456" end="25461" title="Maine" label="Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="25475" end="25488" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q16551" start="25490" end="25497" title="Vermont" label="Vermont"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="25503" end="25511" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q4531878" start="25602" end="25615" title="Shawn Andrews (actor)" label="Shawn Andrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q7363549" start="25625" end="25635" title="Ron Borges" label="Ron Borges"/>
<link wikidata="Q773802" start="25665" end="25678" title="Boston Herald" label="Boston Herald"/>
<link wikidata="Q55237589" start="25687" end="25706" title="Jeanne Munn Bracken" label="Jeanne Munn Bracken"/>
<link wikidata="Q216221" start="25732" end="25744" title="Steve Carell" label="Steve Carell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777200" start="25799" end="25814" title="The Second City" label="The Second City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1565369" start="25817" end="25831" title="Levi L. Conant" label="Levi L. Conant"/>
<link wikidata="Q5334811" start="25905" end="25916" title="Ed Fletcher" label="Ed Fletcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1526814" start="25943" end="25967" title="California State Senator" label="California State Senator"/>
<link wikidata="Q64348981" start="25981" end="26001" title="Lucie Caroline Hager" label="Lucie Caroline Hager"/>
<link wikidata="Q4734559" start="26024" end="26039" title="Alonzo Hartwell" label="Alonzo Hartwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5675415" start="26102" end="26119" title="Henry W. Hartwell" label="Henry W. Hartwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5675415" start="26136" end="26159" title="Hartwell and Richardson" label="Hartwell and Richardson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6759495" start="26162" end="26178" title="Margaret Harwood" label="Margaret Harwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q3433399" start="26193" end="26204" title="Greg Hawkes" label="Greg Hawkes"/>
<link wikidata="Q858388" start="26258" end="26266" title="The Cars" label="The Cars"/>
<link wikidata="Q663035" start="26339" end="26346" title="Lincoln, Massachusetts" label="Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q115803090" start="26349" end="26362" title="Jim Hollister" label="Jim Hollister"/>
<link wikidata="Q308439" start="26378" end="26399" title="National Park Service" label="National Park Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q5388761" start="26409" end="26422" title="Erik P. Kraft" label="Erik P. Kraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q7441209" start="26449" end="26460" title="Sean McAdam (journalist)" label="Sean McAdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q217776" start="26480" end="26484" title="ESPN" label="ESPN"/>
<link wikidata="Q3522349" start="26495" end="26517" title="The Providence Journal" label="The Providence Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q19874704" start="26526" end="26546" title="John Hanson Mitchell" label="John Hanson Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q122697890" start="26557" end="26568" title="Tom Nepanet" label="Tom Nepanet"/>
<link wikidata="Q862257" start="26615" end="26637" title="King Philip&amp;#x27;s War" label="King Philip&amp;#x27;s War"/>
<link wikidata="Q47541935" start="26640" end="26657" title="Jonathan Prescott" label="Jonathan Prescott"/>
<link wikidata="Q885639" start="26679" end="26692" title="Harrison Reed (politician)" label="Harrison Reed"/>
<link wikidata="Q812" start="26706" end="26713" title="Florida" label="Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754256" start="26727" end="26740" title="Peleg Sprague (New Hampshire politician)" label="Peleg Sprague"/>
<link wikidata="Q759" start="26742" end="26755" title="New Hampshire" label="New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="26783" end="26795" title="U.S. Senator" label="U.S. Senator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1614849" start="26813" end="26836" title="US District Court Judge" label="US District Court Judge"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="116847" wikidata="Q2883938" url="?curid=116847" title="Littleton Common, Massachusetts">
<text>Littleton Common is a census-designated place (CDP) in the town of Littleton in Middlesex County, Massachusetts, United States. The population was 3,065 at the 2020 census, up from 2,789 in 2010.

==Geography==
Littleton Common is located in northwestern Middlesex County at (42.536606, -71.471984), in the eastern part of the town Littleton. It is bordered to the northeast by the town of Westford and to the northwest by Interstate 495, with access from Exit 79 (Routes 2A and 110) and Exit 80 (Route 119). It is bordered to the southwest by Harwood Avenue and to the southeast by Newtown Road, Shaker Lane, and Power Road.

Massachusetts Route 2A and 110 (King Street) go to the west out of the community, leading to Ayer, and Routes 2A and 119 (Great Road) leave to the southeast, leading to West Concord. Route 110 leads northeast to Lowell, and Route 119 leads northwest to Groton.

According to the United States Census Bureau, the CDP has a total area of , of which are land and (4.40%) are water. Long Pond is in the southern part of the community. Beaver Brook flows northward through the western side, part of the Merrimack River watershed.

==Demographics==
At the 2000 census there were 2,816 people in 1,098 households, including 774 families, in the CDP. The population density was 311.5/km (807.1/mi²). There were 1,142 housing units at an average density of 126.3/km (327.3/mi²). The racial makeup of the CDP was 97.02% White, 0.28% African American, 0.07% Native American, 1.31% Asian, 0.04% Pacific Islander, 0.25% from other races, and 1.03% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 1.21%.

Of the 1,098 households 32.3% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 58.6% were married couples living together, 8.8% had a female householder with no husband present, and 29.5% were non-families. 23.6% of households were one person and 9.2% were one person aged 65 or older. The average household size was 2.56 and the average family size was 3.05.

The age distribution was 24.0% under the age of 18, 5.1% from 18 to 24, 34.1% from 25 to 44, 23.9% from 45 to 64, and 12.9% 65 or older. The median age was 39 years. For every 100 females, there were 91.8 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 93.2 males.

The median household income was $60,323 and the median family income was $69,375. Males had a median income of $46,806 versus $38,571 for females. The per capita income for the CDP was $26,966. About 4.7% of families and 5.2% of the population were below the poverty line, including 1.9% of those under age 18 and 4.9% of those age 65 or over.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2883938" start="0" end="16" title="Littleton Common, Massachusetts" label="Littleton Common"/>
<link wikidata="Q498162" start="22" end="45" title="census-designated place" label="census-designated place"/>
<link wikidata="Q2433090" start="67" end="76" title="Littleton, Massachusetts" label="Littleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q54073" start="80" end="96" title="Middlesex County, Massachusetts" label="Middlesex County"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="98" end="111" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="160" end="171" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="190" end="194" title="2010 United States census" label="2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q542640" start="390" end="398" title="Westford, Massachusetts" label="Westford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1671364" start="423" end="437" title="Interstate 495 (Massachusetts)" label="Interstate 495"/>
<link wikidata="Q2483939" start="472" end="474" title="Massachusetts Route 2A" label="2A"/>
<link wikidata="Q2078373" start="479" end="482" title="Massachusetts Route 110" label="110"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484124" start="497" end="506" title="Massachusetts Route 119" label="Route 119"/>
<link wikidata="Q4831155" start="720" end="724" title="Ayer (CDP), Massachusetts" label="Ayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7984865" start="796" end="808" title="West Concord, Massachusetts" label="West Concord"/>
<link wikidata="Q49162" start="839" end="845" title="Lowell, Massachusetts" label="Lowell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5610757" start="880" end="886" title="Groton (CDP), Massachusetts" label="Groton"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="906" end="933" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q517787" start="1125" end="1140" title="Merrimack River" label="Merrimack River"/>
<link wikidata="Q166998" start="1177" end="1188" title="2000 United States Census" label="2000 census"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1401" end="1414" title="Race and ethnicity in the United States Census#2000 census" label="racial makeup"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="2527" end="2539" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
</links>
</doc>
